3754 S106469 99842185 6819
A REVELATION OF THE APOCALYPS, that is, THE APOCALYPS OF S. IOHN illustrated vvith an Analysis & Scolions: Where the sense is opened by the scripture, & the events of things foretold, shewed by Histories. Hereunto is prefixed a generall View: and at the end of the 17. Chapter, is inserted a Refutation of R. Bel¦larmine touching Antichrist, in his 3. Book of the B. of Rome. BY THOMAS BRIGHTMAN. Blessed he that doeth reade, and blessed are those which doe heare the wordes of this Prophecy, and which keepe the things that are written therein. Iren. 4. Book chap. 43. All Prophecy before it have his efficacy, be reiddles and am∣biguitye unto men: But when the tyme is come, & that, that which is prophecyed is come to passe, then have the Prophe∣cyes a cleare and certen exposition. AMSTERDAM Printed by Iudocus Hondius & Hendrick Laurenss. Anno 1611.
To the holy reformed Churches of Britan∣ny, Germany, & France, grace & peace from God our father, & from Iesus-Christ our Lord. Thincke it not strange, o most holy spouse of Christ, that a new interpretatiō of the Apocalyps is presented unto thee: considering that among so many both of olde & late wri∣ters, it is the judgement of all, that the Revelation, needeth stil a∣nother Revelation: and that these wordes be continually soun∣ding in thyne eares, The Lord hath spoken, who shall not pro∣phecy? For the Lord hath not onely spoken of old by dreames & visions, but also he speaketh daily, so often as he vouchsafeth to illuminate the mindes of his servaunts, for to manifest the hiddē truth of his word, & to expose the same openly. And with whō∣soever God doeth thus communicate, he thincketh that necessi∣tie is laid upon him, for to manifest unto others, that which him∣self hath receaved. And in deed, should the candel be lightned for to be putt under a bushell? should the comon danger of all, be privily declared for the benefitt of one onely? Is it not rather for this, that being put in the watch tower, he must give warning to the rest, for to avoide with all speed the present danger? The Lepers knew this well, & they could say, that if they had kept the joyfull tydings untill the daye light, evel should have come upō them. But what and if any should conceale the eminent danger, of what punishment should he be guilty? Verely of so much the more greater as the difference is between one altogether lost, and one that is deprived of joy but for a few houres. And therefore ha∣ving learned from this Apocalyps, that shortly a great tentation shall invade all Christendome, in so much as the sword of the Lord shall be made droncken in heaven, & all the host of them shall be overthrowne, & that you, the Christian Churches of Germany, France, & Britanny, are by name favorably admoni∣shed of this tempest by written Epistles: I finding by the will of
God these Epistles which doe shew this thing, & understanding by the inscriptions, to whom they were written, I durst not other∣wise doe, but to render them, to whom they belong: least by the intercepting & keeping of them secret by me, I should both be∣traye your welfare, and be condemned as guilty of treason a∣gainst God. There is no godly man but he seeth, that the Divine worship despised, the most holy word of God derided, the great securitye & pride of the Pastors, & the altogether corrupt and dis∣solute maners of all, of whas order and condition soever they be, doe foretell of some horrible calamitye shortly to come. Now these Epistles doe not foretell the thing by ambiguous cōjecture, but by most plaine wordes doe teach a goulf full of miseries to be at hand & readye to invade us. Thou spouse, see, I pray thee, the seale, knowe the hand, the wordes, the style of the writter,; thou knowest well the voice of the Bridgroome: yf the letters be sent unto thee by him, as they doe shewe, it is more then tyme to cast off those defylements, which thou hast drawen to thy self, by a to much & to long securitye, least otherwise yf thou continue to be negligent unto this thing, thou maiest at the last be suddenly pur∣ged with great sorowe by the fyre of the refyner. Notwithstāding least thou shouldst thinck that I bring onely such great sorowe & morning, beholde also a great joye & a great triomphe. For af∣ter this tempest shall presently followe joyfull dayes, & greatly to be desired; for what can be more pleasant unto the chaste spouse, driven out by the Romish whore (vvho vauntes her self to be the true vvyffe) & by the same vexed so manye aages by all maner of contumelies & in juries, then to see finally that impudent harlott, her nose slit, spoiled of her clothing & ornaments, defiled vvith dung & adle egges; & finally butnt & consumed by fyre? Lift up thyne eares a little & receave of this Prophecy, not some obscure signes, but most certen arguments of the Bridgroomes short co∣ming to avenge thy greif, & deliver into thine hands the vvhore, that thou maiest poure out upon her all the heat of jelousie. And for the increase of thy joy, receave vvithall the last destruction of the Turcks, soone follovving the destruction of Rome, for this
must first be abolished, the fevvell onely & matter of the barba∣rous tiranny of them, the sinevves of vvhich shall altogither be di∣solved & cutt off, after that Christendome shall be purged by an exceeding great destruction of her, of her hainous vvickednesses, as the Apocalyps plainely shevveth. And that thy joy maie be full, knovve also the uniting together of the Ievves vvith the Chri¦stian nations: and so unto the end a most happy tranquillitie. Thinges indeede very great, & greatly to be admyred, parte vvher∣of hath already bin manifested in some sorte to the Christian Church, in so much as vvas fitting those tymes, yet far from the end of the Prophecy, unto vvhich approching, is reserved a more full knovvledge: the other parte is so strange & so unexpected, as I could not ever finde in any, not so much as a probable suspiciō of it out of this Apocalyps. All vvhich effects notvvithstanding, vvill yeilde unto us this nevv centurie of tymes vvhich novv vve enter into, as our exposition, yf I be not deceaved, doth make plaine. For novv is begun the last acte of a most long & most dol∣full Tragedie, vvhich shall overflovv vvith scourges, deaths, ruines: But this Scene being removed, shall come in the place of it the pleasant prospect of a perpetuall peace, accompanied vvith abon∣dance of all good things. Thus then thou hast, most deare Spouse of Christ, the residue of the course of thy vvarrfarre, stand novv in the hatches, & after long tossing, at lenght beholde the Iand; hi∣therto the cloude seen a farre of hath deceaved thee, but novv be∣holde the sea shore, & knovv the mouth of the haven it self. Let thy eies judge, vvhether I be vvorthie, to vvhō the revvard of good nevves be givē. For so farr of is it, that I thinke that vve must stād to the judgement of Rome alone, as I hope I vvill convince by ne¦cessarie arguments, that she is altogether by Gods just judgement bereft of her lightes; vvherby at length shee shall sodainly rush into eternall destruction Therefore let her minde & judge these things as she pleaseth, she shall knovv shortly, vvhat it is, by her inchantments, to de∣ceave her self & others. Thou in the meane vvhile, o naturall Spouse, be mindfull of the tempest at hand, & prepare thy self for
it; hale in the shoote, be carefull of the helm, look to plie the pūpe; least in the entrance of the haven, vvhich God forbidde, thou make shipvvrake. And novv see hovv very acceptable this Reve∣lation ought to be to thee, not onely for the future events of ve∣rie great moment indeede, but also in regarde of the memorie past: to vvhich if thou shalt turne thine eies, thou shalt see even from the Apostles times, that, that continuall path, in vvhich thou hast set thy foote steppes, hath beene marked out vvith so plaine paternes, as thou need desire no plainer historie; & also thou shalt enjoie a most pleasant remembrance of the dangers vvhich thou hast fuffred, vvhich yeilde unto thee so many arguments of the in cōprehēsible providēce, vvisdom, love, truth of God, keeping thee safe amidst great distresses. Surely this addition vvith the rest of the Apostolicall vvritings adjoined to the old Testament, mini∣streth Histories of the vvorlde it self from the first beginning unto the latter end thereof: for vvhich cause this unestimable treasure ought to be to every one most deare. And these are the causes cō∣cerning you, o Christian Churches, of my publicke vvriting: There are also some causes that concerne the Prelacie, namely, mercy & vvrath: mercy because I savv many ignorant rude and unskilfull in the heavenly truth, as yet to vvorship Antichrist as a God. Those vvere to be taken out of the javves of hell, yf so it should please God. For vvhich thing I vvill go before to shine un¦to them vvith so great plainenes of truth, that they shall necessa∣rily see, so that they vvill open their eies, that, that Prelate of Ro¦me is that man of sinne, to vvhom yf they persevere to cleave, they cānot be saved. Truly my indignatiō is kindled against the Ie¦suites: For vvhen by happe I fell on Ribera interpreting this same holy Revelation: Doe, saied I, the Papists againe take courage, that that booke vvhich of late they permitted scarce any mā to touch, they should novv undertake the full handling thereof? Was it a vaine shevv at the sight vvhereof, yea in dimme light, a fevv yea∣res agoe they trembled, that novv they boldely endure to looke in to the same glasse, & crie out that some other thing is shevved in it then their Pope? O vve drovvsy men & sluggards if vve suffer it!
Therfore I thought that their croaking is in some sorte to be restrained, estee¦ming that it would be worth the labour, to shew to the Iesuites, how wicked¦ly they are madde, how foolishly they trifle, how they understand none of these Mysteries, how it cannot be, that here they should be any thing weise; that if they desire the truth, as they make a shewe, at least weise they may have mee a helper to search it out; or if otherweise they doe yet despise it being of∣fred, an aprouver of their condemnation. But yf they will not be silent, for I know that for a short time they shall fill heaven and earth with their noise; yet I hope to have given that force of light, wherby they being hereafter bereft of all shew of reasons, they shall vomit forth no other thing, then their mere blasphemies against God and men. Thou holy mother, by what kindnes & clemency thou art towards thine, pardon, I beseech thee my slendernes, where I shall have slipped; chiefly respect not, nor regarde the rudenes of my stile; the scope of us both is the truth onely; let mee stemmer unto thee, mo∣ther, after what manner soever; I bring unto thee Mandrakes such as I could finde; as for the curious, who doe regarde wordes more then the truth, ther are no herbs in our basket for them; unlesse this, that yf they be diseased with the drowsie sicknes of too much elegancie, they may fetch hēce, yf they please, , the perfume of bitumē or earth pitch, and the herbe called Goates beard, Strab. book 16. wherby, as the Sa¦beans, they may shake off their drousy disease, and awaken their dull senses. I pray God, that you Christian Churches, by understanding may profite in godlines, and by true and earnest repentance, may either quite remove a∣way the evil hanging over you, or be so armed with his might, that in al stor∣mes you may stand invincible. A Citizen and Nourrisson of yours most unworthy: THOMAS BRIGHTMAN.
A VIEW OF THE WHOLE APOCALYPSE. The particular ProphesyChap. 1.1 THE Preface sheweth the argument of the book: 4. The Epi∣stle sent in cōmō to the 7. Churches, after the inscription doth tell who hath givē the Prophecy, who hath received it; the things heard; by which it cōfirmeth the authority of it. Chap. 2. The Epistles ar givē seve∣rally. The first cōprehēdeth the languishing disease of the Ephesians: 8. The Smyrneans are confirmed against the strength of the enemy: 12. They of Per¦gamus ar reprehended for permitting Balaam & the Nicolaitans: 18. They of Thyatira ar reprooved of sinn for suffring Iezabell. Chap. 3. The Sardi∣ans ar charged of hypocrisy: 7. The piety of Philadelphia is cōmēded: 14. The lukewarmnes & boasting of the Laodiceans is with weighty words reprehen∣ded.The common Prophesy Chap. 4. The cōmon Prophecy propoūdeth the generall type of the holy Church, notable for her centre, God, ver. 2.3. for the cōpassing about of the faithfull ver. 4. for Gods protection ver. 5. for gifts, doctrine, ordinā∣ces ver. 5.6. ministers ver. 6.7.8. & finally for the whole publick worship, ver. 9.10.11. Chap. 5. The first of the things which ar spoken of in special, is the dignity of the Prophecy, which is declared, first by the weakenes of the creature: 6. by the merite of the Lambe: 8. & the celebration of all. Chap. 6. The first speciall events ar the seales. 1. The first is opened & the truth pre∣vaileth under Trajan, Hadrian, & Antoninus Pius, at the voice of the first li∣ving creature, of Quadratus, Aristides, & Iustin Martyr: 3. at the voice of the said Iustin, Melito of Sardis, & Apollinaris, the secōd living creature, the redd horse goeth forth under Marcus Antoninus Verus, troubling all with warres; 5. the third seal being opened, the third living creature Tertullian cryeth out, under Severus the Emperour, whē the blacke horse did afflict the world with famine & scarcity. 7. The fourth seale is opened, & the fourth living creature Cyprian speaketh, Decius being then Emperour when the pale horse wasted all with warre, famine, pestilence, & wild beasts. 9. The fift seale is opened, & ther is given some breathing from the publick persecution under Claudius Quintilius,The seales from Iohn to Constantine. Aurelianus & the rest, even to the 19. of Diocletian: 12. The sixt seale is opened, & then rage Diocletian & Maximinian Hercule; who finally being driven out of the Empire by the power of the Lambe, for fear of him the tyrants fled & hidde themselves. Chap. 7. The seaventh seale first doth yeild a general patterne of the whole folowing age: 1. Ther being cōtention, ambition, heresy, they trouble all things with warre: they ar repressed by Cō∣stantine the great, untill he sealed up the elect, & provided for the faithfull be∣ing few & base, in that great calamity of the Church, which forthwith followed. . In which dolefull time at length ther should be more prosperity then in time past, & a great felicity of the faithfull. Chap. 8. Secondly, of the same seaventh seale there is silence in heaven, peace being obteined by Constantine: 2. the trumpets ar prepa¦red, & constantine gathereth the Nic. counsell to cutt off troubles, whih therby are mor increased: 6. The Angels blew, at whose first blowing ther ariseth the cōtroversy
of Consubstantiation: 8. At the secōd, a burning mountaine of ambition, is cast into the Sea, by the Decree tou∣ching the Primacie and dignitie of the Bishop: 10. At the thirde, a starr falleth from heaven; the Arrian heresy being defended by Constance and Va∣lence: 12, At the fourth, the third part of the Sunne is stricken, that is, the Church of Africke by the Vandales. 13, The world is admonished of the neere grievous trumpets, following by Gre∣gory the great. Cap. 9 1 At the fift blowing the bottomelesse pit is opened, & there come forth swar∣mes of locusts, of religious persons in the West, of Sarasens in the East. 13. At the sixt, the Turkes doe invade the world punished for the Romane Idola¦trie. Chap. 10.1 At which time the Turkes arise, the desire of the truth is kindled in very ma¦ny of the Vest; 9. By whose labour Prophecy is againe restored to the earth. Chap. 11.1 Preaching being restored, thereis sōevvhat a more full knowledge of the time past, namely, that the Church frō the daies of Constantine for a thousand two hundred sixtie yeares, was idden in the secret place of the Tēple, the Ro∣manes in the meane while boasting of the holy Citie & utmost Court; 7. and
in that in the end of those yeares the Romane Prelat would prepare warre against the Church, cut the throat of the Scriptures by hs Tridentine Counsell, and make the same mere carkases, & tri∣umphe over them for the space of three yeares & an halfe, tred also under foote the Saints in Germany by the power of Charles the fift, which yet after three yeares and an halfe revived by them of Magdeburg and Maurice, they stroke a very great feare into the enemies, & they overthrew the third part of the Romane dominion:The Trumpets from Constan∣tine to the yeare 1558. 15 The seaventh Angell bloweth, & about the yeare 1558, new kingdomes are made for Christ, Englād, Ireland & Scotland, coming to the Gos¦pell. Chap. 12. The first parte of the seaventh Trum∣pet as yet bringeth a fuller light of the time past, the Centuries of Magdeburg being raised up. The thing is repeated & taught from the beginning, 1. That the first Church of the Apostles, was most pure, but very much afflicted by the Dra¦gō, the Romane Heatnish Emperours, who endevoured with all their power least there should be waie opened to any Christian to the chiefe Empire. 5, That Constantine the Great the manchilde of the Church at length was borne; at vvhose birth the first purity flieth into the VVildernes from the eyes of the
vvorld; that this Constantine did cast the Drgon from Heaven, the Heathnish Em¦perours being depulsed, least againe they shoulde once beare rule in the Church. 13. the hostile povver being takē avvay frō the Dragō, he persecuted the Church ūder Christs name by Constance and Valence: 15. And endevoured to swalovv her up flying avvaye, by the overflovving of the Barbarians sent into the West. 17. Which floud at length being dried up, raised up the vvarre of the Saracens. The first part of the seaventh trumpet of things past.Ch. 13.1 The Dragon being cast out of heaven by Constantine, establisheth his Vicar in the same place; vvhich beast is the Romish Pope, such as he did rise togither vvith Cō¦stantine, made great by the Counsell of Nice: he vas vvounded by the Gothes pos¦sessing Italie: vvas cured by Iustinian and Phocas, also therby made greater then e∣ver before; 11. The seconde Beast is the same Romane Pope, enlarged by Pipine and Charles the great, vvho gave to him as a nevv birth, vvherby he became most vvicked. Ch. 14.1 For a thousand yeare from Constantine, the Church vvas together vvith Christ hidden in most secret places, but she did nothing of great fame in the vvorld; 6. These thousand yeares being ended, Wic∣kliff preached the Gospell to the vvorld: 8. Iohn Husse & Hierome of Prage succee∣de, vvho threatened the ruine of Rome:
9. After those follovveth Martin Lu∣ther, vvho very egerly setteth upō the Ro¦mane Prelate; 14. Aftervvard there is a harvest in Germany by Frederike the Sa∣xon, the other protestant Princes, and free Cities: 17. Also a vintage in Englād by Thomas Cromvvell & Th. Crāmer. The second part of the seaventh trumpet concer∣ning thinges to come.Chap. 15. Hitherto of the first part of the seavēth trumpet of things past: 1 The preparatiō of thinges to come, is the seavē Angels vvith their Viales; 2 The reformed Chur¦ches disagree betvvene themselves, but all triumphe for the overthrovv of the Pope of Rome: 5 The Temple is ope∣ned, and knovvledge increaseth, & the citizens of the Church are made mini∣sters of the last plagues, the end of which the nevv people of the Ievves expecteth before they come to the faith. Chap. 16.1 The vials are povvred: the first by our most gracious Queene Elizabeth and o∣ther Protestant Princes, vvherby the vvhole flocke of Papists is full of ulcero us ēvie. 3. The second viale by Martine Chemnin against the Tridentine Coun¦cill: vvherby the sea of the Popish Do∣ctrine, by the Iesuites the masters of the controversyes was made, as it were, the corrupt & filthy blood of a wōde. 4 The third by William Cecill against the Iesui¦tes, vvhich are the welspringes of the po¦pish doctrine; & so farre are our times gone; The rest of the viales are to come,
but shortly to be povvred out: 8. The fourth on the Sunne, that is on the Scrip¦tures, by vvhose light mē shalbe tormen¦ted & shall boile in great anger and con¦tentions; 10. The fift on the citie of Ro∣me, the throne of the Beast: 12. The sixt on Euphrates, vvherby a vvaie shall be prepared to the Easterne Ievves, that af∣ter they shall have embraced the faith of the Gospell, they maie return into their ovvne countrie: vvhen there shall be al∣so a great preparation of vvarre, both by the Turke against these nevv Christiās in the East, and also in the West by the Pope: 17. The seaventh on the aire, wher¦by the mysterie shall be finished, the Turkes & the Popes names being rased out: & then also the Church shall be set¦tled in exceeding great felicitie, as in the earth maie be expected. The viales from 1558, even to the end.Chap. 17. The execution of the fift viale on the throne of the beast, by vvhich it shall be manifested by some one of no great na∣me, by most undenyable argumēts that Rome is the seat of Antichrist, & that she hath bin made his seate, from the time that the Heathenish Emperours vvere driven from thence. Chap. 18. The second execution of the fift viale is the last overthrow of the citie of Ro∣me by three Angels; 1 descending from heaven, 4 the second exhorting the Ro¦manes to flight, & describing both the
mourning of the ungodly, & also the joy of the godly, 21 The thirde confirming her eternall de¦struction by casting a great milstone into the sea. Chap. 19.1 There is dscribed the joy of the saints for the perdition of Rome: 5 The sixt viale is opened, & the calling of the Iewes is taught: 12 Likewise a warlicke preparation, partly in respect of Christ the cptaine, & souldiers, partly in respect of the enemies; 20 The seaventh viale is declared by the destruction of the false Prophete of the Ro∣man Pope, of the Westerne enemie & his bādes. Chap. 20.1 The vvhole history of the Dragō is repeated, as it was in the Gētile Emperours before the im¦prisonemēt: 2 Hovv it was in prison, into which he was cast by Constantine, & bound for a thou∣sād yeares:An interpretation of the three last viales. in al which space the elect had a battel with the Romish Pope, which being ended, there is made at last the first resurrection: many every where in the west aspiring unto the more syncere truth: 7 Toge∣ther with this resurrection the Devill is loosed, & thē ariseth the Turke vvith the Scithians, Gog with Ma∣gog, which now destroying the greatest part of the earth, at length they turne their weapons against the holy citie, that is, the beleeving Iewes, in which war∣fare the name of the Turke shall utterly be abolished: 11 There is made the second resurrection, by the se∣cond & full calling of the Iewes. Chap. 21.1 The last part of the seaventh viale describeth the fe¦licity of the Church, after the vanquishing of all ene∣mies, by the new Hierusalem descending from hea∣ven, of a most glorious building. Chap. 22.1 It is shewed how this felicitie both by meat and drinke shall redounde to others, and shall continue for ever: 6 The conclusion confirmeth the whole Prophecy by manie most strong arguments.
CHAP. 1. A REVELATION OF THE APOCALYPSE. THE Revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, to shewe unto his servāts things which must shortly be done: which he sent, & shewed by his Angel unto his servant Iohn. 2 Who bare record of the word of God, and of the testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw. 3 Blessed is he that readeth, & they that heare the wordes of this Prophesie, & keep those things which are written therein; for the time is at hand. 4 Iohn, to the seaven Churches which are in Asia, Grace be with you, and peace from him, which is, and which was, and which is to come, and from the sea¦ven Spirits, which are before his throne. 5 And from Iesus Christ, which is that faithfull witnesse, and the first begot∣ten of the dead, and Prince of the Kings of the earth, unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sinnes in his blood. 6 And made us Kings and Priests unto God even his Father, to him be glo¦ry and dominion for evermore, Amen. 7 Behold, he cometh with clouds, and every eye shall see him; yea, even they which perced him through: and all kinreds of the earth shall waile before him, even so, Amen. 8 I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, saith the Lord, which is, and which was, and which is to come, even the Almightie. 9 I John, even your brother and companion in tribulation and in the King∣dome and patience of Jesus Christ, was in the Yle called Patmos, for the word of God, and for the witnessing of Jesus Christ. 10 And I was ravished in spirit on the Lords day, and heard behind me a great voice, as it had bene of a trumpet. 11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last: and that which thou seest, write in a book, and send it unto the seven Churches which are in Asia, un∣to Ephesus, and unto Smyrna, and unto Pergamus, and unto Thyatira, and unto Sardi, and unto Philadelphia, and unto Laodicea. 12 Then I turned backe to see the voyce that spake with me, and when I was turned, I saw seven golden Candlesticks. 13 And in the mids of the seven Candlesticks, one like unto the Sonne of man, clothed with a garment downe to the feet, and girded about the paps with a goldē girdle. 14 His head, and haires were white as whitewooll, & as snow, and his eyes wer as a flame of fire. 15 And his feete like unto fine Brasse, burning as in a fornace; and his voice as
the sound of many waters. 16 And he had in his right hand seven starres, and out of his mouth went a sharpe two edged sword, and his face shone as the Sunne shineth in his strength. 17 And when I saw him, I fell at his feete as dead; then he laid his right hād upon me, saying unto me, feare not; I am the first and the last; 18 And am alive, but I was dead: and behold I am alive for evermore, Amē: and I have the keyes of hell and of death. 19 Write the things which thou hast seene, and the things which are, and the things which shall come hereafter. 20 The mysterie of the seven starres which thou sawest in my right hand, and the seven golden candlesticks, is this, The seven starres, are the Angels of the seven Churches: and the seven candlesticks which thou sawest, are the seven Chur¦ches. The prayer. I entring into a matter beyond the strength of man, pray thee, O Fa∣ther of lights together with thy Sonne the Chiefe Prophete, and the Ho∣ly Spirit, the leader into truth, make plaine to mortall men the way not as yet sufficiently knowen. Our minde seeth not, the thinges thar are before our feete: How little or nothing perceiveth it high and hidden things? And how great danger is there from hence, eyther of preasing rashly into thy secrets, or of passing by true things, and faining things absurd & contrary? Neverthelesse thou who hast made thy word a light to our feet: who callest the most simple to the searching out of thy hid¦den mysteries: and who dost chuse for the most parte fisher men be∣fore the wise of the world. Be thou, I say, present and helpe this my slendernes: graunt me a prosperous voyage between these dangerous Ylands: Cause that I no where runne upon the high rockes of pride, nor sticke in the shalowe of blind ignorance, but the next way by thy guidance arriving at the very truth, I may holily and religiously reve∣rence & maintaine it being found out: not conceale it through any shamefull fearfulnes: corrupt it for any eyther hatred or favour, but may bring it forth purely and syncerely into the viewe of every man, to the glory of thy most great name, and consolation of thy Church yet grievously mourning: graunt this through our Lord Iesus Christ, Amē
The Resolution. THE Revelation after the Proheme is included whole in an Epistle. The Proheme in the three first verses declareth the Argument, Authours, both principall, and also Ministers, and the Fruit. The Epistle is spēt about an Inscription, Propheticall narration, and conclusion. The Inscriptiō is excellent for the person of the wrighter, and of those to whom he writeth, & of him especially from whom salvation is wished, the eternall verity of which one God the Father, the manifold grace of the Holy Spirit vers. 4. of the Sonne, as the triple office vers. 5. so especially his very great benefit on the elect, both present vers. 6. & to be expected in his glorious comming, is celebrated, which the kinreds of the earth shall receive with wailing, and the saints in the meane time desyre most earnestly, as is expressed in those wordes, even so Amen vers. 7. The Propheticall narration res∣pecteth eyther the particular Churches, or the whole: Them partly joint∣ly in the rest of this chapter, partly severally, in the two next. The thin∣ges which are declared ioyntly, are to the end, that the seaven Chur∣ches may knowe, that Iohn undertooke not this wriring at his owne pleasure, but was called and commanded of God. Wherof the person calling may cause a full persuasion, which cannot be of any other, but of God himself, vers. 8. Lykewise the person called, vers. 9.10. Lastly the manner of calling him by hearing, vers. 11. thē by visiō; The type wherof is shewed v. 12.13.14.15.16. & certeyne things following therof are declared, on Iohns parte, a great feare and astonying, on Christs part, a consolation ver. 17.18. then a commaunding to write ver. 19. and the in∣terpretation of the vision ver. 20. A shorte exposition. ver. 1. Apocalyps. The Argument of the booke, signifying a Revela∣tion made of God, the coverings being taken away, which before did hin∣der the eyes of mortall men: Which sort of thinges were wont to be called in old time visions and prophesyes, but in the writings of the Apo∣stles, the word of Revelation is more frequent: I will come, saith Paul, to Visions and Revelations of the Lord, 2 Cor. 12.1. And againe, that J should not be lifted up above measure, with excellency of Revelations ver. 7. So who∣soever of you hath a song, hath doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a Revelation 1 Cor. 14.26. Furthermore, the knowledge of the Gospell is attributed to
Revelation: of seeing which, there is no greater power, before it shall be revealed, then of understanding future thinges: I give thee thankes, saith Christ, O Father, because thou hast hidden these thinges from the wise, & revea¦led them to babes, Mat. 11.25. Whether is then this not the sense of this word, that no new thing is published: but as the Gospell is an open & reveald lawe, so the coverings being removed, that onely to be shew∣ed, which before lay hydde under the olde shadowes? And so it might paradventure be thought, unlesse this were also a word of the ole testament: The saying of him, saith Balaam, that heareth the wordes of the strong God. which seeth the vision of the Almighty, falling downe, but ha∣ving his eyes opened or revealed, Num. 24.4. So the man of God spake unto Heli in the name of the Lord: Did not I reveale my selfe playnly to the house of thy father? 1 Sam. 2.27. Wherfore there is no argumēt from hēce to this purpose. This may be without doubt, that this kinde of spea∣king, used as well here as there, doth shewe, that it neither was in the beginninge, nor yet is proper to the witte of mortall men to finde out such mysteries by searching. Neverthelesse that now all things are easy to be passed through, by the grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, so farre as is behoveable for his Church. Doe thou therfore, most high Day-starre open our eyes that we may behold thy wonderfull things. ¶ Of Iesus Christ: Who is one of the chiefe authours of the Revela∣tion, the Mediatour betweene God and men. All the olde Prophecies flowed alwayes from the same Christ: but in these last dayes God hath spo∣ken unto us by his Sonne, after a singular and speciall manner, Heb. 1.1. Wherupon there is a difference betweene the auncient inscriptions of the the Prophecies, and of this: There, the vision of Isaias, the vision of O∣badias, the booke of the vision of Nahum: The Prophecy which Habbakuke saw: never before, the vision or Revelation of Iesus Christ. This Prophecy must needes be most full of maiesty, which is notable before others for the title: neither is it to be doubted, but that according to the proportion of the light of the Gospell, all things are delivered here more distinctly and more clearely, then ever before. ¶ Which God gave unto him; To wit, the Father, the authour & foun¦tayne of all things. And he gave these thinges to Jesus Christ, in asmuch as he is Mediatour, not as to his coessentiall Sonne. For these thinges doe shewe rather the order, in which God doth give knowledge to his Church, then the originall of knowing in respect of his Sonne, as Th. Beza declareth most learnedly. He is the pipe, by vvhom is derived un∣to
us men, from the unmeasurable depth of his goodnes, whatsoever may be profitable for us. Although the verbe to give, ioyned with the infinitive mode, signifyeth often to permitte, as, thou wilt not give thy holy one to see corruption; that is, thou wilt not suffer him to see, Psal. 16.10. And Edom rfused to give to passe through, that is permitte: Num. 21.21. After which manner Demosthenes speaketh, the word of permitting being ioyned with it, Give and permitte me to speake of these thinges unto you. But it comes all to one, whether we make it the beginning of knowledge, or of power, Therefore we must rest in the first answere. ¶ That he might shewe to his servants: Therefore the understanding of those thinges is peculiar to these. You prophane be ye farre, o be ye farre fom hence. Why, o ye Iesuites doe ye touch this booke? These mysteries are shutte and sealed to you, whatsoever diligence in interpreting you may pretend: Here is nothing for the sworne slaves of Antichrist. Leave off to trouble your selves, and to deceave others. Yf yee desyre indeed to understande these thinges, renounce the Lord whom yee serve, to the end that he whose name ye counterfaite, may impert these secrets to you, returning againe into his family. ¶ Which must shortly be done: An explication of the thinges whereof it is a Rvelation: not of those which were past a good while since, but which should be done afterward and shortly: For he saith, that the time is at hand, because the things should be begun forthwith, and from that time should proceede in a perpetuall course without interruption: Al∣though the last acomplishment should be at length for many ages af∣ter ¶ And he signifyed: That is, which also he signifyed, when he had sent by his Angell to his servante John: Twoo instrumentall causes are rehearsed, the Angell and Iohn. Christ useth his ministery, not because he disday∣neth himselfe to speake to us (for he giveth himself to be seene in his owne person in this very chapter:) but because both our weaknes can∣not endure the beholding of so great maiesty, as it appeareth by and by after in John, who fell downe dead at the sight of him, ver. 17. And also that he may shewe, that he doth rule and commande to the Angels and all other thinges. 2 Who bare record:, As touching John, he describeth playnly himselfe unto us, shewing that he is no other thē the Apostle himselfe: of which two certē and proper markes are rehearsed, one the testimony given to the word of God and to Jesus Christ: The other, an eye beleefe of those thinges which
he testifyed: For Christ chose twelve out of all his Disciples, who should be with him continually, and should be present at all his miracles and conferences, of which they should be witnesses afterward even unto the furthest parts of the earth, Act. 1.8. by which double marke Luke doth note them out, writing thus, Who from the beginning were beholders themselves and mi∣nisters of the word, Chap. 1.2. By which arguments also Iohn himselfe doth maintaine his authority in an other place: That which we have heard, which we have seene with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our handes have handled of the word of lyfe, 1 Ioh. 1.1. And the thinges seen which are here mentioned are not the visions of this booke which fol∣lowe, but the actes and miracles of Christ, at which whyle they were done, Iohn was present. Otherwise howe could those thinges have procured authority to the writer (which thing onely the mentioning of these res∣pecteth in this place) which were not yet made knowne to the Church? Wherfore, that John, who wrote the Revelation, was the Apostle, unto whom those markes doe agree, by which the Apostles were knowen & famous in the Church above others: neither is there any other John be∣sides, to whom these same thinges can agree. And indeede he hath de∣clared himselfe to be such, by very good advise, when as it would be very much avaylable for the credit of the Prophecy, that men should be perswaded of the authority of him that did write it. I mervayle therefore, that Dionysius of Alexandria regarded these things so little, that he would dispute against them so egerly. But his foolish coniectures have bene confuted by others most leardnedly. He then being let passe: from hence it may be understood, that those wordes, which Aretas testifyeth to be added herein in some bookes, & wee see to have ben put in by Plantine and Montanus out of the Compluten translation, And whatsoever he heard, and whatsoever thinges are, & what∣soever must be done hereafter, that these words, I say, have crept in wrong∣fully and into an unmeet place: for thinges not knowne have no au∣thority themselves, much lesse can they bring it to an other. 3 Blessed is he that readeth: Hitherto of the Authours: the Fruict of the Prophecy is the happines of them that reade or shall give eare to others that reade to them, yf truly they doe observe the thinges that are writ∣ten therin: knowledg and workes are to be ioyned togither, in sch order, that, that may go before, so at lenght men come to that happi∣nes. But no word unlesse that which is inspired of God, can conferre such fruict to men. But who are those blessed ones that read? Are they
those that shalbe alive in that space of the last three yeeres wherein An∣tichrist shall exercyse cruelty & tyrāny, a little before Christ shall come to iudgement, as the Papists doe imagine? In deede Frauncis of Ribe∣ra the Iesuite doth thrust togither this whole Prophecy almost into these narrowe straites, prudently verily, as touching his Pope, but in respect of the truth it selfe, very perversly. For were men utterly voyd of this felicity, by the space of those whole thousande five hundred yeares which are now past, since the Revelation was given? Or can any be happy eyther in reading, or keeping those things which perteine no thing to him? If all these thinges are to be thrust into this three yeeres space, they shall in no wise be blessed. But they have bin curious in vaine who eyther hitherto have searched out those things, or have used diligē¦ce in effecting them. Which same thing must needes also come to passe in future tymes, wee know not for the space of howe many ages. But the whole handling of the thinge shall convince this invention, eyther of very great fraude, or ignorance and unskilfulnes. Let us know in the meane tyme that such a fruite is here praysed, which is common to all ages since this divine Revelation came forth to be seen of all mē: which sheweth severally and one after an other the condition of every tyme, even unto the last ende, as shall be manifested with God his helpe, by this exposition of ours. ¶ For the tyme is at hand. Wherin these thinhs shalbe put in exe∣cution. But seeing the whole prophecy doth denounce a battaile, ra∣ther then put on a crowne, the reason seemeth to be fetched from the danger nigh at hand, as though he should say, blessed are they that are fortified with some firme aide against the evils hāging over their heads. But huge great evils stāde at the doores, of which this prophecy is full: therefore they are blessed that shall take heed and keepe faithfully the way of escaping them. 4 John to the seaven Churches: Hitherto the Proheme: The Epistle fol∣loweth, the person of the wrighter of which, namely Iohn, was knowne sufficiently by the thinges before spoken. They to whom he writeth, are the seaven Churches in Asia, that is, the universall Churches in every place, as Aretas and Beda doe well affirme, and all, as I thinke, Inter∣preters with one consent, doe iudge. Neither can invery deede the thinges here rehearsed, beare to be restrained to these seaven Churches. We shall heare in the Epistles sent to every one, an admoni∣tion, that all should heare what things were written to the Churches.
Secondly it belongeth to these seaven Churches to knowe as well of fu∣ture things as of present, the charge of both, namely of writing and sen∣ding, he shewes afterward to have bin committed to him. And the last conclusion of the whole booke, which wished the grace of Christ to them all, shewes that this whole Prophecy was sent to the seaven Churches for an Epistle, chap. 22.21. But wha had it availed these seaven cities which were to remaine but a litle time, to have understanding of such things that after many ages should be, which nothing concerned thē? Hereunto is added that the nomber of seaven is an universall nomber, by whose revolution all times are made, all times being winded upon this Pole, even as the whole heavenlie frame is turned upon the seaven starres. Wherefore, as being full of mysterie, it is used afterward the whole booke through in describing of all things. Yet all Churches are not so to be considered, as yf nothing indeede had bene sent to them, which by name are afterward noted, but togither with the signification of the misterie, the truth of the historie is to be reteined. Seing there∣fore these seaven Churches stretch further than their names declare, whether in them the estate of all times even to Christes comming is to be considered? No verily, but onely of that time, wherein the Church shalbe among the Gentiles. Which thing shalbe manifest by those things that follow, and also so plaine a desciphering of the Churches of Asia seemes to grant, that the Synagogue of the Iewes is not to be mixt with them. Which thing hath caused, that in the resolution, we have distinguished the whole Propheticall narration, into that which is proper to particular Churches, and into that which is common to all Churches. ¶ Grace be to you and peace, from which is: He commeth to the praier, wherby the third person of the Inscription is declared. And he setteth downe the fountaine of grace and peace to be one true God three in per∣son: whose first person these words declare. Arethas thinkes, that these three times doe specially bolong to the three persons. Because the Fa∣ther, saith he, is otherwhere called which is, Exod. 3.14.: the Sonne, which was, Iohn 1.1. the Holy Ghost, which cometh Iohn 16.8.13. Act. 2. But the distinction so cleare which forthwith followeth, gainsaies it, which challengeth this description of that J will be Exod. 3.14. com∣mon to the whole Deitie, here to the alone person of the Father. Wher∣by also we are given to understand that this threefolde difference of time belonges to the unchangeable and stedfast truth of God concer∣ning
his promises. For there is the same force of this circumlocution, as of that abreviation Exod. 3.4. which we know was used, that he might teach Moses that the time was come, that he woulde perfourme the promise once made to Abrahā of delivering his seed out of Egipt. From whence is also that name of Iehova, wherby God was not knowne to the Fathers, Exod. 6.2. because they had not yet obteined that pro∣mise. Certaine minde that this is a name of being, no portion of which a created spirit can understand, as yf God should take to himselfe such names, onely for his owne sake and not for ours. Wherefore these things are as yf he should say, From God the Father most true and constant in all his things: which presently giueth most plentifull experiments of his truth, by sending at length his Sonne into the world, who in former times never failed in any one of those things which he had promised, who lastly so hath caused hope of things as yet to come, that daily he endevoureth the performance of them, and hasteneth the acomplishment of his whole truth. For which cometh hath this force, as a present future, that I may so say: For that which cometh is not yet pre∣sent, nor yet altogether absent: Therefore it is much more significant, then if he had said which will come, or which is about to come, as com∣monly it is turned: For this, which cometh, declareth that he will no fur¦ther deferre his promises, but that now forthwith he is imploied in fulfilling of them: an excellent confort for them, which through wea∣rines of delay doe fainte. But thou wilt say, is truth attributed to the Father onely? Verilie it is common alike to all of them, but seeing the partes of the Sonne and Spirit are chiefly imploied in executing the de∣crees, it is mentioned as proper to him alone, whome order of doing ma¦keth to be the Authour of promising, and the fountaine of goodnes. Gentile impietie hath imitated this division with their tripos which they report that Apollo used for three commodities of things which he had very much tried, , which saw things to come, to be, before they were, as in the Scholiaste of Aristophanes on Plut. ¶ And from the seauen spirites: The second welspring of peace is the Holy Ghost, most plentifully enriching & replenishing his Church with every kinde of giftes, for which cause such a circumlocution is used. For he which togither with the Father & the Sonne is the giver and causer of peace and grace cannot be counted amongst the creatures. Of which matter see that most learned man Francis Iunius. Neither proves it that this is a creature, as the Iesuite will have it, because he is saide to stand in the sight of the throne, after the maner of those that rather serve God
himselfe, than that he is God himselfe: Wheras by this reason neither the Sonne should be God, which being a lambe came and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that sate on the throne, hereafter chap. 5.7. And more plainely in Daniell 7.13. and before him (that is setting in his throne) they presented him, to wit, the Sonne of man. What then, is the Sonne to be beteft of his Godhead? Wherfore we must know that the words mentioned thorough this booke, both here and else where, both universally of God, as the chiefe and highest Governour, in which regard a throne is attributed to him: and also of the Sonne & Ho¦ly Ghost as ministers. By whose more neare working all things are done. Wherfore they are sayd to stand as in a readines before the throne, and as it were expecting the commaundement and becke of the Chiefe Gover∣nour. So was the Revelation given to the Sonne, ver. 1. and therefore the Spirit seemeth in this place to be noted more by his giftes, by which he workes in his saints, then by his proper name. But the things onely of order are not to be drawne to destroy the natures. 5 And from Jesus Christ, which is that faithfull witnes, , and from Jesus Christ that faithfull witnes, that is, , which is that faithfull witnes, the want of the relative being supplied, very often used in this booke after the manner of the Hebrewes. These things apperteine to the thirde fountaine Christ, which we call the thirde in regard of the place which here he susteines, not in order of person. Hi∣therto hath bin differred the describing of him, because it was more at large to be insisted upon, and frō him to be derived the thankesgiving, by whose alone merite we are made partakers of all good things. And first he mentioneth his Propheticall Office, calling him, the faithfull witnes, that is, which hath faithfully, truly, and fully taught the whole will of God, as farre as appetaines to mans salvation. For the whole doctrine of the Gospell is wont to be called a testimony, as Iohn 3.11. and 5.31.32. and 18.37. 1 Tim. 6.13. And can there be any vaine thing in that which comes from so faithfull a witnes? Or appertaines it to his credit, to hide from us any thing, which is no where else to be drawne forth, than out of the chest of the brest of the Romane Prelate? especially when no where, or in one worde, hath he allowed any such store house, whence we must fetch it? But these are the dotages of witnesses (if possible it may be) so vaine and unfaithfull, as this heavenly and most true witnes is faithfull. ¶ That first begotten from the dead. These things concerne his Priest∣hood,
wherby thorough death he hath overcome death, and hath made a full satisfaction for our sinnes, for this is to be the first begotten from the dead, that he first by conquering death arose againe, whom death woulde nevr have let go, if it had but never so litle power to have kept him with him. For which cause the Apostle saith, he is risen againe for our justification, Rom. 4 25. He seemes briefly and distributively to be called the first begotten from the dead, for that which fully should be thus, the first begotten of them which arise againe from the dead: By which two things are signified, first, that he is the Prince and head of them that arise againe from the dead, as the Apostle declares to the Coll. 1.18. And that he is also the beginning, and the first begotten from the dead, that amongest all he may have the preheminence: therefore he is also cal¦led, the first fruites of them which slept, 1 Cor. 15.20. Secondly, that at last by his power he will also raise up others from their graves: Even as he him∣selfe saith, and I will raise him up in the last day, Ioh. 6.39.40. Which two things apperteine onely to the elect: For neither is he the head of the wic∣ked, neither will he at the last daye raise them up in glorie, to wit, as the elect: but onely by the force of that curse (in what daie thou shalt eate thereof, thou shalt surely die, Gen. 2.17.) will restore to them their bodies, in which they shall endure everlasting torments. Wherby it commeth to passe, that this repairing, seing that it is onely unto death, scarsely in the scriptures in ioyeth the name of the resurrection. And therefore the spirit seemeth not to speake collectively, the first begotten of the dead, but distributively the first be¦gotten from the dead, that is, of those that arise from the dead: as before hath bene spoken, there being a plaine difference of the elect dead & the repro∣bate. ¶ And Prince of the Kings of the earth:: The Kingly office of Christ, to which whatsoever is in heaven and earth is in subiection, according to that all power in heaven and earth is given to me, Mat. 28.18. But it was suffi∣cient in this place, onely to have mentioned his superioritie over Kinges, above all which now by infinite degrees he is superiour, who when he was in the earth, seemed the basest of servants. Neither do these things apper∣taine to his dignitie onely, but also to his excellent power over all Kings, which by bridling he now so restraineth, that they can not move themsel∣ves, but as farre as he please, howsoever in former time he yeelded himself to their lustes. ¶ Which hath loved us: So hath bene his office, the present benefite which the saints enioie, is set forth with a thankesgiving: The want of the relative maketh the sentence harsh, which full should be thus, to him which hath lo∣ved us &c. which relative is expressed in the next verse, to him be glory & c
But seing that in so long a circunstance of wordes, a repetition thereof should be necessarie in the end, he omitted it in the beginning, least twise he should repeate the same, that which once onely was to be spoken, he leaveth often unspoken. But Francis of Ribera exclaimes, that this place is corrupted, and that the latine copies without all doubt which now are, are farre better corrected then the greeke copies: But by the Iesuites leave, neither is the place corrupted, and if it were granted, yet he should unwisely conclude this excellency of latine copies. There is in this place a wonderfull cōsent of all greeke copies: Aretas thus readeth and expoundeth, and he saw how all did fitly agree together: The order, saith he, of this sentence after this maner returnes from the last to the first, To him be glory and power, which hath loved us, & wshed us through his blood: But this is harde, saith the Iesuite; Therefore let Iohn have no audiēce in his Athenian eares, as incōgrue, which hath no thing more common, than after the maner of his countrey, both to want, and to abonde with relatives. In the 1. ver. he had, and he had signified, for which also he had signified; In the 5. And from Iesus Christ that faithfull witnes, for And from Iesus Christ, which is that faithfull witnes: in the next verse, and hath made us Kings, for, and which hath made us Kings, and so afterward very often. But be it that the place is corrupted, shall for one blemish the price be taken away from a most beautifull maide, and be bestowed on another whose bodie is wholly deformed? But, saith he, our Jnterpretour, as alwaies he is wont, hath followed true and corrected copies: also there, without doubt, where he trneth, and he stood, for, and J stoode, chap. 12.17. and no man could say the song, for, and no man coulde learne the song: chap. 14.3. and the King of ages, for, the King of saints: chap. 15.3. and in the same place, clo∣thed with a pure stone, for, with pure linnen, ver. 6. which art, and which was, holy, for, which art, and which was, and which will be, chap. 16.5. in the same place, J heard another saying, for, I heard an other saying from the altar, ver. 7. at one houre after the beast, for, at one houre with the beast, chap. 17.12. vessels of precious stone, for, of precious woode, chap. 18.12. Let these suffice for a tast of many other. Saw the Iesuite these things, & was he not ashamed to confirme that the old Interpretour hath alwaies followed corrected co∣pies? But these are faultes of the Printers. It may be some are. But what have we to do with the Printers thereof, as though the strife were not cō∣cerning the greeke and latine copies which now are extant, but of the first edition of the latine translation, which no where at this daie is to be seen? Next, these are faultes both ancient and also now confirmed by the autho∣rty of the Councell of Trent; which hath set downe and decreed, that of many latine editions, this old and common translation, which through
so long experience of ages hath bin approved in the Church it selfe, be ac∣counted authenticke, nor be refused under any pretence whatsoever, it were an easie thing to shift of the authority of the Counsell, if by putting over the fault to the Printers of the bookes, it were lawfull to departe frō the common edition. Thou seest then that those faultes must be made good by thee, and the fidelitie of the old Interpretour very ignorantly, I will not say impudently, boasted of, though in deede so it was needfull for thee, by reason of that dutifulnes wherby thou art bounde to Rome. 6 And hath made; that is, and which hath made, by a want of the relative, as but now we have said. All those things tende hereunto, that they may teach that Christ hath not these good things for himselfe alone, wherwith we have heard by the wordes last handled, he is endued, but doth poure them on the elect, wherby they may be blessed thorough the participation of them. ¶ Kings and Priests to God: Some reade, A Kingdome and Priests, as also the common translation hath. It makes not much for the meaning: yet it is more likely that there is a conioining of persons betweene themselves, than of things and persons. The elect are Kings by participating of Christs Kingdome: through which we have overcome the law, death, and sinne, and doe daiely triumphe over the world, treading under foote the same by faith, 1 Ioh. 5.4.5. By him also we are Priests: who being dead in him, we have God mercifull to us, and a waie opened to call boldly on him. But he addeth wariely that we are made Kings and Priests to God, that we maie not thinke that this honour is given to us, eyther to trouble civill matters or to confound Churches politie. ¶ To him be glory: This is all that we can render for his exceeding bene∣fits, namely to wish that by his righteous praises he be celebrated amōgst all men. And this thankesgiving seemes to be undertaken for Gods pre∣sent gift thorough the knowledge of Christ poured forth on the Gētiles. Beholde he commeth with the cloudes. A benefite to come to be expected at his glorious coming. To come with the cloudes, is to manifest himselfe with a storme and tempest and wonderfull terrour of vehement and great ligh∣tening, to be avenged on the wicked and to deliver his. After which ma∣ner Daniell also speaketh of his coming: J saw in the visions of the night, that behold one like to the sonne of man came with the cloudes of heaven, chap. 7.13. For so the notable iudgements of God, ar wont to be described, by which he poureth forth his fervent wrath on his enemies, that we maie thinke that all creatures doe fight for God, also he will use the heavē & the earth to helpe his people: and furthermore that the reprobate shall have no
meanes to escape. After the like maner the Psalmist being delivered out of the handes of his enemies, praiseth God for his power shewed from hea∣ven in delivering of him Ps. 18.13.14.15. In Mathew it is saide he will come on the cloudes, chap. 24.30. but it may be in the same sence, which is in Ps. 18.11. and he sate on the Cherubins and did flie &c. But the Angels affirme, that he will come as they had seene him going into heaven, Act. 1.11. And no feare was there: onely the cloude tooke him awaie out of their sight, but without any stricking of terrour. But the similitude seemeth to be refer∣red to the truth of the humane nature, in which he shall returne to be seen of all men, after which sorte he went into heaven, not for the pompe and maiestie of his coming: or the Angels speake in regard of the Godly, to whom his coming shall be most ioyfull: for which the reprobate shall in vaine desire that the mountaines should cover them. All be it, it shall be manifest by those things that follow, that here these wordes are not spo∣ken of his last coming, but onely allude unto it because of the similitude. ¶ And they shall waile over him: Here the wailing is of repentance, not of desperation, as is plaine out of Zachary, from whence these wordes are fetched, and they shall looke, saith he, to him whom they have perc d, and they shall lament over him, as a lamentation for their onely begotten, chap. 12.10. But see∣ing that when men shall stand before the throne of the universall iudge∣ment, their repentance shall be to late: by no meanes these things seeme that they can be ūderstood of the last iudgemēt: neither of that his coming with the cloudes, which but now he spake of, but rather of that his excellēt glory, which shall be manifest in the world in the calling of the Iewes. Those are they which once perced him, but at length they shall beholde him: & all the Tribes of the earth, that is, the whole nation of the Iewes, shall with aboundāce of teares bewaile the wickednes of their ancestours for delive∣ring Christ to death. And in deede the Revelation staies her narration upō their conversion, as hereafter God willing it shall be manifest. And becau∣se then the glory of Christ shall be very great in the earth, a most lively pat¦terne of that, which shall shine in the last daye, a preparation unto this is brought for the beautifying of it: Neither alone in this place, but as it see∣meth also in many other. ¶ All Tribes; These things are proper to the Iewes, to whom once tribe by tribe the promised land was divided. The thing could not in more exquisite wordes be declared. Sometime the tribes are taken meta∣phorically, but in no wise here, seeing that Zachary mentioneth by name the Iewish tribes; The land saith he, shall lament, every family apart: the family of the house of David part: the family of the house of Levy apart; all the rest of
the families, every familie apart: The lamenters here, are those, which were percers: and the tribes are of those that lamented, & therefore of them which perced him, to wit, of the Iewes: to whom properly this sinne be∣longs. Therefore these wordes of the Apostle are thus, as if he should saie, Beholde he comes with the cloudes, & all men of all sortes shall see him, also those which perced him, to wit, the Iewes, whose predecessours crucified Christ, and perced his side with aspeare: these being scatered every where thorough all nations, shall at length be convertd to the true faith, & for earnest grief shall morne: both for the dete¦stable iniquity of their forefathers, and also for their so long hardening, yea Amen. And so finally this is the summe of all, that the benefite of Christ partly present is here celebrated in the calling of the Gentiles, (for that which he before spake of Kings and Priestes, is referred to the seaven Churches of A∣sia, that is, to all the Gentiles embracing Christ at that present, for which cause there is attributed to him the praise of glory & power,) partly to come in the calling of the Iewes, which we have declared to us both by their re∣pentance, and also by the desire and wishe of all the Godly. ¶ Yea Amen: The fervent desire of the Godly desiring this coming, is expressed in greeke and hebrew, for this shall be the wishe of all nations. The first particle is properly of one affirming, shewing the certaintie of a thing, in which yet maie be understoode the wishing verbe, Let it be done, or some such like worde: For so it is in the end of the booke, Yea come Lord Iesus, as if he should saie, I beseech thee come so as thou hast promised, chap. 22.20. It is like that both the particles are used in the same sence, otherwise the diversitie both of tongue and signification woulde not note out any coniunction of all people, to which end this twofolde proper for∣me of spech seemes to be used. Amen, not onely apperteines to one asse∣vering, but also supplicating, and earnestly striving, that the thing maie come to passe, as in Ieremy chap. 28.6. Amen, so doe it, the last expun∣ding the former. 9 J am Alpha and Omega: Hitherto hath bene the Inscription of the Epi∣stle, now he entreth into the narration it selfe: where first for the authoritie of the writing undertaken, there is set downe a threefold propertie of the person calling, the excelling power of creating, truth in his promises, and exceeding power of governing The power is first declared metaphorically, and after∣wards in proper wordes. For the beginning & ending doe expounde what Alpha & Omega meane, of which that is the first, and this the last letter of the Greeke Alphabet: by a metaphore they are applyed to any beginning and ending whatsoever. The wordes are plainely of a certeine order and relation to the creature: In which respect they can not properly note out
eternitie, which thing is absolute, nor in any regard is to be measured ac∣cording to the creature: Therefore I am Alpha and Omega have this mea∣ning, to wit, the maker of all things, and againe the end whereunto all things are to be referred, who in the beginning have made all things, and that for my owne glory. It is the abridgement of that which the wise man saieth, the Lord hath wrought all things for himself: yea the wicked for the daie of e∣vill, Prov. 16.4. The constant veritie of God in his promises is declared by a distribution of a threefolde time, as we have shewed out of ver. 4. His Allmightines in the end of the verse seemes to appertaine to that excellent power of governing all things according to his will: in which there shines no lesse his incomprehensible maiestie, then in the first creation of things. For this teacheth that his strength was not spent in his first worke, but for ever is of force without any lessening: which is not tired with any weari∣nes, nether oppressed with the weight of busines, but remaines infinitely beyond all power of any created spirit in doing all things. Such a one is he from whome the commaundement of writing proceedeth, a most mightye creatour, a most faithfull promiser, and the chiefe hovernour of all things. 9 I John: The person also called hath great weight for credit, I John an A¦postle, a brother and companion in affliction, banished into Patmos for the word of God, ravished from heaven in the spirit on the Lords day; Why should not this man speake most certaine truth? ¶ And the patience of Jesus Christ: The comon translation hath and the pa∣tience in Christ Iesus: So also Montanus, the interpretour of Aretas, by Chr. Iesus: Therehy the sence is nothing at all or but litle changed, whether a∣ny reade it according to the construction, as Th. Beza, or as these with a preposition. All tende hereunto, that the communion of the faithfull, (be it either of affliction or of a Kingdome) leane on Christ the alone head, as upon the grounde and foundation. We must take heede lest with the Ie∣suite we doe interprete in Christ Jesus for the end, for Christ Jesus: for so the communion of the Kingdome amongest the faithfull should be establi∣shed without Christ: as if all shoulde not together grow up in him, but shoulde as it were be ioined together betwene themselves into some out∣ward thing a part from him. Patmos, an Iland of the sea Icarium, thirtie miles in compasse: at this daie it is called Palmosa, as the latter Geographers would have it: But in Strabo it hath nothing memorable except the name: He is wont to men∣tion carefully even the very woodes of Palme trees, if there be any: much more woulde he have mētioned so great plentie, wherby the Iland should
be worthie to be renowmed: whereupon this name maye iustly be suspe∣cted: unlesse perhaps the succeeding age caused it to be more happie in fruitfulnes. Munster supposeth that Patmos is that Possidium of which Ptolemaeus speakes in his tables of Geography, booke 5. chap. 2. but Pos∣sidium in the same place is a Promontorie of the Isle Chios, not farre of from the ci∣ty Chios, from thence they saile about the Yland, and leave it on the right hand, Str. book. 14. But Patmos lies together with Corasius towards the west of Ica∣ria, but this towards the west of Samos, Strab. book 10. But thou must observe, that Ihon doth not plainely mention his banishement, but onely that he was in the Isle, soberly bearing his misery, not proudely augmen∣ting it by vaine boasting. ¶ For the word of God:: That is, for having preacht it, not for to preach it: For Iohn of his accord went not thither to preach, but because he had preached at Ephesus and elswhere in Asia, Domitian the tyrant, as Ireneus and others record, banished him thither. The same Isle seemeth to have bin almost desolate and voide of inhabitants, considering especially that the neighbour Iland Icaria much more renowmed, because of the scarcity of inhabitans, as Strabo reportes, did bestowe the use and commoditie of their pastures on the soraine Samians. 10 And I was ravished in the Spirit: , I was in the Spirit: that is, I began to be moved in the spirit for to see and understand those things, which doe farre surpasse mans capacity, as of old the auncient Prophetes being led by the same spirit, did pronunce of things to come, with no lesse certainty then of things present or past. After the same maner Marck speaketh of another kinde of spirit, And there was in their Synagogue a man with an uncleane spirit, chap. 1.23. And againe, there met him a man out of the sepulchres in an uncleane spirit, chap. 5.2. but altogether contrarie in the maner of operation, not onely in respect of holines or unholines, but also of the sweete and quiet motion, seing that the agitations with which the most wicked spirits doe tormente men, are violent and fearfull: whence the Possessed are most comonly depryved either of all their senses, or at the least of some of them: but those who are filled with the holy Ghost, they are more strenghtned in all the faculties of the soule. Both have them obe¦diēt to thē whō they doe possesse, but the one by gracious inclining, the o∣ther by cruell constraining, as the exemples of the one and of the other doe make it plaine. ¶ On a Lords day: see of this Th. Bezam: It is verie like that there was not any holy assemblie in this daie in the Jland, otherwise Ihon would not have walked alone in the shore, & bin solely occupyed in receaving the heavēly
visions, after chap. 12.18. Neither is there any mention that these Pro∣phecies were receaved by distinct times, as it is wōt in the other Prophets, whensoever there is occasion, but they seeme to have bin given all in the same day, and so to have flowed with a continuall course, that there was no intermission after that the faculty of seeing was once given. The com∣maundement also of writing unto the Churches seemes to require the same. For if there had bin any space of time between, he would have had written by parts and peces to the Churches, not waiting for the thinges that would follow, unlesse paradventure he should have bin otherwise ad∣monished, which we doe not reade in this Prophecy to have bin done. But all these things are gathered in one Epistle and not divided in divers. But the solitarines of Iohn was well recompensed, having for teacher God him selfe, when it may be he had none whom he might teach. These thinges being thus expounded, he goeth on into that which concernes his cal∣ling, by which it doth appeare that this charge was imposed upon him by God ¶ And I heard behind me: This worde behind me is wont to shadow out the free mercie of God, which recalleth us being carelesse, not regarding, negligent, nor thinking of any such thing, for to receave most worthy things. In Isaiah amongest other instructions of the heavenly grace, there is made mention of this as of a chiefe thing, & thy eares, saith he, shall heare a word behind thee, saying, this is that way, walke through it, when thou shalt go to the right hand, or to the left hand, chap. 30.21. Wherfore neither Iohn al∣together in heavenly contemplations, preventeth the heavenly grace: but as it were one of the comon people, heareth a voice behind him, war∣ning of the comon unadvisednes of us all: For we are all unapte to com∣prehend heavenly things, untill unwares we be endued with the faculty of them: which none of our owne dignity doeth procure to us, but Gods mercie alone. And the voice was great, as of a trumpet, least we should thinke that any thing being whispered somewhat softlie was paradventure hiddē from Iohn: Nothing here coulde be hidden or passed by, when the eares rang with so loude and shrill a voice: it is a great argument of the certain∣ty of the things which are to be uttered. 11 Saying, I am Alpha and Omega: These wordes were above, ver. 8. But there of Iohn describing the person, whose authority he followed in wri∣ting this Prophecy: here these wordes are of Christ himselfe, uttering the same with his owne voice. Therefore Iohn above using this forme, drew it not forth out of the shoppe of his owne braine, but brought it from hea∣ven, from whence ther can come nothing but most holy. Aretas, the co∣mon
translation and the Complutensis reade not these wordes: but they seeme to be rashly rased by some man, because perhaps they were repeated having so few things interlaced. But there was to be a dictinctiō betweene Iohn and Christ, neither are these things to be accounted superfluous, which do teach by what authour these wordes were first used. ¶ What thou seest write in a booke; that namely, which by and by thou shalt see, and likewise also heare. This expresse commaundement of writing, al∣so to whom by name he should write, sheweth that this was not a volun∣tary message, but commaunded and appointed of God. ¶ Which are in Asia, in Ephesus &c. Above in the fourth verse, onely uni¦versally it was saide in Asia: but by naming of these cities, we understand that the whole continent is not meant, which by this name is celebrated for the thirde parte of the world, but onely certeine litle part thereof, which usually is properly so called. Which lying in an Iland to the Sea Eu¦xinum Aegaeum and Pamphileum, is bounded on the North with Bithynia: on the west with the sea Hellespontus and Aegaeum: on the South with Licia: on the East partly with Licia, partly with Pamphilia and Galatia. In this part of the world flourished of olde tyme these seaven most famous cities, representing here the whole Church amongest the Gentiles. As touching Ephesus,Ephesus. it is a very noble citie by the sea shore of Icarium, not farre from the river Caister, the head citie of Ionia, the greatest marte of all Asia with∣in Taurus, famous because of the Temple of Diana: very well knowne to Christians for the three yeare labour of Paule Act. 19.20. and 20.31, for an heavenly Epistle written to this people, and for Timothy their Pastour bestowed on them, and also afterward for many yeares most fruitfull watering of John the Apo∣stle. Smyrna,Smyrna. a city also of the sea coast of Ionia, on the North of Ephesus, being distant from thence three hundred and twentie furlongs: a Colonie of the Ephesians, with whom in former time they dwelt together: mightie in olde time and having iurisdiction over certeine cities neere adioining, as also Ephesus, in which the meetings of the subiect cities were, See pli. book 5. chap. 29. PergamusPergamū. is a citie of Aeolia towardes the North of Smyr∣na, very glorious, and being the chiefe amongest the middleland cities, once the seate of the Kings of Attalia: which at length became the Roma∣nes, they being appointed the heires by the last Attalus, which brought the countrie into a Province, and called it Asia by the name of the Continent, swallowing up by hope doubtlesse from this small beginning, that whole parte of the world: as though Attalus had not onely bequeathed to them Pergamum, but also all Asia by his testament, whence, unlesse I be decea∣ved, was the first distinction of lesser Asia. ThyatiraThyatira. is the last citie of the
Mysians, a Colonie of the Macedonians, towardes the south of Pergamum, to whose iurisdiction it likewise apperteineth. In time past it was called of Seleucus the sonne of Nicator Thugatheira, for the ioyfull newes of a daugh¦ter that was borne to him: hereof Lydia the purple seller was a citizen, of whom there is mention made Act. 16.14. a stranger of Philippi, as it see∣meth. SardisSardis. is from Pergamum towardes the South about sixe hundred furlongs. Once the chiefe citie of the Lydians, happy by reason of the rich mountaine Tmolus, and Pactolus that yeeldes gold, which runneth through her fieldes. Shee was also of great dignity in the latter ages, ha∣ving chiefe iurisdiction, taking from thence the name of Sardinia, see Plin. booke 5. 29. Philadelphia,Philadelp. of which there is here mention made (for there are three of this name) is of Lidia, or rather of Cecaumena, that is, of the burnt country in the very borders of Lidia and Mysia. Of old a city not populous, even when it most of all florished, because of the dangerous dwelling by reason of often earthquakes, the most parte live in the coun∣try: but, saith Strabo, we maie iustly mervaile at these few, who for desire of the place, are carelesse of danger, and heedelesse of sffetie: or rather what the builders of the city minded. LaodicaeaLaodicaea. by the river Lycus, one of the greatest cities of Phrygia, which reacheth to Caria, neare to Colossie, to whom Paule a priso∣ner at Rome wrote, commaunding that the Epistle should openly be read in the Church of Laodicaea: Whose letters also he commaundeth that the Colosians should reade, Col. 4.16. A citie in time past of great wealth, partly tho∣rough the liberality of the cityzens, who by their Testaments gave to it great riches, partly by reason of selling of excellent soft woole, and blacke as a raven, for which causes their neighbours did much desire it. Such are the seaven cities, to whom this Prophecy was by name delivered, described as in a table. Some man perhapes maie mervaile where Rome then was, to whome in steede of all it might have bin written very breifly, as to her who bragge that shee is the head of all. Verily Christ forgate himselfe, who pas¦sed over his vicare, nor would not send him so much as one letter, who o∣nely seemed to have bin spokē unto. But there is a ready answer, why he wrote not to him, he knew that he could not erre, nor had neede of an ad∣monisher. Let therefore this omissiō be one of the prerogatives of Rome. 12. I turned me therefore that J might see: To see is taken sometimes by synec∣doche for to perceive, as Exo. 20.18. The whole people saw voices & great ligh∣tenings, & the sounde of a trūpet &c. that is, perceaved. But here it remaines in his proper signification, whē he had sufficiently perceaved by hearing, & he now turned himselfe that he might use the benefite of the other sēce. Ther∣fore
the other worde is chāged frō his native significatiō, noting by a voice the man whose voice he thought it was. ¶ And being turned &c. So was the hearing: the things seene are partly thinges, partly a person. The thinges are seaven golden candlestickes: the interpretation whereof we shall learne beneath at ver. 20. In the meane while let us note that every godly endevour receaved greater fruite thē was loked for. Iohn doeth turne himselfe that he might see the man: beholde moreover seaven candlestickes, of which he suspected nothing. 13. And in the middes &c. The person seene is Christ himselfe, as is under∣stoode out of ver. 17.18. like the sonne of man, because in a new shape taken unto him, he caused himself to be seene, not in that native forme which he tooke of the Virgine, & in which full of glory he sitted at the right hand of the father, which may be the reason why the articles are not prefixed, as in o∣ther places, as Th. Beza hath observed. This fourme is put on for the pre∣sent condition of the Church, & therefore an other is taken, where an o∣ther estate of the bride is described, ch. 19.11, 12. &c. Evē as also it cōmeth to passe elswhere in many places, for Christ alwaies is one & unchangea∣ble: neither for his owne sake doeth he so often change his fourme, to whō no alteration befalleth, nor any shadow of turning: but when according to his di∣vers administration he useth a divers condition of the bride, wherby he may both testify his conionctiō with her, & also may shew that he in those alterations of tymes forgettes her not: he takes upon him fourme fit for the thinges. He suffereth when shee suffereth: he also triumpheth toge∣ther with her: what mervaile is it then in so neare a society, if he susteine also a comon shape? According to the same meaning Ireneus expoundeth this divers fourme, So, saith he, the word of God alwaies hath as it were the pro∣portion of things to come, and shewed forth to men as it were the fourme of his fathers disposition, teaching us what are the thinges of God, book 4. ch. 37. Neither is it without cause, that he is with this habite in the middest of the cādle∣stickes, manifesting by the same that this adorning doeth not simply & ab¦solutely belōg to him, but as farre forth as he is cōversāt with the Church for speciall time. Wherefore in such visions, we must not so much seeke what a one Christ is in himselfe, as what his administration is, & what a one the bride is therby, which he setteth forth to be viewed in himselfe as in a glasse. Therefore as touching the interpretation of the speciall thinges, the long garment is the perfect imputed righteousnes of CHRIST, where∣with the bride is wholy covered from top to toe, so as no filthy nakednes appeareth. For this garment is not necessarie to Chr. but serveth to cover the bride, which notwithstāding Chr. weareth on his bodie, declaring how comely for those times in this regard shee should be.
Neither lesse often than significantly, is the righteousnes of faith set forth by a garment. Blessed, saith the Psalmist, is the man whose sinne is covered, Psal. 32 1. And the guest wanting this garment, is cast into utter darkenes, Mat. 22.12. Afterward in this booke, they are pronounced blessed which watch and keepe their garmētes, lest they walke naked, & their shame be seene ch. 16.15. & oftē times so in other places. And what doeth more fitlie resēble the righteousnes of faith, which loatheth our inherent righteousnes as a menstruous clothe, neither can rest in any other thing, except in this one garment of Christes righ∣teousnes. ¶ And girded about the pappes with a golden girdle: made of silken threeds covered with golde. But was the girdle made of such threeds onely? But the Priestes girdle was made of embroidered worke, pictured with scarlet, purple, vio∣let and yellow flowers, Exod. 28.39. Whose stuffe was onely of silke, as Io∣sephe of the Antiquities book. 3. chap. 8. And this girdle was comon to all the Priests: There was another appertaining to the high Priest, differing onely in this one thing, that it was wrought with golde, as Iosephus there speakes. This then is a golden girdle, not that it was wholly of golde, but be¦cause the girdle of the High Priest was for this difference excellent. Nei∣ther is this girdle proper to Christ, but to the Bride: for which cause this same is the girdle of the Angels, beneath chap. 15.6. The which we doe atteine by Christ alone, which hath not onely made his elect, Priestes, but also hath brought them to the honour of the chiefe Priest. Seing therefore that this girdle is ours, it signifieth most pretious faith in the heart. And it is of Golde because, what is more Golden and pretious than true faith? Yea whose triall is much more pretious than golde that perished, 1 Pet. 1.7. This girding is about the pappes, because, except faith hath her seat in the heart it is no faith. And therefore the seaven Angels are girded after this ma∣ner chap. 15.6. because otherwaies it is wont to belonge to the loines, es∣pecially under the law, when faith was not plainely delivered, but lustes were restreyned by the instruction of the ceremonies & rites. But now the bride having obteined more plentifull grace, should remove the girdle frō the loines to the pappes, straitly tying and binding to her those garments by a true faith of the heart, lest being loosed and ungirded they slide downe and spread abroade. 14 And his head and haires &c. The garment and girdle are comon to all memhers: in the head & the haires there is a certeine distribution, wher∣of the former concerneth those which rule in the Christian assemblies, and are to them as heades: the haires do signifie the comon Christian people, which dependeth on the holie teachers, drawing nourishement and orna¦ment
from them, and they bestowing againe on them decking and defēce. Both of them is white, flourishing in the seaven Churches, or rather in the first of the seaven Churches by a singular puritie. For we shall see that this order of the mēbers hath referēce after a sorte to the order of the Church∣ches. Although those thinges which are related here in the last place, in the Epistles are attributed to the first: which reversing of order doe teach that those properties are in such sorte agreeing to some, as that also according to the occasiō they are proper to others. But the whitenes is of wool & snow: of the former, for the simplicity of maners, wherewith the saintes are en∣dued, which every where are called sheepe, and not without cause, seing our head is a lambe: of the latter, because this puritie and whitnes is not naturall, but borowed. For wooll by nature is filthie in greasines, full of dust & ma∣ny other defylings, but being thoroughly washed in the most cleare foun∣taine of Christs righteousnes, it exceedeth snow it selfe, or whatsoever ex∣celleth in the glory of whitnes. So great a thing is it to seeke righteous∣nes not in our selves but in another, that the Spirit contentes not himselfe with one similitude of the garment, but also adioineth the similitude of snow, and many other reasons in other places, shewing howe greatly he would have us to minde this doctrine, & that on every side it should soūde in our eares. ¶ And his eies as a flame of fire: Overcoming darkenes, from which eies no darkenes takes awaie the sight. Which kind of eyes did especially shine in the first of the seaven Churches; in which we shall see that the truth shi∣ned so clearely, that no craft of heretikes coulde darken the same. All their vaine shewes were consumed as stubble with these fierie eise, or as cove∣rings of waxe they do melt forthwith, and do openly bewraie their hid∣den deceit. 15 And his feete were as fine shining Brasse: Wherefore passeth he so quickly from the heade & eies to the feete? especially seing there follow the voice, handes, mouth and face. It is not rashly done, but in that order the mem∣bers are described, which doeth most fitly agree to the Churches. Now therefore he teacheth after that first, what is the estate of the next Church∣ches, where the faithfull are feete, & like to Brasse of Lebanon: for they were the head, haires & eies in an other respect and maner. One member could not declare the whole estate of the Bride, for which cause there are more used, and so much the more because he whom Ihon saw, was like to the sonne of man. As touching Lebanons Brasse, Th. Beza doeth well reteine the greke worde in his translation. Copper is manifest to the Latines, ney∣ther do I beleeve that it sufficiently expresseth the singular elegācy of this
Brasse digged out of Lebanon. For Aretas yeildeth the same reasō of this word. And we know that a possession which engendred metalles befell to the tribe of Asher, who had his seate at the foote of this mountaine. For so Moses speaketh, Iron and Brasse shall be thy shoe, speaking of that coast where this tribe was seated, Deut. 33.25. Some had rather that here it should have the signification of Frankincense: the authour also of which iudgement is Aretas, as it were doubtfull betweene both: all be it he plain¦ly relateth not that this signification is as it were, drawne from use, or ta∣ken out of any approved authour, but as though the composition of the word should signify some such thing. But Anthoine Nebrissensis bringes somewhat of weight for this point, writing (as it is recorded of Frauncis de Ribera) that this title is frequent in Orpheus amongest his hymnes, Chal∣colibanus for Apollo, for Latona, and other Gods; that is, as he interpreteth, the male Frankincense, or the sacrifice of the male Frankincense: as in Virgile in his Bucolickes, and offer for sacrifice the fate vervin and male Frankincense: But I thinke that the wordes which follow contradict it, burning as in a fornace. Si∣militudes are wont to be fetcht from usuall & accoustumed things: but we reade no where of such a prodigall wast of Frankincense, noe not when Ale∣xander himselfe sacrificed, that it should be burned in an oven or fornace, which onely was to be burnt on an altare: Therefore that first significatiō of metall seemeth to be better: chiefly seing the visiōs alreadie before made are according to this maner recorded. In Ezechiel, his feete are like to shining brasse, ch. 1.17. of shining brasse in Dan. ch. 10.6. As touching Orpheus, let the learned cōsider whether Chalcolibanus for Apollo, may not be an image of brasse of Lebanons for Apollo, as if he should saie, that he by his verse, did as it were erect an image of most pretious brasse for Apollo. They wer wont in ancient time to cōsecrate to their Gods other things besides frāk¦incense: according to which custome Synesius a Christiā Poet nameth his Hymnes crownes & garlandes; J make for thee this garland from the holy meadowes. Hym. 3. Such a thing therefore is this Lebanons brasse, whose feete burning in a fornace being like, shew the afflicted spouse in the Churches of Smyrna & Pergamum: which yet receaved no damage by affliction, but through the strength of brasse should continue invincible, & should shine much more cleare than fire. The comō latine translation for Lebanons brasse, readeth copper. The Iesuite according to his wont, that he might by some probable reason hide the errour thinketh that the olde Interpretour first translated it Le∣banons brasse, as it is in the greeke, & that afterwards this word was corrup∣ted by printers or unlearned. But what needs this defēce? Wherefore hath not the translatour here as alwaies followed the best corrected copies: if
the greeke bookes are corrupted? It is foolishnes to bring a thing to the rule which is righter thā the rule it selfe? But the power of the truth carri∣eth the mā that gainesaies it frō his iudgement, & drives him into cōtrarie opiniōs. ¶ And his voice as the voice of many &c. This similitude is often, & for the most parte noteth an huge tumult: in this booke, as it seemeth, it is of a large signification, declaring besides the greatnes of the noise, a certaine unconceavable (as I may so say) notion of things; as is the disordered and confused noise of waters: which storming with contrary waves, & rushing against the shoare rockes, yeilde a certaine huge noise, yet no mā distinct¦ly perceaveth, what all that noise meaneth. Such should by Christs admi∣nistration be the word of truth in the same Churches, in which the feete should be like to burning lebanons brasse. To the heathenish men that lived yea in most pure Ephesus, the truth was a certaine unsavoury and untastable thing, neither sounded it any other thing then barbarous and unpleasant. Cornelius Tacitus calleth the doctrine of the Gospell a certeine deadly superstiti¦on, shewing by his wicked blasphemy not so much his owne as the comon hatred of all the Gētiles, book 15. Suetonius recite that the Christiās were afflicted by torments, that they were a kinde of men of strong & wicked su¦perstitiō, in Nron ch. 16. Pline a very learned & wise mā in a certaine Epi∣stle to Traiane singes the same song, he writes, that when he had enquired of 2 mades, which were said to be the servantes of certaine Chrestians by tormentes, what was the truth, he founde no other thing than wicked & unreasonable superstition, the infection whereof had not onely runne thorough the cities, but also the villages & coū¦trey &c. How doeth the sounde of the truth to such men seeme a certaine rude & vaine beating of waves? Their eares were filled with a sounde, wher¦of they conceaved no sence. And we shall see in the next chapter how these although Gentiles, perteined to Ephesus. But not alone of this kinde of men the wholesome truth was accounted barbarous, but also of many of Chri∣stian profesion in the Church of Smyrna, Pergamus, and the neighbour Churches. Errours & perverse opinions so possessed many, that they were altogither deafe to wholesome doctrine, neither tasted any sweetenes of it, as it will be more plaine in the next chapter. And he had in his right hand seaven starres: He did so defend with his migh¦ty right hand the Teachers of the truth (for these are the starres, as be∣neath i taught vers. 20.) afflicted with many evills, that in all miseries they were conquerours. Although this thing be common to all Church∣ches, yet in those it is cheefly seene, Where the feete doe burne in an oven, and the truth either not heard, or not understood.
Even there we shall see many delivered to death, but for one many forth∣with to arise: neither onely doeth the power of his defending right hand so manifest it selfe, but also in repelling the conspiracies which the wicked doe make to his Ambassadours. ¶ And out of his mouth a two edged sworde: This sworde is the most mightie word of God, more percing than any two edged sworde: It searcheth the reines, and pronounced sentence against the wicked and unbeleevers: Neither doth one iote, or any note become voide and of no effect. It wondeth and killeth, bringing upon the wicked those calamities which it threatneth. Now it cometh out of the mouth, because in the Church of Pergamus Christ would ap∣prove his most holy severity to the world in punishing sinnes, unlesse, saith he, they repent, J will fight against them with the sworde of my mouth, chah. 2.16. as it shall more fully be spoken of there. ¶ And his face shineth as the Sunne in his strength: The face or counteance of Christ, is his worship appointed from God, in which he is seene of his as cleerly as we doe beholde thinges before us: Wherto perteine those exhor¦tations, Seeke yee my face, Psal. 27.8.: Seeke the Lord and his strength: Seeke his face alwayes, Psal. 150.4. Asthough he should say, trust alway in the Lord and apply your selves to the holy study of those thinges, with which he hath taugh that he himselfe is to be worshiped. As long as we bestowe our labour thus, we are conversant in the sight of the Lord, but as soone as the fucalty to be at his publike worship is taken away, we are banished from his face: as Cain complaineth, being cast out of the Church for the murther of his brother, that he was hidden from his face, Gen. 4.14. There∣fore the whole religion of Christ perteining either to doctrine or to pray∣ers, sacraments & discipline should shine most purely in these Churches. For the reason of order requireth, that in the last place the shining face should signify that the last of the seaven Churches should be famous by the cleere vision of Christ. And among these (as we shall see) Philadelphia obtaineth the chiefe praise: the other so beholde the open face of Christ, that they may rather perceive that Christ is angry with them, then reioyce in any of his favorable beholding or countenance. Therefore the whole type or figure hath this summe: That the first of the seaven Churches is no table, by the righteousnes of Christ, thorough the faith and holines of the people, and mervailous quicknes of understanding of the teachers, by whose bright eyes the darknes of errours are driven far away: that those Churches in the middes are on fyre through greate affliction, yet that the truth was not altogether overwhelmed, but did make a lowde noise as the fall of the river Nilus although to very many, it was but as the unconstant
dashing of the waves: That the last Churches had their teachers whole & sound, kept the trueth mighty to subdue the enemies, and a great purity of the whole religion. For nowe it shalbe sufficient to distinguish them in to three degrees for plainesse sake: we will folow a more accurate distribu∣tion, when we shall intreate of them severally. 17 I fell at his feete as dead. Thus was the type from the consequents. First, the great feare of John offers it selfe, such as in the like matter hath befallen other holy men. So great is the infirmity of our nature, and conscience of depravation, that it can in noe wise endure the least shewe of Gods maie∣sty, Dan. 8.9. &c. which is another argument for the credit of the hea∣venly vision. ¶ Feare not; A consolation very necessary, cōsidering that Ihon had not bin able to perceive the things either heard or seen, unlesse he had first bin recreated and confirmed from his feare. And so it is wont to come to passe in holy visions: the evill spirits contrarywise doe increase feare, asmuch as they can, desiring to overwhelme men with feare and desperation. The places of consolation are from his universall power over all things created, in this verse, & by name from his victory and power over death in the verse follow¦ing. Those wordes first & last have great power to confort: for why may not John be of good courage, when he biddeth not to feare, who in the begin¦ning created all things, and is able to bring them to nothing againe at his pleasure: unlesse peradventure, the words first and last are to be referred to glory and humility, then he is the first nowe among all things created, or rather above all things in honour and maiesty, who once being conversāt on earth did seeme the basest among men: Asthough he should say, feare not at the sight of my glory, which is augmented above that you cā think, yet not for your destruction, but salvation. And as once yee have known me the most humble of all men, so in this unmeasurable glory, I reteine my former minde, & doe not despise or neglect you dust and earth. Words full of confort, but in this sense they were to be changed, I am the last and first, because the humility did goe before glory, neyther now should that be placed in the latter place which hah bin swallowed up of the maiestie, coming upon it: unlesse peradvēture they have this sense, I am now the first, who of late was the last: or the order of the wordes being kept, I which was the first, in the beginning being with God, equall to the father, at length taking upō me the forme of a servant, became in the account of the world the last. Both which sentences make for the secōd interpretation, & make it more probable. ¶ And who am alive: Specially he maketh mention of his victory over
death, that he might erect his minde against the greatest feare in life. These thinges confirmed that he was Christ that appeared to Iohn. Never of a∣ny creature is any thing uttered in the person of God, without all signifi∣cation of ministery: least peradvēture men should thinke him to be God, and should give that to the creature, which is proper to God. ¶ Amen: This is most certain which I say, that I live for ever, for confir¦mation whereof, take not onely a naked affirmation, but also a solemne word of sealing up, Amen; The comon translation readeth not Amen: which neverthelesse is found in all the Greeke bookes, and is found be∣neath chap. 3.14. To which wee must hearken rather then the Tridentine fathers establishing onely this edition authenticall and of authority. ¶ And I have the keyes of hell and of death: There is a transposition of the words in Aretas, the Complutense and the vulgar: and I have the keyes of death and hell. And in the conioining of these words hell is wont to be put after death, as death and hell did follow him chap. 6. ver. 8. so death and hell were cast into the lake chap. 20.14. And so the order of things requi∣reth, seing that hell is the last stinge of death. But seeing those keyes are as well to open as to shut (for because he liveth that was dead, he hath power to make others alive from the dead) here hell is not of the damned, which is wont never to be opened, that any should be fetched from thence, as nei∣ther in ch. 20.13. For how can the hell of the damned be cast into a lake of fyre? Therefore these two doe seeme thus to be distinguished, that death be the very separating and sundring of the soule and body; Hell the state and condition in which the body is after the sundring. 19 Write those things that thou hast seen, and which are &c. The comman∣dement of writing is repeated, but explaned more at large. In the eleventh verse it was commaunded onely, write that which thou seest in a booke: Now he teacheth wherto that perteined, which he saw: to wit, to things both pre∣sent and to come: For these both ioined together doe expound that what thou hast seene. And in every of the Epistles, unto which the partes of this visiō are fitted according to the diverse condition of every one, wee shall finde predictions of future things, so as those words which thou hast seen, can not be restrained to thinges onely present. Seeing therfore the seaven Church∣ches conteine as well future things as things present, the whole Prophecy is not rightly distributed into things present and future. For these two mēbers come together, as after wee shall see, in the singular explication and unfol¦ding of the things. Let us holde therefore that which the wordes plainly teach, that this vision proper to the seaven Churches, is touching things both present and future. The observation of which small thing hath ope¦ned
a way to me to understand (as I thinke) the particular Epistles: which I will that the godly iudge. 20 The Mystery of the seaven starres: In the last place is the interpretation, which onely teacheth of two things, of the starres and candlestickes. Why doth he give no expositiō of other pointes? Because these few were ynough to open his counsell of the whole. For after the same maner the rest are to be applyed to the condition of the Church. And so will the Spirit helpe our weaknes, that he may leave some parts of diligence to us. Although the things that remaine of the vision shall easily be made manifest frō the Epistles, which teach by the condition of every one, wht meaning the rest have which now are kept in silence, as shall be shewed in their places. As touching the words, Mystery is of the fourth case, folowing the verbe Write, which is to be repeated, asthough he should say, write the mystery of the seaven starres; And likewise in the member following, and write the my∣stery of the seaven candlestickes: For he interpreteth the starres to be the An∣gels: The seaven starres (saith he) are the seaven Angels of the Churches, that is, signify the seaven Angels. Which let them observe who hold fast, as it were with the teeth, the letter of the worde in other places. Neither are these Angels spirituall substances, but men Pastours and Bishops, to whō the scripture attribute this name: as, although the Angell of the Lord had come up from Gilgal to Bochim. Iudg. 2.1. So in the Prophet Hagg. Then spake Haggai the Lords messenger, ch. 1.13. And Malachy speaking of the Priests, For he is the Angel of the Lord of hostes. chap. 2.7. How great therefore is the dignity of true Pastours, who both are starres, fixed in no other firma∣ment then in the right hand of Christ, and also Angels. What skilleth it though the wicked skoffe at them with reprochfull names, seeing they be in this reckoning and estimation with God? ¶ And the seaven candlestickes are seaven Churches: Very well compared to a candlestick, wherein the everlasting light of trueth shineth, kindled of Christ the Priest morning and evening continually. This similitude is fet∣ched from the candlestick of the Tabernacle, which was made of pure golde, of worke beaten with hammar, of one shaft, and seaven branches. The multitude of branches signifieth the multitude of particular Churches, as well of Iewes, as of Gentiles. The comon originall from one shaft, the most strait coniun∣ction of particular Churches: all which come forth from that one of the Jewes, as from the shaft. Which shaft was more adorned then the other branches, in one bolle, knop, and floure: because, as it seemeth, the Iewes Church at lēgth shall become more aboundant in the gifts of the spirit, then this ours of the Gentiles: Exod. 25.31. They are then the candlestickes of the Church:
but which by their most pretious matter doe note out onely summarily the excellent dignity of it: Christ himselfe, represented severally the beautie of every of each one of the members, in that figure, wherein he was seene of Iohn. Chap. 2. VNTO the Angel of the Church of Ephesus write, these thinges saith he, that holdeth those seaven starres in his right hande, which walketh in the middes of the seaven candlestickes; 2 I knowe thy workes and thy lahour, and thy patience, and that thou canst not suffer the wicked: and hast tried them, which say that they are Apostles and are not, and hast found them lyars. 3 And thou wast burdened, and doest endure, and for my name hast laboured and wast not wearied. 4 But J have somewhat against thee, that thou hast left thy first love. 5 Be mindfull therefore from whence thou art fallen, and doe the first workes; or els I will come against thee shortly, and remove thy candlesticke out of his place, unlesse thou doest repent. 6 But this thou hast, that thou hatest the workes of the Nicolaitanes, which J also hate. 7 Let him that hath an eare heare what the spirit saith to the Churches, to him that overcometh J will give to eate of that tree of life, which is in the middes of the Para∣dise of God. 8 To the Angell of the Church of Smyrna write, these thinges saith he that is the first and last, who was dead, and is alive. 9 J know thy workes and thy affliction, and poverty (but thou art riche) and the blas∣phemy of them that say they are Jewes and are not, but the synagogue of Sathan. 10 Feare none of those things which thou shalt suffer: Beholde it shall come to passe, that Sathan shall cast some of you into prisn, that you may be tryed; and yee shall have affliction ten dayes: Be faithfull unto death, and I will give thee the crowne of life. 11 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the spirit sayeth to the Churches. He that shall overcome, shall not be hurt of the second death. 12 And to the Angell of the Church of Pergamus write, these thinges saith he, that hath that sharpe two edgedsword. 13 I know thy workes, and where thou dwellest, to wit, where Sathans throne is, and that thou keepest my name, and hast not denyed my faith, yea even in those dayes in which Antipas that my faithfull martyr was slaine among you, where Sathan
dwelleth: 14 But I have a few thinges against thee, that thou hast there those that holde the doctrine of Balaam, who taught Balack to lay a stumbling blocke before the children of Jsrael, that they should eate of those things, which were offred to Jdols, and that they should commit fornication, 15 So also hast thou them, which holde the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, which I hate. 16 Repent: or else J will come against thee quickely and fight with them, with that sword of my mouth. 17 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the spirit saith to the Churches: I will giue to him that overcometh, to eate of the hidden Manna, and J will give him a white stone, and a new name written in the stone, which no man knoweth, but he that receaveth it. 18 And to the Angell of the Church of Thyatira, write, these things saieth the Sonne of God, which hath eyes as a flame of fire, and whose feete are like fine brasse. 19 J know thy workes, and love, and service, and faith, and patience, and thy wor∣kes, and thy last are more then the first. 20 But I have a fewe things against thee, that thou suffrest the woman Iezabell, which saith shee is a Prophetisse, to teach & deceave my servants, that they should cō¦mit fornication & eate of things which are offred to Idols. 21 And I gave her time to repent of her fornication: but she bath not repented. 22 Behold I will cast her into a bead & them that committe adultery with her into very great affliction, unlesse they repent of their workes. 23 And I will kill her children with death, and all the Churches shall know that I am the searcher of the reines and of hearts, & I will give to every one of you accor∣ding to your workes. 24 And to you I say, and the rest of the Thyatirians, whosoever hold not this do∣ctrine & who have not known the deepnesses of Sathan, as they say: I will lay no other burden upon you; 25 Yet that which you have, keepe till I shall come: 26 For if any shall overcome, & observe my workes unto the end, I will give him power over nations. 27 And he shall rule them with a rod of iron, & they shall be broken in pieces as earthen vessels, as I also have received of my father. 28 And I will give him the morning starre. 29 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the spirit saith to the Churches. The Resolution.
HITHERTO in comon that which perteineth to all the seavē Church¦ches: that which is proper to every one foloweth, an Epistle being in∣scribed to every one severally. In every one of which, there is an Inscriptiō, Narration, and Conclusion. The three first, are of the Church falling into a worse estate, of Ephesus, Smyrna, and Pergamum: The other fower are of the same returning: and so as the three next are opposed to the three first, & are answerable one to the other: the Thyatiren, to the Ephesine: the Sardinen, to the Smyrnen: the Philadelphen, to the Pergamen: Onely Laodicaea hath noe equall, wherto she may be compared. As touching the Ephesine, which holdeth the first place, the Inscription is by name to the Angell, describing also him, that gave the Epistle: That he holdeth the seaven starres in his right hand, and walketh amids the candlestickes, ver. 1. The Narration, partly respected praise, commending their labour, pa∣tience, discipline, ver. 2. then their unwearied desire ver. 3. partly reprehensiō, which sheweth their sinne, their first love left, ver. 4. & the remedie, which first he propoundeth, teaching in what thing it consisteth, in a care of their first workes, afterward he inciteth them to use it, partly by a denuntiation of re∣moving the candlesticke, unlesse it be done in time, vers. 5. partly by a rehear¦sall of the cause for which they had bin spared hitherto, ver. 6. The con∣clusion is both epiphonematicall requiring attention: and also remunerant: where the reward is the power to eate of the tree of life, ver. 7. The other Ana¦lyses shall follow every one in his place. Scholions. Langui∣shing Ephe∣sus.TO the Angell: Every one of the Epistles are inscribed to the Pastours, not that they shoul have them privately to themselves, but that they should communicate them with the rest of the Church, as hath bin said be∣fore ch. 1.11. Sende to the seaven Churches which are in Asia, to Ephesus, Smyrna &c. and in the end of every one, let him heare what the spirit saith, not to the Angell alone, but to the Churches. But they are sent to him by name, partly because he is the dispensatour of doctrine, exhortatiō, reproofe &c. even as the use of the Church doth require: partly because the safety of the whole congregation, resteth chiefly upon the integrity of the Pa∣stours. Neither are they sent to any one Angell, but to the whole, that I may so say, College of Pastours, who all are comprehended in this comon word. For there was not one Angell of Ephesus, but many: neither any Prince among them, as is manifest from Paul, who to Myletum sent for the Elders or Bishops of Ephesus, Act. 20.17.28. He would have spared the
multitude, if any one had bin over the rest in authority: or at least wise a∣mong the rest of his admonitions, he would had spoken one word of obe¦dience to the chiefe Bishop. But this preheminence and principalitie, was not yet bred: It began then first, after the Apostles were taken from hu∣mane affaires, except that Diotrephes gave some shew thereof. Therefore under the name of one Angell, he writeth to the whole order of Pastours, for whose praise, or dispraise, the chiefe force of every Epistle is intended. For such is, for the most parte the condition of parti∣cular congregations, as their faithfulnes and diligence shall be. Frō whēce it is, that at the end the admonition is given to the whole congregation, fitted to the administration of the teachers. Neither is it to be thought, that these Epistles were sent severally, and asunder one from an other, but that all were written togither in a comon Epistle, such as we have said this whole Prophecy is, & that every Church fetched from thence that which belongeth to them severally. And these things are comon to all the seaven Angels, to be applied to every one a∣part. ¶ To the Church of Ephesus: Of the city Ephesus we have spoken briefly at the eleventh verse of the first chapter: to which are to be added, the reason of the order, the force of the name, and the Antitype of it, that the counsell of the spirit may the better be understood. There may be a double reason of the order: one that this city setteh before our eyes most of all the Church of the Gētiles like to the Pgall sne, whoring & spēding his patrimony in a farre country, Luke 15.1. &  home we know Christ to have set forth as an image of the convei  alling of the Gentiles. For this city, besides the horrible Idolatry whe she was a leader of other cityes: it was also given to most wrtched riot, casting out of the city a certen mā called Her∣modorus, not for ay other crime, then that he was a thrifty mā: this more over being added, Let noe one of us excell, but if there be any such, let him be in an other place, nd among other men. Tusc. quest. book. 5. leafe 125. a voyce in deede of beasts, &, even ni the sentēce of Ethnikes, worthy of a halter. For thus saith Strabo, All the Ephesians are to be punished by death. Beholde ther∣fore that prodigall sonne, coming againe to his father and running to meete him, and falling on his necke and kissing him. How is the grace of God to be praised, who hath converted us Gentiles, being a gulfe of wickednes, the disposi∣tion of all which we see in this city, into a most glorious palace of salvatiō. We were once the Princes of naughtines, now we are become the head of holines, as this among the seaven Churches: noe lesse excelling in godli∣nes; then of late we did excell in all wickednes. For the Father hath commā∣ded
the best robe to be brought forth, and hath killed the fatted calfe for our sakes. An other reason of the order is, that this city was the formost in embracing the faith among all of that country, from whence it spread to the other neighbour places. For Paul coming to Ephesus, dayly disputed in the schole of one Tyrannus, and that by the space of two yeares, so that all that dwelt in Asia, as well Jewes, as Gentiles, heard the word of the Lord Jesus, Act. 19.9.10. Werefore it is made worthily in the same place, the beginning of Cityes, from whence was the beginning of faith. Now the force of the name is to be declared. For it shalbe cleare in e∣very one, that the Holy Ghost hath chosen purposely those Churches, which even by the very names, as it were by certen markes written on the forehead, should manifest their whole condition. We let passe that Ama∣zon, from whom they report that it tooke the name, that which followeth beneath ver. 4. that thou hast left thy first love, teacheth sufficiently what the Spirit regarded in this city: namely that Ephesus, was as it were omission: whereupon we call her languishing, whose godlines waxeth colde in such sorte, as that at length it is utterly extinguished. How is it to be feared that in this thing also it carieth a type of the Gentils! As touching the Antitype, seeing these seaven cityes containe the univer¦sall condition of the Churches of the Gentiles, as it is manifest enough from those things which have bin said at the first chapter, in every of them not onely that one city is to be regarded, but also some felow Church is to be ioined togither with it, which may directly answere unto it. But of what sorte shall we say that these antitypes are. For were these seavē Church¦ches mad patternes of all Churches of that same time, or of a diverse time? Yf we shall say the first, so as in all ages the Church spred through the whole world, did agree to those seaven, to wit, that one should be an Ephe¦sine, one a Smyrnen, one a Pergamen, and so of the rest, it should alwayes be of one forme, and such as it was in the first times, so it shoul be at this day, against which the use of all times teacheth. Therefore it is needfull, to make every one of them severally types, and in that order, in which they are numbred: but the antitypes are those Churches which being divided ei∣ther by the distance of tymes, or the space of places, doe agree to every one in their order. The conveniency of the thinges will shew sufficiently with∣in what boundes they may be concluded. According to this rule we doe make the first Christian Church the Antitype of the city of Ephesus: which fetching the originall from the preaching of the Apostles, continued even untill Constantine the Great, as those thinges shall make manifest, which shall be taught here after. This is the chiefe of all the following Church∣ches,
even as Ephesus is the first of the seaven cities. ¶ These things saith he that holdeth the seaven starres: A description of him that sent the Epistles, which is divers in every one, yet fetched from the former vision, divers members of it being applied according to the divers condi∣tion of things. Which teacheth abōndantly, both the whole former figure to have shadowed out onely the administration of things, and also to be proper in a manner and peculiar to the seaven Churches. The seaven starres in his right hand, declare that the power of Christ is notable in defēding the Ministers of this Church. He is even as mighty a keeper & faithfull main∣tainer of all his faithfull servants, in what place of the earth, or what time soever they hav bin or shall be; yet in some certē both places and times, he manifesteth himselfe more clearly to the world an avēger, than every wher¦in other, as appeareth both in this city and antitype. As touching the city, Paul, who planted the faith there first, how many adversaries found he there? J will abide, saith he, at phesus till Pentecost, for a great doore and effe∣ctuall is opened to mee, and the adversaries many: 1 Cor. 16.9. Yet we reade not that any calamity came unto him. He was beaten elswhere and stoned & left for dead: but here Demetrius stirring up the workemen against him, he that holdeth the starres in his right hand, not onely kept Paul free from all evill, but also Caius & Aristarchus & Alexander, pacifying the tumulte by the prudence of the towne clarke; Act. 19. The same hand shielded Tychi¦chus and Timotheus, the Angels afterwards of the same Church: Ephes. 6.21. 1 Tim. 1.3. And no lesse the Elders, the ordinary Bishops of the Church, whom Paul called to Miletum to give them his last farwell. At length Iohn came to the same place, and there abode many yeares, stabli∣shing all the neighbour Churches. Neither did the rage of the tyrant pro¦ceede to his death: but at length returning from banishement, he dyed quietly in this city. The power of the mighty and starre bearing hande ga∣ve such safety to his servants. The like power also shined forth in preser∣ving the Pastours through the whole time of the first Church. An huge number indeede of the faithfull were slaine dayly, but this is mervailous, that in the opinion of mē it being necessary that the name of Christ should be extinguished utterly, much more the Pastours, against whom the Ty∣rants raged most of all, there was made dayly so greate increase, that it was spoken then commonly and truly: That the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church. But Christ walketh among the candlestickes, as often as he gi¦veth a manifest proofe of himselfe being present and regarding diligently all thinges which perteine to the salvation of the faithfull. In what city gave he a shew of more plentifull grace & favour, than in Ephesus, wherto
for teachers he gave Paul, Apollos, Tychicus, Timotheus, Iohn the Apostle, besides many other Apostolicall men? And where or when was Christ more manifestly conversant in the earth since his ascension into Heaven, then in those first times, untill about Constantine? He did enrich so aboū¦dantly the Church with all giftes, he pricked foreward their sluggishnes, corrected their negligence, rewarded their vertue, so as he might seeme by himselfe to compasse every one, and view their labour with his owne eyes. In one & the same maner he is alwayes amōg the cādlestickes, neither doth he sit idly, but walketh about continually, & cometh to visit every thng, so that he hath no need of a Vicar: yet because by outward arguments, this is not oftentimes alike manifest to the world, therfore that which is properly & singularly belōging as it were to one city & time, is alleaged. ¶ J know thy workes: A narration, and first of praise. And it is common to all the Epistles, in the beginning of the narration, to professe that he knoweth certenly and tryeth every Angels workes. Therefore neither shall reward be wanting at any time to vertue, nor iust punishement to naugh∣tines. And as even now I have put in minde of a Vicar, how wickedly ser∣viceable are they, who arrogate to themselves, as an absolute lord, the power over their felow servants, seeing he throughly knoweth all things, and is not in vaine conversant among the candlestickes? The praise of the Ephesine Angell respecteth either his office, in this verse, or his vertue a∣gainst outward evils, ver. 3. His office consisteth, either in administring the worde and those things which are wont to accompany it usually, the Sacraments and prayers, or in exercising of discipline. As touching that he saith, I know thy labour and thy patience: For the paines which is bestowed in preaching the word, because it is laborious, and full of troubles & grie∣fes, is wont to be called labour in the scriptures, as, we pray you brethren that yee as knowledg them that labour among you; &c. 1 Thes. 5.12. And they are worthy of double honour: especially they that lbour in the word & doctrine: 1 Tim. 5.17. But patience as a necessary companion must be adioined unto the labour of teaching: which the Spirit sheweth, saying and thy patience. As also Paul, The servant of God must not fight, but must be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evill men: teaching them with meeknes that are contrarie min∣ded: 2 Tim. 2.23.24. Therefore this Church was famous in the faithful∣nes and diligence of teaching. Beholde the example of Paul, who by the space of three yeares daie and night ceased not to admonish everie one with teares: Act. 20.31. Doe thou also coniecture from those godly Bishops, who loved Paul so grealy, whom also he againe loved no lesse: Act. 20.37.38 Afterward minde Iohn and the rest. But a matter that is cleare needeth not many
wordes. As touching her Antitype, the matter is even as evident; they did never more faithfully give themselves to teaching. That Monster was not yet borne, that anie should be Pastour, that doth not feede at all: Or that one should sit in the chaire of the teacher, who as dumme should be sleepy, distracted with other bu∣sinesses. There was then no Bishop, who had the office of teaching, who taught not most diligentlie. Even also at Rome, where it behoved that the mystery of iniquity should spring up betimes, they ceased not as yet from this office. The Pastor everie Lords daie at the least did plainelie and clearlie expounde those things which were read out of the bookes of the Apostles and Prophets: then also he did admonish and exhort, that they would folow those thinges, which being holy and good, they had heard rehearsed: Iustin. Apolog. 2. The same thing testify Cle∣mens, Origenes, Tertullian, Cypriam: But the matter is so cleare and manifest, as the contrary therto to be done at this day. ¶ And that thou canst not beare the wicked: Such was the care of teaching, the maner of their Discipline was no lesse pure and sounde: Which first is univer¦sallie set downe, of what sorte it was toward all the wicked: afterward speci∣allie, what it was toward the clergie, that I may so speake, in the next words, and hast tried them which saie they are Apostles &c. The generall discipline did not tolerate men in any sorte living wickedly, and with the offense of o∣thers, but according to the manner of their faulte, did rebuke either pri∣vately, or before many, if private admonition profited nothing: then also at last it did debarre them from holy things, if they would not obey them that counselled them well. And touching Ephesus it can not be uncerten, but that this holy rule did holde there, seeing Paul taught theire the space of three yeares: who gave commaundement to Timotheus touching this mat∣ter so diligently and exactly. The observation therof was famous in the pri∣mitive Church, as even Pline testifyeth in an Epistle unto Traian: The Christi¦ans are wont, saith he, to ryse betimes in the morning to praise Christ as God, for the preserving of their religion, to prohibite murthers, adulteries, avarice, cousenage, and the like unto those: Euseb. kook 3. chap. 33. of the Eccles. Hist. from Tertul∣lian. Out of all doubt they did not onely prohibit in word by teaching: but also did restraine them by holy discipline. And they did determine rightly, that Religion could not be preserved otherwise, unlesse vices be cut of by this spirituall sworde. Iustin testifyeth that no man was admitted to the Sacrament of the supper, but he whose life should answer and accord with his profession, Apol. 2. But more plainly Tertullian writing thus: There are also exhortati∣ons, corrections and divine censure: for it is shewed with great gravitie, if anie have of∣fended, that he maie be sent awaie from communicating in praier, both of the assembly
and all holy soiety: where all most approved Elders have authoritie, having obtained that honour not by money, but by good report: Apologet. ch. 39. Origenes in his 35. treatise on Mat. In the Churches of Christ, saith he, such a custom hath held, that they which are manifest in great sinnes, thereof convicted, should be cast out frō comon prayer, least a little leaven of such as pray not from their heart, should corrupt the whole sprinkling and consent of truth. So in Hom. 7. upon Ioshua: Him that the third time being admonished refuseth to repent, he commandeth to be cut of from the body of the Church by the rulers of the Church: where also he sheweth, that the Priests sparing one, and neglecting their Priestlie severitie, doe worke the ruine of the whole Church. The Epistles of Cyprian are most cleare witnesses, how holi∣lie and regiously he kept it in his Church, yea they do prove how purely the discipline abod hitherto at Rome, as is cleare by the Epistles of Cyprian to the clergie of Rome, and to Cornelius, and againe of them to Cyprian. It is therefore an excellent praise of that time, that conioined togither with the puritie of doctrine, sanctity of manners, by most holsome disci∣pline. ¶ And hast tried them which say thy are Apostles. The other part of disci∣pline is toward Ecclesiasticall men, who were reproved not onelie for sinne in life, but also they did undergoe punishmēts meet for their ungodlines, if they brought anie new thing and divers from the truth, which after law∣full examinatiō was founde not to agree to the rule of the sanctuarie. And great was the courage of the Angell in this matter, who was not skared frō his duty by great names, but did bring them backe to a wholy examining, who did vaunt that they were Apostles. Of which sorte that there were mē at Ephesus it is cleare, from that instruction given unto Timotheus, That thou wouldest abyde at Ephesus, saith he, that thou mayest give warning to some, that they teach none other doctrine, neither give eare to fables and genealogies being endlesse, which doe breed questiōs rather then godly edifying which is by faith, 1 Tim. 1.3. And the same Paul warneth the Bishops of Ephesus, to take heed to themselves and the whole flocke: For I know this, that after my departure, grie¦vous wolves not sparing the flocke will enter in among you, and of your selves shall aryse some, which shall speake perverse thinges, that they may draw disciples after them: Act 20.29.30. But the diligence of the Pastours did plucke the vizzards from the hypocrites and did not suffer their craftes to spread to the destru¦ction of the flock: so the Church continued uncorrupted, even to the cō∣ming of Iohn, who ruled the same many yeares: who at length for a time being removed, it staked somewhat of that former care, as we shall shew by & by. Likewise in the frst church ther was such a troupe of heretiques, as scarce hath bin in all other times. There arose Simonians, Menandrians, E∣bionites,
Cerinthians, Pseudoapostolins, Gnostickes, Sabellians, Samosatenians, Ma∣nichees &c. Some of which the Apostles themselves did perce through with the dart of trueth. Paul delivered Hymeneus and Alexander to Sathan: So Phygellus and Hermogenes, and as it seemeth Philetus. And he taught Titus, that he should shunne an hereticall man after once or twice admonition: Tit. 3.10. But after they were gone to Christ, many other excellent lightes rose up, which did dispell diligently all hereticall darknes. Among which Agrippa Castor, as Eusebius reporteth, Iustin Martyr, Ireneus, Tertulianus, Cypri¦anus &c. Who all fought egerly for the truth against coūterfait Apostles. Wherfore as both the city & that former age were perillous because of the im¦pudency of those, who with false titles made a shew that they were Apo∣stles: so were they no lesse happy by the faithfulnes and industrie of such defenders, who would not be deceaved with a vaine shew, but bringing the matter to the touchstone manifested to the whole Church, that they were most filhy fellowes, who would be counted the principall maisters. ¶ And thou wast burdened: Hitherto his faithfulnes in executing his of∣fice, now he rehearseth his vertue against externe evils: which were many and great, both of that city and of all the Christian world. The battailes of Paul against beasts at Ephesus are famous: 1 Cor. 15.32. But what tran¦quillity could be to the Angels following, who should have to doe with grievous wolves not sparing the flocke: Act. 20.29.30. It was therefore the cō¦mendation of this Angell, that he did susteine and endure calamity stout∣ly, which is declared in a triple degree: that he bare the burden: that he labou¦red under the burden, and yet was not tyred: as though he should say, a great weight in deede of trouble did ly upon thee, under the burden whereof thou gronedst, yet thou wast not discouraged that thou shouldest pluck thy neck from the yoke, and betray the trueth. It is a manlie fortitude to beare out manfully troubles and torment. Many beare the yoke cheerful¦ly as long as they feele but a little griefe; But to goe on constantly among the stinges of grief and sorowe, is a point of great courage, and of heaven∣ly fortitude. Such was this Angell, such also was the whole Primitive Church. Nero and Domitian had greatly persecuted the Church, before Iohn wrote these thinges. And besides Nero and Domitian, it abode patiently under Traiā, Adrian, Antonin, Severus, Diocletian. The times were never more miserable when the EMPEROVRS did let their labour to hire to the Devill, for to shed the Christian blood, which he doeth alwaies thirst after. Yet the faithfull revolted not but cōtinued cōstātly unto the end, becoming at lēgth cōquerers, setting up the signe of victory against the Devill & al foes.
For what other thing were so many skrres and prints, with which many Bi∣shos were marked, who after the tempest of tyrannicall persecution drivē awaie, did meete in the Nicene Counsell, then so many triumphant bowes of the victory gotten against the enemies? Paulus Neocesariensis was bereft of the use of both his hands, the sinewes being shrunke and cut by the per¦secutours with a whote iron. Others had both their eyes put out. Others their right handes cut of by the elbowe, among which was Paphnutius Ae∣gyptius. In summe a man might have seen a company of famous and pic∣ked Martyrs gathered togither: Theod. book 1. chap. 7. He was an An∣gell of an invicible courage, whom so many calamities could not breake, yea not bowe never so litle. Now therefore if we shall gather all these things into one summe, we shall see a most beautifull image of any excel∣lent Church. For beholde an Angell sparing noe trouble of his owne in the labout of teaching, administring the disipline most religiously: suf∣fering none that should offende the Church with his naughtines: either keeping farre away the leven of heretiques, or taking it away most careful¦ly at the very first. And last of all for all these thinges undergoing boldly whatsoever the wicked enemies were able to inflict upon him. Doth he in any thing need amending? In nothing in deede, if onely he had continu∣ed in his integritie: but godlines fainteth by little and little unlesse it be kindled continually: and often times a certen naked profession remaineth, where all his power is utterly dead & lyeth quenched: as we shall see by & by to have happened here. As touching the wordes, Montanus and the vulgar translation doe di∣stinguish this verse otherwise, also they put out and change some wordes: And hast borne a burden and hast patience for my name, & hast not fainted: So Are¦tas, but the first words set out of order: And hast patience and hast borne a burden. But these readings want expresse signification, which our kookes have, which conioine togither burden, trouble, and perseverance. The senten∣ce becometh much more weake where this worde trouble is taken away 4 But I have somewhat against thee Hitherto was the praise: The reprehensiō is for the leaving of their first love: Of which even a light slaking had not wan¦ted great faulte: But to put of the same wholy, how great wickednes: For so the word thou hast left, soundeth: as if the Ephesine Angell were like to those widowes given to riot, which Paul saith, are to be condemned, because they have cast awaie their first faith, 1 Tim. 5.12. Although this losse of love, was nothing to the heinous offence of the widowes, For their Apostacy was manifest, his onely a faint, or rather no care, and a very great negligence of godly duties, the profession of the truth being kept. But the Spirit speaketh of
divers tymes, as it appeareth from this that he saith, that thou hast left thy first love, and in the verse folowing biddeth them to doe the first workes. Frō which it is perceaved easily, of what sorte was this coldnes, to it that the Angell who in the first times of the Gospell receaved, faithfully executed the office of teaching, & observed diligently every ons maners, to which forthwith he applyed a remedie by ecclesiasticall discipline: afterward in the latter yeares did so languish, that he was negligently occupied in the first labour, permitted some of his floke to perish through ignorāce, some through the infirmity of the flesh to be carried headlong into destructiō, no lawfull curing undertaken. This is that love, which Christ taketh grie∣vously to be layd aside so shamefully. For he sheweth that he is then tru∣ly loved, when his sheepe are fed faithfully and with a syncere minde. Wherto perteineth that thrise repeated commandement to Peter, Yf thou lovest me, feede my sheepe, Ioh. 16.17. But in processe of time in this Church this fervency waxed colde or rather altogither vanished away, as is mani∣fest by the reprehension. Such is our infirmity rushing a pace no lesse to the losse and destruction of spirituall life, then our bodies hast continual∣ly to the graves. Wherfore then is there too much cure of this, & none of that? The Ephesians reteined an outward profession, neither were any ca∣lamities able to take it from them, as the former verse even now taught, yet in the meane time they decayed by little and little, neglecting those thinges, without which true godlines cannot consist. And this leaving of love seemeth to have come to passe then, when Iohn had bin sent away in∣to Pathmos. Doubtlesse while he abode at Ephesus he suffered not either doctrine or discipline to decay, but being at length bereft of so vigilant a watchman, they fell into this detested drowsines. The Bishop may be for an example, although not of that city, yet of a neighbour place, who tho∣rough the negligence of holy discipline suffered a certen yong man delive∣red to him of Iohn to be kept, to become a thiefe and a robber. Where∣fore Iohn did worthily hit and cast in his teeth his good keeping: Euseb. Hist. booke 3.23. But howsoever the history be silent in this matter, it is certen that the Ephesine Angels fell together into shamefull negligence a∣bout these tymes. Of which sort also wee finde the carelesnes of the Church growing in use by little and little. In the first times while it had the Apostles for presidents, and eye wit∣nesses of all things, the diligence of the Elders was fervent, who did both preach the word of God faithfully, and also further the godlines of their flocke carefully by discipline, but at length after two hundred yeares frō Christs birth, they suffered all things to waxe worse and worse by a mani∣fest
declining. How began the discipline to be loosed and corrupted, whē the Martyrs & Confessours gave rest to those that had fallē, not onely with∣out the Bishops counsell, but also against their willes? How this outragi∣ous disturbance of the heavenly rule troubled Cyprian, we may see from his Epistles: from whence among other causes of the incumbent persecution, many of which he rehearsed, at length he descendeth to this, And what pla∣gues, what stripes doe we not deserve, when noe not the Confessours, doe keepe disci∣pline, who ought to have bin an exemple to others to good manners: Epist. book 4. 4. And not many yeares after, Eusebius relating the condition of the Church, in which it was a little before Diocletian began his persecution: They, saith he, which were thought to be our Pastours, reiecting the bond of godli∣nes were busily occupyed in mutuall contentions among themselves: These thinges one∣ly increasing beiond measure, contentions, and threatnings, and emulations, and mu∣tuall grudges, and hatred, folowing with all their might preheminence and dominion, as it were kingdomes: book 8. of Hist. chap. 1. It must needs be that the ed∣ge of holy discipline was made blunt in wonderfull manner, which was of no force to cut of such noxiour herbes. But Ambrose, who rehearseth that the divine rule was vanished quite away before his times, speaking of the Elders, at length inferreth most clearly, Whereupon, saith he, both the Syna∣gogue and also afterward the Church had Elders, without whose counsell nothing was done in the Church: Which by what negligence it is growen out of use I know not, un∣lesse peradventure by the slouthfulnes or rather pride of the teachers, while they alone will be thought to be somwhat: upon the 1. at Tim. chap. 5. He was not long after that time which we call the Primitive Church. Yet he so speaketh, as though some ages before his time, this wholesome custome had bin abo∣lished. Which thinges doe clearly shew, how in the later times the first love waxed cold altogether, and at length went to nothing. 5 Remember from whence thou art fallen; Such was their sinne: the remedie cō¦sisteth of three members, a iust consideration of their fall, repentance, and redres∣sing of the discipline. Which all together are required unto amendement and in the same order, in which they are rehearsed. Because we fall by little & little, we perceave not almost into how deep a pit we are fallen: but let us looke back to the high toppe, from whence we are fallen, and we shall mervayle at the low gulfe in which we ly. Wherupon he warneth, that he minde from whence he was fallen. Neither is it enough to perceive that we are fallen, but very quickly we must get out of the gulfe by repentance. He adioineth therfore, repent: But many doe deceave themselves, and thinke that they have repented well, when in very deed they have done nothing lesse: Therefore last of all he requireth, that the first workes be done. For then
thou shalt prove thy repentance iust, if it shall bring forth true holines of workes, and either shall returne to the first love, if it were sincere, or shal increase the same by adding a greater vnto it. But why doth he require in∣stantly the first workes, especially in the Antitype, which conteineth the space of about three hundred yeares? Would he that the Church that was spred farre abroad, and encreased with an innumerable multitude of citizens, should returne againe to their cradell? Or whether will he that there should be the same reason and respect of the whole erth, which is of one ci∣ty? Now also it was nigh, when the Church should have a Christian Magi∣strate, Constantine being about to come straite way to the Empire and go∣vernement of the world: What need should they then have, of that for∣mer ancient discipline? It was meet peradventure that Christ had waited for a little time, and had not urged so earnestly the first beginnings, of which there should be no use in shart time. But these are the dreames of such as are sicke of a fever. He that knoweth what is most fit for his Spouse, requireth earnestly the first workes, after so many yeares, & after the disper∣sing of his Church in so many places: he willeth that shee labour againe in the word, and that shee punish wicked men with the Ecclesiasticall Disci¦pline. He knew that the order appointed by him should fit aswell Provinces as Cities: neither should hinder any whit the civill administration, but fur¦ther and adorne the same above all. From hence then let us learne, that, that first governemēt is cōmon to all times and places: Neither to be permitted to mens pleasure, to folow the way that they will, but that alway in reforming the Church we must have recourse to the first beginnings: unto which rule must be recalled, whatsoe∣ver erres from the right way, and not to frame it according to the corruption of the fol∣lowing Churches. ¶ Or else I will come against thee quickly: The threatning putteth to spurres, and stirreth up the feeble strength of the remedy. Often times the feare of perill, prevaileth more with men, then the hatred of wickednes. He threatneth that he will come quickly and remove the candlesticke out of his place. But what need is there that he should come, who walketh in the middes of the can¦dlestickes? He dwelleth not among his as a revenger, but as a brother & defender; from whence as often as he must take punishement, he putteth on a new person and forme, in which he appeared not before: and is said to come from another place, and to seeme now another, from him whom before time they did know. In the Greeke it is, J will come to thee, for against thee. Now to remove the candlesticke out of his place, is to take away the truth and dignity of the Church. Which though it be not noted expressely by the Historiographers, yet we may not doubt, but that according to this
cōminatiō, Ephes{us} lost a while after the forme & honour of a Church. I cōtēd not about the name of a Church, which I know shee have retained for many ages, but for the first puritie, by which alone God measureth a holy Church, and not by coloured and naked names. Much lesse is the candlestick to be understood of the Episcopall dignitie, as the Iesuite would have it, which wee reade to have continued from those times eight hundred yeares at least. Therefore this candlestick was not quickly removed: Did the Angel perad∣venture repent? It is not likely, seeing in the Antitype it is certen, that, that folowed in a shorte time, which is threatned here to come to passe. For the Angels proceeding in negligence, as we have learned from those thinges which have bin before spoken, Christ tooke out of mens sight the first golden candlestick, by taking away his most holy ordinances, of which the world was most unworthy, on which the primitive Church was founded by himselfe and by his Apostles. For there was a new face of things when Con∣stantine came: there remained yet the desire of preaching in the Bishops: but the doctrine was fowlly contaminated in many points: Reliques begā to be in reckoning, Temples to be adorned more magnificently, all kinde of superstition to increase, besides the pride of the teachers, as a little before Ambrose have taught, spoiled the Church of a necessarie helpe to rule their māners. In stead whereof Ecclesiasticall dignities were encreased, all things being cu∣riously sought out, more for pompe, then for truth. And while men gave themselves to thinges of this nature, the golden Candlestick, which among the candlesticks did obteine worthyly the chiefe praise, was removed out of his place. This shall be more cleare then the light at noone day in the rest of the booke. In the meane time let men see, how evill they provide for themselves and the truth, which thinke every thing right, which they reade to have bin used in those times. Rather let them goe to the entire age in which the candlesticke stoode in his place: which after it was set in an o∣ther place, the same was overwhelmed with darkenes, neither could he give light to others. 6 But this thou hast & c: This also availeth to quicken their carefulnes: they might have bin proude of their present happines, as though their ow¦ne godlines had procured it to them: It is not so, saith the Spirit: but in that the punishmēt is yet witholden, it cometh not of thy approved faith∣fulnes and diligence, but of the onely mercy of God wherby he spareth that little good, which thou hast yet left. For as he would not have de∣stroyed Sodome, if ten good men had bin found in it: so his wrath waxeth not hotte against his, as long as any hope of good is remaining in them. It was but a small thing therefore, that letted, that he should not by and by
translate the candlesticke, neither shoul suffer it to abide any longer among them. But what was this small thing? To wit, that he hated the workes of the Nicolaitanes, that is, of them whose chiefe author was Nicolas of Antioche, once one of the seaven Deacons, Act. 6. Who taught that wiv s ought to be co∣mon, and that it was an indifferent thing to commit adultery, as Ireneus, Theodoret and others doe declare. For as touching that Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. book 3. doth attribute this heresy rather to the wickednes of his folowers, who drew to this foule licentiousnes, the fact and saying of Nicols, which had respect onely to the removing of iealousie, it seemeth scarce credible. For Iohn would have spared the credt of the man, and would have tolde the ringleader of so great filthines, neither would have suffered his name to have bin borne falsly of wicked men. The Ephesine Angell therefore was pure from the contagion of this sinne. What were the Angels of the Primi∣tive Church? They were no lesse free from this blemish. This heresie was soone reiected, for his owne foulenes. But after we shall see, that the do∣ctrine of the Nicolaitanes did extende not onely to the filthines of the body, but also was transferred unto spirituall fornication: ver. 15. Were they al¦so without fault in this parte? In the first hundred yeares the Church remay¦ned a chaste virgin: in the next ages it began to waxe wanton, defyling somewhat the mariage bed, partly with unprofitable opinions, partly with foolish ceremonies, but somewhat fearfully & privily at the first: nothing according to that impudency which came together with Constantine, and afterward. In this respect therefore, Christ suffered it a lōg time, although he saw that their first love had waxed cold. 7 He that hath an eare &c. An Epiphonematicall conclusion, comon to all the Epistles: Wherein he sheweth that all whatsoever thy be ought to hearken to these admonitions of the Spirit. Properly in deede they belōg to the Angels: but it concerneth us all greatly, of what sorte their cōditi∣on shall be. They eyther offende or doe their duty not for themselves a∣lone, but their cōdition is ioined eyther with the great good or evill of the whole flocke. But what doe these things so long agoe past, pertaine to us? There is the same disposition of all Churches, and of every one severally: wherupon it is very profitable for us, of what age soever, to beware by their eville. Although all will not obey these admonitions, but they one∣ly, whose eares the Spirit openeth. For they are bidden to heare, that have eares. And therefore we ought not to mervayl, if we shall see many to contemne securely these threatnings, and to thinke that these prayses and reprehen∣sions belonge not to them at all. But what is that, which he willeth to be heard? That which foloweth by and by, saith the Iesuite, To him that overcometh,
J will give to eate &c. Forsooth the Spirit would have the last clause to be heard of all Churches, and of all the members of any Church, but all that which was before, the Bishop shall have privatly for himselfe: A witty in∣deede and trusty exposition. Are not the Epistles pronounced universally and inscribed to the Churches, Chap. 1.11? Would it not profit them very much to be instructed touching the state of their Angels, and to understād what they might require of them by right? They are sent indeede by name to the Angels, not that they should keepe them close to themselves as my¦steryes, but that by their meanes, they might be communicated to the Churches, whom the Lord useth as his Ambassadours, to speake to his spouse. Which doth yet more appeare from those that folow. For it doth not fit a Bishop onely which after is written to them of Smyrna, Beholde it shall come to passe that Sathan shall cast some of you into prison &c. ver. 10. or that to them of Thyatira, and to you, J say, and the rest of Thyatira, ver. 24. That I say nothing, that in some of the Epistles, the exhortation to heare, shut∣teth up the whole matter, as to the Church at Thyatira ver. 29. To the Church at Sardi chap. 3.6. at Philadelphia, ver. 13. at Laodicea ver. 22. Whereupon if the Church be reserved to the Epiphonema, she ought to open and shut the eares all at one time. For there foloweth nothing to be heard. ¶ To him that overcometh, I will give to eat of the tree of life: The reward in e∣verie one is fitted to the times: and is one and the same everie where, Iesus Christ alone. For what greater thing can he give to his elect? Or what thing shall we need, if we doe enioy him? But according to the divers conditiō of times he is set before us in a divers manner. In this Primitive Church he is the tree of life in the middes of the Paradise of God. Why? Because the first state of the Spouse, was wholy like to the first happines of Adam in Paradise: of which that was a certen visible image and figure, restored in the last times on earth, after our so long banishment from thence. For there was a tree of life in the middes of the garden like a shadow: here Iesus Christ borne of a Virgin was conversant with us in the middes of mortall men: there all kinde of beautyfull plantes, most profitable both for sight and for meate: here a copious abondance of of all giftes, which belong either to salvatiō, or to ornament: there one river, but dividing it selfe from the garden in∣to fower heads: here one voice of veritie among all the Apostles, but which beginning at Ierusalem, was spred abroad into the foure quarters of the world, watering all landes whersoever it floweth with peace and salvatiō. What pleasantnes was wanting there, that the minde of man can thinke of? What is not here sufficiently furnished by him at whose administratiō the Angels themselves are amazed? To wit, that terrible Angell, with a shi∣ning
sword keeping the way to the tree of life; it is now removed out of his place, and an entrāce againe is opened into the gardē most full of true pleasure. Christ therefore promised that they which shall keepe themselves pure frō the corruptions of these times, neither shall forsake their first love, shall con∣tinue those true citizens of this holy Church, and that they shall have free leave to eate of Christ, that true tree of life in the middes of this new Eden. Manie wicked men and heretiques at that time, were thrust headlong (as once A∣dam) out of the Celestiall garden, yet with unlike issue and condition. For Adam falling away from the shadowlike Paradise, by faith in Christ he foūd an entrance into the true, but these heretikes being driven from the hea∣venly and true, what returne can ever be hoped for? Seeing therefore that this is the naturall sense of the wordes, how foully doe they erre, who do count the Primitive Church an infant, rude and imperfect? and doe attribute ripenesse of age and perfection to the latter corrupt times? For they doe preferre Tophet before Paradise: neither doe minde that all pleasantnes did belong to the first beginning: but thornes and thisles and all noisome her¦bes to the curse following. Farre be it that we should thinke the water flowing by durty channels, either purer or sweeter or fitter for our use, the further it shall be distant from the fountaine. Further let the reprobate know that they doe never eate of this tree. For there is the same meate both for way and for country: There is onely a difference of a more full fruition, wherin we shall reioice after the battaile finished. Neither is the reward of them that overcome given to the slougthfull cowards. The An¦gell will keepe them farre from it with his glistering sword, that they may not plucke any thing at any time from this tree. The Analysis. SO is the first Epistle: the second, is sent to the Church of Smyrna, but inscri∣bed according to the manner, to the Angell: afterward he describeth him that sendeth: That he is the first and last, then, that he was lately dead, but now alive, ver. 8. The Narration partly commendeth for their suffering of af¦fliction, which the blasphemous Ieuwes brought upon them, ver. 9. part∣ly instructeth against a newe calamity, both shewing the Authour, kinde, end, continuance: and also promising a crowne, ver. 10. The Conclusion hath both the wonted Epiphoneme, and also immunity from the second death verse eleventh. Scholions.
Sweete smel¦ling Smyr∣na.AND to the Angell of the Church of Smyrna: Smyrna was a Colonie of the Ephesians, as we have said: So also named of Smyrna the Amazone, but of which the Spirit respecteth an other notation. For from whence it is a sweete smelling Smyrna, that is Myrrhe, farre more pleasant then any spices, as is evident from this, that he reproveth no faulte of this Church, but sheweth that it is most deare to him, howsoever nothing was more contē∣ned and despised of the world. Neither must we thinke that it doth hold the second place after Ephesus: For the Spirit doth not recite the cities by iumpes, next putting a sunder either Sardis or Philadelphia, or any one of the rest, but in the right order, in which they were situated. And first he go¦eth forward to the North, in which parte about the three hundreth & twē¦tieth furlongs Smyrna is placed on the shore. From whence againe he de∣clineth to Pergamus further into the North; From Pergamus the rest in their order doe bende to the south. And without doubt this order demō∣strateth the like progresse of the Church. In our parte of the world, the further we goe to the North, so much the further wee goe from the sunne, the fountaine of light. Therfore Smyrna after Ephesus, doe teach that af∣ter the first purity, the Church will proceed every day to greater darkenes, while at length it shall come to Pergamus, the last bound: from whence a∣gaine it shall goe toward the South, every day to be more and more light∣ned with a greater brightnes. Wee shall see in the thinges following, that the event doth so agree, that no equall iudg will condemne these thinges for vaine subtilityes, but rather with mee will admire the greatnes of the mystery. And if we shall hold backe our opinions, while the whole mat∣ter shalbe thoroughly perceived of us, we shall iudge farre more upright∣ly, which shalbe best both for our selves and for the truth: Which onely I doe respect (God is witnes) and not any desire of parts taking or of novel∣ty. But thou wilt say, how is Smyrna so delectable Myrrhe to God, whose condition is worse then of Ephesus? In outward shew indeede it is more deformed, shining with no ornament of lawfull politie: in which respect the North corner doth agree unto it: yet the fervent desire of the godly, who did fight most valiantly for the truth in this miserable deformity, did raise up to God a most sweete savour. Furthermore by how much the grea¦ter tentation doth lie upon them, by so much God is wont to deale more favourably with his. He sheweth not then rigour in threatnings, but con∣forteth as much as he can, that he may confirme the languishing, and not adde affliction to affliction. The Primitive Church suffered most grievous calamities, but at the handes of Heathen men, which was some asswaging of their sorowe. But Smyrna must suffer all extremityes at the handes of
their owne. In which griefes that it should not faint or be overcome, he heareth nothing but that which may adde courage. Hereupon reprehen∣sions are passed over, although it had more of the basest sort then the for¦mer, Ephesus. The Antitype is the next Church after the first. His Colonie, as of Ephesus Smyrna: sometime also inioying one comon name, even as those two cities, by reason of their great coniunction at the first, as Strabo sheweth. This Antitype taketh his beginning togither with Constantine, untill which time the Primitive Church, the Ephesine Antitype continued, and proceedeth even unto Gratian about the yeare of the Lord three hun∣dreth foure score and second according to Euseb. ¶ These thinges saith he that is the first and last: The description of the sender of the Epistle, is fetched from ver. 17. of the former chapter. In which wordes we have shewed that Christ is praysed as the maker and ruler of all thinges: by whose authority and commādemēt alone all things are done, and that to his glory: or rather that in this elogie is praised the mervay∣lous ioining together as well of his great maiesty as of his humility. Which interpretation receaveth confirmation from hence, that the condition of the Smyrneans was like; Thou art afflicted, saith he, and poore, but in very deede thou art riche. What other thing is this then, although with the world thou art counted the last, thou art notwithstanding in truth the first. And toge∣ther also it sheweth that alteration, wherby the truth first flourished amōg the Smyrneans in very great estimation, afterward despised & trampled un∣der foote of hypocrits: even as Christ in the beginning was in incompre∣hensible glory, God with God, but in the last times, taking upon him the forme of a servaunt, made himselfe of no reputation, being made like unto men. He taketh to him selfe titles that may fit the present condition of thinges. Whereu∣pon he spreadeth a divers beame of his glory in the severall Epistles, accor¦ding to the diverse condition wherein the Churches are. Wherby he tea∣cheth that, that of his infinite divine maiesty is chiefly to be contemplated with the minde, which may be most availeable for the present matter. But that they should not thinke that they must alway ly in this base estate, he adioineth another title: Who was, saith he, dead, but is alive; as though he should say; although I was in the beginning the first, after the last, yet I a∣bode not any long time in this most base estate, but death being overcom within the space of three dayes, I obteined my former dignity, in which I now live for ever. These thinges then declare the notable chāge that came to passe at Smyrna, and no lesse in his Antitype. Where the first truth, which by the space of three hundred yeares was established by so much blood, be came at length to be hated of the Christians themselves, and the last for∣tune
stayed together with his professours: which Christ, as he himselfe rose from the dead, should raise againe from the dust, and place it in the for∣mer degree of dignity. Why then should they be discouraged, whom their Captaine hath gone before in the same steppes? Or wherfore should they feare afflictions, whose issue is so ioifull and confortable? 9 J knowe thy workes and affliction: The narration of the condition, which he saith, is knowen of him, as in the rest, least peradventure they should sup∣pose, that their miseries are not regarded of him, because of his so long suf¦ferrance. The state of this Church was afflicted, as at the present time in this verse, so afterward to be expected, in the next: Wherto the Antitype a∣greeth altogether. For after the first age driven away, by and by a lamen∣table strife arose, when Constantine succeeded. The persecutions of open enemies ceased, but the strifes and contentions of the citizens forthwith waxed very hote. And not onely of the whole Church in generall, but al∣so of this city: Theodosius Iunior boyling with envie against one Cyrus, whō he saw to be very gratious with the people, sendeth to Smyrna under a co∣lour to make him Bishop of this city, but with a determinate purpose that he should be killed; For the Smyrneans had killed long a goe 4 of their Bishops; which barbarous cruelty sheweth howe grievously this Angell was afflicted: Epitome chr. set out with Euseb. chr. by the famous Ioseph Scaliger, pag. 293. But if we shall enlarge this Smyrna a little unto those contentions of the citiezens, of which I spake; by and by came Arius, who kindled that fire, wherby all thinges as well divine as humane, were enflā∣med. The Bishops studied noe other thing, then that one might spoile a∣nother of their seates and dignities. Eustatius Antiochus was banished with a great company of Elders and Deacons: Athan. in his Epistle to them that lead a solitary life. Athanasius him selfe the onely defender almost of the truth, was not onely assailed, but also oppressed with all kinde of false ac∣cusations; neither did they cease from their wicked assalting him, before that he was banished to Treveres in France. Those were sorowfull times, when the Emperour in the meane time not minding sufficiently the drifts of the Bishops, did not knowe the true originall of those sturres. ¶ And thy poverty: That is, houw thou art moked and contemned, as a beggar: but be thou despised mor thē any Jrus of those hypocrits, thou art rich in mine account, that thou maiest regard the lesse the wicked scoffing of those men. And that we may let passe the Smyrneans, the matter is cleare in the Antitype. How few were there of the Orthodoxe that durst profes∣se the truth? How superstitiously were those fewe suppressed of the ene∣myes? Certenly the Saints were constrained to runne hither and thither,
that they might crave aide against the tyranny. They also being turned out of their goods, could not maitaine their life but by the liberality of others. Athanasius alone may be in stead of many exemples: from whose often pe¦rils, flight, hidden places, no hope to escape, any may easily see, how the faithfull could prevaile nothing with their riches to repell the iniuries of their enemyes. The Smyrnean Angell was then poore in deede, if we mea∣sure riches by humane defence. ¶ But thou art rich: Not naked and forsaken, as men thinke, but by mee and in my account abounding in all riches: Which things also are toge∣ther for to shew what defence and estimation Christ could prepare for his even in spite of the world. Authority did increase together with afflictiō, as we knowe it came to passe concerning Athanasius, who being vexed with all maner of contumelies in the East, was in the west in great estima∣tion. Constantin the sonne, Constans the brother, Iulius Roman, The Bi∣shop of Treveres, who gave him entertainement most kindly and liberally the space of two yeares, did reverence him according as he was wortthy. Moreover also Constantin the great himselfe having perceaved the calum∣nies of his adversaries, did honore his innocency and vertu, and determi∣ned to bring him againe from banishement. ¶ And the blasphemy of those &c. Hitherto the kinde of the present cala¦mity: now he sheweth the authors, arrogating to themselves, that which in no wise was fitting them. But is it blasphemy for a Iew, to professe him selfe to be a Iewe? A Jew is taken figuratively for one people of God, which alone among all men, knew the right way of worshipping him; as though he should say: They that boast that they worship God after the ancient rule of the law, in which maner their ancestors once worshipped, and all men ought allwaies to worship. This was blasphemy, the retaining of the worship abolished, and the thrusting upon God the ancient ceremonies, by which the glory of his sonne sent at length into the world, shoud be overwhelmed: For which cause, although they were Iewes by stocke, they lyed in affirming that they were Jewes, being so farre from that holy peo∣ple, that in very truth they made a Synagogue of Sathan. And it is knowne, with what bitter mindes they persecuted Christians in all places, as we see in Paul & Barnabas at Antioche, Pisidia, Jconium, Lystra, and in other pla∣ces, Act. 13.50. and 14.2.5.19. Which they did also at Smyrna about these times, as we learne from this place. Vnder Constantin these Iewes wer Arian Bishops, namely, Eusebius Nicodemiensis, Theognis of Chalcedon, Maris, Patrophilus, Vrsatius, Valens, and the rest of this sorte, men in deede not Eth¦nikes, nor woly void of all knowledge of God, as neither were the Iewes,
but bearing the name of Christians, & such as were standart bearers in this warre. Who notwithstanding did holde their errors with thooth & naile, no lesse then that stubburne nation of the Iewes, striving to establish their Decrees onely, to vexe by all meanes such as were contrary minded, to boast that they alone had the true faith, to condemne all the rest of ungod¦lines and blasphemy. But whatsoever boastings that wicked company made, as though God dwelt in their congregations onely, they gathered Churches not to God, but to the Devill, of whose Synagogue, they were the chiefe rulers. ¶ Feare none of those things which thou shalt suffer: Now he instructeth them against the future evills, which were apparent to be more grievous then those that were past. Those thinges with which the Iewes did trouble them at the present, then also those false accusations of the Bishops, while Constā∣tine lived, were light skirmishes of a sharper battaile following by and by after. Therefore he describeth diligently all the manner of this combate, who should be the chiefe Captaine of it, with what kinde of cruelty he should rage, to what ende, and how long. The Prince is the Devill, whom after we shall learne to denote the Heathen Emperours, open enemies of the truth, as chap. 12.9. This doth comprehende also the Heretiques, Christians in name, but in very truth wolves devouring the flocke. The kinde of punishement is the prison, under which, as the history tea∣cheth is comprehended proscriptions, confiscation of goods, banishmēt, slaughters, fires, tortures. With all these thinges the Devill should great∣ly torment, to drawe men from the truth. But this persecution should en∣dure for ten daies onely. And a day in this booke is taken for a yeare. The nūber also of ten some time signifieth properly, some time by Synecdoche noteth out some uncerten number: I thinke that both are here used, that certen number should be of the Type, and uncerten of the Antitype. Ther¦fore as touching Smyrna it selfe, this persecution fell out in the times of TRAIAN, which Devill, a professed enemy of the truth, did reigne next after this writing, very fierce against Christians, delivering men into prison and death, that he might make them to renounce the profession of Christ. Smyrna could not be free from the comon calamity: especially when Bythynia being nigh to it, did altogether abounde with the murders of the Christians, as the Epistle of Plinius Secundus to Traian doeth shew. From whence also it may be gathered after a sorte, of what continuance the persecution was. For in the fourteenth yeare of Traian, Plinie rela∣ting to him the multitude of those that were slaine, was an occasion of
staying that rage, and of obtayning some breathing. What yeare it began, it is not plainly set downe by the History-writers. Some suppose that it was at the very beginning of his reigne: but in the fourth yeare trium∣phing over the Daces and Scythians, he seemeth to have had first his King∣dome hindred, so as he could not have leasure to afflict the Christians. But it is certen that he exercised his cruelty ten yeares at least. It is likely that the end of that warre gave the beginning of tormenting Christians. Nei∣ther is it needfull that this affliction be referred to Smyrna onely: but that it was that generall of which he maketh mention in the Church of Philadel∣phia, which should come upon the whole world, Chap. 3.10. As touching the Antitype, Constance and Valence Emperours, in name Christians; in deede noe lesse fierce against the orthodoxe and true godly people, then once the Ethnike Devills were. In which account also are holden the inferiour mini∣sters of that wickednes: of the people, Syrianus, a Captaine, and Sebastianus, Governour of the armies Manicheus; Of the Bishops Eusebius, once of Ni∣comedia, then of Constantinople, Macedonius, Georgius Alexandrinus, and others of that sorte, not Bishops, but monsters: whose barbarous cruelty was scarce matched by any Tyrant. Of old the matter was handled with brawles, chidings, and calumnies of all sortes: But after the death of Con∣stantine, the Devill was to come forth on the stage, and what broiles were raised up? It was a light thing to drive holy men into banishement, to cast very many into prison, to kill almost an infinite number; They tyran∣nised with torments and all manner of contumelious punishments. Some were beaten with stripes unto death, some marked in the forehead with prints of hotte iron, some tormented with other tortures. Yea the brestes were cut of from holy women: Vnto some they were burnt of with a hotte iron: to many with egges rosted in the fire to an exceeding great heat. Who would beleeve that any such thing could have bin inferred upō Chri∣stians, from men of Christian profession? It cannot be shewed in fewe wordes, how full of calamity those times were, but see Socrat. book 2. and 4. Theod. book 2. and 4. Sozom. book 3. 4. 6. And although this tyranny did continue above fourteene yeares, yet notwithstanding it doth make those ten daies of the same manner that we have sayd. ¶ Be faithfull unto the death: He provoqueth unto fortitude, the re∣ward being propounded to be Eternall life. It is a profitable losse which is recompensed with so great gaine. What should nor the godly under∣goe most willingly, being sure of such a reward? It is fitted to the times ministring comfort against the losse of this present life.
To which purpose he spake before, that he was alive which had bin dead, that by his exemple they should learne not to feare death, which they should know to be a meane between God and them of eternall happines. 11 He that hath an eare: The wonted conclusion, warning all men, to hearken diligently to these instructions touching fortitude and courage of minde in afflictions. We were instructed before against the sluggishnes which is inbread in us: here we are armed against outward violence. The reward which is added to the end, He that overcometh shall not be hurt of the second death, is common to the whole Church. That which was before, be∣longed properly to the Angell, the knowledge whereof notwithstanding was very necessary to the people, as hath bin said before. But seeing that this conflict was to be undergone as well of the people as of the Pastours, confort also is given them by name, to the same purpose that the former was, but in a divers respect. For there are two things which are wont to kindle the desire unto every excellent acte, hope of reward and contemning of the perill: that first was proposed to the Postours, whose courage is wont to be more ready and valiant by looking into the reward. This second to the People, whom the feare of danger chiefly withdraweth from their duty, & suffereth them not to undertake any thing worthy commendation. He teacheth therefore that they must not feare to spend their life, if need be, for the truth sake: for there shall be no feare of the second death, by which the body and soule perish for ever: according to that of Christ: Feare not them that kill the body, but cannot kill the soule: but feare him rather, who can de∣stroy both soule and body in hell fyre, Mat. 10.28. This in hell fyre, is this same which he calleth second death: By the which the whole man shalbe no lesse deprived of all solace in God, as the body is destitute of all helpe being separated from the soule by the first death. This is that horrible death, to be feared in deede, from which he that hath overcome death, doe deliver his: from which he promised to free them that overcome: He doth not promise to deliver them from the first, being too light a thing, either to be given by such a great price Rewarder, or to be expected by those that ar his. And what need is there to be defended from the first death, which the necessity of nature will bring at length; but to prevent it for the truths sake pro∣cureth a farre greater crowne? He promiseth therfore that which is best, and doth not allure us with a vaine shew of some light thing. Analysis.
SO is the Epistle to the Smyrneans: That to the Church of Pergamus is in∣scribed likewise to the Angell: he that sendeth hath a two edged sworde. The narration commendeth his constancy, illustrated by the throne of Sathā, and the comon times, in which Antipas suffered ver. 13. then he repro∣veth the sinne: which he sheweth both of what quality it is, consisting in suffering Baalamites ver. 14. and Nicolaitans ver. 15. and also the remedy for it, namely repentance, which he setteth forth by the danger of refusing the same ver. 16. Lastly he concludeth with a solemne Epiphoneme, and proposeth a reward, the hidden Manna, the white stone, & an unknowne name, written upon it, ver. 17. Scholions. 12 And to the Angell of the Church of Pergamus;Towred Pergamus. Pergamus so farre as the Spirit seemeth to respect the notation thereof in this place, is as it were , that is,  the tower of Troye, as Hesychius expoun∣deth it: to with, a towred city, high and superbe, agreable to that which followeth in the next verse, where the throne of Sathan is. It is distant from Smyrna Northward about five hundred and fourty furlongs, with a grea∣ter distance then Smyrna is from Ephesus, in the last border of the North latitude as touching those seaven cityes. A great diminishing of light fell out in the Smyrnean corner under Constantine, Constance & Valence even at the first turning from Ephesus first purity: But nowe he goeth from Smyrna to Pergamus into the utmost darkenes, the Church being about to suffer a greater defect of light then ever before this time since Christ was borne. The Antitype of this Church is of longer time then the former, as also the distance of place is greater, conteining a great part of the kingdome of darkenes, from the three hundred and foure score yeare, to wit, from Gratian, where the former period ceased, unto about the yeare one thousand three hun∣dreth, as in the explication we shall see. ¶ These things saith he which hath &c. The furniture of him that enditeth the Epistle, is taken out of chap. 1.16. Which now he taketh before the other, because he would shew himselfe such in practize in this Church. For he would punish the rebells, as he speaketh after ver. 16. on whom no light punishement should be layd by a two edged sworde and that sharpe: and the sword is the worde of God it selfe, whose force should now be manife∣sted in the subduing of the man of sinne: Although this sword in this period is shaken rather then inflicted. For he threatneth a fight against those that repent not, ver. 16. he cometh not forthwith to handy strokes.
13 I know thy workes: A narration of his more approved condition, which is set forth two wayes: that he neither denyed the faith, allthough he dwelt in that place where Sathans throne is: scondly that neither in those dayes, wherin Anti∣pas was slaine. It is not hard to know, why it is called the throne of Sathan. For the city where the Ethnike Emperours had their seat made warre pro∣fessedly against the Lambe, is called the Throne of the Dragon, chap. 13.2. So of the foster & inferiour cities, which come nighest to the disposition of this chiefe city, because they make a pallace more garnished for the Devill, they are noted with the same name. Nowe was the mother city of the Romane Empire in Asia. For it is likely that this region being brought into a Province, after that Atalus Philometor King of Pergamus had named the people of Rome his heire, the Proconsull being sent to governe the same, placed there the seat of his iurisdiction. Plinie in his 5 booke of his naturall History chap. 30. saith that this City was by farre the most famous of Asia, which glory should lesse agree unto it, if the Proconsuls had had their dwelling in any other place, seeing honour is wont eyther to come to cities or to departe from them together with the chief rulers. Although before it perteined to the Romane power, it was the head city of the Kingdome of Asia. For so Livius speaketh entreating of Scleu∣chus the sonne of Antiochus; He leadeth, saith he, to the assailing of Pergamum the head and tower of the Kingdome, Decal. 4. book 7. It was therefore a great thing to professe Christ in the hearing & sight of so mighty a city & spiteful against the truth. There may not be prophecying in Bethel, for it is the sanctuary of the king and the Kings house, Amos 7.13. Aretas reporteth of Antipas, that he gave testimony to the truth at Pergamus, and that his martyrdome was kept even to his times: But I finde noe more in any author worthy credit. From this place it is evident that he was a very famous Martyr, by whose suffe∣rings was signified the rage of a most grievous persecution. This is another praise that Pergamus had continued constantly in the faith, when a fierce tempest raged very greatly. It is an easy thing to professe Christ, when a man may doe it either with honour, or without danger: But to reteine the profession of him without feare, even with the danger of life, is an excellent commendation and a point of true courage. Wee have said that the Antitype was the Church from the foure hundreth yeare, to the three hundreth above the thou∣sandth; When after Constantius, Iulianus and Valence, Smyrna being left it went further toward the North unto Pergamus, that is, was hidden in thicke darknes, being brought under the power of that City, where The Throne of Satan is, namely ROME.
This is that Towred City, The Tower of Troye, whose Daughter shee boa∣sted her selfe to be, once the Mother City almost of the whole world, the proude Lady and Queene of the Nations noe lesse famous for the stately Temples, Theaters, Highe Places, then for the ample and large dominiō and Empire. It is plainly called the Throne of Satan in the 13. chapter of this booke, both because it was once the Seate of the Ethnike Emperours, as at the place wee will shewe And also because they being taken away, it was made the Seate of the Popes, who during this time have most plainly shewed, that they reigned by the helpe of the Devill and not of God. Foure and twenty Popes were all given to Divelish arts: some of which gave up themselves wholy to Sathan by covenant to obtaine the Popedome. Yea by the space of whole foure scoe yeares from Sylvester II. unto Gregorie the seaven, noe Pope reigned but grealy famous in this impiety. Can any doubt where the Devill hath his Throne placed, when he shall see so many Necromancers clothed in purple sit at Rome? Rome therefore is Pergamus, and not onely the city of Rome, but the whole Romane dition, as farre as the Dominion of the Romane Bishop did extende. As long as this tyranny flourished, in all those places subiect unto it, there was the Seate of the Pergamen Church. And they that keepe the name of Christ, are the faithfull dispersed at that time in every place, who not discouraged with the Romane tyranny, reteyned firmly in the meane tyme the foūde doctrine, of which sorte were many in the East, in Africa, in our Britanny, and in other places, yet rather apparent or manifest man by man, then notable in any whole assemblyes. For now was the time of the Church lying hidde, as after shalbe shewed more fully, chap. 7. and 11. and 12. Antipas was slaine, when about the yeare eight hundreth it began to be a matter wor∣thy death, to resist the Romane Bishop. For beholde what a most fit name the Spirit giveth to the Pergamen Martyr: He is called Antipas not with a feigned, but true name; which yet by almost so many letters & syllables, should declare that the Martyrs of this time should be Antipapes: not that twoheaded or threeheaded Hydra, whose heads should contend one with another for the Papacy, but who should oppose themselves against these sacrilegious Popes, desyring that, that wicked power should be brought into order. Of which sorte were Leo Isaurus, killed after a sorte by Grego∣ry the 2. when he was by him spoiled of the Empyre of the East. Frederick Barbarossa was vexed with all māner of iniuries. The Bishop Florentine of lesse fame, was condemned, for teaching that Antichrist was come. A certen man called Arnulphus, or as others write Arnoldus, was hanged at Rome, because he had spoken boldly against the Pope, Cardinals and Priests.
Gerardus & Dulcimus Navarenses, burnt alive with thirty others; because they preached that the Pope was Antichrist: and many others, of which it were to long to make a catalogue, neither is it my purpose. The godly rea¦der may coniecture from the Decrees, which are found in the Right of Bi∣shops, how many Antipes, or rather Antipopes, were killed in this Pergamē state. The first of which is, He that goeth about to take away the privilege of the Church of Rome, given of the very higest head of all Churches, he doubtlesse falleth into heresy, and is to be called an Heretique, Dist. 22. All or the Patriarches againe, Let him become Anathema with God, which violateth the censure of the Romane Bishops, Caus. 25. q. 1. generall decree. To which adde, They are not homicides, who through zeale of the mother Church are armed against excommu¦nicats, Caus. 23. q. 5. Of the killers of excommunicats. From which con¦sider with thy selfe, seeing the good will of the Romane whore hath bin al∣way the same, even also before that these lawes were made, how many An∣tipes have bin killed of the same, after shee had gotten some power. Yet ma¦ny even in those times kept the truth faithfully, so farre as it was revealed unto them, for which cause a more glorious crowne is layed up for them. 14 But I have a few things against thee: The other part of the narration, wherein the Angell is reproved for his too much gentlenes toward the wicked. From whence it came to passe that this Church was infected with the doctrine of Balaam in this verse, and the Nicolaitanes, in the next. There was but one plague of the Nicolaitanes in the Church o Ephesus, unto this is added also Balaam. Whose fornication (which he taught) had not respect so much to the defiling of the body, as to the violating of godlines by Ido∣latry. Which double corruption is so distinguished, that the doctrine of Balaam is proper to the Antitype, although it be rehearsed in the former place, the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes to the type, to wit of the very city Per∣gamus. As towching that, most fitly is the Pope of Rome in those first times compared to Balaam, a secret hypocrite, of great authority with Kings, ready to a∣ny thing for lucre sake, uttering some true oracles, but as a diviner and man of the Eth∣nike superstition, perswading the worship of Images to Constātine and Jrene Augustes, as it may be seen in the Synodicall Epistle sent unto them, as Balaam to the King Ba∣laac, that he would entise the Israelites, beautifull women being et before them, to of∣fer sacrifices to Baal Pehor, Num. 31.16. Nowe therefore wee see, why Ba∣laā was reserved to this place, to wit, that he might signify his true afspring, the Pope of Rome, as like his father, as one egge an other. He in these times which we have spoken of should treade the Church under feete. But this was the sinne of the Pergamen Angell, that he suffered too favourably men to draw of the dregges of this false Prophet. It was his duty to have bin in∣stant
in teaching, admonishing, reprooving, correcting, if peradventure the contagiō might had bin stayed, that it should not spread further abroad. Of which when the godly were some thing to negligent, handling to gēt∣ly this man of sinne, and halting or somewhat fayling, as cometh to passe in a comon corruption, gave occasion to the overseer of Churches, both to contende with them, and also at length to punish that estate. And who knoweth not, how tenderly and mildly they which embraced the trueth in those times, touched in speaking or writing, the Romane Tyranny? They should had thundred against it most vehemently, and spared noe sharp∣nesse of wordes, but we shall finde that the Angell in this point performed not his duty. But how then had he but a few thinges against the Angell, seeing the whole state of the Church was so greatly corrupt? Wonderfull is the gentle entreating of our God. He requireth but a few thinges of thē, to whom he giveth fewe. The greater their corruption was, so much the lesse he exacteth. He requireth not so great ability of him that liveth in darknes, as of them round about whom the cleare light shineth. ¶ That they should eate of those thinges which were sacrificed to Idols; that is, being present at the worship of Idols, should give honour to them. Other¦wise if any thing offerred to Jdols were solde in the shambels, and the offence of some weake brother hindred not, any man might well eate of it, 1 Cor. 8. &c. But the Spirit seemeth with good advisement to have spoken rather of eating that which is offered to Idols, then of worshipping the Idoll, that he might shewe the crafty and subtill way of this Balaam in provoking and alluring men to Idolatry. It seemeth not so ungodly a thing to men to eate flesh sacri¦ficed to Idols, as to fall downe at the feete and give adoration to the Image. Therefore this Balaam would endevour to winne men to his purpose by very small thinges and having a faire colour. He would abhorre Idols in words as much as any other, and would cry out that the honour which he commaundeth to be given to Jmages, is farre from this ungodlines, by such wordes deceaving the unskilfull, and bringing them into this offence, of which the Spirith speaketh. 15 So thou hast &c. The reddition of the similitude, whose proposition is not spoken a word of. Thus it should be full. As once the Israelites had those that held the doctrine of Balaam: so thou hast them that holde the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes. In stead of the proposition he attributeth the doctrine of Balaam to the Pergamen Church, because it was proper to his An¦titype: but from whence may be gathered the first part of the similitude. But this poison of the Nicolaitanes had infected doubtlesse Pergamus. ¶ Which J hate: as before, the comon translation is, repent likewise. And
so he beginneth the verse following in this sense, as I have warned the E∣phesine Church, so doe I admonish thee. But this is weaker, then if he did commaund simply, repent. 16 I will come against thee quickly, and fight against them; He threatneth a double punishement, one against the Church it selfe against which he saith that he wll come quickly: The other against the corrupters, against whom he saith he will fight with the sworde of his mouth. For wee may not thinke, that he will come against the Church, onely to take away those plagues & destructions of men (for this could have no feare, but would be a thing to be chiefly wished) but shee also must suffer the punishment of her negligen¦ce, as they of their wickednes. Therfore this violent breaking into the Church, was a certen chastisement by warre, or some such calamity, as is manifest in the Antitype: whose times were very troublous, partly by the overflowing of the Northerne Barbarians, partly by the Saracens, whom the Devill armed against the seed of the woman, after shee fled into the wildernes, as we shall shew at the chap. 12. to which times these things perteine: but here generally and obscurely shewed, because this place suffered not any ampler light. The other punishment is against the Balaamites, against whō he will use the sworde of his mouth. For we must observe, how he distingui∣sheth these from the Church: of her he sayd, I will come against thee, then turning his speach to the Balaamites, and J will fight, saith he, against them. But what is it to fight with the sworde of his mouth? Whether to inflict the pu¦nishments which he hath threatned in his word? Certenly Paul saith that he had in readines, wherewith to punish all contumacy, 2 Cor. 10.6. And Ieremy is set of God over the nations and Kingdomes, to root out and destroy &c. chap. 1.10. For there is no weapon in the whole armory of the world so effectu¦all on both partes. Wherfore seeing by the iudgement hereof all fornica∣tions and Idolatries are appointed to a iust punishment, worthily may he say, that he will fight with that sworde, according to the rule whereof the pro¦nounced iudgement is exercised. But nowe when in an other place it is sayd of Antichrist, that Christ shall consume him with the spirit of his mouth, 2 Thes. 2.8. (which maner of speaking what force it hath, we have learned by experience, to wit, that his errours convinced, his lyes detected, then his fraude and deceits set in the open light, he shalbe brought to destructi∣on) these wordes seeme to have the same meaning. And certenly after that the Church was for a while scourged by those Norther & Souther barbariās, Christ begā to vexe those Perganiē impostours with the light of the truth: for about the yeare 1120, arose certē godly men, which preached openly that Antichrist was come: that the holy dayes, Ecclesiasticall broken songs, prayers
for the dead, pilgrimages, oyle, extreem unction, & the rest of that sorte, were supersti∣tious things: Worke Trip. & Henric. Mon. Thol. To these were added in a short time after the Waldenses, the Albingenses & Parisienses, who published a booke of the perils of the Church, & many other private men. Frō thēce began this fight, which was soft in the beginning, terrible rather in the sha¦king of the sword, then in wonding: but after coming to a iust & full bat∣taile, as after we shall see, which hath fallen out prosperously to the godly hitherto by the grace of God: but most unhappily to them that dwell at Rome in the throne of Sathan. 17 He that hath an eare; Let every one drowned in the Romish superstitiōs give eare, let him attende & hearken, in what account with God is that un∣maried Vicar of Christ: of what price is that famous & much spoken of Ro∣me, that Chaire of Peter, the piller of truth, mother of the faith & of all Churches; to wit, that chief Prelate, that wicked Balaam: the very city which is renow∣med with the vaine praising of men the gate of heavē, is the very palace & thro¦ne of the Devill. Neither let any thinke that hatred doth wring these words from a man that is an adversary: but let him compare the prophecy & the event, which if he shall see to agree in all things, let him know that he is warned of the dāger, not so much by the words of mā as by the H. spirit. ¶ To him that overcometh I will &c. The reward is threefould, hiddē Mā∣na, a white stone, & an unknowne name written upon it: Every one of which fit the times in a wonderfull manner. As for Manna, it is the meat of the wil∣dernes ministred frō God, when there was no meanes to have other bread. And in this Pergamen state, when the company of the Nicolaitanes & Balaami¦ticall ofspring, that is, Romane Jdolaters possessed all places, the Church was conversant in a waste, unpleasant, & terrible wildernes, whether wee shall see the woman betake herselfe flying from the Dragon, ch. 12. But Christ feedeth the same with the meat of the wildernes, as once the Israelites. For he will not be wanting to his in the most hard times, but bestowe aboundātly the ioy of the Spirit, wherby not onely they may be preserved in life, but also be very glad as for the greatest ioyes. Therefore this Manna is the same meate, with the fruite of the tree of life in Paradise, as hath bin observed afore, ver. 7. but the manner of ministring of it is divers, there in a most chast, pure, and flourishing Church, it was the fruit of the tree in the middes of the pa¦radise of God: here the truth being despised, contemned & trode under foot & utterly opressed with most thicke darknes, it is Māna the foode of the wilder¦nes: this meate should be hiddē frō the world, & they should suppose thē famished, who had fled into this wildernes, as the Egyptians did thinke the Israelites for this cause would perish suddēly. But God did sustaine his extra ordinarily with this bread of Angels.
Yet there is this difference betweene the Manna of the Pergamen people, and that of the Israelites: For this every way was spred rond about the tentes: that was dispersed peculiarly to every one of the saints, who did not dwell so thicke togither in so great number as the Jsraelites in their tentes; but in certen rare dennes, farre removed frō the eyes of the world. From whēce the Manna of these is hidden, theirs manifest, like to that which was gathe¦red from the comon allowance of the people and by the commandement of God layd up in a golden pot, which the people had no power to see afterward, Exod. 16.33.34. Heb. 9.4. Which in a more excellent figure did sha∣dow out the heavenly food. For the other Manna being kept above one day was full of wormes: this abode pure and incorrupt through all ages, a lively and expresse image of the immortall foode. Therefore this Manna doeth not ly openly about the tents, in the waye of every one that will gather it up, but is given from the golden pot, as much as may be sufficient to main∣taine life. And certenly unlesse Christ by hidden meanes in those most cor∣rupt times had provided for his, they had bin utterly undone, as touching their salvation. ¶ And J will give him a white stone: The second reward. Aretas repor∣teth that such a stone was wont to be given to maister wrastlers striving on the thea∣ter. But it is not likely that that custome is here regarded: For that was o∣nely to the entring of the fight, and not to the rewarding of the overcomer. In the playes called Olympiques, that the champions should not run togither rash¦ly, they pulled stones out of a sylver pot, and those on which they did fall being marked with the same letter (for they wer two by two marked with the same characters) were committed in the fight by the iudges: neither doe I thinke that there was any other use of stones in playes. In iudgements they were used to an other ende, to wit to give voices. In which thing they were divers, according to the sundry lawes of the peoples; sometime hol∣low and bored through, by which they did condemne, sometime full and solid, by which they did absolve. Some time also they were distinguished onely by the colour, the black condamning, the white contrariwise absolving. So Vlpian on Demosthenes against Timocrate: The stones sometime bored and not bored: some time black and white. To the same purpose the Scholiste of Aristophanes in . But that of Alcibiades is famous, who in the iud∣gement of life and death would not beleeve his mother, least peradventure shee unwares should put a black stone for a white, Plutarche in Apotheg. of the King. He doeth allude therefore to that manner of absolving in iudge∣ments. But wherfore now is there a second, yea a third reward, which in the former Churches was but one? The use of the godly did so require.
For because those few and rare faithfull, in so great a multitude of the un∣godly, were hated of all, condemned of schisme, errour, heresy, and I know not what wickednes, an absolving stone is promised them. That although they should be guilty by all mens suffragies on the earth, yet they might knowe most surely, that they are iudged guiltles before the heavenly tribu¦nall. How great a solace is this against the reproches of the world? Be of good courage, if God iustify, who shall condemne? Rom. 8.33. ¶ And in the stone a new name written: A third reward. He persisteth in the same custome of iudgements: in some of which their names were written in the stones, who came to be iudged. Aristides being desired of an unlearned and one that knewe not who he was, that he would write to him the name of Ari∣stides in his shell, he wrote his name into his owne banishement: Plutarch in Apo∣theg. of Aristides. Here the like custome is shewed. But the new name to be written in the white stone is the childe of God, such as the faithfull perceive and acknowledg themselves to be by the testimony of the Spirit, Rom. 8.16. Which also avayleth against the railings of the world, to whō they should be as the filth and ofskowring of all. But why dost thou vexe thy selfe with thought of so great contempt, seeing thou art with God in the honour of a sonne? This name also is unknowne to all, except to him that receaveth it. For the world knoweth us not, 1 Ioh. 3.2. Therfore their testimony is of noe ac∣count, on what side soever. But besides beholde the solitarines of those times, wherein the elect were no lesse unknowne to the world, then the way of salvation signifyed now by the hidden Manna. Analysis. Such is the Epistle to the Church of Pergamus,Thyatira growing. This to the Thyatirens is intituled also to the Angell: then he declareth that he that sendeth is the sonne of God, with fiery eyes, and feete like fine brasse, ver. 18. The Narration prayseth the increase of Godlines, ver. 19. but reprehendeth for suffering of Jesabell; whose naughtines he describeth, first by the kinde of sinne ver. 20. se∣condly by the hardning ver. 21. and punishment, which is notable both for the nature of the punishment it selfe, which is divers according to the mā∣ner of the delinquents: For Iezabell her selfe is punished by the Bed: They that committe fornication with her, by great affliction ver. 22. and her sonnes with death: as also by an excellent testimony of all Churches, of the iust and se∣vere iudgement of God ver. 23. To whom finally he annexed a counsell a∣gainst this wickednes (the way wherto he sheweth by gentle entreatie, laying noe other burden upon them ver. 24.) requyring constancy, ver. 25. & per∣swading
therto by the reward of power over the nations, vers. 26.27. & the morning starre ver. 28. The conclusion ver. 29. Scholions. 18 And to the Angell of the Church of Thyatira: Thyatira is so called as it were Thugatera, as we have shewed at the first chapter. A name well concurring with the thing. For the godlines of this Church is growing, as a daugh∣ter new borne, which alway groweth up, till shee hath attained to a full maturity. In which respect it is opposed to Ephesus: which being of full age the very first day, or shortly after, the further shee proceedeth, as ha∣sting to old age, became weaker every day, while at lēgth the naturall heat being extinguished, shee fell into the coldnes of death. And here is the first bending from the North, to wit, Pergamus, toward the south, but fur∣ther to the East, being distant, according to Ptolemy, about foure score English miles. The Antitype is the time from the yeare 1300. unto 1520. ¶ These things saith the sonne of God: Now Christ maketh himselfe knowne by his name, eyes, & feete: every one of which doe appeare more clearly frō the Antitype of what sorte they are. As touching the name, now first of all it offereth it selfe, not expressed before eyther in the things seen or heard in the first chapter. There was mention of the sonne of man, ver. 13. but the whole vision did declare sufficiently that he was the sonne of God. It seemeth here to be used, as though now he would returne out of Egypt. He had bin exiled now a good while, but in the renewing of the Church he retur∣neth as it were home, beginning more familiarly to be knowne to his, frō whom he had seemed before time to be farr of. The firie eyes, are those spoken of in the first chapter fourteen and fifteen verses: by whose cleare∣nes he sheweth to the Thyatirens, that now the time flourisheth wherein the light of the truth should dispell darknes of errours and falshood, as it flyeth at the sight of the fyre: as came to passe about the yeare 1300. when a new company of Teachers arose, by the iudgement of all which the Pope was strangled, and began to be spoiled of his estimation, which he had kept nowe a good while by fraude. For they did maintayne ear∣nestly, that the Imperiall Maiesty ought to be prefered above other, and that the Pope had noe power over it. Among these were Ockamus, Mar∣silius, Patavinus, Dantes, Iohn de Ganduno, and many other. The feete like fine Brasse doe teach, with what kinde of tormēt the Romane Balaam should rage against the faithfull feet of Christ, he should deliver them to be burned in the flame, endevouring to quench one burning by another.
Which cruelty he hath not exercised now the first time, but hath brought it to noble infamy, by more frequent burnings then ever before. The fires shyned through all Europe many Martyrs burnt every day. But notable be∣fore others were Iohn Hus, and Hierome of Prage, who a noble payre of feet like fine Brasse did shyne in the fornace of Constancie in the eyes of all our world. But An¦tichrist was deceaved who thought to have consumed those feete by fire. For now at length he hath had experience, that these feete are not stubble, but fine Brasse, which shineth more in the fyre, and is not consumed. 19 I know thy workes: The workes which are rehearsed, Charitie, Ministra∣tion, Faith, & Patience perteine to private duty, rather then publike office: asthough this Church were hid in some secret members, and was not fa∣mous in an excellent administration of thinges. Such was doubtlesse the state of the Thyatirian City: It is plaine touching the Antitype. For although there were every where many excellent men, who did defend the trueth by writings and lively voice, yet no publike Churches companies were consti¦tuted or set in order. Or if any were, as about the end of this periode men began to meet together somewhat boldly, they obteined not a lawfull re∣formation. The chiefe prayse was of their Love one to another, but not that feigned, wherby men promise largely, but performe nothing, but wherby both by deed and worke they holpe where there was need: whereupon un¦to charity he adioineth ministration. Their mutuall Faith also was excel∣lent free from all fayning and trechery. For this Faith seemeth to be a fruit of that which is properly so called, to wit, Faithfulnes, wherby they regar∣ded from the hart one an others goods. When it signifyeth a Trust in God for Christs sake, it is wont to be set in the first place, as the fountaine and welspring of other vertues; which peradventure deceaved the olde Inter∣preter, and caused him to set this word before the other, contrary to the truth of the Greeke copies: For so he readeth, and Faith, and Love, & Mi∣nistrtion, and Patience. Patience was seene in suffering the calamityes wher∣with they were troubled continually by the hatred and plotting of the Ro¦mane Prelat. The last prayse is of their last Workes, which are moe then the former. For so doth reade the Comon translation, the Complutent Edition, and the Kings Edi∣tion, who is also used by Robart Stevens, in his Edition thus, And thy last workes moe then the first, to wit, by putting out the second and.
And so indeede the sentence runneth better; especially seeing workes are re∣hearsed in the beginning of the verse: which if they were set downe againe, and not read togither, peradventute the repetition should be superfluous. As touching the matter, it is an excellent prayse to growe in godlines, and to exceed the former times in the fruitfulnes of good workes: which thing indeede befalleth them that are planted in the house of the Lord, which in old age are fatte and green, Psal. 92.15. Whose way shineth as the light, it shaineth more and more to the perfect day, Proverb. 4.18. So this Church alway encrea∣sing and proceeding further and further, grew stronger every day frō small beginnings. About the yeare 1300, many stronge couragious men sprung up, faithfull deffendours of the truth, but about seventy yeares after, Iohn Wicklefe added much to their beginnings: hee made cleare the doctrine in farre moe pointes, and confirmed that more plentifully with arguments, which they had barely searched out. And fouty yeares after followed him Iohn Husse and Hierome of Prage: by whose preaching and martyrdome there was made a farre greater encreasing. The Bohemians followed these, who openly did fall away from the Romane Antichrist, and appointed a more re¦formed worship in their assemblyes. And then the myndes of all the god∣ly became stouter through all Europe, who more bouldly professed the truth, howsoever they knew, that they did it with the danger of their life. Neither did Thyatira stande still here, but about the yeare one thousand five hundreth, shee powred out largely a new plenty of most learned men: who gave noe vaine hope of a fuller and clearer light to breake forth by & by after. And these are the last workes more then the first. Worthily therfore she is Thugateira that is, a daughter growing so notably, even as the waters running from the Temple, which at the first being small, after full of shallow places, could not at the last be passed over for the deepnes, Ezech. 47. And so in this first bending from the North, was made the first payre of contraries; For this growing Thyatira is directly opposite to Languishing Ephesus, which became omission, leaving, as we have shewed, worser in the last times, by the conti∣nuall omission of labour and watchfulnes, then also heaping up supersti∣tions, till at length all care of true godlines awas abated, and so in the two following Churches it became alway worser: Now at last it began to re∣turne, and to oppose three other Churches to these three, as we shall see in ech one of them. 20 But I have a fewe things against thee: The reprehension is, that the womā Iesabell was permitted to deceave the servants of God with her vaine shewes, There∣fore either their negligēce, or faint heart, or both are blamed; wherby it came to passe, that shee dealt not with the wicked according to their deserts;
but they were suffered to sleepe securely in their sinnes. Who this Iezabell was in the Thyatiren City, the old Hystory sheweth not. From this place we understand, that in the same place there was a certen Chiefe and famous woman, an Idolatrice, Sorceresse & Harlot, like the ancient Iezabell, which was the wife of Ahab; yet by thus much more furnished to destroy, because this shewed her selfe openly an enemy and adversary to the truth: that would be accounted for a Prophetisse. From that which followeth, appea∣reth that shee was taught to the naughtines in the schoole of the Nicolai∣tans, of which shee became a schoole mistres, teaching others the same ru∣les. For the Heretiques abused the labour of women to sparse abroad their poysons. Simon Magus hath his Helena, Carpocrates his Marcellinam, Apel∣les his Philumenam, Montanus after in the latter times, in places nigh to this Thyatira, his Priscilla & Maximilla. In the Antitype the thing is clearer. For this Iezabell is Rome Queene, Idolatrice, Sorceresse, Whore, Killer of Mar∣tyrs, Prophetisse, the head of all Churches, and the whole way of salvation, which ne∣ver yeelded to any heresyes, and many such like, with which wee shall see her adorned by the Holy Spirit partly in this book, partly shee boastingly set∣teth forth her selfe impudently. Lately we learned tha the Pope was signifi¦ed by Balaam, now we have the city shewed by Iezabell. Both which per∣teine to the describing of the same Synagogue of Sathan, see in the Bishop and City, are things very neerly conioyned. And how doth it fit the times, that the Spirit doth set before our eyes now such a city? How long time did the Pope deceive under a shew of godlines, as the Hypocriticall Balaam in the former ages about the beginning of increasing honour and reputation? but after he was growē to an inmeasurable greatnes, lifted up above Kings & Emperours, so as now all mē quaked at the very name of the Pope of Rome, his Rome became the Queene Iezabell, an impudent and painted whore. Balaam therefore and Iezabell declare the same kinde of impiety: onely they are di∣stinguished by the increase an times. Rome in her infancy, as Balaam, han∣dled her matters more warily and secretly: shee pretended that shee could not speake, but that which the LORD should put in her mouth: being grown to full age, as the Prophetisse Iezabell preacheth openly that shee cānot erre, and that shee is the rule of faith and all godlines; That abused the labour of Kings to bring in and set up Idolatry: This by her owne authority com∣mandeth to committe fornication and to eate thinges sacrificed to Idols, in exacting the worshipping of Idols & Images. Who can admire enough the singular art of the Spirit, who hath so lively set forth this matter. This then is Iezabell: the holy men of this time shaking too softly & modestly this peste, have therein so much the lesse approved themselves to Christ
our head, who would have no earnestnes spared in repressing so great im∣pudency. Learned men have dealt some what more boldly and freely, then they had done in former times: yet they used not that earnestnes that was meete in a cause of this sorte. ¶ And I gave her time to repent: In these words is shewed the stubburnes of Iezabell. Christ dealt some while patiently with that impure Thyatiren woman: so also with the city of Rome, the stormy trouble of Barbarians be∣ing quieted, and the Longobardes being overthrown. Neverthelesse this peace brought noe amendement, but increased rather the apostacy, while they came to this height of impudent Jezabell. For wee shall see that after those times all ungodlines did grow, the Papists striving to oppresse the for¦mer dimnes with infernall darknes. 22 Behold I will cast her in a bed: The punishement of Iezabell. The bed is sometime to delights and riot, as in the Prophet, sitting downe on beds of yvo∣ry, and abounding upon their heds: Amos 6.4. Sometime to sicknes and weak∣nes, as, The Lord will upholde bim on the bed of feeblenes, and turne all his bed in his sickenes: Psal. 41.4. Of which in this place? Not of delights, although this be a great punishment, to be given up to the occasion of sinning: but of grief, as appeareth from this, that by and by after followeth, where they that committe adultery with her, shalbe cast into great affliction. Therefore the Thy¦atiē womā hath languished. Rome also hath bin sicke since the year 1300 cō¦suming more every day, as being sicke of a consumption. For since that time palenes hath covered her face, her stomake is grown weaker, her soule is become heavy, & her flesh consumed: yea her infirmity hath grown so farr, that if thou beholde her at this day, thou wilt say that shee is a dry carkase in respect of her former plight and good liking. O the infinite wisdome of God, which even in one worde, hath given so lively image and picture of a time so farre of Could the languishing destruction of Rome be no∣ted out more elegantly and evidently? God would not have her perish on a swift or speedy disease, that the peoples should not forget her, but with a wasting consumption to be corrupted and waxe rotten, both to the end that her lingering punishement should be an image of the eternall paine, and also that shee might be a spectacle to many ages, whom shee had led in errour so long a time. Certenly unlesse Rome doe feele and acknowledg this her consumption, shee must needs be sick, not onely of a consumption, but also of a Phrenesy. ¶ And those that committe adultery with her: The punishement of the a∣dulterers, who are the Kinges and Princes of the earth, as is after in the
17. chap. 2. Vnlesse these shall forsake the whore, they shall feele great af¦fliction. Have not yet the Kings learned this sufficiently by experience, the most fierce and savage Turke on the one side vexing the Emperour, the Spa∣niard on the other side? Remember the ages past since the yeare one thou sand and three hundred, in which Iezabell began to languish: Who can attaine to declare the great evils which Transilvanie, Polen, Boheme, the house of Austriche, the Emperour, The Venetians, the Spaniards, have suffered at the handes of this barbarous Turke? Did not this your affliction begin at the same time, wherein Iezabell Rome was cast into this her sicke bed? Why doe ye not observe that your adultery, which this whore hath brought forth, and caused all these evills unto you? But this calamity hitherto, while Jezabell lyeth sicke in bed, is nothing to that wherewith at length yee shalbe punished, unlesse yee renounce betime her ungodly commerce and society, when shee shall yeeld her last breathing, as wee shall shewe after∣wardes. Is it then now time o yee Princes and Peers, to fly like cowards from the true God unto the whore of Rome? They have noe pardon or ex∣cuse, who bewitched with her beauty while shee flourished, companied with her. What torment awaiteth your wretched lust, whoe doe nowe em¦brace a stinking carkasse? For the love of Christ provide for your selves in for¦saking with all speed this Harlot, least suddenly at length yee be overwhel∣med (when your repentance shall be too late) both with the most grievous calamityes of this life, and also those that shall be endlesse. 23 And J will kill her children with death: The third punishement is of her children. These are the Popes, Cardinals, Archbishops Bishops, Priests, Ie∣suites, and the rest of the whole troupe of this Hierarchie. Christ will destroy by death all those, not onely by this first, but also unlesse they repent, by the second. This is yet to come, begun after a sorte, but nowe shortly to be ac¦complished, as after shalbe declared. ¶ And all the Churches shall know; The Churches testimony of the iust and severe iudgement of God. For at length the other multitude of Christians shall have experience that Christ is such a one, as he hath decla∣red himselfe alwayes in his word. His long patience hath almost taken a∣way credit from his holy threatnings, but in very deede he shall shewe at length, that they were not vaine terrours of wordes, but which shall bring most certen vengeance in their time: and this partly begun, partly is yet to come. What reformed Church doth not see the long cōtinued langui∣shing of Rome, and prayse the iust God and celebrate him, crying out, O the deepnes of his iudgements? But there shall be a more plentifull argument of his prayse, in her last and full destruction.
And wheras he saith that he searcheth the reynes & hartes, in the same he shew¦eth to what end his eyes were like a flame of fyre ver. 18. to wit, because not onely his servants should approve themselves to be sharpe sighted in sear∣ching out the deceits of this whore, but also Christ should shewe him selfe such in administring of things, laying open the impiety of Rome, howsoe∣ver coloured with many coverings. 24 And to you J say & the rest: Now he commeth to the Consell, as we have noted in the Analysis, teaching how they should defende themselves a∣gainst this wickednes of Iezabell. And it is given to you and the rest of Thya∣tira, that is, to thee the Angell with the company of thy colleges, and the rest of the Church which have abode in sounde doctrine, as Theod. Beza hath expounded very well. The comon translation, the Complutent Edition, and others doe put out the particle and, but to you I say the rest of Thyatira: But Aretas doth reade the same, whith whom other written copies doe agree. From which particle it is evident, that not onely the last clause doth pertei∣ne to the Church, but also the whole narration, although it respecteth chief∣ly the Angell and speaketh to him by name. The same iudgement is to be holden of the rest, for there is the like reason of each one. ¶ And who have not known the deepnesses of Sathan, as they say: But who are they which say? As farre as seemeth to me, the teachers of this heinous wickednes: asthough they should bragge that they alone did knowe the deepnesses of Sathan, to perceive all his cunning and subtilityes, and to∣gither also to knowe the way wherby they may resist his mischievous de∣vises, and therfore that they permitted confused lust and buggery, or at least whoredome, for to avoid a greater evill: that the other teachers which the comon sort holde true Ministers, are simple men and unsklfull, altogither ignorant of Sathans entreprises. The name of Sathan seemeth not to be cast in their teeth of Iohn in reproch, but to have bin used of thē∣selves willingly, in that sence which I have said. So ungodlines is wont to vaunt it selfe, challenging to her selfe alone the power to loose and deliver others, when her selfe is on every side bound with the snares of the Devill. Wherefore the greeke worde is more fitly translated by the olde Interpre∣ter, who have not knowne. For the Spirit doth rather checke the boasting of the wicked, then praise the integrity of the faithfull. ¶ J will lay no other burden upon you; That is, I will denounce no more grie∣vous thinge against you, as well expounde it Theod Beza. A burdēsome Prophecy was wont to be called Massa, that is a Burden. These words then shew, that noe notable calamity should invade this Church. Which ought to be beleeved so to have fallen out in the city of Thyatira. Wee know that
it hath come to passe in our parte of the world, there having happened no other notable mutation, besides that which was spoken, from the yeare 1300. by the space of 200. yeares after and somewhat more. For frō that time the Turke waxed strong, but this perteined to the affliction of Kings, that committed adultery with the whore, as wee have shewed at ver. 22. The true Church getteth no great losse therby, but that it is a griefe to hear, that men of Christian name, should be trode under foote so cruelly of a most wicked enemy. Otherwise while the Turk vexed the Romane whore and her adulterers, the trueth springing up againe got leave to grow. 25 Yet that which yee have, hold till I come: He exhorteth to constancy, that they keepe faithfully the things gotten. Neither is this exhortation onely a precept what they ought to doe, but a Prophesy what should be done, as often else where. Therefore they should goe forward in the light of the trueth, neither should suffer themselves to be driven from the right way. And the comming of which he speaketh is a fuller reformation, wherby Christ being banished from us as long as superstitions and errours doe reigne, when they are taken away doth come to us, and giveth the confort of his presence. Therefore this sparkle of truth should continue alive, while at length it should breake out into a flame, to wit, even to the times of Lu∣ther, as by and by wee shall see. 26 For if any shall overcome &c. And he that overcometh and keepeth to the ende my works I will give to him &c. in steade of and to him that overcomeh and keepeth J will give, &c. an Hebraisme, such as is also in the chap. following, ver. 12.21. where the nominative case is put absolutely, by defect of the preposition lamech, as in Psal. 11.4. Iehova, in the heaven is his seate: that is, of Iehova, or as touching Iehova, his seate is in heaven: So Psal. 18.31, God him∣self, his way is upright, for Leel Deo, that is for God, or, as touching God: that of Paul is like,  &c. Rom. 8.3. which doth so trou∣ble the Interpreters, not marking this Hebraisme, whether to adunaton be the nominative absolute▪ the sense whereof is, for as touching the impossibility &c. But the end which he here mentioneth, is not of this life, but of this period; which should then cease, when a perfiter reformation should come. ¶ I will give him power over the nations: The reward is double, of power over the nations, and of the morning starre. We have said that the rewards are apply¦ed to the times, and doe signify those good things, which the saints enioy in this life, howsoever they be also pledges of future things. Power then o∣ver the nations, is power over the enemies of the Church. This name once lighted upon all, as many as were not the people of Jsraell, but strangers frō their lawes and covenant, now of the Gentiles themselves, all that professe
Christ syncerely are counted among the Israelites: The other multitude, that openly despiseth the trueth, or embrace it onely in name, doe stick still in their former myre, and are called by the old name of Gntiles. There were therefore Gentiles amonge the Thyatirens, namely Iezabell with hers. Amōg us Rome with her Adulterers and children. Neither must wee doubt but that the Thyatirens obtayned victory against Iezabell, as ours against Rome and her followers. For when Luther arose, some Princes of Germany, departed from the service of the Romane whore: Whō at length after some strugling, they cast to the ground and trode her under foote. The same came to passe by the grace of God in many other places. Therfore this promised power is the society of the victory against Papists: which at this day all reformed Churches enioy: whereof in short time there shalbe a full triumphe as af∣ter in his place, by God his helpe, wee shall shewe. 27 And he shall rule them &c. These are the attributes of the former power. To rule with a rode of iron, is mightily to subdue and to compell to o∣bedience will they nill they. Which was done of the Protestants Prince in Germany and elswhere, Who turned the Papists out of their Monasteries, Col¦legies, Temples, Groundes, and other goods, and bestowed them on former u∣ses, to wit, to the maintaining of godly teachers, widowes, orphanes, schooles, or finally on whatsoever could make to the promoting of Chri∣stianity. But the Papist cryeth out that this is sacrilegious and tyrannicall: Let him cry out as much as he will: the more he mourneth, the more we doe acknowledge the hard iron rode to be upon his backe. Therefore as many of the Thyatirens as should preserve even to the end, the trueth kindled among them, they should see this ioyfull day with their eyes & should be parta∣kers of the victory. Not that it should be neefull for them to be living at that time, which arose about the yeare 1300: but because that is wont to be attributed to all which are of the same condition, that happeneth to a∣ny of them, to wit, to them which should be alive at the end of this period. For so the cōmuniō of saints require that that which is a few should be alls. ¶ And as the potter &c. It is without any hope of restauration, even as the fragments of earthen pottes, which are for no use. Let then the Romā Pope sweate & move every stone, that he may recover his former authority: he striveth in vaine, his fall is unrecoverable: he shall finde no glew, whereby his earthen vessels may againe be ioyned together. That in the end, As I have received of my father, signifyeth that this power shall not be obtayned, without blood, For Chist first suffered, and so entred into glory. So Christians after some dangers and battels, yea overthrowne in warre, as wee knowe to have fallen out in Fredericke Saxon, Philipe the Lantgrave, & their armies,
shall obtayne this dominion over the Papists, as wee shall shew more fully in his place. 28 And I will give him the morning starre: An other reward noe lesse a∣greeing to the times. This starre is Christ, as wee shall see after in the 22. ch. where he hath thus, I am the roote and gneration of David, that bright morning strre: so called, partly because in this life he imperteth to the saincts him∣selfe a pledge and first fruites of the true glory, least through a long desyre they be discouraged in their mindes: partly he taketh to himslf this name in respect of the divers administration of things. When he shineth fully, he is both the morning starre, the Day and the Sune; but when he giveth a lesse light, but so yet that he giveth hope of the perfit day following by and by, he is the morning starre, the Precursor of the Sonne. And we must knowe (that which shabe clearer in the expositiō following) that a most bright light of trueth, of all godlines and religion shall shine upon the earth, when our brethren the Iewes shall be converted to Christ. Seeing therefore that then shalbe the full day, that renewed Church which goeth nex before, is the day starre, which in the morning being seen nigh the Horizon, sheweth that the fountaine & spring of light will straightway appeare. And this Church is that reformed, which succeedeth the Thyatiren, taking his beginning af∣ter the yeare 1520. Which the full restauration of the Iewes followeth at the heeles, as the Sunne the morning starre. That which is here but barely a∣vouched, as much as may be sfficient to illustrate this place; the sequent treatise shall adde proofes. Wherfore in this place the promised morning starre, is that sweet communicating of Christ, which one shall enioy in the reformed Churches, whereof he shall be enrolled a citizen: which communi∣cation, shalbe followed of the full happines of the saints, as great as can be on earth, shortly after. 29 Let him that hath an eare; The usuall Epilogue, but to be observed by reason of his divers placing. For to what end in the 3 first Epistles is the re∣ward set after the cōclusiō: In the 4 last this Epiphoneme holdeth alwayes the last place? First the Spirit teacheth this, that there is a certen difference betweene the three first and foure last: which wee have observed, distingui∣shing all the seaven into the three frst Churches growing worser, and the foure last waxing stronger after sicknes & feeling themselves somewhat better. Secondly there may be an other reason, which I gather from the event, that the rewards in the three first, as to eate of the fruit of the tree of life in Para∣dise, not to be hurt of the second death, to eate of the hidden Manna &c. were not payed on the sudden and in one moment, but perteyned to a time farre of and delayed.
Whence doe follow the Epiphonemes, as though after the admonition, they should give time to deliberate: but in the foure last they goe before the Epiphoneme, as if the admonition once given, there should be no place left for to take counsell, but the thing forthwith should obtaine an issue, beyond all expectation, togither the deedes and sayings. And so wee know it came to passe in the reformation begun by Luther, which we have shew∣ed to be a reward in respect of the Antitype of the Thyatiren state. Who would have beleeved that from so small beginnings that thing could have gone so farre at length? Luther indeede thought nothing lesse, then any al¦teration or defection from Rome: or who could have expected in so small a space so great a change of things? But now was the time, when there should be power over the nations; and therefore the matter once begun, proceeded of it owne accord, an alteration of those things being made in a moment, wherat the world then not without cause was astonied, & at this the enemies doe at this day beholde with so heavie eyes. It seemeth that there shalbe the same suiftnes of the following rewards, which a man shall see given before he shall heare that they were to be given: and therfore in place they goe before the admonition, which also noe lesse they shall goe before in time. You therefore o Pastists, you againe I speake unto, if per∣adventure the Spirit hath given any of you eares, that you may heare: at∣tend diligently those things, which have bin spoken. See what a one is your Rome which you embrace with so great reverence, and whether you ran the last yeare to celebrate your wicked Iubiles: shee is not a holy vir∣gine, as you are perswaded falsly, but a most impudent Jezabell, a most cru¦ell murderesse of the saints, from whom wee ought rather to fly into anie wildernes with Eliah, then to runne to her by sea, by land, leaving at home the most chaste spouse of Christ. Behold also that this sorceresse had lyen¦sike now many yeares agone: (can you otherwise deny it?) which calleth the Turke to come upon the Christian world, expelleth our brethren out of their places of abode, turneth them out from their goods, spoiled them of their children and wives, and constrayneth them to be carried away in∣to most cruell servitude, and heapeth many calamityes upon us all, which are farre of from that burning hatred. And not onely these thinges at this present, but which shall bring finally an horrible death upon you her chil∣dren. Can it be doubtfull to any, who shall weigh diligently these things with himselfe; but that wee ought to flee very soone & very farr from this plague and mischiefe? The Spirit give you eares to heare; I will speake noe more; to them of whom the trueth is esteemed, a bare signification of the ill of God shalbe sufficient: let him be filthy still, who shall contemne
this. I will turne my selfe to the unfoulding of those things that remayne. Chap. 3. AND to the Angell of the Church which is at Sardis wrighte: These things sayeth he that hath the seaven Spirits of God, and the seaven starres: I know thy workes, to wit, that thou art said to live, but thou art dead. 2 Be vigilant & strengthen the things that remaine, ready to dy: for I have not found thy workes perfit before God. 3 Remember therfore how thou hast receaved and heard; and observe, & repent. That if thou doest not watch, J will come against thee as a thiefe, neither shalt thou know what houre J will come against thee. 4 Notwithstanding thou hast a few names even in Sardis, which have not defi∣led their garments, and therfore they shall walke with me in white: for they are wor∣thy. 5 He that overcometh shalbe clothed with white garments, neither will I ever put his name out of the booke of life, but will professe his name before my father and before his Angels. 6 Let him that hath an eare heare what the Spirit saith to the Churches. 7 And to the Angell of the Church of Philadelphia write: These things saith he that is holy and true, which hath the key of David; which openeth and noe man shut∣teth, shutteth and noe man openeth. 8 J know thy workes: beholde I have set before thee an open dore, neither is any man able to shut it: because thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my worde, and hast not denyed my name. 9 Beholde I will give those which are the Synagogue of Sathan, that is, of them which say they are Iewes and are not: Beholde, I say, J will cause them to come and worship before thy feete and to know that I have loved thee. 10 Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keepe thee from the time of tentation, which shall come upon the whole world, to try the inhabitans of the earth. 11 Behold, J come quickly, holde that which thou hast: that no man may take thy crowne. 12 Him that overcometh, I will make to be a pillar in the Temple of my God, nei∣ther shall he goe forth any more: and J will write upon him the name of my God, and
the name of the city of my God, that is, of the new Jerusalem, which cometh downe from heaven from my God, and my new name. 13 Let him that hath an eare, heare what the Spirit saith to the Churches. 14 And to the Angell of the Church of the Laodiceans write, These things saith Amen, that faithfull and true witnesse, the beginning of the worke of God: 15 I know thy workes, to wit, that thou art neither cold, nor whote, I would thou wert eyther cold or whote. 16 Therefore because thou art lukewarme, neither cold nor whote, it shall come to passe that I will spewe the out of my mouth. 17 For thou sayst, J am rich, and increased with goods & need nothing. And know∣est not, that thou art wretched, and miserable, and poore, and blind and naked. 18 I counsell thee to buy of me Gold tryed in the fyre, that thou mayest be rich: and white garments, that thou mayest be clothed, and that the shame of thy nakednes may not appeare; and that thou anointe thyne eyes with eye salve that thou mayest see. 19 As many as I love J rebuke and chastice. 20 Be hotte therfore and repente. Beholde J stand at the dore and knocke, if any shall heare my voyce and open the dore, I will come into him and suppe with him & he with mee. 21 He that shall overcome, J will give him that he may sit with me in my throne, as I haue overcome, and sit with my father in his throne. 22 Let him that hath an eare heare what the Spirit saith to the Churches. The Analysis. THERE be three Epistles of this chapter: One to the Sardenses, an o∣ther to the Philadelpphienses, the last to the Laodiceans. Neither are they without cause included in one chapter, seeing they are of nature somewhat divers from the former. For the former were further distant one from an other, so they had Antitypes of a longer time: But these are both severed one from another with lesser distances, and also wee shall find the Church∣ches directly answering unto them, to be of a more conioined tyme. The Epistle to the Sardenses after the inscription to the Angell, describeth the Sē∣der from the seaven Spirits, and seaven starres: after it addeth the Narration. Which reproveth him, that he carrieth the name and some shewe of life, whē in very deede he was dead, ver. 1 but togither also he teacheth the remedy, which is double: the first consisteth in confirming the other things that are rea∣dy to dy. For it should come to passe, that by the iust iudgment of God ma¦ny should dy, who so should punish the neglect of lawfull and iust amēn∣dement, ver. 2. The second, that he should remember what things he had re∣ceived,
and should repent. Which admonition, lest he a should negligently re∣garde, he is sharpened by threatning of his unexpected coming, ver. 3. After he prayseth some for their pure garments. Which prayse conteineth the reward, both proper to them, and also comon to all conquerers ver. 5. Which is threefolde, white clothing, a permanent name in the booke of life, and his profes∣sing of him before his father and the Angels. All which are concluded with the usuall Epiphoneme ver. 6. Scholions. 1 To the Angell of the Church which is at Sardis:Hy ca Sardis is the seconde of the Churches rising againe, going yet further in the South, and growing in a more ample light of trueth. The Antitype is the first reformed Churche, begun of God by Martin Luther of Wittemberg, a towne of Saxe upon the ri∣ver Albe, in the yeare 1517, when that holy man opposed himselfe against the Romane Questors selling for mony the forgivenes of sinnes to the peo∣ple. The trueth began to be revived under the Thyatiren state, but noe re∣formation followed; This was first undertaken at the time which I have said. For which cause wee shall finde no mention in these three Churches of this Chapter, eyther of Balaam or Jezabell. For they were pure from the fault of this whore, whose fellowship they renounced utterly. But yet not∣withstanding seeing the same should not be done of all after the same ma∣ner, but a threefolde difference would be found in them, in like maner they are shadowed out by three cityes according to the beginning and conditi∣on of every one. The first, after the impudency of Iezabell restreined, is Sar∣dis. And the first after the Romane impudency weakened, is the Germane Church of that time, which even nowe I have set downe. Onely the indif∣ferent and good readers are to be intreated that they doe not thinke me to descende to this or that interpretation by any ill will, but in good faith∣fulnes to follow that sense, which the printed steppes of the Spirit going before, seeme to me not darkely to point at. I know how fearfull a thing it is even to hurt the estimation of any brother with wrongfull suspicions, how much more heynous a sinne it should be to cast any blot rashly upon any whole Church? And certenly as in all my life I desire to put farr away all virulency of tongue, so especially I have thought alway that I must take heede that I make not the name of God a cloak for my lust. Let not then the office of an Interpreter be any fraude to mee, speaking either here or in other places of things presēt otherwise peradvēture thē many either would or expect. It is an impious and detestable thing, to play the hucksters
with the word of God, in speaking rather according to the pleasure of men, then the trueth of the thing it selfe. Therefore all as well hatred as favour set aside, if wee shall see that that which is uttered agreeth with the trueth, let us quake rather at the threatnings of the most iust God, then be angry with him, who to the end that wee may not be oppressed unwares with the evils hanging over our heades, hath endevoured to his utmost power to re∣veale the hidden truth. Which I hope I shall obtayne easily of all the god∣ly, so farr shall it be from them, to reprehend myne industry: with which hope supported, I will proceed to my purpose through Gods helpe. ¶ These things faith he that hath those seaven Spirits of God, & those seven starrs: In the description of the sender of the Epistle, of those Spirits which are re∣hearsed, there was no mention made in the vision of the first chapter. They are fetched from the comon inscription of the Epistle in the 1 chap. ver. 4. They are seaven for the abondance of all gifts, which that number usually signifyeth. Christ hath in his owne power, that being the keeper of the storehouse of the heavenly grace, he bestoweth the Spirit on whom he shal thinke good; Wherupon he saith, that he will sende the Conforter from the Fa∣ther: Iohn, 15.26. who should receive from Christ, and shew unto us, Io. 16.14. The Starres are in the right hād, chap. 1.16. Likewise in the Ephesine Church, wherein we have heard is declared the safety of the ministers, whom Christ carrieth in his handes, chap 2.1. To what end then is this repeated a fresh? Was there wanting now any other honour spent wholy on the for∣mer? in no wise, but onely because the conveniency of things, and not any vayne novelty, is sought. Because Sardis should finde the same safegarde of Christ in defending her Pastors, which he had shewed in Ephesus; not without cause doth he use the same similitude, wherein there is so great cō¦iunction of things. But of Sardis the History speaketh not a word: Which thing in her Antitype is most cleare. For he that giveth the Spirit plentiful∣ly, to whom and when he will, shed out in those times so great plenty of all giftes, as no where els in these last times. Good learning had bin alrea∣dy as buryed, being driven away for many ages by the rusticity of the Scho¦lastiques: untill at length, after the wonderfull art of printing was found out (which cunning flowed frō the same fountaine of the Spirit) many ex∣cellent wits were raysed up to search out the truth. Among which were, Iohn Picus, Mirandulanus, Angelus Politianus, Platina, Trapezuntius, Gaza, Hermolaus Barbarus, Marsilius Ficinus, Pyrbachius, Ioannes de monte Regio, Aldus Manutius, Rodolphus Agricola, Ioannes Iovianus, Pontanus, Philippus Beroaldus, Ioannes Reuchlinus, and many other most learned men; Whose chiefe labour was in setting forth the tongues, arts, and other humane learning:
but how great an entrance was made from hēce to finde out the mysteries of salvati, the conioyned times have taught. For by and by after came Martin Luther, Philippe Melanthon, Erasme of Roterodam, Zuinglius, Oecolam∣padius, Capito, Blaurerus, Bucer, Musculus, Calvin, and many other most lear¦ned men, so many lights of the Christian world, who being holpen by the studyes of those former, brought forth againe the trueth, covered with long filthines and uncleannes, dissipated the Romish darknes, and dispel∣led utterly as smoke hither and thither all the subtilities of the enemies. Doth not Christ worthily take upon him selfe this ensigne of the seaven spi∣rits, enriching this time with so great plenty of gifts? Neither was lesse fa∣mous his power & grace in conserving safety to the Pastors. Who would not have thought that Luther in so great hatred and envy of all men, for whom almost the whole world layed waite, even also he under whose feete the Emperours once were compelled to subiect their neckes, that Luther I say, should have dyed a thousand deathes? But peradventure troubles be∣ing raised up he did scarce endure; yes by the space almost of thirty yeeres he abode in the battell safe, even from privy assaults, with which the Pope is wont to make away those men, whom he cannot conquer with open warr and force: and at length lying sicke in his bed and giving up his soule to him that gave it, he slept quietly in Christ. What should I speake of Me∣lanthon, Peter Martyr, John Calvin and the rest of the valiant Herolts? Bucer being buried a fewe yeares before, at lēgth turned to dust, was digged out of his grave, or rather an other buried there latelyer, that they might shew their cruelty even in the burning of his ashes, whom they could not, nor durst not hurt, while he lived. Who then hath not seene the starres in the right hand of Christ, so wonderfully defending his servants against all force of adversaries? And ought not the fresh memory of these things, to give constācy and courage unto all, that reposing themselves in the same protection, they may goe boldly to the deffense of the truth every one ac∣cording to his calling? There is not indeed the same expresse promise of o∣ther times, yet there is alwayes the same crowne, for them that fight law∣fully. ¶ J know thy workes, that thou art sayd to live, but art dead: A reprehension for their counterfit lyfe, of which the Angell beareth a shewe, being voide of trueth: from whēce Sardis may be called Hypocriticall. The force of which notation is manifest from the name it selfe. For Sardis as Sardian laughter, such rather in shew, then in very truth; so called of the city Sardis, even as the Sardonian laughter, of the Iland Sardonia, as Erasmus noteth from Plu∣tarch. For that kind of herbe ranunculus in English trowfoot, by which the
mind is taken away, may grow as well in Lydia as in the Ilnd. This Church was counted alive but was dead: like unto this laughing, which feigneth ioyfulnesse, in the meane tyme full of deadly sorowe. And from hence it is evident howe Sardis is opposed to Smyrna; This found all outward things most troublous, so as shee was almost held of all for dead; yet in the mean time live a true life, and was most acceptable to God: That abroad in the iudgement of men livth and flourisheth excellently, yet within, death reigneth, true godlines being banished: From whence is made the second payre of contraryes, as was observed in the comon analysis of the seaven Epistles. But in what thing consisted this fayning, as farre as concerneth the city Sar¦dis, it is not cleare to us from the history: there flourished in the same pla∣ce not very long after, the famous Melito, celebrated by Euseb in his 4. booke chap. 26. But hence it appeareth that the matter was brought to that case when Ihon wrote, that although the Angell seemed to himselfe, and peradvēture to some others, excellently well furnished with all things unto salvation; yet that he wanted many things necessary, and abounded in the contrary. Wee knowe that they which are alive outwardly, may be dead either in ignorance of doctrine and corruption, or through carelesnes of Godly du∣tyes: as Christ calleth them dead, which were voide of faith and knowledg of salvation, Iohn 5.25. And the Apostle calleth the wanton widow, dead when shee is alive, howsoever shee had given her name to Christ, 1 Tim. 5.6. In which respect also workes are called dead, Heb. 6.2. as declaring that they ar in deede dead that give themselves up to the study & love of them. It may be that partly through neglect of godlines, partly by corruption of doctrine the Angell of Sardis fell into this dead life. If the doctrine had bin quite extinguished, which in deede is the soule of the Church, shee could not have obtained even the name of any life. We have sayd that the An∣titype, because of the following order of things, was the first reformed Church, springing up in Sax, when Luther began to teach. For the Thyatirē Church have some blame for suffering the Romane Iezabell. This first, as Iehu, labou¦red that the painted & shameles whore should be cast out of the window, so as shee did sprinke the earth with her braine. From whence it cometh to passe, that shee is not rebuked so much as in one worde in respect of this. This Church then hath the name that shee is alive, for the truth resto∣red, which in wonderfull manner shee hath manifested; and also for the ex¦cellent courage, wherby shee weakened and trode under foote the Romish tyranny, shaking of the same not onely from her owne necke, but also gi∣ving the same to be derided of the whole world: yet shee is dead, having some errours and corruptions of no small importance, chiefly that consubstanti∣ation
of the body of Christ in the sacrement of the supper, which many other absur¦dities followed, which doe spred like leposy, and take away the life of the members living by themselves. Notwithstanding these thinges are not to be understood of every man, but of the whole police and forme of the Church, which is apparent to the world: the image and proportion wher∣of, the Spirit purtrayeth to us. Which also is to be observed in the rest. 2 Awayke and strenhthen the things that remaine ready to dy: The first remey is of diligence in confirming the rest; who, if it were not with all speed lookt unto, should rush into the destruction of death. By the which it is taught, that if the Teachers would bestowe faithfull and diligent paines, in cleansing the whole doctrine and godlines, they should take away from many the occasion of falling: but if they shall carry themselves over negli∣gently in this matter, there would be a lamentable ruine of many. In the Antitype the thing is so cleare, that any man may bewayle it with teares, ra∣ther then to prosecute it in wordes. For how many excellent men hath that monster of Vbiquity cast headlong into death? The seedes whereof Lu¦ther sowed in the yeare 1526. and 1528. in a disputation against Zuinglius & Oecolāpadius. But they ought to had bin pulled out againe of his bookes, at least after the controversy was brought a sleepe, least lurking as it were in the furrowes, they should breake forth at length into deadly hemlocke. But Luther himselfe was carelesse thereof, providing after the manner of men rather for his owne estimation then, as was meet, for the safety of the brethren. Moreover I doe finde lacke of thy faithfulnesse and diligence, o holy Philip: because thou hast not thrust through so foule an errour accor∣ding to his desert. Peradventure thou thoughtest that it was to be hādled more gently of thee, partly in favour of thy friend, partly because thou sup¦posedst that it might be abolished by silence more easily then by sharpe inveiging of wordes. But the errours which are not refuted, seeme to be allowed, and their estimation groweth so much the more as they are dealt with more gently: for they are gangrenes, which gentle remedies doe not heale but make worse. While therefore neither of you watcheth nor doth his duty, many dy: how many I pray, and how great men? An huge num∣ber in deede of all degrees: of which the principall as standerd-bearers wer Iohannes Brentius, Iacobus Andreas, Selnecerus, Kirchnerus, Chemnitius, and o∣thers of that sorte, who have encreased this monster of Vbiquity, of it selfe horrible, with so many and notable errours, that there hath bin scarce at my time any other more foule and deadly. Lamentable in deede is the fall of the famous men, whose labour was once courageous and no lesse profitable against the comon enemyes. And what a crowne had they re∣ceived,
if they had continued in the same warrefarre, and had not as cruell Elephants turned back of the enemyes, wasted their owne friendes. But my office is of an Interpreter and not of a quereller: and therefore I leave of these things. This death invaded not onely some perticalar men, but al∣so many whole cityes and provinces, as may appeare by the booke of Con∣corde published in the yeare 1580. which is not of so great force to stablish the errour with the consent of so many, as to testify this miserable calami∣ty of the brethren. And to this errour touching the Supper of the Lord, and person of Christ, were many other also added, to wit of Originall sinne,, of Free will, of Iustification, of Good workes, of the Lawe and Gospell, of Indifferent things, and of Predestination. Therefore death assaileth with a manifoulde dart: how great must the slaughter be, seing shee casteth to ground even with one, great troupes of men? ¶ For J have not founde thy workes perfit; The reason why so many fell into death. The Church of Sardis, as farr as it seemeth, admitted not the syncere truth of God, but reteined some Ethnike superstition. The Church of Germa∣ny did indeede cast away many Popish errours, yet in the Sacrament of the sup∣per, shee sticke still as it were in the clay of bodily presence, not as Rome, drea∣ming of a changed substance of bread and wine into a true and reall flesh and blood, but no lesse contrary to and disagreeing from the trueth, con∣ioining the true flesh and blood togither with the outward signes, affir∣ming that he is present here on earth. This leaven Luther never cast out, but contended fiercely with Zuinglius & Oecolampadius, for to defend & re∣taine the same. Neither would God, which afflicted so grievously the Co∣rinthians for the prophanation of this sacred mystery, so as many were weake and sicke, and many slept, 1 Cor. 11.30. have goe away unpunished the ne∣glect of amending in this point. Of which punishement to come some proofe was made, whn Luther was constrained for the defense of an un∣iust cause, to fly for succour to Vbiquity and to confirme many other things touching the manhood of Christ, which are contrary to the truth. But for the heat of contention, he could not so well consider and minde, that frō those beginnings and flourishes, he should understand God to be angry. How did he not beware of that errour which did draw with it so great a multitude of wicked opinions? Why feared he not, what might have hap∣pened to others, having tryed in himselfe, into what case he himselfe was brought in disputing? But his eyes were holden, that he could not forsee for the time to come, and turne away this so grievous punishment frō his people. Wherfore their workes were not perfit, because a full reformatiō was not used, but onely one errour chaunged into an other noe lesse grie∣vous.
And God is wont often times to punish sinne with sinne. 3 Remember therefore &c. The second remedy is, to remember and repent; Theod. Beza translated thus, remember what thou hast received. And so in∣deede some time the worde pos seemeth to be taken. For that of Mark take heed what thou heare, chap. 4.24. Luke hath it thus, take heed how you heare, chap. 8.18. But when he saied even now, that theire workes were not full be∣fore God, he seemeth not so much to exhorte, that they would reteine those thinges which they had received (for so they should have continued in their former errours) as that they should remember the manner of recea∣ving: So as pos in this place ought to remaine in his owne proper significa∣tion, denoting rather the quality, then the substance of the thing. He war∣neth therfore the Sardenses, that they goe backe to the first institution, and amende things fallen into decay, after the rule of that alone: Even as also the Germane Church, that they minde what Luther propounded to himself at the beginning, and make their reformation according to that rule But he regarded noe other thing at the first, then that all humane inventions dri∣vē away, onely the divine truth revealed in the scriptures inspired of God might prevayle. For so in the preface of his assertion of the artickles cō∣demned by the Bulle of the Pope Leon x. First, saith he, J will that they beare mee witnesse, that I will not be compelled with the authority of any at all, how holy a father soever, unlesse as farre as he shalbe approved by the iudgement of divine scrip∣ture: Againe, Let the first principles then of Christians be none other but the word of God: but all men conclusions be fetched from hence, and againe to be reduced thi∣ther and tryed therby; Those first of all ought to be knowen of every one, & not sought out by men, but men to be iudged by them; Whereupon also he rehearseth that of Augustine in his 3. booke of the Trin. be not bound unto my Epistles as un∣to the Canonicall Scriptures &c. Therefore wee may not cleave in the bookes of Luther, as the Vbiquitaries doe, and they which corrupt the Sacrament by the late devised consubstantiation, but as he thought he must be wise one∣ly out of the scriptures, so all his writings are to be brought backe to these holy balances. Why doe wee give greter authority to his bookes, then ei∣ther he to the bookes of others, or himselfe would have to be given to his owne? A matter indeede of great moment, and in which alone consisteth the turning away of the eminent evill. Vnlesse men turne their eyes to these things, and have their eares bent to heare their voice, and also those things performed which they shall commande, an other scourge remayneth for Germany more bitter then that, which even hitherto hath afflicted her not lightly. What godly man taketh not great griefe minding the destructiō of so many brethren by a pernitions errour, so long contētions of minds,
so sharpe battels both of wordes and weapons? But he must needes be more vexed, when he considereth with himselfe, that there is not yet an end of these evills, but some greater thing to hang over their heads, unlese they repent betimes. I could not but warne the brethren of the danger, least I should heare with my great griefe, them to be afflicted and full of ca¦lamity, whō I desire in Christ Iesus to flourish. And I hope that howsoever my iudgment shalbe troublesome, yet my good will shall not be ungrate. ¶ Yf thou shalt not watch I will come &c. The perill that he threatneth is his coming as a thiefe, and that in an unexpected time. He doth not expressely mention what kinde of evill shall come, although in some parte it may be gathered from the similitude: which often times is used in the scriptures to signify the invasion of the enemy, but seeing the next words have respect hitherto, neither shalt thou know in what houre I will come against thee, peradvē∣ture he meaneth some other thing, to wit, a certen force & violence, such as thieves use in robbing houses. Who often times not onely doe spoile the maysters of their goods, but also committe adultery with their wives, and defloure the virgins, and compell by torments, to confesse where the mony is hidden: which having once gotten, that their wickednes may not be bewrayed, they kill all without difference either of sexe or age. There∣fore Christ seemeth here to threatenē the like outragious fiercenes of some cruell enemy. Of whose comming wee may not define by the iudgement of the flesh, seeing it shall not be knowne in what houre he shall come. Nei∣ther must we labour much to search out, who this enemy should be. The Spirit who hath determined that his comming shalbe sudden, would not have him knowen by name. It may be, that it is the Turke, to whom the raynes may be loosed a while, till they be lookt unto which are to be pu∣nished. But whether it shall be he, or some other, wee may not sleepe se∣curely, and neglect reformation, because wee see noe danger at hand: but we must thinke how it may come upon us in a moment. And it is to be fea¦red, that this which is threatned shall no more be avoided, then that of re∣moving the Candlesticke from the Ephesine Church, chap. 2.5. These thinges depende on the condition of repentance, to which the eares of men are deafe even the greatest part. 4 Yet thou hast a few persons, in the greeke it is a few names, that is, a fewe men, as Act. 1.15. and after in this booke chap. 11.13. In these wordes he cometh to the other part of the narration, which perteineth to commē¦dation. Which alwayes at other times is wont to take the first place. But this new disposition & setting in order is not done rashly, teaching that in the latter times shalbe some, who refusing errours should embrace the
trueth. As we knowe was done, when the booke of Concorde began frō this occasion, and so many visitations undertaken, that the Calvinists, as they speake, might be rooted out utterly. For such men followers of true godlines and iudgement, were conversant in the most inward bowels of this Sarden state. Beside many free Cityes, Strasburg, Heydelberg, Marpurg, Newstadt, Breme, the peopell Anhaltine &c. who opposed themselves against the forgeries of the rest. In every one of those places famous lights now and then did shine, which driving farre away that darkenes, gave a ioyfull day to their flockes. ¶ Which have not defiled their garments: The garment is Christ himselfe, the comon clothing of all the faithfull: of which in the parable, Friend howe ca¦mest thou in hither, not having on a wedding garment, Mat. 22.12. And Paul more plainly, For all yee that have bin baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. But it hath a diverse signification according to the diverse res∣pect of thinges, into which it is referred. In respect of God, it belongeth to iustification: in respect of other men, to sanctification and profession; in respect of our selves, to honour, glory, triumphe, ioy, &c. Therefore these Sardens, kept their profession of Christ sincere and entyre from all the filth and polluti∣ons of those monstrous opinions. Although they also which by repentāce did awake frō those errours, may be said to keepe their garments also pure. For they that are in Christ, are not esteemed according to their former foul¦nes, but according to their present apparell, wherewith all their fomer un∣cleannesses are covered. ¶ And therefore they shall walke with me in white, to wit, garments. These are the same garmēts with the former, but a little differing in respect; for those were of profession, wherby the valiant souldiers of Christ did appeare to o∣thers: these are of glory, triumphe, and ioye, which they shall enioy both in themselves from the feeling of Gods love shed abroad in their harts, and also which they should receive frō the praysing of others, who shall prayse God in their name, who hath bestowed on thē fortitude & victory. A white and pure gowne in a solemne mirth is commendable, both among the Gen∣tiles and also the people of God. From whence the wise man alluding to this manner, Let, saith he, thy garments be white alway, Eccl. 9.8. But especially I thinke that of Marke is to be regarded, where some steppe of this celesti∣all glory appeared in the shining garment, so white as snow, such as no fuller can make on earth, ch. 9.3. At which sight Peter beeing overwhelmed with un∣measurable ioy minded this one thing, which way he mought have bin a∣ble to enioy it alway. So this shalbe a most āple reward for the saints in which they shall so hartely delight, that they shall desyre no greater thing in this life.
And if any should aske the brethren themselves, whose these garments ar, I doubt not but they would answere, that this ioy is of more value, which they obtayne by Christ in retaining his truth, thē that they would chaunge it with all the delight of this life. Certenly great is their glory among all the godly, which wee pray with all our harts to be perpetuall to them. ¶ For they are worthy. The Papists are glad in their owne behalfe for this words, as an excellent patron of their merit of condigne worthines: but let them remember that this merit is attributed to the garmēt not to the body, that is to the imputation of the righteousnes of Christ, wherewith we are clo∣thed as with a garment, not to our inherent holines; For not to defile the gar∣ment, cannot be of more estimation, then the garment it selfe. And seeing there be sundry significations of the garments, as wee have shewed, the wor¦thynes ariseth not either from profession of good workes, wherby the saints are seen of others, neither from the ioy of the Spirit, which wee our selves feele within us, but from this alone, that the father counteth us righteous being clotheth with his sonne. He therefore is worthy that is clothed, though not of every use of garments, but onely of that peculiar respect, wherby we are presented blamelesse in the presence of God: even as a man seeth, although not the whole man, but onely that part, to which the faculty belongeth. 5 He that shall overcome &c. Some copies and the comon translation read thus, He that shall overcome, shalbe so clothed. But the reddition of a similitude is unusuall, where there is no question: unlesse peradventure they be refer∣red to the former verse, as though he should say, as they that at all have not assented to errours, shall walke with me arayed in white apparell, so they that after some striving shall departe from the same, shallbe clothed with white. As though the first reward were perteining to them that fell not, this to them that repented & forsooke their errours, with which they were possessed before time. Of which sorte were many in Germany before the booke of Concord was published, when in most universityes the chiefe tea∣chers understood the true doctrine of the supper of the Lord, and the opini∣ons of Vbiquitie & corporall presence in the supper, every where were contem∣ned, as witnesseth Georg. Sohnius in his exposition of the August. Cōfes. which appeareth more clearly from the Synode of Desdrense, in the yeare a∣bove 1571, where it was ordained by the comon consent both of all the Superintendants of the Dukedome of Saxonie, and also of the Doctours of the Vniversityes of Lypsia, and Wittemberg; That the Vbiquitie of the body of Christ, was an horrible prophanation of all the articles of the Creed, and a renewing of all Heresyes, Gallobel. in the yeare 1592. And since that time a perfitter light breaking forth every day, many were raysed up from their drowsines,
and opened their eyes to the truth. Whom also even as well as the other, he adorneth with white garments, who gave a penny to them that were hyred at the eleventh houre, Mat. 20.9. Such then is the first reward, two yet doe remayne. ¶ And I will never put his name out of the booke of life; The second reward applyed to the times. For because very many in these tymes should fall from the trueth, and many cityes, peoples, provinces, regions, should cō¦sent to errour (as at this time it is evident how farre and wide the contagiō spread abroad, flying also over the sea and infecting those Northern regiōs Gotia and Suetia) by which their approving of errour they should blot their names out of the register of the saints, and should cut of from them∣selves the hope of life, unlesse they should repent, least I say, the falling a∣way of so many, should trouble the saints, he biddeth his conquerours to be of good courage; Christ himselfe would set them free from falling, howsoe∣ver they should see infinite nūbers to rush downe violently on their right and left hand. For it is he alone, who first calleth us backe from errour, then sanctifyeth & confirmeth us in the trueth, least at any time we should revolte from it. Therefore howsoever this reward be full of confort, yet it teacheth that the time should be lamētable through the fall of many. For to betray and forsake the trueth, is not a light matter, as many suppose, who easily are caried away with every winde of doctrine, but it is an argu∣ment of a man of no reckonning with God. But how, wilt thou say, can they be blotted out, which once were written in the booke of life? especially see∣ing that this booke is the booke of the Lambe, as in the chap. 13. 8. that is, wherein those that are written, the Lambe acknowledgeth them for his, & counteth them heires of eternall life: neither is there any of those that are given to Christ, that can ever perish, Ioh. 6.37.39. & 17.12. I answer that these things are spoken in respect of us. For there is a twofolde booke of life, one, as I may say, of vocation, an other of election. Into the first are put all, who by the preaching of the Gospell are taken into the fellowship of the Church, who rightly doe seeme unto us to be partakers of life, and endu∣ed with the hope of eternall salvation. For the scriptures are wont to speak so generally, giving thankes to the Father, who hath made us meete to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light: Who hath delivered us from the power of dark¦nes, and translated us into the kingdome of his deare sonne, in whom we have redem∣ption by his blood, the forgivenes of sinnes &c. So the Apostle speaketh of the multitude of the Colossians without difference, chap. 1.12. And after the same manner every where in other places. Yet men may be put out of this booke. For many are called, but few chosen, Mat. 22.14. And it is decla∣red
after in the 7. chap. by an exemple, Dan and Ephraim being passed over in the rehearsing of the tribes, as souldiers put out of wages, and cassed out of the register. For God of old, as in a certen visible shadow of this booke, cō¦maunded the genealogies of each tribe among the people of Israell to be kept diligently. Wherto also perteined that of raysing up seed to the dead, that his name should not be put out from his people: Deut. 25.6. In which respect also the Psalmist wisheth to certen reprobates, who held a place in the Church, like true citizens, that God at length would separate them frō the congregation of the Saints and manifest them to be meere hypocrites, Psal. 69.29. Wherefore all are put out of this kooke of life, who forsake the fellowship of the holy Church, either through errour and heresy, or wic∣kednes, or other cause whatsoever: not that for this cause they are blotted out of the booke of Election, but because by this way they make manifest, that they were never written in this booke; as Iohn saith, they went out from us, but they were not of us, 1 Ioh. 2.19. But the other booke, to wit, of Ele∣ction is never spotted with any blottes, but the names once written in, doe cōstantly remayne in the same without rasing out. Although these bookes are not so open and evident, that they can be read of all men without dif∣ference: but it is declared to every one severalty by the Spirit that is found in this register, in what estimation and account he is. ¶ But J will confesse his name: The third reward is of confessing their name. Which sheweth not onely the falling away of many, but also that others shalbe compelled by force: So as there is great neede of the power of the Spirit, least any weakened by the iniuries and threats of adversaries, doe forsake the trueth. For the confession of their name before his father, is for the confort of confessing Christ and his trueth boldly and without feare. So sending his Apostles to preach, furnisheth and instructeth them against the feare of affliction, Mat. 10.32. And who knoweth not to what inhu∣manity & cruelty proceeded the hatred of them who call themselves Lu∣therans, against the professors of the truth? In the yeare 1580. was obtru¦ded upon the Ministers of the Churches, and Schooles the booke of Con¦corde, avouching the execrable errour of Vbiquity. A subscriptiō was com¦maunded in the name of the Princes, the refusers were proclaimed Sacramē¦taryes, or put out of their places. In the yeare 1591. Christiā Duke of Saxony being dead, Paul Kreilius Chaunceler, suspected of Calvinisme as they speake, was cast into prison: Vrbanus Pierius Professor of Wittēberg, was lead captive into prisō: Gundermānus of Lipsich, cōmitted prisōner. In the yeare follow∣ing was appointed a newe visitation, they went through all Saxony: they that would not subscribe to the articles, were removed from their offices.
What should I rehearse the broyle of Lipsich the yeare following, when all the university men on every side assembled togither to breake opē violētly the houses of the Calvinists? Or the savage cruelty of the Dressenses against the dead body of Jac. Lassius, to which they denyed a grave among the wic∣ked, because being alive he was a lover of the purer truth? I recite these few against my wil, & I would be ashamed to mētiō them, but that the brethrē were not ashamed to cōmitte them. But how much better is it for you to heare these things of your friends, thē of your enemyes? These as much as they cā doe exaggerate with words your evill acts, unto your perpetuall shame & of all religiō: I doe onely shew the congruency of the Prophecy, that seing in what account you are with God, yee may thinke earnestly of re¦forming the errours & making peace with the brethrē. God give you to see that way, wherby consenting to one truth, you may turne away the iudge∣mēt frō your heads, which otherwise will overtake you. In the meane time yf I shall prevaile nothing with you (which estimation I pray may be farre from you) yet I shallbe glad to admonish the brethren, that they be of good courage, who doe endure troubles and calamieyes among you. Christ will not be ashamed of them before his Father, if they shall abide cō∣stantly in their profession. Feare not therefore the stately looke and coun¦tenance of men, but being grounded upon this hope, that which ye have worshipped in darkenes, professe now openly & in the eyes of all. 6 Let him that hath an eare heare; Yee therfore brethren of Saxony, for Je∣sus Christ sake give eare and hearken, what action the Spirit chargeth you with. Your prayse is great in respect of your first combate, and breaking off the yoke of the Romish tyranny, yea of you that in this were the first of all: But the Cananites left in your lande, are come to be thornes in your sides and eyes. Those fewe errours neglected at first, by the iust iugement of God have brought forth newe errours: by the contagion whereof true godli∣nes being driven away, and togither with it true life lost, there is left unto you a Church defyled with horrible death. Neither is this the end of evills, but some new, great & suddē calamity shall come upō you ūlesse you shall obey forthwith the Spirit giving you warning. Therefore let that unhappy obstinacy depart and be packing, and take those counsells, which may pro¦mote the truth, recall againe the banished life, and may procure the salva∣tion and safety of every one of you. And doe not onely give eare, but let all hearkē & learne by your evill, how great danger it is to cherish the least errour in the matter of religion. Analysis. SO is the Epistle to the Sardi, this to the Philadelphians is inscribed like wise to the Angell: He that sēdeth is notable for Holines, Trueth
and the key of David: which he carrieth not idle, but with the same openeth & shutteth, the supreme power being in himselfe ver 7. The Narration reci∣teth first the good things, both present, of an open doore, which is illustra∣ted by his cause, a little strength and the constant observing of his worde ver. 8. and also to come, both of subduing their enemies, ver. 9. and also of ministring help in the comon tntation; of which also a reason is rendred, from their patiēce in the profession of the Gospell ver. 10. After he provoketh them unto a care of conserving that which is good, because his coming is at hand, and there may be danger of their crowne to be taken away ver. 11. Then is there a greate re∣ward, when he shalbe made a pillar, and shall have written upon it the name both of God and of the newe Ierusalem, and the newe name of a sonne, ver. 12. To all which is added in the end the comon conclusion. Scholions. 7 And to the Angell of the Church of Philadelphia; We have shewed at the first chapter ver. 11. that Philadelphia is situate in a dangerous place, and therefore not so frequent of cityzens, who did dwell scatteringly in the fieldes, fearing the often quaking of the city. But shee carrieth a sweet name, and which alone conteineth within it all vertues. Neither found out the Apostle Peter any thing, when he would exhort to all godlines, which might commend more fitly the same unto us then brotherly unfai∣ned love, 1 Pet. 1.22. How well this name doe fit this Church, which is reproved of no sinne openly! But as it was truly godly because of brother∣ly love, so is shee lowly and not famous, both through a continuall feare of danger, and also solitarines of the cityzens, who dwelt here and there, and in waste places, where they could get safe dwelling. Wherein shee is altogither contrary to Pergamus a towred and proude city, as be∣fore Sardis to Smyrna, and Thyatira to Ephesus. And so there is made 3. payre of contraries. It lyeth from Sardis toward the South, having an in∣crease of greater light, as becometh a reformed Church. Shee is set in the second place after Sardis (for this is the first after Iesabell overcome) wher by is shewed that her Antitype is the second reformed Church, which should arise after the Germane, and this is the Church of the Helvetians, Suevia, Geneva, France, Holland Scotland. I ioyne all these into one, be∣cause they live almost after one and the same kind of lawes and ordināces, as touching the things that are of any moment. Neither doth the distāce of place breake of that society which the coniunction of mindes and will doth couple. Yea this dispersiō doth agree chiefly to the Philadelphians,
whom we have shewed to dwell thicker and more frequent in the fieldes then in the city. Wherby it commeth to passe that this thinnes of he citi∣zens taketh up much place, though the citizens are not so many. Wee shall finde that this Church which I speake of arose a little while after the Germane; when Vlricus Zvinglius began to teach at Tigur in Helvetia, in the yeare 1519, and the reformation was begun the fourth yeare after, to wit, in the yeare 1523, at which time no Papist durst enter into combate against Zuinglius, who did deferre the iudgement of all controversyes to the arbitrement of the sacred scriptures. They of Constance, Basill, Stras∣bourg, Geneva and others, followed their steppes. Where it is to be ob¦served that the former Antitypes were distinguished by longer intervalles: these three last as they have types lesse distant one from another by space of place, so they are ioyned one with an other with a nearer coniunction of times, neither are they devided so much by ages and limites of yeares, as by lawes and customes. For after the first receiving, which happened to some later then to others: wee shall see that they did all flourish togither. ¶ These things sayth that holy one, that true one, who hath, &c. A description of him that sent the Epistle: whose two first properties are taken out from the nature of the sonne of God, which yet are not rehearsed expressely in the vision of the first Chapter: They doe greatly helpe to declare the admi¦nistration of this Church. Touching the city Philadelphia it selfe, we finde no other thing, but that in the age following, there abod in that place a famous congregation of the faithfull, over which Demas had the charge, as is gathered from the Epistles of Jgnatius. In the Antitype, a divine power specially shineth forth sanctifying the Church, by kindling the desyre of godlines, and in making it in Christ Iesus fit and cheerfull to every good worke. Let my wordes be without envy, the true doctrine soundeth no where purer, the worship lesse corrupted, more flourisheth the faithfull di¦ligence of the Pastours, is performed more willing obedience of the peo∣ple, nor greater reverence of all religion among all degrees. But this holi∣nes seemeth chiefly to respect manners. In which thing is not to be passed over that famous testimony of Iohn Bodin, speking of them of Geneva; Of whom that thing, saith he, is prayse worthy, if any thing any where in the earth, and which maketh a comon wealth to flourish, if not in riches and greatnes of Empire, yet certenly in vertues and godlines, namely that censure of the Popes, then which no∣thing greater and more divine could be devised to bridle mens lusts, and to represse those vices, which by no meanes could be amended by any humane lawes and iudge∣ments. How be it that this restraint is directed after the rules of Christ, first privat∣ly and friendly: after some what more sharply: then if thou obey not, there followeth
an heavie, grave and effectuall prohibition from the holy things; after the interdiction, is the punishement of the Magistrate. And so it cometh to passe, that those things which are punished no where by the lawes, are there restrained without any force and sturre or great adoe. Therefore noe whoredomes, no drunknesses, noe daunings, noe beggars, noe idle persons are found in that city, Those are his wordes in Meth. of History chap. 6. Worthyly is the sanctifyer of the Church to be pray∣sed, who hath wrought, that they should will and effect these things accor¦ding to his free good will. There is the same care and fruit also of the rest, according to the measure, which Christ vouchsafeth to every congregatiō of them. Neither is his trueth lesse excellent, both in as much as he is a Pro¦phe in teaching, and also a Surety in promising. Wee shall see this dou∣ble trueth in the following Church to be distinguished by their proper wordes; both which the Greeke worde true seemeth to containe, when it is put absolutely and by it selfe. And as touching trueth of doctrine, wher is it more pure and more sincere in the whole earth? The whole Papacy hath here his throate cut. The Anabaptists, Antitrinitaries, Arians, and such like monsters raysed up againe from hell, partly in Germany, partly in Transylvania, have founde no where a fiercer enemy: What also hath it not assayed, that shee might pull away from the Germane Churches their errours? Neither doth shee keepe onely the doctrine of salvation uncor∣rupt, but also shee both delivereth and teacheth in writings and exerciseth in practise a syncere māner of administring, wherby salvation is bestowed. Certenly the whole will of God is communicated with his saints, so as Christ taketh to himselfe not undeservedly this prayse of true in governing this Church: He doth also performe plenteously that which he promised, that he would keepe safe and sound those that seeke him with an upright heart. What have not endevoured the Franch man, the Spuniard, the Savoyā, the Pope, to roote out them of Geneva, a small people, and environed on every side with enemyes, and shut up from all ayde of friends? Neverthe∣lesse it flourisheth yet still thankes be to God, and shall flourish hereafter, while all her adversaryes burst with envy: as long as shee shall continue in this holy order. The French Church hath ben preserved hitherto, no other wise then the three children in the fornace. Who would have beleeved that the Lowe Countryes had ben able to resist and withstande the raging Philip, the cruell Duke d'Alve, and so many bloudy Tyrants? But true is he, who hath promised this honour to his saints, that they should binde the Kings with chaines, and their nobles with fetters of iron, Psalme 149.8.9. And that I may not speake of every each one, they can be safe onely by thy pro∣tection, o most high God, who art constant in all thy promises, whom
both enemyes almost infinite doe persecute with deadly hatred, and also to whom many of their freindes through envy wish not very well. ¶ Who hath the key of David: The third property perteineth also to the same administration. Christ openeth and shutteth, to whom he hath thought it good, the entrance into the kingdome of Heaven, by his regall power. Which faculty in deede he bestoweth upon all his, which doe de∣clare and preach the worde purely and syncerely, but which is principally to be seen in that part of governement, wherby obstinate sinners which will not yeilde to admonitions, are delivered to Sathan by the Ecclesiasti∣call censure, and are cast out of the Church, which is the Kingdome of Heaven: according to that, Whatsoever yee shall binde on earth, shalbe bound in heauen, and whatsoever yee shall loose in earth, shalbe loosed in heaven: For where two or three are gathered togither in my name, there am J in the middes of them: Mat. 18.18.20. By these therefore is shewed, that the power of opening and shutting, of binding and loosing is very effectuall in these congrega∣tions and more over also the whole administration of the censures. And what godly man doth not thanke God from his heart, and extolleth not with worthy ptayses the holy paines of this Church, which restored disci∣pline fallen into decay, and brought it backe to the rule of trueth and use of the primitive Church? But it is to be observed, that this key was sayd before to be the key of Death and Hell, in the first Chapter and 18. verse, by one part denoting the whole force of them. Therefore that key is to be feared, which locketh up the gate upon the wicked being thrust into Hell, howsoever they despise the same with security: And yet notwithstanding no lesse plea¦sant to them that feare God, because it unlocketh to them the dores, by which they may enter unto life. But why is it called of David, seeing it is of Aaron rather, whose office was to keepe away the leprous and uncleane from the holy things, and to shut up the Temple against them? Certenly the Priest onely could pronounce men uncleane: he was not wont by an ordinary & proper power to use force to compell the disobedient. Christ both King and Priest is very mighty in both facultyes and powers, and ioineth togither both in this Church: who not onely rayseth up Pastours, that they should denounce men uncleane, but also together adioyneth the civile Magistrate, that he should give his ready and diligent labour to the Pastors in this. So before Bod. the punishmēt of the Magistrate foloweth the debar¦ring frō holy things. Therfore both swordes are drawn in this Ch but several∣ly by those to whō the one & the other belōgeth. And indeede this society is most sweet, seeing all the industry of civill Magist. ought to have respect therto, that we may live with all godlines & honesty, 1 Tim. 2.2.
The wordes seeme to be taken out of Isaiah chap. 22, 22. J will lay, saith he, the key of the house of David upon his shoulder, when he openeth no man shall shute, & when he shutteth no man shall open; But in this place the worde house seemeth to have ben omitted purposely; for he sayth not, which hath the key of the house of Dauid, but that hath the key of David. There is a difference, because that seemeth to perteine to an inferiour minister, and that onely in the fami∣ly of David, this to a supreme Governour, and that of a whole kingdome. So the omitting of one worde, putteth a difference betweene the type & the truth, Eliakim & Christ. See also Isay 9.6.7. The Complutent Edition & the Kings Bible read somewhat otherwise, who openeth and no man shall shut the same, who openeth not, and no man shall open: Arethas hath, except him that o∣peneth. 8 J knowe thy workes: beholde I have set before thee an open doore: He entreth into the narration, and first of a present good thing. And it is an opē dore: Which sometime signifyeth the faculty of preaching the Gospell: From whence Paul would have that it should be earnestly desyred of God in his behalfe, that the dore of utterance may be opened to him, Col. 4.3. And that speach may be given unto mee in opening my mouth, Ephes. 6.19. And worthily is it so called, seeing by the word a dore is opened to us into heaven, which being taken away and removed, the dore is shut and loked, so as noe man can enter in, Luk. 13.25. And not onely the faculty of the Ministers is the doore, but also the readines of the hearers, as, For a great dore and effectuall is opened unto mee, and there be many adversaries, as though he should say, al∣though there be many that doe resist and strive against the truth, yet there are many, whose desyre is prompt and ready, 1 Cor. 16.9. And againe, coming to Troas to preach the Gospell, and a doore being opened to mee in the Lord. This dore is opened, when the hearts are opened to receive the truth, as Lyd a, whose heart the Lord opened, that shee might attende to those things which were spoken of Paul, Act. 16.14. But although the name of dore be attributed to those a parte, yet most of all the dore is then opened, when all these things meet ioyntly togither, the word, discipline, the care of the Magistrate and of the people. Then is there free leave to pearce into the consciences of men; unto which an entrance is shut up after a sorte, where any of these shalbe wanting. This then is that open dore, wherby this Church was famous. Which in deede no strength of wit hath opened, which consisteth either in the vertu of speaking, or in the sharpenes of wit and prudence in understanding, but onely that chiefe key-bearer, who hath given freely that which no man could have obtayned by humane strēgth. How ungodly therfore doe they, which doe checke by reprochefull words,
that which Christ hath conferred for an excellent benefite? They whet their tongues against heaven, yea against God himselfe: But they shall not escape upunished, let them clatter as much as they will. ¶ Neither can any shut it; The endvour of the adversaryes hath not ben wanting; some have loboured to barre these dores by slandering, repro∣ching, inveighing, with all manner of contumelyes: others by force and weapons, as it were by a rushing downe violently to shute this gate, but he hath perfomed his promise, who hath confirmed that none shall pre∣vayle: the enemyes have lost their labour, and have got no other thing thē shame in the world, for their cruell minde against the truth, and punihe∣ment at Gods hande, meet for their desertes. Let the experience of the time past be a confirmation against future feare. ¶ Because thou hat a little strenth: The comon translation hath, because thou hast a little vertue, the sens, if I be not deceaved, being wll expressed which dependeth on that which followeth, neither is it absolute of it selfe: as though he should say, because although thou hast but a little strength, yet thou hast k p my words. And in deede the fortitude in the greater danger is more famous. And this manner of speaking is frequent among the Hebrewes, who use the copulive vu, for the discretive particule: (the custome and manner of whom i frequent with Iohn) as, Neyther shall any straw be given you, and yee shll deliver the whole tale of bricke, for, yet shall yee deliver &c. Ex. 5.18. So, And behold an escaping remayning in her, for, yet shall some remayne who shall escape, Ezech. 14.22. Afterwardes also Iohn in the same manner, And men raged in heart, and blasphemed and repented not, for, and yet repented not, chap. 16.9. If he had praysed a part their small strength, how should there not be in the same thing much depravating. For this is wont to a∣bounde, where that which is opposed, is but little and small. Sardis had a fewe names, wherupon death had possessed the greater part. Neyther would the Spirit have passed over in silence the corruption, if he had found any worthy reprehension. Therefore the comon translation ought here to holde in that sēse which I have shewed. This Church is of weake strēgth, which dwelleth here and there, and the greater parte under a popular state, one onely people enioyeth a Monarch for their patron. But neither is this Church able to doe much either by her owne or by her friendes riches. Therfore the greater is the prayse of thy fortitudo o Philadelphia: who hast not yeelded to the threats of the adversaryes, neyther forsaken the truth, by being dismayed with the vaine feare of men. 1 Behold I give of the Synagogue of Sathan; Here is a defct of the word some, I will give some of the Synagogue of Sathan, of those which say that they
are Iewes. This is the future good thinge, as we have shewed in the Ana∣lysis, and it may be manifest from the latter member of the verse, Beholde I will make them come: unlesse peradventure this verbe of the present tence didomi, respecteth the present time, wherein some of the Iewes submitted themselves to this Church, for a token and pledge of a full subiection af∣terward, which it may be the last words meane. We shewed upon the ch. 2.9. howe they which by nation are Iewes, doe ly saying they are Iewes, to wit in bragging that they are the onely people, when in the meane time they refuse Christ, in whom onely we are counted children, and doe con∣tinue and rest in the abolished ceremonies of the law. By which thinges they have made themselves to be the Synagogue of Sathan, and not a con¦gregation of saints, whatsoever they affirme to the contrary in wordes. In the Antitype are Iewes as many as intangled in errours, challenge to thē∣selves alone the trueth, faith, salvation and promises of God, speaking of nothing, but the temple, the temple, of which sorte were the Arian Bi∣shops under Constantine, Constance and Valence, and such as are at this day the Romanists, glorying no lesse in the Chyre of Peter, then of olde the Iewes in their temple. These onely will be Catholikes: their Church to be the onely spouse of Christ, that noe salvation can be found, out of their congregations. But let them deceave themselves with as goodly wordes as they will, by their true name they are false Iewes, in shew onely Christians, who gather congregaions in the honour of the Devill: God acknowledgeth thē not, which thrust u∣pon him an other worship, thē that which he hath appointed frō heaven. Some of these therefore are givē to this holy Philadelphia, seeing there are many dayly, whō God of his singular mercy plucketh out of the iawes of Antichrist, & enlightneth their eyes, that they may acknowledge & embra∣ce the truth. Amōg which are Peter Vergerius, Peter Martyr, Hier. Zāchius, Martinēg{us}, & many other, both Italiās & other natiōs: who first being papists were afterwards converted to the trueth. ¶ Behold J say: Excellent doubtlesse was once the victory of the Phlladel∣phiās over the Iewes, & no lesse famous shalbe at lēgth the triūphe of this Church over the Papists. Hitherto we have fought with thē by pen & inke: but the time shortly cometh whē they shalbe rooted out by weapōs, chief¦ly by the labour of this Church, as after shalbe shewed more playnly. Rome shalbe destroyed of some other, but being overthrowne, holy Phila¦delphia shall pluck up by the rootes the remnāts of the Popish kingdome, so as no name of it shalbe left, as wee shall shew in chap. 19. For this wor∣ship of the false Iewes perteineth to that time, whē the Romish beast being cast into hell, all his hostes shalbe killed with the sword that cometh out of
the mouth of him that sitteth upon the horse. ¶ And they shall know that J have loved thee; For hitherto thou art made a mocking stocke, neither doe unthankefull men acknowledge any love of mine, by the singular gift of godlines, which I have bestowed on thee: But then I will adorne thee with those things also which are in account with the world: thou shalt set up a token of victory over thy enemyes, & shalt inrich thy selfe with their spoyles, that every one may be compelled to cō∣fesse that thou art dearly beloved, whō contrary to all hope they shall see increasd so wōderfully. O holy Philadelphia cherish thy hope with these things, neither be grieved in minde whatsoever the world saith otherwise. 10 Because thou hast kept &c. My worde & doctrine which I have taught the world with great patience, and which is also to be preached allwayes with the like patience: which I see thee to have used to thy great perill, & yet thou hast abode constantly in thy duty. ¶ J will keepe thee also &c. But what is it to keepe frō the houre? Would not God suffer the tētatiō to touch the Philadelphiās at all? It could scarse be done that they should be free altogither in the comō calamity of all the world. To keepe therfore is to deliver, as the Lord did keepe them out of the handes of their enemyes; that is, delivered, Iud. 2.18. as though he should say, I will not suffer thee to be overcome in that tētatiō, but I will give thee strength, by which thou mayest not onely beare conragiously the calami∣ty, but also overcome & be victor. But what is this houre of tētatiō? In the type it selfe, that persecutiō doubtles under Traian, which Philadelphia togi¦ther with all the other Churches susteined. Neither is it to be omitted why in the Epist. to the Ang. of Smyrna, he sayd that the same afflictiō was of x dayes, which in this place he included in one houre: in both places he res∣pecteth the cōcurring of the type & Antitype: there because ūder Cōstātine, Costāce & Valēce (within which times wee have shewed that the Antitype of the Smyr. Church is to be limited) there should be a lōg calamity, raging in the greatest part of that space, he defyned that afflictiō by x. dayes; in which he noted both the yeares, so many as Traiā should go on with rage, & also that lōg delay in the Antitype under the Christiā Emperours; But see∣ing in the Antit. of the Philad. Church there should be afflictiō farr greater then all, yet short, he hath ioyned the same trouble of times in one houre in the type. This tētatiō therfore yet to come, which shall come upon the whole world is the last fight of the Rom. Antichrist in the west, & of the Ma¦humetā Turke in the East; very terrible in the whole preparatiō; but on which the Church shall carry away the victory, to be preferred farre before all the triumphes and the victoryes of all men. Of which is here givē a tast the full declaration is reserved to his owne place.
But seeing in this battell there shalbe a comō victory of the whole Church, and here seemeth to be promised some thing proper to this alone, perad∣venture this tentation shalbe an other, which shall goe before that warre. And before wee have heard that in the Church of Germany some grievous thing doth hang over their head. For he threatneth that he will come as a thiefe: Then also in the Church following wee shall see that some storme is to be expected. Wherefore it is to be feared, that shortly this tentation wll come upon us, and shake the Christian Churches with an horrible tē∣pest. Besides the conicture of this place, the sinnes which reigne every where, not without caus indeede may increase this feare. It shalbe profi∣table for every one to prepare himselfe, that he may stand firme in that day. And wee may gss at the greatnes of this tempest in some sorte from the very words themselves. For they promise that this alone shalbe kept pure, sound and undefiled: whereto belongeth also the reward of Pillars, ver. 12. What then shalbe done with the other Churches? The future disturbance of all things seemeth so miserable, that there shalbe left noe face of any Church any where besides. For it seemeth that those Churches at length shall by the iust iudgement of God come to nothing, which have not re∣garded a full reformation. 11 Beholde I come quickly: Hitherto the good thing: the way to preserve is by constancy, unto which he exhorteth, first by his quicke coming. The Philadelphike Church felt the houre oftentation, by and by after this wri∣ting. For Traiane succeeded next after Domitian: under whom Iohn recea∣ved this Revelation. Neither shall the newe restored Philadelphia finde it to be longe, before all these things be performed. Within two hundred yeares after shee was borne againe, shee shall see the issue & end of all these things, as the Prophesy following shall declare with God his helpe. ¶ Holde that which thou hast, that no man may take away thy crowne: Goe on couragiously in the rase wherein thou hast begunne; keepe thy sanctity of manners, purity of wholesome doctrine, severity of heavenly discipline, least if thou shalt beginne to relent any thing in this matter, an other take thy crowne from thee. But what crowne is this? The honour which shee shall receive from the enemyes brought under her and worshipping be∣fore her feete, ver. 9. Which manners of rewards doe depende on the du∣tyes of godlines, unto which they are propounded, and are taken away some time from the saints for a correction of their cowardlinesse. Where∣fore they doe unskilfully, who transferre these things unto eternall life, as though that could had ben taken away from the elect, or at the least wise, as though they should alwayes waver as for an uncerten and doubtfull
thing, of which they could have no sure hope, as long as they dwell on earth. It may come to passe, and allwayes it cometh to passe, that the wic∣ked may deceave themselves with a false persuasion. But the elect have the Spirit, who witnesseth that they are the children of God, neither can he, the au¦thour of all trueth, either deceave or be deceaved, Rom. 8.16. Although if any thinke that there is the same reason of the earthly and heavenly re∣ward, of which they will have that to be at least a type, the same thing may be answered truly and rightly, which wee have sayd before touching the booke of life, ver. 5. That many are called, but fewe chosen. Now the crowne may be taken away from them that are called not persevering, the which for a time they did hope for: in which respect it is called not with∣out cause their crowne. But how doe they tryfle, who wrest unto the elect, that which perteineth to the called onely, because they invy that others should have that certenty or asseurance of salvation, which themselves feele not! As touching the wordes, take it is here the same with that of Mat. 5.40. and take thy coate, that is, take away. 12 Him that shall overcome, I will make a pillar; word for word in the greek, He that shall overcome, I will make him, for, the overcomer I will make, or, as tou∣ching the overcomer, J will make him; an Hebraisme of the nominative case ab∣solute, such as we have observed in the chap. 2.26. The reward is, that he shalbe like a pillar in the Temple of God, that is, he shall abyde firme & stable in the Church of God, neither shall he feare any ruine or fall, in what man∣ner soever the rayne shall fall, the flouds shall come, and the windes shall blowe, & all things at one brunt shall fall upon it. He alludeth unto those two brasen Pillars, placed in the Temple by Salomon, which did figure out the stability of the children of God, 1 King. 7.15. And so is this Church by the grace of God, not defiled with schisme, and fowle apostasy, as lately wee have seen the Sarden Church: which taking noe care of a full reforma∣tion, by the iust iudgement of God lost many cityzens, losing them as a figge tree her unripe figges, so farre of is it that they should be a Pillar. Phi∣ladlphia should be free of this sorowe: not because shee should see some Apostates, who should fayne godlines for a time, but because those fewe should more commende her faythfullnes in trying and casting out of Hy∣pocrites, then cast upon her any blot of schisme and defection, ¶ Neither shall he goe out any more: The pillar is declared by a double pro∣perty, one of continuance, an other of a name written upon: the first is signifyed in these wordes, and he shall goe out noe more: the force of which seemeth to be this, that they may meet with a secret doubt, which peradventure might trouble some bodyes minde, because when the city was takē by Nebuchad¦nezzar,
those pillars were broken and the brasse of them was carryed to Ba¦bylon, Ier. 52.17, Least any should feare that the same should befall him, namely that although for a time he shallbe placed in the Temple, yet at length he should be banished away, he biddeth them to be of good cou∣rage. For he promiseth that this pillar shalbe such, as no Nebuchadnez∣zar shall ever breake in peaces, neyther ever carry away by any force. The Sonne abideth in the house for ever, Ioh. 8.35. The bond woman with her sōne ist cast out, but the heire shall live allwayes in the sight of his father, Gal. 4.30. and c. ¶ And I will write upon him the name of my God. The name written is three fould, of God, of the newe Ierusalem, and a new name of sonne; All which are spo∣ken according to the manner of the Pillars in the Temple the figure wher∣of the Spirit here declareth, pointing unto it as with the finger, by the same thing teaching by the way, that nothing was ordained there in vaine, al∣though it might seeme to be of never so small moment. Salomon ador∣ned the two erected pillars with two names: The one on the right hand he calld IACIN, that is, he shall stablish; That on the left hande BOAZ, that is, in him is Strength, 1 King. 7.21. not onely shewing by the mat∣ter it selfe of the pillars, but also by the names, in what firme estate the e∣lect doe stand before God, both present and future. For the present the children of God have strength in themselves: for the time to come, God will so stablish them by his grace, that they can never fall away from him altogither. Although that I may put you in minde also of this further, that they seeme to signify the two Churches: by that on the right hand Jacin, the Church of the Jewes, which God at length in his time should stablish, ha¦ving not yet gotten stablenes, because of their harneded heart, wherby they should refuse Christ, when he should come: by that on the left hand, Bohaz, the Church of the Gentils, because of the present strength which should be in it, when shee should embrabce Christ at the first hearing. So Christ would write names upon those Pillars, better then those Jacin & Bohaz. For first he will imprint the name of his God, that it may be manifested to all men, that they have bin set at liberty to be Gods chiefe treasure and ri∣ches, as it cometh to passe in things marked openly, which doe shew by their titles to every one that looketh on them, whose they are. In which sense it was said in the 9. ver. and they shall knowe that I have loved thee. In which respect also holines to the Lord is written upon the belles of the horses, in Za¦chary 14.20. The second name is of the newe Jerusalem, of which in ch. 21.2 to which time this reward perteineth: frō whence it is cleare that these 7 E∣pistles respected not onely the present condition of the 7 cityes, but by the
way of types to contayne a lōge following age, evē as we have interpreted. But so farre as pertineth to newe Ierusalem, wee will shew in this place, that it is not that city which the saints shall enioy in heaven after this life, but a Church to be expected on earth the most pure and most noble of all that ever have bin hitherto. The rewards in a peculiar manner doe serve the ti∣mes, and if this felicity shalbe after the resurrection, it shalbe comon to all the saints, not proper to this Philadelphia. This therefore signifyeth both that the Philadelphians shall cōtinue untill that restauratiō in which new Ierusalem shall come downe from heaven, & shalbe conversant among men, & also shalbe ioyned with the same in a league & fellowship, shalbe indued with that heavenly city, & enioy the same Law, privilege & happi∣nes. At which time all shall acknowledge thy reformation not to be a thing devised of man as contentious men affirme, when they shall see the same ordinances to flourish in newe Ierusalem. The third name is the newe name of sonne: What can be new unto him? namely that which is not yet acknow¦ledged of the world. Hitherto he hath suffered the tyrants to beare rule & to treade under foote the name of Christ, as though he were a King onely in title, who should have right to reigne, but should want pover. But at length he shall rise up, & shall take a clubbe into his hande: he shall de∣stroy all his enemyes, he shall give the triumphe to his spouse, & shalbe ce¦lebrated King of Kings by all men through the whole cōpasse of the earth. Vnto the society of which glory he shall take his servants, he shall deliver them from the calamityes, wherewith they are now oppressed, he shall gi∣ve them power over their enemyes, & shall bestow on them the whole glo¦ry of his Kingdome, as much as mortall mē cā receive. And there is some difference betweene a newe name put absolutely as in chap. 2.17. & a newe name of sonne. For that perteineth unto the certenty of adoption by Christ, which faith was very weake in the Pergamen state: this belongeth to the so¦ciety of the Kingdome, which shalbe communicated with his in the last times. 13 Let him that hath an eare heare; Hear therefore Philadelphia and re∣ioyce, thou art lowe and nothing esteemed, but God will exalte thee. O∣nely goe foreward constantly & augment your care & diligence, slake and asswage it nothing. Neither regarde the skoffes of the wicked, who shall bring upō thēselves sorow, & to thee a crowne. Shortly there shalbe an end of thy warfare. In the meane time wee will pray for thy peace. Doe thou againe ioyne thy prayers with ours, that Christ would bestow the same things upon the rest of thy brethren, which he hath so greatly approved in thee. Fare well. The grace of our Lord Iesus Chist be with thee, Amen.
Analysis. SO is the Epistle to the Philadelphians, the last remayneth to the Laodi∣ceans, whose inscription is to the Angell, like to the former. The des∣cription of him, by whom it is sent, is fetched from a double property, first of Trueth, partly in the promises, in that he is Amen, partly in the Doctrine, in that he is the falthfull & true Witnesse; secondly of power, wherby he is the beginning of the creature of God, ver. 14. The Narration first reproveth & shew¦eth the greatnes of the sinne, both secretly omitting the making mention of any good thing, as in the former Churches, and as also openly, both by comparison of coldnes, as a lesser evill, ver. 15. and also by the punishement to be inflicted, the vomitting out of his mouth, ver. 16. After he teacheth the way to heale them, both by opening the cause of the disease, which is a false perswasion of their owne worthynes, and ignorance of their misery, ver. 17. and also in prescribing a remedy to be sought from Christ alone, ver. 18. And not this alone, but also by persuading the use of it, as well by the chastising of sonnes, if they shall neglect it, ver. 19. as also by his readinesse to apply, ver. 20. and by the reward, ver. 21. The last ende is the Epilogue, to heare what the Spirit saith tu tho Churches, ver, 22. Scholions. 14 And to the Angell of the Laodiceans: Laodicea situated at the river Ly∣cum: was once a great city and famous, abounding both in cityzens & ri∣ches, and also in all other things, as we shewed in the first chap. ver. 11. It was built by Antiochus the sonne of Stratonice, and for his wife Laodice her sake, called this city Laodicea, as it were, the Princesse and ruler of the people, to whom shee should administer iustice and make lawes. From whence wee call her Glorious, great both by name, and also in their owe o∣pinion, which boasteth that shee is riche, and wanteth nothing, ver. 17. It is from Philadelphia more toward the East then the South, being distant from it according to Ptolomy not above tenth scruples. Shee is the third city since there was mention made of Jezabell, the reproche of whom Sardis tooke away from the Churches. Shee hath this proper to her, that shee hath none, to whom shee can be opposed, as in the former Churches. Vn∣to Ephesus was opposed Thyatira, to Smyrna Sardis, to Pergamus Philadelphia, Laodicea the seaven hath noe fellow. The Antitype is the third reformed Church, which before I note or shew, the uniust suspicion and offence of some men is to be put away by intreaty. No disease or corruption of minde hath moved me to seeke out an odious application. No mans either ri∣ches
or honours, God is witnesse, grieveth mee. I am content with my lit∣tle. Neither have I counted any thing to be more foolish, then to please ons selfe by displeasing others. But howe dishonest and filthy a thing is it, to sit as doth the fly upon the soares of the brethren? My soule hath all∣wayes abhorred such dealings. But when I considered that these seaven ci¦tyes were set forth for a type of all Churches among the Gentiles, and then also perceived the course it selfe of the time, and the mervaylous concur∣ring of all things, I durst not unfaithfully hide the truth with silenee, least I should make my selfe guilty of others blood. Farre be it, that I should distaine willfuly that Church which through the mercy of God hath brought mee forth, nourished and susteined mee, which I desire in my daylie prayers and labour, to be most blessed. But seeing the soare cannot be cured, unlesse it be touched, neither truly touched without griefe, I thought I must not refuse to cast my selfe against what troubles soever, ra∣ther then to betray the salvation of her, of which every one of us ought to have greater regard and care then of his owne. Verily he that gathereth the teares of his children in his bottle, knoweth that I have not viewed round about this Laodicea with dry eyes. I could not but morne from the bottome of myne heart when I beheld in her Christ lothing us, and very greatly provoked against us. Wherfore let no man blame me for that, which not so much my wil, as the duty of a faithfull Interpreter compel∣leth me to bring forth. And I hope that the lovers of the truth will not despise and refuse so equall and reasonable request: with which hope sup∣ported, but especially with his ayde, who is the leader of my way and life, I will gird and make my selfe ready unto the thing it selfe. The Antitype I say, is the third reformed Church, that is, ours of England. For all the purer Churches are comprehended in this threefolde difference: For ei∣ther they presist and continue in those steppes which Luther hath traced out, such as are the Churches of Germany, especially of Saxony, and those next bordering of Suerland and Danemarke; or they abhorre that errour of Consubstantiation, as all the rest with one consent: which yet doe not a∣gree in all things, but follow a differing manner of governing and admini¦string, the French and their companions one, our English another, a cer∣ten propre and peculiar one. Whereupon there are three distinct several∣ly, unto which the three types Sardis, Philadelphia, Laodicea, after that Iezabell was overthrowne, that is the yoke of the Romish tyranny shaken of, doe answere. And to the last Laodicea, the English doth agree, whose last original taketh her beginning at the yeare 1547. when Edward the King of most famous memory, came to the rule and governement of the
common wealth, but then at length shee was confirmed and stablished, when 11 yeares after our most peaceable Queene Elisabeth begā the king∣dome. Most mighty King Henry her father had expelled the Pope, but re∣teyned the Popish superstition. And before he began to stirre any whit, e∣ven against the Pope, the Churches of Germany and Helvetia were foun∣ded. The Scotish Church is later in beginning then ours: yet by right it is numbred with them, with which it agreeth in ordinances: into whose ti∣mes shee is cast, which is to be esteemed rather from the agreement of things, then alone from the difference of time. Wherfore our English Church alone constituteth the Antitype answering to Laodicea; as shee which began last of those, in which there appeareth noe difference of any moment. ¶ These things saith that Amen: Amen is used as a proper name and unchā∣geable, as before he that is, he that was, & he that cometh. This threefoulde property perteineth therto, that it may teach what manner of one Christ would shew him selfe in governing this Church. The first is fetched out of the first chap. ver. 18. although Amen there wanteth the article, neither is it read at all of the comon Interpreter, yet notwithstanding this place gi∣veth coniecture that it ought to be read. The second is taken not out of the vision of the same chapter, but from the inscription of the comon Epi¦stle ver. 5. Neither is the third found in expresse wordes, but in the 8. ver. he is called the beginning and the end, from whence this seemeth to proceed, the beginning of the creature. The two first propertyes perteine to the double truth, one of promising, the other of teaching: in respect of that he is called that Amen, according to that of the Apostle, In him are all the promises of God yea and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. in respect of this, a faithfull & true witnesse. As tou¦ching that, Christ taketh this name upon him now, because he should shew himselfe very cleare & famous in performing his promises. But what are they? All blessings of heaven, of earth of cattell, of children, of peace, of war∣re, of good health & the like, to them that obey the voyce of the Lord: but all cōtrary things to thē that refuse. Deut. 28. Which how they were per∣formed to the Laodiceans is not plainly apparent to us, being destitute in this point of the light of the History. As touching our England nothing can be more cleare then the excellent goodnes of God in this thing. For the space of these 42. yeares & more, what aboundance of all good things hath ben powred forth upon our Iland. He hath given us a most peaceable Queene, excelling so in all prayse, as no age hath seene the like. Togither with her he hath given peace. What good thing hath not issued frō thence? Frō hēce the lawes are in force, iudgemēts are exercised, every one ēioyeth
his owne, iniuries are restrayned, wātonnes is repressed, the nobility is ho∣noured, the comon people goeth about their worke with all diligence, arts doe flourish, handicraftes are used, cities are built excellently, riches increa∣sed, infinite youth groweth up, the fieldes abunde with corne, the pastures with cattel, the moutaines with sheepe. What should I use many words: hence is a porte & place of refuge opened to the banished for Christs sake: affoardeth ayde to them that are oppressed by tyrants, neither have wee almost any other labour, thē that wee may helpe thē that neede, & all this even while our eares doe ringe of the noise & tumulte of the nations round about us, no lesse then as the waves of the sea. England never had so long quietnesse of dayes. At which our felicity strangers are astonished, our ene∣mies are grieved, wee our selves almost knowe it not. But prayse be to thee most true Amen, who hath given us this ease and rest. In bestowing lar∣gely upon us so many good thinges, thou hast shewed truly to the world, that thy Gospell is a guest not going away scot free, which dot so aboun∣dantly blesse those that receive & entertaine it. Keepe & continue these good thinge unto us, yea thou wilt keepe them, which art Amen, if wee shall keepe and defende thy trueth. ¶ That faithfull witnesse & true: The second property is of trueth in tea∣ching. For these thinges perteine to the propheticall office of Christ, as hath bin said in the first verse of the first chap. where he is called faithfull, because of the diligence of labour, wherby he is exercised in his office with very great faithfulnes, to whom the FATHER hath well commited a businesse of so great momēt; true for the soundnes and syncerity of speach, without all, even the least spot of falshood. In this kinde of trueth he should manifest him selfe in wonderfull man∣ner in this Church. But touching the city of LAODICEA, we have noe more then before. In the Antitype those former riches of his grace are in this thing, if it may be, surmounted and excelled. And to what end were all the good thinges, if wee could not have the whole∣some doctrine of trueth? But ever since the first times of our most peacea∣ble Queene, he hath raysed up continually diligent and learned Pastours and Teachers. who have preached the worde purely and syncerely. Nei∣ther at this day are many wanting by his infinite mercy, who bestowe all their labour in imperting to his people the whole will of God, and that pure and uncorrupte from all leaven of falshood. Although not without cause in deede, one may mervayle howe in so disorderly custome & licence to doe all things that they will (excepting the diffaming of the dignityes) the doctrine hath continued so long whole and sounde.
But he that is a faithfull and true witnesse, sanctifyeth the Pastours with the truth beyonde all hope: in whose lippes he dwelleth even hitherto: all∣though by many not obscure tokens he threatneth that shortly he will go away, unlesse betime he be met with. ¶ The beginning of the creature of God: The last property which is of power. For whether we interprete the greeke worde fort begning or for dominion, it cometh to the same end, seeing it is necessary that all things be subiect to his gouvernement, who in the beginning made them In which respect Christ hath shewed himselfe wonderfull also among us. What hath not the Pope of Rome endevoured and undertaken, that he might trouble our peace, partly by execrations, excommunications and bulles, sounding an alarme to open rebellion: partly attempting privily, Iesuites being sent by stelth, and other privy murtherers who should kill the sacred Princesse with sword, poyson, torments, divelish artes, or any other way. Wee knouwe that not long agoe the Prince of Orenge was set upon with desire to kill him,, by a popish cut throate, and was killed. Late is the memory of Henry King of France, whose murther Iacobus Clemens a monke attempted & accomplished. And Henry the fourth who nowe enioyeth the soveraignty, escaped hardly the bloody handes of Iohn Castell the Iesuite, being stricken through the iawe bone with a knife, and two of his teeth dashed out. But our Queene assailed of many at many times, with sundry treasons, hath ben kept whole and sounde from the least harme. From whence was this I pray? Was oportunity wanting to these wicked men. The alone Prince of the creature, to whose becke all things obey, hath laughed to scorne & deluded the counsells of the wickel, repressed the endevours of the ungod¦ly, and made frustrate their subtill devising, and restrained them least they should touch his annointed, nor hurt the nurce of his Prophets. His power is noe lesse famous in briddling the Spaniard, with whom wee make warre nowe so many yeares. What is ther that he doth not thinke to effect by his ri∣ches, who alone procureth trouble almost to all Europe and other parts of the world? The invincible navie of the yeare 1588, swallowed up in hope our whole country, our lives and goods. But good God howe was he disapointed without any labour of ours, through all the seas cost asun∣der, scatered here and there and broken in pieces? He came out one way against us, and fled seaven wayes from before our face. This is thy prayse alone o most mighty Governour, whom the windes, the waves, the harts and hands of men will they nill they doe obey. O ye Kings why doe ye not regard? Why doe you not learne, ye that iudge the earth? Will ye fight yet still against the Prince of the creatures to your owne destruction? Yf yee shall
goe on to be so made, wee in the meane time will betake us under his winges, by whose defense alone wee stande safe against all your assaults. Such is then the threefoulde property wherby Christ sheweth him self to be seene in this our Laodicea, to wit, constancy in promising, syncerity in teachting, then an invincible power in defending. 15 I knowe thy workes, that thou art neither colde nor hotte. In declaring the greatnes of their sinne, he maketh no mention of any good thing, contra∣ry to that of the other Churches, none of which was of so desperate estate, noe not Pergamus neither Sardis, as to be voyde of all prayse. But this evill, as though it could not endure the fellowship of any good thing heareth nothing but reprehension, without confirmation of any honesty. Not but that there were many singular men, whose faithfulnes and diligence the Spirit might approve (for it can not be but that where Christ is a faith∣full and true witnesse, there some should take singular paines) but because he respecteth the comon forme and outward face of the Church, namely of what quality it is, not so much for her owne sake, as for the administra∣tion of the Angels, which was such, as he that considered the matter but with indifferent eyes, he shall iudge her worthyly to be voyde and empty of all vertue. It is an horrible evill which refuseth all fellowship with good∣nes. And althoug by this silence, wee may be able to coniecture, how grievous the disease is, neverthelesse afterward it is described more plain∣ly of what quality it is: and first, for more perspicuity and clearnes, by a de¦nyall of contraries: I know, saith he, that thou art neither colde nor hotte, but some thing compact and ioyned togither of both. Whereupon this evill consisteth of a temperature and mixture of certen contraryes. Now he cal∣led him colde, who with a quiet minde can endure that the dutyes of god∣lines should be neglected and despised, little or nothing at all regarding what manner of worshipping eyther he himselfe or other doe holde: him hotte, who doe boyle with a right affection and desire through vehement heate and fervency, as scalding water, seething in the potte with a certen restlesse motion, for so the Greeke worde zestos doe signify, of which sorte are they which can by no meanes suffer superstitions and ungodly religi∣ons, but doe try all lawfull meanes, that there may be an amending. For hotte, is not here sinnefull, as is a rash zeale as it cometh to passe in habites, in which both extreames doe swerve from the right: but it is of prayse: As Apollos being fervent in Spirit, Act. 18.25. And Paul exhorteth that they be fervent in Spirit, Rom. 12.11. Yf by excesse he should degenerate from the trueth, lukewarmnes, holding the middes, there were some considera∣tion of honesty. But fervency or Zeale is an affection, following the love of
holines, with a great and earnest affection of minde; whose defect, whether that more removed of coldnes, or this, nigher of lukewarmnes, is blamed. And lukewarmnes placed in the middes of these extremes in that, wherby a man staying himselfe from committing grievous sinnes, embraceth god∣lines, so farre as may be enough to maintayne the reputation of an honest, prudent, and civile man. The College then of the Laodicean Pastors, was as it were a Senat of prudent and moderate men in the matter of religion. Even as at this day the lukewarme have the report comonly & in every place. Yet it is not playnly mentioned from what mixture of thinges this luke∣warmnes did arise. Before these times of Iohn, Paul biddeth the Collossians, that they should say to Archippus, who then was the Pastor of the Laodicean Church, that he would looke to fulfill in the Lord, the ministery which he hath recei∣ved, Col. 4.17. From which things appeareth that the Pastorall faithful∣nes began then to shake and leane, which afterwardes fell most shame∣fully, when the Spirit sent these Epistles to the Angels. In our England the matter is more cleare, where there is such a forme of Church established, as is neither colde nor hotte, but set in the middes, and made of both. It is not colde, in as much as shee professeth the helthfull, pure, and entire doctrine of salvation, wherby wee have bidde fare well and forsaken the Romish Antichrist, and have rysen from that cold death, wherein wee lay before time. Hotte in deede shee is not, whose outward government for the most parte, is yet still Romish: In the degrees of their Clergie, in Elections, and Ordinations, and whole administration of the Censures: Which mixing of the pure doctrine and Romish regiment togither, maketh this lukewarmnes, wherby wee stande in the middes betweene cold & hotte; betweene the Ro∣mish & Reformed Churches, of both which wee are compact, as Martin Bucer of godly memory, complayneth in a certen Epistle sent to a most beloved friend of his, at Cambridge, written in Ianuary 12. in the yeare 1553. He in the tymes of King Edward the VI. was used amonge other, who should determine the reforming of our Church. But in what thinges both his owne and Peter Martyr his authority prevayled he himselfe manifesteth in that Epistle even nowe spoken of: for so he writeth: Whereas thou puttest mee in minde of the purity of the rites and ceremonies, know thou, that there noe stranger is asked concerning those things; yet of our selves, when wee may, wee fayle not to doe our duty by writtings, and in presence, and chiefly that the people may be provided of true Pastors, after also of the most purity, both of doctrine and ceremonies. And in an other place, There be some who by most humane wisdome and vanishing co∣gitations, would ioyne togither God and Beliall, by the leaven of Antichrist. These things he did write, which wee at this day finde by experience too true.
¶ J would thou wert colde or hotte. I would to God that thou wert either wholy Romish, or at lenght admitte a full reformation. He sheweth the hor∣rible greatnes of the evill by comparison, wherein he preferreth a wicked and noe religion, before this mingled lukewarmnes. But doth not luke∣warmnes come nearer too good? From whence then hath it more fautie? Certenly sinne is more sinfull, where grace is more plentifull. The fall of the Angels in heaven, left to themselves noe way to obtayne pardon. The sinne of our first parents was more wicked being committed in paradise: most foule was the Idolatry of the five & twenty men committed be tween the gallery and the Altar it selfe, Ezech. 8.18. God wilbe sanctifxed in them that approch unto him; and suffereth more easily his grace not to be knowne, then to be despised: The servant that knoweth his maisters will & do∣eth it not, shalbe beaten with many stripes. Wherefore if Baal be God follow him; why halt ye betweene both? As though it were hard to iudge whether were better. God abhorreth to come into this tryall. There is more sound iud∣gement in him, who not knowing the trueth, continueth in his superstiti∣on, then in him who being somewhat inlightned, is tossed this way & that way, uncerten still what to follow. Therefore a meane here is worst of all: which under a shew of prudent moderation and tranquility; is honoured of the world, which God esteemeth lesse then his next extreemes on both sides. It is then better to fall away to Rome? Be it farre from us. For in this place Christ preferreth the blinde Papists before those Angels, who bewitched with ambition and covetousnes, doe refuse holy reformation. He saith not that the condition of the whole Church is worser, to which the true foode of salvation is ministred, whereof noe power is granted in the Romish Church. 16 Therefore because thou art lukewarmne &c. The aygernesse also of the pu¦nishement, discovereth the horriblenes of the sinne, which seemeth to be confirmed with an othe; For the greeke worde which Theod. Beza transla¦teth, therefore, the comon Interpreter hath, but, and it is of one swearing and confirming by othe in this place, as though he should say, So, or thus let this or that be done to mee, as it is certen that I will vomite thee out of my mouth, After which manner the word So, is used by the Latynes, as in that Ode of Horace, So the mighty Godesse of Cyprus &c. as it hath ben obser¦ved by Henry Steven. And with the Heb. Aeen is the same with sic, as in Isa. So he bare our sorowes, that is, certenly, cha. 53.4. & Eccl. ch. 8.10. and in so J saw the wicked buried, that is, truly, certenly, as some would. And such silence is often used in execrations; Therefore I sware in my wrath, if they shall enter in∣to my rest, Heb. 3.11.
¶ It shall come to passe that J will vomit thee: As it cometh to passe in meates, which either hotte or cold, are reteined of the stomache because of the ex∣ceeding quality, which causeth feeling, and exciteth the stomacke to em∣brace it: but that which is lukewarme, because of his nigh and familiar heate, neither in entring is felt, neither being entred is it for that cause di∣gested, but remaining idle, and bringing at length trouble by his tarying there, is thrust out of dores with vomiting as an unprofitable guest. But we must beware that similitudes be not wrested, beyond that which they doe intende, as though naughty and wicked men should remayne con∣stantly in Christ, as cold meates in the stomacke. For such were never in Christ: neither doth he tell what he doth approve simply, but what he pre¦ferreth. Furthermore the thinges are referred to his externe administra∣tion, wherby he beareth longer with the notably negligent, or rather all togither strangers then lukewarme, as the experience of all times proveth, & at this day wee see in the Romish Church, which although shee hath for∣saken utterly the trueth, hath flourished a longe time, when in the meane time God rebuketh forthwith the true, neither differreth chastisment un∣to any long time, if he shall see them slacking a little their earnest affection, and to leane more to lukewarmnes. But what is it to be vomited out of his mouth? Will Christ, in whose mouth and lippes the very trueth resteth and abideth, take away his trueth from this Angell, delivering him up in∣to absurde opinions, and that he should beleeve lyes againe? The itching desyre of many men at this day, to give againe to the people monstrous & reiected opinions, maketh this interpretation probable. Wee knowe what is taught within these fewe yeares in the Schooles, is preached usually in the assemblyes, is disputed at the publike Comices, and was published in print the last sommer. But this should be the punishement as well of the people as of the Angels, to whom it seemeth to be proper. Therfore I have noe certenty touching this matter. Surely the event will declare shortly. In the meane time let us knowe that this shalbe a fearfull punishement: for first Christ will take great pleasure. in reiecting from himselfe this An∣gell. For what can be more pleasante to a man that hath a disposition and will to vomit, then to be eased by and by of the cause of his griefe? Even as Moses threatneth to the Apostate Iewes, that Iehovah will so reioyce in destroing and rooting them out, as before he reioyced to doe them good, Deut. 28.63. Second∣ly because he will cast out this Angell with greate dishonour. For an un∣cleane place is sought for vomiting: howsoever Antonius in the assembly of the people of Rome governing the publike businesse, filled his owne bo¦some and the tribunal with gobbets of meate. Thirdly, that the Angell
shall never recover his former dignity. For farre be it that the Prince and Authour of all cleannesse, should ever returne to his vomit, But this pu∣nishement was not to be inflicted to the whole Laodicean Church, but to the Angell alone, that is, to all lukewarme Pastours, partly because of that which wee spake even nowe, partly because the Church is wont to be men∣tionned expressely, where shee is intreated of. As unto the Ephesine Angell, I will remove thy candlestick out of his place, chap. 2.5. It shall therefore be peculiar to the Ecclesiasticall men without the destruction of the whole Church. Neither is it to be doubted but the same at length happened to the Laodicean Angell, which here is denounced: The which thinge is also certenly to be expected in his Antitype, unlesse shee shall prevent it by re∣pentance. For it shall come to passe that that faithfull witnesse shall over∣throwe this whole Hierarchy, and not alwayes suffer men, seeking onely ho∣nours and riches, not those things which are Christ, to enioy even this false flicity. Certenly a great and reprochfull iudgement abideth those lukewarme ons. Of which though they be troubled with noe feare, as ha∣ving with their terrour put to flight all the noyse there of: yet though all shall hold their peace, he will not deceive, who hath threatned that he will punish. It is also to be feared, that the Church may feele some adversity through contagion and consenting to. Such as are the Angels, such beco∣meth shee for the most part: and none is so ignorant of the matters, who seeth not plainely that the whole body is sicke of the same disease. But have mercy upon us o thou beginning of the workmanshippe of God; deale not with us accor¦ding to our sinnes, thou knowest our making, that wee are dust and ashes. How should not earth wax cold? Rayse up in us the burning heate of thy love: dissolve J pray thee our yce: neither suffer us to please our selves in our miparted godlines, but kindle us with thy heavenly fire unto a full heate and fervency, that wee may both avoide thy lothsomnes of us, and may alwayes enioy that pleasantnes, which thou givest to them whom thou lovest: Amen. ¶ For thou sayest I am riche: Thus was the nature of the sinne. The cause is double, a false perswasion of their owne worthynes, and ignorance of their misery. That grew from their wealth, which was of earthly and not spiritual ri∣ches, for against these he opposeth the riches, which he biddeth the Angell to buy of him in the next verse. Neither could he have ben lukewarme if he had expected spirituall riches from any other then from Christ alone: but rather throughly cold, and altogither a stranger from grace, being be∣come voyd and separated from Christ, Gal. 5.4. But he seemeth to have aboun¦ded in earthly riches, because of the wealth of the city which wee spake of chap. 1.11. For which cause peradventure Archippus was more negligent
of his ministery, whereupon Paul would that he should be admonished: Col. 4.17, although small fruit seemeth to have followed thereof, seeing that even unto these times of this Revelation, there was so great matter of boasting: and that also not newly bred, but gathered from old time. The abondance therfore of things for this life, begate this lukewarmnes. And it is noe newe thing, that prosperity doth steale away our mindes, & draw men away from God. This warning is often in the lawe, that they should take heede to themselves, least being fullfedd, and filled with good things, they should for∣geth Iehovah. And the boasting is threefolde, the first of the present wealth: The second of long continuing; The third of a perfit and absolute to every use. For so the wordes require, that J am rich, should be referred unto the present riches: I have ben rich, unto those that are past; I want nothing, unto a certen fulnes. From which further must needs spring a certen persuasion of a per¦manent state, and also constant felicity for the time to come, And it is to be observed that he bringeth in this Angell boasting in his owne wordes: otherwise then was done hitherto; & yet this not in vaine, seeing nothing is uttered rashly of the H. Ghost. But as touching the Anghel of Laodicea a clearer application offereth not it selfe: In our England the congruency is so manifest, that nothing could have bin expressed more lively. For what other cause can wee bring of our lukewarmnes, the Popish gouvernement mingled with the pure doctrine, then the love of riches & honours? Men suffer not this hope to be taken from them: but they had rather have a halfe godlinesse, togither with the inioying of their riches, then a full and perfit reformation with the losse of them. Yet least they should seme to preferre any thing before the trueth with dishonour, they prayse some what proud¦ly our present happines in the published bookes and in the assemblyes: as wee may see from the writings of many men, which have come forth in these last yeares. Not without cause therfore the Spirit maketh this Angell vaunting him selfe, but in the same setting before our eyes our notable glo∣rying. And wee have said that the first bragging was of the present riches. Howe doth our Angell triumphe in this respect? and lifteth up the head above all other reformed Churches? In other places there are poore and basse Pastores, almost of a vulgar state & condition; nor of any greater au∣thority, then their godlines and learning can procure unto them, But our Bishops are Peeres of the Realme, superiour in honour to many great states: also in riches, company of men and mayd servants, in magnificence of houses and all the other pompe of the world, equall to any even the greatest Earles. Howe riche is the reste of the Clergy? The Deanes, Arch-Deacons, Prebendaries, Chaplaines, heaping and gathering togither ma∣ny
benefices, as they call them, doe match Squires at least in early reve∣nues. Doe not this amplify and encrease very greatly the glory of the Church, that her ministres doe shine in garments of silke and Velvet, doe walke in the streetes with the retinue of noble men, & so drive farre off the contempte of the ministery? Where canst thou see after the Pope expel∣led, a Church to reioyce of so rich thinges and of such prosperity? No where in deede; neither doe I envy or grudg at it; onely our reioycing is not good. And would God that our riches did serve to the promoting of Gods glory, rather then to the hindring thereof; but they have brought in this miserable lukewarmnes, whyle that wee may retayne them, wee make noe reckoning of true godlines. The second boasting is of the long continuance: For this plenty it not newe, but which hath ben confirmed nowe by the space of two and fourty yeares. With how great prosperity of all things. Who may be so bolde as to reprove the condition of this Church as maymed and imperfect, which the experience of longe time hath approved to be most happy? Not I in deede, unlesse prosperitie were an argument rather of Gods patience, then of mans Iustice. In the third place he vanteth that he wanteth nothing: What telst thou mee, saith he, of other reformed Churches? I see no cause why other reformed Churches, should not imitate ours, rather then wee them, seeing wee are inferiour to them in nothing. The answere to the admonitiō made to the Parliament, pag. 226. Yea why doest thou call me backe unto the first Church? As though wee were to be bounde with the first beginnings and principles, as with fet∣ters: And it were not lawfull for us, to alter those thinges, which at their first originall were not so profitable, as at this day they seeme hurtfull, this is in a certen Apol. of the governement of the Church, pag. 81, A bould, that I may not say ungodly, assertion, to affirme that any thing ordained of the Apostles, should be noe lesse noxious to our Churches then profita∣ble to them, for which they were appointed. But I remitte this to the heat of contention. In the meane time let such a man knowe, that the Apostles Church was most perfit, and was not to be made perfit by the inventions of them that came after, but that all other are to be tryed and examined by the square thereof. That saying of the first Councill of Nicen is to be celebrated, which is, Let the olde customes holde. And that also of Tertullian against Praxeam, Beholde, whatsoever is first, that is true: and whatsoever s later, that is false. And it is not to be doubted, but that Paul taught Tim. most ful∣ly how he (hould behave himselfe in the house of God, 1 Tim. 3.15. Is all that instruction abrogated for oldnesse? Should the time teach better & more certen things, to which those Apostles should give place?
Surely the Church, as Adam in the first beginning was purest; the farther shee proceedeth, the more filth shee gathereth, unlesse God extraordina∣rily make the light to shine out of darknes, as lately in this last age. That first Church was the garden of Eden, as wee have shewed in chap. 2.7. The Church of the following ages compared with that, was a wide and barren wildernes. Perfection is not to be measured by multitude of professors, or by amplitude of riches, but by the integrity and purenes of God his insti∣tution and aboundance of heavenly gifts. Let it be then enough to prayse mens inventions, let us tread under foote the sacred trueth in comparison of them. ¶ And knowest not that thou art wretched; The other cause of the evill is the ignorance of their misery. For prosperity blindeth the minde of the world, that it cannot see in deede in what state it is. Therfore in many wordes he declareth this misery, because in so deepe a drowsines a light upbraiding would not cause any feeling. he maketh a fivefold degree of it. Of which the two first are as certen comon accidents; the three last doe shewe the very kinde of the disease. For the remedy is threefold, of golde, of garments, & eye salve in the verse following, and teacheth that the disease consisteth chiefly in these three thinges. The accidents are referred either to his owne sense, or to the compassion of others: in respect of that, the Angell is wretched, in respect of this, miserable. A man is wretched, who is consumed with some great sorrowe, whether it aryseth from a publike calamity, or from some private and domesticall griefe. And there is none placed in any dignity whatsoever, who can keepe himselfe from this anguish, whereupon Kinges in the tragedies lament that they so often are wretched. Such heavinesse of minde did lie once upon the Angell of Laodicea, as is at this day in our En∣gland. Howe, wilt thou say, where noe publike calamity presseth? The Spi∣rit speaketh of private sorrowe, as is evident from the glorying of this An∣gell, for which there can be noe place in a comon mourning and sorrow. but this interior griefe doth torment miserably the English Ang. For how great griepes doth he feele, who desyreth exceedingly riches & honours, and cannot get them? Or at least who cannot enioy securely those things being gotten, whom many godly and learned men doe inveigh against with most grievous wordes? and not this onely, but also doe prove mani∣festly from the trueth of God, that such dignityes are unmeete for the mi∣nisters of Christ, and that they cannot stande togither with the faithfulnes of Pastor & Bishops? Howe must it needes be that these disturbers should be very grievous, especially seeing this opinion is now favoured of the mul∣titude: and the nobility hath perceived plainly long a goe the trueth of it?
Yf one could opē the brest of this Ādgell, doubtlesse he might see his heart almost consumed with this griefe, howsoever without all things are ioy∣full, & the comō wealth flourisheth with happy tranquility. And I doubt not but that the Angell will confesse, that I have touched his most inward sense in this thing. This Angell is miserable to others; not to the wicked Papists, to whom the former griefe is not sufficient, but to the godly bre∣thren, both at home and in other nations, who being free of all partiality doe acknowledge the condition of the Bishops & other Clergie, who doe give themselves wholy to ambition, and labour for honours, to be misera¦ble & unhappy, howsoever it doth very greatly please our selves. For what is worthy of more pitty then to see brethren snared with the vaine glory of the world, altogither to desire and to enforce themselves to get earthly di∣gnityes, and to make shipwracke of the heavenly crowne? Yf they had al∣wayes lyen in the snares of the Devill, the thing were not so much to be la¦mented; but after that they have escaped from his snares by the holsome knowledge of the gospell, be entangled againe in the same by this way: what godly man cannot both be grieved at their change, and also bewayle the comon misery of us all, which by a thousande meanes are drawen into the same destruction? Such therefore are the accidents, grievous indeede of themselves, yet but as a flee biting in comparison of the disease it selfe: which nowe let us touch, as gently as wee can, and with the minde onely to heale, and not to exasperate it. The first matter to be purged is poverty. And konwest not, saith he, that thou art poore: Of what sorte of poore? not poore in Spirit of whom Christ speaketh Mat. 5.3. for this is a blessed pover∣ty, that a wretched. Also the Angell boasteth that he is and hath ben rich, and that he wanteth nothing, so that he is farre from that holy humility. This poverty therfore is the timorous begger lives, which both quaketh at the sight of a richer man, nor either speaketh or doeth ought, but to the pleasure of a mightier man, and also which susteineth the wretched life by begging mony and reliefe: For the greeke worde ptacos, poore, hath the na∣me both from fearfulnes, and also he is noted with the same name of him that laying at the gate of the rich man, desyred to be fylled with the crum∣mes, which fell from his table, Luke 16.20. Which of these agreeth to our Angell? Is not all this dishonest covetousnes removed farre from so great riches as are ministred to ours? I would to God it were in deede: but here as alwayes I am compelled to admire the infinite wisdome of God, who hath opened our secret impostume, with a word so fit for the thing, as no∣thing ever could be spoken or thought more fit. For first, howe servile a feare possesseth the Angel, from hence may easily appeare, that he speaketh
almost nothing, which he thinketh may displease any one. The Bishops doe feare the Peeres: the Parish Pastors, the Bishops, whom they perceive to be ready to scourge them, if any provoked at home, will crave their aide, es∣pecially if he can obiect their minde to be out of love with some ceremo∣nies. So reprehensions are silent, naughtines reigneth, the hand of God is heavy upon us, and whither the matter will growe at last, prudent men feare not without iust cause. But chiefly the beggery of asking is notable. For runne over with your eyes and mindes the whole Clergy. Will yee that wee beginne at the weakest? Those that they call Curates, both in very trueth & also in the iudgement of all men, are beggers. In whom wee may see that which was threatned to the family of Ely, men bowing themselves for a piece of silver, and a masell of bread, and requiring to be ioyned to one of the Priests, that they may eate a piece of bread, 1 Sam. 2.36. In the rest, who through their grea∣ter aboundance walke more underpropt, what running up and downe? what bountifull giving and bribes? What importunate and earnest intrea∣ting? Howe great flattering intisements of humble service and soothing of all duties, that they may procure to themselves Ecclesiasticall offices? Very many doe fly unto the Kings Court, or to the house of a most noble man the Lord Keeper of the Great Seale. For these places are like the beautifull gate of the Temple of Salomon: in this, men enter in great multitudes, and there is great hope of carrying away the penny, Act. 3.2. Others followe the States and Peeres, to whom they become either domesticall Chaplaines, or that I may so say, vassals: For what cause I pray? That assoone as any Be∣nefice, as they call it, shall happen to be voyde, they may enioy the same by the gift of their Lords. And this is thought to be an honest way to get an Ecclesiasticall charge. But is not this flattery meer beggery? In obtai∣ning a divine office is favour any whit lesse dishonest then mony? Yf wee will weigh the matter rightly, it is of the same fault and blasme, to enter either by bribe, or by favour. The other rable is diligent about the comō sorte of Patrons in the Country, in whose Porches they set, flatter and speak fayre to their wyves, flatter their children, Winne their fervaunts by gifts: and in every place behaveth himselfe like wretched beggers. Some more craftily, even as they, which sit in a way having two pathes, and in publick wayes doe offer pilled roddes and sticks to them that travayle by, to the end that they may get some mony: so they either by bountifull giving of present mony, or by agreement to give a certen yeerly rente, doe make a waye for themselves. But thou wilt say, this is the corruption not of our Lawes, but of the men. Certenly as longe as this way to obtayne Ecclesiasticall charges hol∣deth,
which hitherto hath prevayled, noe remedy can be brought for this beggery. Have wee not knowne this sufficiently by experience? In the late assembly of all degrees of the Realme, a sore and heavy ordinance was made against it; hath ought ben effected thereby? Nothing at all, but o∣nely that the thing be done more warily and subtily. Wee avayle nothing with our lawes, where the Lawes of Christ are not kept. But that wee may proceede, when the thing is begged of the Patrone, howe much lesse bu∣sinesse remayneth to the unlearned route, to obtayne Institution of the Bi∣shop? Here not onely humble request must be made to the chiefe Lord, but to the Examiners, Groomes of the chamber, Clarkes, Buttlers, yea to the lesse Iacke, not because ignorance shall keepe him from an entrance, but becau¦se he is wont to bring most gaine to the servants, who hath neede of more favour. There is noe Tower made so stronge, which an asse loaden with Golde doth not vainquish. Neither any almost so unlearned or foolish, which taketh the repulse. But what engines and crafty meanes are used, let them looke to it. There is the same consideration of Prebendaryes, Archdeacons, Deacons. Are the Bishops themselves voyde of this avarice? What meaneth then that often attending at the Court and on the Peeres of the Realme? Why wayte they not tyll they be sent for? Why are they not pulled against their wills from theyr studyes? Yea if any should appeale to their consciences, whe∣ther are those fatte manoures and farmes of their Bishoprikes let out to hire of their owne accord to farmers that longed for, or promised bribes to the adiutours of their dignity? But are they onely beggers in suing for the office? Some indeede are come to that beggery, that if their seate be to be changed, they pay not their first fruites, except they have raked togither shamefully some almes from the poore Rectours under the name of a benevo∣lence. Thou art therefore a Begger o thou English Angell. And therefore with thee it is ordinary and usuall, that the best are passed over, and others lesse worthy, are in better estimation. For as wee bestowe some almes u∣pon the blind, lame, and those that are full of sores, wee stoppe our eares against them, whom wee see to have a body well liking and in comely ap∣parell, so men of a blind minde, deformed and maimed doctrine, and wit∣ty understanding, doe gather togither much almes, when they that have more learning and farre better iugement, are sufferred to hunger and to perish through famine, which cometh to passe eyther because they cannot cry out so stoutly, or because they are more ashamed to begge, or because men have lesse pitty of them.
But it is not my purpose to pleade their cause, thy beggerlines o Angell, is to be reproved of mee, which wilt thou, nilt thou, thou canst not but ac∣knowledge, if thou wey the thing with thy selfe in earnest. Thou dost aboū∣de indeede in riches, but nothing is more filthy then the way of getting them. Shall the begger, after he hath filled his purse with asking almes, cast away his patched cloake, and in silke vaunt him selfe to be rich & weal¦thy? What other thing is thy boasting, then the bragging of riches, which thou hast gathered most dishonestly by begging? And yet I doe not speak these things to that end, as though the stipend of the godly Pastors, who holily both enter into and execute their office, should be meere almes. For the labourer is worthy of his wages; neither can this distribution be sayd to be freely bestowed, any more then is any made to one which liveth of his publike office. God which made the earth, hath so given it to the children of men, that he reserveth a portion to himselfe, which he hath be∣stowed on them, who earnestly bend themselves to holy things. Therefore the Patrones doe not give of their owne, when they doe appointe the year∣ly rents to the Pastours of the Churches for their paines, but deliver them to those, to whom they are due, and of which they have ben the keepers onely. Wee speake not, I say, of such speciall persons, but generally of the state of the Clergy, the manner of which is so ordained, that the Angell ma¦nifestly groweth rich by almes, and in deede is noe other thing, then a Lord Begger. There is added to beggery blindenes, wherby the evill becometh farre more grievous: For what is more pittifull then a blind begger, whom necessity constreineth to seeke his living abroade, and the want of sight suffereth him not to seeke? But this is a blindnes of minde, wherby a man being deprived of a witty and prudent minde, cannot provide for himself touching things profitable and honest before God and men. The Angell then being voide of this wisdome, sinneth even so in administring his offi∣ce, as of late he sinned by beggery in the manner of getting. And this is the worst kinde of blindnes, which for the most part, neither acknowled∣geth his owne darknes, neither can suffer patiently admonition: yea doth use the staffe wherby he ought to have tryed the way, against him that sheweth him of the danger. Yet thou art to be admonished o miserable An¦gell, howe froward and angry soever thou shalt be: it may come to passe, that at length thou mayst see, and be wise: if not, at least wise I may be wi∣thout danger of setting a stumbling blocke before the blinde, if I have seen the pitte and not shewed it him. And that I may deale with thee more fa∣vourably, I will make thy selfe iudge, whether thou be better sighted then I accuse thee: although this be unreasonable in ons owne cause, wherein
thou must needes be twice blinde. Call therfore to remembrāce with mee, your last constitutions, which are wont to be wisest, handled in the Con∣vocation at London, and published in the yeare 1597. what medecine dost thou make for the Church being sicke? First thou decreest that fitte men be admitted unto Ecclesiasticall holy orders and benefices, as they call them. The title in deede recreated many, and very many did iudge thee nowe at length to use thine eyes. This kinde of men hath made the Church sad a great while. There was hope of remedy when thou shouldst see and acknowledge the disease: For of evell manners doe aryse good lawes. But howe wisely hast thou met with this evill, and satisfyed mens expectation, wey well with thy selfe, after give sentence. Thou knowest that it was ordained in a statute of the Realme, that none should be admitted unto holy orders, but he that should be foure and twenty yeere olde at least, and have brought before the Diocesan the testimony of such men as the Bishop knoweth to be of sounde religion, both of his honest life, and al∣so of his professing the doctrine of our Church; yea have ben able to render a reason of his faith in the latine tongue: or at the least hath ben endued with some speciall gifte of preaching. Although this were long agoe enacted, the Church hath ben greatly troubled with a newe rable of most unworthy men. With what cau¦tions then hast thou helped the imbecility of the lawe? For wise and quick sighted men are wont, when they have perceived the weaknes of the lawe, to helpe with more sharpe lawes for that point, wherby they see the impu∣dency of men to breake through. Thou in deede hast established manie things, but I pray, what serveth for the worthynes of Ministers, That noe man be received to holy orders, unlesse at the same time he shall exhibite the presenta∣tion of himselfe to some benefice then void? or, who shall not bring a certificate from some Church, wherein he may serve the cure of soules, that is, where he may play the Curate under some one in reading of prayers: or who hath not ben appointed in some College; or at least who is not to be admitted of the same Bishop unto some Benefice, or to a Cure. To what Idiote or any the worst man may not these thinges perteine? But thou proceedest and addest other thinges as vayne as these: Moreover if he shallbe, sayest thou, of an other Dioces, unlesse he shall bring dimis¦sory letters, be full foure and twenty yeeres olde, and hath taken some degree in the V∣niversity (which last is required onely in men of another Dioces), finally that holy orders be not given, except on the Lords day, or holy dayes. Excellent ordi∣nances in deede, for which the reformed Churches may be ashamed. What doe these thinges profit at all, that a fit man be admitted? What that after should be ordayned ministers either more learned or more ho∣nest? Wilt thou on the H. Spirit crying by Paul, who is fit for these thinges, ob¦trude a man with a presentation, with a Certificate, with Dimissorye letters; or
who hath ben licenced on the Lords dayes? But I will not debate the matter har∣der, onely I appeale to thy conscience: What I pray have you provided in this matter, who hast covered the wall ready to fall with such foolish pla∣string? What touching plurality of Benefices? Thou decreest that it is to be restrayned. And well in deede: for it is an hainous thinge, that one should be a sheapheard of sheepe, which he feedeth not, or at least should receive any fruite from them, which take noe profit from him. It were meete ther¦fore, that here thou shouldest bring forth whatsoever skill thou hast, to cure this evill, which not onely the divine oracles, but also comon sense cō¦demneth of sacrilege. What remedy then doest thou apply? Namely, Let no man enioy this faculty, unlesse he be at least a Master of Arts, and a publike and fitte preacher of Gods worde: A notable Physician in deede. What have Mai∣sters of Arts deserved so ill at your hands, that thou would have those first burdened with so great a sinne? Thou confessest that Plurality is an evill thing, and to be corrected, yet thou permitest this mischiefe to them: In deede it is a notable privilege of their degree, wherby they first are licen∣sed to be evill. But whether thoughtest thou that the destruction by these meanes would slay more secretly? There are so many, thankes be to God, as if all, letted by no other religion, should use of the liberty of thy consti¦tution, more parishes, I beleeve, should want Pastours resident with them, then at this day they wante. So thou doest stay and represse prudently the evill by augmenting of it. But peradventure it is enough for thee to decea∣ve men onely with a title and pretence of repressing plurality. Moreover there is an ordinance made touching hospitality in the Benefices cared for. And this is the calamity of our Church that the Ministers doe not feede the poore with beefe. That of binding the Regulars to make sermons in their owne proper per∣sons, would seeme to belonge to a sharper sight, unlesse peradventure it should call them away from other places, where their labour is more ne∣cessary; I let passe the Matrimoniall ordinances. That is worthy remembrāce touching excesse about Excommunication to be reformed. For thou seest it to be defiled shamefully with many pollutions: I would to God thou wouldest see and regarde as well those thinges, which belong to the holy and law∣full reforming of it. But why doest thou first deny, that herein any thing can be inovated or altered without a great mutation to the whole Ecclesiasticall iurisdicti¦on, and of very many lawes of this Realme; yet afterward thou wouldest reduce the same to his auncient honour and dignity? Wouldest thou make a reforma∣tion without an alteration? Thou wilt have nothing to be changed, that the lawes may not be violated, yet thou pretendest to recall the former comelines. It pittiest mee that thou canst not see thyne owne blindenes.
But by this provision thou hast openly shewed what reformation wee must expect, such indeede by which noe amending maye be made. Therefore the Title might had ben enough for this thing. Yet that thou mightest seeme to doe that which thou doest not at all, thou usest a certen forme of ordinances. For let us see howe they answere and agree to the promise. First thou ordainest, That in grievous crimes, the sentence be pronounced, either by the Archbishop, Bishop, Deane, Archdeacon, or Prebendary, in his owne per∣son. What is this auncient use of prononcing the sentence by them, whose names, except onely the Bishop, had not ben heard in deede in the Church, as long as the true honour and dignity of excommunication re∣mayned? Why is there noe place left for the Pastour of every congregatiō to whom once it belonged to pronounce the sentence? Peradventure it makes noe matter to him what is done to his sheepe, or it maye be that he is not fit, nor endued with iudgement and wisdome enough. In very deede this feae might peradventure have prevayled some what in time past: But nowe it ought not, seeing thou hast set us free enough from it in the first booke of the Decrees. For it is not to be doubted, but that he that hath ben furnished with Presentation, Certificate and the other things, with which thou hast in the same place instructed him, should be fit enough and more then fit unto e∣very parte of his office. Or if I must deale with thee in earnest, what let∣teth that the Pastour using the counsell of others, and making diligent in∣quiry, may not pronounce the sentence, as well, as either the Bishop or Pre¦bendary, or any other? But thou wilt say, wee will not have this matter to be handled by common advise, but to stande to the iudgement of one a∣lone. Is this the meaning of thy reformation, and yet darest thou make mention of the honour and dignity of the auncient use? Christ commaunded to tell the Church: Shall any one susteyne the place of this Church? One in deede for order sake did pronounce the sen¦tence, but the matter was iudged not by his sentence onely, but by the advise of the whole assemblie and Councill. Neither would PAVLE have the Jncestuous man to be excommunicated, but when the brethren were ga∣thered togither, and consented, as wee reade in the first Epistle of the Corinthes, chapter five, verse fourth. And so the Church for some ages after, as is cleare from Origene, Tertullian, Cyprian and others. Wherfore I woulde mervayle that thou doest promise so boldly concerning the former and an¦cient dignity, but that I knew that blinde men feare not the faces of men. But what if this thyne amending which thou pretendest doth lay open a way to impunity of grievous crimes?
The Commissary as long as it perteined to him, twice at least every yeere did compell the Church Wardēs by vertu of an othe, that they should pre∣sent wicked men: Nowe while he should doe that, there is noe cause per∣adventure, when the Priest associated with him cannot denounce the sen∣tence against such man. And in deede it is not to be hoped for, that the Church Wardens willingly will flee unto the Bishops, Archdeacons or Pre∣bendaryes, whom they knowe not where they may finde, or who peradven∣ture are farre of from them, and a iourney cannot be made without char∣ges, when being present, and that at other mens costs, they can scarce be driven by othe to bewray the guilty. Thou oughtest to have minded these things, and not to have used a remedy worse then the disease it selfe. Se∣condly thou speakest of Excommunication for contumacy, which hath noe newe thinge from thy former decrees. But the repeating of the old manner, is with thee a reformation, least peradventure any boxe should want a superscription, although there be nothing in it. I passe by the Chā∣ge of Penance, the foule things of the Officials, the excesse of Apparitors (of taking away whō, you ought rather to have intreated, then of moderating them) and Registers. Thou thy selfe howe mayest speake howe well thou hast used thyne eyes, who passing by many great evills, eyther art wholy occupyed about tryfles: or if peradventure thou hast touched any weygty matters, thou makest them either worse by curing, or in deede nothing better. Certenly by many reasons thy blindnesse is proved. But Christ open thyne eyes: I will not so much deale with thee by wordes, as for thee by prayers. For I have not purposed the handling, but onely the iudging of these things. The third part of the disease is nakednesse: garments are used that wee may provide for shamefulnes. Out of which when one is put, his igno¦miny is set openly in the sight of men, according to that of the Prophete, Beholde I am against thee, saith the Lord of hosts, and will uncover thy skirts, unfol∣ding them upon thy face, that J may shewe thy nakednesse to the nations, and to the Kingdomes thy nakednes, Nah. 3.5. Therefore this nakednesse is a reproch, dishonnour and contempt, whereof this Angell is sicke. For it cannot be that our Clergy should not be contemned of men, who manifestly & cleer∣ly doe see howe beggerly Ecclesiasticall stipends are sought and desyred: howe filthily and negligently the holy offices are administred: howe all care of the flocke is naught set by, & the study of Gods glory is cast away. When I say men see these thinges, can it be that they should not despise the Angell seeking onely his owne things, not those which are Christs. And the Angell himselfe at certen times seeth the same thing in some sorte, as can testify the often complaintes of their publike sermons, although he
knoweth not the cause, or he would not knowe it, fearing more, as it were, the remedy then the disease. But it appeareth plainly, howe greatly he is despised, from that which happened a fewe yeares since. A certen man set forth bookes, who called himselfe a Marrer of Prelates in which he dealt boldly with the Angell, Howe acceptable to the people were those merry conceites in wordes? Howe plausible almost to all men? Howe gladly and greedily, and with howe great pleasure were they received every where? Noe man is so ignorant and unskilfull in thinges, but that minding the time, he may say thus with himselfe, For Iehovah hath poured contempt upon the Princes: those that honour him he honoureth, and the despisers of him shalbe made light: he hath made our Priests to be abiect to all the people, because they have broken his Covenant. These things, I say, a man considering with himselfe, had not swerved from the trueth. For if there had ben any estimation of the Angell, men would rather have mourned, then laughed, and delivered those wri∣tings to the fire, before they would had worneth them with fo often han∣dling and looking on them. I would not tell thee these thinges, unlesse the Spirit did affirm plainly, that thou doest not know thyne own nakednes. That false glory wherein thou flourishest, suffereth thee not earnestly either to minde or regarde what men speake and thinke of thee. But learne from hence if thou be wise, howe servants going before in great number, and having chaines, and a great troupe of serving men folloing after, are of no force to drive away contempt, and to deliver from the despising of the co∣mon people: or if thou canst not perceive these things so well in thy selfe, beholde the Papists, and the Pope their Prince, howe doth he nowe stincke for his desert with the greatest part of men, contemned, naught set by, vile and hated of all the godly: whose feete notwithstanding some Princes be∣ing bewitched, yet doe kisse, and then whom, noe mortall man hath ben in time past of more imperiall maiesty. Remember our former Prelates, whose riches were greater then thyne, their authority greater, their power more to be feared: yet because the common sorte of people did see them to be meere gluttons, howe did they deryde them? The pride of our Wol∣sey was mocked openly. For the honours of this world are figge leaves, or as it were torne and ragged clothes, which cover not the nakednes, but make more deformed through the loupes. Minde these things, and be not proude of thy golden feathers, but rather where thou art naked, cover thy shame, least through vaine boasting of the part adorned, thou lye despised with the common people for thy other deformity. And thus at the length I have opened this rotten sore; if my paines & travaile shalbe acceptable, and if being cleansed it doth farre well, howe great thankes shall I give to
our God? but if the evill onely shalbe stirred up and provoked, and the handling shall disquiet them that are sicke: I will conforte my selfe with the conscience of duty, and the usuall wages of the Physitian. 18 I counsell thee to buy of mee Golde: Hitherto the cause, nowe the remedy is taught: both from whence it is to be fetched, and by what meanes, and also what is the matter of the medicine it selfe. It is to be fetched from Christ a∣lone, he alone hath borne all our infirmities, and alone yet can heale our griefes. The way to fetch is by buying: not because he requireth a pryce; for he selleth wine and mylke without mony or chaunging of my thing, Isayah 55.1.2. But because he will have a desire to be brought, even as in getting of things with greate cost: in which togither also he sheweth the dignity of the remedy, which otherwise is not deare at any price. The medicine is threefolde, after the manner of the disease, which wee have shewed to be threefold, Golde, white garments, and eye salve: Golde is set against poverty: white garments doe cover nakednesse; and eye salve doth helpe against blindnes. Wee have sayd that wretchednes and misery were accidents, which forthwith vanish, when their fountaynes are taken away. Of what sorte every one of them is, may easily be understood by their contraryes. Golde is opposed to the riches and poverty of the Angell, that is, to the hegging of Benefices and Ec∣clesiasticall Offices. For the former riches are not true, and doe not let but that the Angell may be the most base and vile begger. But the Golde of Christ driveth farre off this beggery. It is therefore that most holy manner appointed by Christ himselfe, of calling, chusing, ordayning, & appoin∣ting Ecclesiasticall men, every one to his office. Wherby Pastors doe not seeke for the office, but are sought for: are not promoted for a peace of money, but for goodnes and vertue, not for favour, but learning, not at the will and pleasure of any man, but by the election and consent of his flocke. Christ will have this Golde to be bought of him, because he him∣selfe hath described playnly this whole way, end hath not left it free to men to deale in this matter at their pleasure. As long as the thing shalbe in the power of one Patrone and Bishop, there will never be wanting bribe gi∣vers, and such as will suffer themselves to be corrupted with rewardes. But if Christ rule be kept, this begging poverty would flee away never to returne againe. For this golde is tryed in the fyre, proved often times & wholy fined. Wee see the excellency of it in the primtive Church, & also a¦monge our neighbours at this day. It dreadeth not any touch stone, it fea∣reth not any fyre, it bursteth nor asunder by any knocking of the hammer, but it abode invincible in time past, & yet doth abide, with the great glory of them that are made rich therby. Whyte apparell is opposed to the former
honours & nakednes, that is, contempt. These garments also Christs will have to be bought of him, having them most pretious & most prayse worthy. For what contēpt can come to thē, whō their worthynes hath chosen, their lear∣ning ordained, their holines put in authority? Whom many have earnestly desired for their tryed godlines, doe admire for their diligēce in teaching, doe feare because of the most free truth, & reverence as exemples of all vertue & honesty? Be an exēple, saith Paul, to the faithfull, in speach, in cōversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, in chastity, let no man despise thy youth, 1 Tim. 4.12. Behold the way to deliver from contēpt. These garments are full of maiesty, with which youth being covered, is not despised. And so once the Prophets wente ador∣ned: whose hairy garmēt had more estimation with all men, then the silke & vaine painting of others. Those wicked men & skornes of the Prophets, who were togither with Iehu, when the Prophet having entred in, did lead him out from the cōpany, unwares did shew what good opinion of the Pro∣phet they had fixed in their mindes. What, say they, would that made man have with thee? Yee rather, why doe yee made men aske what that made man would have? But their tongue spake according to their wicked custome: their desyre to knowe did shewe aboundantly what authority & credit they gave to him secretly; whereupon when the message was knowne assuredly, they created him King whom the made man had annointed for King. The Baptist with his leather girdle & garment of Camels haire was safe from the iniury of the Priests, because of the honour, wherewith the comon people honoured him. The strenght of the divine institution is great, in which God himselfe getteth authority, eyther by the voluntary obedience of men, or by some punishmēt inflicted frō God. There is no neede of the shewe of earth¦ly riches & honours, which at the first is wont to dazell the eyes of the un∣skilfull, but at lenght when the vanity of it is perceived, it is no lesse despised them frogges fallen from the ayre. Therefore garments are to be bought of Chr. by which alone our nakednes is covered, appearing otherwise very de¦formed, whatsoever clothes thou puttest upon it. Eye salve of old was all kinde of medicine, made in that manner, that is might be kept while neede should require. At lenght the name remayned chiefly in those, which are pre¦pared for the diseases of the eyes: because the Physitiās have used abondāce of it. Here it is applyed against the blindnes, namely the wisdome of the flesh, & ignorance of spirituall things. Wee reade that a certē sensible thing was made of the spittle of Chr. & of earth, Io. 9.6. as it were by the know∣ledge of Christ by the word that proceedeth out of his mouth, & also the knowledge of our selves, who made in the beginning, of the earth, savour nothing but the earth. Both these are to be ioined togither & to be knea∣ded into one lumpe, they profit nothing asunder,
For our misery being knowne particularly, bringeth forth desperation; & Christ being receaved without the feeling of our owne unworthynes, is un¦profitable and unfruictfull. And yet wee are no table to mixe & compoūde togither these thinges, but it must be obtained of him, who came into the wold to iudgement, that they which see not, should see: & they that sce, should be made blinde: Ioh. 9.39. First therefore wee must remove our owne wisdome, which as longe as it reigneth, doth possesse us so wholy, that it leaveth noe place for true and heavenly. For o Angell, wouldest thou have devised a refor∣mation taken wholy our of thyne owne braine, unlesse thou hadst swelled full of the opinion of thyne owne wisdome? Overlooke thy decrees, where is the Spirit called into counsell? By what authority of Gods word is the a∣mending of things confirmed? After what exemple of the purer Church, are our matters being fallen downe, corrected and amended? There is a deepe silence of all these things; noe where is heard, either Paul, or any o∣ther witnesses of the holy trueth, upon whose credit the things established might rest and stay themselves. I beleeve thou shalt scarce finde a Synode, even in the corruptest times, in which the divine authority is more dumbe and speechlesse. This opinion is to be layd away o Angell, thou must ac∣knowledge that thou art earth, and that thou hast noe eye salve in thee, tyll thou shalt be mollified with the heavenly spittell, and subdued into a linamente. Depende therefore on the mouth of Christ, from whence flow∣eth that which is profitable to doctrine, to confutation, to correction, to instructi∣on which is in righteousnes, that the man of God may be perfite, to every good worke, 2 Tim. 3.16.17. From hence is conpounded that eye salve, which will take away the skales of the eyes, & endue thee with that sharpnes of sight, that thou mayest see playnly, how thou oughtest to behave thy selfe in the house of God. Neither must thou give eare to them, who not onely unskilfully, but also ungodly cry out, that the rules of these things are not to be fetched from this shop. Christ would not seth forth himselfe to be a seller of eye salve, unlesse he had it both aboundantly, wherby he might healpe our wante, and also it were not lawfull to buy it from any other. So then the medicine is threefould, Golde against poverty, which earthly riches ease not: white raiment against nakednes, which the honours of the world hide not: Eye salve against blindnes, which the wisdome of the flesh taketh not away. From which nowe at length it may be understood, that those riches where of in the former verse the Angell boasted is not the righteousnes of faith alone, as the counterfait Ambrose prateth unwisely. For those riches rested not on Christ alone. Whereupon he warneth that he would buy gold of him, which he should doe in vaine, if before the Angell did aboun¦de
in the same. But the righteousnes of faith hath all his treasures placed in Christ alone; of which he is made partaker, whosoever beleeveth truly, and renounceth all other righteousnes, Iohn 6.48. Rom. 3.7. Therefore o Ribera, drawe rather water out of a pumeise stone, then overthrowe the righteousnes of faith from this place. But such trifles of thyne doe fall of themselves downe, that I neede not spend time in confuting of them. 19. As many as I love &c. An exhortation to use the remedy: and first frō the chastising of them whom he loveth. A reason in deede of very great mo¦ment. Whosoever is either among sonnes, or amonge the reprobate: Yf he receiveth noe sonne, whom he rebuketh and chasteneth not, what shall be done with the multitude of the rest? An horrible destruction remaineth for them, whom he will spare never so little, who doe not suffer his owne children to escape uncorrected. Therefore a chastisement is at hande, un∣lesse thou repent betime, and that very grievous and full of trouble, as the very wordes themselves doe shew: which are wont to be used for a confort in a bitter affliction, wherewith the minde is so stricken as if it were forsa∣ken of God. Therefore he saith they are sonnes, whom he beateth with so cruell punishements, least through the grievousnes of the punishement, they should despayre of his fatherly goodnes. Therefore it is not time nowe to strive and to contend with mutuall hatred and reproches, but the eares are to be lift up to the alarme of Christ, and wee must either thinke forthwith of the remedy, or some great and lamentable calamity is to be expected shortly. And it is to be observed that he doth rebuke and chasten; that is, convince and punish. These two thinges are to be ioyned togither. Punishement is unprofitable where wordes are silent, stripes are fierce. From whence chastisement is well called discipline, wherein the offender feeleth paine and learneth togither. But what shall then be the fruict of so longe and spitefull contention, when the convinced and chastised sonne shalbe compelled, will, he, nil he, to singe a contrary songe? Were it not better to give now eare to learne, then to expect that sorowfull chaunging of our iudgement? Although Christ in deede hath convinced already, see∣ing nowe by the space of many yeeres, many notable men doe labour in this thing, that the brethren may understand the trueth. What remaineth now, but that at length he fetch out his roddes and chastise those whom he hath rebuked so longe time without fruict. ¶ Be hotte therfore, Straine therefore thy zeale to the utmost. The transla¦tion persisteth in the former metaphore, but the Spirit speaketh now pro∣perly, teaching that the former heate, was nothing else then zeale. For∣sake, saith he, thy lukewarmnes; purge out all the Romish leaven, that thou
mayest hange no longer in the middes betweene the reformed and the Anti-Christian Church: cast away for his sake honours & riches, who for thy sake was most despised & most poore. Let faithfull Pastours be appointed for the severall congregations; let them that have charge & rule be compelled unto deligence, let the chaungers & corrupters of the doctrine be repres∣sed: let the censures be restored to the Pastors over their flocke. And dispu∣te not with Christ, how profitably the Politie used of the enemy may be ioi¦ned with the Gospell. He that reproveth in his people the manners of the East, & would not have his to be shorne after the similitude of the Gen∣tiles, will not easily suffer this society with Antichrist, which our carnall wisdome mindeth. This is the force of this zeale, which unlesse wee shall receive forthwith, wee shall undergoe some sharpe chastisement. ¶ Andrepent; Repente of the iniuries which thou hast done to the bre∣thren, in casting some into prison, in turning others out of their goodes, in depriving many of the power to preach the word, in reproching & tra∣ducing all with the odious name of Anabaptists. Thou knowest that they have no fellowship with them in any of their errours. They that reproove thy superstitions, teach most purely & holily cōcerning the Magistrate: whō they honour no lesse faithfully & reverently, then any other whatsoever. Yf I should say that he were esteemed more holily & religiously of them, then of all other, I should not ly. For they that cleave to God with most firme mindes, are such as observe most his decrees, & in all true obedience yeelde up themselves to him, whō they acknowledg to be ordained of God among men in his feare. That was a notable calumnie, wherby both thou hast de∣ceived the Prince, & also hast procured hatred to thy brethrē. But thou saw¦est that this weapō was most ready at hād, & to thē hurtfull above al other. Repēt, & wash a way thy former offēces with teares, forget thy riches which the more thou lovest, the more payne shalt thou feele. It is forsaken with much adoe where it cleaveth so neare the heart. But Christ is determined, unlesse thou repent betime, to spue thee out of his mouth. 20 Beholde J stand at the doore: A second reason persuading to use the reme¦dy, takē from the readines of Chr. to dwell with thē that shall receave him. which belōgeth to every one of the mēbres: that former respected proper∣ly the Ang. but why doth he say that he stādeth at the doore & knocketh? Why openeth he not the doore & goeth straite in, especially seeing he hath the key of David, wherewith he openeth & no mā shuteth? above in ver. 7. These things are spoken most elegātly & most significātly in respect of the Laodiceā Church & ours: in which Christ stādeth at the doores, an entry in some sorte stopped up against him. The Philad. Chur. in which once flourished Gods ordināce, & in whose Antitype it is force at this day, all the reliques
of Antichrist being thrust forth, hath the doore unlocked & opened: & es∣pecially because of the true use of excōmunication restored, wherby the ga∣tes of heaven are both shut & opened, & also the doores of every ons consci∣ence are opened, that Chr. may passe in without any tarrying. For where good heede is taken to every ons manners, & according to the present oc∣casion men are admonished, reproved, cut of, received againe, & the other things are performed faithfully & diligently, with the regard had of every ons salvation, all doores & barres of the harte are cast downe & removed, & in very truth the gates then lift up their heades, that the King of Glory may enter in. But when as England is lukewarme, because of the contagion of the Ro∣mish government (as once Laodicea for some such like mixture) & hath not any administration of the censures, graunted unto lawfull Pastors, as Christ hath appointed: as often as the word is preached, Christ standeth knoc∣king as it were at the doores shut, to whom no other way is open into mens hart, thē by the worde: whose power wee read to have bin great once, whē in one sermon three thousand were converted, Act. 2.41. Neither is it at this day of it selfe lesse mighty: yet there is a diverse raison of a Church to be gathe∣red, & one gatthered. God sheweth himselfe extraordinarily bountifull in inviting his people, which after he hath gathered togither, he will have them to grow by the way appointed. As touching the fruit of the Gospell therefore, the people receaveth no lesse losse of so excellent an ordināce, thē the Angell doth acknowledge himselfe maimed & lame, being spoiled of his lawfull power. This key is wanting to our Church, & therefore it is noe mervayle if Christ be hindred that he cannot enter in readily, seeing the doo¦res are shutte. But are wee thē destitute of every good thing? in no wise, but wee enioy still a double good thing wholsome to the elect: the first of which is the going in of Chr. unto those that doe open to him. The 2 is their most sweete setting downe with Christ. That is the most sweete solace of recei∣ving Christ, which the Saints perceive, as often as at the word preached they feele their harts to be opened by faith, by the worke of the Spirit. For then he entreth in & suppeth with us, in imperting himselfe most beningly and sweetly: even as he bad Zacheus desiring to see him & clyming up on a wil∣de figge tree, to come downe & to make ready for him entertainment at his house. Luke 19.5. And he suppeth not going awaye scotfree, who doth give them that thus embrace him, that they be made the sonnes of God, Ioh. 1.12. He againe, entertaineth us, that wee maye suppe togither with him, as often as with pure mindes wee come to the Sacrament of the Supper, wher∣in he feedeth us with his owne flesh and blood most sumptuous delicious dainties, above all that can be spoken or thought.
In which sense it is spoken in Luke chap. 13.29. Then they shall come from the East and from the West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit downe in the kingdome of God, that is, men shall assemble togither to the Gospell from all quarters: shall embrace the doctrine of the kingdome, and shall be partakers of Chr. truely, whose pledges they shall take, bread & wine, sit∣ting downe at his table in celebrating his sacred supper. For he speaketh of the calling of the Gentiles, whose faith and assenting to the whole truth, he signifyeth by one sacramentall action. These guests now Christ would call, when in the meane tyme the Iewes, of whom he speaketh in the para∣ble, did abhorre and despise the way of salvation, as wee see it hath come to passe now for the space of many ages. Wherto pertaineth that which in the same place the Iewes excluded doe alleadge, requiring an entry for thē∣selves because of their former familiarity in eating & drinking in his sight; ver. 26. as though they should say, O Lord, wee communicating at thy table, have feasted merrily with thee, in eating of thy sacrifices, wilt thou locke the doore nowe against us? For in this respect the meate of the sacri∣fices was the same thinge to the Iewes, that the bread and wine is to us. Neither are these thinges notwithstanding so to be taken, as though the elect were limited within the boundes of this life; but because the supper which is made on earth, is a pledge of the eternall feast in the heavens. These thinges therfore proove, that a double and great good thing doe a∣byde in the English Church, that is to say, the preaching of the word and the lawfull administration of the sacraments. In both which Christ bestoweth him selfe upon hispeople, keeping a mutuall feast with them, he first being re∣ceived of us by hearing, secondly entertaining us againe with the supper-of his body. O wee therefore most impure as often as wee fly from and forsake hearing of the word, for wee refuse Christ to be our guest: O wic∣ked despisers that wee are, as often as wee withdrawe our selves from re∣ceaving the sacrament with our brethren. For wee despise Christ bidding us to supper. But these thinges are added for the singular confort of the godly. For who would not quake and thinke of flying very quickly from this Church, when they should heare that the condition of the Ministers is hated of Christ, whom not repenting he will vomit out of his mouth shortly, unlesse by the words of Christ himselfe they were assured of their communicating with him? Praise be to thee therfore most meecke Lambe, who finding the dore shutte against thee, dost not departe quickly, being moved with anger and fury, and deprive us of all meanes of salvation, but leavest yet an abondance of thy selfe to all that doe open to thee knocking by the word, and despise not thy most sweete inviting by the Sacrements.
Therefore wicked and blaspehmous is their errour who doe fall away so from this Church, aa if Christ were banished wholy from hence, and that there could be no hope of salvation for them that tarry there. Let them minde here Christ feasting with his people. Will they be ashamed to sit downe there, where they see Christ not be ashamed? Are they holier & pu∣rer then hee? But why doe they not convince themselves, by their owne ex¦perience? They cannot deny, but that they beleeved in Christ before they made a separation from us: whence came this faith? Cam it not from our preaching in our Church? Can any then preach except he be sent? Rom. 10 13. &c. Why then doe they so perversly refuse, for some blemish in the outward calling, that worde, whose divine force they feele in their harts? Althoug the fruict it selfe doth noe more free from blame our cor¦ruptions, then a true childe, adultery. And therefore, neither may wee ey∣ther take pleasure in them, nor they forsake and fall away from us for some blemishes; Wherefore returne to the unity of the Church, which hath be∣gate and nourished you. Yf you fly from this Christ, who suppeth with is elect in our assemblyes, and welcometh them againe, yee shall finde him no were. In the meane time let us also minde how great evill wee call for upon our selves, who by holding hard our superstitions, doe throwe our brethren into so great danger. Certenly if that hath any weight, which the truth himselfe once confirmed, it were better for such men, that a milstone being hanged about their necks, they were drowned in to bottome of the sea, Mat. 18 6. I wish health of minde to both. But more over this place is to be deli∣vered from the fraude of the Papists, who will have it to be in the power of men to open to Christ knocking. Whether, saith Bellarmine, doth he not know, that they cannot open? Should he not be a foole, who would knocke at the doore of his niggbour, if he knewe certēly that none were within, who could opē? in his first book of grace and free will, chap. 11. I answere, he should not without cause be a foole, if his onely end of knocking were, that he mitght enter in: But Christ knocketh at the doore of the reprobates, whom he knoweth nei∣ther to be willing, nor able to open, not that he may enter in, but partly that he may upbride thē with their impotency gotten by their owne fault: partly that he may encrease their condemnation. For so speaketh the E∣vangelist expressely, Therfore they could not beleeve Iohn. 12.34. Why then u∣seth he wordes to them, who have not ability to beleeve? Christ himselfe sheweth: If I had not come, saith he, and spoken unto them, they should not have had sinne, but now they have no cloke for their sinne, Ioh. 15.22. Therefore he spake unto them, that for the contempt and hatred of his onely begotten sonne, their condemnation migh be the greater. Such are the powers of
the naturall man, as is the love of the trueth in the Papists, who seeing it, refuse it wickedly. 21 To him that overcometh J will give to sit, word for word in the Greeke is, He that overcometh I will give him, in stead of I will give to the overcomer; by the nominative case absolute, as was observed before chap. 2.26. This third reason is taken from the reward of being a companion and par∣taker of his throne: Not because the glory of every one of the children shalbe equall to the honour of the Man Christ: but because the glory & ma∣iesty of the head, shall redounde to every one of the membres. Therefore the thrones are not peculiar to the twelve Apostles of which see Mat. 19.28. but common to all the elect. Althoug in a certen peculiar manner they are attributed in the same place to the Apostles, as it may be wee will shewe in an other place. And wee have sayd often that the rewards are fitted unto the times, and to contayne a Prophesy, which is here also to be respected. Christ therfore mentioneth the throne which he obtayned, after his sacri∣fice finished on the crosse: shewing that the like thinges are to be endured also of his, afterward they shalbe partakers of his throne. Therefore by this making mention of it, he lesseneth the affliction, and so the consola∣tion of it he setteth himselfe for an example, as though he should bidde us looke upon him, and not to be overcome of any troubles, when wee see that he ascended into his throne of supreme dignity by this way. And wee knowe how much this contending for reformation hath cost many & ex∣cellent men, whose sufferings shall not be forgotten, although they be not recited of mee. Onely let them confort their faintnes of heart with the expectation of his throne. What thoug they be trode under foote, while they shall see others to flourish with the dignity of Peeres of the Real∣me? Christ hath prepared for them a throne with himselfe. Let noe man regarde an earthly chayre: as hitherto they have confirmed abundātly, that they are farre of from such desire, whatsoever ambitious men prate other∣wise, who doe coniecture of other by themselves. 22 Let him that hath an eare heare: Nowe therefore thou whosoever hast felt Christ to be thy guest, & hast tasted agayne of the daintyes of his table, left up thyne eates & attēd to the thing which the Spirit saith to the Chur∣ches. Let man goe, & rest not in him, but regarde the conveniency of all things from the beginning to the end. And complaine not of the newnes & strangenes, as though thou wouldest appoint Christ, to whom & when he should reveale his secrets. Wee know that somethings have bin sealed up unto the determined time. But if it be needfull, that thou confesse it to be a divine truth, let us all endevoure earnestly, Princes, Peeres, Angels
people, that wee may turne away the evill that hangeth over our heades. What an horrible thing is it to be vomited out of the mouth of Christ with loathing and abhorring? The land vomited our once the Chananites, and they were destroyed utterly. Shall their punishement be lighter, whom not the land, but Christ himselfe shall spue out? Therefore let us use the reme∣dy seriously. Wee have neede of zeale, wherby wee may attayne a full re∣formation: Wee hang yet betweene Heaven and Hell: The contagious va∣pour of the Romish marsh doth molest and annoy us; our sylver hitherto is foule with drosse: our wine is mixt with water: Christ will suffer no lon∣ger such Angels that are in the middle? What if this myne admonition be the last token and signe to thee of bewarring? Let us therfore give eare, & not whet our teeth against the stone that is hurled: But let us quake for feare of the hande that threwe it. Thou o Christ, who tookest lingring Lot by the hande to pull him out of the city, open our hearts who are slow and prolonge the tyme, that wee may obey thy warnings and exhortatiōs. Chap. 4 AFTER I saw, and behold, a doore was opened in heaven: and the first voice which I heard, as it were of a trumpet talking with mee, said, come up hither, and I will shewe thee what things must be done hereafter. 2 Then straight way J was ravished in spirit: and loe a throne was set in heaven: & one sate upon the throne. 3 And he that sate was to looke on like a Iasper and a Sardin stone; and round a∣bout the throne was a rayne bowe in sight like unto an Emerald. 4 And round about the Throne, were foure and twenty seates, and upon the seates I sawe foure and twenty Elders sitting, clothed with white rayment: and ha∣ving crownes of golde upon their heads. 5 And there proceeded from that Throne lightnings, and thunders, & voy∣ces: and seaven lampes of fyre burning before the Throne, which are the seaven spi∣rits of God. 6 There was also before the THRONE a Sea of glasse, like to Chrystall, and in the middes of the Throne, and which compassed the Throne, foure beasts full of eyes before and behinde.
7 And the first beast was like unto a Lyon, and the second beast like unto a Calfe, and the third beast having a face like a Man, and the fourth beaste like a flying Ea∣gle. 8 And the foure beasts every one of them by themselves, had six winges rounde about, and within were full of eyes, saying day and night without ceasing, Holy, Holy, Holy LORD GOD that almighty one, which was, and which is, and which is to come. 9 And when those beasts shall give glory, and honour, and thankesgiving to him that sitteth upon te throne, to him, I say, that liveth for ever and ever. 10 The foure and twenty Elders shall fall downe before him thaat sitteth upon the throne, and shall worship him that liveth for ever, and shall cast their crownes before the throne, saying. 11 Worthy art thou o Lord, to receave glory, and honour, and strenght; because thou hast created all things, end by thy will they are and have bin created. Analysis. HITHERTO hath ben the Prophesy of particular Churches: that of the whole Church followeth; which propoundeth first the matter summarily in this chapter: afterward specially in the rest of the chapters. This conteineth a new calling of Iohn, consisting in the thing seen, a doore open in heaven, in the first voice heard of a trumpet, ver. 1, and lastly in the effect, wherby he was in the Spirit forthwith, in the beginning of the second verse: and also the universall type of the future Church, which is described in the rest of the whole chapter. Whose Prince as it were the centre, is most glorious by the Throne, most delectable in sight, shining with heavenly brightnes rounde about, ver. 2.3. The membres of this centre, as it were the circunference, are the foure and twenty Elders, full of maiesty, reverend in their seates, age, holynes, and crownes of golde, ver. 4. The things accō∣panying these persons, are partly giftes, which God hath bestowed on the holy congregation; partly the worship it selfe, which the congregation of the faithfull doth yeelde unto him. The gifts are first of protection: wherby proceede from the throne lightnings, thunders, and voices, for the punish¦ment of the wicked world, because of their entreprises against the congre∣gation of the saints, ver. 5. Secondly, of sanctification, wherby he presenteth the holy congregation blamesse before him, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, of these the interne are the seaven lampes burning before the throne, ver. 5. The externe and their instrumental causes, are, the Sea of glasse & the Beasts; whose place, number, eyes of the body, the proper countenance of
every one, and adorning of winges, are described in the ver. 6.7.8. After¦ward their office, ver. 8. And the worship that is given to him that sitteth on the throne is thankesgiving, in which the Beasts goe before, as the cap∣taines & standerd-beates of the publike congregation, ver. 9. Afterward, the other body of the Elders followeth, both in adoration, ver. 10. & also in consent to the same glorifying, ver. 11. after that custome, wherby God is worshipped in the christian congregations. Such is the congregation of the Godly before God; and some such might be alwayes, although not evident and visible to the world in equall glory at all times. Scholions. Afterward J saw; Those things being declared which are of some short time, nowe the Spirit, those boundes being enlarged, pursueth with a con∣tinued order, those thinges which should shewe the comon and entyre fa∣ce of things from the time of this writing unto the last ende. The handling of which things wilbe admirable, neither wilbe accomplished and perfor∣med without his ayde alone, which shewed these thinges first to his servant. Trusting therefore to his grace, I will proceed in the worke begun. Vnto the finishing whereof, howsoever other things shalbe wanting, certenly faithfulnes and diligence in searching out to my power, shall not be wan∣ting. These first wordes are perteining to a newe preparation, unto a newe prophesy. For Iohn is noe more conversant on the earth, but is taken up into heaven, where through a doore opened he beholdeth wonderfull changes of things that were to be knowne by noe other way. Therfore the manner of the Prophesy following is divers from the former. That former is straighter, even as also the place where it was seen, a small Iland compas¦sed with the sea: this spred farre and neere passing all measure, even as also the heaven it selfe containing all things within his compasse. Furthermore a certen visible print and signe of thinges to come was there to be seene in those seaven cityes. For the Churches that after were to be inlarged & in∣creased, should be pourtrayed and drawne out by the will of God, accor∣ding to the present image and figure of them, but there was noe token or shew among mortall men of the things to be spoken of in this second pro∣phesy. For the peculiar iudgements, of which there is most speach here, are to be fetched from that secret revelation alone. Vnto the heaven then, where liberty of this vision was given, is added afterward the booke sea∣led with seaven seales: then noe creature sufficient to open the same: nor a∣ny sufficient power of any one, except of the Lambe onely, as wee shall see
in his place. All which things, as they declare the excellency of this Pro∣phecy, so they require our greater attention and earnest bending of our mindes to them. As touching the wordes, the first voice is heard, because there is the same author of both Prophecies: and soundeth like a trumpet, wherby the thinges heard may be made more certen and out of doubte, & might be perceived the better of Iohn, as hath ben observed at chap. 1.10. It biddeth to come up hither, where onely the things might be seene, of which there was noe tracke or path made in the earth. And he would not that he should see a farre of as through the doore, by which meanes he might be deceaved, or not see the thinge playnely enough, but that he should be present and before him, that he might have a certen & undoub∣ted knowledge of the things. But that which followeth is not voyde of doubting, howe he may say, that he will shewe a vision of things which must be done after these. For whether should the following Prophesy not take her beginning, before that former of the seaven Churches should at∣tayne his ende? But in them wee see is intreated of thinges of our time: or if wee respect the bare types, many thinges to come were fore shewed; moreover in those thinges that followe it shall noe lesse appeare that Iohn- doth tell of things agreeing with their owne times: so that the wordes cā∣not be so understood by any meanes. Wherfore neither is that distributi¦on firme, wherein the whole Prophecy is distinguished into thinges pre∣sent and future. The Spirit followeth not such distribution, but mixeth many future thinges with present as they are counted. Wherfore these wordes, after these thinges, are not refferred, in respect of their begin∣ning, to the end of the former prophecy, but unto the present age of Iohn, yea unto that very moment, wherin the Spirit revealed these thinges: from whence a newe beginning be in taken, he describeth the continuall course and terme of time of the whole Church, and annexeth those things which could not be understood sufficiently from the former types. Therefore Theod. Beza well translated heta tauta by and adverbe hereafter. But in res∣pect of the end, not without cause this second Prophecy, is counted after the former, as being of a farre longer time, reaching unto the last cōming of Christ, wheras that former is termined with farre narrower boundes. Frō these things therfore there are, as wee take it, two things chiefly to be observed: First, that from this place those things onely are handled, which doe follow the tyme of the revelation made. For so he speaketh playnely, And J will shew thee the thinges, that must be done hereafter. Which being mar∣ked of certen Interpreters, I mervayle was not observed in their expositi∣ons: But the times through the whole treatise to be confounded so by a
whirlewinde, that all thinges were wrapped in most thicke darcknes. Wee being taught by their exemple, wee will borowe light from hence for the exposition following. The second, that this Prophesy belongeth to the whole Church, which is neither tyed to any particular Churches, nor is en¦ded with any other boundes, then the whole frame of the world. The Spi∣rit set in the first place, that particular Prophesy, that he might relate co∣mon thinges commonly, without interrupting of the narration. 2 Therfore I was suddenly ravished in the Spirit: Here is the same au∣thority altogither, which was before, as well from the person calling, as from the persone called. For it is the same holy inspiration of God, which he mentioned in the first chapter verse 10. But what neede was there of a newe inspiration? Had the former ceased, that in a certen distance of time it might be kindled a fresh? Without doubt the instinction was continu∣all without intermission: but he saith that it was suddenly in the Spirit, be∣cause the Spirit did frame him to receave newe visions, unto which he per∣ceived himselfe prepared forthwith. The whole Revelation seemeth to have ben finished in that one Lords day, chap, 1.10. and therefore that there fell out noe intermission after that it began once to be exhibited. ¶ And beholde a Throne was placed in heaven: Such was the preparation by a newe calling: now he cometh to the cōmon type of the holy Church. The description of which was necessary before he should enter into the o∣ther Prophesy. For when as her manifolde dangers and notable alteratiōs were to be rehearsed, her flight, returne, false friends, open enemys, coū∣terfait Sosiae, who should vaunt themselves under the shewe of her, and many other things of that sorte were to be declared, with which shee should contende and have to doe, it was needfull, that first a certen forme and image of her should be pourtrayed, which is the principall point of the treatise following, lest peradventure in so great sturres and troubles, wee should suppose her to have ben wholy extinguished and abolished, or at least wise her face being not knowne, wee should be the more hindred from acknowledging of her. Werfore wee shall finde this Type to be common to all ages, as of which there is mention made in the fourteene chapter of this booke and thirde verse. Where the companions and followers of the Lambe sing a newe songe before the foure Beasts and the Elders. And againe nearer to the ending of the Prophesy, the foure and twenty Elders and the foure Beasts fall downe and worship God, as may be seene in the nineteene chapter of this booke and in the fourth verse.
So in other places, as speach is made of the true Church, so farre as any thing is to be done in the publike assembly, shee is noted alwayes after the manner of this type. For wee may not thinke that any congregation on earth is to be found of so absolute purity and sounde perfection, as is here described, but that all the holy assemblyes of the elect, are counted such in Christ, before God the Father, although much terrene dregges be sprinc∣keld upon them, according to that, The Church to be sanctifyed by Christ, & to be purged by the washing of water through the word, made also glorious, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but to be holy and without blame, Ephes. 5.26.27. An exemple of which description wee have here set before our eyes. And for that purpose besides, that wee should conforme all our assemblyes un∣to this rule: even as Moses was commaunded to make the frame of the Taber∣nacle, and all his implements, altogither as was shewed to him in the mount, Exod. 25.9. But the type of our Church is shewed in the very heavens, according to the more plentifull glory, wherewith the Gospell shyneth above the Lawe: But howe much the more diligently all things are to be considered Seeing therfore wee knowe the drift of the vision, let us search out the ex∣position of the severall things. First, the head it selfe of the Church is descri∣bed, such as the true members doe alwayes confesse and worshippe; both by his sitting in a Throne in this verse, and also by the similitude following. The sitting declareth the maiesty and glory of the most high God, and noe lesse his steddy and stable dwelling among the Saints, in whose assembly he hath placed his throne of dignity, to goe to noe other place. And be∣cause there is but one throne and one that sitteth on it, wee knowe that God is one in nature, power, maiesty, glory, and that there is not any o∣ther beside, who ruleth in the middes of the saints. Therfore the holy Church, worshippeth and prayseth with all honour and reverence the one onely supreme Iehovah. 3 And he that sate, was to looke on like: Aretas, the Complutent edition, and the Kings Bible doe not reade these first wordes, and he that sate was but they adde by and by to the ende of the former verse, these following wordes, like in sight; Our bookes and the comon latine translation doe di∣stinguish more playnly the sitting and the similitude; which thing in descri∣bing the true God, seemeth that it ought not to be omitted. This verse sheweth a little more fully of what sorte this one God is; of whom yet it set¦teth forth noe image but onely a certen kinde of colour, after those aun∣cient representations made once to the olde people. You saw, sayth Moses, noe similitude in the day that Iehovah spake to you in Horeb, out of the middes of the fyre, Deut. 4.15. For the same is that one true God reigning in the Chri∣stian
assemblyes, whom from the beginning the primitive Church worship¦ped. And seeing that in the infancy of the Church he shewed noe image of himselfe, much lesse is any similitude to be expected in this up growen and ripe age. This is a more familiar & fuller manifestation, seeing beside one and the same essence, which the common glory noteth, the incomprehen∣sible distinction of the three persons, is in some sorte revealed by the three pretious stones, the Iasper, Sardin, and Emerald. For it pleaseth the Spirit to use the delightfull Iewels to disclose these mysteryes, because the grace and beauty of these doth most of all excell in this world belowe, whereupon they may be most fitte images of that pleasantnes, which exceedeth all crea¦ted understanding; especially seeing the representation is rather of the ver∣tue then of any forme. The first sight of the Iasper, resembleth the person of the Father: this Iewell is greene, and not without cause called the mother of Jewels, the kindes of it are so many, and the honour so auncient. And what more fitly among pearles could shadowe out the Father, who is the first in order, alwayes of a flourishing eternity, & of whom the other per∣sons have their beginning and originall? The second sight is of the Sardin, wherby the Sonne is represented. This Iewel is redde of a fleshly colour, frō whēce also it is called a Carneole, fitly in deede being in his stead, who tooke upon him flesh for our sake, and was made a man, like unto us. The third sight is of a rainebowe, of the colour of an Emerald, wherby the H. Ghost is noted. He compasseth the Throne round aboute, as in the booke of wis∣dome chap. 9.4. compassing the whole circuit of the divine maiesty with an unutterable sweetnes. For the Emerald doth shewe so acceptable, plea¦sant, and shining greenes, that the eyes beholde nothing more gladly. Yet this Raynebowe is not like that which is comonly so called. For this is not over against the Throne, but about the Throne: neither is it an halfe circle, but whole and full on every side. For it is rounde about the throne: finally it is not of three colours, as the true Rainebowe, but of one onely and simple colour of the Emerald. Such therfore is that God, one in nature, three in persons, the head and centre of the Church; whome alone the faithfull are in love with, and doe worship, taking pleasure most sweetly with all their hartes in his incomprehensible sweetnes. ¶ And rounde aboute the Throne: So is the Head, nowe he adioyneth the body, like the circumference of this centre, as wee have sayd. Which is des¦cribed by the place, the number of members, age, apparell and crownes. The place is double, common, about the hyghest throne, and proper, the peculiar thro∣ne of every one. The comon, rounde about the throne, is before, behinde, at the right hand and at the left, that it may parte the Raine bowe (which
compassed also the Throne, but with a contrary situation, above, beneath, and on both sides) at the right corners. Although the Rainebowe seemeth not so much to be divided or touched, as to be included with this compas∣sing of the Elders: which neverthelesse it should cut in the middle, as it were, if it were extended unto a full compasse. Vnlesse peradventure the highest throne be set in the same playne place, in which were the thrones of the Elders; for then the Rainebowe shall not be in a contrary seate or si¦tuation, but shallbe compassed onely with a longer circuite, as the circum¦ferences nigher the centre are wont to be contained in those that are fur∣ther of. This common seate is attributed to them from the manner of the saints, who are called his compassers, as vowe and performe to Jehovah your God, yee that stand round about him, Psal. 76.12. And as Christ promiseth, that he will be in the middest of them that shalbe gathered togither in his name. Mat. 18.20. So in olde time, the Tabernacle was set in the middes of the Jewes cam∣ping, Numb. 2. And this is for the confort of the Godly, whom all, God receiveth without respect of persons, being alike nigh to all that call upon him: least peradventure any should complaine, that he is dealt with all uniustly, as who being set in a latter place, hath noe accesse unto God, but by messen∣gers and mediatours. The proper place is every ons Throne. For they sit upon Thrones. Wherby is signifyed that all are of a Kingly dignity; of which an other marke is added in the ende of the verse, namely the Crownes. This honour the saints enioy by Christ, who hath made us Kings and Priests to God and his father, chap. 1.6. Neither doth he adorne with this benefite some fewe excellent faithfull ons a part, but receaveth all the elect into the fellowship of the same honour. Every one knoweth, howe this certen num¦ber of foure and twenty thrones, and so many Elders, tormenteth the Inter∣preters. Some referre it to the twelve Patriarches, or the twelve Prophetes, & so many Apostles. But the thing as it seemeth is farre from the trueth. For he speaketh of future congregations, not of those that were past, as before ver. 1. Then of such, whose office is performed on earth, not in heavē pro∣perly so called: as afterward wee shall see, ch. 14.3. & 15.7. That I may not say that they swerve wholy from the scope of this vision. Others apply it o∣ther way: but it were to longe to recken, much more to confute all opini∣ons. It shalbe sufficient to propound, that which seemeth most likely to mee, & to put it to the iudgemēt of the godly. The Spirit alludeth to that distribution of the holy offices & servants of the King, ordayned by David from God into 24 orders, 1 Chr. ch. 24. &c. For first the chiefe Priests were distributed into 24 orders. After the same māner, the chiefe Levites that served the Priests in the same ch. ver. 31. So the holy Musiciās, ch. 25. & the
Doore keepers, ch. 26. Of those that served the King 24 thousandes in their severall distributiōs, ch. 27. Therfore seeing the whole congregation of the children of Israell, whether wee respect the tribe of Levi, or the rest of the people accoūted after a sorte for the Kings lot, whose affayres they did ad∣minister, was distinguished into 24 orders: not without cause those Elders which are both Priests & Kings, & are in steade of all the faithfull serving Christ, are rekoned in so many orders & by the same number. And togither also is shewed by this number of 24, how much larger is the Church of the Gētiles, thē was that of the Iewes. This was cōtayned in 12 Patriarches, as the chiefe heads: that greater by halfe: that is many degrees, which a certē measure signifyeth indefinitly, exceeding so in multitude of cityzens, as al∣so in clearnes of the things knowne. Whence the neerer they came to the times of Christ, so much were all things in former time the clearer & grea∣ter. How cleare made David the service of the Tabernacle, the offices be∣ing described, their place assigned to every one. But the Temple of Salo∣mon surpassed all the former glory; all things were made with larger dimē¦sions, accordind to the increase of the light of the Sunne approching nee∣rer. whē Christ at lēgth was exhibited, the Sunne attained to his height, by whose brightnes all the former light vanished away. So thē is the number: as touching the age all are Elders, not because of their feeble strength & wa¦sted through old age, but for their gravity worthy of reverence, & their ma¦ture iudgements, by which they embrace the truth: then also because they have a certen present possession of their dignity, such as agreeth to perfect men, & of a cōfirmed & strengthened age. Infants, although they be wor∣thy honour through the right of inheritance, because of future hope, yet they want the present fruition of things. And in the whole time in deede of the Lawe, the heire was an infant, and differed nothing from a servant, brought into bondage under the elements of the world, as under tutours & governours: but whē the full time came, we ar no lōger under a schoole maister, but ēioy the liberty of mē, so as all the faithfull now ar called Elders most sigificātly, Gal. 3.25. & 4.1.2. &c. White raimēt is the marke of the Priest hood, Ex. 28.40. which office the beleevers in Christ doe execute, giving up their bodyes a living sacrifice, holy & acceptable to God, that their reasonable service of God, Rom. 12.1. The golden crownes of the head, manifest the solēne maiesty of a kingdome. For Kinges doe not alwayes beare their crownes, but in so∣lēne assemblyes & where they will shew plainely their glory according to the presēt occasiō. But there remaineth still to these the solēne honour of royall maiesty, whose crownes ar never put off, except whē they give ho∣nour to the supreme King: whē their bare heades ar more honourable then they thēselves crowned with a Diademe.
The Complutent edition and the Kings Bible doe not reade, and they had, nor Aretas: yf they are to be added, the usuall defect of the article is to be supplyed in this sorte, who also had. 5 And out of the Throne proceeded: Hitherto the body. The giftes that doe accompany it, are first of Protection, for out of the throne come lightnings, and thunders and voices: because for the Churches sake God in fearfull man∣ners doth punish the wicked; who are plagued for the contempt, tyranny, and iniuryes which they have don to his singularly beloved spouse: and at lenght they doe feele the delaying of the vengeance recompensed aboun∣dantly with the sharpenes thereof. The punishement of the persecutours are witnesses, whose rage and fury God hath alwayes punished in this sort by his speciall providence. Otherwise howe could the truth have bin spred and extended even unto these times, in so deadly hatred of the world? But he that setteth on the throne doe not permitte any to oppresse his saincts without punishement, he reproveth also Kings for their sakes, saying, touch not myne annointed, and doe my Prophets noe harme, Psalm. 105.14.15. For the Lord shall roare out of Zion, and his voyce out of Ierusalem, Amos 1.2. Why thē is not the world wise at last, when it seeth that this is the fountaine of all evills, because it doth entreate so contemptuously and unworthyly the Church? And the lightnings and terrible thunders, doe signify punishments, and not to be avoided by any meanes, as which doe fall violently upō men from heaven. But to what ende are voyces added? Surely voices doe note out often times the craking of thunders, as Exod. 19.16. And there were voices, and lightnings, and a thicke cloude upon the mount, and the voyce of a trum∣pet very lowde: So in chap. 20.18. And all the people did perceive the voyces and the voice of a trumpet. But seeing in this place there is expresse mention of thunders, the voices are referred to some other thinge, namely to the sounde of the trumpet. For he doth allude unto that fearfull sound of the trumpet in giving of the lawe, wherby the Israelites were summoned to ap∣peare at the Tribunall seat and iudgement. The sounde whereof, when it continued and waxed very stronge, Moses sayd, I doe feare and quake, Exod. 19.19. Heb. 12.21. For the expectation of iudgement did more abash and trouble their minde, then the present horrour of some terrible specta∣cle: the feare of which, the minde can susteine in some sorte, unlesse it be troubled with the conscience of sinne: when it shallbe cast downe with the feeling of this, it quaketh at every shewe of evill, as if torments were prepa¦red and by and by to be undergone. The voices then here are some strange things betokening some evill to come, or stinges of conscience, with which the mindes are allwayes tormented, with expectation of some more grie∣vous
thing to come. This feare shalbe as a torture to the wicked, tearing and vexing with greater torment of minde, then any present, though grie∣vous calamity. Such then are the weapons which are layd up in this armo¦ry: which in deede are drawne out and brought forth in a readines for ta∣king of vengeance, even as the use either of the whole Church, or the ne∣cessity of any of the saints privatly doth require. Wherfore there is no cau¦fe why they should feare the wicked world, for whose defense so grievous punishments are prepared. ¶ And seaven lampes of fyre: After the grace of protection, are declared the giftes of sanctification: of which the inward are signifyed by the seaven burning lampes, after the account of the seaven spirits which are before the thro∣ne, chap. 1.4. For by the flame of these, those lampes doe burne, with that difference onely, wherby the river differreth from the fountayne. The which thinge the lampes doe signify, vessels of a certen and limitted mea∣sure, whereas the Spirit himselfe is unmeasurable, and cannot be included in any straight vessels. For which cause he was before most free, not limi∣ted by any addition of any measurable quantity, where mention was made of him as of the third person, of equall glory and maiesty with the Father and the Sonne, chap. 1.4. And these lampes are called the seven spirits of God, both because they are gifts that flowe from the Spirit, and also there is a most straite ioyning togither of the effect with his cause. For they be most sweete fruites which the Spirit created in the hearts of the saincts, in giving them faith, hope, charity, peace, ioye, praye, and the other things with which the elect are sanctifyed. They are likened to lampes of fyre, accor¦ding to the custome of the lightes in the Temple, which were to be lighted every day of Aaron and his sonnes, Exod. 27.20. For the Spirit will have them to be kindled in the hartes of the elect, by the labour of the Mini∣sters, through the worde and sacraments, and not to be expected contra∣ry to the order delivered to us of himselfe. There is the number of seaven, because of the manifold varietie of giftes, wherewith he adorneth the faith∣full: as every where that number is used to note an infinite number. Last of all these giftes are compared to fyre (for the lampes are of fyre, & burning before the throne) because they inlighten the minde, & burne up the stub∣ble of the inbread corruption, and kindle a desyre of all godlines, which Iohn calleth the Babptisme of fyre, Mat. 3.11. And howe great confort ari∣seth from thence, that the name of the Spirit himselfe is attributed to those giftes? Which are, saith he, the seaven Spirits of God: From which the faith∣full may understand, that that force which they feele in their hearts raysed up of God, is a most sure pledge of God dwelling in them. Such then are
the inward giftes, of which the Church shall never be destitute: but some congregation of the Godly shalbe remayning alwayes, in which those sea∣ven lampes shall burne. 6 There was also before the Throne a Sea of glasse: The first outward gift which serveth for those inward, as the instrumentall cause, is the Sea of glasse: which seemeth to be some very great vessell and huge lake after the likenes once of the Sea in the Temple, of which 1 King. 7 23. Likewise he made a molten Sea. This Sea is to be understood of such a vessell. For howe can that which is before the Throne compassed with a company of Elders standing rounde aboute, be spred abroad on every side like the sea properly so called? The circuite in deede of the Elders may extende so farre as the compasse of the earth, yet it behoveth us to remember that the thinge was shewed to Iohn in a type, that wee should not thinke of any such unmeasurable space. Both the name and the largenesse of the vessell doe shewe the fulnes of all giftes, which the Church doth drawe from Christ unto her salvation, who received the Spirit without measure, and from whose infinite riches it is bestowed upō us, Iohn chap. first, ver 16. For to what ende otherwise was there so bigge a vessell, at which Aaron and his sonnes should wash their handes and their feete? For cleansing whereof, some small pitcher or cruse would had sufficed? And in deede this Sea sheweth very fitly a certen resemblance of the whole out∣ward worship, which is to be performed to God. The doctrine often time is compared unto waters: Hoe, saith Isaiah, whosoever thirsteth, come yee to those waters: For the carrying away of which, he commendeth no other buckets to be brought, then the eares: Jnclyne your eare, saith he, chap. 55.1.3. From whence the Ministers are called waterers, 1 Cor. 3.6, Baptisme also is signifyed by the Sea, through which the Fathers passed, and were all baptised unto Moses, in the cloude, and in the Sea, 1 Cor. 10.1.2. Furthermore the water noteth the spirituall drinke of the holy Supper: And all, sayth he, dranke the same spirituall drinke, ver. 4. By the same also prayers are signify¦ed, as the Israelites being gathered togither to Mizpa drew water and powred it out before the Lord, to wit, rivers of teares, with earnest repentance wrunge frō them, 1 Sam. chap. 7. ver. 5. And noe lesse is it a signe of thankesgiving, as in the Revelation, they that got the victory over the Beast, stood at the glassy Sea, having the Harpes of God, wherewith they sunge his prayses, chap. 15.2. There∣fore this Sea sheweth by right the whole worship: which in respect of the lā¦pes is like a Sea of oyle, wherewith their heavēly fyre is nourrished cōtinual∣ly. But what māner of one this Sea is, wee must see frō the Epithets; the first of which, he sayth that to be glassy. How is this? Is it in respect of the co∣lour? There is a glassy colour & agreable to the Sea: Wherupon Virgille des∣cribing
the Fairies, attributeth the same to the Godesses of the Sea: The Nym∣phes did spinne the fleeces of woll of Miletus, dyed with a deepe colour of glasse, Geor. 4, And againe a little after, —and all in their glassy seates, were astonished: glassy not in respect of the matter, but of the colour & clearnes. So Ovid. There is a cleare river more bright then glasse, a sacred fountaine, Epist. Sapph. But glassy in this place is even, as of glasse, shewing rather a shining matter that one may see through, then a colour without matter: wherto serveth the other Epithet, like unto Chrystall. Glassy, to wit for a difference from the legall Sea. Which being made of brasse, a thick & darke matter, could not be seen through of any sight, 1 King. 7, 23. The face of God did shine upon his, but under those rites & ceremonyes somewhat darkly: which thing also Moses declared, putting a vayle over his face, that the children of Jsraell should not looke into the ende of that which was to be abolished, 2 Cor. 3.13. But contrary∣wise all wee beholde with uncovered face, the glory of the Lord as in a glasse, In the same place ver. 18. Therefore their Sea is of Brasse, and ours of Glasse, and great is the dignity of the Christian Church, in comparison of that under the Lawe, considering that our worship doth shew us the most pleasant fa¦ce of God, as it were through a most cleare glasse, how amiable are thy Taber¦nacles, cryed the Psalmist in that darknes, Psal. 80.1. But how admirable ought the most sweete countenance of Christ to be unto us, whom wee with Peter and those two disciples, doe see shyning as the Sunne, & his garments made white as the light, Mat. 17.1.2. O wee blessed men, if wee could have all∣wayes our eyes fixed on this glasse. There is a certen incomprehensible ma¦iesty of God to be seen in that very creature, but this knowledge is com∣mon to the reprobate, there is noe where any meanes to enioy a saving sight, unlesse by this glassy Sea; God hath replenished it with most pure waters, both of knowing and worshipping him truly: of both which he hath layed up such aboundant plenty in this sea, that there is no neede to fetch any thing from any other ditches. And this ought to be the scope of all worship, that it may shewe us GODS face: By howe much the more eyther the doctrine or the cere∣monyes doe hurt or stop up our eyes in this matter, by so much the more doe both of them swerve from the right. The other Epithete is Like unto Chrystall: What neede is there of this seconde? In deede that he may teach, that that Glasse is not onely bright, but even also most purely bright, which noe other mixed colour doth in noe sorte darken. For Chrystall is, as it were, voyde and free of any co∣lour, approaching the neerest to the purity of the ayre, which the eyes doe pearse through almost as easily.
Therefore noe humane devise and invention is powred into this Sea; but it is pure from all filth added to it, and also perfite and absolute without any thing detracted from it. As it is taught in Deut, 4.2. Such is the worship of the Saints in Christ, in whom God the Father beholding his elect faith∣full, findeth noe thing in them coloured, nothing maymed and imperfect, nothing filthy and defiled. All worship ought to levell hereto, and be fra∣med after this patterne. Others doe interprete these things otherwise: some doe referre this Sea to the iudgements of God; but enough was fore shewed touching them, in the thunders and lightnings, Others thinke that it signifyeth a multitude of men living on the earth. But if this multitude be holy, it was noted before in the foure and twenty Elders. But if it be wicked what doth it before the throne? or howe may the purity of Chrystall agree unto it? There is noe need that I should confute other mens interpretati∣ons in many wordes. The very order of the thinges doth shewe easily, what cometh nighest to the trueth, This onely I will say, which is common to this whole booke, in every allegoricall interpretation, before all thinges the purpose of the allegory it selfe is to be regarded, without which every interpretation shalbe doubtfull and uncerten, and of noe weight: but if wee shall knowe that well, and shall adde to it prudently the other circum¦stances, wee may drawe noe lesse constant sense from an allegory, then frō any other playne place. ¶ And in the middest of the throne, and which compassed the throne foure Beasts: The second outward gift are Beasts: whose qualityes come first to be con∣sidered, which respect the preparation to their office, if in a fewe wordes wee shall first see of what sortes the beasts are. Which is heard to be knowē from the iudgement of the Interpreters, they are in so manyfold differen∣ce, wee will propounde in a word, as wee have begun and intended, that which seemeth to be most neerly ioyned with the trueth. They are servāts and Ministers of God, all whose labour is bestowed in preaching the word and in looking to the other things which belonge to the Ecclesiasticall po¦licy. For first, it is manifest that they are men: for so they sing together with the Elders, thou hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, chap. 5.9. Second∣ly, seeing there is two sortes of Redeemed: one of the people, another of the Ministers: the very place in which they serve, sheweth that they belonge to this second degree. For they are conversant betweene the hyghest Throne and the Elders set rounde aboute. Therefore they approch neerer unto God, and are as his messengers betweene both. Hereunto is added, that they are leaders of the publike action, as is manifest after at the ninth ver. Lastly, they are represented so in winges, eyes, and their whole shape, that
they may be most furnished, to performe this office. Neither are they any of the excellent men of the age passed, but Ministers to come, to which sorte of thinges this whole Prophecy is applyed, as that of the first verse hath taught, I will shewe thee the things that must be done hereafter. They are cal¦led Beasts because of that lively force of the Spirit, wherby they are quicke∣ned, and that spirituall life, which they effect in others, God working togi¦ther with them. In which respect the like servants of God, full of the Spi∣rit and most nimble to dispatch all sortes of businesses committed to them for to doe, are named Beasts in Ezech. chap. 1. But if they be Ministers, how may I count them among the giftes? The faithfull Ministers are of the chiefe giftes of God as he saith of the Levites; Beholde I have taken your bre∣thren from among the children of Jsraell: they are given you for a gift, for the Lord to administer the service of the Tabernacle of the congregation, Numb. 18.16. &c. And Paul, Let noe man, saith he, reioyce in men, for all things are yours, and Paul, and Apollos, and Cephas, 1 Cor. 3.21. Most clearly to the Ephesians, when he ascended up on high, he lead captivity captive, and gave giftes unto men, some A∣postles, some Evangelists, some Prophets, some Pastors and Teachers, chap. 4.8.11. These thinges being thus established, let us nowe see the propertyes them∣selves. As touching the place, they are betweene the throne, and which did compasse the throne, both in the middes of the throne, and round about the throne. Not in the very middes in respect of the place, where one sate like to a Ias∣per stone, ver. 3. nor because they did hold up the throne, as the Bulles Salo∣mons brasen sea: under which they were put in that manner, that their backe partes lay hidden within, their fore partes stood out abroade, 1 King. 7.25. For when the foure Beasts did fall downe, howe should not the throne fall to∣gither with them? For it is read after, that the foure Beasts did fall downe be∣fore the Lambe, chap. 5.8. But in the middes, hath the same force, as to be be∣tweene, or in some parte: as Abraham is called a Prince of God in the middes of the children of Cheth, Gen. 23.6. that is among, and so every where in other places. Wherfore Theod. Beza hath translated it playnly, betweene the thro∣ne, and which did compasse the throne. Wherby is signifyed, that the Beasts in respect of their office doe come nigher to Gods maiesty, then the Elders, & in some parte to touch that seate, which shyneth with Gods glory, an evi∣dent argument of the administration given to them. There is the number of foure according to the state of the Christian ministery augmented. For as the Christian congregatiō is twice so greate as the Legall: that cōsisting of foure and twenty Elders, this of the twelve Patriarches: so there is a double respect of the Ministers, of foure Beasts, unto the foure and twenty Elders, unto the one onely tribe of Levi, in regard of the twelve Princes of Israell.
In respect of the Elders which sit round about the hyghest throne, they are foure beames of the two diameters, dividing themselves into straight an∣gles, by the which the circumference is conioyned every way, and equally with the middes of the throne. So disposed toward all quarters, by the foure chiefe corners, that as the river of Paradise divided into foure heades, they might be able most cōmodiously to water the whole Church. These qualityes are yet more remote, them of the bodyes & winges are more neer∣ly conioyned: The first of these are Eyes, of which the Beasts are full, before and behinde. The fulnes noteth the notable quicknes of perceaving a thing, and the rich understanding of divine things, wherewith they are endued by the gift of the Spirit: Such kinde of Ministers Christ requireth, as be, the light of the world, Mat. 5.14. and that they goe before the blinde in the right way, least they fall into the pit, Mat. 15.14. Which may be able to teach, 1 Tim. 3.2. That they be able, both to exhorte by wholsome dotrine, and also to convince them that speake against it, yea to stop their mouth, Tit. 1.9.11. For the Priests lyppes ought to preserve knowledge, and the Lawe is to be sought at his mouth: for he is the Angell of the Lord of hostes, Malac. 2.7. Therefore they that wante eyes, eyther altogither, or for the most part, what felowship have they with these Beasts? What communion have the moules with Argus? Let them there∣fore looke to it, who doe set for officers before the Christian people, such as have but one eye, and such as are blinde, what answere they can make to him, who requireth such plenty of eyes in Pastors. Those that have refused knowledg, ar they not refused of the Lord, that they should not execute the Priest office to him? Hos. 4.6. But the eyes both before and behinde, is a kind of knowledge, wherby they knowe both thinges past, and also see things present, and resting onely upon the divine oracles, doe wisely per∣ceive things before hande. The Ministers being altogither like unto a house-holder, which bringeth out of his treasure things both newe and olde, Mat. 13.52. Such kinde of knowledge both the auncient scriptures Moses, the Psalmes, the Prophets, and also the writings of the Evangelists and Apostles, doe minister. Out of these fountaynes may aboundantly be drawne, that the man of God may be furnished with eyes, both behinde and before. God in Christ doe account all eyed Pastors, who according to the talēt receyved, doe instruct faithfully, the people committed unto them, howsoever much humane ignorance be in the best. 7 And the first Beast was like a Lyon: Such is the common property of all the Beasts; the proper forme of every one is, of a Lyon, first: the second of a Calfe: the third of a Man; the fourth of an Eagle: Which foure diverse formes, almost all the Interpreters doe refferre to the foure Evangelistes.
And so as according to Aretas the Lyon is Iohn, the Eagle Marke: according to others, the Eagle Iohn. Marke the Leon. Augustine will have the Lyon to be Mathewe, Marke a man: so uncerten are they. But wee may not thinke, that the Spirit was so ignorant an artificer, that there should be neede of his name to be inscribed, to whom every picture doth belonge, or that o∣therwise the Lyon, the Aygle and the man, could not be discerned one from another. That of the first verse doth ende the controversy about this point. Which must, saith he, be done hereafter. Which wordes doe forbidde to looke backe, and to minde that which is past, but rather commaundeth to ex∣pect some future thinge. They seeme therefore to perteine to those giftes, wherewith every one of the faithfull Ministers are to be adorned in some parte; besides those giftes of knowledge. For the eyes ought to be cōmon to all, every one ought to be learned: the other giftes may be diverse, as God hath givē to every one privatly for the use & necessity of the Church. Although noe man can be voide altogither of the other vertues, who is in∣deede partaker of one. From whence Ezechiell attributeth these foure faces to every one of the Beasts, chap. 1.6. And in deede there ought to beare sway in each one, the courage of the Lyon, the patience of Oxen, the prudence of men, last of all the contempt of earthly things of the Eagles. Yet not without cause some proper thing here is applyed to every one severally. Peradventure that therby the Spirit may shewe in what principall vertues the Pastors should excell others according to the foure diverse seasons. The first age after Iohn gave famous men in all those vertues, chap. 6.1.3.5.7. Whose fortitude yet most of all appeared, wherby they did both suffer and over∣come the most fierce cruelty of the tyrants. The age following after Con∣stantine ministred Oxen, when liberty was taken from the Ministers, & every excellent man was oppressed under the yoke of Antichrist, with the bur∣dens of humane ceremonies. The Ghospell recovering life againe by Wick∣lefe & Luther, affoarded men, who being weary of the Romish bondage, both desyred earnestly and at length obtayned the Christian freedome. Wee doe expect yet Eagles, which the calling of the Jewes, will give at length, when the Ghospell shalbe restored fully, and brought to his perfit glory, which this Prophecy will shewe shall come shortly. Thē the Bishops shall beholde the Sunne with steddy sight, and shall search out with mervaylous quicknes of understanding, whatsoever yet lyeth hydde in the trueth of God: neither frō our times & māners, shall they basely creepe on the earth minding earthly things, but shall fly upon high, having all their conversa∣tion in heaven. 8 And every of the Beasts, &c. Hitherto of the form of their body: the form of their winges is described by a triple property, nūber, stāding & eyes. Every
Every one hath six winges, so many as had also the Angels in Isaiah, 6.2. but not of like use, as it seemeth. For the Angels with two did cover their face, with two their feete, with two they did fly. But the placing of them of the Beasts is such, as it is not fit for this thing. For they are rounde about them, behind, on their sides, before them, that they cannot serve fitly to cover either the face or feete. Neither in deede are they given them for flight. For what neede have they to fly, who have the place of their abode betweene the throne and the circuite of the Elders? Therefore they belōge to ayde & succour, by which they fly most readily into every parte to helpe others. Such an office is twofold in the Church, one of Helpers, an other of Governours, 1 Cor. 12.28. That belongeth to the Deacons and Widowes: whom once the Apostles appointed to looke to the poore, and those that had any infirmity of body, by a divine ordinance, least that they attending to such businesse, should become lesse carefull about prayers and the administration of the word, Act. 6.2. &c. 1 Tim. 5.9. This office belongeth to the Elders, who are appointed to governe onely mens manners, and are moderators of the di∣scipline. Teir office is shewed by the eyes, of which the winges are full wi∣thin. For to what ende els should there be newe eyes in the winges, when before the whole body was beset with eyes? In deede those eyes of the bo∣dy are of knowledge and science, and therfore doe sticke neerer, being in the body it selfe, which the Ministers may as well want as their owne eyes, wich are ioyned to their body with so neere a coniunction: but these eyes of the winges, being removed a little farther of, are placed as it were in a watch tower to search out every ons manners, executing the Office of watches and wardes, as the Apostle sheweth, saying, Obey your Teachers, & submitte your selves to them, for they watch for your soules, as they that must give ac∣count, Heb. 13.17. And how fitly is it that this kind of eyes is within and under the winges? For they must looke onely to the flocke, which dependeth upon them, as Peter warneth 1 Epist. 5.2. They ought not to care for ano∣thers flocke; or at least they must watch over the Christian people, For what have wee to doe to iudge thē that are without: wee must iudge them that are within: God iudged them that are without, 1 Cor. 5.12.13. Such a Tabernacle was seene in the mount, as touching his ministers; according to which patterne the Christian Church was framed by the Apostles, whose besides the Pa∣stors, ordained also these Helpers in every congregation, which should go∣verne the reformation of manners togither with the Pastors, whom Paul mentioneth, commaunding that the Elders which rule well should be had in dou¦ble honou: specially they that labour in the word & doctrine, 1 Tim. 5.17. For such are blinde, and which in understanding doe not understand, who avouch
that this two kinde of Elders can not be proved from this place. Further, what else shall wee understand to be those Governements in the 1 Cor. 12.28. then the office of them, who are appointed to this charge? In the be∣ginning of the verse Paul reckened up, Apostles, Prophets, and Teachers, upon whom lyeth the administration of the word: unto which, after some other things interposed, namely, namely Powers, Gifts of healings, and Helpes, at length he adioyneth Governements, that by this order interrupted and dis∣continued by so great a space, wee might knowe that these Governements, is a certen distinct thing from the charge of teaching. Furthermore, of what sorte were those Elders, which were conversant togither with the Apostles in the Church of Ierusalem, Act. 15.4.6? Were they such as bestowed all their labour in teaching the people in the publike assemblyes? It is likely that the Apostles abiding there, layed asyde this care of teaching, and gave thē∣selves to execute a certen Lordshippe. A few yeeres before, they suffered not them selves to be pulled from prayers and teaching, Act. 6.4. but at length peradventure this exceeding love was abated; they followed their ease, and gave over the duty and charge gladly to the Elders. Away with this folly: the holy mē were not sleepy with slouthfulnes, neither did they affect ambitious dominion over others, which they forbad others by their example, 1 Pet. 5.7. But to their power labouring in that which was the principall, they used those Elders as the eyes of the winges to take good heede to the holines of their flocke. It is also evident from the use of the primitive Church, as was sayd before in chap, 2.2. But first of all Ambrose is a substantiall witnesse in this matter, upon the 1 to Tim. chap. 2.4. Whēce also the Synagogue, and afterward the Church had Elders, without whose counsell no∣thing was done in the Church, which by what negligence it is growne out of use, J know not, unlesse by the slouthfulnes or rather pride of the Teachers, while they alone wilbe thought some what: Such are his wordes: from which it doth most clearly ap¦peare, what sorte of Elders the Primitive Church had; such in deede, who with ioint studyes and counsels regarded the dignity of every one togither with the Pastors. Ambrose complayneth that these were worne away (whē those other preaching Elders fayled not in his time, neyther could fayle) and that by the negligence or pryde of the Teachers. And it is manifest frō Hierome, that an other kinde of governing was by and by growne in use in stead of those Elders. For he mentioneth to Rusticus, of the Ecclesiasticalll Se∣nat: The Church, saith he, hath a Senat, a company of Elders, without whose coun∣sell, the Monkes may doe nothing: And againe: And wee have our Senate of Pres∣byters, Gratian. C. 16. q. 1. The Church. But the Senate was become much unlike to the integrity and institution of the first time, as wee learned even
nowe from Ambrose: after whose time & age men labour in vaine to finde out this kinde of Elders, which he complayneth to have perished and come to nothing before his times. Those winges therfore togither with the eyes are those Deacons and Elders: Of which what picture more fitte could have ben given? In them is required simplicity, in these, diligence; Rom. 12.8. That first is signifyed by the eyes in the wings: this second by the wings with eyes. From which first is perceyved howe necessary these Offices are in the Church. For they are the winges of the Ministers. What is a bird without winges? Yet this lacke is more dammageable, because a bird being desti∣tute of winges, perisheth her selfe alone: the Pastours being voide of thē, the whole flockes are set in daunger of destruction. For they are winges of helping, as wee have said, wherby aide is ministred not so much to the Mi∣nisters themselves, as to the people. And seeing the Apostles had need of Deacons, that a more necessary worke might not be left of them: could they by themselves observe every ons life, without the hinderance of the admi∣nistration of the word? Therefore they tooke to themselves the winges full of eyes, which the Beastes have before the Throne, and have taught by their owne example, howe maimed and lame the Pastors are, to whom these winges are wanting. Againe, wee learne, that these Offices are advantages, and additi∣ons, as parts hanging to the Pastours, ioyned to them as necessarily, as winges to the body, from whence they drawe life, and by whose benefit they are moved and upholden. And that therefore a divorse is not right∣ly made betweene them, as in the common wealth of the Scaphusians, where none of the MINISTERS are present in the Consistory, but lear¦ned men out of the Senate, and for the most part some DOCTOR of the Lawes is chosen amonge the Iudges of the Consistory: See for this, Io∣sias Simlerus in his treatise of the Common Wealth of the Helvetians. Neyther are those excuses of any moment, wherby it is pretended, that another manner of governing not lesse profitable is used in stead of ELDERS and DEACONS, as it is done in Englande. Is it not, say they provided in a speciall manner, for the poore, by the statutes of this Kingdome? And doe not the Church-Wardens present wicked men un∣to the Commissaryes? What neede is there of other Elders and Deacons, es∣pecially indeede, seeing all that way is wholy severed from all overseeing of the Pastors, to whome alone these winges ought to be fastened, and not to any other body of Commissaries? God give therefore Winges to the Beasts, that his people may be holpen, all whose holines almost is lost, be∣cause the Pastors being destitute of their winges full of eyes, there is none
that with an earnest and true affection of minde, will looke into the disea∣ses and sikenesses, and fly speedily for to heale them. Lastly our brethren are to be intreated, that they will speake more modestly of the ordinance of God, least giving themselves to reproaches and raylings, they be found to open their mouth against heaven it selfe. ¶ Day and night without ceasing, saying: Hitherto hath ben the prepa∣ration unto their Office, nowe it followeth, of what sorte their Office it selfe is, which is shewed by their unwearisome diligence in praysing the Lord. Which one thing in deede sheweth sufficiently that these Beasts, by their charge and Office are stewards of the Mysteries of God, to wit, Pastours, in whom he hath put the word of recenciliation, and whom he hath made his Ambassadours, who should intreate and pray the people in CHRIST steade, that they would be reconciled unto God. It is in deede the duty of every one to prayse God without ceasing: Such diligence the Apostle requireth in all Christians, saying, Pray continually, in the first Epistle of the Thessalonians chapter five, ver. 16. But especially it belongeth to them, who ought to give themselves to this study with their whole mindes and thoughts. For as Paul councelleth Virgins, that they might cleave fast to the Lord without any distraction, in the first Epistle to the Corinthes, chapter seaven, ver. 35. That should be the onely care of them, that bende themselves with all di∣ligence unto holy things, all whose businesse both in the day time and in the night is bestowed in meditating on the things of the Lord: You, sayth the Psalmist, which stand in the house of God every night, Psalme 134. ver. 1. Were there any prayers before day breake, or in the night time, as in the Monasteryes of the superstitious Monkes? Not at all: But this kinde of speaking sheweth that their whole labour was spente in worshipping the Lord: Such as then was the study of the Levites, and of them especially, who departed not from the Temple neither day nor night, for the space of the weekes of their course, in the second booke of the Kinges 11.5. & in Luke chapter first, ver. 23. And such ought to be the care of all, who deale with holy thinges by profession They who are deteyned with the affaires of this life, because they have their mindes withdraen from the contemplation of heavenly things, wor∣thily may be sayd to leave sometime their care of serving God, by cōparisō with the Ministers. Seeing then so continuall a paynes is required to the Ministers, may they intermeddle with other Politicall and civill affaires? Shall they whose mindes ought never to be vacant from holy meditations, so farre intangle themselves with earthly cares, that they can minde very little divine thinges? Christ, who alone was fitte for every administration,
would not be a iudge to divide the inheritance between the disagreeing brethren: Which office he refused, not for any inability to performe it, but onely for our exemple. To whom also he hath appointed boundes of our power, least by wandring without our limites, wee should be unpro∣fitable both to our selves, and also to others. The Princes, saith he, of the Gē¦tiles beare rule over them, and the Nobles exercise power over them, but it shall not be so amonge you, Mat. 20.25.26. Of which commandement when the A∣postles understood this to be the meaning, that they should take upon them nothing that might hinder never so little their holy function, they would not suffer so much as that the care of the poore should be layd upō them, though most neerly ioyned with godlines, that they might not wā∣der any whit from their duty. Therefore the Romish Antichrist, with his Prelates, hath ceased long agoe in many ages past, to be in the number of these Beasts. Howe farre also are our Bishops from them, who have forsa∣ken prayers & the administration of the word, not that they may looke to the poore, but that they may handle civill affayres and enioy the honours of this world? Whom thou mayest see oftener in the iudgement seat, then in the Pulpite, and to differre nothing from the Politike Magistrates, but onely in name and apparrell. Doe they day and night extolle our God with meet prayses of his holines? God open their eyes, that they may see howe excellent things they leave, for thing of no value, that at length ac∣knowledging their errour they may returne to better things, al trifling lets being cast away. The Psalmist telleth openly, that they are blessed, which dwell in the house of the Lord, and that in this respect, because they prayse God con∣tinually, Psal. 84.5. What then shall wee chaunge with this office, which so great King being destitute of, envied, that I may so say, to others, through a godly zeale? But too much it may be, is already spoken of this matter: too much in deede to him that speaketh the trueth, but to all that love their errours, I doe feare that they will not be enough. The office of these Beasts is declared, not onely by this care, but also by the forme it selfe of the thankesgiving, for they cry, Holy, Holy. Holy: by which thrise repeated crying togither, they prayse the one onely Iehovah, seeing in repeating they say one certen thinge: which one also they acknowledge to be three, in re∣peating thrise, that which they gave to one: wherby likewise they esteeme every each one person of equall honour, commending each with equall prayse. For holines containeth within it all prayse, which signifyeth such a purity, which is sprinkled and mixed with noe spotte or blemish. And this the Beasts doe give to God, not onely setting forth the same soe in words, but also in making the people holy, or at least in using that labour wherby
to their utmost power they may make them. From whence of all the testi∣monialls of Gods prayse, this chiefly doth sounde and ringe againe in the lyppes of them that serve God. Some bookes doe repeate these wordes six times: but Aretas agreeth with our copyes, and these wordes are in other places of Scripture, Isay 6.3. So is the title of holines: this the Beasts doe set forth by a double kinde of Power and Trueth, wherunto perteineth that distributive nowne, which is, and which was, and which is to come, as was de∣clared before, chap. 1.4.7. And they mention first of all the Power, shew∣ing the incōprehēsible glory of holines, which is most hard where one hath liberty to doe what he will. He that can doe all thinges, and yet in the least thinge abuseth not his power and authority, it must needes be that his glo¦ry exceedeth the comprehending of every minde. Againe, howe hard is it to keepe the promise which thou hast made, when they to whom thou hast promised doe breake their promise almost every moment? O therfore the unmeasurable holinesse of our God, whose truth mens infidelity doth not hinder. 9 And when those Beasts shall give: Hitherto the giftes, with which God doth notably adorne his Church, nowe the worship is described, to which the Beasts and Elders togither doe earnestly bende themselves. The māner whereof is such that the Beasts have the chiefe doing in the action, and goe before the Elders with their voice, as the Ministers are wonte in the assem¦bly of the people. For these thinges are spoken according to that order, which God hath appointed in his Church, wherby all the people doe give worship to God, the Minister being the leader. But it is to be observed, that this action of giving glory doth differ in a respect from that of the for∣mer verse. For that perteined to private care, which is continuall, their whole office tending to this onely ende: this is proper to their publike function, and at certen time, as is manifest from those thinges which fol∣lowe in the next verse. As touching the wordes, Theod. Beza translateth, when they did give, and so the other wordes they did fall downe, they did cast of, by the imperfect tence: but the property of the time is to be kept, seeing a future thinge is here foreshewed, and not a thing past reported. 10 The foure and twenty Elders shall fall downe: The action of the people go¦verned by the conduct of the Ministers. And it consisteth in two thinges, in gesture in this verse, and in words in the following. The gesture is three∣folde, of casting downe themselves before him that sitteth on the throne, of worshipping, and casting of their crownes. The first signifyeth their cheerfull hast, that at the voyce of the Beasts they fall downe by and by. The second, the iust worshippe given to him, to whome alone it is due. The third, the
sincere trueth of their minde, in performing this adoration, in that put∣ting off their owne dignity, they acknowledge themselves his servaunts, before whose throne they cast their crownes. But how, wilt thou say, doe the Elders fall downe, when the Beasts doe give glory, seeing the Beasts are employed in this labour day and night without ceasing? Doe the Elders never sit in their thrones, but fall downe alwayes prostrate on the groūde? Wee must remember that which I said even nowe, that the private care of the Beasts is one thing, their publike action an other. That hath noe inter∣mission, this is performed with certen respites: to this alone this throw∣ing downe of themselves perteineth. From whence there is a double argu¦ment, that all these thinges belong typically to the Christian assemblyes on earth. There are noe set times of worship in the heavens, but all that e∣ternity is bestowed about this thing. Secondly, neither shall there be any neede of leaders and rulers to performe the worshippe. For Prophecy shall then cease, 1 Cor. 13.8. much more the Ecclesiasticall Policy, which is orday¦ned in respect of this: but every one being a Priest, thē not onely by right, but also in practize shall prayse God the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost, without the mediation and helpe of any other then himselfe. Seeing ther∣fore this type is proper to the Church on earth, let every one consider with himselfe earnestly, howe greatly it belongeth to them, to frequent the pu∣blike assemblyes with all diligence, that as often as the Beasts give glory to him that sitteth on the throne, he may fall downe before the throne, and worshippe him that liveth for ever. Certenly they that contemptuously sit at home, and neglect the congregations of the faints, or in the meane time make iourneyes and withdrawe themselves in any other unnecessary man∣ner, shewe openly tha they belonge not at all to that most honorable com¦pany of the Elders. And let not any deceave himselfe, by his honours, di∣gnityes and excellency, as though the publike assemblyes, were either of the unskilfull multitude, or of the base people, and that he might either be present or absent at his pleasure: but let him beholde here Kinges atten¦ding to the voice of the Beasts, nor that once or twice, and at certen tymes, but whensoever the Beasts give glory: that is, as often as they doe execute their publike office. The praysing of God of these, and their adoration of God are ioyned allwayes togither: so that neither may any thinke that he is free and discharged from his duty, neither to have performed it enough at some fewe times. 11 Thou art worthy o Lord: The praysing which the Elders use in wordes is noe other thing then a subscribing to the crying out and shouting of the Beasts: these celebrate the holines, Dominion, omnipotency and trueth of
God. The Elders nowe doe singe togither, thou art worthy indeede o Lord, to receave glory and honour, which wee and all thy creatures worthily doe give to thee: as though unto the sung of prayses of the Ministers, the people should give their consent, saying Amen. But howe may God receive power? They meane the prayse of all vertue and power. Power can not be given to God otherwise, but onely by acknowledging and praysing. Which then shineth forth most cleerly, when he sheweth his strength extraordinarily, both in delivering his owne and also in destroying his enemyes. ¶ For thou hast created all things: The people ought not onely to con∣sent to the thankes given by the Ministers, in the meane time themselves being voyde of all knowledge of their owne, as it commeth to passe in the Papacy, where after the prayers not understood is sung Amen, by the un∣skilfull common people, or some as they will, supplying their place: but their consent ought to come from a true faith, and that not confused and implicite, but of which a true sense and feeling is setled in every ons harte peculiarly. For the God of reason, requireth a reasonable worshippe, not unknowne, rash and voyd of counsell. Whereupon not without cause is added from what fountayne the declaration of the consent of the Elders, to wit, frō their owne acknowledging of the exceeding power of God both in creating all thinges, and also in preserving the same: and noe lesse from the sense of his most free good will, by which alone being moved, he made all thinges in the beginning, and governeth and preserveth the same at this day, according to that saying, Who worketh all thinges, after the counsell of his will, Ephe. chap. 1. ver. 11. For which cause, there is repeated in the ende of the verse, they have ben created, that wee may understande that the will of God not onely hath rule in governing things at this time, but also that it gave the first originall to the same. And so is the patterne of the Christian Church, so much the more famous then that of the Lawe, by how much heaven in which Iohn sawe this figure, is more excellent then the Mountaine where Moses sawe the Tabernacle. There is the same ende and purpose of both: of this that it might be a patterne of the worshippe to the Legall people, which should holde even to the time of reformatiō: of that, that it might be a type unto Christians, according to what square, they should frame all their assemblyes, both generally and specially. Graunt O most high God that wee may be founde as faithfull in bringing backe all thinges unto the Heavenly patterne, as Moses was unto that earthly.
Chap. 5. AFTER I sawe in the right hande of him that sate upon the Throne a booke written within and on the backe side, sealed with seaven seales. 2 And J saw a stronge Angell preaching with a lowde voice, who is worthy to o∣pen the booke and loose the seales thereof? 3 And noe man was able neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth, to open the booke, nor to looke theron. 4 Therfore I wept much, because none was founde worthy to open, and reade the booke, neither to looke thereon. 5 Then one of the Elders sayd unto mee: weepe not, beholde that Lion of the tribe of Juda, that roote of David, hath obtained to open the booke, and to loose the seaven seales thereof. 6 Then J behelde and loe betweene the Throne and those Beasts, and betweene those Elders, a Lambe standing as though he had ben killed, having seaven hornes & sea∣ven eyes, which are those seaven spirits of God, sent forth into all the world. 7 He came and tooke the booke out of the right hande of him that sate upon the Throne. 8 And when he had taken the booke, those foure Beasts and those foure and twen¦ty Elders fell downe before the Lambe, having every one harpes and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of the saints. 9 And they sung a newe song, saying, thou art worthy to take the booke, and to open the seales thereof: because thou wast killed, and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kinred, and tongue, and people, and nation. 10 And hast made us to our God, Kings, and Priests, and wee shall reigne on the earth. 11 Then J behelde and I heard rounde about the Throne, and of the Beasts, and Elders, the voice of many Angels, and the number of them was a thousande hundred thousands, and ten hundred thousandes. 12 Saying with a lowde voice, worthy is that Lambe, that was killed, to receive power, and riches, and wisdome, and strength, and honour, and glory, and blessing. 13 And every creature which is in heaven, and which is on the earth, in the sea, and all thinges that are in them, I heard, saying, unto him that sitteth on the Throne, and to the Lambe, be prayse, and honour, and glory, and power for ever more. 14 And those foure beasts sayed, Amen. And those foure and twenty Elders fell downe on their faces and worshipped him that liveth for ever more.
The Analysis. I have spoken summarily of the common type: the speciall Prophecy cō∣prehendeth both the excellent dignity of this Revelation in this chapter, and also the evnts themselves in the rest of the booke. That thinge is de∣clared first, in respect of the Creature; secondly, of the Lambe: In respect of the Creature it is altogither unsearcheable, as appeareth, partly from the sig∣ning of seaven seales, ver. 1; partly from the testimony of all creatures, which after the inquiry proclamed, and the thing was caused to be cryed by the voyce of the Angell, as it were of a common cryer, ver. 2. then also after tryall made at last, ver. 3. all doe acknowledge their owne unablenes. Of which lastly there is a sorowfull consequente, the weeping of John, which this imbecility, and despaire to enioye so excellent a good thing did wring out from him, ver. 4. In respect of the Lambe onely it is able to be searched out as first an Elder sheweth, who conforteth Iohn, ver. 5. Secondly the Lā∣be comming at the same instant and taking the booke, ver. 6.7; from whence at length aryseth the singular ioy and thankesgiving of the whole Creature, but apart first of the Church, ver. 8.9.10. and of the Angels, ver. 11.12. After of the rest of the Creature, ver. 13. Last of all the Church togither subscribing to the common ioy & reioycing of all thinges, ver, 14. Scholions. Afterward I saw at the right hand: the cōmon translation hath In the right hande, as also the Interpreter of Aretas; but all the Greeke copies with one consent have at the right hande. They peradventure have put it in the abla∣tive case, because it followeth after in the seavēth verse, that the Lambe tooke the booke from the right hand. But this is noe sufficient cause to departe from the naturall property of the wordes, when it may be that the weaknes of the creatures might be made to appeare the more, the booke at the first was not in the right hande, but at the right hande: from whence if there were noe power to open it being offered and layd before without asking, much lesse would there have ben any if he had held it in his handes. After∣ward when the debility of the Creatures was found out, the booke was ta∣ken into his handes, that the dignity of the Lambe might be the better knowne, not taking it up hastily lying at his side, but receaving it from hande to hande. As touching the intent of this vision, it seemeth good to the Spirit, after the lively representation of the true Church in the former chapter, (which was to be layd as the fundamēt of all the building follow∣ing,
before that he should come to the particular Prophesyes) to put men in minde of the incomprehensible excellency of this Prophecy, For wee are wont, such is our slouthfulnes, to passe by very greate and excellent thinges carelesly and sleepingly, unlesse peradventure some body pull us by the eare, and require instantly diligence, mentioning the greatnes of the thing. Least perchance the same thing should fall out in this place, he setteth before our eyes, that this is a Prophecy of that kinde, which con∣teineth in it all the dāgers that at to be undergone of the Church through her whole race on earth, yet wrapped in so great obscurity, that no crea∣ted minde can beholde it a farre off, much lesse unfolde the same to others. An argument in deede most worthy to be knowen, and farre most plea∣sant of all thinges, opening to us the hidden Mysteries, with exceeding great desyre whereof men are inflamed: or otherwise in searching out of them, they torment themselves rashly and in vayne. And yet neverthelesse it is not to be desyred onely for this cause to knowe it, but because also it conteyneth events of that moment, that it would be very hurtfull and for rowfull to the Church, if they should wholy be concealed. Therefore Iohn wept, being privy to the dangers, and togither therewith also min∣ding the lacke of a guide. And in deede the Church hardly holdeth on her course, though this lampe be given her: Howe miserable had shee ben, left utterly in darknes, and not perceiving sufficiently eyther which waye shee should goe for∣ward, or where to set her foote safely? Iohn therefore had had iust cause to weepe, if there had ben hope noe where of opening the sealed booke. But the sudden assault of griefe, bereft the holy man of understanding, and suffered him not to thinke in whom there was ability, while at length he knewe by the putting in minde of an other. Therefore this Prophecy is famous for the worthynes of the argument, excellency of the Mystery, plē∣ty of fruict, but farre way most excellent, because he alone was founde worthy to open the same, who by his death founde out a redemption for the elect. This is that thing for which the Church on earth, the Angels in Hea∣ven, lastly the universall Creature reioyceth greatly, and that not for a glo¦rious shewe without the trueth of the thinge, as the manner is in humane writinges, in which the thinges are amplifyed for to adorne and set them forth, but from a true feeling and iust cause of reioycing, as hereafter wee shall see through Gods his helpe. In the meane time shall not this excee∣ding great ioye of Heaven and Earth kindle in men a diligence to reade, a desyre to understand, and an endevoure to observe? It is in deede a thing
worthy of our serious meditation, into which I have digressed and dis∣coursed in many wordes, because I see that the Interpreters, eyther not to have marked the intendement of this chapter, or at the least, otherwise then was meete, to have spoken nothing at all, of a matter very needfull and necessary. ¶ A Booke written within and on the backeside: The first commenda∣tion of the Prophecy is from a Booke, a copious writting, and Seaven Seales in this verse. That which is recorded in a Booke, must without all contro∣versy be certē, being a faithfull helper of the memory: whereas that which is noe otherwise grounded then onely upon the memory, may easily in continuance of time, eyther be utterly extinguished, or at the least wise cor¦rupted. Whereupon GOD biddeth Ieremy, for the greater credit of that Prophecy, to write all the wordes that he spake unto him in a Booke, in the thirty chapter of Ieremy and in the 2. verse. So carefull is he to provide against our doubting, that wee should not thinke otherwise of the things, then of such as are written in publike bookes, & graven as it were in brasse, so as they can neyther be altered nor forgotten. The plenteous writing is shewed, in that the booke was written within and on the backe side, on both sides of the leafe. And he speaketh after the olde māner of writing in somewhat lōge parchments, which afterward were wounde about some rounde smooth peece of wood, frō whence they were called volumes, & Christ is sayd to have unrolled the booke, and rolled it up againe, as in Luke chapter 4 verse 17. And the outside (that I may use the wordes of the most learned Theod. Beza) alway remayned cleane, unlesse the inside was not able to containe the whole writing, for then they wrote on the outward part; which sorte of writinges were called exteriour writings, as being written on the backe side. This so great prolixitie therefore, did containe not onely the chiefe points which peradventure might be included in some narrow place, but also eve∣ry most small thinges: so that neither is there any neede to seeke and fetch ought from any other place, which perteineth to the knowledge of future thinges: and that wee knowe also that nothing can be done without the will of God. The Complutent edition and some others read without, but on the backe side, is more often used: from whence is written on the backe side, as wee have shewed a little before. Finally, howe pretious are these Myste¦ryes, which God hath with himselfe, sealed up with so many seales?. The creatures could not so much as to looke on the BOOKE, as is in the fourth verse, much lesse was there neede of seales for to hidde from them. But by these meanes he will declare and manifest, howe greatly wee ought to re∣verence his secrets.
2 And J saw a strong Angell publishing; There is a great dignity of the Pro∣phesy, from the certenty, largenes, & scaling up; but nowe a greater appeareth, seeing the highnes thereof surmounteth every created Spirit. For it is not of that kinde, which the more prudent sorte of men can comprehende by any skilfull foreknowledg, but wherein all must needes confesse their igno¦rance. The which for to shewe, he alludeth to the manner of Princes, who in difficult thinges are wont by great rewards to provoke their subiects by the voyce of a Cryer to try their strength, and there is almost none, whō in such businesse, some small hope will not thrust forward to make tryall. If so be that noe man cometh forth, what is this else, than an open confessi∣on of their imbecillity. So the Angell is sent to enquire, who is worthy to opē the booke? If noe man offereth himselfe, let us acknowledge our owne im∣potency, and the power of our Mediatour: and togither also let us honour with due reverence these holy mysteryes: for which cause God causeth in us this feeling of our owne want of power, as of old in Adam, before whō ere he gave him a wife, he set all creatures, that noe fit helper being found, he might make the more accounte of the wife given him. ¶ Who is worthy: He maketh not inquiry of the power and strength, but of the deserte and worthynes. For even all the creatures if they should cō∣spire togither, are able to doe nothing, to wringe out perforce the things from God. Whatsoever wee obtayne, wee enioye it at his will and pleasure, and by entreaty, and the Lord being iust in giving his thinges, regardeth their worthynes, upon whom he bestoweth his benefits: whom unlesse ei∣ther their owne, or an others iust dignity shall commende, they can hope for noe good thinge from him. But if a bare foreknowledge of future thinges, shalbe of so greate importance, in what estimation is the know∣ledge of salvation to be had? 3 And noe man was able: A free confession of the creature, that it is able to doe nothing herein. Let them therefore looke to it, who doe make her a patronesse for thēselves in matters of greater moment. Why then should wee mervayle if noe man understandeth any of these thinges, not onely a∣mong the Gentiles, although the most quickwitted of them, but also not in the whole Kingdome of the Papists, noe not that blasphemously uner∣ring Pope himselfe, with all his Seraphicall Doctours, arrogating to them selves the victory of all knowledge, learning, prudence, and wisdome? These thinges surmount all humane sharpenes of witte, least peradventure thou reiect rashly that which shall not please those our maisters. And the distribution of thinges in heaven, in earth, and which are under the earth, may be understood frō the proclaiming of the Angell; he made enquiry who was
worthy? Therfore the inquisition perteined not to the Devils, and soules pu∣nished for sinnes. For what hope or shewe of worthynes could be here? Ther∣fore the thinges in Heaven, are the Angels; they in the earth, Men living: they which are under the earth, are the Saints sleeping in their graves. Whom he signi∣fyeth in this manner by that one part, which cometh neerer to our sense. In which respect Iacob sayeth, and I shall goe downe to my sonne mourning into the grave, Gen. 37.35. In these alone their might be some question. Therfore that place is to colde for to kindle a Purgatory. ¶ Nor looke thereon: for so hath Theod. Beza: the common translation hath looke upon: I should rather turne, looke in. For so the sentence encrea∣seth: seeing this is greater, then not to open. The booke could not be loo∣ked in, so long as it did remaine sealed: whereupon the addition would be superfluous in this sense. 4 J wept therefore:) It is a lamentable thing in deede, that the Church should wante the gift of Prophecy. But Iohn bewrayed his infirmity, ha∣ving forgot, or at least wise not minding, that nothing is so hidden that could be unknowne to our chiefe Prophet, & of which he would not teach his Church, so farre as should be expedient for his. Wherefore one of the Elders warning him that he should not weepe, doth togither with gentlely re∣prove his ignorance, or rather forgetfulnes: as though it were a shamefull thinge for a teacher not to knowe that, which the common sorte of the faithfull should not be ignorant of. 5 Beholde he hath obtayned:) Many as it were contending, but one obtay∣ning the victory before the rest. He seemeth to speake after the manner of the former proclamation, wherby the thing was put as it were to a publike strife and tryall, and in which Christ bare away the chiefe prayse, yea the whole. ¶ That Lyon of te: A circumlocution of Christ the King, fetched from Gen. 49.9. But what hath the Lyon to doe with seales? Our sinnes did remove farre frō us, all the mysteries of God: Which when Christ hath by his mighty power abolished, and conquered for ever the enemyes the De∣vill and death, worthyly with this name as a badge of the victory, he co∣meth forth to obtayne that for us, which our enemyes kept away. ¶ The roote of David; So hath Th. Beza translated rightly the Hebrewe word, to which the Greke worde answereth, and is some time taken for a roote, as is in Isaiah: He groweth up as a tender plante before him, and as a roote out of a dry ground, chap. 53.2. But a roote properly groweth not out of the ground, but that which springeth from the roote, neverthelesse this in deede is such a roote, that also togither it is the roote of David, that is, the
fountayne and welspring from whence salvation and life flowe unto Da∣vid: so that nothing can be more significant then this word, neither hath there bene at any time any roote besides of this kinde; See Psalm. 101.1. Mat. 22.43. &c. 6 Then J looked and beholde betweene the Throne:: Word for word in the Greeke is in the middes of the Throne, as before in chap. 4.4. &c. The Lam¦be is in the middes of the Beasts and Elders, to wit, in the assembly of the faithfull, in the middes of the Church. ¶ A Lambe standing, as though he had ben killed: The Lambe is described by his triple offe: These wordes as thgh he hath ben slame, perteine to his Priesthood, being eternall through the eternall power of his death: Sea¦ven hornes, declare him to be a Kinge: Seaven eyes (which are so many Spi∣rits) and the taking of the booke, shewe him to be the chiefe Prophete. The skarre of a deadly wound is a token that he once dyed, and teacheth that the Fa∣ther doth give all things to his Church for the merite and through the be∣holding of it. For this is it wherby our Priest once entring into the holy place, hath obtained eternall redemption: Heb. 9.12. And in that he hath once gat redemption for the elect, shall he not also obtayne all things for us, that may avayle any way for our good? The seaven hornes is that supreame pow¦er, wherby the man Christ sitting at the right hande of the Father, ruleth and governeth all things according to that, which Christ being raysed frō the dead, sayd to his disciples, all power is given mee in heaven and in earth. Mat. 28.18. Therefore that most meeke Lambe wanteth not those weapons, wherby he chaseth away his enemyes, althoug by his great patience he see¦meth not to regarde the iniuries which they doe. And thou mayest obser∣ve, that it is not needfull that the parables and similitudes should agree in all thinges, seeing here to the Lambe contrary to nature are attributed seaven hornes and as many eyes, that is, gifts of the Spirit wherewith Christ endueth the faithfull. They are sent from him, seeing noe man can be par∣taker even of the least gift, unlesse he bestowe it on them. For God heareth not sinners: but from his fulnes wee all receive: and he being gone to his Father, sendeth the Conforter unto his, which leadeth them into all trueth, as in the Gos∣pell of Iohn chapter sixteene ver. seaventh and thirteene. A visible token whereof were once the cloven tongues like fire sitting upon the Apostles, and that miraculous gift of speaking suddenly with other tongues Act. 2.3. &c. With which faculty not onely the Apostles were endued, but afterward al∣so others embracing the faith. Neither are they onely sente into all the world, that they may conferre the comfortable knowledge of salvation to the E∣lect: But that CHRIST may search out all thinges that are done in his
Church, yea which are done in any other place of the world. Wherefore howe great impudency is it to thrust upon the Church a visible head, see∣ing the LAMBE is furnished with so many eyes, neither hath them idle and unoccupied, but sendeth them forth with all diligence into the whole world? The care of Christ taketh not indede away the Ministers, eyther Ecclesiasticall or Politicall, which he hath ordained: But to faine and invent a newe kinde and degree, and that under a pretence that CHRIST is ab¦sent, is proper onely to that man, who is directly opposite to Christ. As touching the wordes; some Copies reade, as is noted in the Greeke Bibles lately set forth at Frankeford, which are, that the relative may be re∣ferred as well to the hornes, as to the eyes. After which manner also Are∣tas readeth this verse. And the Hornes may be sayd to be sent into the whole world, when CHRIST putteth forth his power in succouring his owne servantes, and destroying his enemyes. But it agreeth more properly to the eyes, which when wee turne toward any thinge, wee are sayd to cast them upon the same. 7 He came and tooke the booke out of the right hand of him that sat on the throne: There is a double consideration of Christ, one so farre as of the eternall God sitting togither in the Throne with the Father, chap. 4. ver. 3. The other so farre as he is of the Mediatour attending on the throne and prepa¦red and ready to performe those things which make for the salvatiō of his people. There is the like regard of the Spirit, who as he is the Eternall God partaker of the Throne, compassing the same about, as in the fourth chap. and third verse. But according as he sanctifyeth the Church with created giftes, there are seaven Spirits before the Throne, seaven burning Lampes, seaven Hornes, and seaven eyes. 8 Having every one Harpes and vials: A reioicing and thankesgiving of the Church for this greate benefite of taking and unsealing the Booke. There∣fore they take unto themselves fit and proper instruments for this pur∣pose, Harpes and Vials, that is to say, Prayses and thankesgiving. For Vials full of odours are the harts of the Saints, which the Spirit hath filled with a fervent desyre of calling upon GOD: the Harpes perteine to glad¦nes of minde: and reioicing in prayers is the very thankesgiving. But he alludeth to the manner of the Temple, where the LEVITES praysed GOD with Musicall Instruments, and the PRIESTES had their Pottes and Bowles set before the Altar, full of odours, as wee reade in the Prophete Zachary chap. 14. ver. 20.
¶ Which are the prayers of the Saints: He speaketh not of the offerring of prayers for the dead, which are made of them that are alive on the earth, but as I have shewed in the former chapter, all that which is attributed to the Beasts & Elders declareth what exercises the Saints goe about with all diligence in the militant Church. So also after in verse 10. And wee shall raigne, say the Elders, upon the earth, not preaching, doubtlesse, the King¦dome of the soules departed, but of the holy men on earth. The heartes of these as golden vials doe breath out and yeeld up prayses and thankes for those greate benefites, which are obtained for us by Christ. If the Elders ofer onely the prayers of other men, as the Iesuite interpreteth, they should be dumbe in the common ioy of all things. Nay rather the benefite is theirs: for they themselves shall raigne, say they: therefore they offer not other mēs, but their owne prayers. 9 And they sung a newe sunge: It is called a newe songe, in respect of more plentifull grace ministred nowe since Christ hath ben exhibited, then was in olde time under the shadowes of the Lawe. The auncient people did not prayse the man Christ so openly and clearly, before he had taken unto him our flesh, as at this day the faithfull doe prayse him clothed with or na∣ture; from whence not without cause this more manifest praysing is called a newe sung. But he alludeth unto the manner of the Lawe, where newe & greater benefites are celebrated in newe formes of prayses, conceaved of purpose; whereupon there is so often mention of a newe songe in the booke of Psalmes. ¶ And hast redeemed us; Therefore the Beasts and Elders are men redee∣med by the blood of Christ: neither in deede some twelve chiefe men of the Iewes, and as many Christian twelve Apostles, with the foure Evangelists. (For this whole company was not chosen out of every Tribe, and tongue, and people, and nation, but out of the nation of the Iewes onely) but of all the faithfull in every place: all which this holy company and bande mustered indiffe∣rently from all places of the world, doe worthyly note out, as wee have ob¦served upon the fourth verse of the 4. chapter. And it is sayd significantly, out of every Tribe &c. not all Tribes &c. because all men are not redeemed by the blood of Christ, but onely the elect, as Aretas hath well observed. 10 And hast made us to our God Kinges; Some copies doe reade them, & so this whole verse in the third person: but Aretas, and the common Latine trans∣lation, doe reade in the first person: wee have expounded these thinges be∣fore. But why doe they mention this benefite in the cause of taking the booke? Because it is proper in deede to a Kingly power, to prevayle with God, and to beare away those thinges from him, wherof lately they had
noe power nor ability. Wherfore they sing that they are made Kings to God, as though they should say, that they not onely are Kinges, because they have subdued Death, Sinne, and the Devill, but chiefly because they have God regarding their commodityes, & keeping nothing from them, which any way may make for their good. This is that Kingly power, most noble in deede and alway to be praised. But where they say, they shall raigne on earth, from hence that is evident, which even nowe wee said at the eight verse, that this is the company of the militant Church reigning on earth. For why should the Saints in Heaven having attayned heavenly glory reioyce in an earthly dominion? 11 And I heard round about the Throne and the Beasts: The glorifying of the Angels, who apart from the Church prayse God, of whom there is another cōsideration thē of men redeemed by the blood of Christ: for these being fallen are restored, and they, are upheld that they fall not. And therefore are placed without the circuit of the Throne & the Elders: to whom yet they are next, on every side garding the Church, both that they may watch for her safety, and also may reioyce in her behalfe, for her prosperity. From whence in the seconde place is rehearsed their gratulation, as though they would learne every day more and more from the Church, the incomprehen∣sible mystery of redemption, in which they behold with such earnest desire, 1 Pet. 1.12. ¶ A thousande hundred thousand. The common translation hath not these wordes a thousande hundred thousand: but Aretas, the Complutent edition, and other copies read them. And so in Daniel 7.10. from whence this place seemeth to have ben taken, albeit the Iesuite will have nothing to be added in the common translation, of such purity is it. But where ought to be a greater number, then where every kinde of Creature which is in Hea∣ven and beneath, with one consent agree to prayse the Lambe, ver. 13? Therefore he had better covered his shame, if he would rather confesse free¦ly the defect, then to defende a manifest fault. 12 To receave power: Worthy is the Lambe that was killed, that nothing should be so heard, which his power may not overcome: for he hath de∣served by his death in such sorte that he should have power over all things. Therefore by right all prayse is given unto him as to the most mighty, most rich, most wise &c. the common translation for riches readeth Godhead, without the authority of any Greeke copyes. Notwithstanding it must be soo, be∣cause so it seemeth to the Iesuites, that the olde Jnterpreter hath followed alwayes the more corrected copies. I would passe by such things, if the impudency of the adversaryes did not compell mee to make them manifest, at least in a
word. 13 And the whole creature: All the Creature reioyce at this Prophecy, evē they also which are void of reason, because from thence they may perceive plainly, that there shalbe an ende at length to their labours. Which time they expect with earnest affection, much desyring to be freed from this yoke of vanity, Rom. 8.21. ¶ And which are on earth: in the Greeke it is and which are in the earth, that is to say, which live in the overmost part of the earth, and under the earth, which ly hid in the most inward bowels. The whole creature expecteth a renovation, not onely that which sheweth it selfe abroade & is to be seen, but also which lyeth hid within in secret. But seeing here he speaketh of cre¦atures voide of reason (for it was spoken before of the whole kinde of rea∣sonable creatures) who would had from hence built and erected Purgato∣ry, but men voyd of reason? But for wante of other guests, they are com∣pelled to stuffe their Popish banqueting chamber with bruit beasts. ¶ And which are in the Sea, and all things which are in them: The common translation corruptly hath it thus, And which are in the Sea, and which are in it: , by a chāge of gender, wherby figuratively persons are attribu∣ted to the thinges created: See Theod. Beza. 14 And the foure Beasts; The beginning & the end of the thankesgiving is attributed to the Church, because this benefite doth most of all belonge to her. Therefore her glorifying is double, one wherby shee goeth before all the rest in praysing: the other wherby shee accordeth with the reioy∣cing creature. But the foure & twenty Elders follow the leading of the Beasts, as it is wont to be done in the Church, where the people speaketh to God, not so much in their owne, as in the Ministers wordes, and yeeld themsel∣ves wholy to his government to be ruled, as touching religions and man∣ner of worshippe, as wee have observed in chap. 4.9.10. CHAP. VI. After I beheld whē the Lambe had opened one of the seales, & I heard one of the foure Beasts saying, as it were the noise of thunder, come & see. 2 Therfore I beheld, & loe there was a white horse, & he that sate on him had a bow, & a crowne was givē unto him, & he wēt forth cōquering & that he might overcōe. 3 And whē he had opened the secōd seale, I heard the secōd Beast saying come & see. 4 And there wēt out an other horse red, & power was givē to him that sate therō to take peace frō the earth, that they should kill one an other & there was given unto him a great sword. 5 And when he had opened the third seale, I heard the third Beast saying, come & see. Then I beheld, & loe a blacke horse was there, and he that sate
sate on him, had balances in his hande. 6 And I heard a voice in the middes of the foure beasts saying, a measure of wheate for a penny, and three measures of Barly for a peny, and wine and oyle hurt thou not. 7 And when he had opened the fourth seale, I heard the voice of the fourth Beast saying, come and see. 8 And I looked and beholde a pale horse, and his name that sate on him was death, and hell followed after it, and power was given unto them over the fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with death, and with beast of the earth. 9 And when he had opened the fift seale, I sawe under the Altar the soules of them that were killed for the word of God, and for the testimony which they maintayned. 10 And they cryed with a loude voice saying, howe long Lord which art holy & true, doest thou not iudge and avenge our blood,, requyring it of them that dwell on the earth? 11 And longe white robes were given to every one, and it was saide unto them, that they should rest for a little while, untill their fellow servaunts and their brethren be accomplished, who are to be killed even as they were. 12 And I beheld when he had opened the sixt seale, and loe there was made a great earthquake, & the Sunne became blake as sack cloth of haire, & the moone was like blood. 13 And the starres of heaven fell to the earth, as a figge tree casteth her greene figges whē it is shaken of a mighty winde. 14. And heaven departed away as a scroule when it is rolled, & every mountayne & Yle were moved out of their place. 15, And the Kings of the earth & the Peeres, & the rich men, & the Tribunes, & the mighty men, & every bondman, & every free man, hid themselves in dennes, & among the rockes of the mountaines. 16 And sayd to the mountaines and rockes, fall upon us and hide us from the presense of him that sitteth on the throne, and from the wrath of the Lambe. 17. For the great day of his wrath is come, and who cā stande? The Analysis. SVCH is the Excellency of this Revelation: The Events doe follow, which first are the Seales: secondly the Trumpets: lastly the Vials. For all the rest of the Prophecy is distinguished into three notable periode, which containe the chiefe alterations to come in the world, even unto the coming of Christ, every one of which againe is divided into seaven points, so as from the last of the former aryseth alway the whole sequent period.
As touching the Scales, there is in every one a certen preparation, afterward the type of the future thinges. And the preparation is partly common, wherby the Lambe openeth each one in order, partly proper to the foure first, which besides have an inviting by one of the foure Beastes to come and see. There be sixe types of this chapter (for so many seales are opened) a white horse, ver. 2. a read ver. 4. a blacke ver. 5. a pale ver. 8. The cry of the soules ver, 9.10.11. and great earthquake, to the ende of the chapter. Analysis. After J beheld when the Lambe had opened the first of the seales: Nowe the Spirit entreth into the events, which will instruct us touching all the chan∣gings succeeding by course in the world, as farre as is expedient for the Church, and which are of any moment, unto the last end of all thinges. A great matter and chiefly necessary to be knowne: but such as into which noe understanding of mortall man can penetrate. Therefore whom in the beginning I have prayed unto, him doe I call upon againe, having gone forward in some part by his alone grace, that he will graunte mee happily to make an ende of the thinges that remayne, who hath graunted mee so to beginne, as I am persuaded is agreeing with his trueth. Thou therfore most holy and most wise Lambe, who alone hast deserved to take & unscale the booke, and not to that ende that thou shouldest have these secretes for thy selfe alone, but that thou shouldest communicate them with thy Church, as farre as shalbe for her profit, graunt, I pray thee, unto mee thy most unworthy servant according to thy bounteous∣nesse, that perceaving cleerely what hidden and secrete things these seales conteine, I may reveale the same holily unto the world, to the edification of thy Church, the ruine of Antichrist, and the glory of thine owne name, to be published unto all ages, Amen. In that wee have distinguished the Events into three rankes, wee have the Spirit himselfe for our authour ioyning the trumpets to the seales, & the vials to the trumpets, in such sorte, as that alwayes the first thing of that which followeth, doe aryse out of the last of that which wente before. Therefore they bring in darkenes upon themselves, who doe thrust togi∣ther into one, the seales, the trumpets, the vials, and also the seaven Can∣dlestickes, so as each one of every order should be ioyned one to another in equall degree, as if the Father & the Sonnes should be equall, & should runne togither the same terme of yeeres. Furthermore seeing the seales ar as it were promises of future thinges, the trūpets adversities approaching with great noise: the vials, things that are powred upon men by little and little, and come upon them unwarres, as wee shall after see, & overwhelme
them: it seemeth not to be convenient, to cōfounde these contrary things togither, so that the thinge should be promised and accomplished all at once: and that the same thing should be done openly and secretly at the same moment of time: but let us come to the wordes. ¶ When he had opened (saith he) one Seale, that is to say, the first, as Theod. Beza translateth it: for after followeth, the second, third, &c. And so the Hebrewes every where use to speake. But before I proceede to the thinges that are behinde, that cold comment of the Jesuite is to be removed, who thinketh that the opening of the booke is something diverse from opening of the seales: as though nothing in the booke could be read and shewed unto us, before that all the seales should be opened. Which opinion verily faineth unto us I knowe not what booke, of which wee have received never a word written, neither doe wee understand from thence ought touching thinges to come. For the Revelation hath nothing more besides the opened seales For out of them the trumpets come forth, and againe out of them the vials, as wee have advertised in the resolution, so as all the rest of the Prophecy is li∣mited with those thinges, that are conteined in the seales, as wee shall proove by manifest argumēts in their places. If therfore after all the seales opened he hath found out some booke to be read, it is Apocryphe that is a hid booke, the originall and authority whereof is not known, & which peradventure may lie hid in the coffer of the breast of their Pope, but which to reade and knowe the Church hath nothing to doe. Furthermore it is needfull for the clearer understanding of the periodes, first the termes of time wherein thinges are finished and every severall article of them, to set downe some entrāce, from whēce wee must begin: which surely wee iudge to be by and by after this writing of John. For that saying of the fourth chapter ver. 1. I will shew thee the things that must be done hereafter, calleth backe Iohn both to that moment of the Revelation given, & also teacheth to count from thence all thinges which are delivered in the booke follow∣ing. Therefore there is noe neede to have recourse unto the first ages of the world, nor unto the Monarchies, nor unto the times of Christ or the E∣vangelists, or in any such thinge of the age past: but John writing this Reve¦lation by the commaundement of God about the ende of the Empire of Domitian (as Ireneus sheweth in his 5 booke against heresies, & Eusebius out of Ireneus in the 3 booke of his Ecclesiasticall History chap. 18. At the ende of the raigne of Domitian, about the ninety seaventh yeere from the birth of Christ) wee thinke the beginning of the Seales, to wit of the first pe¦riod is to be set at that time, from whence wee shall see every ech thing which followeth to flowe with a ready course stopped and stayed with noe
uneven places. The event in the unfolding will shewe what is the limite of every Periode. These things being thus established, let us returne unto the declaration of the wordes, afterward wee shall see the thing it selfe and co¦herence thereof. The first preparation is of the Lambe opening the first seale. For he is the word of the Father, who doth minister unto us whatsoever un∣derstanding wee have of Gods will. And the events are called Seales, both because they containe a mystery most hidden from the understanding of the prophane multitude Isay 8.16. and also because these first experimēts should be pledges of future thinges. Not that wee should undersād these to be bare forshewings of things and empty promises, who doe onely de∣nounce the troubles in word, the execution whereof is cōmanded in some other place in this booke (for that is no where to be founde) but that they are signes of that kinde, which bring togither with them their eecution, and doe give a firme pledge of future things. He openeth the seale in or∣der one after another, and not all togither with one labour, both because the manner of the thinges to be don did so require, & that also the whole Prophecy was not to be uttered at once, but to be drawen  peece-meale, as it wre for abty of a dyly pttance. The second pption is of one of the foure Beast, calling Iohn to come and see. And this one Beast is the first, to wit a Lion, Chap. 4.. But the st are Go of the Chur∣ches, as hath ben observed in the foresaid plce hoe labo Gd useth to instruct others. These call men to see and obse, ot only bcase it is their office to forewarne the Chuch of th that re to oe to passe, whether good or bad: but especially ee  thinge next to come, should be notable through their faithfulnes & dince in this ter. But the Lion speaketh first, because they wich firt h begne the cō∣bate, should have like courage & successe, no lesse prvilig in th tey goe about, then Lions making their pray. The voice is, n it  ∣der, penetring very farre that it might be heard of many. C saith he, & see, speaking to Iohn, representing nowe the person of the faithfull, who likewise should be stirred up by the voice of the ministers to observe thse wonderfull events: which thing also is common to the three ses follow∣ing, that being once spoken here, it may be understood in the rest. 2 J behelde therefore, and loe a white horse: The first type is a white horse, and the sitter on him with a bowe and a crowne. As touching the horse, he is a warlike and swift beast: to which worthily God compareth his actions, both here & in other places, because with great courage & swiftnes, they will breake through, whatsoever men shall make against. Zach. 6. The white colour is ioifull, proper to some famous solemnity, as in the triumphe of Diocletian
and Maximian: After, saith Pomponius Letus, the chariot of the triumphers of golde and pretious stones, which foure horses drewe, comparable in whitnesse with the snowe. But a rider is attributed to this and the rest, that wee may knowe that they wander not up and downe rashly at their pleasure, but are ruled and governed by the raines of Gods Providence. And it may easily be ges∣sed what manner of sitter it is from the analogie of the 8. verse. For there he is noted by name, that sitteth on the pale horse, whose name, seeing it is death, his name may be life or trueth, that hath so noble and pleasant a forme. But whereas he is furnished with a bowe and crowne and went forth conquering that he might overcome, by the same thinges is signifyed, that an assault farre of shalbe made, and that a notable victory shall ensue thereof: which should not vanish away with the present successe, but should even also flourish with future happines. For a bowe is a weapon of that kinde, as with which the enemyes are hite both farre and neare. But the Crowne is a token of victory, so as both in the horse & sitter on him, all things are ioyous & pros∣perous. So is the interpretation of the wordes, wherwith the History doth agree so wonderfully, that noe picture doth more lively represente his pa∣terne, then the type of this seale, the condition of those times. Wee know that while Traiane was Emperour, after Iohn was gone from Pamos to E∣phsus, that is by and by after the Revelation was written, a most lamentable persecution waxed very hotte and fierce, which raging even unto the four∣teenth yeere, at length by the letters of Pliny second Proconsull of Bthyia, it was some hat quenched and mitigated. Neverthelss the first Beas had not yet spoken. For Pliny was a heathen man and noe member of the Chrch, much lesse the chiefe ruler. Neither sd the trouble wholy thro∣ugh his admonition, onely this was obtayned, that the Christians should not be searched for unto punishement, but onely should be punished whē they were brought unto the Governours & accused, Eus. Feel. Hist. book. . 33. Wherfore the fight yet cōtinued, & Traiā being dead, a fewe yeares af¦ter it waxed more fierce under Adriā: who at lēgth going on with rage un∣to the destructiō of the name of Christiās, the Lion roared out, even the first Beast, as the thūder. For God raysed up Quadratus the Bishop of Athens, & also Astides a Philosopher citizen of the same city, who as liōs stoutly regarding not the dāger of their life in respect of the good of the Church, spake to A∣driā by Apologies, then also in face, pleaded the cause of the Christians. By which the mindes of the faithfull were raised up with attente of the evēt, & not in vaine, seeing frō thence followed a great change forthwith. For the white horse & his sitter with a bowe & crown wēt forth: that is, the truth triūphed ioyfully whē the Emperour being overcome by the oration of those godly
men did ordaine, that noe Christian should be condemned, unlesse he were convi∣cted of some crime, punisheable by the Civile lawes. This was a manifest victory of the trueth, and a greate token of future hapines, Euseb. Hist. booke 4 ch. 3. But her power was more excellēt under the next Emperour, Antonin Pius: about the beginning of whose Empire, the Christians being againe mise∣rably oppressed from the former hatred, at length Iustin Martyr Leo, admi¦nistring the word of God in the habite of a Philosopher, (as sayeth Euseb. booke 4.11.) wrote Apologies for the Christians unto Antonin, to his sonnes, and to the Senate of Rome: wherby he effected God working togither with him, that it was enacted by publike decree, that noe man should trouble Chri∣stians in that respet, because they were Christians, but if any would proceede to mo∣lest them, the acusd, usd should be free and absolved from the accusation, although foūd to be such a one, but the accusr should be made subiect to punishement: as it appea∣reth by the Decree of the same Antonin, in Iustin and Euseb. booke 4.13. Nowe surely the trueth triumphed wearing a crowne, and the Emperours did lye downe bing stroken by the bowe, who seemed to be farre beyond the lot of private men. Yea in the most remote countryer one Apologie being throwne, the enemyes were so restrayned, that they could attemp nothing against the trueth. The same Iustine also by his most learned wri∣tinges, stopped the mouthes of the Iewes and Grecians, so as the victory of the trueth was famous, Euseb. booke 4.18. Therefore this time next after Iohn excellent for Apologies, & ioyfull fruict of the persecution stai∣ed, is the voice of the Lyon, the first Beast, and that onely pleasant solemnity, which the trueth did keepe, being sit on the white horse with the bowe and crowne. 3 And when he had opened the second Seale; So is the first Seale. The second as touching the Lābe that openeth it, there is nothing newe. But the Beast is an other, namely an Oxe, whose place was the seconde, in chap. 4 7. And wee knowe that this beast is borne to labour; not to be compared with the Liō in the glory of overcoming: yet farre more noble in the praise of enduring sorrowe. Neither is the voice here so terrible and roaring, as was that of the thundering Lion, but vulgar and common: whēce he saith that he heard the second beast, saying, which yet should have his force to stirre up men to hearken to the event. 4 And another horse came forth that was reade: The second type is a read horse, & the sitter upon him, to whom was given a great sword. Of the horse wee spake at the second verse. That fiery colour signifyeth warre, contentions, slaughters blood, as in Isaiah: Who is this that cometh from Edome, with stieped garments from Bozrah? Wherfore art thou red in thy garments, and thyne
apparell as of him that treadeth in the wine presse? chap. 63.1. The sitter on him is furnished with power, because he should order the matter, not at his owne pleasure, but by an others commandement. Power is given, partly by word, partly by signe. By word. leave being graunted to take peace from the earth. For so the verbe  to take, is taken for , to take away, as wee have ob∣served before in chap. 3.11. But the Earth in opposed to Heaven. And see∣ing Heaven in this booke doth note out the true and holy Church, as after it shalbe manifest, the earth contrarywise signifyeth the ungodly world, from which peace is taken, and not from the Church. Which is yet more playne from the declaration of the power, which proceedeth so farre, that it should set mē togither by the eares, to kill one an other, as these wordes shewe, that one should kill another, but the Church avengeth not her selfe by slaughter of the enemyes, much lesse by a certen furie in murdering her owne friendes. But this butchery one of an other groweth from the strifes and battells amonge the Gentiles, wherby one should runne headlong to an others destruction. Wherefore it is not here spoken of the persecution of the Church, but of the tempest of warres, wherewith the whole world should be shaken. Which is declared to be very great by the signe and Instru¦ment of the power, that is a great sword given to the sitter on the horse. Which thinge came to passe, after that Antoninus Pius was dead. For his sonne Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus Verus, by name a Philosopher, by deede a greate enemy of the trueth, being blinded with the Heathens superstition, moved a mercilesse persecution against Christians. Which that the second Beast might restraine he uttered a voice. For Iustin sent a second Apologie to the Emperour, Euseb. booke 4.16. of the Eccl. Hist. Melito Bishop of Sar∣di, & Apolinarius Bishop of Hierapolis doe the same, pleading earnestly the cau∣se of the Christians, in bookes written to the same Emperour, Euseb. Hist. booke 4.26. But the Emperour more learned then his Father, lesse godly, receaved the defense with deafe eares. From hence the voice of this Beast became the voice of an Oxe, as which prevailed not, as before the voice of the Lion did prevayle. But the Beast neverthelesse after his lowing did beare a grievous yoke of the former calamity. Iustin himselfe, before in strength a Lion, nowe in patience an Oxe, killed for Christ his sake, ob∣tayned the name of Martyr Euseb. Hist booke 4. 16. The residue did mourne under the crosse, without any rest given them. Notwithstanding howsoever the voice prevailed not to appease the cruelty, yet it was instead of an alarme to warne, the faithfull howe great evill was like to come short¦ly upon the world for their cruell hardeing against the trueth. Peace shalbe taken away straiteway from men; seeing it should be most iust, that
they which would refuse eternall peace, should not also enioy this earthly; and they which so greedily thirsted after innocent blood, should be satia∣ted at length with their owne blood. Therefore by and by all thinges are on fire w warres. The Parthians nowe first of al af Trian fall away f he Romanes. Thither the brother of the Emperour goeth, be in ad∣ as a forte to the Empire, and at length a very great disconfiture  he returneth home with triumphe; to whom this felicity was bu , being suddenly dead of an Apoplexi, whle he sate with his bro¦ter in the chariot: Eutrop. Brev. booke 8. Shortly after arose the warre of the people of Bohemia: so great as ther hath not bin the like in any time, as the se Eurropius saith, worthily to be compared with the warres of Cathg: which togither with the Bohemians, the Qd, Vands, the Sar∣es, and Suves, and all Barbary, from the Ce of Paonia even to the middes of the Gaulles. Hoe mistable was then the face of things, the sa∣me author dscribeth excellently after thi manner: For, saith he, there was not rest any where from warre, and through all the East, Illyrum, Italy, France, battayles were hotely applyed: these were earthquakes, not without the destruction of cityes, inundations of rivers, often pestilence, kindes of locusts hurtfull to the fieldes: so as nothing at all almost wherby moll men are wont to be wasted with very great sorowes, can be spoken or thought, which raged not when Antoninus was Emperour. Those are his wordes. It was a great and cruell sword which was moyst & drunken with so much blood. If any doe thinke that warre was noe stran∣ge thing to the Romanes, neither to be like to be true, that a thing so co∣mon and uall should here be signifyed, let him compare the Empire of this Antoninus with theirs which went before: he shall see that the warre had ed by the Providence of God for a lōge space, to the end that this iudgent of God, when it should come to passe, might be more famous. Aus his father governed the whole world by his sole authority, noe warre being made for the space of three and twenty yeeres. Sextus, Aure∣lius Vulr: Hadianus also had peace the whole time of his empire, except that once onely he fought by his Vice-Roy; Eutrop. Brev. booke 8. Was not the thing worthy observatiō, that after the peace of 44. yeeres, all pla∣ces should be suddenly troubled with the burning flame of warres? Every man seeth that there is so great agreement of all things, namely of the Pro¦phecy, Time and Event, that it cannot be doubtfull, but that the Spirit poin∣ted as it were with the finger to this onely thinge. Tertul. in his Apol. that a notable peace was granted at length to the Cristians by this Emperours decree: but this came to passe after the warre of the Marcomanes, in which having tryed the singular helpe of God against the enemyes by the prayers of the Chri∣stians
who were souldiours in his army, he could not but provide at lēgth for their safety, who had brought health both to him selfe and also to his Empire. And yet he lived not longe after this warre, the next yeere after the triumphe departing this life. 5 And when he had opened the third seale &c. The Beast of the third seale is a man, chap. 4.7. mighty in reason & experience of things. Not but that the former Beasts were of this same force also and power, but because this should be the chiefe thing wherein the third Beast should excell. The voice also of this is more obscure, then was that of the first: which yet should be sufficient to teach the faithfull what punishement God would take of the world for their sake. ¶ T I behld, d lo a blake horse: The third type is a blacke horse, the sit∣ter on w he th in i ha es, being commanded to bring in a dearth al∣  the Bs, yet so as he should not hurt wine and oyle. Therefore as oang this orse the bl olour sitly agreeth to the hunger starvē, who  a body ithout blood ithout iuyce, & without colour: as Ier. Lam.  pure th o ow is their bewy become more darke then  8. Also through hunger the eyes are dimme, & covered with da  eyes receed light, whē he had put his hāde to his mouth. 1 S. .28  which the ster hath in his hādes, is called , w  to wit the beame of the balāce, on which the soles doe hā¦ge  the whole. A s instrument for famine, see∣ing  as weighed. 6 Ad I : Ths v is the  being in the middes of the Beasts: ch. 5 6  unisll administratiō of thinges beig  Bt seng this voice is d, amōg the Bea, neither as  go out frō  lace by the same is signifed th the very , but yet which alone should knowe the coll . ¶ A measure of whe &c. The Inter  he en quātity of this measure some give to it 3  8. e∣sichius  are as it were ood divided: which in one word  called cō∣monly Demnson, a s mre of corne. Atheneus speaeth ore dinct¦ly of it in his 3 booke Dopsi, shewing for how long a tme this allowanc was, calling it the sstenance for one day. Aristophanes in  bringth some∣what a more full light where  twitting the servants, sayth whom I have taught to fashion foure loaves of bread to a Choenix, to wit, a measure of cor¦ne. Therefore Chocnix conteineth so much corne, as would suffice to make foure loaves.
The Scholiast addeth, that foure great loaves were made of a Choenix, and 8 small ones:  signify corne in generall, in this place wheate, or meale of wheate, a dearer provision then barley, three measures of which are not solde for more then one of wheate; for a peny, understand shalbe folde, or some like word. Denarius is a latine word, being worth ten pieces of silver. The auncient writers make it equall in weight & value to the Attike drach∣ma, that is seven pence. It is of three kindes, as some will have it, one of which is worth after our accounte seven pence, an other eight, an other ten. And thus much of the corne: as touching the other sustenance, he sayth, and oyle and wine, hurt not. The latine translations reade the wordes being displaced, thus, and wine & oyle hurt not: the meaning is, yet wine and oyle hurt not, after the manner of the Hebrewes, the copulative being put discretive∣ly. The wordes wine & oyle cānot be referred unto those that went before, as though he should say, a measure of wheate shalbe sold for a peny, and three measures of barly for a peny, likewise wine and oyle for a peny: Iu∣nius on this place, thou shalt not doe uniustly, for the wordes oyle & wine are the accusative case of the following wordes thou shalt not hurt, and not the nominative going before the verbe, as the wordes, measure and measures are. Wherefore all succour for life should not be taken away, but onely neces∣sary things should be diminished. Oyle and wine which serve for delicious dainties, should be left unhurt, because it had seemed good to God to pu∣nish the poorer sort first, the Princes and states being reserved as dainties from famine to the pestilence. For whom the famine could not consume, because of their riches and aboundance, those the pestilence should eate up and should kill with a speedy death, as in the seale following. So are the wordes. The event is not so playnly mentioned of the History-writers, as were to be wished, who doe gather onely the more notable thinges, and doe easily passe over for the most part thinges vulgar and common, espe∣cially, when as this famine consisted onely in the scarcity of corne, & not in a dearth of all victualls: Yet God would have some tokens of it to be ap¦parent, as farre as might suffice to set out of danger the trueth of the Pro∣phecy. Commodus the sonne of Antoninus did succeede his father, who being Emperour there was given by the mercy of God some breathing: I thinke, because frō the Emperour himselfe alone, man kinde should have plague and pestilence enough. Pertinax & Iulian followe: both of a short raigne, and therefore lesse hurtfull. At length Severus enioyeth the Domi∣nion, a cruell authour of a most grievous butchery, whether of his owne accord, or by the instigation of other men. Then the third Beast cryed out, admonishing the faithfull that God would punish the wicked loathing spi¦rituall
foode with a great penury of the sustenance of this life. For Tertul∣lian, whō by right thou mayest call a Man excelling in witte in good iudg∣ment and in learning, who hath almost as many argumēts as wordes, who through anger falling away unto the Heresy of Montanus, by his infirmity also shewed, that nothing perteining to a man, was alienate from him: this Tertullian, I say, sent a most learned Apologie written against the Gen∣tiles, to the Nobles of Rome, by which at least secretly, as writeth Franciscus Zephyrus, they might have knowledge of the common cause of Christians, seeing that openly they might not. Neither did he thinke that onely the Princes of the Romane Empire were to be called upon of him generally, but also by name Scapula the President of Cartage, if peradventure he might tame by these mea∣nes his cruell minde. He sheweth him the true cause of the publike cala∣mityes, to wit, that the wicked world by persecuting the trueth, did bring upon themselves those sterilities, that after sowing time the harvests were lost, that deluges arysing from showers of raine and fearfull tempests marred all thinges. For so he speaketh, Yet wee must needes be grieved, because noe city shall carry a∣way scotfree the shedding of our blood: and also as under Hilarianus the President, when concerning the floores of our burials, thy cried togither, they shall not be treshing floores, they were not their floores. For they have not done their harvests. Which wordes shew plainly, that there was great barrennes in those times, when as there were noe harvests: and therefore as it seemeth, those floores were given to the Christians, wherin they might bury their dead, when through the great barrennes they were to noe use for to lay up corne. And why should wee not acknowledge here the blacke horse, seeing the Sunne in the as∣sembly at Ʋtica, had almost quite lost his light, and that not by an extraordinary e∣clipse, but being placed in his high and exaltation? as witnesseth the same Tertul∣lian to Scapula. Neither did this want of sustenance torment onely the wic¦ked Gentiles, but also did troble the Christians, for God will have wordly goods to be common to the prophane: and afflictions to his owne children, that all of like fellowship might proove both his lenity and severity: Tertul. in his Apol. So then the event doth agree with the Prophecy, punishing the world with an other scourge, even famine, which could not be raysed from their drowsi∣nes with that great sword and destruction of warres. The Iesuite will have the blacke horse to be understood of Heretiques, although according to his wonted errour, he hath noe regard of the time. For he referreth these thinges to the fortieth yeere of the Lord, when Mathewe wrote the Ghos∣pell: wherein he passeth over the boundes set of the Angell, I will shewe thee the thinges, which must be done hereafter, chap. 4.1. Many Heretiques indeede arose in the time of that respit which the Church enioyed under Commodus,
as Montanus and others of that sorte: but seeing the former Horse, & that which followeth, doe note bodily calamityes inflicted upon the world for iniuryes and violence offerred to the trueth, it were unmeete to transferre this which is placed between them, into an other kinde, especially seeing there is a manifest consent of the History. Neither must wee thinke that a famine belonging to the common people, is a lighter matter, then that it should be meete that men should be forewarned of it. For it was the pur∣pose of the Spirit, to appointe these first calamities as pledges of the fol∣lowing Prophecy: from whence they are called, Seales, as it were confirma¦tions of the other thinges which are to be delivered, that the trueth of these predictions being perceived, which should follow in the next times, the faithfull might be noe lesse without doubt touching those thinges which are to be expected in the last ages. Therefore these Seales, are as the three kiddes, three loaves of bread, a bottell of wine, Likewise a Viole, a Tymbrell, a Pype, and a Harpe, with which men meeting Saule, made a more undoubted persua¦sion in him, touching the promised Kingdome. 7 And when he had opened the fourth seale, I heard the voice of the fourth Beast: The fourth Beast is an Eagle, flowing on high, and little esteeming the thin∣ges that are on earth, chap. 4.7. He standeth in equall degree with the last former Beasts, and doe not attaine that power of the first, whose roaring sounded out like thunder. Yet neverthelesse by his Eagles cry he instru∣cteth the faithfull touching the evill to come, whom he biddeth come and see howe great destruction should come upon the world by and by. 8 And beholde a pale horse: The fourth type is a pale Horse, the Sitter on whō is described by his Name, Follower, and the busines committed to him. The co∣lour of the Horse is , which properly signifyeth being greene, & a thing so greene as grasse: Some time it is taken for the deformity of herbes waxing dry, which have lost their colour, from whence it is taken for palenes, which is the colour of a thing withered, as pale feare, because feare maketh men pale: and Constance the Father of Constantin the great, was called Chlorus for his palenes, as saith Zonaras in Diocletian. That sickly colour doth very well become the Horse on whose backe sitteth Death himselfe: where he that sate, is used for to him that sate. Which kinde of speaking is according to the Hebrewes, as was observed chap. 2.26. Although least any should thinke it to be against the rule of Grammar, and through his owne ignorance im∣pute barbarisme to the holy writer, wee have also examples in other ton∣gues of most eloquent authours. Livius speaketh thus, The learned, saith he, in religions and common lawe, when duo ordinarij Consules, two ordinary Cōsuls of that yeere, one perished by the sword, the other by sicknes, denyed that the substitu∣ted
CONSƲLL could have an assembly of people to chuse officers. Where duo ordi∣narij Consules, is put for duorum ordinariorum Consulum, that is, of two ordinary cō∣suls. So Salust. Therefore in the beginning Kings (for that was the first name of Go∣vernement on the earth) being diverse, part exercised their wit, part their body. Ma∣ny thinges of this sort are noted of learned men, of whom also it is obser∣ved that this manner of speaking is very usuall with the Grecians. First, to the rider the name Death is given. From the proportion whereof names al∣so be given to the former, so as he that sitteth on the white horse, may be cal∣led trueth: on the red horse, warre: on the blacke horse, famine: Which I doe mentione, because I see that some little to the purpose, doe faine here the Devill and I knowe not what others to be the Sitters. Nowe the Sitter is named Death, for excellency sake, both because the plague of this seale should bring more swifte destruction, and also because it should annoy with moe kindes of killing. The third scourge of God is wonte to be the Pestilence as in Ezechiel. That they shall fall by the sword, by famine, and pestilence, chap. 6.11. The which notwithstanding is not here made the captayne of the ranke, but onely, mustered into the place of an ordinary souldiour, as wee shall see by and by. The cōpanion or rather waiting made of Death is : which in latine is commonly translated Hell, but it would be more fitly translated Grave, which also the greeke word signifyeth, & so it ought to be understood in this place: especially seeing many holy men should die togither with the rest, whom it were a wicked thinke to iudge to be swal∣lowed up of the Hell of the damned. For as touching that the Jesuite doth thinke, that Hell doth follow to devoure Traiane, whom he will have to be this Sitter, wee shall see in the applying howe fond a thing it is: that I may not say how carelesly he mixed and confoūdeth all thinges, who bringeth againe to Traiane the Prophecy which was passed beyond Severus. Second∣ly power is given to the Sitter, and togither also is limitted with his boun∣des, and there was given them: where some bookes doe read the order being changed, and power was given to him over the fourth parth of the earth, and the common Latine translation, for the fourth part of the earth, readeth, over foure parts of the earth: by these meanes the whole world being made subiect to their dominion, against the consent of all the Greeke copies. But nowe it is a detestable thing to thinke after the Tridentine Decree, that the commō trāslatiō was not corrected according to the best Greeke copies. Although a good sense in deede may be drawne from the wordes, that the foure partes of the earth, may note the largenes of the countryes in which the destructi∣on should go on with rage: even as the fourth part of the earth; the multitu∣de of men which should perish by this death.
The Power is defined with a foure folde kinde of destroying, with Death sit∣ting on the horse, which he useth as his Ministers. Warres & Batells leade the first army, whose weapon is a Sword; Want of foode guideth the second hoste: the third the Pestilence, (for by death he meaneth it) to whom is attributed the name of the gender, because it taketh men away with a most quicke de∣struction, and setteth before our eyes a most lively image of death: and thē also it is wont to be alwayes the follower of Famine. And in many mother tongues it is called Mortality. The last scourge is of Beasts, a scourge much used in former times, as I will sende upon you the Beasts of the field, Levit. 26.22. So, Aso when I shall send my foure sore iudgements upon Ierusalem, even the sword, and famine, and noysome Beasts, and Pestilence, Ezech. 14.21. An exē∣ple whereof wee have, when the Lord sent Lions among the newe dwellers, who succeeded the ten tribes carried away, 2 King. 17.25. or it may be that Beasts, be taken metaphorically, for men mighty on earth and made like Beasts, a fre∣quent name in the scriptures of Tyrants and wicked Princes, as of Pharaoh: Thou art like a yong Lion among the nations, Ezech. 32.2. And famous in Da∣niell is the nothing of foure Kinges by so many Beastes, that is, a Lion, a Beare, a Leopard, and the fourth terrible Beast, to wit, a Centaure, compact of ma∣ny: chap. 7.4.5. These are then the bandes of Death, which nowe ioyned togither, he would spread abroade into the world, when the gates and wayes were opened, which before were severall plagues. And that it is also so come to passe the coherence of things doe teache it. After Severus the state of the Church was quiet, untill at length the Empire came to Decius. Maximinus troubled somewhat, but he being killed a while after, his mad∣nes and life was short. But Decius neither feared with the calamity of war∣res, nor any whit moved with the scarsity of victualls, both which he might easily perceive, the slaughters of the innocents to have brought into the world, commanded that rigour should be shewed toward the Christians, with all kinde of torments. Then the fourth Beast spake, for Cyprian being indeede an Eagle, a contemner of the world, and of the thinges that are ve∣ry much esteemed of other men: who at his first conversion bestowed all his goods upon the poore: who earnestly reproved the covetousnes of o∣ther men in heaping up patrimonies: sharply rebuked the pride of them that preferred themselves before others: reprehended swelling insolency, and immodest boasting of confession, & by all meanes, openly avouched, that these scourges were provoked by such sinnes. This Eagle, I say, flying so much the more higher, by howe much the more he did abase himselfe, in writing against Demetrianus Ethnicus: shewed playnly, that this was the chiefe cause of all evills, wherewith the world was tormented, that the Gē¦tiles
did persecute so barbarously the harmelesse worshippers of Christ: whom the world after their manner through envy charged, for to be the cause of the commō calamityes: but that holy man did put away those calumnies, and declared manifestly the true fountaine of all the evils. Nei∣ther was his voice false, God forthwith approving it by sending into the world divers and sundry sortes of horrible destruction. Decius himselfe was swallowed up in a golfe-mire of a marsh, not bequeathing himselfe to death for his country, after the example of the olde Decius: but going downe as it were quicke into Hell, for a iust terrour of all mercilesse Ty∣rants. Gallus & Volusianus by and by after felt the wrath of God, who are fa∣mous for no remembrance of their notable acts, but onely for the destru∣ction of mankinde. For first when these reigned, the sword slewe an infi∣nite sorte of men. For the Scythians when Decius was gone, & when first the yoke of tribute was layed upon the Romnes (which howe much blood it cost, any man may easily coniecture) altering forthwith their act, did make invasions, did drive away spoiles, did violently enter in, often times by a very great army by land and by sea, did wast Dardania, Thracia, Thessalia, Macedonia, and the country Hellas: part did molest Asia with the spoiling, rasing, and destroy∣ing of many cityes on every side: By whose example also other enemyes did a∣ryse: the Parthians did take and hold by force Armenia, and did passe through into the parte of Syria; which mischiefes when Gallus & Volusianus, make ready to withstand, they are both killed of the souldiours. Aemilianus a three-moneth Emperour was chosen of the same into their place, and of them kil∣led. Valerianus cometh alive into the enemyes power, and is made a footstoole to Sapores, for to get upon his horse. The sword then played his part greatly, lea¦ving scarse any part of the world free from slaughters. The famine gave oc¦casion both to Demetrianus of calumniating the Christians, and to Cyprian of defending them. Doest thou, sayth he, speaking to Demetrianus, mar∣vayle and complaine in this your obstinacy and contempt, if the earth be foule with the standing of dust, if the barren clotte bringeth scarse fainte yellowish and wanne her∣bes and grasse, if seldome raine descende from above, if the beating haile maketh the wine feeble, if a subverting whirlewinde doe breake in pieces the olive trees, if drought doe stoppe up the fountaine & c? From which it is cleare howe grievous the cō¦dition of those times was, as concerning vittailes. And although the untē∣peratnes of the Heaven had not ben, there was calamity enough from the continuall warres to spende up all the store: seeing it must needes be, that the fieldes and country were forsaken, the tillage of the earth was negle∣cted, that the cattel were not regarded, the corne layed up was burnt with fire, and that all succour of life was destroyed. From whence the sword
hath Famine ioined with it, as an unseparable companion. The third wea∣pon of death was the Pestilence: then which noe mā will say easily, I thinke, whether at any time, there hath ben any more sharpe and grievous, either for continuance of time, or for multitude of those that perished. It arose first under Gallus & Volusianus, beginning at Aethiopia, it was spread almost through all the East and Weast; it made many cityes wholy empty of city∣zens, and continued whole 15. yeeres, as Zonaras in Gallo, and Dionysius of Alexandria in an Epistle to the brethren, doe describe lamentably, the cru¦ell fiercenesse of it: and togither also maketh mention of the former calami¦tyes, giving a most cleare testimony of the fulfilling of this Prophecy in those times: After the persecution, which he spake of a little before, there fol∣lowed both warres and famine, which wee endured togither with the Gentiles: bea∣ring alone the thinges, wherewith they oppressed us: yet even alike partakers of those thinges which both they brought upon them selves, and suffered, and againe wee re∣ioyced in the peace of Christ, which he gave to us alone: But when both wee and they had ben cased a very short time, that pestilence entered, a thing more terrible to them then any terrour, and more lamentable then any calamity, and (as one of their owne History-writers sayd) which alone exceeded the hope of all men, yet not such to us, but an exercise and tryall inferiour to none of the rest: for it absteined not in deede frō us, but it came on with farre more violence against them. These thinges hath he in Euseb. Hist. booke 7.22. Cyprian from this sorrowfull and unwonted e∣vill, tooke the argumēt of his booke touching mortality. As for the Beasts, if they be taken properly, I remember not that I have read any notable dā¦mage and hurt done of them at this time: although it is noe light conie∣cture that they did much harme in the Easterne and Southerne countryes. In some ages coming after, when also the famine and pestilence became worse and worse, men were afraid of the dogges, least being accustomed to eate their carkases cast forth abroade, afterward they should desyre thē alive for meate: whereupon they set themselves to kill the dogges, Euseb. booke 9.8. neither could it be, but when foode fayled in the fieldes, and men were lesse able to defend themselves, that many were devoured of the Beasts. But if wee referre them to cruell men and tyrants, in noe mans remembrā∣ce at any time were there so great troupes of Beasts in every place, spoiling and renting men in pieces. For when Gallienus was Emperour, who after Valerian was taken, reigned alone, so many tyrants arose, who tooke to themselves the name of Emperour, as there were not so many since Cesar was Dictator, to that time, in so long a row and continued ranke of EMPE∣ROƲRS. Thirty are recorded by Trebellius, who at one time, in divers coū∣tryes,
invaded the Empire: in which also certeine women scoffed at the name of Romane. How great a dismembring of men must there needes be, whē so many Beasts strove at once about the Empire? Such then are the three Seales, every one notable for their scourges: the two former for their speci∣all, the last for all these kindes of punishements, wherewith the world was to be punished, for despising and vexing the trueth. For when the milder correction prevailed nothing with their stubburne hartes, almost all the hostes of death are sent in upon them, even as also the event hath most ful∣ly approved. Neither yet are these evills so proper to this one age, that they can agree to noe other; but they are the common punishements of the con¦temners of godlines; Lev. 26. Ezech. 6.11. &c. And afterward after these ti∣mes of Gallienus, one may see the Famine and Pestilence did consume all, whē Maximinus raigned in the East, Euseb. booke 9. 8. But there is so solemne a Prophecy of them in this place, both because the next times after Iohn, should be famous for these punishements, which men should procure to themselves for despising the Ghospell, and also because they should be faith¦full hostages, pledges and seales of the future events, that were to be expe∣cted many ages after. 9 And when he had opened the fift Seale, I sawe under the Altar the soules &c. Of the fifte seale there is noe Beast, by whose voice Iohn is invited to see. And that not without cause, but because this secret should passe over, men being not stirred up by any publike solemne crie, to observe the event, as was done in the former; neither certenly doth the History reporte, that a∣ny man performed any such labour, in which respect such an office might be attributed unto him worthily. Furthermore, this Seale consisted partly in rehearsing thinges past, partly in reporting an evēt of that kinde, which is wont to glaunce by without perceaving: especially seeing our natures ar so disposed, that adversities doe abyde more surely in our mindes, then prosperityes. Wherefore seeing the Seales are made like unto the events, it is no mervayle, that noe type is set forth here, to which noe event should be answerable. ¶ J sawe under the altar the soules: The fifte type is the soules of the Martyrs ly∣ing under the altar in this verse, requiring vengeance against their enemies, ver. 10 & receaving answere ver. 11. Which three members doe respect three times, to wit, the time past, present, and to come. The soules lying under the altar de∣clare most finely from the consequent, what wente before, that is to say, in what cōditiō the Church was during those former seales, and with howe
great cruelty of men she contended. Wee have heard in deede the trueth o∣vercoming, wee have learned also that warre, famine, and pestilence with their cō¦panions possessed and spoiled all thinges, but there was noe mention yet, in what state the true worshippers of Christ were in the meane time: all∣though from the victory of the trueth, their conflict may be gessed, & frō those calamities anoying the world, that great wronge was done to the godly, for which cause the enemies were so sharpely punished. But the thinge is made manifest nowe by this complainte of the Martyrs killed, that is to say, that an infinite quantity of blood was shed of men that wor∣shipped the Sonne of God, frō that time in which John wrote, unto the ende of the raigne of Galienus, whither the former seales have brought us. And what place is there that have not heard of these horrible massacres all this space of time? Tratan, Hadrian, Antonin Ver, Maximin, Severe, Decie & the rest, not Emperours, but Murtherers have defiled all Histories with guilt∣lesse blood But he that followeth brevity may not recken up severally the innumerable murders. Although who coulde be able to rehearse them if he would, seeing the Ministers of the wickednes confesse themselves not sufficient to kill them, that came running togither to punishement of their owne accord. For so a certaine man Tiberianus, who had the chiefe doing of things at Palestine, reported to Traiane, as Suidas declareth in his Traia∣no. Plinie a heathen man being moved with the multitude of them that were killed, obtained some ceasing, or at least a certaine moderation. So pitifull was the condition of the Christians, that the enemyes had compas∣sion on their calamityes: reade the 3 4.5.6.7 book of Eusebius, where almost every page is washed with blood. It is noe mervayle, that the saincts being wearied with so continuall slaughters, doe aske at lenght some de∣livery. So is the meaning of this verse, but the wordes are yet to be made cleare and delivered from the slanders of the adversaries. From whence then is this fetched, that the soules of the Martyrs lye under the Altar? Without doubt in that rspct, that David used oft, as in Psal. 27.5. For in the time, saith he, of trouble, he will hide mee in his Tabernacle, in the secret place of his pa∣villon shall he hide mee, and set mee upon a rocke: and againe, thou dost hide them in a privy plce of thy presence from the pride of men: thou keepest them secretly in a cottage from the strife of tongues: Psal. 31.20. But it is knowne that the Taber¦nacle both according to the partes, and according to the whole, was a sha∣dow of Christ. Wherfore to be hidden in the Tabernacle, is to have Christ alone for the place of their succour and refuge, by whom alone wee are co¦vered and defended against all assaults of the adversaries. From hence it is apparant why the Soules are sayd to be under the Altar, to wit, that wee
should understand first from thence, that all the salvation also of the Mar¦tyrs consisteth in the alone Death of Christ, under the which the holy cham¦piōs hiding themselves as under a shielde, can appeare safely and boldly be¦fore God; and that they doe not merite eternall life to themselves by th shedding of their owne blood for Christ his sake, as the Papists wickedly dote: but to have neede of this covering, without which otherwise they cannot stande in the sight of Gods maiesty. Secondly that wee may know that all the children of God must be conformable to the image of their first borne bro∣ther: Rom. 8.29 and must walke the same way to heaven, wherein he hath gone before us, that is to say, by suffering of troubles, being made sacrifi∣ces and oblations, and to be killed with many anguishes. For which cause Paule sayth, that he in his flesh for the body of Christ, doth fulfill the rest of his af∣flictions, Col. 1.24. And the rest or defects he calleth conformityes, and not satisfactions, either of worthynes or merit. For whatsoever remaineth yet to be suffered of any of the saints, that is wanting after a sorte to the afflictions of Christ, who iudgeth all our calamityes his owne. These are common to all the faithfull, who have place alike under the Altar: but especially to the Martyrs, whose sufferings are famous before the rest. For which cause this covert to hide in, is attributed to them by name. Seeing then they lie un∣der the altar in this sense, after the usuall speaking in the scriptures, howe wickedly doth the Iesuite wrest these wordes unto the Idolatrous custome a∣monge them, of dedicating Temples? Whose manner is to bury the bo∣dyes or reliques of the Martyrs under the altar in the Churches, which they dedicate to them: & afterward to call the Church by his name, whose reliques are there buried, as though more respect were to be had to the re∣liques under the altar, then of him whom they will have to be sacrificed on the altar. Would the Spirit have respect to this custome, wherby very great iniury is done both to Christ, and also to his holy Martyrs? To Christ, becau∣se he is spoiled of his honour, and thrust beneath his servants. To Martyrs, because they are made robbers of his glory, for maintayning whereof they shed their blood. Neither are the Iesuites content to abuse these wordes unto the defence of Idolatry, unlesse also they destroy that which was well built of others. Bernard in his third sermon of the Saints, taught from hence, the holy soules loosed from this prison of the body, not forthwith to enioy perfite blessed∣nes, but to waite for full happines at the last iudgement, reioycing in the meane time with great and huge comfort: I dispute not howe such doctrine is not drawne necessarily from this place: the sentence seemeth to be true and agreable with the other scriptures. For so David speaketh, when J awake, I shalbe satis∣fied with thy image, Psal. 17.15. Neither did Paule expect a crowne before that
day, in which it shalbe given to all that have loved the bright comming of Christ; 2. Tim. 4.8. Neither would God that the auncient people should be made perfite without us: much lesse is it like to be true, that one of the essentiall parts, should attaine absolute happines without the other, Heb. 11.40. They that would (more boldly then becometh modest Christians) that the separate soules, should have a cleare sight of God, in whom as in a glasse they be∣holde all thinges, past, present, and to come: what reason doe they give, why the soules under the ALTAR not content with this sight alone, as if they were ignorant doe enquire of the time of vengeance? Many such thinges ought to have restrained the Iesuites not to fight against a true sē∣tence. But they sawe that unlesse they should give to the separated soules full happines in the cleare beholding of God, the Jnvocating of Saints would be overthrowne, and that there were no reason left, for to shewe why wee should implore their aide, seeing it was not the manner before Christ was exhibited: but let it be sufficient to have touched in a word their crafty dea∣ling. ¶ For the word of God: Which most constantly they have professed & prea¦ched, as ch. 1.9. And for the testimony which they maintained, in the greek which they had, peradventure in this sense, that they were counted Christi∣ans by the testimony of others, as 1 Tim. 3.7. But he must be well reported, evē from them that are without: as if for the word of God, should belonge to them, who by their profession have procured to themselves the hatred of the wic¦ked: but the testimony which they had, to them that are manifested by the iud¦gement of other men. 10 They cryed with a lowde voice: Hitherto the first mēber, which hath ope¦ned the condition of the time past: nowe the present state under Galienus, is shewed by a cry. Through yrkesomnes of continuall trouble, a delive∣rance from it at lēgth is asked; seeing they have endured more thē enough. This cry sheweth the manner of Gods iustice, which cannot suffer uniust murders unpunished: in which sorte the blood of Abell is sayd to have cryed, Gen. 4.10. But how great is the patiēce of our God, which is provoked by a cry to punishement, before that he prepares to it? But whither did the saints beare the former iniuries without speaking, neither cryed out before this 5 seale? Without doubt they did alwayes sigh under the crosse: but nowe first of all mention is made of the crying, because the time was not farre of when they should be delivered from those sorrowes. For God is wont when he will bestowe any thing upon his children, to stirre up their harts to fervent prayers, both that they may more esteeme the good thing obtained, and also that they may learne howe great a regard he hath of us
that call upon him with sincere mindes, ¶ How long O Lord which art holy & true: They set forth God with those ti∣tles, wherby they may stablish & increase their faith, as it ought to be done in all right invocation. For because he is holy, he cannot let goe unpunished the ill deedes of the world, especially seeing he is also true & hath made lar∣ge promises touching the blessednes of his people. ¶ Doest thou not iudge & avenge: Iudgement perteineth to the knowledge of a matter, vengeance to the performing & executing of the thing iud∣ged, which signify punishement toward him that doth wronge: yet chiefly I thinke the delivering of the innocent party: from whence it is construed often with a preposition, as in Luke avenge mee of my adversary, ch. 18.3. Where the widowe doth not so much desire fervently the punishement of the ad∣versary, as her owne deliverance. So David 1 Sam. 13. and the Lord avenge mee of thee, so hath Tremelius. I would rather translate the wordes thus, & the Lord shall deliver mee from thee, as also the Greeke Interpreters have it, the Lord deliver mee from thee: for he doth not wish evill to Saul to his face. And such a thing is it which the Soules require, to wit, that God at length would after so long a tryall, deliver the Church from the power & tyranny of the e∣nemyes, & that he would not suffer it to be oppressed alway with the yoke of the wicked. That this is the summe of the request, it is knowne from the graunt. That is not denyed them which they desire earnestly, but it is differ¦red to some time, which being accomplished, they should receive the thing so much desired. 11 Then longe white robbes were given to every one: Montanus omitteth the white robes, & readeth, & it was given to them that they should rest. Other co∣pies reade in the singular number thus, & a white robe was given them; & so A¦retas & the cōmon translation, & there were given to them every one severall white robes. The answere made to the soules is evidēt by a signe & by a speech, by both which is declared what should be the next cōming cōditiō of the saints. The robes are givē for a signe, which are garmēts hāging downe evē to the heeles, fitte for to hide all deformity in the body, as Cyrus of the ro∣be in Xenophon: it seemed to hide, if any should have any defect in his body. Fitte ve∣stemēts for the saincts, & meete for Christ to give them. But whereas the robes are white, that perteineth to an ornamēt used in time of ioy, as wee hav shewed at ch. 3.4. But now they ar givē to every one, not so much for the sou¦les cause thēselves, in so much as they enioy gladnes in the heavēs, but for to signify the things to be done on earth. For wāted they robes all that time frō Traiane to Gallienus? Christ promised that he that overcometh shalbe clothed in white aray ch. 3.5. How long is this promise differred? It is not to be doub¦ted, but that the race being runne out, there is some reward of the labour.
Therefore these robes are not they of which it was spoken before, which ar given by and by after the labour is ended, but of an other kinde, signify∣ing that the saincts should have merry dayes on earth for a time, which they should celebrate as it were with white gownes, as is the custome in the time of solemne mirth. The answere made by worde cometh to the sa∣me ende, which both commandeth them to rest, and also stteth downe limits how long it should continue, namely, a very little time, untill their fellow servants were ful∣filled, which should be killed, even as they were. In summe a ioyfull rest for a short time is fore shewed, which at length a newe slaughter of the faith∣full should follow: which at length being finished, that should come to passe which the holy soules desired. The History witnesseth, that the thing fell out after the same manner. For after Galienus, succeeded Claudius, Quin¦tilius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Florianus, Probus, Carus and his sonnes, & at length Diocletian: through all which space of about fourty yeeres, unto the nine∣tinth yeere of Diocletian, there was a time of a white gowne, and of ioyfull mirth, free from the murders and spoiling of the saints, the Emperours thē∣selves being restrained of God, that they might not interrupte and hinder the peace graunted. Which calmnes Euseb. describeth eloquently in the 8. booke and 1. and 2. chap. of his Hist. For being about to write of the sorrowfull time of Diocletians cruelty, he prepareth him selfe a way, by the remembrance of the former happines. He professeth himselfe unable to de¦clare according to the worthines of the thing, howe great every where a∣monge all men was the credit and liberty of the Christian trueth: Howe great was the mildnes, saith he, of the Emperours towards ours, to whom they com∣mitted authority and rule over the Gentiles? whom they suffered without punishemēt and bouldly to professe their religion, held in great estimation, loved entirely, and coun¦ted most trusty to them, as that Dorotheus and Gregorius. Also the Governours of the Churches founde noe lesse courtesie, assemblyes were celebrated with very great cō¦pany of people, the accustomed houses were not able to receive the multitude, but it was needfull to build newe and larger. Certenly the whole narration casteth a savour of mirth most convenient to these white robes: neither is there neede of a∣ny other comment and exposition of these garmēts and of that rest, which the holy soules are commanded to take. But this felicity remained uncor∣rupted, untill Diocletian disturbed it. For this one onely conflict was re∣mayning to their fellowe servants, which at length being past, they should enioy the thinge much desired: neither should any rage of Tyrants after∣ward trouble them, as before times. 12 Afterward I beheld when he had opened the sixt seale, and loe there was a great earthquake: Neither hath the sixt Seale any Beast to make attention, because
men were attentive enough by the answere given to the Soules under the former seale. For it was sayd that one onely strife remained. And in deede it might easily be understood, that the time was not farre of, when an ende should be put unto publike murders, seeing all degrees of men did encline with so great gentlenes to the trueth. But this Seale hath both some thing proper in the rest of this chapter, and also common in chap. 7. That is the last triall of the Seales: the first part of which conteineth the going on of the sor∣rowfull Tragedie and all the former calamityes, ver. 12.13.14. The secōd the ioyfull isue in subduing the enemyes and appeasing all hurliburlies, ver. 15.16.17. As touching that, Aretas reporteth from the monuments of Andreas, that very many sayd, that this earthquake was a passage from the perse∣cutions, which were brought upon them for Christ his sake, unto the time of Anti∣christ. And so the scriptures are wont to call some notable alteration, an earthquake, as where it is sayd: yet once more I will shake the earth, Heb. 12.26. It signifyeth the remooving of those thinges that are shaken, as Saint Paul declareth. And in the olde Testament, the going of the children of Jsraell out of Egipt, is called an earthquake, as Psal. 68.9. The earth was moved, and the heavens dropped at the presence of God. Those Interpreters have touched the point according to the trueth, but onely they did misse in this, that living under Antichrist, they expected him yet to come, not knowing that he was come longe a goe. Which errour of the auncient Fathers (as who being further of from the last event, were lesse able to perceive the matter it selfe) the Papists snatch to themselves greedily: and here they make a very great gaping and distance of time, leaping over from the times of Traiane, in which they conclude the former Seales, unto the last ende of the world, which they reserve to their Antichrist, as though by this earthquake, all iudgement of that which is right had fallen unto them. But whether is it likely that a whole thousand and five hundred yeeres, and yet to come, wee knowe not how many more, have bin passed over with silence, and that all the rest of the Prophecy was stuffed togither into the narrow straites of 3. yeeres and an halfe, as Fraunces of Ribera the Jesuite will have it? It is indeede a profitable abridgement and a short way to set free his Lord the Pope from a very great feare. For it could not be, but as often as he should beholde his face in this glasse, he would seeme to himselfe to be Antichrist, unlesse the Iesuite now did make it apparant, that all that, was but a phantasme which made him afraid. That nothing is here spoken of the present time, neither of that which is past through many ages, but that all the speech following, is of the time yet to come. But wee will put away this smoke & mist through Gods his helpe, neither will wee suffer that the Pope seeming
to himselfe a triksy felow, should love himselfe to destruction: & also will make playne, that the Jesuites, doe not interprete but moke the scriptures. ¶ And the Sunne became blacke: These figurative and hyperbolicall spee∣ches doe shewe that there should be a persecution, the most fierce of all those which the Church endured at any time from Christs birth till nowe. For so the Prophetes are wont to speake when they pointe at any great ca∣lamity, as Isaiah, He will clothe the heavens with blacknes, he will make their co∣vering as a sacke cloath, chap. 50.3. And Ieremy, When I beholde, saith he, the hea¦vens, they have noe light, ch. 4.23. and the heavens above shalbe blacke ver. 28. but most playnly in Ezechiell, speking of the overthrowe of the Egyptiās, When I shall put thee out, I will cover the heavens and make the starres thereof darke; I will cover the Sunne with a cloude, and the moone shall not make her light to shine: all the cleare lights in the heaven I will make darke upon thee, and bring darkenes upō thy land, saith the Lord, ch. 32.7.8. Many such places doe teach, that these speeches are not to be refferred to the last iudgement onely, as some doe expounde, but also to other times: which those auncients did see, of whom spake Aretas even now, who would have these thinges to be understood of the passing over to Antichrist. This blacknes of the Sunne & the other disturbance of the creature, perteineth to that horrible slaughter, wherby those wicked men Diocletian, & Maximinian endevoured to roote out the Church. For wee shall see that the Sūne & Moone doth note stably through this booke, the chiefe ornaments of the congregation of the faithfull: so that the Sunne may signify the Scriptures, the Moone that excellent glory of god∣lines wherby the saincts doe shine, after they have borrowed light frō thē. That both these should be miserably defyled by this common calamity, this seale sheweth it. The accomplishement whereof is recited by Eusebe, booke 8.2. For when the Emperours in the nineteenth yeere of their reigne, ordained by publik decrees, that the bookes of the holy scriptures should be committed to the fire in the middes of the marked: wee sawe, sayth Eu∣sebius, with these very eyes, that the sacred Scriptures, inspired of God, were cast in to the fire, in the middes of the market place: and in the same place a little after, the Kinges letters patents did fly to & fro in every place, wherby it was commaunded to abolish the scriptures. So this Sunne as a sacke cloath of haire noteth not o∣nely generally, that the publicke ioy should be turned into very great sor¦row, but also especially that outragiousnes, wherby cruelty was exercised against the sacred scriptures. Neither could it be otherwise, but when the fountaine of light was darkened, the Moone which hath her light onely borrowed, should fade away into the darke colour of blood, as almost al∣waye it happeneth, when shee is kept from having society with the Sunne.
13 And the starres from heaven fell to the earth; The starres were Ministers & Pastors of the Churches, chap. 1.20. In which signification they are used both here & in other place afterward. Many of thē through feare should revolte from the trueth, which is shewed by the falling from heaven to earth. Neither that onely after many dangers and divers calamityes, wherby be∣ing weakened they should yeeld, but in the very first assault, they should fall downe as greene figges, that is, with very little adoe, even at the first rumour of perill; for the figge tree most easily looseth her fruit before ma∣turity, neither tarrieth almost for the violence of stormes, but with any light blast of winde, maketh an untymely birth, that I may so say, Plin. booke 16.26. Of which thing the Spirit maketh mention, in so fine a simi∣litude, that the faithfull being forwarned, should not be discouraged with the so easy falling away of many. Eusebius sheweth that the thing fell out altogither as it was here foreshewed. For after that first decree of demoli∣shing the temples & burning the scriptures, there was added an other not long after of apprehending the Pastors of the Churches, and compelling them to sa∣crifice to Jdoles: Here many courageously persevering, were not overcome with torments, but an infinite sorte of others, being astonied a good while before through feare, were weakened at the first assault, Euseb. booke 8.2. by the which he sheweth the sudden fall of many. 14 And the heaven departed away: The heaven every where in this booke si∣gnifyeth the universall purer Church, and it properly to be at length her dwelling place, & in the meane tyme in such sorte by her represented, that it hath not any more lively image on earth. These thinges therefore prove that the calamity rested not in the Governours alone, but that the whole face of the Church was covered with so blacke darkenes, that it could be seene almost no where. Let the same Euseb. be read in the 3 booke ch. 3. where he bewayleth the miserable wasting of it, with lamentings borrowed from the lamentatiōs of Ieremy, chap. 2.1.2. Likewise from Psal. 89.39 &c. Yet notwithstan∣ding this desolation should be but as the foulding of a booke. A booke is not destroyed when it is rolled up, but remaineth as great as it was before, it becometh indeede lesse evident and apparant in the sight, being redu∣ced and brought into a farre straighter roome: So likewise the Church should loose nothing of her syncerity, howsoever her glory might seeme to be quite abolished. But the similitude of a folded booke is taken from the auncient custome, wherin bookes were not bound into leaves, but were rolled up as little wheeles, whence they were called volumes, as Are∣tas hath nored, The Hebr, saith he, did vse rowles, that which is books with us:
in the same sense it is sayd in the Epistle to the Hebrewes, chap. 1.12. and as vesture shall thou folde them up, that is, thou shalt deface all their glory as of a vesture folded up, whose gorgeousnesse and beautie cannot be seene. The Hebrewes have for it Tachliphem, thou shalt change them, Psal. 102.27. the which is translated by the Greekes significantly thou shalt folde up: seeing the Psalmist speaketh of such a changing as is altogither contrary to the nature of the heavens. For the heaven is Rqhh, stretched out, spread abroad as a curtaine, or as a mortall plate divided: but rolled up it ceaseth to be Raqi∣ahh: so the Church is made to be spred through all nations, ad to imprt to them, as the heaven to the earth, light, warmnes, and life it selfe: but nowe for a time it should be rolled up, neither should any glory of it be seen abroad. Where thē was the visible maiesty of Rome in the meane time, when the heavē departed away as a booke folded up? But they have good∣ly provided for them selves touching such dangers, who have cost of all these thinges unto the last day: but howe amisse and wrongfully shalbe shewed by and by at ver. 16. ¶ And all mountaines and Ilands: There is nothing so firme, which this tempest should not remoove, nothing so farre of, whither it should not goe and be spred. The word mountaine noteth that, and the word Iland, this. It is a great storme, which doth either scatter the little hilles of the earth, or which doth rage but in the bordering and lowe places: but that which doth either cast and drive away the Mountaines themselves, neither stayeth in the continent, but also flyeth over the sea into the Ilandes, must needes bring extreame destruction. Eusebius beginning this boysterous storme at Nicomedia, pursued it by the very footesteppes through all Syria, Aegypt, Cappadocia, Cilara and Phrygia; booke 8. but being as it were wearie with travayling, and loathing so sorrowfull a narration, he came not to our Eu¦rope: although Thracia, Italy, Spayne, France being nigh to them, and our Iland Britanny somewhat further of, ministred noe lesse plenty of Martyrs, although the moderation of Constans, caused all things to be more milde in these countries. The eight booke of the Ecclesiasticall history of Euseb. expoundeth these three verses largely. 15 And the Kinges of the earth, and the Peeres &c. Thus farre is the Epitasis, now followeth the Catastrophe ioyned togither with the former troubles. For in the middes of the rage and heate of this calamity, Christ would shewe forth his divine power from heaven, and as it were raysed from his slepe, would appease suddenly the tempest by his word alone, as he did in time past being awaked by his disciples. First at the sight of him Kinges and the Peeres of the earth should flee away, and should hide themselves
in most secret dennes. For what other thinge drove Diocletian, & Maximin Hercule, that having the soveraigne power of thinges, and a most fervent desire to roote out Christians, when also they had continued theyr fury un¦to the second yeere, resigned the Empire suddenly and returned to a pri∣vate life? A thing, saith Eusebius, never heard of, to have come to passe at any time, booke 8.13. Neither without cause doth Ignatius cry out, o wonderfull thing and unknowne till this age, that of their owne accord, neither old age pressing them, nei¦ther the weightines of things, both brought themselves into order. Euseb. layeth the cause upon their phrenesy. Nicephorus also upon their rage, arysing doubt lesse from thence, because they sawe that they laboured sore in vayne to de∣stroy the Christians. But they touched not the true cause: from hence they should have learned this, which is it and noe other: The Lambe at length shewing himselfe to be the avenger of his Church, inwardly and secretly did stinge their mindes with the conscience of their wickednes, and feare of vengeance: wherby he drove these mē even against their wills unto this unheard modesty. The thing is manifest from Maximianus, who, after that stinge of conscience waxed somewhat weake, it repented him of his fact, and left no meanes unattented, for to recover the scepter which he had laid downe. An other of the Emperours, who succeeded those that ga∣ve over their place called Gallerius Maximianus exercising tyranny against Christians, the same Lambe vanquished by an horrible disease, and drove him to recantation: an exemple whereof see in Euseb. booke 18.17. Ma∣ximinus also being made Emperour in the East by Galerius, at length against his will acknowledged Christ to be the King, and gave free leave to his worshippers to live after his precepts and ordinances, Euseb booke 9.9.10. Maxentius that Romane Tyrant striken with feare by the same Lambe, fayned himslfe to be a Christian for a time. Sabinus and the other rulers of the Provinces, follow¦ing the authority of the Cesars & Augusts desired to winne the Christians favour also by a fayned gentlenes, and to hide themselves from the wrath of the Lambe. So great a feare of the Lambe came upon all degrees of mē, that every one thought himselfe well provided, who could get any corner wherein he might lye hidde in safety. 16 And they sayd to the Mountaines: It is an argument of exceeding despe∣ration, when they esteemed all evill but light in comparison of his wrath, from which they would redeeme themselves with any most grievous dam∣mage whatsoever. Diocletian being sent for by the letters of Constantine the great, drunke poison for feare. Maximianus ended his life with an haltar. Gallerius perished of a most fowle disease. Maximinus prevented the death that was nigh to him from Licinius, by a voluntary death. Maxentius tooke
for him selfe a denne in the very bottome of the great river Tybris. So in divers maners the Tyrants desyred to be hid from the sight of the Lambe. Many men from the lykenes of speaking, doe thinke that these thinges are to be referred unto the last day. But noe man can deny, that these same kindes of speaking are applyed of the Prophetes unto other and also unto the last calamityes. And they shall come, sayth Isaiah, into the holes of the rockes, and into the caves of the earth, for the feare of the Lord, chap. 2.19. Likewise Hoseah: And they shall sy to the Mountaines, cover us, and to the hilles fall upon us. When yet neverthelesse he speaketh there onely of the carying away into Babylon, chap. 10.8. Therefore the likenes of speaking hath small force to effect that which they would have. Moreover neither can the consideration of the time suf∣fer that interpretation by any meanes. For seeing the time of the Trum∣pets and Viol is of longe continuance, as wee shall shewe in the thinges that follow, the sixt seale must needs be a great way from the last day, espe∣cially seeing the first Trumpet shall not beginne to blowe, before the sea∣venth seale be opened. This one thing may be sufficient to convince that strange interpretation. 17 For that day cometh: In which the Lambe would doe that for the soules which they desired, ver. 11. would take deserved vengeance on the enemyes, would breake the yoke of the Tyrants, would take away the power of assayling with publike persecutions, would set his people at liberty, neither would suffer them to he vexed a∣ny more for a longe time, as after chap. 20.2. of any enemy of this kinde. Therefore the Church now could not be withstood by any forces, that shee should not get out of trouble, and obtaine the soveraignty of things, even as the experience of the same times hath shewed plenteously. Nowe therefore wee see the wonderfull Prophecy of the sixe Seales, in which have ben disclo∣sed the thinges of chiefe moment, from the time of the Revelation given unto the raigne begun by Constantine: surely in so expresse types and image of the thinges to be done, that although peradventure some will accuse the interpretation of novelty: yet every syncere and equall iudge will mer∣vayle rather, that the same hath not ben observed of others afore time, thē refuse this as strange. Yf any desyre to understand more fully touching the sixe Seales, let him reade the seaven last bookes of the Ecclesiasticall Histo∣ry of Eusebius, which may well serve him in steade of an ample and suffici∣nt Commentary.
CHAP. 7. AFTER that J sawe foure Angels standing on the foure corners of the earth, holding the foure windes of the earth, that the winde should not blowe on the Earth, neither on the Sea, neither on any tree. 2 And I saw an other Angell coming up from the East, having the seale of the living God, who cryed with a lowde voice, to the foure Angels, to whom power was given to hurt the earth and the sea, saying, 3 Hurt ye not the earth, neither the sea, neither the trees, till wee have sealed the servaunts of our God in their foreheads. 4 And J heard the number of them which were sealed: there were sealed an hun∣dreth an foure and forty thousand of all the tribes of the children of Israell. 5 Of the tribe of Iuda were sealed twelve thousande: of the tribe of Ruben, were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Gad were sealed twelve thousand: 6 Of the tribe of Aser were sealed twelve thousande, of the tribe of Nepthali we sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Manasses were sealed twelve thousand: 7 Of the tribe of Simeon were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Levi were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Jssachar were sealed twelve thousand: of the tribe of Zabulon were sealed twelve thousand: 8 Of the tribe of Joseph were sealed twelve thousande: of the tribe of Beniamin were sealed twelve thousand. 9 After these thinges I beheld, and loe a great multitude, which noe man could number, of all nations, and kinreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the Thro∣ne, and before the LAMBE, clothed with longe white robes having Palmes in their handes. 10 And they cryed with a lowde voice, saying, Salvation commeth of our GOD, that sitteth upon the Throne, and from the Lambe. 11 And all the ANGELS stood round about the THRONE, and about the ELDERS and the foure Beasts, and they fell before the Throne on their faces, and worshipped God. 12 Saying, Amen, praise, and glory, and wisdome, and thankes, and power, and might bee unto our God for ever more, Amen. 13 Then spake to mee one of those ELDERS, saying unto mee, who are thse, and whence came they, which are arayed with longe white robes? 14 And I sayd unto him, LORD thou knowst. And he sayd unto mee These are they which come out of great affliction: and have washed their longe robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lambe.
15 Therefore are they before the throne of God and serve him day and night in his Temple, and he that sitteth on the throne will protect them as in a bowre. 26 They shall hunger noe more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sunne light on them, neither any heate. 27 For the Lambe which is in the middes of the throne, shall feede them, and lead them unto the lively fountaines of waters: and God shall wipe away all teares frō their eyes. Analysis. HITHER To that which is proper to the sixt Seale: that which is com∣mon followeth, that is to say, a certen generall pourtraiture of the whole future Church, even unto her last ende. Which is distinguished in∣to two times: The first is in which the true worshippers are defined with a cer¦ten number, who are called the sealed by a peculiar name; the occasion of whose sealing are the foure Angels, prepared to shewe rigour against all men, standing for this purpose on the foure corners of the earth, that they might restraine all provision of food for salvation ver. 1. Afterward the Minister of sealing, who exempteth the elect out of the multitude of the destroyed, cō∣ming from the East with full power, and noe lesse valiantly executing the office committed to him, forbidding with a lowde voice that they should not proceed in their intente, untill he have sealed certen that were to be taken out, ver. 2.3. But howe great the number of the sealed is, it is shewed generally, ver. 4. Specially of what Tribes, and how many of every one, ver. 5.6.7.8. And this time belongeth chifly to the trumpets. The second time is of an infinite & innumerable multitude: whose citizens ar described partly by those things which Iohn himselfe could understand by himselfe, to wit by the things seen, whence they were, where they stood, and in what apparell ver. 9. Likewise by the glorifying of God heard, both of themselves ver. 10. and also of the Angels consenting to the same ver. 11. and more fully praysing God in their be∣halfe ver. 12. Partly by the instruction of an Elder, whereunto a way is pre∣pared by a question ver. 13. & a confession of ignorance, in the beginning of the verse following: afterward a full doctrine is added, which sheweth that they came out of great affliction, but that nowe they are blessed through the impu∣tation of the righteousnes of the Lambe ver. 14. testifyed by their constant desyre to serve God, and of him againe by his defense ver. 15. then also by an e∣ternall freedome from all evills ver. 16. and last of all by the fruitiō of good thinges ver. 17. And this second time for the most part is of the Viols. Scholions. 1 After I sawe foure Angels: This whole Chapter belōgeth to the sixt seale,
wherein a newe common type is set forth of thinges that are to be done af∣terward. The former was common to all the three periods, chap. 4 This conteineth onely the two latter, to wit, the Trumpets and Viols. For the Spi¦rit reioyceth for perspicuity and consolation sake, to set before our eyes of∣ten times, certen common figures, both that the thinges may be more ap∣parant, and also that the event beheld a farre of may recreate the minde, being in heavines. But when after that isue of the former calamityes, which was spoken of in the ende of the former chapter, the seaventh seale should bringe in divers sorts of troubles, before he cometh to declare them, he setteth as it were this table in the sight of all men, in which viewing the fu∣ture image of the holy Church, wee should knowe assuredly, that the same can in noe wise be abolished and cleane taken away, howsoever horrible tē¦pests might seeme to appeare and cast downe all things to utter destructiō. This purpose of the Holy Ghost being considered, will free us frō the great confusion, wherewith the Interpreters are wont to shuffle togither all things, and to cast upon the most wise distributour of the times, a wrap∣ping & intangling which cānot be unfolded: which surely if ever elswhere, it is most of all shunned in this booke, wherby it shalbe made manifest, that the Spirit is not a lover of confusion, but that he alone is the principal authour of all right and prudent dispensation. ¶ Foure Angels: These are not the foure Angels of the last time, which is yet to come a little before the ende of the world. For their endevour in holding backe the winde goeth a little before the sealing, as the next words make playne. But they that are sealed must reigne a thousand yeeres on earth, and those not reaching to the ende by some ages, as wee will shew by the helpe of God at the twentith chap. ver. 4. But it grieveth me to cō∣tend so often with this Iesuiticall Monster: that I may make short, if every verse almost doe not disprove this exposition, let it obtaine what authori∣ty it can. More over neither are these good Angels, when as that which they entreprise perteineth rather to the destruction of soules, then of bodyes. Certenly the prohibition doth not altogither take from them the power of hurting, but restraineth it onely for a time, till the sealing was finished, which is apparant to have ben done, before that the Trumpets doe blowe. Wherefore they rush in togither with the Trumpets, being already prepa∣red to bring in trouble, and stayed onely with the let of sealing: assoone as that should be dispatched, they should fly greedily upon that, from which they would not refrayne themselves, unlesse they had ben constrained. Therefore both they doe bring those foure mischiefes which ar threathed by the foure first trumpets, and also unhappy and pernitious effectors of so
sorrowfull events. They may be shewed by name from those Trumpets, so that the First may be called Contention, the second, Ambition, the third Here∣sy, the fourth, Warre. These foure Angels did take to themselves the foure corners of the earth, ech one being ready from their stations to bring in that mischiefe, which in the next wordes is mentioned. For assoone as a∣ny tranquility appeared, when nowe Diocletian was driven away, and the other Tyrants: the Bishops began forthwith to be given exceedingly to privie discords. What meanes assayed not Constantine the Greate to quench this raising flame, who appointed a Synode at Rome, and commanded Mil∣tiades and Marcus to sit in examination of the controversy against Caeci∣lia? But when the Synode was not able to ende the strife, he appointed for chiefe doer in the same businesse Aurelius Bishop of Syracuse: whom togi∣ther with his fellowes in office, he commanded to goe from the Citie Ar∣les in France, and the matter being heard againe, to set them at one, that were at variance. The counter-writings of Constantine touching this thing are to be seen in Euseb. booke 10. 5. The Antichristian ambition sprung up in the times of the Apostles, least wee should thinke that it fayled nowe in playing her part: But now, saith Paul, you knowe what letteth, that he should be revealed in his time, for the mystery of iniquity worketh already. 2 Thessal. 2.6. And surely one would scarce beleeve, but that those arrogant boastings of the Chaire of Rome, with which the Decretall Epistles doe abounde, were for∣ged of the posterity, and afterward to have bin ascribed falsly to the aunci∣ent Fathers, so impudēt and vaine are they, unlesse Firmilianus had proved, that they are their owne, at least for a great part, whose names they beare. For speaking of Stephanus then Bishop of Rome, He that so boasteth, sayth he, of the place of his Bishoprike, and avoucheth that he holdeth succession from Peter, u∣pon whom the foundations of the Church are set, shewing playne enough, how the Bishops then were given to boasting, amonge the Epistles of Cyprian, Epist. 75. This same age was famous by the beginning of the Heresy of A∣rius, whom wee have sayd to be the third Angell. Neither was the Norther∣ne Barbarousnes, which had brought longe agoe the Romanes under the yoke, quiet in those times, as may be seen in Euseb. upon the life of Const. booke 4. Albeit that in stirring they prevayled not: yet there wanted not a desire to troble the state, that wee may easily now acknowledg the prōt∣nes of these foure Angels. And they did in such sorte divide the world a∣mong themselves, that Contention did invade with force from the East; Am∣bition from the West; Heresy from the South: Warre from the North: the chiefe quarters of the world being so occupyed, that the holes out of which the vitall winde should issue, were altogither stopped frō the earth, as shall be made more playne in his place.
¶ Holding the foure windes of the earth: Wee have seene the Angels & their standings, their endevour is to take away the winde from the earth: the foure, saith Iohn, windes of the earth, which yet is one by nature, but divers according to the countryes from whence it bloweth. But this winde is not properly to be understood, seeing such a calamity hath never befallen, albeit many ages now are past, since this Prophecy was accomplished. For if it were pro¦per, howe should not the stopping up hurt as well the sealed, as the repro∣bate, who dwelt togither and one with an other? I therefore understand the winde, to be the force and faculty of the Holy Ghost, whom Christ cō∣pareth to the winde, Iohn 3.8. the winde, saith he, bloweth whither it listed, so is every one that is borne of the Spirit. For as of olde that disordered Chaos, and seed of this our world could not otherwise consist, then as it was quicke∣ned of the Spirit, who moved himselfe upon the waters, Gen. 1.2. So neither doth this earth nor sea, nor trees come to the feeling of any vitall strength, unlesse that sanctifying winde doth lye upon them, from whose breathing they doe as it were drawe their life. It is not indeede in the power of any creatu¦re to restraine the force of the heavēly Spirit: yet the trueth being stopped, which he used as his chariot, not without cause the passages may be sayd to be stopped, wherby he should blowe to our good. ¶ That the winde should not blow upon the earth, nor upon the sea &c. Nowe the thinges are reckoned up, from which they would had restrayned the winde: to wit, from the Earth, the Sea, the Trees. The Earth before, were the Heathen Nations, as chap. 6.4.15. Afterward it seemeth to signify al∣way, not men wholy repugnant to the name of Christ, but the common sorte, & mixt company of the corrupt Church, which hath succeeded in the place of the Gentiles, as chap. 8.13. & 12.9.12.13.16. & 13.11. &c. The Sea signifyeth, the do∣ctrine, sometime true, and then it is placed before the Throne within the cō∣pas of the Elders, where it is of glasse, & like to Chrystall, most cleare & most pure, as chap. 4.6. More often it is brought to shew false doctrine, in which sense, it resteth and is quiet as in his channell, in the bosome and embra∣cing of this earth, which it doth fasten togither with his humidity, though grosse and brinish, through secret passages, least being by nature easy to be reduced in powder, and not cleaving togither, it should be dissolved through her atidity. For unlesse there were some bande of consent amonge the counterfeit citizens, even the wicked assemblyes could not stande. The trees wee understāde to be mē frō ch. 9.4. wher cōmādemēt is givē to the Lo¦custs, that they should not hurt any tree, but onely the mē that hav not the seale of God in their foreheads. Now the exception is alway of the same kinde, of which that is, frō whēce the exception is made: & therefore when as men are ex∣cepted, it must needes be that the trees also are men:
not indeed of the basest sorte, & condition, but who shewe thēselves above others with their high dignityes, and lift up their heades among the rest, being more famous in the Christian Assemblyes. But if the Angels would have hurt onely this earth, sea and trees, why was there not free leave graunted them? Because in that vile heape many of the elect lay hidden, who were to be provided for: for their sakes the Angell from the East would have the confused multitude to be spared, neither any hurt to be done to any, un∣till order was taken for them for whom it was necessary. The wicked gaine the deferring of punishment for those fewe good, whom they have dwelling among thē. ¶ And I sawe an other Angell which was come up from the East: in greeke which did ascend: some copyes doe reade coming up: the Hebrewes figuratively doe take these wordes to ascende and descende, for to departe, to goe forth, to goe, to re∣turne, as he went up from Ierusalem, that is, he returned and left of to assault it, 2. King. 12.18. But it is well ioyned with the rysing of the Sunne, because the Sunne seemeth to ascende from the East, untill he be come to the mid∣des of heaven. The first occasion of sealing being declared, there is now described by what Minister it was done. Whom both the respect of the time and all circunstances doe proove to have ben Constantine the Great. He succeeded in the Empire, after that the Lambe had thrust out Diocletian, and the other Jdolatrous Tyrants. But he came up from the rising of the Sunne, ha∣ving come from the Easterne countryes to receive the Empyre. For being a yong man he served in warre under Diocletian in Syria. But after his vertu had procured him envy, so as often through secret trecheries he was in pe∣rill of his life, he was compelled to get himselfe out of the East as speedily as he could: and to goe to his Father. So Eusebius writeth he was provoked to flight for his safety: in the life of Constantin orat. 1. Zonaras saith that he was given of his father for an hostage to Galerius, of whom when he sawe that he was hated through envy, and that in the battell at Sarmatia he was cast forth of set purpose to danger, and againe for the same intente commaun∣ded to fight with a Lion (both which battells he executed with good suc∣cesse) by flight at length he escaped away to his Father: & togither also by these meanes avoided the danger and obtayned his Fathers Empire, the seate whereof afterward he placed at Bizantium. Therefore whether wee res¦pect his first returne from the East, or minde the decrees which after the Empire was established, touching the worshipping of the true God by Christ, did fly often from thence into that part of the world that was under Rome: the History agreeth very well with the Prophecy: but that former seemeth to come nigher to the meaning of the Holy Ghost, because of those thinges that follow.
¶ Having the Seale of the living God: Both himselfe instructed in the true knowledge of God, and endued with very great authority to spread abroad the same unto others: whom while by his owne exemple and zeale he pro¦voked to embrace the trueth, he is sayd to marke them with the seale of the living God and to take them for Gods chiefe treasure. He cryed with a lowde voice, promoting the trueth by Edicts published, removing farre of to his power, all that which might hinder the amplifying of it. He did represse for a time, according as it was appointed of God, those foure Furies of Hll which were prepared to hurt, whereof wee have heard at the first verse. He restreined the Ambition of other men, by his owne maiesty. Howe great la∣bour did he take to pull up by the rootes all contentions, who esteemed no∣thing more excellent then to seate peace among the Bishops that were at va∣riance? Moreover in the very Nicene Councill, he cast into the fire billes gi∣ven to him, wherein the Bishops accused one another, adding this one thing, Christ commandeth that our brother should be forgiven, who desireth to ob∣taine forgivenes, Socr. booke 1.7. By which moderation, albeit that he could not pull up the roote of bitternes frō these cōtētious men, yet he brought to passe, that the branches could not burst forth so plentifully as they o∣therwise would. The Arian madnes he bound with fetters of Brasse cunningly wrought at Nice as speaketh Evagrius booke 1.1. He overcame in many battells the Sarmatians, and the Goths, and almost all the nation of the Scy∣thians: so as they durst attempt nothing afterward for some longe time. This was that voice which revoked the Angels from their entreprise, untill that should be performed which would be for the good of the elect. 3 Saying, hurt not the earth &c. untill wee have sealed; untill is an adverbe of time most commonly: some time of place, as . &c. Xenoph. Cyrop. 5. Whither doth this latter agree better here, that they should worke their purpose onely within certen boundes, that they should not enter into the boundes of the godly? Yf they must have absteined from hurting, while all were sealed, it seemeth they must have stayed untill many ages, much more beyond the time of Constantine. The sealed that are mentioned in the first trumpet, chap. 9.4. were not yet bor∣ne, when Constantine reigned: much lesse they, of whom there is mentiō made cha. 14.1. Which thinges seeme to make against the signification of time: but neither is ther an easy reasō of the place. For it is no wher read that all the elect were gathered togither and shutte up in any one country, as in old time the Israelites in Goshen, where they should be free from the cōmon evils. It remaineth then, that wee understande it figuratively: so as till wee have sealed, is all one as if he should say, till wee have layed those foundations, by
which both the elect now living may be Gods owne, carying upon them his marke, whereof also the foot steppes may remaine unto the posteritie by continuall succession. So as he may be sayd to seale all, who was onely the beginner of seang. But he sealed, proposing before the elect a patterne of sounde doctrine, chiefly in the Nicene Councill, labouring that the pures of the trueth might be defended against the fraude of Arius and other wicked men: wherby the faithfull might acknowledge one true God, and his onely eer∣nall & coessentiall Sonne Jesus Christ, in whom they should put all the hope of their salvation: which after in chap. 14.1. is sayd to have the name of the Lmbe and his fathers name written on their foreheads, least peradventure any Iesuite may dreame, that he speaketh hereof the signe of the crosse. Wee must observe furthermore, that sealing is alway of a few among many. For it is a saving of labour to leave the greater multitude without a marke, and to distinguish by some token the fewer number. These thinges therefore proove, that howsoever the Church flourished outwardly in very great glo∣ry, when Constantine enioyed the soveraignty, yet in the meane time had a very smll number of true godly men. Which wee ought to remēber care∣fully, that wee may understand more easily those thinges, which in more wordes are spoken touching this matter, in the repetitiō of the same time, chap. 11.1.2. & 12.6. &c. ¶ Jn their foreheades: The true worshippers are marked in the foreheads, openly shewing their faith: for with the mouth confession is made unto salvation, Rom. 10.10. Its all one to Antichrist if his slaves doe receive his marke in their hande: which according to the occasion, they may eyther shutte or open, chap. 13.16. For he permitteth all manner of counterfaiting to them that are his, so that it may helpe any thing to the enlarging of his Kingdome. 4 And I heard the number of the sealed; Such then was the cause of sealing: nowe he cometh to the generall number of the sealed. Artas will have to be signifyed in this number of an hundred fourty and foure thousande, that eve∣ry one of the Apostles multiplyed his talent twelve times. Certenly the di¦ligence of the holy man is much to be commended, who thought nothing in this booke so small, which might not be worthy of searching out, and of which it should not be lawfull to seeke out a reison soberly, so that the analogie of sounde doctrine be kept alwayes. But when I consider diligent¦ly in my minde this whole second periode, of which these sealed are, the Spi∣rit seemeth to have chosen out most divinely that number, which may re∣presente before our eyes a lively image and pourtraiture of the Church of the same age and time. The number is long, and indeede of an huge length,
but of a lesser breadth by a thousand proportion; teaching, as it seemeth to me, & as it hath ben found true by the event, that the present true Church for all that space of time should be very slender, narrowe, obscure, and scarce perceivable, such as in this proportion is a longe figure: and that the dignity of it is not at all to be esteemed from the present amplitude, but from the length onely, that is, by the during and continuation of time, in whose longe space, a sufficient number of the elect should be gathered togither. For example, let there be drawne a Geometricall figure, whose lines are in every parte alike distant one from another, whose shorter side is one foote longe, divided into twelve partes: the other side a thousande feete longe, whose voide space conteineth this number: surely the figure shall seeme to be almost of noe breadth, but the sides being severed by so small a distāce, will make a certaine shewe of lines coincident and meeting togither. Such should this Church be, whose longer side, the number of twelve thousande out of every Tribe doth make: the shorter side, that small number of twelve, which is of the Tribes. Learned and good men will easily acknowledge what I mea∣ne: & if any thing shalbe wanting in my coniecture, they will rather adde of their owne, wherby it may levell the righter at the marke, then blame mee for my paines-taking. Doubtlesse there is so great a consent of the Hi∣story, that the coniecture is to mee more then probable. But let the other brethrē iudge of it, to which I submitte this and all the rest of my writings. But yet this whole number was not sealed at once & togither, in the time that Constantine liveth on the earth, but figuratively one part is here put for the whole, upon whose first fruites onely the marke was set, whereas the rest in course of time should be sealed, every one according to the conside∣ration of their age, as wee sayd at the former verse. ¶ Of all the Tribes of the Sonnes of Jsraell: Are these then naturall Iewes, or are they not also Gentiles, adopted Israelites? as in the Rom. 2.28. For he is not a Iewe, who is one outward, but which is one inward. Also, ye knowe that they which are of the faith, are the children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. And againe, peace shalbe upon them, and mercy, and upon the Israell of God, Gal. 6.16. Therefore the name is common as well to the Gentiles as to the Iewes. Neither will the consideration of the time suffer that the naturall Iewes should here be si∣gnifyed. This sealing was begun by and by after the tyranny of DIOCLETI∣AN was utterly abolished, as wee have shewed before. And to this num¦ber onely is ability given to learne the Newe Songe, as wee shall see in the foureteenth chapter and at the third verse. Which in these times was not proper to the Iewes, neither ever shalbe.
But if this concerning the time shall not be granted mee, & if this sealing is to be expected a little before the ende of the world, as the Iesuite will ha∣ve it, how shall, after the sealing of the Iewes, as he iudged, an other infinite number come to the Church, as is taught in this chap. ver. 9. seeing that the Iewes shall not be called, before that the fulnes of the Gētiles be come in, Rom. 11.25. Furthermore it shall belonge onely to the sealed to learne the sunge, but if the Iewes alone shalbe sealed, at whatsoever time at lēgth it be done, what shall become of your most holy Rome, and Christs Vicar, who shall hav noe place among the sealed? But wee will deliver the most blessed Father of this feare. This described forme of the primitive Church comprehen∣deth both those sorts of people indifferently, so as they all, as well of Gen∣tiles, as of the Iewes, who love the syncere trueth in their heart, shalbe foūd in this number of the sealed. And indeede the writers doe make mention, that some of the Iewes came to the Church in those times: but let them be Iewes, they shall not be Israelites alone, since the stoppe of the partition wall is broken. 5 Of the tribe of Iuda twelve thousand: Hitherto the generall summe, nowe are reckened the particular companies, of which that whole is made. In which these thinges are to be observed, first, that there is an equall number out of eve∣ry tribe. For God beareth good will alike to all the elect: neither hath any iust cause of complaining, that more respect was had of others, them of him. Secondly, that some of the auncient tribes are passed over, and that newe are put in their places: For there is no mention made of Dan or Ephraim, but in place of them come Levi & Ioseph. Some alleage this cause, why Dan is omitted, for that Antichrist should arise out of that tribe. What letteth then, that there should not be two Antichrists, seeing the name also of Ephraim is o∣mitted? Surely the distinction of the tribes would had bin very profitable to discerne Antichrist from other men, which God undoubtedly would hav kept entire & safe, that his Church might beware of him, if he would have had this enemy to come out of this nation. But the true cause of passing by them seemeth to be this, that the tribe of Dan in time past revolted to the Gentiles: and Ephraim was the causer of the rest to rent the Kingdome, and persuader to institute a newe worship, whereby the tenne tribes fell away from God: for Ieroboam was an Ephratite. I King. 11.26. Wherefore neither doth he mention him, but ascēdeth unto the first Patriarche, teaching that the names of the wicked shalbe blotted out of the booke and cathalogue of the living, as wee have observed at chap. 3.5. Thirdly, that in the rehearsing there is noe or∣der kept, either of beginning or dignity. And yet the names are not rashly gathe¦red togither (as leaves flying in the hollow rocke of Sybille) although peradven∣ture
it will be a very heard thing to finde out any reason, why they are set downe in this wise: yet neverthelesse let us assay to doe it, trusting in God his helpe. The countryes doe seeme unto mee to be noted, from which God would gather out his elect, in all this space of time when the Church lay hidde, and would severe them from the vile and naughty persons of the world, in the same order of places, wherein the Tribes of the Israelites lōge agoe tooke up their seates in the promised land: to wit in this manner, that Juda should signify the Southerne part of the Church: Ruben and Gad the Easter∣ne: Ascher and Nephtalim the Northerne, and the west parte: Manasse partly the Easterne, partly the Westerne, who dwelt on this side and beyond Iordan: Symeon & Levi that part which was spread here and there and one with another: Issachar and Zabulon, the Northeast part, to wit the Sunne raysing: Ioseph and Beniamin the mid¦dle countryes. For wee shall see that after Constantine was dead, there was such a wandring progresse, as it were, of the Church. For in the first times her pu¦rest part seemeth to have ben in Africa, as it were in the Tribe of Iuda: the which most of all then was free frō the Arian Heresy, thoug brought forth by Aegypte next neighbour: and in the meane time infinite uncleannesse had overflowed the rest of the world. And this purity continued from Con¦stantine, till the invasion of the Vandals. Then Reuben and Gad succeeded; For when that barbarous people pestered the whole West and South, that which rested of the hope & face of the Church, did all flourish in the East. But when the Saracenes at length destroyed also this vinyarde, our Britanny and the Northerne regions, lying toward the west, as Asher and Nephta∣lim flourished greatly: when more then two thousand Monkes of Bangor refused to take upon them the Romish yoke: for which cause the Britans did undergoe a grievous persecution, raysed up by one Augustine a Romish Mō∣ke. The sequent age gave Manasse, partly the East, partly the West, when both Leo Isaurus, and also Carolus Magnus with ioint endevours though somewhat disioyned in respect of places and times, assembling Councels condemned worshipping of Images. The next times were most miserable, whē nowe Antichrist was come to his highest power and dignity. Nowe the trueth did lye so trampled under foote every where, that the Church could not be seene in any certen places of abyding: but the sealed, as Simeon & Le¦vi did lye hidde confusedly, and here and there, knowne to God onely, re¦moved farre from the sight of the world. In the ages following after, the seale passed over unto Issachar and Zabulon, that is, to the Northerne people, lying toward the Sunne raysing. For there are read famous conversions in this time of the Polonians, Saxone, Danes, Suevians, & Norwegians. And al∣though the conversions came by the labour of superstitious men, yet ne∣verthelesse
is was the seale of God and profitable to his elect. For where the doctrine is corrupt and contaminate with errours, there the grasse is bet∣ter then the stalke: the seed newe sowne is purer thē the greennesse waxing to an hearbe For they that are first converted, doe heare onely of faith and the way of salvation by Christ, but waxing more growen, they are wont to be corrupted and marred by the superstitions of their teachers. Last of all, the end nowe of those that were to be sealed approaching, true citizens were chosen out from the middle regions, as it were out of the Tribes of Ben∣iamin and Ioseph. For about the yeere a thousand two hundreth arose the Waldenses at Lion in Fraunce, who making separation frō the Church of Rome, professed a more pure doctrine, with the losse of their riches and lives. Frō hence did spring the Albingenses about the city of Toulouse, who afterward were spread through all Germany and Bohemia, whose lot did not fll nei∣ther about the furthest South, nor to the utmost North part of the world: but a middle place of dwelling was given them among their brethren. I runne over these thinges briefly, rather dislosing, then throughly han∣dling the matter: but they that plainely perceive the History, from these fewe thinges, I knowe, will admire and reverence the mervailous wisdome of God togither with mee. 9 Afterward I behelde, and loe a great multitude, which noe man could number: Wee have spoken of the sealed, and comprehended them in a certen num∣ber: the indefinite multitude can neither be declared by the number, nei∣ther is sayd to be sealed: not that any of the elect & perteining to the king dome of God, is in the meane while without the seale (for this is necessary to every one of the faithfull) as though there were a way opened for any man to goe to heaven without faith, as a certaine great man of blessed me∣mory, seemeth to interprete, mooved of a good affection, but not very warily nor truly: but because by reason of the huge multitude, which should professe Christ openly and syncerely, there should be noe neede of a privie marke of distinction, wherby they might be discerned from other men. For sealing belongeth to the Church lying hidde, when a disordered multitude of superstitious and wicked men beareth sway, in which there ar a fewe good men, known to God, & regarded of him, as in Ezech. 9.2.3. but where the godly worshippers are sufficiently manifest in their number & multitude, there is no use of this sealing. These thinges therefore teach, that after that darkenes, wherewith for a time the Church should be op∣pressed, it should rise up againe at length into the light, furnished with very great multitude of true Christians, which out of all nations should embra¦ce the trueth, and professe the same openly and without feare. And this
plentifull harvest began about the yeere 1300. at which time the sealing cea¦sed. Not that this huge multitude was apparent so suddenly at once: but because the first fruites were brought forth, with which continuall increase a length should yeelde this great company not to be numbred, as wee have shewd in his place. ¶ Of all nations: not by every Tribe, as before, out of certen separated coū¦tryes, but from all in common, Germanie, Fraunce, Britannie, Italie &c. For he alludeth to to the auncient manner of the Church. As long as the time of sealing remained, the elect were fewe, as in time past the Israelites, while they alone were the chiefe treasure of God above all nations of the world; but after that time was ended, then true Christians were in greater num∣ber. as also the former people of God, was encreased very greatly, when the Gentils were taken into the Church. Surely this repairing should be like to the first calling of the Gentiles: even as wee knowe it came to passe after the Waldenses and Albingenses, when many learned and faithfull men rose up, who defending the trueth boldly, gathered togither many lovers of true godlines. ¶ And they stoode before the Throne: gathered into the Church, and ac∣knowledging Christ truly as chap. 4.3.4. &c. ¶ Clothed with white robes: see chap. 3.4. and 6.11. ¶ And Palmes in their handes: which cannot yeelde under any burden. A fit marke of them who at length doe lift up their heades, against the wills of all their enemies. They should get the victory of Antichrist, which af∣terward is sayd to get the victory of the Beast, and of his image, and of his marke, chap. 15.2. By this one word he noteth their fight and triumphe. 10 And they cryed with a lowde voice: word for word, and crying, and so the verbe were must be understoode. Also the participle is put collectively with the nowne multitude, as before the participle, standing. The great admiratiō of Gods bounteousnes in restoring his Church should drawe from the Saints crying and showting for ioy, who should not hold it sufficient to acknowledg the exceeding mercy of God with their accustomed voice. Al though that crying may signify also a bolde professiō of the truth, which durst scarse mutter in former ages: but at lēgth should despise the enemyes & obtaine perfit boldnesse. Wee & our Fathers have seene with our eyes this thing brought to passe. There is no mā which hath tasted of true godli¦nes, but he giveth God thākes frō his heart, for the light of his truth resto∣red in these last times. And although the Romish Antich. doth gnashe his teeth togither for āger, yet we cesse not to praise boldly the great name of G. so as the world ringeth with the saints voices. And why should not wee as ioyfull victours cry a loude, who have palmes in our hādes, & by the grace of God the neckes of our enemyes put under our feete?
God graunt that wee may extoll him alwayes with meet prayses for his in∣finite goodnesse, least making small account of so unmeasurable grace, wee bring upon our selves some lamentable trouble, wherby the ioy of our tri¦umphe may be distained. 11 And all the Angels stoode: see chap. 5.11. The auncient mirth of the Church shall returne, at which the Angels shalbe glad, both themselves consenting to the ioyfull showting of the Saincts, and also lauding God apart in their behalfe. 12 And power and might: that is, let the prayse of power and might be given un to him. For God sheweth a mervaylous power in delivering his Church. The Saincts indeede doe beare Palmes, but the victory is gottē by the strēgth of God alone. Howe mercifull is our God, who will have the paines to be his in consuming the enemyes, and the triumphe to be ours? 13 They which are arayed in longe robes. Hitherto this multitude was descri¦bed by those thinges which may be perceaved by the sense: now he cometh to the more perfit instruction by communing with an Elder. And first he con¦vinced Iohn of ignorance, wherby the knowledge received might be the more acceptable: togither also teaching, that the faithfull people, whose person Iohn nowe representeth, shalbe as ignorant of the trueth of this type, when the time of fulfilling it shall come, as Iohn in this place, untill they be taught of the learned Ministers, after which sort Iohn is here instru¦cted of the Elder. Neverthelesse it shall appeare from those thinges, which follow, that the Elder demanded not of the generall innumerable multi∣tude, but of one certen kinde conteined in that great company. Who yet all are in one apparell, and reioyce in one name, because they shall cleave one to another both in consent to the same trueth, and also by a continu∣all ioining togither of the times, who also shall at length be partakers of the same glory. 14 Thou knowest: As though he should say, I knowe not, thou knowest. Wher¦fore this company is not the same. which he sawe lying under the altar, chap. 6.9. &c. For in that place he understood that they were killed for the word of God, neither had he any need to be taught againe: but as it is a new troupe of the godly, whom by his ignorance he declared should be un∣knowne to the world, suspecting nothing lesse. ¶ These are they which came out of great tribulation: The Elder did aske two thinges, Who are these and whence came they: Iohn is ignorant of both of thē. The Elder therefore teacheth him: but answering onely to one, that is to say, whence they came: which yet also should disclose the men themselves. It was indeede a great affliction, which the Church suffered under Antichrist,
that whole time, wherein the faithfull were knowne onely by the marke prin∣ted on them: and not that onely, but also some ages after, as it shalbe made manifest afterward. Yet I doe not thinke that this is meant in this place, but that it is called Great for excellency sake, for the greatest of all that ever was since the world was made. Which surely Moses will tell us of in his sōg in these wordes: For fire was kindled in my wrath, which shall burne even unto the bottome of the grave, and shall consume the earth and her encrease, and set on fire the foundations of the mountaines. Ʋpon the consumed for hunger, and wasted with scab, and bitter pestilence, I will sende also the teeth of beasts, with the venome of serpents of the earth. The sword shall kill without, and in the chambers feare, both the young man and the younge woman, the suckling with the gray headed, Deut. 32.22 Mo¦ses sung that these evils should come upō the Iewes, for their falling away from God. Which albeit they strike a certen horrour into men, even by the wordes rehearsed, yet they scarse touch the least parte of those calami∣tyes, wherewith the most wretched nation is wasted by the space of a thou sand sixe hundred yeeres, even to this very day: which times I doubt not but Moses hath shewed in those wordes, that I may put you in minde of this by the way. Who can number by counting, howe great evils those aun¦cient Jewes, who killed the Lord of life, and defiled their handes with the blood of the Apostles, suffered in the destruction of the city? Noe History sheweth that there was ever made so horrible a slaughter. The enemy him selfe refrained not from teares, acknowledging the strange murders bey∣ond the cruelty of any warre. You might thinke that the whole natiō was here destroyed utterly, especially, when they who were left in that utter rui¦ne, were solde to be slaves, were throwne to the wilde Beasts, were made mocking stockes in the theaters: finally were not exempted from death, but reserved unto torment. Indeede a fewe yeeres after it seemed to have ben revived, but it was to endure newe calamityes, like as in the Comedie, the heart of Prometheus being eaten, was restored often times. For Hadrian killing againe this people most miserably, forbade them their native soyle, and dispersed them into all quarters of the world. Since that time they are dispersed, vacabondes, banished from their owne country & land, wan∣dring through the whole world: without Governour, without God for a King: yea, that I may use the wordes of Terlullian in his Apologet. to whō it is not so much permitted, as that according to the right of strangers they may salute their Fathers land with their feete. There was never noe calamity of any peo∣ple, eyther for the kinde of punishment so grievous, or for the length of time of such continuance: there hath not ben any spectacle so cleare of God being offended: not any so fearfull exemple of his eternall wrath.
Neither yet should there belesse trouble a little before that time, whē God shall give an ende to this so long misery. At that time, saith Daniell, when there shall be a time of trouble, such as hath not ben, since it was anation, even unto that time: which, that it is to be understood of the last sharpe assault before the full restoring of the nation, wee shall sometime shewe more clearely, if God will. Therefore whether wee respect the present casting of of this people, or that future calamity, at their receiving againe into grace, this great affliction is proper to the Iewes, who togither with the remnants of the Gentiles, being revived after the tyranny of Antichrist, and with them which shall then first open their eyes to see the truth, shall make that great company, which noe man could number, ver. 9. These thinges are confirmed from that happines, which followeth in the next wordes, which perteineth to this present life on earth, & not to that future in the Heavens, the sound fruition whereof shall not come, before that there be made one sheepfolde, the elect Iewes being chosen into one Christian people, as wee shall shewe at chap. 21.22. From which it is nowe manifest, seeing that this indefinite nūber is made partly of the Gentiles, partly of the Iewes, whose calling ought to be expected a longe time after that sealing, which was spoken of before, that those definite and sealed ones were not Iewes. Furthermore sound peace and all perfite happines shall follow the calling of the Iewes, as in the next wordes it is declared briefly, but more largely at chap. 21. and 22. But when the sealing was finished, there remained yet much of that great affliction. All which shall more appeare in the thinges that follow. ¶ And have washed their longe robes: At length being converted by faith unto Christ, and clothed with the imputation of his onely righteousnes & holines. 15 Therefore they are before the Throne: as before in ver. 9. chosen into the Church, and gathered into the assembly of the faithfull. ¶ Day and night: without ceasing. For then the fallings away shalbe en∣ded, and they shall cleave constantly to God, even to the last ende. ¶ Jn his Temple: Yet there shalbe noe Temple there, as chap. 21.22. But in that place is understood the abolishing of the ceremonies, which they shall regarde no more for the worshipping of God thereby: here is a pilgri¦mage yet on earth from the Lord, where we have neede of the coming between of outward meanes for to worshippe him: of which there shalbe noe use in the heavens. ¶ They shall hunger no more: They shall wante nothing, neither shall any adversity trouble them, which is signifyed by hunger and thirst; moreover also all causes of calamityes shalbe driven farre away: the Sūne shall not burne
them, neither shall there be any heat, which shall bring scarsity: the whole creature shall consent to further the happines of the holy people. Here the things are set before us in fewe wordes for a tast, which shalbe declared more at large afterward. 17 For the Lambe that is in the middes of the Throne shall governe them. Now the cause is rehearsed of the former happines, to every part of which it is distributed conveniently; shall governe, answereth to those wordes, shall not hunger: shall lead them to the lively fountaines of waters, respecteth the thirst, which he said should be sufferred no more: and shall wipe away all teares, hath regarde to the heate of the Sunne, which he promiseth shall not be trobel∣some afterward. ¶ From their eyes: The teares falling from the eyes. Montanus hath , as it were abiding in the eyes: as if God by drying thoroughly the eyes, should leave no faculty to weepe. Isayah, the teares from all faces, ch. 25.8. So then is the common type, while the trumpets and viols endure, that is even to the last ende. About the beginning and proceeding of the Trum∣pets, the number of the elect should be sealed: about the ende there should be a more ioyfull, more plentifull, and more evident multitude, which af∣terward under the viols encreasing every day, at length should have their brethren the Iewes ioyned togither with themselves, when there shalbe a full happines at last, so great as can be expected on earth, which shall not be discontinued againe by any generall miseries of the times, untill Christ himselfe shall come to iudgement. This common type is to be declared by every member in those thinges that are behinde, according to the severall mutations, and notable events, that shall happen this whose space. CHAP. 8. AND when he had opened the seaventh seale, there was silence in heaven about halfe an houre. 2 And I saw the seaven Angels which stoode before God, & to them were given seven trumpets. 3 Then another Angell came, & stood before the altar, having a golden censer, & much odours were given unto him, that he should offer with the prayers of all the Saints upon the golden altar, which is before the throne. 4 And the smoke of the odours with the prayers of the Saints wēt up before God, out of the Angels hande. 5 Afterward the Angell tooke the censer and filled it with fire of the altar, & cast it into the earth, & there were voices, & thundrings, & lightnings, & an earthquake.
6 And the seaven Angels, which had the seaven Trumpets, prepared themselves to blowe the trumpets. 7 So the first Angel blew the trumpet, and there was haile and fire mingled with blood, and they were cast into the earth, and the third part of the earth was burnt, & the third part of the trees was burnt, and all the greene grasse was burnt. 8 And the seconde Angell blewe the trumpet, and as it were a great mountaine bur¦ning with fire, was cast into the sea, and the third part of the sea became blood. 9 And the third part of the creatures, which are in the sea, the livings things I say dyed and the third part of the shippes were destroyed. 10 Then the third Angell blew, and a great starre fell from heaven, burning as a torche, and it fell into the third parte of the rivers, and into the fountaines of wa∣ters. 11 And the name of the starre is called wormwood, therefore the third part of the waters was turned into wormwood; and many men dyed of the waters, because they were made bitter. 12 Afterward the fourth Angell blewe the trumpet, and the third part of the Sunne was smitten, and the third part of the Moone, and the third part of the starres, so that the third part of them was darkened, and the third part of the day was darke∣ned, and likewise of the night. 13 And I beheld and heard one Angell flying through the middes of heaven, say∣ing with a lowde voice, woe, woe, woe to the inhabitans of the earth, because of the soundes to come of the trumpet of the three Angels, which shall blow. Analysis. THE cōmon type being declared, the Silence, which is proper to the sea¦venth seale remayneth. Which, of what it is, is declared in the first ver. Afterward he proceedeth to the following period of the trumpets, which is cō¦prehended in the compasse of this, and is distinguished into seaven trumpets: the preparation of which is double, common, and speciall: that, cōsisteth first in the seaven Angels, furnished with so many trumpets, ver. 2. Afterward in one other Angell, who executeth the office of the High Priest, as it appeareth from the furniture, in respect both of the instrument and ende, ver. 3. and al∣so of his ministery toward the elect, ver. 4. and against the enemyes, partly by casting fire into the earth, partly in raysing up from thence voices & thun∣drings and great perturbation, ver. 5. The speciall preparation is of the seaven Angels making themselves ready unto the businesse appointed to them. The Execution also hath likewise some thing comon, to wit, a warning by the blowing of the trumpets: and also something speciall, even the proper
effect of every blowing of the trumpet: which is distributed in the foure first lighter, and the last three, heavier. They are handled in the rest of the chapter, by their distinct articles. At the first blowing of the trumpet, there was hayle and fire, ver. 7. At the second, a burning mountaine is cast into the sea, ver. 8. At the third, a starre fell from heaven into the rivers, ver. 10.11. At the fourth the third part of the sunne was smitten, ver. 12. As touching the three last more grievous trumpets, the preparation commō to them is had in ver. 13. where the Angell flying through the middes of heaven, denounceth with a mourning voice more horrible calamityes from them following. Scholions. 1 But when he had opened the seaventh seale: Such then is the sixt: the sevēth seale followeth, whose effect, which proceedeth from the opening, is called Silence, which sometime is used for any resting, as why are yee silent in bringing home the King, that is, why doe yee rest, 2 Sam. 10.11. Sometime it is oppo∣sed unto tumulte, from whence, the still waves of the waters, Psal. 107.29. Of which sorte is this silence made in Heaven, that is, in the Church on earth, which often times is called of Christ the Kingdome of Heaven. The space of this silence is about halfe an houre, surely very shorth, which should almost ende assoone as it should beginne. In which is taught, that the Church af∣terward shall enioy for a small time happy rest, after that the open enemies should be driven away, and that confortable Angel Constantine the great, should arise from the East. For this silence is ioined togither with that sub¦duing of the cruell enemyes, wherewith the sixt chapter was concluded. For the common type, of which sorte was the whole seaventh chapter, doth not interrupt the order of things. And indeede such quiet dayes fol∣lowed by and by after those trumpets. For Maxentius being overcome at Rome by Constantine, and Maxentius in the East by Licinius, howe glad a day appeared to the Church through the whole world? Howe great dele∣ctation, howe great ioy, howe great triumphe was ther of all degrees? How pleasant was it that the prisons were opened, that men were called backe from the mines, that their feete were loosed from boundes, that their nec∣kes were delivered from the axe? Neither onely to have these thinges, but also an Emperour, of which never any man before did so much as dreame, who endevoured exceedingly to adorne by all meanes that he could, every one of the meanest that was named a Christian. Eusebius triumphed not without cause, singing with the wordes of the Psalmist, Goe to, see yee the workes of Iehova, how he maketh desolatiōs in the earth, causing warres to cease unto
the ende of the earth, howe he breaketh the bow, and cutteth in peeces the speare, he burneth the chariots with fire, booke 10. 1. Nowe both the Augustes, as well Licinius as Constantinus, with one minde did procure diligently, not onely the peace of the Church, but also the ornaments of peace, as it is apparāt from the Decrees published in the name of them both, Euseb. booke 10. chap. 5. &c. But this was a short peace, and in very deede but of halfe an houre continuance. For first, the Augustes themselves were at concorde scarse one three yeeres space: afterward, when they were reconciled, Lici∣nius assaileth openly the Christians, and attempteth a generall slaughter. There came more over civill warre, which waxed fierce among the rulers of the Church, the Bishops themselves: who being voide of all feare of the cōmon enemy, did fall one upon an other with the weapons of wordes, as if they had ben weary of peace, even assoone as they had tasted the sweetnes of it with the top of their lippes. See Aurelius Victor of Cesar. part 2. Euseb. booke 10. 8. 9. and upon the life of Constantine booke 1. to the ende & beginning of the second. Furthermore those thinges which wee have no∣ted before at the first verse of the seaventh chapter. 2 And I saw those seaven Angels: Such hath ben the Silence, from which at length proceedeth the second periode, distinguished from the former, be∣cause the entrance into this, began not but at the ende of the seales. For shall the Trūpets be aunswerable to the Seales, which are brought to their last ende, before the Trumpets be prepared to sound? More over take away the TRVMPETS from this seaven Seale, that which wee leave unto it beside and above the Silence of halfe an houre, is a certen small thing, and more slender and baren, then beseemeth the di∣gnity of it. I see that such an opinion hath pleased some learned and Godly men, but he that shall marke and observe the thing diligently, shall perceave, that the same is quite cōtrary to the methode of the REVELATION. The Heralds of this Periode are the seaven Angels Trumpeters: The words themselves doe not shewe playnely whether these Angels were good or noe They are sayd to stande before GOD: but this is a doubtfull kinde of speaking, in so much as it may be attributed as to the evill, so to the good Angels: and therefore it is sayd that SATAN presented himselfe to∣gither with the Sonnes of GOD, before the Lord: as wee reade in the Booke of Iob first chap. ver. 6. But the proportion of the BEASTS in the Seales, and of the seaven ANGELS Ministers of the Viols, every one of which was clothed with Pure Linnen, as wee shall see in the fifteenth chapter of this booke and at
the sixt verse, may cause us to esteeme and iudge these Trumpeters in the same number of Holy ones: especially seeing that the article, those seaven ANGELS, hath also the force of nothing some that were knowne: of which wee had none before, unlesse the finger be pointed unto those seaven SPIRITS of God, sent forth into all the world, of which wee have seen in the fift Chapter and at the sixt verse. Wee sayd that the foure ANGELS of the seaventh Chapter are the foure first Trmmpets, but wee meane not the TRVMPETERS themselves, but the events which followed when they blew those their Trumpets. But the parts of this Periode are distinguished by Trumpets, because these events should be more notable, more famous and manifest to all men, and as it were sung with the publike and lowde voice of a Trumpet In receaving of which, there is a certen preparation before they beginne the worke it selfe, because by and by after the silence made, there should be given some token of the troubles to come, before the rage should waxe hotte and be kindled. To which is to be referred that Schime betweene Cecilianus and Donatus of Afrike, of which wee made mention before: the Apostasy of Licinius, and his wicked entreprise against the Church. The Contention in the East touching the Lords Supper or Passeover: But especi∣ally the infection of the Arian Heresy, the which assoone as it sprung up, began to spred quickly farre and neare, and to kindle so great close and se¦crete hatreds, that neither the scorning of the enemyes on the theatres, nor the most earnest desire of the EMPEROVR himselfe testifyed both by his letters and teares, and also by the Embassage of Holsius Cordubensis a most famous old man, could not avayle any thing at all to quench the flame: for this see the second book of Eusebius, upon the lyfe of Constantine, in his letters to ALEXAN∣DER and Arius. All these thinges as Trumpets, were given in the sight of all men, as bing indeede sorrowfull presagies of the future blowing of the Trumpets. 3 Then an other Angell came: Hitherto the preparation of the seaven ANGELS; Nowe followeth what manner of entrance was made to the events following in one ANGEL: Whom wee may not suppose to be any Spirituall substance, such as are the ANGELS properly so called, that is to say GABRIEL, or any of that sorte, as the Iesuite would have it, but a Man, according as this Booke of the Revelation is wont to speak, in the which there is nothing more common and ordinary, then to give & attribute the name of an Angel, unto Men.
Furthermore this heaven is the Holy Church on earth: the Altar the more inward holy place of the same, the Ministery of the High Priest, which the Angels properly so called doe never execute: but the trueth of which be∣longeth onely to Christ, the type unto men onely, who have a nature fit for sacrifice, about which thing the office of the Priest is chiefly occupied: of which nature seeing the Angels are voide, neither can they represente the Priest. Neither any where in the scriptures are these dutyes attributed to them. Furthermore the ministery was done before the throne, where ther is noe place for the Angels, but in the compasse of the throne: and of the El∣ders, and of the Beasts: that is to say, they compasse about the uttermost circuit of the Church, watching on every side for the safety of it: whatsoe∣ver is within the circuit, is the Hyghest Throne, the Lambe, the Beasts, the Lā¦pes, the Chrystall sea, the Altar &c. of which thinges there is a necessary use in the congregation of the faithfull. I doubt not but that this Angell is the same, which in the former chapter was sayd to ascende from the rysing of the Sunne, to wit, Constantine the Great. For that which there summarily kept the Angels from hurting untill they had sealed the elect, that seemeth in this place to be declared severally in what maner it was done. Neither doth a∣ny thing let but that the same man may be described in divers maners, ac∣cording to the divers nature of the thinges that are to be done. ¶ And he stoode before the Altar, the Greeke hath, at the Altar, Monta∣nus agreeth unto it. Afterwards it shalbe clearely seene at chap. 11.1. that the Church about this time was gone into the Temple, and had hiddē her selfe in the privie places thereof: wherfore not without cause he is sayd to stande before the Altar, seeing he was the chiefe of them, who having esca¦ped from the corruptions of the world, went a part from other into the co¦vert of the Temple. But he stoode not in this place as one of the common sorte of the faithfull, but in the ornament of the Priest, having a golden Cen∣ser, and much odours given unto him, that he should offer with the prayers of the Saincts. How may these things, wilt thou say, fit to Constantine? Surely as the type of the High Priest to Iesus christ: whose person to represente is not proper nowe to one certen kinde of men, but is common to all the faithfull; whom all Christ hath made Priests, and that not of the second, but of the highest sort. But why should not he above all have the image of the Priest, in whom most of all did shine the likenes of his Kingly dignity? well spake he of himselfe in the assembly of the Bishops, And I, saith he, am here as one of you: for J will not deny my selfe to be your felowe servant, in which na∣me I reioice most of all: Socrat. booke 1. chap. 7. ¶ Having a golden censer: the greeke word  signifyeth properly
Frankincense here is taken, for the Censer it selfe, as is manifest frō the first verse, where this  is filled with the fire of the Altar. But the golden Censer was an instrument of the most Holy Place, Heb. 9.4. and belongeth one∣ly to the High Priest. ¶ And odours were given him. Therefore this Angel is not Christ: who ta∣keth not odours frō any other, but he himselfe is a most replenished store house of all graces, and giveth to every one, as much as is needfull. Those odours are a most ample, both ability, and also will to make peace, which is the ende of the Priesthood, and of burning incense before God: in which res¦pect the Lord is said, to smell a sweete savour, when he accepteth a Sacrifice: Gen. 8.21. ¶ That he might offer with the prayers: These thinges are spoken according to the auncient custome of the Temple: where the Priest burning incense within upon the golden altar, in the meane time the whole people taryed without, giving themselves to prayer, as in Luke 1.10. And the whole mul¦titude of the pepple prayed without in the time of the burning incense: from whence it cometh to passe, that it is sayd in this place to be givē to the prayers: which before time was wōt to be ioyned togither with them at the same momēt. And the prayers of the Saincts are the godly wishes of the faithfull, who ear∣nestly desyred, that some remedy might be founde betimes against the e∣vils neare at hande, which they saw to before shewed by many apparant tokens. For could it otherwise be, but that the syncere mindes seeing strifes, privie grudges, and contentions raigne every where, and to consume all things (I meane those which wee shewed even nowe to have followed the halfe houre silence) should not strive earnestly with God by prayers, that he would not suffer the trueth tryumphing over the tyranny of the enemyes, to be abolished by the discords and alterations of them that were of the housholde? But what other meane could there be of appeasing controver¦sies, then to gather togither the parties disagreeing one with an other, and when the matter was reasoned of on each side friendly, by a good compo∣sition to drawe them to be of one minde? This was it then which the ho∣ly men desyred that the present controversies might be taken away, by a generall Councill assembled, and the future evils might be prevented. Epi∣phanius reporteth that Alexander Bishop of Alexandria solicited Constantine and required of him earnestly, that he would summon a generall Councill, and that not of himselfe, but from the common advise of other Bishops, whom he had consulted with about this matter, booke 2. Tom. 2. heresies 69. Ruffinus booke 1. chap. 1. From which wee may perceave what was the common desire of all men. Onely Constantine next after God could give odours to this desire, that
is, bring it to some desyred issue: for, as saith Euseb. It was in the power of the omnipotent God onely, to cure these evils. But Constantine alone of all men on earth to be the minister of these good things, in the life of Constantine, in the 3. booke of the sayd Euseb. ¶ Vpon the Golden Altar: The Altar of incense, that was before the vayle, as Exod. chap. 30. ver. 3. Here it noteth the company of the chosen saincts, the first fruites of the whole world, as speaketh Eusebius: in as much as this company doubtlesse did holde the place next to the most holy, as in olde time, the Golden Altar was set before the vayle. And surely by right may this crowne of most holy men be called the Golden Altar, the great assem∣bly of which cometh nighest unto the maiesty of God, and in which the visible glory of God most of all sheweth it selfe. Where, saith Christ, two or three shalbe gathered togither in my name, there am I in the middes of them, Mat. 18.19. Therefore it must needes be that this company should have the next place to the Most Holy, in the middes of which Christ himselfe did remaine. ¶ Which is before the Throne: Within the circuite of the Elders. For that is said both here, and in other places to be before the Throne. Which whole space God would have to be proper to the elect on earth, who approach next to the Highest Throne, and are not separated by the coming between of Angels. 4 And the smoke of the odours went up: Thus farre the preparation of the Angell, now followeth his Ministery: and first that which perteineth to the Elect in this verse, in respect of whom the smoke of the odours is said to goe up, that is they were made partakers of the thing which they desyred so greatly. The maner of speaking is taken from the same custome of the Levi¦ticall Priest, the similitude of whom he hath used hitherto. Once every yeere the Censer was to be brought within the vayle, that the cloude of the incense might cover the Mercy Seate, which is upon the Testimony, to the ende that the Priest should not die, as wee reade in the booke of Levit. chapter sixeteenth, twelve and thirtheenth verses. Also Incense was to be burned every morning when the lam∣pes should be kindled, as in the booke of Exodus, chapter thirty, verses sea∣ven and eight. Whose thicke vapour ascending should pearse through the vayle, and should perfume with a most sweete savour all the inward most holy place: a visible signe of our prayers, which doe penetrate the heavēs, and by the sweete savour which they cast forth through Christ, doe obtaine of God, that which wee aske. From whence the Psalmist saith, Let my prayer be esteemed as incense before thy face: Psalme hundreth and fourthy one second verse. Therefore the smoke of the odours goeth up, when our prayers co¦ming
before God, doe obtaine for us that which wee asked according to his will. And when the holy men desired that some way should be taken, for the ending of that strife by a generall Councill proclaimed, by these things is shewed, that the thing was graunted them at length which they desired. For Constantine seeing that he did try in vaine all other remedies, appointeth a generall Councill at Nice: he commādeth the Bishops to take publike horses, and all to assemble at the day appointed. Whom at last being gathered togither, he most sweetly admonisheth touching the care that they should have to search out the trueth; he with very great equity heareth the disputers against it: finally he governeth the whole businesse with such gravity and wisdome, that at length the wicked blasphemy be∣ing condemned by common consent, the holy trueth prevailed. By which fact of his surely the thicke cloude of the odours, went up from the hande of the Angell before God, when doubtlesse by his care, paines, diligence, charges, moderation of the whole businesse, so wholesome a thing, so much desired of all the godly, was undertaken, begun, and brought to an ende. Nowe he set a marke in the foreheads of the elect, wherby they might be discerned from the base sorte of the ungodly. Therefore Constantine is that Angell, those odours given him, which he should give to the prayers of the Saincts, is the power to gather a generall Councill: the Golden Altar is Christ himselfe in the middes of this holy company: The thicke cloude of the odours going up, is the whole matter brought to an ende most prosperously. And this is that time untill which the foure Angels should keepe the truce, of which wee have seen at the 7. chap. ver. 1. ¶ With the prayers of the Saincts: Prayers, peradventure by the want of a participle, not of the preposition with, as if the perfit sentence were this, And the smoke of the odours, which were given to the prayers of the Saincts went up, the word being repeated from the former verse, where was, that he should give to the prayers: a thing very usuall with the Hebrewes, to understand in the things that follow, the verbe that was used before. But by this reason the odours given should onely ascende, and not also the other prayes of the saincts, which also are odours, as wee have seene in the fifte chapter & at the eight verse, Therefore by want of the preposition the sense seemeth better to agree: Yet Theodorus bez have it with the preposition with, and not with the of as the Common translation, and the Iesuite, who interpreteth it material∣ly, that the odours ascending were made of the prayers of the Saincts, whē it was sayd before, that he should give to the prayers of the saincts. But no∣thing that is givē to a thing, is made of the same thing, to which it is givē
¶ Out of the Angels hande: Because he helde a Censer in his hande: but which is as much as if he should say, by the ministery of the Angel, Constantine ministrng, whatsoever was needfull for this matter. 5 After the Angel tooke the Censer, and filled it with fire of the altar: The fact of the Angel, as farre as it respecteth the wicked. But the full Censer sheweth the greatnes of the evill: the fire of the altar, the kinde of it. That was an ex∣cellent confession of the faith, which the holy Councill published against Heresies: which surely was like the coales of the altar, which the fire falling frō heaven kindleth in the hearts of the Saincts, upon which they may burne most sweete odours in calling upon one true God in three persons. But this same fire cast into the earth, that is this godly confession spread abroad e∣very where by the Emperours proclamations into the wicked world, or the Church at least in name (for I told you that so the Earth signifyeth often times) how great troubles raised it up forthwith? Doubtlesse even as that fire cat on the earth by Christ▪ made all full of privie displeasures & broyles while the godly with the heat of it, wer enflamed with a desire of the truth, but the wicked were set on fire with hatred and envie, Luke 12.49. so this holy Decree, a firebrand of the same heavenly fire, raysed up a very great hatred in the contrary wils of men. When the Trumpets were first given, they fought one against an other, onely with a dssenting of opinions, but the evill encreased now by the remedy, as cankers are wont. For after this Councill came all maner of calamityes, deceits and false accusations, which being shewed here briefly by the voices, thunderings, and lightnings, af∣terward are declared severally in the first trūpete. So therefore, that which was holy and holsome to the godly, turned to greater destruction and provoking to the wicked. ¶ And there were thunders and voices: Some bookes have voices and thun∣ders: Aretas onely thunders and lightnings, omitting voices and earthquakes, These thinges doe note generally what fruite of that Coūcill should redoun¦de to the wicked. But thunders and voices seeme here to be two wordes for one thing, to wit lowde thunders, as Ier. 4.29, they shall goe into the very clou¦des, and clime up upon the rockes; that is, upon the cloudy rockes by reason of the height of them: unlesse peradventure voices be the same thing here, which they were in the 4. chap. 5 ver. 6 And the seaven Angels, which had: The second preparation of the seaven Angell, who nowe goe about the businesse, of which before in the Trum∣pets that were given, there was given some proofe. For these thinges ae spoken of the executing of the worke, as likewise the wife of the Lambe is sayd to make her selfe ready, at the very marriage, after in chap. 19.7. Nowe
therefore when the prisons where broken, those mischiefes should fly out, which evē hitherto made a stirre in the inner partes: the foure first of which are described in this chapter, farre lighter indeede then the three last: and therefore wee shall see, that albeit in a certen order of blowing the Trum∣pets they doe assayle, yet they all doe togither come upon men with force, distinguished onely by shorte spaces of time to beginne. ¶ Prepared themselves to blowe the trumpets: This sounde of trumpets, see∣meth not to be a voice manifesting to Iohn alone, that is, to the elect in the Church, the trouble that should come, such as was that of the Beasts in the first seales: but the divine administration, giving by the holy Angels so notable beginnings to the facts: that by the same, as it were by a noyse of trumpets, all sortes of men should be awaked, for to consider the be∣ginning of things. Many things doe creepe upon us by little and little and secretly, so as their beginning is unknowne, and are growne olde before they be perceived: but here the beginning should be marked, and percei∣ved playnely of any one, so that the procedeing of them could not come suddenly upon any man, but such a one, as would be willfully negligent. Although the sound of a trumpet doth cause rather astonishment and feare, then teach the hearer knowledge. And so in deede it cometh to passe, that the further wee proceede, the more obscure are the iudgements of the e∣vents. In the Seales the Beast doth call Iohn for to come and see. In the Trum∣pets there is never a worde: onely a sounde is given. In the Viols, there is scarse any noise, but so farre as the liquor powred out of a cuppe doth yeelde. Certenly as longe as faith and godlines was sounde, as in those first times, small iudgements did awaken the Church: but in these last when iniquity is growne in use, wee passe over even the greatest workes of God with eyes shutte up and deafe eares. Which carelesnes of ours God both discloseth and reprooveth by this increasing darkenes of the signes. For lesse light is not given from any lacke of perspecuity in God, but onely for a reprehen∣ding of our future secutity. 7 Therefore the first Angell blew the trumpet; All things nowe being fini∣shed, which hitherto caused a delay, at length the Angels sounde the trum¦pets: at the first sound a double effect followeth. The first is a shower of haile, and fire: The second the burning of trees and grasse: the haile comming frō hea∣ven and with a great noise, signifyeth the very great trouble, which from the housholde servāts of the Church, at least by outward professiō, should fall suddenly upon their owne heades. But the fire mingled with blood, the fervency of the same trouble, and increase even to the shedding of blood. But wee must remember that these mischiefes are set on fire with the bur∣ning
coales of the altar. Which thing is here manifest. For the matter was not deferred for any lōg while, but in the middes of the Nicene Fathers the first Angell blewe the trumpet: for the holy men had scarse approved the trueth by a common consent after they had considered the matter diligēt∣ly, but the haile began to fall downe violently, and to make a wonderfull great noise. Certaine Bishops, verily citizens of the Earth, making a preten∣ded shew that they were offended with some wordes of the Confession, but in very deede inflamed with the coales of the altar, laboured to hinder the consent and to be against it so farre as in their power did lye. These were five, Eusebius Nicomedieosis, Theognis Nicenus, Maris Chalcedonensis, Theonas Marmariensis, & Secundus Ptolemaitensis, who malitiously alleadging a¦gainst the word Consubstantiall, would neither agree with the rest touching the faith, nor subscribe to the condemnation of Arius. This was a mani∣fest beginning of the haile, which a while after fell in greater abōdance. For after that Eusebius and Theognis faigning an alteration of their opinion, had recovered their former dignity, they went about this one thing, to try by all meanes howe that through the sides of Athanasius, they might pearce the trueth. And these cunning devisers looked so well to the matter, that noe times have bin more troubleous through most impudent false accusa∣tions, malitious surmises, lies, and uniust vexations: That Athanasius had killed Arsenius, had ravished his hostesse, had takē away craftily the provision of corne at Constantinople, had ministred mony to one that attempted an alteration: & what time affordeth exemples of like impudency? The good Arian Bishops remo¦ved from his seate Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, because he was one of them that helde the trueth, a whore being brought forth, who obiected unto him dishonest conversation with her. Neither were these thinges done se∣cretly and privately, but that wee may acknowledge the huge noise of the haile, in assemblyes full of men, by continuall runnings up and downe frō Thracia & Alexandria into Syria, by wicked accusations, by appealings to the Emperours, in abrogations of ungodly sentences, and approving of the same againe, so as the whole East had businesse enough by these meanes, & did ringe on every syde with the noise of this shower. But the broile stayed not here. CONSTANTINE the sonne of Constanntie mingled haile with blood, banished many, put many to death, Howe cruell a thing was it, that he compelled by torments to consent to the wicked opinion, that reverend old man Holsius of Corduba, to whom his Father gave so great honour? But the outrageousnes of VALENS is almost uncredible, wherby the Church was spoiled on every side, the faithfull were cast headlong into the
river Orontes: cruelty was exercised by every kinde of death. Surely that shippe in which under a colour of sending foure skore excellent men into banishement, he cōmanded them to be burnt in the maine sea, was more unnaturall then that weake shippe of Nero, in which he devised a death for his mother. And the Bishops who of late passed all mortall men in im∣pudency, strove afterward with tyrants who should be most cruell. What slaughters did MACEDONIƲS make through all the East, Georgius and Lucius at Alexandria? It would aske a longe time to set downe all: doubtlesse the former miserable times came againe, the name onely of the enemy being chāged: for those of the time passed wer Heathē, but these wer false Christians Verily the wonderfull and mervailous falling of haile in & about those times, shewed manifestly what was the state of thinges: And haile filling the hand rushed downe violently, every severall hailestone being as great, as the hand could conteme, as Socrates in the foure chapter of his booke doth say. And it seemeth that Gregorius Nazianzenus at that time made that ora∣tion, whose inscription is this, when the Father held his peace because of the ca∣lamity of the haile. ¶ And they were cast into the Earth, and the third part of the Earth &c. So readeth Aretas, the Common Latine translation, and some other Copies: and so it seemeth that it should be read, both that the greatnes of the evill may be the more perceived, and also that those thinges which follow may be understood the more easily, this first being set downe which is the chie¦fe. He commeth nowe to the second effect which was hurtfull onely to the wicked, the sealed being well defended from the evill of it. For, saith he, they were cast into the Earth: which wee have taught to signi∣fy Earthly men, wholy addicted to the thinges of this life. But this showre rained not upon the whole earth, but onely upon the third part. But he cal¦leth it the third, after the common manner, the whole being distributed in to three parts: Which third part was the East, to wit, Asia, and the bor∣dering places. EVROPE and AFRIKE understood it rather by hearing then in very deeded. VALENS and ƲRSATIVS Bishops, the one of the city Mur¦sia in the country of Pannonia, the other of Singidon a city in the Superior Mysia, did endevor and laboured much to fill those parts with this poison. But God who is mercifull, did in his kindnesse restrayne and represse this mischiefe within the boundes of the third part of the world, least that in overwhel∣ming the whole Church, it would at length destroy and overthrowe the same utterly.
¶ And the third part of the trees was burnt: The trees are the foster children of that Earth, of which I spake even nowe, and those more stronge & tall then any of the rest, as after in the 7. chap. but the Greene grasse signifyeth the newe borne Infants of the Church, and the common multitude. But the tēpest seemeth to rage more grievously against the Grasse, then against the trees: for of these the third part onely is on fire, but all the grasse is burnt up. But this whole grasse belongeth to that third part onely, even as that third part of the trees, are all trees of the East: from whence the condition of the trees is nothing better, then of the grasse. These things teach, that all of the Christian name, as well the highest as the lowest, who lived in those countryes of the third part of the world, and were not in trueth grounded and built upon Christ, should be so miserably smitten with this storme, that they should make shipwracke of their salvation. But you will say, that they were destroyed before: that is true doubtlesse in Gods councill, yet it often cometh to passe, that reprobate men doe flatter themselves for a time, with a certaine false hope, and doe with very great care delight to fol¦lowe some outward religion: which afterward the time doth prove mani∣festly, to have ben meere hypocrisy, and a vaine appearance of holines: so those burnt trees & grasse, should make shipwracke of their counterfait god lines, dashing themselves against the rockes of so great ungodlines of the Bishops. And howe could it be, but all in whose hartes the trueth hath not taken deepe roote, either should be carryed into errour, or, which is worse, should contemne all religion, should revolte from Christ himselfe, should hate the worshippers of him, whom they should see to be bent to this onely thing, that they may rayse up strifes, contentions, and troubles? Well wrote Constantine in an Epistle to the Councill gathered togither at Tyrus, he upbraided the Bishops, in that they did nothing else but sowe dissentions and hatreds, and those things which did tende to the utter ruine of man kinde: Socrat. booke 1. 34. But there needeth noe witnesses in a matter not doubtfull. The excee∣ding great mercy of God is rather to be praysed, which kept a fewe safe from this storme. 8 Afterward the second Angell blewe the trumpet, & as it were a burning moū∣taine: The first effect of the sounding of the trumpet of the second Angel: is a great mountaine burning with fire cast into the Sea: The second effect is, the death of the third part of the creatures that lived in the Sea. As touching the first, Mountaines in the scriptures are Princes, States of a Realme, Loftie minded, & all of that sorte, as Isaiah saith, that the day of the Lord shalbe upon all the high mountaines, and upon all the hilles that are lifted up, and upon every high tower, and upon every stronge wall, chap. 2.14.15. From whence it seemeth here to
note Kingdomes, Principalities, Honours, Dignities, the Pompe of the world, and Traine folloing great men, and the Ambition of such thinges. This Moun∣taine burneth with fire, as Vesuvius or Aetna, because the desyre of honour and riches is fervent, neither are men wont to be occupyed coldly in get∣ting such thinges. It is throwne into the Sea, because the ambition of these things is cast into the doctrine, a newe decree of the Councill being made, tou∣ching order and honour, of which their Ancesters never had a thought. For wee have shewed before, the Sea to be the most pure doctrine of the true and heavenly Church, chap. 4.6. but of the earthly and false, the foule and grosse, chap. 7.1. Seeing then that this is the meaning of the words, wee shall finde that the second Angell by and by after the first sounded the trumpet among the same Nicene Fathers. For after that sentence was given touching the coes∣sentiall nature of the Sonne, of celebrating the Easter upon one and the same day, & of Miletium, they turned themselves unto the making of Canons, by which the Ecclesiasticall Discipline should be ruled. Amonge other Canons, they make a Decree touching the Primacy of the Metropolitanes, that the Bishop of Alexan∣dria should have authority over all the Churches, in Egypt or Lybia, and Pentapolis: because the Bishop of Rome had the like custome: Likewise as in Antioch and the o∣ther Provinces, let the honour of every Church be reserved. And that no man or∣dained without the will and knowledge of the Metropolitane, should be counted a Bi∣shop: that honour also be given to the Bishop of Ierusalem, and consequently that he may receive honour, the dignity neverthelesse proper to the Metropolitane City remai∣ning. Surely this burning Mountaine was cast into the Sea, when from this beginning, there was strife among the Church men about dignity and ho∣nour, as for the maintenance of religion, and their private sustenance. In∣deede the obscurer Churches were wont in former times to goe to the lear∣ned and skilfull Bishops of more famous cityes, and to aske their advise if any doubtfull thing had fallen out, and to crave their aide to whom the excellency of the place procured more authority: but that which they did before of their owne accord, nowe must be done necessarily: and those whom lately they saluted as their brethren and felowes in office, they were now to be acknowledged by higher titles. From hence came into the Church, exercising of authority and having dominion: by which in a short time af∣ter, all thing were turned up sidowne. Constantinople thought that shee was regarded nothing according to her worthines, by this Nicene Decree: wher fore a fewe yeeres after, a Councill being gathered in the same place under Gratian and Theodosius the elder, shee ordained in plaine wordes, that the Bi∣shop of the City of Constantinople, ought to have the honour of Primacy next after the Romane Bishop, because that it is newe Rome; see the first Councill at Constan∣tinople,
Canon the fift. By which things both shee bewrayed her owne am∣bition, and also shewed some what more fully, what those some thing ob∣scure circunstances of wordes in the Nicene decree meant. ¶ And the third part of the Sea became blood: The Second effect, is the corru∣ption of Doctrine, & the death of the things in the Sea. The Doctrine is tur∣ned into blood, that is into a nature wholy growing out of kinde. Before indeede, it began to be foule and thicke, defiled with many superstitions, but afer the desire of Lordship & Primacy was mixed with it, it became an horrible blood. But what this third part is, the History sheweth clearly. In the former sounding of the trumpet the East was smitten with the haile: nowe the West is punished with the bloody waters, as some time Egypte. Now Rome must play her part, which not content with the Primacy of Order the which the Nine Fathers gave her, strove as much as shee was able, to get her selfe the highest estate also of power over all the rest. And shee had many opportunies doubtlesse before others, as to be the head City of olde time and no y t longe agoe, that preiudice of the Nicene Decree, the exceeding peace the which shee enioyd, when in the meane time the whole East was inflamed with the deadly firbrandes of dissentions, finally ordained as it were a sanctuary, the orthodo∣xes being driven out of their setes: under a coulour of defending of whom, shee crept in by stealth to that dominion, which in her heart shee sought so greedily. For while both the banished Bishops, of whom shee seemeth to deserve well, praysed her of a gratefull good will more then was meete, and shee vaunting her selfe the more freely in a good cause, shee exercised a certen empire and dominion unwarres over all men. Which coming of hers appeareth evidently in Sozomenus in his 3. booke chap. 8. Athanasius of Alexandria, Paulus of Constantinople, Marcellus of Ancyra, and Asclepa Ga∣zensis, being cast out of their people fled for succour to Rome: the defence of whom Iulius Romain tooke freely: neither was that to be reprooved, un∣lesse he had made craftily to himselfe from hence a steppe, unto tyranny. For so he writeth to the Churches in their behalfe, as though the power were his owne to command any thing imperiously. As if it were meete that he because of the dignity of his seate should be carefull for all, he restored to every one his owne Church. But when letters were sent every where touching this mat¦ter through the East, being as I said full of authority and power, which he arrogated to his seat, the Easterne Bishops, in other things not to be ap∣proved, did this well and according to their duty, that they thought the arrogancy of the man was to be convinced of them, and the Romish ambiti∣on to be reprooved freely. And from hence is that which they answere, that the Romane Church doth
strive and contende with all men about honour, as if shee were the schole of the Apo∣stles, made at the beginning the mother City of Godlines: although the teachers them∣selves of the doctrine came from the East, and were men of that country &c. There was added to his cunning of boasting so insolently of the Apostolike Chaire, a crafty interpretation of all duty, as of due obedience: the saluting of his brethren and fellowes in office, by the name of honourable Sonnes, and other no∣table fraudes of that sorte, as Damasus in his Epistle to the Constantino∣politane Councill doe shewe, in these wordes: In that, saith he, your charity most honourable sonnes, giveth due reverence to the Apostolike Chaire, by the same thing you procure very much reverence to your selves. For although it apperteineth to us chiefly to order the sterne and rudder which wee have taken upon us to governe in the holy Church, in which the holy Apostle sate a teacher, yet wee confesse our selves to be unworthy of so great an honnour, Theodor. booke 5. chap. 9. Incredible is the charity of the Romane Pope, who embraceth noe otherwise then as Sonnes, so many Bishops present in the Councill. In the next age his unsatia∣ble desyre brake forth more evidently. Three most Holy Popes, who could not erre, Zozimus, Bonifacius and Celestinus are convinced of falshood, be∣lying the Nicene Councill to stablish their owne Principality. The sixt Councill of Carthage (albeit they reprove so great a naughty act more gently then was meete) writeth to Celestinus, that they could not finde any such thinge in the truer Councils, which are received for Nicene, being sent them from holy Cy¦rill and Atticus of Constantinople, out of the originall, which they long a goe sent from thence by Faustinus, as out of a part of the Nicene Council: and therefore they warne him, that he would not doe that wherby he may seeme to bring into the Church of Christ the smokie pride of the world. So in short time their impudency increased, neither from hence forth did they cease before that Rome the conqueresse had taken from all the rest the apple of contention. The Nicene Fathers tought to provide for the peace of the Church, by pla∣cing some chiefe Patriarches, as it were in a watchtower above the rest, but the issue convinceth them both of an exceeding great errour and aberrati∣on, and of their labour to be very ill and unprofitably bestowed: and to∣gither also it teacheth howe much safer and better it is to continue and keepe within the boundes and simplicity of the divine and most holy word of GOD, then that wee should alter or change any thing in it lea∣ning unto humane wisdome and inventions of men. Such is this third part, into which the burning montaine was cast: and that the doctrine afterward became most fouly corrupted, & marred, now it is mor knowne thankes be to God, thē that is needfull to spende time in proving it.
Wee shall finde that this is the continuall Cokou song of all the Papists, an im∣moderate boasting of the Apostolique Seate, whether they doe refferre all things wrestingly, the Sunne and Moone, the two swordes, and the Church built upon Pe∣ter. 9 And the third part of the creatures dyed: There remaine yet two partes of the second effect: one touching the death of the creatures in this Sea: the other of the dstroying of the shippes. The creatures in the Sea, are all that basest com∣pany of the Clergie, as they call them: of which sorte are the Doore-keepers, Rders, Singers, Exorcists, Acobythes, Subdeacons, Deacons, Archdeacons, Dea∣nes, Religious Monks, Brethren, and the rest of that kinde. The Shippes, are those of a higher degree, whose office was to take paines in preaching the word, and to transporte it hither and thither as merchants, or any other way to exercise marchandize in this Sea▪ the third part of all those should perish, that is, all that execute this corrupt ministery in Europe, the third part of the world by drinking up this redde blood, they should be destroyed, who puffed up with ambition, despise the simplicity of their office, and neglect all maner of dutie through desyre of attaining a better dignity. In the East the overflowing of the Barbarians quenched this flame: In the West, the times being some what more quiet, gave leave to it to spread abroad at her pleasure. The greatnes of which burning, by which are burned all the Ma¦riners, Watermen, Maisters of Shippes, Pilottes, sayling in the middland Sea be∣tweene Europe and Afrique, from the gulfe of the Sea Ionium unto the Iles called Gades, that is, the Ecclesiasticall men of this our world, may be comprehended more easily in minde and thought, then declared by wordes, of him that followeth brevity. I would to God that the broken peece of this Mountaine did not yet styll trouble the Chrystall Sea in Christi an Churches. But how agreeth it to this Sea-evill, that in the same tempest, as sayth Hierome, by an earthquake of the whole world, which befll after the death of Iulian, the Seas passed their boundes, and as if God did threa¦ten a floode againe, or that all things should returne to the olde Chaos, the shippes being carried to the unapprocheable places of the Mountaines did hange upon them? In the life of Hilar. Eremit. Annian Marcell booke 26. at the ende, reported the same, mentioning that this came to passe the 12. day of the Calendes of August, when Valentianus was first Consull with his brother. 10 Then the third Angell blew the trumpet: The Primarie effect of the third sounding of the trumpet is a starre falling from heaven into the third part of the rivers and of the fountaines, burning like a torch, called wormewood. The Seconda∣ry effect is bitternesse procured thereof, and the death of men drinking of the wters.
Wee ought to remember that, which is cleare ynough from the things be∣fore said, but it is to be set downe againe and againe, because of them, who to the ende that they may darken the thinges, doe often repeate the con∣trary, that the wordes are not to be taken properly. Yf one great starre should fall, wee should not need to expect any further evill following Neither would it fall into the third part of rivers onely, but cover the whole earth: wher∣upon they that urge the property, are constrained to goe from the words, and to faine a certaine multitude of exhalations gathered togither. But it shall be manifest from the whole Prophecy, that he speaketh not of that which is to come, but of that which is past in respect of our age. Therefore they who call us backe to the naturall signification of the wordes, doe of set purpose desire to hide the trueth so, that it may never shew it selfe. Let us come to the matter. Wee have heard that the starres are the Ministers of the word in the Churches, chap. 1.20. Although the word doth not so ap∣pertaine to thē alone, but that also it may be applyed sometime to others. Howe, saith the Prophet, speaking of the King of Babylon, art thou fallen frō heaven o Lucifer, the Sonne of the morning? Isaiah 14.12. Therefore the word fitteth them who glister aloft, as it were in heaven: especially if they shine with the light of trueth. This is a great starre, not darke and cloudy, but of a notable greatnes. It fell from heaven, by falling from the true Church, through Heresy or some other ungodlines. Jt burneth as a torch, because the fire of it should be flaming & mounting up, coming forth openly abroad, not burning onely with a secrete heate, as even nowe the Mountaine did burne: whose flame yet should not continue longe, but the nourishemēt failing as of a lampe, it should be cleane put out: It falleth into the rivers and fountaines, that is upon those men from whom as from fountaines the do∣ctrine should flowe unto others, of which sorte are the Bishops disposers of the word: the divers consideration of whom doth procure unto them divers names. Even nowe they were Shippes carrying hither and thither the mar∣chandizes of the word: nowe because by their continuall flowing they doe maintaine that universall Sea of doctrine, and increase that which abideth in the multitude, worthyly are they compared unto rivers and fountaines. The starre falleth into them, peradventure the common people remaining more syncere, which comprehendeth not so great subtilityes. Although howe shall the river flowe cleare, where the fountaine is corrupted? Vnles peradventure as the Sea waxeth not sweete by the watering of the rivers, so neither doe the multitude gather bitternes from the corruption of these. But the matter is otherwise here, seeing a little leaven leaveneth the whole lumpe: and albeit, the fountaines should be most corrupt, yet it should
not be without daunger to them, who should drinke thereof, but they should perish even as well. The name of the starre is wormood, not because it should be called so commonly, but because it should shewe her selfe to be some such thing by the effect. And wormwood some time noteth the bit∣ternes of afflictiō, as beholde I will feede my people with wormwood, Ier. 9. that is, most bitter corrections: some time the deadly poison of hereticall wicked∣nes, as take heede that there be not in you a roote bringing forth hemlock or worme∣wood, Deut. 29.18. that is, least your minde be the seedeplot of any Idola¦try and wretched life, as the most learned Tremelius and Iunius doe ex∣pounde it. Both seemeth to be ioyned togither here, that the bitternesse of the calamity may be mixed with the vitious and corrupt doctrine. Now for the application. The third Angell did blowe about an eleven yeeres after the former. When Constantius, to whom befell the Easterne Empire, and by and by after the death of his Father, through the fraude of a certaine El∣der, whom he used familiarly, was cast from heaven into the Arian Heresy. The impiety began before through Arius, and gotte some patrons, as be∣fore wee have said: but Arius forthwith counterfaited a recantation: by the same cunning Eusebius and Theognis recovered their chaires. Neither durst any openly make any stirre, while Constantine remained alive. This fu∣rour enraged the mindes of some, and drove them to worke the ortho¦doxes what troubles they were able, but they made shewe of an other thing. Furthermore these were lesser starres: but Constantius was a great starre flaming as a torch, bringing forth the thing out of lurking corners in∣to the cleare light: and endevouring with very great desyre to amplify it. The same account is to be made of Valens the Emperour, who followeth af∣ter Iulian & Iovinian. By their meanes Wormewood fell into the third part of the rivers, and into the fountaines of waters. Before time the Bishops were sicke of this disease: but nowe they began to rage, having got such rulers. The whole East, except Athanasius and Paulinus drunke this deadly poison of the Ari∣ans and Emmonians, see Hierome against the errours of Iohn Bishop of Hier. Not onely Nilus was turned into bitternes, but also the rivers and fountaines of Thracia, Hellespont, Bithinia, and the whole continent region: in all which pla∣ces the Arians expelled out of the Churches all that were of a right iudgement, and punished them shamefully, Sozom. booke 4. 27. More over the poison was pow∣red forth on all men from the borders of Illyricum, even unto Thebais, as Basyll cō∣playneth in his Epist. 69. And what wormewood was at any time more bit∣ter, then for Christians to be beaten with stripes to death by Christians, to be deprived of their goods, and priviledge of the cities, to be burned in the fore head with a hotte iron, and to be handled with noe lesse cruel∣ty,
yea rather more cruelty of brethren, then before time of most fierce & outragious enemies? Yet all these thinges and many mo suffered the or∣thodoxe at the handes of Macedonius of Constantinople, and others his fel∣lowes in office, not Bishops, but fiendes of Hell, as Socrates writeth in his se∣cond booke, chapter 27. This mischiefe vexed and over ruled a longe time that third part, both by it owne selfe, and also by the unhappy birth of the Macedonians and other wretched ofspring of that sorte: neverthelesse whē Valens was dead, this flame also decayed, the matter of which was consu∣med, as of a lampe, which hath noe more oyle. Those Wormewood waters did wonderfully provoke the calamity of the haile with which nowe at lenght they mixe themselves, and hindred that the burning flame of ambi∣tion in the West could not be holpen. For nowe the three Trumpets came on with rage togither, which molested at the first asunder and mor lightly. 11 Therefore the third part of the waters became: The Second effect shewing the fruict of the falling starre. The Teachers and Bishops almost all, of that third part, who should be the springs of learning unto others, forthwith infected the wholesome waters with the bitternes of that wicked opinion: but they made this deadly mixture not onely to themselves, but also all which drunke hereof, and sufferred themselves to be infected with the sa∣me opinions, got to themselves destruction, as hath ben declared by us before. 12 Afterward the fourth Angell blewe the trumpet: Here is mentioned one effect onely of the fourth trumpet: otherwise then in the former. Nei∣ther that without cause, but for this intent, as farre as it seemeth, because the former evils came from them of the housholde, and that it was therefore needfull, not onely that it should be shewed which was done, but also the Authours, whereunto the first effect perteined especially. But this calami∣ty should come altogither from the Enemy, and from men that were stran¦gers from the Church, any fall of whom there was noe neede to rehearse. Wherefore he cometh to declare this trumpet noe otherwise then to the re¦lating of the former calamityes, which the spitefull Heathen Tyrants did bring in before time, as in chap. 6.12.13. This onely effect smiteth the third part of the Sunne, of the Moone, of the Starres, of the Day and of the Night. The Sunne, Moone, and Starres wee interprete as before, to be the chiefe ornaments of the purer and true Chyrch: So as that the Sunne should be the Scriptures themselves, the foun∣taines of light. The Moone the doctrine borrowed from thence, which is compared sometime to the water, and also sometime to the light for a di∣vers respect.
the starres, the Ministers: the day, ioyfulnes and mirth in the Church from the enioying of this Sunne: the Night, a sorrowfull condition, either in re∣gard of affliction, or of darkenes and obscurity which is cast upon the trueth, or of both: whereupon there shall be noe night in the full happines of the Church, chap. 21.29. Neither are the Ministers starres, because they are ser¦vants of the night, but because they put away the darknes that is in others, themselves in the meane time being inlightned wholly by the light of the Sunne; The meaning therefore is, that a most grievous calamity, common noe lesse to the false, then to the true Church, shall invade the third part of the world: as the History witnesseth it to have come to passe. I passe over the tempests of those warres, which the most obscure nations Gothes, Suevians, Hunnes, He¦ruls, Vandals, and the other confederates of these, inferred: which scarcely repressed of Constantine the Greate, at length when he was taken from the earth, overflowed all Europe: I thinke that this forth sounding of the trum¦pet, is to be referred especially, when Gensericus the Vandal, about the yeere after Christ is birth 438. passed over from Spaine into Afrique, sent of Boni¦facius. For what Decius or Diocletian is to be compared with this man in cruelty? The divine goodnesse delivered from their iawes Augustine, a few dayes before the city Hippo was takē. What torments endured not the rest of the saincts? The Tyrant commandeth all holy bookes to be burned, e∣very one without regarde to be killed, that they should not spare the inno¦cent, but suckling children being pulled from their mothers brests, to be partly dashed against the stones and the grounde, partly to be cleaved a∣sunder in the middes from the crowne of the head. And they were better dealt with all, then the rest which remained alive, many Ministers of the word, and famous men being laden with huge burdens in steade of Ca∣mels and beasts, and compelled with goades of iron to hasten their going, as often as through wearines they stayed. Proclamations from the King ar set forth, that all in generall should be destroyed, who had holy orders. And Victor of Ʋtica who wrote the History of this persecution, maketh mē∣tion, that of an hundred and three score Bishops, which lately were in Zengetana & the provinciall iurisdiction, three onely were left alive, at what time he wrote these thinges: and that one of these three escaped persecution and lived as a banished man at Edessa in Macedonia. Verily the third part of the Sunne, of the Moone, of the starres, and of the day was smitten; seeing the Africane Church, the third part of the world, lay wholly quenched, as farre as man could iudge. Espe¦cially when as Hunorichus Nundrus, and at length Gilimer made a gleaning with greater cruelty (if any thing can be greater) then Genserichus used in reaping the first harvest. Neither was the Night untouched, but the third
part of it was likewise smitten, that is, the whole false Church also, which is wont to be more populous then the true, and to cover it over with her dar¦kenes, was partaker of the same calamity. For the Vandals desired to roote out all at once every one of the Christian name: farre otherwise then the o∣ther barbarous natiōs in Europe, which sought onely places to dwell in for themselves, and bare noe such hatefull mindes against religion. For which cause wee thinke, that this fourth sounding of the trumpet, doth proper∣ly belonge to the Africane Vandals. And so much the more, because by their meanes it was brought to passe that the Sunne in those countryes did go downe alway to this very day: for after that horrible darkenesse, which the Vandals brought in, God by his fearefull iudgement gave up those na¦tions to the Mahumeticall madnes, whose hellish darknes at this time suf∣ferreth noe confortable Sunne beame to shine upon them. Howe is it to be lamented, that that part of the world, which afore time was beset with most famous lights, Tertullian, Cyprian, Augustine, and others almost infi∣nite, is nowe altogither become blacke, and doth not shine with one lit∣tle sparkle? But so is thy will most holy Father, who hast compassed about us Europeans left alone, and most wickedly abusing thy holy name, with very sorrowfull spectacles of thy wrath, both toward the East & South. So therefore are the foure first trumpets, Contention, Ambition, Heresy, & Warre: those foure Angels, which Constantine the Great for a time restrained. But the first and third trumpet belongeth to the East: the second to the West: the fourth to Africa. The Prophecy of this chapter conteineth about two hundred & thirty yeeres, to wit, from the beginning of the reigne of Constantine unto the yeere of Christ five hundred thirty and three, at which time Belisarius carried away captive Gilimer, and destroyed the name of the Vandals in A∣frique, Evag. booke 4.16. Yee may fetch a larger declaration from Eseb. upon the life of Constantine: from Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomene, Eva∣grius, Procopius, of the warre of the Vandals: and Victor of Vtica tou∣ching the persecution of the same men: whose Commentaries God would have to be extant, for the light and credit of this Prophecy. 13 And I sawe and heard one Angell: Nowe he cometh to the three last trumpets, much more troublous then the former, as appeareth from the co¦mon preparation in this verse. For as though the usuall sounding of the trumpet were not of sufficient force to cause feare, a common Proheme to these three full of terrour is prefixed: every severall afterward is declared by their transitions. As touching the wordes, some reade for an Angell an Eagle, as Aretas, the Complutent Edition, and the common translation: brought hereunto as it seemeth, because the fourth Beast was like a flying Eagle,
chap. 4.7. But the word one being adioyned, maketh against it. For it was wont to be the limiting of a thing uncertaine and indefinite. But the Eagle the fourth Beast was onely one: wherefore it had ben superfluous to say, I heard one Eagle. Therefore one Angell agreeth better: which word is gene∣rall, and by right may be limited with some addition, as Andreas readeth, and some other Greeke Copies. Furthermore he is called an Angell which fly¦eth through the middes of heaven, after in chap. 14.6. But this one Angell is some one man alone, picked and chosen out from the rest, to some pecu∣liar office.  is not the middes of heaven, as the Astronomers call it, who call midday in this wise, but the middes betweene Earth and heavē, to wit, the middes of height, not of lenght, as the Angell appeared to David, 1 Chron. 21.16. But seeing heaven is the holy Church, and the earth the false and counterfaite, which carrieth the name & shewe onely of the true: this Angell being seen betwixt both, seemeth not to have attained the pu∣rity of that, and yet to have flowne somewhat aloft beyond the dregs and filth of this. He cryeth with a lowde voice, that he may be heard of all men, that there shall come farre greater calamityes, frō the three trumpets that are to come, then yet have gone before. But that these shall come upon the inhabitans of the earth, who doe counterfait holines, whereas in very deede they are wi∣thered branches and rotten members. The time and congruency of the matter doe make me to thinke that this Angell is Gregory the Great Bishop of Rome: he was one, as it were taken out of the rable of many Bishops, whose labour God would use to profit his Church. But although he sate unwares in the chaire of wickednes, yet God knoweth to plucke his out of the iawes of Hell. And significantly doubtles is he called one, as though it were a miracle for any one of any goodnes to be founde among that dege¦nerating route. This Gregory did fly in the middes of heaven, pressed downe with many superstitions and errours, that he could not be enrolled a citi∣zen of the heavenly city. Whose neverthelesse singular good will, care, di∣ligence, right iudgement in many thinges lifted him up on high farre abo∣ve the rest of the common sort, and that company of superstitious ones. He cryed with a lowde voice, denouncing to the world a great calamity by ANTICHRIST who should come straight way. The King, saith he; of pride is at hande, and wich is unlawfull to be spoken, an army of Priests is pre∣pared: booke 4. Epist. 24. Againe, the King of pride is at the doores, in the sa∣me booke, Epist. 38. In the same place againe, where is that Antichrist, which chalengeth the name of universall Bishop, and for whom is prepared an army of Priests to attende upon him? He is at hand, sayth he, and at the doores: yea he was farre neerer then he thought, in whose chaire he sate even himselfe,
but by his account he could not be farre of. Neither is it lawfull to dimi∣nish the Popes credit, who could not be deceaved, especially avouching the same thing so often and in earnest. Seeing therefore that this Gregory next after the fourth trumpet, that is, the Vandalike persecution, so expressely cryeth out aloude, that Antichrist is at hande, then whom noe greater pla¦gue and calamity could befall the earth: and that a fewe yeeres before, that the Monster borne longe agoe, broke forth into the open light, it must needes be that he was this Angell, who is shewed almost so playnly by this type, as if he had ben named. CHAP. 9. THEN the fift Angell blewe the trumpet, and I sawe a starre fall from heaven into the earth, and to that starre was given the key of the bottomelesse pit. 2 He opened therefore the bottomelesse pit, and there arose a smoke out of the pit, as the smoke of a great fornace: and the Sunne was darkened, and the ayre, by the smoke of the pit. 3 And there came out of the smoke Locusts upon the earth, and unto them was given power, as the scorpions of the earth have power. 4 But to them it was sayd, that they should not hurt the hay of the earth, neither any greene thing, neither any tree: but onely those men, which had not the Seale of God in their foreheads. 5 And to them was commanded, that they should not kill them, but that they should be tormented five moneths: and that their torment should be, as the torment of a Scorpion, when he hath stung a man. 6 Therefore in those dayes shall men seeke death, and shall not finde it, and shall de¦sire to dye, and death shall fly from them. 7 And the formes of the Locusts were like unto horses prepared unto battell: & on their heades were set as it were crownes, like unto Golde, and their faces like as the faces of men. 8 And they had haire as the haire of women, and their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons. 9 And they had habergions, as habergions of iron: and the sound of their wings was like the sounde of charets, when many horses runne unto battell. 10 And they had tailes like unto Scorpions, and stings: and they have power in their tailes to hurt men five moneths. 11 And they have a King set over them, which is the ANGEL of the bot∣tomelesse pit, whose name in Hebrew is Abaddon, but in Greeke Apollyon, that is, Destroying.
12 One woe is past: and beholde yet two woes come after this. 13 Then the sixt Angell blewe the trumpet, and J heard a voice from the foure hornes of the Golden Altar which is before the eyes of God, saying to the sixt An∣gell, which had the trumpet. 14 Loose those foure Angels, which are bound at the great river Euphrates. 15 Therefore those foure Angels were loosed, which were prepared at an houre, & at a day, and at a moneth, and at a yeere, to slay the third part of men. 16 And the number of the army of horsemen was two thousand times an hundred thousand: for I heard the number of them. 17 And I sawe the horses in a vision, and them that sate on them, having fiery ha∣bergions, and of Jacinth, and of bristone: and the heads of the horses were as the hea∣des of Lions: and out of their mouthes went forth fire, and smoke, and brimstone. 18 By these three was the third part of men killed, that is, of the fire, and of the smoke, and of the brimestone, which came out of their mouthes. 19 For the horses power is in their mouthes, and in their tailes: for their tailes are like unto serpens having heades, wherewith they hurt. 20 And the remnant of the men, which were not killed by these plagues repented not of the workes of their handes, that they should not worshippe devils, and Idols of Gold, and of Silver, and of Brasse, and of stone, and of wood, which neither can see, neither heare, nor goe. 21 Neither repented they of their murthers, nor of their sorceries, neither of their fornication, nor of their theft. Analysis. SVCH hath ben the common Proheme, as was said in the last verse of the former chapter. The speciall effect of the greater trumpets follow∣eth: two of which are handled in this chapter: The Fift, unto the verse 13. The Sixt in the rest. The first effect of that is, the fall of a starre from heaven, ver 1. The second effect is the opening of the bottomelesse pit, the smoke coming out of the pit, darkening the Sunne, ver. 2. and the ingendring of Locusts: of which afterward there is a description, first in respect of their power, like un¦to scorpions ver. 3. over whom, ver. 4. of how long continuance, ver. 5. howe great, both from the degree of paine, which should not be unto death, but onely for torment, ver. 5. and also from the esteeming of death, as a lesser e∣vill, ver. 6. Afterward there is used a lively description of them, both of what sorte they are by themselves, and that partly in summe: That they are like to warrelike horses, ver. 7. partly by every member in regard of their heades and faces, in the same verse, of their haires and teeth, ver. 8. of their
habergeons and winges, ver. 9. of their tailes and power of hurting to cō∣tinue, ver. 10. and also lastly, what they are in respect of their King Abad∣don, ver. 11. So is the fift trumpet. The two next are set forth by transitiōs, ver. 12. The former whereof, that is the sixt conteineth both the calamity in the rest of this chapter, and also a consolation of the Saincts in the two fol∣lowing. The calamity first is commanded, the authour of which commande∣ment is declared, ver. 13. The Minister to whom it is given, and the summe of the commandement, ver. 14. Afterward it is performed in very deede, both by the Captaines, to whom a space of tyrannising, and the number of them that are to be killed, is prescribed, ver. 15. and also by the souldiers, the number of which is shewed, ver. 16. and fierce and terrible dispositiō, ver. 17. The event of all which is double, the killing of the third part of men, ver. 18.19. The hardening of the rest, ver. 20.21. Scholions. 1 Then the first Angell blewe the trumpet, and J sawe a starre: The first effect of the fift trūpet is the fall of a starr, as wee have sayd in the Analysis, which starre is not any good Angell, they are never sayd to fall from heaven to the earth, which alwayes in this booke is takē in the worse patt: but to descēde, as chap. 10.1. and 18.1. and 20.1. Furthermore, this starre is the An∣gell of the bottomlesse pit, of which in ver. 11. who is called Destroying, not o∣nely because he shall destroy others, but also because he himselfe shall goe in∣to destruction, chap. 17.8. Who hath come from the same bottomlesse pit, from whence he hath caused destruction to others, in the same place: It is well true that a Holy Angell hath the key of the bottomelesse pit, chap. 20.1. but that is a key to shutte onely the bottomelesse pit, after that the Devill is put in: this on the other side is onely to open the same. Neither is that firme, that the key is never given to others, then our friends: for what other thing is the Key, then a power over a thing? Which wee knowe is granted to the fow∣les spirits; whereupon the Devill is called the Prince of the world, Iohn 14.30. the Prince of the power of the ayre, Ephes. 2.2. the Prince of the darkenes of this world, Ephes. 6.12. Therefore this starre by an usuall maner of spea∣king in the Scriptures, is some wicked Man, to whom wee have heard be∣fore nowe, that the name of starre is given. That Ambrose, which not very long agoe Tonstall published, will have him to be some Arch-heretique, who as a starre in heaven, before he fell, shined brightly in the Church with learning and wisdome: Ioachimus Abbas, that it is some Clergie man endued with knowledge of learning: Well and according to the meaning of the Holy Ghost, as wee
shall see by and by. He is said to have fallen in the time past, which fell be∣fore nowe. For this starre fell not first at this fift sounding of the trumpet, but departed longe before from her soundnesse by certen degrees, & was tumbled downe into this pit of ungodlines. Although this preter tence noteth not onely the thing which is nowe past, but also after the maner of the Hebrewes, a continuing action. Of which sorte are those, This is my be loved Sonne in whom I have ben well pleased, Mat. 3.17. So before, Beholde sayth Christ, I have stood at the doore and doe knocke, chap. 3.20. Of which sorte are many in other places. It fell from heaven unto the earth, by revolting from the holy Church to a degenerating company of ungodly men. But this fall nowe first began to be marked, after the sounding out of the fift trū¦pet. For that which is done leisurely and privily, is not perceaved to be a doing, before that it be manifestly come to passe. The key of the bottomelesse pit given, is a power granted over infernall darkenes, which was shutte up in the bottome of the pit of hell, for that is the bottomelesse pit. Now first this power was granted to sende forth the smoke, howsoever the fall from heaven was before that the trumpet sounded. Nowe that wee may finde out who this starre is, the thing is not to be measured by one or two circū∣stances (for so wee shall finde very many to have fallen from heaven) but all things are to be taken togither: which surely whomsoever they shall fitte, he doubtlesse is that very man whom this Prophecy painteth out unto us: it cannot be that the holy descriptions should be generall and common, so as they may be applyed to divers things contrary to the meaning of the Spirit. But it is to be observed, that this trumpet is not limited within any certaine boundes of the third part, as the former, but to have free liberty to spread farre abroad in what place soever it will, as in the common prohe∣me the Angell cryed out in the ende of the former chapter, woe to the inhabi¦tans of the earth: as though the calamity should be contained within noe o∣ther limits then of the whole earth: from whence it cometh to passe that the latter trumpets exccede the former, not onely in the very kinde and con∣tinuāce of the evils, but also in the space and largenes of the countries thē∣selves, to which they should bring dammage. These thinges being thus layd, wee shall finde that this trumpet sounded immediately within three yeeres after that Gregory died (whom evē nowe wee shewed to be the An∣gell flying from the middes of heaven) about the yeere from the birth of Christ, sixe hundreth and seaven. At which time Boniface the third obtained of Phocas the parricide, that the Bishop of Rome should be universall: then also Mahumet in the East (whom Robertus Cetenensis and Bibliander refer unto the same time in the eleven table: albeit I thinke that others more truly doe reffer
him to a fewe yeeres after: as touching the summe of the thing there is noe difference) was beleeved of his owne people to be a greate Prophet. Both starres fell from heaven before this time. The Romane defection is manifest in the Idola∣trous worshipping of reliques, & in attributing that to the Saincts, which is proper to God alone: that I may not recite many other wicked supersti∣tions, when as it would aske a longe time even for to number them. Gre∣gory that middle Angell, whom by right thou mayest call holy in compa∣rison of many other that were to come: in howe plaine words doth he be∣wray the impiety of this seate herein? The holy Martyrs, sayth he, our defen∣ders are present, they will be asked, and they require to be sought. Therefore in your prayers seeke yee these helpes, finde yee out these defenders of your guiltines: in his Ho¦milies on the Gosp. Againe, Which Holy Peter of late could be your helper in all things, and more over he is able to forgive your sinnes, booke 4. Epist. 34. Againe, let him put his trust in the grace of the omnipotent God, and in the helpe of the blessed Apostle Peter, in the booke 4. chap. 39. Moreover, from the crosse, in which is the wood of the Lords crosse, and the haires of John Baptist, wee have alwayes con∣fort of our Saviour, through the intercession of his fore runner, booke 7. Epist. 126. Neither was he the first authour of this Idolatry: neither did they which fol¦lowed indevour to overthrowe it, but rather increased it with all their po∣wer. And not without cause indeede, the fall of this starre became thē first knowen, when the Bishop began to be called universall, then yet the eares of all men might ring with the late crying out of Gregory, He is Antichrist, who chalengeth to himselfe the name of universall Bishop. Frō which also it is ma∣nifest, howe both they deceive and are deceived, who require instantly the testimonies of Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostome, Augustine, or of any other Father, by which expresly it may be proved that the Pope of Rome is Anti∣christ, seeing his fall could not be so plainly discerned before the blowing of the fift trumpet: which doubtlesse sounded not, before these holy men cea¦sed to be among the living. The fall also of Mahomet from heaven is evident. The Saracenes had received the true faith of Christ by the instruction of Mo¦ses a certaine Bishop of that people, when Mavia the Queene reigned, as in Socrates booke 4.36. or Mania, as Sozemene calleth her, booke 6. 38, At which time Valens governed the Empire of Rome in the East. From this beginning, or peradventure from Zacomus the Prince, who flourished a fewe yeeres before, the trueth seemesh to have ben spred a¦mong them unto the times of HERACLIƲS, corrupt without all doubt with much filth, and corruption, as is wont to come to passe in pro¦cesse of time, yet not quite abolished, as it is cleare frō Mahumet himselfe:
who acknowledged the Scriptures, and tooke to himselfe companions, or rather had for maisters Sergius of Constantinople, a Nestorian Monke, and Iohn of Antiochean Arian, Wherefore it is plaine that both of them had fallen. The key was given to the Bishop of Rome in that manner which I have said, For an ordinance of the Emperour being established, that the Bishops of Ro¦me should have full power to assemble generall Councills and to disolve them, to confir¦me and disanull the thinges which should be decreed in the Councills: and that the Ci¦ty of Rome should be the heade of all holesome life, when before Constantinople was so esteemed because of the seate of the Emperour (as writeth Pomponius on Phocas) what could not this key open? Doth not the Pope worthyly boast of the Keyes, and carrieth them an ensigne for his armes, least perhaps any should be ignorant, that he is the same, whom Iohn sawe should come? And this is that difference betweene the other superstitious men, and the Pope of Ro∣me. Many others did give more to the Saincts departed, then was meete, and defiled themselves with the most grievous sinne of Idolatry, yet to noe other was given the key to open the pit, but to this universall Bishop. Let noe man therefore to hide the Antichrist, call forth the defense and fellow∣shippe of others that erred, but let him ioyne togither all the properties, nor iudge of him for one alone. But as touching Mahomet, what could not he obtaine of the simple multitude, being counted of all a great Pro∣phet? Whose sowning from a disease the rude multitude beleeved to have bin a confe∣rence with the Angell Gabriell. Surely a mighty Key and fit to open the pit of Hell. Therefore the respect to the time, the greatnes of the matter, thea∣greablenes of all things, which shall more appeare in the explication: fi∣nally the large boundes of this trumpet doe cause that as well Mahomet as the Romish Pope are to be contained under this starre. Neither is it an un∣meete thing that many persons should be noted by one type: whom the likenes doth compose and make to be some one thing. 2 Therefore he opened the bottomelesse pit, and the smoke ascended; Such was the first effect. The second sorte of effects doe arise one from another in a certen order. For first, he openeth the pit: from the pit opened smoke ascendeth: out of the smoke, beside the darkening of the Sunne, come Locusts. And the Smoke is Heresy in doctrine, and superstition in worship. For what other thing can breath out of the Hellish pit? Before time indeede by many cranyes it sent forth a foule vapour, but nowe through the doores opened by the helpe of these men, it began to goe out hastily. The Sunne and ayre are dar∣kened, after that errours growed in use, and the light of the trueth was quite put out. Neither is it a darkenes of one place onely, such as the high rope of some mountaine doth cause, but the whole ayre is filled with black¦nes
differring nothing from the darknes of the night. And certenly after once the Primacy was obtained of Phocas, Bonifacius the next both in name and order, consecrated to all Saincts, Pantheon a Temple of Heathenish I∣dolatry, practizing the same ungodlines, which the Ethniques did before, but under an other something more glorious name. Whose holy day also he appointed, that the wickednes of worshipping an newe army of Gods, might not be Romes alone. Theodatus his next successour decreed, that the parents who had received even through ignorance, their owne children from baptis∣me, should not live togither any more in the society of wedlocke: but that there should be a separation made, and the woman should receive her dowrie, and be married to an other after a yeere. A newe kinde of incest by spirituall kindred, which God knewe not when he made his lawes of incest and unlawfull marriages, Lev. 18. Bonifacius the fift added, that wee by Christ are delivered from originall sinne onely: that the lawe requireth noe more of us, then that which wee are able to perfour∣me by our owne strength, or at least by the helpe of the divine grace. Vitalian, that all things ought to be done in the Church in the Latine tonge. Finally, that I may not recken up an infinite thing: the matter at length came to this point, that all must necessarily submit their neckes to this yoke: That every soule that wilbe saved, must confesse the forme of the Romane tradition: and that all her decrees are to be received, as if they were stablished by the divine voice of Peter himselfe: as Agatho in his Epist. among the Acts of the sixt Councill at Constantino∣ple. This smoke which at the first opening of the pit, was but thinne, be∣came every day thicker, almost by infinite degrees. And the maner of Wor¦shipping God, began to be noe lesse corrupted, which did consist wholy in Masses, Altars, Garments, Images, Chalices, Crosses, Candlesticks, Censers, Banners, Holy Vessels, Holy Water: in a multitude of Prayers, Pilgrimages, Fa∣stings, and an exceeding great company of not onely idle, but also ungodly ceremonies, the most pure ordinance of God forsaken in the meane time, and troade under foote. Howe longe before, and howe farre this smoke spread it selfe in the West, one alone Boniface Venofride an Inglishman may be instead of many witnesses, who being the Legate and Apostle of Gregorie the second, brought into bondage under the Pope the Franckes, the Noriques, the Boies, the Thy rigates, The Cattes, part of the Saxes, the Daces, the Sclavonians, the Frises. How great a multitude of slaves by one mans travell? But this was nothing to the whole West, covered in a shorte time after with the same smoke. For the Princes being made to beleeve, that, that Church was founded of Peter, and this Peter left the keyes and power given him of Christ to his successours at Rome, and in no other place in the earth: so as he that should cut of himselfe from the Church of Rome, should become a banished man from the Christian religion (as Adrian in his
Epistle to the Spaniards:) it is noe mervayle if by this darkenes the Sunne was taken away from all Churches every where. But this darke night became yet much more thicke, when at length the holy Scriptures being wholly layd aside, and all good learning being banished, sophisticall Theologie was onely in account, the unpure Decrees and Decretals, held the gover∣nance. Then the Aegyptian darkenes was not thicker, thē that which came upon the whole West. The Easterne smoke sent forth by Mahomet was gros∣ser at the very first beginning, so as it might be felt with the handes. He unto three holy Scriptures, as he speaketh, that is, the Lawe of Moses, the Psalmes of David, and the Gospell, ioyneth his Alfurta, an horrible Chaos of all blas∣phemyes. And as if the Easterne people had not received hurt inough frō the dotages of Mahomet, Heraclius the Emperour spread also amōg them the errour of the Monothelites. So then about these times, every man may see aboundance of smoke coming out of the opened pit. As touching the wordes, instead of a great fornace, Aretas, the Complutent edition and some others reade a burning fornace, peradventure both are to be ioyned togither, but the sense is cleare. 3 And out of the smoke went Locusts: An other effect of the second sorte, the procreation of Locusts: that is of men, who resemble their dispositiō most fitly in their multitude and slouthfulnes. The wordes may not be under∣stood of some venimous creatures indeede: whose ofspring doth not re∣quire à man falling from the trueth, of which sorte wee have shewed the starre to be which fell from heaven: neither are the true Locusts bred from the smoke of errours: but the ofspring must be of the same kinde, of which his cau¦se is. Wherfore frō this ignorance & most grosse errours there came forth in the East the Mahometish Saracens, a cōpany of vile persōs by troupes run∣ning violently to robberies, living not so much of their owne as of others: a natiō borne to eate up & devoure the goods of other men, which hath wasted the whole East in a fewe yeeres: afterward spoyled miserably the west & our Europe. The Westerne Locusts are Monkes, Nunnes, the yong brethrē the in∣numerable route of religious, the Cardinals with the whole Popish Hierarchy. All these beetles sprūg out of the same smoke, or dunge of ignorāce & errour. For after that men did attribute their salvatiō to their workes, what mea∣sure could there be of newe religiōs & newly devised superstitiō? Al doe fer¦vētly thirst after salvation, which whē they understāde to be in their owne power, & to cōsist in the observatiō of such thinges, there was no superstiti¦ō frō which they could stay thēselves. Surely a man is scarce more begottē of a mā, thē these Locusts frō that smoke. Whatsoever pleasant thing was any where, in any coūtries, flying thither in troupes, & placing themselves
there, they devoured it wholy: neither was their living more dainty then secure, as though all the rest of mankinde had bin created for to be the cookes of these banketers. Howe great troupes there have bin in time past, any man may coniecture from hence, that a certaine Generall of the Minori∣tes, which one secte filled fourty Provinces, promised to the Pope towards his expediti∣on against the Turkes, out of the Seraphicall family of the Franciscanes, thirty thou∣sande wariours, who could performe valiantly warlike offices, without hindring at all the service of holy things: Sabel. Ennead. 9. booke 6. Howe huge a multitude must there have bin of all the religious men, considering that one family of them ministred so copious an army? To which is to be added Polydore Virgill, affirming, that there was never any ordinance of humaine godlinesse, that grewe more in a short time: for this alone family of the Franciscanes filled the whole earth: so as the common people astonied did suspect, that godlines was not so much re∣garded of many, as idlenes and slouthfulnes: of Invent. booke 7. chap. 4. Behold the Locusts, even by the iudgement of the common people. There were Mōkes indeede of olde time, but such as lived by their labour: neither were they at all of any Ecclesiasticall degree: but this newe generation sowing nothing of their owne, devoured other mens harveses: and that it might be evident whose ofspring they are, The Monkes are inrolled by Boniface the 4. among the tribes of Priests, and power is given to them to preach the word and mini∣ster the Sacraments. Boniface the fift added the power of binding and loosing. Nowe therefore they are made the creatures of the Pope, of whom alone they re∣ceave their dignity and authority, which before they could obtaine no fur¦ther, then the opinion of their godlines would procure unto them. And not without cause it is noted of learned men, although minding nothing as it seemeth this Prophecy, that in this age three great miracles came to passe, the Monasteries of Monkes were builded, Kinges themselves became shaven Monkes, & dayly fornication was amonge the holy canonized state, Beleus Centurie the first on Vitalianus. Surely the Monkery of this time had some peculiar thing, which did cause astonishement unto men, although they had litle regard to this Prophecy. ¶ And power was given them, as the Scorpions of the earth have power: Nowe followeth hereafter a description of the Locusts: and first from the power given them, which they obtaine like to that, of the scorpions of the earth. This creature is of the infects, it hath five armes, toothed with forked clawes: the cruell plague of the poison of serpents, as sayth Plin. They are of an angry dispositi¦ō, whence the proverbe, thou provokest the eight-footed scorpion: and Scorpio a∣mong the Greekes, is to exasperate, to stirre up, to make very angry, af∣ter the manner of a Scorpion.
And as it becometh their outragious madnesse, they carry alwayes a draw∣ne and ready weapon to inflict a deadly wounde. The rest of the insects ha∣ve their stinges hidden within: the scorpion alone is armed with a longe stinge hanging out, which is not idle, but alwayes striking, giving himselfe noe reste at any time, that he may not be wanting at any occasion: his go∣ing is with a winding steppe, by which he striketh the more unwarres. Such doubtlesse is this smoky breed in the power of hurting, which at the first were Locusts in multitude and sloughtfulnes. The thing is cleare in the Saracenes a furious nation, prompt and ready alwayes to kill: which by stealth & pri∣vily is wonte to assaile men, and to come on with rage in those places, in which it was least of all feared. Also our Religious Locusts in the west, which seemed to breath forth no other thing then charity, gentlenesse, courtesie, were as quickly mooved, as the Scorpions. If a man did offende but one e∣ven the least of that shaven heard, he stirred up the whole troupe, neither did he carry it away scotfree, although placed in the higest estate of nobility Don Pluto dares not ta assay, though he be Prince of Hell, So much as dares th'unruly Monke, & crafty beldame fell. In which two verses Pope Pius, who before his Popedome was Aeneas Silvius, was not afraide to pronounce, that the rage of the Devill is milder, then the monkish. They carried their weapon standing out and knowne to all men; the terrible lightening of excommunication: but they gave a blow for the most part fetching a compasse, & secretly, and they pretended alwayes fained causes of their forie. Although if they pleased not to drawe this wea¦pon, at the least way, they tormented with feare of Purgatory, and Hell, whither they thrust downe all their enemies. Nowe therfore was the time, when men dwelt among scorpions, as in time past, Ezech. 2.6. 4 And it was commanded them that they should not hurt the grasse of the earth: These thinges shew over whom power is given them. First, all Hay is exce∣pted simply; secōdly also in part the greene and trees: onely men unsealed, ar left to their lust. As touching the hay (fOr so may the Greeke worde with the olde Interpreter be well translated, specially seeing that the word green followeth next after) it is the dry grasse cut of from the earth, which seeing it is the company of the wicked, as wee have often shewed, the grasse cut of from thence, shalbe men separated of God from the society of other wicked, by certaine playne and knowne markes. The Locusts should not hurt these, not because there lacked will and endevour; but because they should loose all their labour in attempting their destruction, whom God would defende by his mighty arme against their violence. As wee reade that it came to passe in the East, when Constantine Pogonatus was Emperour, about the yeere
674. For then the Saracenes with great armies, by lande and sea invaded Thracia, they assaulted Constantinople the very seate of the Kinge: but after that by the space of seven yeeres togither they could effect nothing by vio∣lent assaults, at last many shippes being burnt by a fire newly found out of one Callimcus, and the rest of the navie being partly drowned through a storme, partly dashed against the rockes, they were discouraged and wea∣kened, so that having lost all hope, they desyred peace for thirty yeeres: which they redeemed by a yeerly tribute of a thousand poundes of Golde, and 40 men prisoners. But doe you aske the cause why the Saracens fought here so unprosperously? There was a certen Hay time in those countryes, when Constantine abandoned the impiety of Heraclius and Constans his Father, & rooted out utterly Monothelisme, the sixt Councill of Constantinople being as¦ssembled. Indeede Martin & Agatho Bishops of Rome, condemned also the same Heresy: who yet cannot be counted among this haie, being tied to the earth by other veines, to wit a most fowle Idolatry: of which the Church of Constantinople, was more pure, which received not true and expresse Ima∣ges before the  Coūcill a fewe yeeres after under Iustinianus second, as sheweth Antonius Contius, in the third part of the Decrees, in the third chap. of distinctions, the sixt holy Councill: and Polydor. Virgil. in his 6. booke and 13. chap. concerning the Inventours. In the times of Leo Isaurus, the same Locusts came flying againe about the yeere 719. with a farre greater num∣ber of shippes, and more hurtfull armies. But God sufferred them not to hurt his haie, which he himselfe doubtlesse had moved in stirring up Leo to prohibite that wicked Idolatry: which haie time became yet more evident, when Gregorie the second excommunicated the Emperour, and deprived him of the Empire and of his felowshippe, that is cut him of frō the wicked earth, because he had ordayned that holie images and pillars should be throwne downe and destroyed. Therefore the Locusts are driven away by battaile, by famine, by a sea-fire, by tempest, and haile mingled with fire, that they might acknowledge God to be the defender of his haie: and the whole na¦vie of shippes, tenne onely excepted, did perish: of which tenne, five also were intercepted of the Emperours souldiers, the rest at length arriving at Syria, that they might be tidings bringers of that horrible slaughter. It was Doubtlesse a manifest example of the haie saved from the iniurie of the Lo∣custs. Besides these Locusts, the whole East was also full of Monkes: but as the scorpions in some landes doe not hurt, as in the Jlande Pharo, in the No∣rike Alpes, and elswhere: so in very many places they bring death without any remedy; and as the Locusts destroy very often whole nations with famine, some time also they are for meate: so the poison of the Monkes was more
sharpe in the West part, in that it did not enter into the East: neither were they much hurtfull in the West, to the cut grasse. Discreete men, to whom the trueth did shew it selfe more clearly, despised the hypocrites without feare, and sufferred not themselves to be devoured of them, as the other unskilfull multitude, which through a shewe of Godlines became a pray. ¶ Neither all greene thing, neither all trees, but onely those men, which have not, &c. The meaning is, that some greene thing, and some trees should be delivered from this vexation of the Locusts, all the rest being yeelded up to their cruelty, who had not the seale of God in their foreheades. In the for¦mer chapter and seventh verse, the third part of trees was burnt, and all greene grasse, to wit, of that third part, because all that part of grasse, and of trees, should be of the cōpanie of the cast awayes. But unlesse some trees should be counted in the number of the elect, the foure Angels should not have bin forbidden before to stay their rage, even for one moment of time, ch. 7.1. Here therefore a fewe are taken out of a great number, as the natu∣rall force of the wordes doth shewe sufficiently. The wordes doe beare doubtlesse that interpretation, which the most learned Theod. Beza brin∣geth, thus, neither any greene thing, nor any tree, but onely the men &c. For the universall signe, all, is taken some time for any, as chap. 7. ver. 1. neither u∣pon all tree, that is, upon any: where the Complutent edition readeth upon any tree: and chap. 21.27. any thing that defiled, or any defiled thinge, as hath the Common translation. Also the particles , may be understood by way of opposition, but onely the men &c. as, but they onely which are written in the booke of life of the Lambe, chap. 21.27. But here I thinke that it is rather to be translated according to the proper signification of the wordes by way of exception, thus, except onely the men, which have not the seale &c. The dif∣ference is, that exception is alwayes of a thing of the same kinde: opposition may be of any divers thing whatsoever. And this placeth every greene thing, and every tree in the number of the sealed: that attributeth the same thing to some certen trees, and onely to some greene thing, counting the rest of the grone in noe place of those that are to be saved, more agreably to that which wee mentioned before. chap. 8.7. Neither is it needfull in the other places al∣leadged to departe from the naturall property of these particles, if wee shall consider the matter diligently. From these thinges then it is prooved that there are some within the compasse of the false Church, whom God chalengeth to him selfe by a privie sealing: and that this greene thinge and trees are men, as wee have interpreted, chap. 7.1. the exception requiring it, which noteth expressly men sealed, that also the greene thinge and trees should be men, out of the number of which men are excepted. And surely there
were many men, yea some Kingdomes England, Denmarke, Germanie &c. whether the rage of the Sarracenes came not: and in those places where they raged, did they exercise tyranny over any other, then those men, who had not the marke of salvation? What other strife doe the History-writers of those times and places report, then about the sepulchre and the crosse of the Lord, and such vaine things wherewith Christians were bewitched? Neither did superstitious Locusts vexe any other men but those which were addicted to their superstition, as even nowe wee said. 5 And to them was commanded, that they should not kill them: Howe great is their power, wee may perceive from the degree of torment, from the conti∣nuance of it, & estimation of death, as a lighter thing. As touching the first, it was not permitted them to kill, but to tormente. Howe may this agree to the Sa¦racenes, who shed so much Christian blood? These thinges seeme to be spo¦ken, not simply, but in comparison. Yf consideration be had of that slaugh¦ter, which in the next trumpet was to come, the Saracenes may well be thought, not to kill. At their first beginning the Christian name was not so much hated: neither was there neede of any great murder, when the nati∣ons which they set upon gave out their vanquished handes, yeelding al∣most of their owne accord to have fellowshipe in that ungodlines. In the latter times there was a more fierce and bloody victory, by howe much the battell was more eger. But the Spirit did purposely chose out that kinde of speaking, which might agree very well to both the troupes of Locusts. For those in the West should not be so fierce and cruell in killing the bo∣dies. But this comparative speach noteth both the cessing of these in this respect, neither taketh from the other all killing, though farre lesse then that which was to come. ¶ But that they should be vexed: To wit, the men that were without the marke. There is a defect of the relative they.  properly signifieth to be try∣ed, here it is used for to be afflicted, tormented, or any way to be vexed, as every where in the holy Scriptures, & elsewhere. Montanus and Plantines edition reade, that they should vexe, which they seeme rather to take, that the sentence might be lesse harsh: but Aretas and the Common translatiō have it in the passive, as also Theod. Beza. Neither is it in vaine that there is made so sudden a passing frō the verbe active to the passive, but to shewe that this sorrowfull time is not to be measured by the furie of them that tyrannize, but by the calamity of the sufferers: which thing bringeth great light to understand the continuance of the torment, of which, in the next wordes which follow. ¶ Five monthes: Primasius readeth sixe monethes: but the Greeke copies
with one consent, and the Common translation have five. This place is in∣deede very darke, and such as hath alwayes much troubled the Interpre∣preters. For howe may so small a space agree to the Kingdomes either of the Sarracenes, or of the Papists? Let every day be counted for so many yeeres, that five monethes should be at least as much as an hundred and fif¦ty yeeres, after the manner of the Scriptures in other places, as in Ezechiel fourty dayes, every day for a yeere I give thee: and according to the continuall custome of this booke (as hereafter wee will shewe God willing) yet never∣thelesse what is this so small and short a distance of time, to these so longe continuing tyrannies? Wherfore Bullinger and some others of our coun∣trymen doe thinke that this number is assigned as it were of the hotter monethes, in which especially the Locusts are wonte to be in chiefe strēgth, for all the graunted space of tyrannizing, how great soever it shall be. The which opinion seemeth to mee like to be true, unlesse that the very great care of the accounte, which is used in other places, required here also some certen and limited thing. The Iesuites, being like unto the Cuttell, doe pur¦posely as I thinke, powre out here their darkenes, to the ende that all thinges being confounded and disordered they may lurke the more safely: they will have so many common monethes to be signified, as though that woe had ben in vaine, which the Angell flying through the middes of Heaven had sung before the three last trumpets. Did he not foreshewe by the same that the plagues to come, should be more grievous then those which were past? What greater thing shall this trumpet have then the former, if the Locusts, in whō lieth the whole force of it, neither are endued with power to kill, and also that the power which they have is of so short time? It was a great destruction which the former trumpets brought in, and full of ter∣rour, neither passing over in a moment, yea not in a fewe yeeres, as wee have shewed: but if this calamity be so shortened, neither shall it compare with the former evils in grievousnes of torment, and also in respect of the shortnesse of the paine, it would be found much easier. But I will not stād long in refuting the toies of the Iesuites. It is most iust that they who will coyne figures at their pleasure where they are not, should not see the same, where they are in very deede, having as it were their eyes blinded. The thing peradventure may be somewhat more apparant, if wee observe cer∣taine positions: the first of which is this, whole Kingdomes and their Kinges are not spoken of here, but onelie the Locusts and their exceeding great power: which wee see to rise up by certen degrees. First, they come forth out of the smoke: the smoke out of the pit opened: the pit is not opened before the key be given: neither is the key given, assoone as the starre fell, but some long time after.
From which it is necessary that the Angell be farre more auncient then the infernall generation. For who requireth the issue of ones body to be equall to the parent? Wherefore that is not to be cast upon the Kingdome it selfe and Kings, which is proper to the Locusts. Whose age is not to be regarded from hence, but onely the sommer time & vigour of this overflowing cō∣pany of vile persons: The sommer time, I say, because neither the first ori∣ginall of the Locusts, nor the last ende seemeth to be limited in this space. For they must needes have a beginning to growe, before they have a pow∣er to hurte. But after their power should be diminished, they should hurt noe small time through the stinke of their rotten carkeises. The seconde, the time is not to be counted from the bringers of the paine; but from the sufferers. Whereunto have refference that verbe passive, that they should be vexed, of which we spake even nowe. For it importeth much from whether of them wee make the accounte: if the reckening be from the Locustes themselves, they should have power to vexe in noe place of the world, but for the spa∣ce of these five monethes onely: but if respect be had to the sufferers, the same distance of time shalbe given to certaine countries, and shalbe esteemed according to the diversity of places, howsoever the continuing of the Lo∣custs, in some place it may be shalbe longer. Frō which followeth a third position, that the five monethes are not once onely to be numbred, but so many to be understood figuratively, as there are countries, which were to undergoe the same calamity for so greate a space of yeeres. Which foundations being laid, we shall see noe small consent of the History. The first troupe of Locustes was of the Saracenes, who beginning about the yeere 630. to fly about, Mahomet be∣ing their captaine, in the first five monethes, that is, the first hundred & fifty yeeres afflicted most miserably the whole Arabia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Ar¦menia, Persia, they tooke likewise Egypt, spoiled Afrique, and at length en∣tred into Spaine. True, wilt thou say, but they have helde all these places, ex¦cept peradventure Persia, Armenia, and some parte of Arabia, not onely for an hundred and fifty, but more or lesse foure hundred yeeres. I deny not, but in the meane time it is to be considered howe long they were trou belsome to men of the Christian name in those places. It is certaine that there were congregations of Christians in great number, when first the Sara¦cenes invaded: and that they were not utterly rooted out by and by, but af∣ter a long continuing misery, at lēgth they were wholy destroyed by death, by slaughter, by falling away to that impiety waxing strong, which became every day more confirmed by an accesse of newe strength. By which things it came to passe, that the countries which before time perteined to the wor¦shippers of Christ, in the space of those five monethes, became all to the infidels,
either noe Christians at all, or very fewe being left there. In the next ages wee shall finde the History very silent as touching the making mention of Churches in those places. But wee doe limit this first invasion within the space of an hundred and fifty yeeres: not because at the ende of this time, they were dispoiled straiteway of the countries which they subdued, but be¦cause afterward they fought with ill successe against the Romanes, often ti∣mes vanquished, killed, put to flight, hardly keeping that which had ben gotten, much lesse getting any more. At the yeere 780. about the ende of Leo Copronimus, that is after the hundreth and fifty yeere, since which time they first grewe stronge, their insolency was restrayned by almost continu∣all received slaughters, & by domesticall discordes: Leo hanodraco brought them under in Asia: Constantine who raigned with Irene his mother put them to flight. Nicephorus was beaten by Leo Armenius. The same did Theophilus, Michael the sonne by Basilius, Petronas and Andreas Captaines: and the other following Emperours founde noe lesse good sucesse against them: so that nowe there being a manifest decay of their former prosperity, not without cause their florishing sommer may be thought to have ended in the East, they began to braunch out in the Mediterrane Ilands, in Italy & Peloponne∣sus, all which places by the space of an other hundred and fifty yeeres they cruelly spoyled and destroied. The inhabitans of Cyprus being thrust out of their dwelling places, and transported other where about the yeere 807. at length by the prosperous conduct of Zimisca, recouvered their native countrie after an hundred and three score yeeres. This space is greater by a fewe yeeres: but some weakening and infirmity is wonte to goe before the last destruction, so as the vigour may agree very well unto the number set downe. They bring in subiection to them all Sicilia assailed often befo∣re about the yeere 867: neither could they be expelled wholly frō thence, before that Georgi{us} Mamaces destroyed them utterly about the yeere 1060 more or lesse. Zonaras reporteth that not longe after they returned under the power of the Agarenes, but Ambustus Catacalon, many thousandes of them being killed, repressed them so, that they neither durst nor could bring much hurt to the Christian inhabitans. This space also is longer thē the determined monethes, unlesse peradventure the dwelling of the Sara∣cenes was not so troblesome to the inhabitans, in those yeeres numbred o∣ver and beside. But in Italy the thinge is more cleare. About the yeere 830 the Saracenes being called out of Babylon for aide, shee felt destruction by and by from them, whom shee sent for to be her helpers: for they brought a very grievous desolation upon the chiefe part of that country: neither was there any pause of the vexation, Otto second being Emperour, in the yeere
980, that is by a plaine accounte, in the hundreth and fifty yeere after the spoiling begun, killed them with so great a slaughter, that from thence he got a name, and was commonly called the Death of the Saracenes. Here is so great a consent of the time, as if the Spirit had respected this country a∣lone, and in it had ordained an example of his wrath, in delivering her up for to be spoiled of these Locusts, which was the teacher of impiety to the whole earth, and out of which an other kinde of Locusts did spring noe lesse noisome then that former. But touching them wee shall see by & by: let us prosecute those thinges which remayne concerning the former. Therefore this first company, which by a limited space of an hundred and fifty yeeres did robbe and slay in sundry places by a certen interchangea∣ble course, at length newe troupes of Turkes followed. Who at first were troblesome not so much by the dammage which they brought by themsel¦ves, as that in taking by force the countries of the Saracenes, who abode in heapes togither in the East, they drove them forth more into all the West. But after the poison of the Agarenes waxed olde, least the Christian name should enioy even a very little peace, the Turkes tooke upon them their of¦fice, which they performed more cruelly, then they themselves whom they succeeded. For beginning at Romanus Diogenes in the yeere 1073, who be∣ing taken of the Turkes, and againe sent away, having his eyes first put out, was killed of his owne people. The Turkes not enduring that their good turne should thus be nothing regarded of the Romanes, vexed and tooke away the whole East: untill a newe invasion of the Scythians made them fea¦re, and constrained them to devise howe they might defende themselves, rather then to molest others: wherby they were brought to seeke peace of Iohannes Duca Emperour of Rome, who then lived at Nice, Byzantium being lately taken of the Latines. Which fell upon the yeere 1223. see Niceph. Gregoras in the second booke of the Romane History. For so it pleased God the supreme governour, that the Turkes, as Locusts & Scorpions should vexe, before that after the manner of cruel Lions, they should make hor∣rible slaughters without any difference of sexe or of persons. And there∣fore worthily their assayling untill the yeere 1300, was called robbing by the History-writers, rather then warre: undertaken rather with a minde to take booties, then with anie hope to possesse the places, which they had taken. This rehearsall hath ben some thing full of wordes: but my desire is to bring light unto the History: which that I may doe, I regarde nothing my owne trouble.
The other kinde of Locustes are our Religious ones in the West part of the world, who as longe as the Saracens were in their chiefe strength, had not yet attained their perfection. They overflowed indeede before through great abondance, but the sommer was not yet very hotte, wherein they should most of all tyrannize, untill in the times of Innocent the third the Do∣minicans, Franciscans, the Poore, The Penitent, the Observants, the Trinitaires, the brethren of the Holy Ghost, and other infinite of scowring of that kinde, a∣rose with full power to vexe men at their pleasure. There was noe age so a∣bounding with religious, as Polydore Virgil and other learned men have observed. Neither did some writers thinke, that all the orders were even to be reckoned up, both because they would have regard to brevity, and also because they were wonte often to spring up after the manner of tod∣stooles, as saith Polydore Virgill in booke 7.3. And certenly nowe was the Power of darknesse, the Locusts being armed with their stinges. Hildegardis the Abbesse sawe from God and bewayled a fewe yeeres before, the misery to come by the begging Fryars and hungry Locusts, and not longe after experience taught the world, that her sorrowe was not in vaine. This pla∣gue dared longue, neither left it any thing uneatē up wholly, untill about the yeere 1360, to wit, and hundred and fifty yeeres after their power re∣ceaved, at length a West winde began to blowe by Wickleffe and other godly men: which shaking them of from the boughes, ceased not to blowe, un∣till they were driven in to the Skarlated Fathers, as it were into the read Sea. But that none may obiect that their stinking carkeises doe even hitherto infect the aire: noe man can deny but that since that time they have lost their stinges, which thinge onely this Prophecy respecteth. ¶ And their paine should be as the paine of a Scorpion: Not that they should kill as Scorpions (for this was forbiddē them before), but that they should inflict a wound causing noe lesse sharpe griefe, then the stinging of a Scor∣pion. It is likely that some great inflammation of blood, striking & pear∣sing througly doth thereof arise: especially seeing it is a chollerick creatu∣re, as wee have declared before, ver. 3. But what torment is to be compa∣red with that, whereby men are spoyled of their goods, are pulled asunder from their wives, are berefte of their children, the chiefe comforts of this life: neither this by any necessity of death, the griefe whereof is forgotten with the time, but wherby the living & strong are separated away from the living, that the griefe may be renewed dayly, and a man onely left alive for misery? That men sufferred all these thinges at the handes of the Sarracens, is more knowne, then that it needeth examples: and wee shall see that they endured noe lesse the same at the handes of the begging fryers, if wee shall well
marke somewhat more diligently. For these heires spoiled of their inheri∣tances, in sitting by their parents ready to dy, and wringing from them, partly by threates of Purgatory, partly by an hope to be delivered frō thēce through their singing of masses for their soules, and by their prayers, pos∣sessions of great revenew, farmes in the country, lands, Lordshippes, and great summes of money. For which thing any word of the sick man halfe dead was sufficient, or if the breath were gone, yet any sigh uttered at their demaundes. It was a grievous thinge to the heires for to be dispoiled of their goods by this fraude: but it was more grievous to be bereaft of their wives and children. What was it else but under colour of a vowe to breake marriages, to withdrawe children from the governement of their parents, that against their willes, they would keepe themselves close in their Mona∣steries? And here are to be referred those most famous decrees: If any shall say, that a ratifyed marriage, is not broken of by a solemne profession of religion of one of the two yokefellowes, let him be accursed. This decree is of the Councill of Trent: but it was in use in former times, chiefly whē these Monkes abounded. And many exāples doe proove that not onely marriages ratifyed were undone, when as it is wonte to be a hotter fire, and greater torment not to obtaine the thing desired, but also those that were accomplished, which examples being sufficiently knowne, I doe passe over purposely. More over that it is lawfull for children to enter into a religion against the will of their parents. An other torment of miserable men. They tooke then away husbandes, and wives, and children from those, to whom God and Nature had conioyned them. Whom when they had in their keeping as pledges, what could they nowe be afraid of their most loving mates, and most tender parents, who durst not to attēpt to doe any thing against it, least they should be cruell towar∣ds their owne bowels? yea rather what should they not hope for and carie away? This tyrannie therefore brought noe lesse wealth and security to the spoilers, then vexation to the spoyled. That I may not say, howe great∣ly it did molest the Priests and Bishops that the sickle should be thrust in∣to their harvest of the superstitious Locusts, and that they are wiped both of all estimation and also money with the people, while the Fryars bare the sway in hearing confessions, and doing other things, which by right per∣teined to the secular Priests, as the Archbishop of Biturim complaineth in an as¦sembly of the French Bishops, Maidenburg Centur. 13. chap. 9. colum. 964. But peradventure this was a more easy torment, consisting wholly in thin∣ges of this life: that was farre greater, which did cast a snare upon the con∣sciences, by enioyning a necessity of confessing all their sinnes with every circumstan∣ce. Jnnocent the third, to whom the Westerne Locusts owe their stinges; pow∣red
the first poison and strength of vexing into this superstition. Whosoever, sayth he, confesseth not alone all his sinnes faithfully at least once a yeere to his owne Priest, let him both living be kept from entring into the Church, and also dying let him want Christian buriall, in the Councill of Lateran, canon 21. The Lo∣custs armed with this stinge, afflicted men with most grievous torments. And certenly what racke could be more painfull? Not to confesse was to betray their salvation, as they were made to beleeve. But to confesse was all one plainly, with this, for a man to offer his throate to the tormenter: when as those holy hypocrites would absolve most readily the wolves & Fo∣xes from great sinnes: and would devoure the poore Asses for one bundle of litter stollen away, as a certen man wrote pretily in the Penitentiarie of the Asse: The iniury which thou hast done to a stranger in taking away the litter from him, is an exceeding great wickednesse. Such then is the torment, so farre as may suffice to manifest the trueth: the full declaration whereof would be longer then would fitte our purpose. 6 Therefore in those dayes: Men shall be so weary of their life, that they shall seeke death, even as a thing which they desire very earnestly, that is, Death shalbe esteemed a lesse evill, then this torment. Hence it came that the Mardaitae did fortify Libanus, flying from the Saracenes: to whom assem¦bled many captives, servants, and that were home-bred, because they were not able to endure any longer the tyranny of the Saracenes. Although the safety which they sought by falling and flying away, did runne from them; who were compelled againe by force and armes to their former bondage, as saith Zonar, in Constant. Pogonatus. Our England was so grievously ve¦xed and polled by these Westerne Locusts, that it complayned in vaine, that shee was more miserable then Balaams Asse: clubbes & spurres did pricke their sides, and suffered them not to rest even a very little while: but to go forward, and to obey their most uniust exactions, which the Holy Pope did urge continually by these Horsleaches, was nothing else, then to goe willing¦ly into certen destruction, set before their eyes. Certenly during the reigne of Henry the third, men by the iust iudgement of God being given up to the lust of these Locustes, were sicke of a disease more grievous then death. Nei∣ther did this misery belong to one Kingdome alone, but also the neigh∣bours, Scotland, France, & Germany groned under the same burden. From whence not without cause Iohannes Camotensis, as he is alleadged of Agrip¦pa in the booke of the vanity of sciences, said, the Legates of the Popes of Rome did so play the Devill in the Provinces, as if Sathan had gone forth from the face of the Lord to scourge the Church. But chiefly men sought death, and founde it not being terrifyed of these locusts with the feare of Purgatory. They would
willingly have died the common death of the body, which all antiquity iudged alwayes to be the Haven and ende of all miseries; but when the Lo¦custs thundred out that the flames of Purgatory were not inferiour to hell fire in torment, they quaked for feare being about to die, and felt themsel∣ves to be spoiled of all confort of death. From hence it was that for to be freed from this their feare, they did give to the Locusts, whatsoever they would aske, yea often times when they did aske nothing at all. Yet never∣thelesse howe of necessity did the miserable soule stagger and was vexed, when even common sense did teach, that sinnes cannot be purged by any corruptible price? Thought therefore & anguish of minde did presse them downe on every side, considering that a bought confidence did free them from paine little or nothing at all. 7 And the forme of the Locusts: A description of the Locusts, which first in cruelty are like unto horses prepared unto battell. There is a great alacrity of this beast unto fight: he diggeth his feete in the valley, and reioyceth in his strēgth going forth to meete the weapons, he moketh at feare, and is not made afraid, & tur∣neth not backe through feare of the sword: Iob. 39, 25. There should be no lesse promptnesse in the Locusts. Famous are the invasions of the Sarracenes in all the Histories: the war∣like prouesse of the Popes bande hath not peradventure ben so observed of all: which yet is as cleare and famous, if wee consider the thing neerly. What souldiers used Innocent the third to roote out the Albingenses? Besi∣des Dominicus the mourninge trumpetour and Heralde of this warre, who a little after, was made one of the foure Princes of the Begging Fryards, he mustered an army of the Crosse-bearers: by whose aide, as it were of horses running to the battell, he hoped to represse the heresy, as they call it, & to abolish it utterly. This order had indeede their originall before nowe, but shortly after being brought almost to utter decay, Innocent restored it for this warre: that the mischievous persons, as it were halfe dead, might be brought againe from Hell, by the authority of the same man, by whose meanes they should have power to tyrannize and to vexe the world a fresh more spitefully, see Polydore Virgill, of Invent. in the third chapter of the 7. booke. Neither did the POPE, whose manner was to confounde all thinges, and to set KINGES togither by the eares (as PROBƲSTƲLLEN¦SIS sheweth in an assembly at Wirizburg, under Honorius the fourth) afterward use any other incensours to raise up hatred.
Yea as often as the Popes were to make warre (for the Pope is martiall, & not without cause, when as the Locusts his subiects are so warlike) a full armie of Crosse-bearers was at hande to fight for their King. Hildegardis fore-shewed worthyly that these Hypocrites should be sowers of privie grudges, who reioice in nothing so much, as in cōtention and bickering ofmen. ¶ And on their heads were set as it were crownes: The first propertie was ge¦nerall: nowe he followeth on the thing he began by every mēber. The Crownes on their heades like unto Golde, are the shaving and rasing of the head, which in time past was of great estimation among men, even as a crowne of Gold: so called doubtlesse, because the crowne of the head being sha∣ven, seemeth to appeare in the middes like to a crowne. In howe great ac¦count it hath bene some time, Bellarmine sheweth out of Hierome in an Epistle to Augustine, which is the 26 among the Epistles of Augustine. I pray thy crowne, saith he, that thou wouldest salute in my name, thy brethren, my Lord Alipius, and my Lord Evodius. And Augustine in an Epistle to Procu∣lian a Bishop, Epist. 147. Yours doe adiure us by our crowne: ours doe adiure you by your crowne. Mee thinke I heare, yea by this Scepter: Homer. Iliad 1. Both kinde of Locusts was notably knowen by these crownes. Herodotus in Thalia maketh relation to the Arabians, that their haire is shorne, as Dyonisius himselfe was wonte: And they are shorne beneath like a globe, shaving their temples. But the shaving of the Monkes & religious men was of all other most famous: Polyd. Virgil speaking of the Benedictines, They are shaven, saith he, with a ra¦sour from the crowne of the head lower then halfe of the skull: the haire beneath cut of after the forme of a small circle about the eares and the temples compasseth the head like crowne, from whence the crowne of the head it selfe being shaven, is called a crowne, booke the 7. chap. 2. See howe fitly he interpreteth Herodotus, minding noe such thing, but onely moved with the conveniency of the thing it selfe. For that which he saith, they are shorne belowe rounde, he hath translated elegantly, The haire belowe cut of in the likenes of a little circle, a thing longe a goe forbidden to the Iewes: you shall not cut rounde the crowne, becau∣se of the Arabians neighbours as it seemeth, who were shorne after that manner: that in noe thing they should be like the Jdolaters, Levit. 19.27. But it is meet, that these Monkes, who differ onely in name from the un∣godly Gentiles, should agree with them in the likenes of polling their heades. The golde of this crowne, that is, the authority and dignity of this shaving, wee may see from hence, that they were wont to make obtestati∣ons by their tonsure, as even nowe in the Epistles of Hierome and August. Ys the dignity thereof was so great when yet the superstitiō was very yōg, of what gravity and authority was it, after it came to a perfit ripenes?
Frances de Ribera will have  to be an Helmet, after the māner of speaking of the Greekes: but he is deceived,  indeede sometimes is used in that signification in Homer, as , but never , as may be understood from Plutarch, Sump. 8. Problem. 6. The Latines, sayth he, doe call  a crowne from the head: as Homer by similitude have called,  an helmet. So Hesychius descri¦beth  to be, . But there is noe such thing concerning : To that, saith he, Servius affirmeth upon that of Virgill, all according to the custome had shorne haire, hid with an helmet: on which place Servius writeth thus: a crowne, that is, an helmet, and he hath used the speech of Homer, for he called an helmet . I doubt not but Ser¦vius knewe that  is in Homer, and not : but because of the likenes of the wordes, the Printers have erred, and given to us the one for the other. Seeing therefore that the Grecians doe distinguish the use of these two wordes, the signification of the one is not to be transferred unto the other. ¶ And their faces, as the faces of men: Of an alluring forme and full of hu¦manity, but wherein there is noe trueth nor syncerity. What wonderfull cunning men are the whole rable of those superstitious in this thing? Whō did they not passe in fayned courtesie? But well spake Hildegardis of them, They are gentle, saith shee, but great flatterers, false traitours, holy hypocrites &c. There need noe witnesses in a cleare matter. Also howe could the barba∣rous Arabians have brought under them so many countryes in a short time, unlesse by a certen counterfait humanity, they had allured them to a willing apostacy? Where fierce cruelty plainly sheweth it selfe, men had ra¦ther die in fighting, then in serving miserably. 8 And they had haire, as the haire of women: Haire are given to women for a co¦vering, saith the Apostle 1 Cor. 11.15. Therefore this superaboundant: groing of haire, sheweth that the Locusts shalbe covered with the names of women, as it were with longe haire, and shall glory very much in this ornament, counting it a very great honour to themselves. What is more apparant? It is knowne that the Arabians were called Agarenes of Agar, Sarahs maide, and this name is often in Zonaras, Nicetas, Gregoras, and other Grecians, who were necessarily to report the thinges that were done of them, this name being given them for a reproch, as writeth Sabellicus, Ennead. 8. booke 6. leafe 177. b. but most auncient, and in their opini∣on most glorious, 1 Chron. 5.10.19. & 27.31. & long before the booke of Chronicles was written, Psal. 83.7. from whence also it is evident, that the name is honourable, and by which they would have themselves to be
principally called. For why else are they distinguished from the Ismaelites, wholly of the same ofspring, úlesse that they inhabiting toward the South of Iudea, reioiced more in the name of their father: these toward the East and Southeast, and being nigher to the Iewes themselves, rather in the name of their mother? Which name also at length passed the other in glo∣rie, it being very famous with forraine writers, at last being made a name Patronymicall even to the Ishmaelites themselves in stead of that former. Bt from whence at length were they called Saracenes? From Sarah her selfe, as farre as it seemeth. For after their ofspring frō Agar seemed more vile, then that it could fit their enriched estate (for when the Iewes were de¦stroyed, both their stomacke and wealth grewe) the maide being refused, they passed over into the name of the mistres, and afterward would be cal∣led Sracenes. For so Hierome on the 25. of Ezechiell writeth, that by the Mdiantes, the Scripture meaneth the Agarenes, who nowe are called Sa∣racenes, taking to themselves falsely the name of Sarah, that forsooth they may seeme to be descended from the free woman and the Dame. From whence often times in other places he saith, that this is a wronge name, be∣cause, that it was chalenged of them selves wrongfully & uniustly. Which things doe cause, that it may not seeme to have ben derived from Sarak, which signifieth in the Arabian tonge thievish or robbing men. For what any one man, much lesse a whole nation, would take unto them a reprochfull name? Neither was there any cause that Hierome being neere to the origi∣nall thereof both in time and place, skilfull in the tongues, and very dili∣gent to learne such things, should envie them that name, or call it perverse being doubtlesse most fit and farre the meetest for them. Yf it may be law∣full for mee to gesse, I thinke it was made of Sara, and the putting of an o∣ther word Qedar, whose first letter, as the Hebrewes maner is, concurreth unto the composition of the word, as if it had ben writen Sarahqedar, & by contraction Sarah, and in Chaldee Saraq. As though they should call them Saream Arabians, for a distinction from the Iewes, which are Sarean Jsraeli∣tes: not that they would faine themselves to be descended from Sarah, but when as the maides children were their Dames, Gen. 16.2. why should not the children take to themselves the names as well of the Dame as of the maide? This indeede might have some colour, if they had ben bound∣men, but being borne out of the family, and so many ages after they put upon themselves this name impudently. I have rehearsed these thinges so∣me what at large, for to search out the trueth of a doubtfull matter, if per∣adventure my labour can doe any good. The summe of all cometh to this point, that the Arabians gave themselves this name from a woman for
their reputation. Were not also the Westerne Locusts proude of the name of Marie the mother of Christ? The Carmelites were named the Munkes of the holy virgine: from whom Honorius III taking away their garment of sundry colours, gave them a white one, and called them the family of the Virgin, that name of virginity might agree with the white robe, which colour is not spotted, see Polyd. Virgil booke 7. chap. 3 of Invent. Afterward sprung up a newe family of Servants of the Virgin Marie, Philippus Florenticus Me∣dicus being the founder of it, see in the same place chap. 4. But what are these fewe to the whole swarme of those Religious? Yea Dommicus & Francis¦cus, from which fountaines flowed an infinite company of vile persons, glo¦ried in the same Marie their Patronesse: I bring for witnesse the History of Lombar∣die, which they call the golden Legende, which is able enough to convince their ungodlines, and to approve the trueth of the Prophecy: but then which, there is nothing more vaine, as concerning the trueth of the thin∣ges which are reported. Thus therefore it is written in the life of Sainct Do¦minicus, pardon mee, I pray, if I relate a Fable unto you: When Blessed Do∣minicus being at Rome, was instant with the Pope, for the confirmation of this order, he sawe in the Spirit Christ being in the ayre, and holding three speares in his hande, and shaking them against the world, whom his mother meeting quickly, asked him what he would doe: and he said, behold the whole world is full of three vices, to wit, pride, conveteousnesse, and lust, and therefore I will destroy it with these three speares. Then the Virgin falling downe at his knees said, most deare Sonne have thou compas∣sion and moderate thy iustice with mercie. To whom Christ answered: doest thou not see what great iniuries are done to mee? Staie thine anger my Sonne, and waite a while: for I have a faithfull servāt and stout champion, who shall vanquish the world wandring everie where, and shall subdue it under thy dominion. J will give also an o∣ther servant to him for an helpe, who shall fight with him faithfullie. To whom her Sonne said, beholde I bin pacified, and I have accepted thee, but I will see whom thou wilt appointe to so great an Office. Then shee presented to CHRIST Sainct DOMINICƲS: To Whom CHRIST said, in deede he is a good and stout Champion, and will doe carefully all the thinges of which thou hast spoken unto mee. Shee presented also SAINCT FRANCES. And CHRIST com∣maunded him likewise as the former &c. In the same place after. And bles∣sed DOMINICƲS continuing in prayer, and intreating the Blessed Virgine MARIE, to whom as a speciall Patronesse he had commited the whole care for his order &c.
From which wee see, what haire these fryars had. And not these onely, but also the whole nation of the Papists, who hold not Iesus Christ to be favo∣rable to them any otherwise, but so farre as Marie by her intercession pro∣cureth them favour. But it shalbe superfluous to wring out that thing by witnesses, which they confesse at this day of their owne accord. But thou wilt say, howe now doe I attribute longe haire to the fryars, whom of late I had sayd to be shorne and shaven? To be shaven and to glory in the name of a woman, are not contraries: which to be signifyed by these allegories, and not any proper covering of haire, I suppose to be manifest enough. So before, chap. 4. Foure and twenty Elders are said to sit upon thrones crowned: who yet afterward fall on their faces, and throw downe their crownes at the voice of the Beasts, giving glory to God continually: which seeme so repugnant, that they cannot stande, if they be taken not figuratively but properly. Christ also in the parable, from one that had not on a wedding garment, and cast into utter darkenesse, inferreth, that many are called, and fewe are chosen, when as the proper application would make the contrary, that many are called & fewe are reiected, Mat. 22.13.14. But the favourable readers will unloose these thinges easilie of themselves. ¶ And their teeth were as the teeth of Lions: The well knowne rage of both hath sufficiently proved to the world, their teeth to be as of Lions, seeing the Saracenes assailed with sword and fire: they devoured widowes houses under a co¦lour of prayers and godlines. 9 They had also habergeons: Both the one and other should be fenced nob∣ly, and should be noe lesse safe, then if they should have ben covered with iron corselets: labour should be undertaken in vaine, either for to subdue them by warre, or restraine them by any force, as long as their time of reig¦ning should continue. How unprosperously did the Romanes warre often times with the Arabians, untill their fore appointed time of tyrannizing was passed over, is relatetd by Zonaras in Constans the nephewe of Heraclius, in Justimanus Rhinometa, and others. The same also is evident in the friars: one exemple shalbe instead of many. The Vniversity of Paris, accused to the Pope, a certen blasphemeous booke patched by the Dominicanes, which they called the Eternall Ghospell. The Pope disallowed the booke, yet he would not have it to be condemned publikely, that nothing might be di∣minished of the estimation of the Monkes: neither would he correct any further their wicked impudency: Maidenburg Cent. 13. chap. 8. col. 776. Therefore he that did strike them with any weapon, it was as if he had cast it against an iron corselet, or rather against a brazen wall. ¶ And the sounde of their winges: The huge noise of the Locusts, whē they
should even move themselves to make an assault against any. I will speake nothing of the Saracenes, whose hostile in roades, howe great terrour they brought to men, who is ignorant? Was it not a thing worthy of feare, un∣to all Kingdomes and Dominions whatsoever, that almost an infinite host of most strong men did remaine in the middes of them, who were wholy addicted to the faith of a forren Pope, and did altogither depend upon his pleasure alone? By what cunning could the Pope more terrify the Kinges, then by the clapping togither of these winges? It is noe mervaile that the Popes cherished so greatly this bande of men, whose labour was so profita∣ble unto him. 10 And their stinges were in their tailes: The Complutent edition & some other bookes read otherwise then the translation of Theod. Beza: And they have tailes like unto scorpions, and stinges; and in their tailes they have power to hurt men five monethes. Aretas agreeth with the same. And so indeede the de¦claration of the thinges in order set forth requireth. For that which was set downe before undeterminatly, verse 3. and 5. as though the power to hurt had ben common to all the Locusts, in this maner is drawne more di¦stinctly and expressely to one certē kinde. Nowe it is shewed that the chiefe fiercenesse shalbe in the tailes, to which also the five monethes should proper∣ly belong: but the tayle is every worst and filthyest thing in his kinde. Doth not the thing it selfe declare that it came so to passe? Who of the Sa∣racenes did chiefly bring misery upō our men? Certēly the tayle of the Sara∣cenes, the basest route, the rascall sorte and company of vile persons, which having noe resting places of their owne, rāne hither and thther into Cypr{us}, Creta, Sicilia, Sardinia, the two Ilandes Baleares, Spaine, Fraunce, and Jtaly, to seeke a place to dwell in. The other multitude, whose tyranny was more stable and which continued longer, kept the countries more quietly, and with more estimation, which they had once possessed. Also of all the Religi¦ous, the Begging fryars are the tailes▪ to whom especially the sting belongeth, & the five monethes of tyrannizing. For taking their beginning from Innocentius the third, they grew into almost an infinite number, untiil the yeere one thousand three hundred and fiftieth, that is untill Gerardus Ridder wrote a booke against them, which he intituled the teares of the Church, in which he proved that that kinde of life was farre from a Christian perfection: that it is a∣gainst charity, that they doe feede of other mens labours, when a man should be able to get his living with his owne handes: that they are hypocrites: that they live most filthily: that for mens sake and for lucre they mixed fables, Apocrypha, & most vaine dreames with the syncere trueth: that they devoured widowes houses under a colour of long prayers: that they did troble the whole Church many wayes, by their confessiōs,
sermons, and solemnitis at mens burials, and therefore that it belongeth to the Bi∣shops to restraine and represse this immoderate libertie and abuses of the Monkes. Those are his wordes: the summe of which I have mentioned, because it agreeth wonderfully with this description of the Locusts. Neither doe I attribute it to him alone, that this plague was quailed and repressed: but many couragious men desirous of true godlines wer about that time, who with ioint forces did put to flight the same. From hence therefore it is more apparant which wee said at the fifte verse: That the whole Kingdomes, either of the Saracenes, or of the Pastists, is not to be gathered into that space of five monethes: but this time belong to the Locusts onely, and chieflie those, which have the consideration of tailes, as wee have declared. 11 And they had a King set over them: Here the articles have an expresse signification of that which is intended: That Angell of that bottomlesse pit, as it is wont to be done in certen and knowne thinges. Yet wee have had be∣fore noe mention of this Angell of the bottomelesse pit in expresse words, un∣lesse the same be hee, to whom the key of the pit was given. And soe indeede it is needfull. For who rather should be the Angell of the bottomelesse pit, then he that had the key given him to open the pit & to send forth the smoke? By which argument wee have shewed that the starre which fell was an evill Angell. That King to the Saracens is Mahumet, or the Mahumetish Calipha, whom they obeyed. But to the Superstitious Locusts the Pope. For as Bonifa¦cius the 5. chose the Monkes into his cleargie, wherby it was made manifest, whose creatures they are, as was said at the 3. ver. so Innocent the third, that it might become known to all mē, that the tailes of the Locusts, that is, the beg∣ging fryars, doe acknowledge no other King then the very Pope, decreed in the councill of Latr. can. 13. That no man from hence forth should invent any new religi¦on; but whosoever would be converted unto a religion, should chuse one of those that were approved. Which is not so to be understood, as though he would pro∣hibit simply any newe religions, but that afterward no newe order should be instituted, without the approbation of the Apostolicall Chaire, as is founde in the ende of the chap. concerning the religion of Dom. Which decree, Gregorius the x. renewed in the Councill at Lions in France, in chap. The diversity of Rel. From which decrees, that was made necessary, which before was free, as Bellar. himselfe confesseth in his 2. booke of Monk. chap. 4. And what is this else, but to be a King? To whom it appertaineth to tie men with the bon∣des of lawes, & upon things which are at our choise to lay a necessity: wher¦fore the Papists are holden with their owne iudgement, & wee neede no o∣ther arguments. But this King is signifyed by name, & that two waies, in Hebrew Abbaddon, & in Greeke Apollyon, after a maner of speaking usuall
with the Hebrewes, the participle being put for the substantive. And cer∣tenly that adversarie, is called, the childe of perdition, 2 Thes. 2.3. But it is no¦ted by the name of both nations, because that King shalbe cōmon as well to the Gentiles as the Hebrewes: diverse indeede in the sounde of langua∣ges, but one & the same in very trueth. Even as Augustine from the wordes Abba Father, argueth a consent as well of the Gentiles, as of the Iewes un∣to one true God. The Hebrewe word fitteth the Saracenes, because they are neare a kinne to the Hebrewes, & bordering on them by their countreyes. But the Greeke word Apollyon after the manner of the Scriptures, noteth the rest of the Gentiles whatsoever, which fetch their beginning from any other stocke then the Hebrewes. With howe nigh frienship therefore are the Romish Pope, and the Mahumetish King ioined togither in trueth, albeit that they pretende warre and an hostile minde? The Spirit giveth them rightly one name, which doe one thing, although in a contrary shewe. So then wee have a most cleare description of the Locusts, so as noe man cā be in doubt nowe, either who should be that Angell of the bottomelesse pit, or who is his infernall armie. Hath not therefore Bellarmine notably deceaved both himselfe and his hearers, who in a certen oration which he made in the Schooles, draweth wrestingly all these thinges against the Lutherans? Doth he respect the time, when this mischiefe should overflow the world? It is that doubtlesse which followed next after that desolation, which the Vandals executed upon that third part of the Christian world. What other Locusts were there at that time besides those which I have spokē of? Wher shall one finde the shaving the protiction of a womans name, the utterlie undone, & undoing Prince, and every of the other markes any where else, then in that same heard, whereof languishing nowe a long time and giving up the last breath, he himselfe is one? But that the matter may be yet more apparāt, if it be possible, I thinke good to adde here in stead of a cōclusion the pro∣phecy of Hildegardis the Abbesse, both because I have made often mention of her, & also because I thinke that a copy of it is not easily gottē, & it doth much set forth the thing it selfe. The notable man of blessed memory, our countrey man Iohn Foxe, placed the same in the Acts & Mon. of the Church turned into English, which he had by him in Latine written in parchment with old characteres thus: THE PROPHECIE OF HILDEGARDIS. In those daies shall arise a people blockish, proude, covetous, faithlesse, & craftie: which shall eate up the sinnes of the cōmō poeple, holding a certē māner of foolish superstition, ūder a fained covering of beggerie, by a forged religiō, preferring it selfe before all other.
Of an arrogant disposition, and sained devotion, voide of all shame and feare of God: a strong and ready authour and inventour of newe abominations: but all wise & faith full Christians shall detest this order: they shall give labour, and shall give themselves to idlenesse, esteeming more a living by flatterie and beggerie: endevouring with all their power everie meanes, whereby they maie perverste resist the teachers of the tru∣eth, and hinder them, ioyning to themselves for that purpose Noble men. Then also who shall deceave the great States of Realmes, and drawe them ino errour that they my minister to themselves necessarie sustinance and the pleasures of this world. For the Devill shall grasse into their hartes these foure chife vices, Flaterie, Envie, Hy∣pocrisie, Backbiting: Flterie, wherby they maie get to themselves manie great things: Envie, when they shall see benefits to be bestowed upon others thn themselves: Hypo¦crisi, that they maie please men with a fained pretence: Backbting, that they maie ex¦toll and set forth themselves with praises, but derogate from others, to the ende that they maie be had in estimation of men, and deceave the simple. They shall preach in∣deede diligently, but without all sense of godlines, and not after the maner of the Holy Martyrs before time. They shall derogate from the Secular Princes, they shall take awaie the Sacraments from the true Pastours, and shall receive almes of the needie, sicke and miserable, winding themselves by little and little, and stealing into the fa∣vour of the common people: they shall have familiaritie with wemen, teaching them how with flattering and fained wordes they maie deceave their friendes and husbāds, and rob them of their goods, to give to them. For they will receave whatsoever hath ben gotten by theft, robberie, or anie evill cunning, and they will say give us, and wee will pray for you: So that labouring to hide other mens sinnes, they shall wholly forget their owne. And, o grievous thing: they will receive anie thinge from vagabonds, pilferers, extortioners theeves, and robbers by the high waies, from church-robbers, usurers, adulterers, Heretiques, Shismatiques, revolters, harlots, bawdes of Noble men, periured merchants, corrupt iudges, souldiers, tyrants, and such as live in tra∣des contrarie to the lawe of God. They are perverse and wicked, embracing the persu∣asion of the Devill, the sweetnesse of sinne, an easie and delicate life, and a certaine a∣bundance of thinges even unto eternall damnation. All these things shall appeare ma∣nifestly in them all, & everie daie they shall growe more wicked and more hardened in their heartes. And when their fraude shalbe founde out, and their naughtiesse, then gifts shall cease, and they shall goe about to houses hungrie like ravening dogges, their countenances cast downe upon the grounde, and their neckes made short, as do∣ves, that they maie be satisfied with bread. Then the people shall prosecute them with an outcrie, woe be to you wretches, children of sorrow, the world hath deceived you, the Devill hath ruled you hitherto by his power: you have a fraile flesh, and hart ut∣terly without wisdome and unstable, wavering mindes, and eyes delighted with much vanity and folly, your idle paunches have coveted dainty dishes of meate, and your
feete have ben swift to wickednesse. Remember the time when you were openlie bles∣sed, but secretlie envious, abroad poore, but rich at home, curteous in shew, but in ve∣rie trueth great flaterers, false traitours, perverse back biters, holie Hypocrites, supplā∣ters of the trueth, iust beiond measure, proude, unchast, unconstant teachers, delicate Martyrs, confessours desirous of much lucre: gentle, but false accusrs, religious but covetous, humble, but yet proude, mercifull, but shamelesse liars, pleasant flatterers, peaceable persequutours, oppressours of the poore, bringing newe sects invented of your selves: counted mercifull, but knowne by experience to be wicked, lovers of the world, conspiratours, drunkards, ambitious, patrons of wickednesse, robbers of the whole earth, unsatiable preachers, men pleasers, beguiling simple women, sowers of privie grudges. Of whom Moses that excellent Prophet spake well in his Songe, a people without councell and understanding: Oh that they would knowe, that they would un∣derstand, and consider their latter ende. Yee have built indeede on high, and when it was not graunted you to rise higher, yee have fallen downe togither, even as Simon Magus, whom God cast to the grounde, and smote with an huge blowe: so at length you have ben throwne downe from your false doctrine, naughtinesse, lyes, slaunders, villanies, out of the cloudes unto the verie earth. Then the people speaketh to them, get yee hence, you teachers of abominations, destroiers of the trueth, brethren Shuna∣mites, fathers of heresies, false Apostles, who counterfaited the life of the Apostles, the followers of whom you have ben in noe sorte. You are the children of iniquitie: wee will not follow your maner of courses. For pride and arrogancie have deceaved you, and unsatiable covetousnes hath wrapped in her snares your erring mindes. And after that yee would clime higher then was meete and reasonable, by the iust iudge∣ment of God yee have fallen downe headlong into eternall shame and reproch. These thinges Hildegardis foretolde about the yeere 1146, three skore yeeres before the begging fryers were bred: whom notwithstanding shee painteth out so cunningly and lively, that shee may seeme not so much to have foretolde a thinge to come, as to have reported a thing past. Who can describe more clearly the beginning and disposition of these Locusts? Who can speake more plaine of their destruction? even of us, who have seen the thing declared to be true by the event? Neither onely treated shee of those which should spring up next after her age, but also of the Isuites of our time, and the other company of vile persons of that sorte, which doth annoy in these dayes. For all these Locusts belonge to the same pit, are of the same manners, and shalbe in the same destruction. 12 One woe is past; The first of the three more grievous. For the second followeth in chap. 11.14. as it hath ben observed before, that one with the Hebrewes is as well a nowne of order as of number, in chap. 6.1. This woe is past, not because noe remnants should remaine when the next trumpet
should come after the other, but because the heate of it should be much cooled againe, so as it wanted but a little, but that it might seeme to have bn utterly quenched. For this Angell of the bottomelesse pit shall not be aboli∣shed wholly, togither with all his servants before the bright comming of the Lord, 2 Thes. 2.8. There is the same meaning of this word chap. 11.14. For the veation of the sixt trumpet should not vanish away altogither forthwith at the first sounding of the seventh, but should tarie after that for some longe time. But the space of this trumpet is of sixe hundred yeeres and more, to wit from the yeere 406. unto the yeere one thousand three hundreth and fiftieth, or there about. 13 Then the sixt Angll blwe the trumpet: Nowe the sixt trumpet follow∣eth, and th sco woe: of which first is declared the commandement: second∣ly the Execution. In that is to be considered the Authour, the Administra∣tour, and the meanig of the commandement it selfe. The Authour is, one voice from the foure horn of the golden Altar. Wee have shewed at chap. 8.3. what manner of altar this is. Properly it signifyeth Christ, in whom, & by whom onely our prayers doe please God: as once was shadowed out by the golden Altar of incense set before the vaile, upon which alone, it was lawfull to burne the holie incense. This Altar had foure hornes, upon which onelie once a yeere reconciliation was to be made of Aaron, and with the blood of the scifice for sinne in the day of reconciliations: Exod. 30.10. For albeit the daylie prayers were sweete and had also a good savour, the incense of which was dayly offerred on the altar, yet these yeerly prayers, which were made upō the hornes of the altar were most fervent, & of chiefe moment. But it is to be observed that the voice which is heard, coming from the hornes of the altar, is not a praying, but a commanding voice, saying, loose those foure Angels: From whence this voice is not of the faithfull praying, but rather of Christ hearing their prayers. For therefore it is made from the hornes of the altar, both that hee may teach that this voice is an answere given to the supplica¦tions of the saincts, and also that wee may knowe that by him alone is ob∣tained that, which wee aske, by whom & in whom onely wee offer up our prayers to God. Therefore when the godly desire earnestly, that God would provide for his Church being troubled, this of loosing the 4 Angels cometh from the hornes of the altar: that while they should handle the stiffe enemies of syncere religiō according to their desertes, the trueth in the meane time might spring againe, & enioy a more quiet seasō. Wee have learned from those thinges which have ben said before, that the pure reli∣gion had ben oppressed wholly and overwhelmed, partly by a deluge of Lo∣custs, partly by other infinite corruptions, chiefly by the tyranny of Anti∣christ.
But when it seemed good to God about this time to beginne sme restoring of the trueth, it pleased him to trouble Antichrist and to disquiet him with the feare of the foure loosed Agels, least he should doy his growing trueth in the first blade, and not sffer it to come to that ripsse which wee see nowe. Wherfore this commandement came in good season to the Church, for whose sake alone all the alterations come to passe, which wee see in the world. 14 Saying to the sixt Angell: To him, to whom the commandement is given. This first is appointed the effectour of the worke, the former only denounced the evill: peradventure the contagion of the sinne letted them from putting their hand to the worke, but here should be a cleare separa∣tion of the punishement and the fault, that the minister thereof should not neede to feare the infection of this. ¶ Loose those foure Angels:Car. Gal. pg. 56. & duravit us∣que ad ann. 1191 &c. The meaning of the commandement of loo∣sing the foure Angels: who stood prepared in readines, expecting onely whē a signe should be given them. But what manner of Angels were these? were they properly so called, and bounde to a certē place, that they could not stirre from thence, untill some speciall leave was given them? Certen∣ly it is read that Asmodeus was exiled into the desert of the uppermost Egypt, Tob. 8.3. But this worthily may be counted to be of small credit, because of the Iewish lyes, unto which that people was so given, that also Iosephus a man doubtlesse learned and eloquent, durst affirme, Salomon either first to have in∣vented, or at least by his bookes to have encreased the Divelish art of coniuring a spi∣rit, booke 8. chap. 2. of Antiquities. Thi, I say, had ben vaine by right, unlesse an authoritie of greater waight out of this very booke of the Revela∣tion agreed unto it, chap. 18.2. Where it is signifyed, that the uncleane Spi∣rits are shut up into certen places, as into a prison. Which yet neverthelesse see∣meth not to be common to all, but onely to some certen. For howe can all be tyed to limited places, when it is free for some to compasse the whole earth? Iob 1.7. Of which also some walke about as roaring Lyons seeking whom they may devoure, 1 Pet. 5.6. They rule also in the aire: & the spirit that nowe worketh in the children of disobedience. Eph. 2.2. And they are the governours of the world, yea the Gods of this world, blinding the mindes of the infidels, Eph. 6.12.2 Co 4.4. Can they performe these things being absent? Therefore some doe seeme to be cast into certē places, as into a prison▪ some to have more free liberty to walke abroade. Yet neverthelesse the impiety of the Magitians is nothing holpen from hence, who thinke that they are able to constraine the Devils with a certen necessity of abiding within a circle, in a smooth stone, in iron, steele, in a looking glasse, in the nayle of a man, or any like thing. For God
hath reserved this power to him selfe alone, and to his holie Angels, whom often he useth for his ministers in this thing, he hath given noe authority any where to such men. Neither are these Angels onely Devils, but also men, who are ruled by their power, whom nowe it is a common thinge to be called Angels. For the army is made of men, as is manifest frō ch. 20.7. Where againe he intreateth of the same thing. Sathan goeth out to deceave the nations, and to gather them togither unto battell. But the Captaines are of the same kinde with their soldiers. Wherfore seeing the order of things hath brought us unto the yeere one thousand three hundreth, it is not to be dobted, but that they are the Turkes: of which iudgement are a great part of Interpreters: they are said foure, because there were foure chiefe fa∣milies of them. For after the slaughter received of the Scythians: Iconium the Princes Palaces being lost, and after some yeeres spent in robberies, at length they retiring backe, they recovered themselves againe, and divided among their Princes that of Asia, which in short time after they tooke frō the Romanes. The first of which was Carmnus Atisurius, the second Sarcha∣nes, the third Clms & Cerasus his sonne, the fourth Atman, as he is writ∣ten in Gregoras, or after others Ottoman: to which the same Gregoras ad∣deth the fift Aurius, booke 7.1. And so many they seeme to have ben at the first: but afterward to have ben brought to foure. Laonicus Chalcocondy las saith, that in the beginning there were seven, booke 1 of the Turkes af∣faires But he ioyneth a certaine man called Teciem with Ottoman, and rec∣keneth the children asunder from the fathers. But it is not a thing to be mervayled at, that this confusion of barbarous people could not be re∣presented certenly by the History-writers, albeit Gregoras lived in the sa∣me time, and had the charge of keeping the rolles of the Emperour Andro¦nicus the elder. This nation came some ages before from Armenia & the countries bordering on Euphrates. From which places they did repell ea∣sily the Romanes, which were wearied longe agoe, and wasted with many calamityes. But about the beginning of the reigne of Andronicus Paleolo¦gus the elder, before the yeere 1300. it spred her selfe abroad through A∣sia, even unto the Sea Aegeum. But that they should not breake forth frō some other place, then from their fore appointed lists, to wit from Eu∣phrates, at that time, when the raines were let loose unto them, God by the helpe of the Catelani drove them againe unto Euphrates. These men their Captayne being Ronzerius, were souldiours in pay under Androni∣cus, the prowesse of whom was such, that for feare of them, the Turkes fledde not onely from Philadelphia, which then they besieged, but also al∣most beyonde the auncient boundes of the Romane Kingdome, as Gre∣goras
testifyeth, booke 7.3. This feare therefore did drive them into the countries about the river Euphrates, & did as it were lay fetters upon thē for a time. Neither was it a small bounde tying them, that they could not rage as they would, in that their forces being devided unto many Princes, every one a part were too weake, that they should dare to attempt any great thing. Both these impediments were taken away at the time of the power granted them. For first of all the Catlani followed not on the victo∣ry begun, but shortly after went away returning home. Secondly about the same time, to wit, about the yeere 1291, whatsoever by lawfull warre the Christian Princes tooke in Palestina, and in the countries adioyning in twelve expeditions, and after the possession of 196 yeeres, they had lost nowe all that, so as those landes being given over, every one went their way home. Finally all the families of the Turkes, whether of their owne ac∣cord, or compelled by force, submitted themselves to that one family of the Ottomans. By which meanes the Turkes being free from all feare of the enemy behind them about Euphrates, neither having any before them, that could set against them sufficient forces, renewed their assault against the Romanes, whom in short time they overwhelmed wholly, as it were with a deluge. ¶ Bounde at that great river Euphrates: So called properly, that famous ri∣ver of Armenia, running to the West part of Mesopotamia, where the Tur∣kish nation abode many yeeres before it entreprised this warfarre. 15 Were therefore loosed: The execution of the commaundement, lighting upon the yeere 1300, by one consent of all History-writers; when their do¦mesticall dissentions being appeased, and all consenting to the Empire of the Ottomans, they might freely bende themselves with all their power to enlarge their boundes, and some time at length creepe out of their narrow straightes. Howe longe time this power given to the Turkes should conti∣nue, is declared in the next wordes, prepared at an houre, & a day, & a moneth, and a yeere, which so exact description perteineth to the conforting of the godly, whom the Spirit would have to knowe, that this most grievous cala¦mity hath her set boundes, even to the last moment, beyond which it shall not be continued. Which indeede seemeth to be the space of three hun∣dred ninetie and sixe yeeres, every severall day being taken for a yeere, af∣ter that manner which wee interpreted the monethes before. But the yeere set downe here simply is meant to be the common and usuall Julian yeere, of three hundred three skore and five dayes, and some fewe houres. All which time counted from the yeere one thousand three hundreth, shall ende at lēgth about the yeere one thousande sixe hundreth ninetie & sixth:
which is the furthest bound of the Turkish name, as also other scriptures by a merveilous consent doe proove, unto which nowe to run, is not permit∣ted unto mee, but a fit occasiō shallbe given at an other time, if God will. In the meane time wee must knowe that the power of the Turkes shall not remaine whole unto this ende, but shall threaten their ruine before or about fourty yeeres, before that last destruction of them shall come: but of this matter at some other time more at large. ¶ To slay the third part of men: Not without cause doth he make mention of the power granted to kill, because more blood should be shed by these Angels, then by any enemyes before spoken of. A great number were kil∣led of the Saracenes: and the Romish Antichrist is wholy berayed with the blood of the Saincts: as after chap. 17.4.6. But the slaughters made by them were none in comparison of these, neither therefore doe come into any account. The rage of the fierce enemie is limited with the boundes of the third part, as wee have seene that it hath come to passe in the East, part¦ly in Asia, partly in Europa: from whence it is not to be feared that it shall∣be extended much further. And surely it is kept backe by the force of the same prohibition, wherby the violent waves of the sea are kept by the limi∣tes of a small sende. For what barre is there in the West to stay them, when the Christian Princes endevour one an others destruction? Albeit there may be granted an excursion beyond those boundes for a small time to pu¦nish some men, as wee have observed in the Sarden Church, chap. 3.3. 16 And the number of the horsemen was: of the armies of a horseman, for of horse¦men, unlesse peradventure it be set partitively, as though he should say▪ and the number of the armies, of that of horsemen was two thousand hundred thousand: I heard also the number of the armies of footemen, which things need not to be stood upon, considering that any may easily gather frō so great a nūber of them, that these were almost infinite. The Comp. & the K. bible reade, of an horse. A certē olde copy hath of horses, & ten thousand times ten thousāde. The word two being put out, which Aret & the Com transl. hath. The Inter∣preter of Aret. & the Com. declare this number by the parts, twentie thousā¦de times ten thousands: which Th. Be. in the whole translateth two thousande ti¦ms an hūdred thousand. In the clause following the Compl. & the K. bible doe omit the copulative, &, read by Ar. & the Com. transl. Beza hath it by a rational coniunctiō for I heard the number of them, as if the number expres∣sed perteined to the whole army, which yet is referred expresly to the ar∣my of horse men, but the indefinite number of the rest of the armies, should have respect unto that of footmen: unlesse peradventure all the hosts are of horsemen, because of the swift increase wherby the Turks should waxe strōg,
as also is signifyed in the verse following. But these are smaller things, yet not to be neglected. Wee understand that their armies shalbe exceeding greate. And in many expeditions it hath ben knowne for certen, that the Turk alone did bring moe souldiers into the battell, then all the Christian Princes ioyned togither. 17 And more over I sawe the horses:: Such is the number of the hosts, their disposition is declared in this verse. Which, of what sorte it is, is shewed frō the horses, from the armour of the sitters on them, from Lions heads of the hor∣ses, and from that which cometh out of their mouth. They are Horses in their ala¦crity and promptnesse to warre, as before ver. 7. The habergeons of the sitters on them, are firie, of Iacinth, and of brimstone: altogither of the same qualitie, of which that is, which cometh out of the mouth of the horses, which breath out fire, & smoke, whose colour is of Iacinth & brimstone: which three ar the instru¦ments of killing men, as after shalbe said. Seeing then they are armed with these three on their breasts, it is even as if he should say, that they ar armed srely with the destructiō of mē, as who suppose that all their safety & defē¦ce lyeth in slaying of other. How lively doe these things pourtray the Tur∣kish Empire, which is susteined with no other holde thē tyrāny? But further the firie habergeons ar cleare to all men, evē as the fire cānot be hid. Which is another marke, by which properly this route may be challenged to be∣long to the Turkes, not to the Saracens, or Romanes. For the Turkes doe vexe with opē warre, neither is there any of the Christiā name, but he may behold a farre of their hostile minde in their habergeōs & breasts. The Saracens al∣so were noisome, but they invaded as it were by skippes & unexpected fly∣ing upō mē privily, & as craftily as they could. Also the Romish Locusts so de¦ceived with their vaine shewes, & doe yet deceive, that they whō they kill, cānot be persuaded that they ar their enemyes. For they hide their haber∣geōs & corselets, neither make shew of any hostile thing, but lurke as Scorpiōs ūder a stone. The liōs heads of the horses doe note great cruelty, wherby the wic¦ked nation was brought to notable infamy above all whō wee ever heard of. Moreover in this point they passe the Locusts, who had lions teeth onely, but these have the whole head, that unto the hugenesse of their teeth maie be ioined the strēgth of their iawes, & sternnesse of their cōtenance. That which cometh out of their mouth is threefold, fire, smoke, & brimstone: which three seeme to note one thing, to wit, the ordināces of warre, whose origi∣nall was not lōg after the beginning of the Turkes, which they use with a mo¦re furious affectiō thē other men. The greatnesse of that gunne was almost incredible, which Mchmetes used in assaulting Constantinople, to the drawing whereof were used seventy yoke of oxen and two thousande men, as sayth Laonic. Chalcocond in his 8. booke of the Turkes affaires.
And those twelve thousand Ianizarites whom they have to their ordinary gard for the safegarde of their body, are all gunners. See also if any thing could be spoken more fit to declare the nature of the ordinance. First here is mention made of fire: but least a cōmon fire should be understood, there is adioyned a double differēce, of smoke & brimstone. For the fire of the ordināce is notable for an abūdāce of smoke, which ariseth frō a suddē kin¦dling & quēching, as cometh to passe in the noise of discharging ordināce. Where the fire burneth continually, and with a shining flame, there is very little smoke, being swallowed up by the flame. More over this fire is Brim∣stone. Is not the gunpouder made of salt peter, coale, and Brimstone? The Spirit therefore describeth this enemie to us by those weapons, which should take their beginning almost togither with his tyranny. But this fire cometh out of their mouth, because they doe sende forth this fire as easily, as a breath: Yf onely that chiefe robber shall commande desolatiō to be brought upon any countrey, most quicke handes are readie, which forthwith doe his commande, and bring all thinges into a wildernesse. 18 Of these three: Thus farre of what qualitie the Captaines & Souldiers ar, nowe he cometh to the event: which first is the staying of the third part of men. Wee heare, o lamentable thing, dayly massacres: neither is any almost igno¦rant, howe farre and neare their cruelty goeth on with rage. But whereas he saith, of these three, it is to be understood of these three togither. For smoke and brimstone asunder have no harme in them. He reckeneth three, as distinct, because the former descriptiō of fire required such a reckening. Although men shall not be consumed by gunnes alone, but one kinde of warlike instruments is put for the whole. 19 For their power: The Complutent edition and the Kings Bible reade thus, For their power is in their mouthes and in their tayles: Aretas and the Cō∣mon translation agreeth: and so it seemeth that necessarily it ought to be read: otherwise the reason which followeth agreeth not with those things that goe before: For their tailes &c. From hence therefore, an other differē∣ce betweene these horse men and the Locusts cometh to minde: For these did beare their stings in their tayle chieflie, that is the dregges of the Saracenes, who had noe proper places of their owne to dwell in, and did flie about hither and thither see∣king habitations, and turning others out of all their goods, when in the meane time the chiefe Calyphi, Scriphes, and Sultans followed their pleasure at home in Babylon, Persia and in Egypt. Soe the Begging Fryars, the tailes of all the religious sorte did sting vehemently. But here the head and the taile are even like: the same destruction cometh from them both. The chiefe Turke himselfe, the Bassae, the Begi, and the other Ministers of their tyranny,
doe all breath forth and exercise the same cruelty. More over these very Princes were the causers of the other to tyrannize, & ministred unto them weapons for their furie. ¶ Having heades Wherewith they hurt: The tayles also have heades and mou∣thes, by which they sende out the same destruction. They are all of them frō the highest Emperour to the lowest slave serpents with heads at both en∣des, as the most learned Franc. Iunius hath writen very well. 20 But the rest of men: An other event is the obstinacie of the other men, who are nothing moved with those miseries, neither gave themselves to a∣ny amendement of life. But who are those other? Are they not Westerne mē, the third part of men being killed lōg since in the East? Afrique being so gotten through the invasion of the Saracens, that it would yeeld unto the dominion of the Turkes without any bloodshedding. But the sinnes which sticke so fast to them, are against the first table, to wit, Idolatry in this verse. The exceeding naughtinesse whereof is declared, first from the Authour, in that it is an humane invention: secondly, because it is a worshippe done unto Devils: thirdly from the wretched and doting affection, which appeareth from so manifolde sortes of Idols, of golde, of silver, of brasse, of stone, and of wood: last of all from the notable folly of worshipping thinges void of all sense. Frō all which it is more cleare thē the Sunne, who amōg the Westerne peo¦ple, are the cause of this most grievous calamity frō the Turkes. For where shall wee finde this Idolatry? Surely the Protestants, as they call them, & the reformed Churches have banished away unto hell, from whence it first came, all worshippe, reverence, and sacred honour of Images. Wherefore shee that boasteth her selfe to be the Catholike Church, whose head is the Bishop of Rome, whose Temples glister with images of Golde, Silver and Brasse: yea which hath not refused the worshipping even of those that are of stone, and wood: shee, I say, is that other multitude, which wresting the Scriptures, corrup∣ting the testimonies of the Fathers, faining miracles, and defending to this very day the Idolatrous worshipping of images, by whatsoever force, fals∣hood, fraude and subtill devises shee can, will not be awaked with this most sharpe scourge. Doth shee not impudently and stubbornly affirme, that Images consecrated unto true names, are by noe meanes to be counted amonge Idols? But what other speaketh the Spirit of, then such, which after the third part of men slaine of the Turkes, are defended stifly in the Christian world? What other doth he call divelish? What other worship of Devils? The mat¦ter is plaine, it can not be denied. At length therefore o thou Rome, cease to seeke out foolish crafty shifts. Deceive not thy selfe. Thy adoration be∣fore the image of the Virgin, is as if thou shouldest supplicate unto Venus.
The worship which thou performest before the graven image of the Father, is done to the Devill, not to God himselfe. The Spirit causeth mee to use this boldnes: cry thou out as much as thou wilt, that these speaches ar blasphe¦mous, and after thy manner accuse the holy trueth of God of ungodlines. But it is not to be expected that wordes should teach thee, whom stripes can not teach. Yet neverthelesse, though thou shalt receive noe profit here of, all the godly shall detest thee, who by these abominations, bringest a most cruell fiend upon the Christian world. Art thou not ashamed to ex∣horte the Christian Princes unto warres against the Turke, whom thou ma∣kest invincible by thy Idols? To pretende a minde to fight against a cruell enemy, but to minister privily unto him that aide, wherby all our forces ar made a pray unto him? Yf thou desirest from thy heart, that this spoiler of the world should be repressed or rather extinguished: cast away thy dung hill Gods: forsake thy sacrilegious Primacy: amende the rest of thy corru∣ption according to the rule of true godlinesse, then shalt thou see this mor¦tall and cruell mōster, covered indeede with all villanies, to fall of his owne accord: which could not stand surely one moment, unlesse he were holden up by these thy sinnes. But neither wilt thou be admonished, neither can he be overcome, before thou beest overcome, as after shalbe manifest. 21 Neither repented they: An other kinde of sinnes: which are foure, mur∣ders, sorceries, formcation, thefts: of which he that knoweth not Rome to be the shoppe, he seeth but a little in the cleere sunne shine at noonetide. CHAP. 10. THEN I sawe an other Angell comming downe from heaven, clothed with a cloude, & the rainebowe upon his head, & his face was as the Sunne, & his feete as pillars of fire. 2 And he had in his hande a little booke opened, and he put his right foote upon the Sea, and his left on the earth. 3 And cried with a loude voice, as a Lion roareth: and when he had cryed, sevē thunders uttered their voices. 4 And when the seven thunders had uttered their voices, I was about to write: but I heard a voice from heaven saying unto mee, seale up those thinges which the sevē thunders have spoken, and write them not. 5 And the Angell which J saw stande upon the sea and upon the earth lift up his hand to heaven. 6 And sware by him that liveth for evermore, which created heaven & things that are therein, & the earth and the things that are therein, & the sea, and the things hat are therein, that time shalbe noe more.
7 But in the dayes of the voice of the seventh Angell, when he shall beginne to blowe the trumpet, even the mysterie of God shalbe finished, as he hath declared to his servants the Prophets. 8 And the voice which J heard from heaven spake unto mee againe, and said: goe and take the little booke which is open in the hande of the Angell standing upon the sea, and upon the earth. 9 So J went unto the Angell saying unto him: give mee the little booke: and he said unto mee, take it, and eate it up, and it shall make thy belly bitter, but it shalbe in thy mouth as sweete as honie. 10 Then J tooke the little booke out of the Angels hande, and ate it up, and it was in my mouth as sweete as honie: but when I had eaten it, my belly was bitter. 11 Then he said unto mee, thou must prophecy againe among the people, and nati∣ons, and tongues, and to many Kinges. Analysis. SVCH then is the first part of the sixt trumpet, to wit, the evill: the com∣fort followeth, consisting partly in the authority of the revealer: partly in the thinges revealed. His authority appeareth from the power of a certen Angell coming downe from heaven, notable by his clothing, ornament of his head, shining of his face, bright burning of his feete, ver. 1. Likewise knowledge, which the booke open in his hande sheweth, and his presence everie where, declared by so great a pulling asunder of his feete ver. 2. The thinges revealed are, either to be Sealed up, or to be communicated: Those have their principall cause, the voice of the Angell: their instrumentall cause Seaven thunders ver. 3. Likewise their consequent, which conteineth both the endevour of Iohn in writing, & also the prohibition that he should not write, ver. 4. The things to be com∣mumicated are, either touching the finishing of the mystery of God in the times of the seventh trumpet, confirmed by an othe ver. 5.6.7. or of the gift of prophecy, restored againe to the Church, the preparation whereunto is set downe in the rest of the chapter. Prophecy it selfe followeth in the eleventh chapter. The Preparation is occupied either about the Signe or about the In¦terpretation: that before the booke received, hath a commaundement to take it, in the eight verse: and the obedience of Iohn, in the ningth verse. After the same delivered, both a commaundement to eate it up, and also an instruction touching the diverse tast of it, in the ningth verse, and the triall made by Iohn, in the tenth verse. Last of all is added the Interpretation in the ele∣venth verse
Scholions. Then I sawe an other Angell: Wee referre these thinges in the Analysis,  the confort of the sixt trumpet, which is fitly added. For who would not al¦most faint through wearinesse of so long continuing trouble, hearing noe other thing in the Church for a long rowe of yeeres then violent stormes of haile, burning mountaines, falling starres, the Sunne darkened, troupes of Locusts, & serpents with a head at both endes, casting out flames of fire, wherby an infinite number of men should burne miserably? Nowe therefore to them, that have ben as it were a long time and much tossed on the maine sea, is the land pointed at, and the haven shewed, in which at length there might be rest from these troubles: neither this onely, but also in the meane time a prosperous winde is breathed forth, which may cause a readier sayling. For which purpose a most mighty Angell came downe from heaven, divers frō those, who blewe the trumpets, or of whom mention was made long agoe elsewhere. For they were servants, this is the very Lord Christ: as whose clo∣thing, countenance, voice, & whole decking, is more imperiall, then can befall to any creature. Neither doth so strange a forme, and unlike to the true na¦ture of man, hinder: considering that it hath ben manifest from the first chapter, that he taketh upō him that outward shew especially, which may serve most to the declaring, and confirming of the things propounded. Therefore as touching the description of him, he is called strong, because he hath strength sufficiēt to deliver the Church from those adversities, wher¦with it shalbe oppressed. He cometh downe from Heaven, because nowe at length after a long distance of time, he would visit his Church, from which he seemed to have ben absent now a long time. And about the blowing of the sixt Trumpet, when the foure Angels were loosed, in the yeere 1300, as was sayd before, Christ began to give a more plentifull leave to enioy his presence, then in the times going next before. Yet howsoever he came downe from heaven, he was clothed with a cloude: not knowne indeede plain¦ly to the world, but covered yet with so great darkenesse, that he was to be seene, as it were through a lattice. He carrieth the rainebowe on his head, a no¦table messenger of the olde covenant, and of faire weather, both that wee may understand him to be faithfull and constant in his promises, and also that the former stormes shalbe driven away dayly more and more, by little and little, untill at length a cleare sky shall returne on every side. His face shineth like the Sunne, Christ indeede being most glorious, at least in that parte, in which he is knowne and perceived of men: but his feete doe yet bur∣ne with fire, because his lowest members on the earth must burne yet with a
great heate of affliction. Although there should be noe danger of peri∣shing in this fire, for the feete are pillars, yea and that also of Brasse, chap. 1, 15. For these thinges belong to the same time, see chap. 2.18. So therefore Christ carrieth in his owne person, an image of the present Church under the sixt Trumpet. Which began to encrease againe about the yeere 1300, yet covered with much darkenesse, which notwithstanding gave hope of a more perfit restoring in due time: & in the meane while revealed the most sweete face of Christ, which the world had not seene a long time: although the faithfull in the meane season were troden downe with manie calami∣tyes. 2 And he had in his hande a little booke open: To whom fitteth better an o∣pen booke, then to him who hath opened the seales of it? chap, 5.5. Becau¦se therefore Christ commeth forth with an open booke, it is taught that nowe againe after longe ignorance, leave shalbe given to men to knowe the trueth, as wee knowe it came to passe about that time. For at once the Turkes began to wax strong in the East, and most learned men to arise in the West, who maintained the trueth boldly. But it is onely a little booke, which he hath in his hande, to wit a small booke, either because the ende nowe approching, there should not remaine so many alterations, but that they might be contained in a little booke, as after in the sixt verse, delay shalbe no more: or rather because the knowledg of men in this time should be slender and small, whereunto perteineth the clothing with a clowde, as wee have shewed at the former verse. ¶ And he put his right foote upon the Sea; This grosse Sea of the inferiour world, is the doctrine of the corrupt Church, as chap. 8.8. No lesse also per¦teining to them, whose is the administration of this doctrine. The Earth, conteineth the rest of the common people, who in name are Christians. But the feete are the members of Christ, to wit, his faithfull servants, by whom as it were by feete, he walketh on earth. Of these the right foote is the strō∣ger, by which being set upon the Sea, it is declared, that Christ nowe at length will chuse out some from that vile sorte of Ecclesiasticall men, for to be his feete and faithfull members. Also the left foote placed on the earth, sheweth that he will take out likewise some from the lay people, who al∣though they could not compare with the Ecclesiasticall, those right feete, in excellency of giftes, yet they should be made his true members, & enioy the same honour with them. Such right feete were Iohannes de Poliaco, Mar∣tinus Patavinus, Iohannes de Ganduno, Michael Cicerius, Michael de Coriaria, Guilielmus Ockam, Gerardus Ridder, Iohannes Rochetalada, Armachanus an J∣rish Bishop, Ioannes Wtcklefus and others. Christ drew them out of the salt sea
of the Popish doctrine: whom hee tooke out from the company of Ecclesia∣sticall men, and brought them to sweeter and wholsomer waters of the trueth. Out of the lay people, he had for his left feet, Ludovicus Bavarus the Emperaur, Marsilius Patavinus, Dantem Aligherium, and many others who defended to their power the trueth seene and acknowledged. 3 And he cryed with a loude voice as as Lion roareth: Hitherto hath ben the description of the Angel, nowe the chiefe cause of the things that were to be sealed up is set forth, to wit, the crying out of an Angell like a bellowing Lion, for so the Greeke word signifyeth properly that which belongeth to Oxen and the like beasts. Lions are properly said to roare: albeit some times it is attributed to Asses and Camels, as Hesichius sheweth:  is to ma∣ke a roring like unto Asses, Camels, and oxen. But the Angell belloweth, bccause he must speake softly, and dared not to lift up his voice (for there is ioined togither with it, he cryed with a loude voice,) but that he might shewe that the meekenes and patience of the oxen is nowe to be mixed with the cou∣rage of the Lion. And so indeede Christ, as it were revived againe then in his members, cryed out strongly: which crying out neverthelesse carried a shewe of the bellowing oxen onely, neither yet made any man greatly a∣fraid. Those first springing up Christian Worthies strove by lamentings and complaining speaches: yet neverthelesse they bare a grievous yoke of bon¦dage, which they could not shake of, whatsoever strugling they made a∣gainst it. ¶ The seven thunders uttered their voice: Which as an Echo answered this lowing. And these seven thunders are I suppose those Angels of which af∣terward in chap. 14.6. &c. Surely the time agreeth fitly, as wee will shew at the place: then also their office may worthily be likened to thunder, which sounded againe when this roaring was uttered. For taking their be∣ginning from thence, they made a noise with so great roaring, that such as despised the lowing of the Angell, should at length begin to tremble for feare of this thunder. But it is an excellent thing, that the thunders speake not, but at the crying out of the Angell, even as also the Echo hath noe voice of it selfe, but onely yeeldeth againe the voice which it hath received; so those restorers of the truth, howsoever the world condemned them of no¦velties, brought notwithstanding nothing, but that which themselves had learned of God. 4 And when the seven thunders, &c. Such were the causes, now is shewed the care of Iohn: whom when the seven thunders were heard, being about to w∣rite, a voice from heaven prohibiteth, & biddeth to seale them up. These mi∣steries were to be kept secret, as before, the booke could not be read, as long as
it was sealed, chap. 5. For these times knewe not what those thunders did speake, neither did they marke whereunto at length they would come. ¶ And write them not: So Aretas, the Common translation, and other Greeke Copies, as though these wordes should declare, what that Seale, should be, to wit, not to put in writing, but to have it secret for himselfe alone. But is any thing revealed privately to Iohn, which he might not pu∣blish abroade? It is not surely to be thought, especially seeing Christ to this ende received this Prophecy, that he might shewe it to his servants, as before in chap. 1.1. Where, to his servants, saith he, not to any one alone, but for the common good of the whole Church. Wherefore these wordes seeme thus to be understood, as though he should say, bring not these voices of the thunders into this place, but reserve them to an other more proper and fit. Which iudgement certaine printed copies doe favour, which read, & here∣after thou writest, or peradventure, shall write: but although  might easily be changed into  the first vowell being altered, and the last syllable takē away: yet I scarse thinke, that readings quite opposite one to another are founde at any time. Wherefore when it is heard to iug what sense to take, that interpretation pleaseth me most of all, which alike agreeth to both, to wit, according to that meaning which wee brought even nowe. Vnlesse some would rather have that these wordes and shalt write hereafter be refer∣red to the next visions which follow: but that the voices of the thunders should be buried in silence for ever. But the former interpretation is more sure, that the Revelation was given for a common solace, and that therefore those things should be disclosed afterward in their place, which nowe are commanded to be kept close. Albeit I deny not that some thing may be communicated to the Saincts apart, as to Paul, who heard thinges that could not be uttered, 2 Cor. 12.4. But the drift of the Prophecy is to be regarded. More over to what purpose should it be that those things should be over∣whelmed with an eternall silence, if at lēgth that were to be brought to pas¦se, which the thunders spake? Therefore let them be sealed for this time, in which they were hidden from the world, as it commeth to passe for the most parte in their first beginnings: afterward let them be written, in the place wherin they shall obtaine their ende, when the things shall become most plaine by the event. That is to say, being perfected they should be un¦derstood, but they should not be knowne as long as thy were to be fini∣shed. 5 And the Angell which I sawe standing &c. lifted up his hand: Hitherto of the thing that was to be sealed: now it followeth touching the finishing of the mysterie, which first is of things to be communicated. It is confirmed by an othe, that it shalbe shortly.
For in that he lifted up the hand, it was done from the old solemne manner of swearers: frō whence to lift up the hande, is often times taken for to sweare, Gen. 14.22. Numb. 14 30. Ezech. 20.5. 6 And he swore by him which liveth: , The Grecians speake by the fourth case , but Iohn after the māner of the Hebeewes-sweare unto me in the Lord, 1 Sam. 24.21. But he describeth God by his power, which most of all appeareth in creating things: wherby he bringeth into minde, that he is noe lesse able to put an end to things, then to give a be∣ginning. And that therefore it is not to be doubted, but that he would straightway performe the future worke, who in the beginning made all things of nothing. ¶ That time shall be noe more: So I translate the word , which some times signifyeth continuance of time, as , time, day, delay, shall mollifie & mitigate. Whence  to stay, tarrie, defer, is the same that  is in Luke 12.45. Heb. 10.37. Aretas and the common sorte of Interpreters will have it to be understood of the abolishing of time af∣ter the ende of the world, as if the Sunne and the rest of the starres should stay their courses, and noe longer finish their yeerly rounde courses: but these things are to be referred rather to the shortnes of time, then unto the consumma¦tion of the world. For otherwise there should be noe speciall comfort, but that which had ben noe lesse common to all ages. For even from the very beginning of the world, it might well have ben said, that there shalbe noe time after the ende of the world. To what purpose also should he sever the parts which are not disioyned by the coniunction but in the beginning of the next verse? Time shal be noe more, but the mysterie shalbe finished. Time after the consummation differeth nothing from the consummation. Therefore this is the meaning of the wordes, that there remaineth a very little time unto the fi∣nishing of the mistery. Which is the summe of the preaching of the first An∣gel, chap. 14.7. For, saith he, the houre of his iudgement is come: in which is performed that, which is signifyed here by the Angel swearing. For they be∣longe to the same time, and the argument of the preaching is one and the same. For though they held their peace, the very restoring of the trueth would cry out, that the ende draweth neere. 7 But in the dayes of the voice of the seventh Angel: He describeth the time of the finishing: but that which followeth, when it shall come to passe that he shall blowe the trumpet; the common translation hath it not right, when the Trumpet shall beginne to blow; which thing hath deceived some expositours, so that they though that this finishing of the mystery should be referred unto the first sounde of the trumpet of the seventh Angell. But it shall appeare
more clearly then the light after in this booke, that this ende is not to be expected at the beginning of the sounde of the trumpet, but some longe time af∣ter. There shalbe noe small distance of time betweene the Vials: the first whereof shall not be powred out before that the seventh trūpet shall blow, as after shalbe seen more clearly. What then promseth the Angell tou∣ching the taking away of time? Not that the thing shalbe done in that mo¦ment, but because the space to come, is nothing to that which is past. ¶ The mystery of God shalb finished:  shalbe finishd: So hath the Common translation: the Complutent edition hath  by repeating  that it is finished, See Theod. Bez. All Expositours which I have seen, doe understande these thinges of the last coming of Christ to iudge∣ment. Which shalbe in the dayes of this seventh Angell: yet if the drift of this booke be considered, & every point of the last time be diligently exa∣mined, it shall easily appeare, unlesse I be deceaved, that there is an other meaning of these wordes. The whole Prophecy tendeth to that point to shewe what shalbe the race of the Church, as long as shee must bee as a stranger on earth. Which having ben shewed clearly cōcerning the Church of the Gentiles, some mention was to be made of the restoring of the Iewes, the which other scriptures shewe that it shall surely come to passe, before that there be an ende of the whole frame of the world. Neither in examining every minute of the seventh trumpet, shall wee finde that the Revelation goeth any further, then to the restauration of this people, as with Gods helpe wee shall make it apparant in his fit place. Which restoring doublesse may well be called a mystery, because it is so farre removed from all humane ū∣derstanding, of which there is almost noe hope in them, to whom the very benefit perteineth, as in many places the Prophets shew. Why, speaketh the Lord by Isaiah, should thou say, o Jacob, and speake O Israell, my way is hid frō the Lord, and my cause is passed over of my God? chap. 40.27. And againe, Yf so be that Sion saith, the Lord hath forsaken mee, and my Lord hath forgotten mee, chap. 49.14. Therefore I suppose that this calling of the Iewes is this my∣stery. Doubtlesse it is sure that in the time of this trumpet, the last ende shall be put to all thinges, and therefore wee shall finde noe such conclusion of the seventh trumpet, the third woe is past, as of the fift, one woe is past, chap. 9.12. likewise of the sixt, chap 11.14. for the Revelation leadeth not thither, because neither perteineth it to us to knowe, neither is it to be imperted to any creature, which the sonne himselfe knewe not, as farre as he was a mā, Marc. 13.32. ¶ As he hath declared to his servants the Prophets. To whom this mystery was revealed plenteously: but which is not understood of our expositours:
wherby it cometh to passe, that the things which the Prophets foreshewe to come, the common sort so interpret as if they were past. Moses in his most famous songe about the ende, singeth this Mysterie, Deut. 32. Da∣vid every wherein the Psalmes: So Isaiah, Ieremiah, Ezechiell and the rest: it would be too long, even to recken the places. Learned men wilbe con∣tent with this bare disclosing: whom it is sufficient to admonish even in one worde, that they would seeke another meaning of many places in the Prophets, then hitherto they have followed in their expositions. If these things are to be understood of the last comming of Christ to iudgement, there are not very many words, or at the least cleare enough in the Pro∣phets touching this thing. But frō hence wee learne that the old prophe∣cies are not to be finished, either in the first comming of Christ, or in the calling of the Gentiles, but that they reach even unto the perfit accompli∣shing of the Mistery. Wherefore they that doe restraine them into the nar∣rowe straightes of the calling of the Gentiles, stoppe up to themselves the way to understand them, and take away much comfort from the Church. 8 Goe thy waye and take the little booke: An other thing to be communica∣ted is Prophecy restored againe to the Church. For this commandement shew∣eth what should come to passe to the Ministers of the word in the times of this sixt trumpet. Iohn himselfe for his part seemeth before nowe to have ben furnished sufficiently for the receaving of the Reveltion, both by those thinges which he sawe, and heard, and also endued with the inspiration of the Spirit extraordinarily. And if the passing from one matter to an other had ben set forth onely for to teach, he would have used the same in their fit pla¦ces in the rest of the treatise. Wherefore I doubt not, but that here a type is set forth of the Ministers of that time, as in many places elsewhere Iohn representeth the faithfull Therefore as here the booke being received from the Angell, and eaten up, he should play the Prophet againe: so about these times should be raised up faithfull Ministers, which should declare the trueth to the world. Wee made mention that some godly men about the time that the Turkish tyrannie beganne, and the feet of the Angell set upon the Sea, & the Earth, arose forthwith, who undertooke boldly the charge of prophe∣cying. Which was a notable benefit of God: this office had ben banished a long time from the earth: put to flight by the hellish smoke, which the bottomelesse pit, opened by the Romish Starre, sent forth: nowe it came againe by the grace of God, and men were bidden to take the little booke open, which the former times had shutte: the force of which commandement raised up those, which I spake of, and many others which followed: whom unlesse an heavēly desire had inflamed, they would not have offerred their
lives to so many dāgers, which necessarily were to be undergone in so great envie & hatred almost of all men. But from this cōmandement, wee draw this cōmon sentence, that men are slow & loath to take the paines to Prophecy: & not otherwise to settle themselves to this office, except they be stirred forward of God. 9 Therefore I went unto the Angell, saying to him, give mee the little booke: This gifte is to be obtained by intreatie, even also of them, who have abilitie givē them thereunto. Wee must desire earnestly of God with Iohn, that he will give us the little booke, albeit wee be nowe entred into this office. And the lit∣tle booke is given, when greater abondance of knowledge is ministred, which was most excellēt in this age, now first of all the art of printing bookes be∣ing found out by a great gift of God. But further these things declare, that the men of that time, being awaked once of God from their drowsines, shall greatlie endevour to profit more in the kindled trueth. And surely their industry was no∣table, and their increase in all kinde of knowledg, chiefly of divinity, so swift, that thou mayest say not without cause, that they had not so much read, as devoured the bookes. After Wickliefe the barbarousnes of the Schola∣stiques being reiected, the liberall artes were revived through so happie a∣boundance of most famous witters, that there is none, but he must cōfesse that to be the time of devouring bookes. ¶ And it shall make thy belly bitter: The word tasted in the mouth is sweet, but bitter in the bellie, that is, the knowledge of Gods will is verie sweete & plea∣sant of it selfe: but the publishing of it, wherby fruite may come to the rest of the mē∣bers, even like the digestion of meate, when it is concocted in the stomake, is full of troubles and anguish. Which thing sometime Ieremy tryed and complained of, chap. 15.16. Likewise Ezechiell chap. 3.3. And all none excepted, who have runne togither in this race: but those newe champions especial∣ly, I meane of this time. To whom doubtlesse the word was so much the sweeter, by howe much they came with a more sounde hunger, to wit, ha∣ving ben stollen away from the world for some ages, and nowe first againe restored by the favour of God: whore Ambassage contrariwise was so much the more bitter, by how much men were plunged in more thicke darkenesse, whom because of the long custome of sinne, they must needes finde more stubborne and spitefull. The condition of that time could not be shewed more briefly and manifestly. I therefore tooke the little booke: Althoug Iohn heareth, howe great trouble this meate will bring him, yet obeyeth he willingly the Angell, and eateth up the booke as he was commanded. There was a better love in him to Gods word, then any regard of lothsomnesse, or wringing in the belly frō bitternesse.
Such excellent fortitude was in those learned men of that age before spo∣ken of: it could not be, but that they knewe certenly, howe great trouble they should procure to themselves by avouching the trueth: yet neverthe∣lesse they laboured valiantly, setting more by the sweetnesse which they re∣ceived from the ioy of the Spirit, thē by all the bitternes of perill. By whose example all Ministers of the word must goe on boldly: neither is the office to be forsaken because of the troubles. It is noe newe thing for that to be found bitter by experience, which being tasted a little at the tongues ende seemeth sweete. Therefore let every true Prophet have this lesson well medi¦tated: least peradventure lighting upon unexpected evils, he be overcome at length through infirmity. 11 Thou must Prophecy againe: Nowe in fewe wordes he sheweth, to what ende the former signe was used, that it may be understood that Prophecie was to be restored againe to the Church in those times. The preparation whereunto was the receaving and eating up of the booke, to wit, a burning de∣sire of learning, which gave hope of a more perfit light to appeare daylie. But their opinion is foolish, who will from these wordes have John to be ex¦pected about the ende of the world with Enoch & Elias. These things belōg not to the last time, but to the sixt trumpet, which wee will declare manifest∣ly hereafter to be past. And Iohn is set forth onely as a type, not described by any office, which in his owne person he should beare in the last times. CHAP. 11. AND a reed was given mee like unto a rode, and the Angell stood by saying, rise, and mete the Temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein. 2 But the court which is without the Temple, shut out, mete it not; for it is given to the Gentiles: & they shall treade under foote the holy city two and fourtie moneths. 3 But I will give to those my two witnesses, and they shall prophecy a thousande two hundreth and threescore dayes clothed in sackecloth. 4 These are two olive trees, and two candlestickes, standing before the God of the earth. 5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouthes, which shall devoure their enemyes. For if any man will doe them wronge, so must they be kil∣led. 6 These have power to shut heaven, that it raine not in the dayes of their prophecy∣ing: and have power over waters to turne them into blood, and to smite the earth with all maner plagues as often as they will. 7 Moreover when they finished their testimony, the Beast that commeth out of the
bottomelesse pit, shall make warre against them, and shall overcome them, and kill them. 8 And their corpses shall lie in the streetes of the great citie, which is called spiri∣tually Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was crucified. 9 And men of Tribes, of peoples, and of tongues, and nations shall see their corp∣ses three daies and an halfe, and shall not suffer their carkases to be put in graves. 10 And the inhabitans of the earth shall reioice over them, and be glad, and shall send giftes one to an other: because these two Prophets vexed the inhabitans of the earth. 11 But after three dayes and an halfe, the Spirit of life comming from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stande up upon their feete: and great feare shall fall u∣pon them, that shall see them. 12 After they shall heare a great voice from heaven, saying unto them, come up hither: and they shall ascende up to heaven in a cloude, and their enemies sawe them. 13 And the same houre was made a great earth quake, and the tenth parth of the city fell, and in the earthquake were slaine seven thousande men, & the remnant were feared, and gave glory to the God of heaven. 14 The second woe is past, and behold, the third woe commeth quickly. 15 And the seventh Angell blewe the trumpet, and there were great voices in heaven, saying, the Kingdomes of this worlde are the Lords, and his Christs, and he shall reigne for evermore. 16 Then those foure and twenty Elders, which sate before God on their thrones, fell upon their faces, and worshipped God. 17 Saying, wee give thee thankes, Lord God almighty, which art, and which wast, and which art to come: for thou hast received thy great might, and hast obtai∣ned thy Kingdome. 18 And the Gentiles were angry, and thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they should be iudged, and that thou shouldest give a reward unto thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saincts, and to them that feare thy name small and great, & shouldest destroy them, that destroy the earth. 19 Then the temple of God was opened in heaven, and the Arke of his covenant was seene in his temple; and there were lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and eaarthquake, and much haile. Analysis. SVCH is the preparation unto the newe Prophecy, as was observed in the eight verse of the former chapter: the Prophecy it selfe followeth in the first fifteene verses of this chapter: which belongeth either to the whole bo∣die
of the Church, or some chiefe mēbers of it. As touching that: The Church is either true, or false: the true should lie hid this whole periode of fourtie moneths small, very secret, narrowe, which is shewed by the temple measu∣red, ver. 1. the false in the meane time very ample and spatious, ver. 2. The chiefe members are two Prophets: whose divers condition is shewed accor∣ding to a threefold difference of time: the first, by a thousand two hundreth & threescore dayes: all which space being black they should goe in monrning apparell, ver. 3. Who yet in the meane while should be like Olive trees, & Candle∣stickes, ver. 4. neither should be hurt of any, without punishement, ver. 5. and endued with great power, ver. 6. The second time is of three dayes and an halfe, in which being slaine, ver. 7. they should lie unburied in the streetes of Sodome and Egypt, ver. 8.9. and should make their enemies merrie with their death, ver. 10. The third time is not determined after the three dayes and an halfe, in which they should rise againe, lifted up by the Spirit, first upon their feete, which should strike a feare into their enemies, ver. 11. Afterward into heaven, at which the tenth part of the citie should fall, many should be slaine, the rest should be made afraid, ver. 13. Last of all a transition is used, declaring the ende of the sixt trumpet, and the beginning of the seventh, whose Analysis shalbe after ver. 14. Scholions. 1 A reede was given mee: After the preparation made, as wee have heard in the first times of the trueth, springing a fresh, and many excellent men bending themselves diligently to the study of good letters, whose ferven∣cy was such, that for the space of two hundreth yeeres, after one thousand three hundreth, they might seeme to eate up bookes. After, I say, this pre¦paration, at length about the ende of the sixt trumpet, the matter came to this conclusion proposed in these wordes: That is, the Prophecy did shine more plainly, and a more plentifull knowledge of the times, both past and present, the learned men sawe, by the booke which they had received of the Angell, that the Church nowe many yeeres had bin much afflicted, so as it could not be seen of the world, & then also at that present to be won∣derfully vexed of Antichrist. For this Prophecy is a repeating of a long ti∣me past: as Moses wrote Prophetically the first beginning of the world: which name, howe great estimatiō procureth it to the History? But to com to the matter, this Prophecy, I say calling to minde the time past, contai∣neth all the space of the former trumpets, as it appeareth from the speci∣fying of the time, which is added in the next & third verse. For if will coūt
backe the two and fourty moneths, in which the Church should be in the temple, they conteine not onely that houre, day, moneth, and yeere of the sixt trumpet, of which wee have spoken in chap. 9.15. but also beside the five moneths of the fift Trumpet, in the same place ver. 5. & those foure ti∣mes repeated: to all which neverthelesse there remaine yet nine moneths reckened over and besides, which to what other thing cā they be referred, then to those foure first trumpets of the eight chapter? But peradventure, thou wilt say, these fourtie two moneths take their beginning at the end of that houre, moneth, and yeere of the foure Angels, chap. 9.15. & both thes spaces togither may perteine to the sixt Trumpet: which thing cannot be by any meanes. For the whole sixt trumpet is troubleous to the wicked, in which respect it is called the second woe, chap. 9.12. & 11.15. But if the times be disposed in this manner, it hath little misery for them, who by the space of two and fourty moneths triumphed in all mirth, when in the mea¦ne while the Godly are afflicted. What so great hurt should the sixt trum∣pet bring them, if after that short trouble of one yeere, moneth, day, and houre, they should have a threefolde longer felicity and more? It is most certen therefore that this Prophecy reacheth backe even to the first begin¦ning of the trumpets: but that it is set in this place, because the whole ra∣ce of this time could not be perceived before that it should be brought to an ende. And nowe indeede God raised up learned men, Philippus Bergo∣mensis, Franciscus Guicciardinus, Martin Luther, John Carion, Philip Melancthō, Gaspar Peucer, Henry Bullinger, Iohn Sleidan, John Functius & others, who lin∣king togither the histories of things that were done, represented this face of the Church in their writings. Which Prophecy doubtlesse was to be ad¦ded at lēgth necessarily. For not without cause some might aske, what was done with the true Church, when the Haile, smoke, the third part of the grasse, the burning Mountaine turned the Sea into blood, the Locusts, and the other fi∣endes tyrannized? In all these Trumpets hath ben a wonderfull silence con∣cerning it. Nowe therefore the Spirit sheweth by this Prophecy revived, of what sorte the condition of that time was in the meane while, least that alone should be passed over, for whose sake this writing was undertaken. Ther∣fore this chapter is to be ioyned with the seaventh, where the Prophecy touching the Saincts ceased. To the same perteineth that sealing, and this, that I may so say, Temple measuring: and it is the same wholly and all one thinge, except that that belongeth to every severall cityzen, this, to all iointly, and to some chiefe members.
Nowe as touching the wordes: the reede given is the power graunted of the trueth, wherby the Saincts should measure the length and breadth of the true and lawfull worship, least in a wonderfull confusion of things, they should swerve from a due proportion. In so much as it is like a rod, it tea∣cheth that the trueth shalbe much holpen, and borne up by the authority of head rulers. For  is very often taken for an ensigne of honour, the Scepter which Kinges beare in their handes: by which name also are called the roddes which are carried before the Magistrates: likewise an in∣strument of exercising power, as in the Poete, Circe accomplished her char¦mes with a rod, and Mercure with his white wande. The Temple therefore was to be measured by the labour of some chiefe man, as wee heard it came to passe in the seventh chapter, where Constantine the Great was the Minister of scaling. For while he provided for the peace of the Church, and main∣tained the trueth carefully, he procured a safe place of refuge for a fewe ho¦ly men, from the contagion of the times. ¶ And the Angell stood by: which wordes are wanting in Aretas, and by that meanes he maketh the reed it selfe the bidder, arise and mete But the labour of Angels conioyned elsewhere, where the like businesse is done, seemeth also to require here, that nothing should be done, but in the pre∣sence of the Angell: see Ezech. 40.3. and after Revel. 21.16. Wherefore Theod. Beza hath well restored this place from the Complutent Edition. ¶ Mete the Temple: The true Christian Church is shadowed by the type of the olde temple: every severall part of which was described once most exactly and measured by the commaundement of God himselfe: to the ende that men should knowe that this house is framed of God, that it is not of humane building: and therefore they should not take ought upon them in changing things at their pleasure, as though the celestiall wisedo∣me had not sufficiently provided for the most convenient maner of every thing. The things to be measured are the Temple, the Altar, and the Mini∣sters of the worship. The Temple was devided into the most holy, and the holy pla∣ce, which had the altar of the burnt offring set at the doore. He biddeth him to mete these onely, of the whole building: small partes of the whole, and onely the more secret roomes. For the tabernacle before time being thirtie cubits long, and twelve broad, was sixteen times and more lesser then the court. Afterward the temple enlarged by Salomon, and by the Angell in E∣zechiell, had farre more spatious courts. The temple then alone being mea¦sured, sheweth that the true Church shalbe brought into very narrowe straights, limited with small boundes, and remooved wholly from the sight of men. For the holy place was not opened to the people, but the
Priests alone ministred in that place, of which sorte here all true Christians are counted, as before chap. 1.6. Therefore when Constantine came to the Kingdome, the Church began to hide it selfe in a secret place, by going frō the sight of the world into a certen more inward roome. Whereunto per∣teineth that sealing, chap. 7. Wherby a fewe of many were severed by some privie marke. Neither ought it to seeme mervailous that this separating of themselves from others, was made in so great glory of peace, and desire to advance the Christian name. For when some raised up contentions, others coveted much to get honours, many travailed with heresies and brought them forth, all did bend themselves with all their power to heape up super¦stitions: was it easy in that state of things for any pure, syncere, and sound thing to abide in his place? But the obscurity of the Saincts indeede, grew more every day, by how much more those foure mischiefes increased. The which thing Rome also her selfe granted unwares. For doest thou demāde where our Church was before Luther? Therefore thou knowest not. But understand thus, where thou Rome wert not, to wit, in the hidden holy place of our God: whither shee had runne for succour with all the rest of the Saincts from thyne infection. But when thou boastest, that thou art a Ci∣tie set on a hill, which never was hidden, but hath flourished with a continuall and manifest succession, confesse also that thou art not the true Church, and that thou hast founde noe place in that covert of protection. ¶ And them that worshippe in it: Mete is a common verbe, and of a conti¦nuall quantity: but here figuratively it signifyeth also, number thou, as if he should say, put into the number of nine those fewe, who in trueth worship me secretly: for there was a certen number in sealing the elect, chap. 7. which same thing is declared here in other wordes, when he biddeth him to meete the worshippers. All the Saincts are sayd to worship on the Altar, because they put all their hope and trust in the death of Christ: which kinde of sa∣crifices, perteineth not to the Tribe of Levi alone to offer, but to everie true godly man likewise. And this onely is that thing which discerneth the true Christian from the false and counterfait. But that the most in those times, worshipped not so on the altar, wee must thinke not without cause, when it is to be seene clearly from their writings, that many who ought to have shined before others in all knowledg, attributed to much to their volunta∣ry workes, and to their owne holinesse. 2 But the court that is without the Temple: So Aretas and the Complutent edition doe reade: but some bookes have, which is within the Temple, to wit the court of the Priests, in which was the altar of burnt offrings, which he mentioned even nowe, which court some time is called by the name of the
temple. Neither is this reading to be reiected rashly. For Iohn is not biddē to mete this court, but onely the Altar of this court. And it may be that it a∣greeth more fitly with that, which followeth, if the inward court be cast out, then if that be cast out, which was already without before. But both have respect to the same ende, that it is nothing to be esteemed whatsoever is more then those foresayd Temple, Altar & Worshippers. For the court is given to the Gentils, that is, to the Christians as for a name: neither this onely, but also the holy City (which they should tread under foote, not by spoiling it like an enemie, but in frequenting it daily under a colour of worshipping, as in Isaiah 1.12.) and that for the space of fourtie two moneths. These things shewe clearly, what should be the condition of the false Church in those times, wherein the trueth should be hidden. First it should noe lesse exceed in number and multitude, then the people which once dwelt at Ierusalem, and was wont when the holy things were done to be in the utmost court, exceeded the number of them, who executed their office in the Temple. Good God, howe great difference was there? Exceeding great was the cō∣pany of the inhabitans, and of them that continually flocked to the tem∣ple: howe in the meane time few Priests were there within, in comparison of that great multitude which was exercised without? There should be the same quantitie of fained Christians, in respect of the true and naturall Ci∣tizens. Secondly it should have her counterfait worshippers, dwelling ve∣ry neere the Temple. For they should possesse Ierusalem, and the whole court should be theirs. How neerly was the court ioyned to the Temple? How did it compasse the same round about? Ezech 40.5. Good God how nigh was this society? Who durst have condemned the court of propha∣nenesse, unlesse the Angell himselfe had commanded it? And the event su∣rely was altogither answerable. For in those first times, when the foure first trumpets sounded, what was Athanatius alone unto so greate assem∣blyes of Bishops? What afterward was Basil the Greate, or Gregorie Na∣zianzene unto almost the whole East? Yf thou shouldest respect the multi∣tude, who would not have contemned one or two in cōparison of so great a rable? But if you would respect holines, were they not all Bishops? Did not all desire to be esteemed valiant defenders of the trueth? How easy was it therefore here, either by the number or likenes to be deceaved? In the last ti∣mes also there is the same boasting of the holy citie, and of the outmost court a∣gainst the Temple. Is not the Church of Rome spread through the whole earth? Have the Lutherans heresies, as they clatter, ever passed over the Sea? Have they seene at any time eyther Asia, or Afrique, or Egypt or Gre∣cia? Who can doubt of the Holy Catholike Church, which counteth her
Bishops even from Peter himselfe, by a most certen succession? But Rome nowe boasteth of her multitude: by how much in time past shee hath flou¦rished in greater number, by so much the more is shee nigher to the great assembly treading under foote Hierusalem, and further of from this small number lying hid in the Temple: wee see in this place the whorish Church most furnished both with multitude and neighbourhood. Yf these things shalbe sufficient to get the victory, thou hast overcome, o Rome, so well in populous City, as in proximity. But let them looke to it, that are caried away with the name of the Catholike Church, how easily here they may be deceaved of the whore, which possesseth the holy City, and the very outward court next to the Temple. Let them in the name of God weigh the matter in earnest, and diligently: and not suffer themselves to be beguiled with vaine boasting. Let them minde, that unto them that looke but of a farre off, they seeme all to be in the Temple it selfe, who are but within, yea the outmost part of the walles: but let them come nigher, and they shall see most cleerly, that those whom even now they thought to be in the most inward roomes, are kept certenly from the holy place with brasen walles. Albeit the discerning now is not so heard, as it was in time past, while the Church had no place in the publike. Read but the writings of our men, & by the grace of God thine eyes shall waxe cleere to perceive the trueth. Mayest thou not worthily suspect the Popes craft, restraining thee from buying and selling of our bookes, and of all familiarity? Yet neverthelesse doe thou strive so much the more to knowe the trueth, that thou shalt see the same to be hated of thine, through the conscience of their owne defor¦mity. ¶ Two and fourty moneths: The time wherein the true Spouse should lie hid, and the false should rule. But how great darkenesse is here? And noe marveile, in so great blindnesse of mans understanding. Wherefore be thou present, who hast received these thinges that thou mightest disclose them to thy servants, to the ende that by thy guiding I may goe safely. For to dispell the obscurity, it is to be observed first, that there is not signify∣ed in these two and fourty moneths three common yeeres & an half going a∣bout. I hope that the accord of the things hath proved already, that the foure Euphratean Angels in the 9. chapter, are the Turkes. To whom power being given for one houre, and moneth, and yeere: seeing that the three hundreth yeere is nowe slipt away, is there any so obstinate, who will yet avouch that these two and fourty Moneths are to be restrained togither wi∣thin the narrowe limites and straights of their owne and naturall-signifi¦cation?
Hereunto is to be added, that seeing these moneths pertaine to the Beast, chap. 13.5. that the same was not yet borne in the time of the revelation. For Iohn sawe her rising up afterward, chap. 13.1. which thing no where is either said, or can be said of the Romane Empire, this is certenly that space, in which Antichrist shalbe borne, shall growe, be wounded, and re∣cover health againe: wherein he shall exercise power over evey tribe, ton∣gue and nation, & shall make the dwelling place of his tyranny the queene of the whole earth; in which finally both he himselfe, and also all the Mini∣sters of his pleasures shalbe altogither given to exceeding riot, as is cleere from chap. 13. and 17. and 18. But can all these thinges be performed in three common yeeres and an halfe? Peradventure Therapontigonus Platgi∣dorus shall recover life, who conquered the halfe part of all nations well nigh within twenty dayes. Alexander of Macedonia is compared to a Leo∣pard, which had foure wings on his backe, notable tokens of his swiftnes, that he should obtaine the Empire of Asia in twelve yeeres, all that time dwel∣ling in tents, neither giving himselfe to any other thinge, Dan. 7.6. But Antichrist should for iust cause ride on the very Sunne, to subdue all coun∣tries none excepted in three yeeres and an halfe, and in the meane while to give up himselfe through idlenes to all delights & wretched intemperan∣cie. But it is more plaine yet after in the chap. 20.4. Where the enemies of the Beast refusing to be subiect to his governement, and raigning with Christ a thousand yeeres on earth, to with all that space of time in which the Divell is bound and tyed in chaines, and the subiects of Antichrist lie dead before the first resurrection, doe proove necessarily that the Beast al∣so Antichrist was through all that time: otherwise how were they able to re¦sist him, not onely commanding nothing, but also not living? The same thing also shalbe minifest from the person of Antichrist, which in his place wee will shewe not to belong to one man alone, but to a certen kingdome and succession, chap. 17. Secondly seeing this account is not common, it is needfull that wee recken these moneths after the manner of the other scriptures: for almost all things in the Revelation are expressed after the ma¦ner of the auncient types. But what is that maner? Shall every severall mo∣neth note seaven yeeres, as the weekes in Daniell? It is wholly without all example and reason, to compare the moneths to the weekes. Neither will the wordes suffer it by any meanes. For the Angell sheweth that every eche day is to be counted, from whence he noteth commonly this space, some∣time by two and fourtie moneths, some time by a thousand two hundred and threescore dayes, as in the next verse, and in chap 12.6. But that way whereby the moneths are brought unto the weekes, and there is made the
number of two hundred ninetie & foure yeeres, numbreth not the fourth part of the daies. Wee therefore thinke that every one is to be reckened, and that so many yeeres are to be assigned, as there are dayes in these mo∣neths, which agreeth wholly unto the manner of the weekes in Daniell. Thirdly that these are not Iulian yeeres. For these two and fourty moneths make onely a thousand two hundred threescore dayes. But so many Iulian moneths doe effect a thousand two hundred seventie eight dayes, & more. Whereupon there wante of the Iulian, foure score dayes, and some what more: how many yeeres the thousand two hundred and three score dayes doe lacke (every one by it selfe being taken for one yeere) of the thousand two hundred three score Iulian yeeres. What moneths then doeth the An¦gell use here? Not the Lunarie, nor Iulian, but onely the Aegyptiā moneths, every of whch consist of thirty dayes. He hath shewed, that according to the custome of this nation onely, wee must recken the moneths, because it was it that should kill the Prophets of the Lord, and in the streete of whose great city they should lie troden under foote, & unburied for a mocking stock, after in ver 8. After the manner of these moneths wee have limitted by thirty daies, every of those five moneths, chap. 9. Fourthly, that this ac∣count is not to be begun, either from the passion of the Lord, or any other time, which went before this writing. For as wee have told you divers ti∣mes these wordes, I will shewe thee the things that must be done hereafter in chap 4.1. will not beare it. Neither by and by after the giving of the Revelatiō. For next after followeth the dwelling in heaven, the cloathing with the Sunne, the crowne of twelve starres, and the Moone trode under the foote, chap, 12.1. For with all this glory shined that first most holy Church, or else wee can not finde to what times wee may referre it. But of what sort I pray you, is this space of two and fourty moneths? Namely of a most waste wildernesse, of sackcloth, uncleenes, corruption, and lamentable deformity. As touching that the wordes are expresse, that this wonder appeared in heaven, where after∣ward the Dragon warred: at length throwne headlong from thence, chap. 12.7. &c. But what had the Dragon to doe in heaven, but that he might lie in waite for the woman travailing with childe? From whence also did the wo¦man flee, if shee dwelt in the wildernes before the time of her travell? Whi¦ther, from the wildernes into the wildernes? But all the errour is from hence, because the wildernes is not defined by his proper markes. For this wildernes is not the want of humane and extern comfort, but of the gifts of the holie Ghost; with which the first Church abounding most largely, felt not any desert place, although wholly destitute of all humane succour. Shee was indeede very greatly afflicted by the cruelty of the Emperours,
but the Dragon casting the third part of the starres to the earth tooke not heavē from her, neither spoiled her of the clothing of the Sunne, although he deprived almost an infinite number of Saincts of their bodies. For her dignity is not to be measured by an outward pompe and shewe, but by true faith and purenesse of the whole worship of God, in both which shee then flourished very greatly in comparison of all other ages. It being now knowen for certaine to what both time and place, these moneths belong, to wit, to flight, wildernesse, privie places to hide in, neither to the first be¦ginning, but after a longe and most grievous battell with the Dragon, in chap. 12.6. it must needes be that seeing these things are attributed to the Beast chap. 13.5. that it is also a living creature of some wildernesse, (and what other place is fit for wilde beasts dennes? from whence shee is seen afterward more clearly in the wildernes, chap 17.3.) and that it is not the first, that is, the Romane Empire, but the second enemy, to wit, An¦tichrist, who in as much as he could, would make this place of refuge to the woman, dangerous. From which thinges it is apparant, howe ab∣surde it is to ende these moneths in the death of Licinius, to wit, straight∣way after their beginning. Which may yet more appeare, if wee shall min∣de this terme of time being given them, that the whole sixt trumpet also is concluded almost with the same boundes: for when these are finished, there remaineth a very little of this. How then is not the mystery of God finished, as is foretold in chap. 10.7. yf the seventh trumpet hath soun∣ded nowe so many ages, to wit, these thousand three hundred yeeres more or lesse a very little? Not but that wee knowe, that a thousand yeeres are even as one day to God, 2 Pet. 3.8. But because it seemeth strange, that when the seven seales and sixe trumpets are finished in one three hundred yeeres, that nowe one of the same trumpets should not finde an ende in foure times three hundred yeeres and more. But there is noe such unequal difference of the sacred Prophecy. This monstrous proportion, whatsoever it seemeth to be, is nothing else but humane folly, & not a right dividing of the times. Neither is that firme, that noe certaine time of domesticall calamityes is signifyed no where in the Scriptures: for Numb. 14.33.34. 2 Sam. 24.13.14. 2 King. 8.1. and other the like, which might be ad∣ded, wil prove the contrary. Therefore that I may conclude the whole mat¦ter, seeing the seales doe leade unto Constantine himselfe, and these mo∣neths are of a longer time, then all the trumpets that are past, of right doe wee iudge that they take their beginning in the sixt seale, where heaven de¦parted away, chap. 6.14. Why should not the woman consider of newe places to abide in, when the former were gone away, & come to nothing?
And when Diocletian, and Maximianus gave over the Empire of their owne accord, the Dragon was throwne downe from heaven, to wit, in the yeere of the Lord 304. when the desired peace began to be given to the Church, and the Soveraignty to fall to Constantine, and of an exceeding great company of Christians in name, a fewe elect were sealed, chap. 7. Which things being thus layd, from necessary principles, I hope that now a large entrance is made to the finding out of the trueth of those thinges which follow. ¶ And I will give to my two witnesses: Theod. Beza hath, But I will give it to my two witnesses, as if the holy city should he given to them, which should appertaine to the Gentils, not to the witnesses, who should have place with the rest of the Saincts in the Temple. Therefore wee must read as it is in the Greeke, But I will give to my two witnesses, &c. In which wordes he turneth him selfe nowe to the chiefe members of the holy Church, when hitherto he had declared summarily the things that belōg to the whole body both of the true & false Church. Nowe these wordes I will give and they shall prophe¦cy, are the same with these, J will give power, I will appoint, or I will commaunde them to prophecy, as Iosuah gave them that same day to be hewers of wood, that is, frō that day appointed them to hewe wood, Ios. 9.27. see the 1. chap. ver. 1. But the meaning is not to be stayed in the office of prophecying, as tho∣ugh they should prophecy in those dayes only, which is their continual du¦ty, but that they should doe it all that time clothed in sackcloth. The old Fa¦thers being farther frō the evēt of these things thought that Enoch & Eli∣ah being these 2 witnesses, should come to fight with Antichr. in the last ti¦mes. But wee beholding the thing done now long agoe, may surely iudge, that the Spirit hath another meaning. The Papists with great applause re∣ceive this opiniō, & make much of it, obtruding it upon the world as an o∣racle: to it because it carrieth men away frō the present cōsideratiō of the things, a thing cōmon to them in all their expositiōs, & for the which they sweate much. But the peculiar expositiō of the things will cōfute sufficient¦ly their stiffenes in that opiniō. Therefore that I may dispatch it in a word, wee gather that these two Prophets are the holy scriptures, & the assemblies of the faithfull Wee will render a reason after in the descriptiō. Although everie one may see at the first sight how fit both are for this office. The Scriptures beare witnesse of the trueth, Ioh. 5.39. And the saincts doe praise the power of God & declare his goodnes, as every where in the Psalmes. A person is attributed to the Scriptures, after that manner, wherby the adioincts are signifyed from the subiects, as Moses for the Lawe &c. Then which kinde of spea∣king, there is nothing more commonly used.
Before the type of them was the Sunne, but seeing there was here mention made of warre, of death, of the resurrection, a person necessary, which should be capable of those things. From whence there is this newe way of signifying an olde thinge. The time how long they should prophcy is limi¦ted with a thousand two hundreth and three score dayes, altogither the same ti∣me with the two and fourty moneths before. To what ende then doth he nowe devide it by little parts into dayes, & not declare it briefly by moneths as before? To wit because the office of prophecying is such, that they must take paines in it continually without ceasing, not by a stinted labour every three moneths, foure times in the yeere, or peradventure somewhat more diligently once every moneth, but wherein wee must continue alwayes as in a watchtower, least the enemy continually lying in waite, come unloo∣ked for upon us sleeping or being absent. Moreover that wee should ack∣nowledg the singular providence of God towards his holy servants, which at all occasions is ready, both to deliver them from evill, and also to store them with good things. For the same reason he helde the Angels in his hande, chap. 1.20. and the Psalmist singeth, The keeper of Israell slumbereth not, Ps. 121.4. Finally that he may shewe that the moneths are not to be nūbred in a generall maner, but every day by it selfe a part, as wee have said before. Sacks are the cloathing wherein they should prophecy, because they should execute their office, vilely arayed, clad in mourning apparell, spoi∣led of all lustre, in the same garment that is wont to be used in lamenting. But whēce was this sorrofull arraying in that triumphe which the Church made under Constantine? Surely, although great was the glory of peace, honours, dignityes, riches, wherewith he endowed most nobly, and ador∣ned the Churches, yet as touching true godlinesse, all things began to be farre worse. The Heaven departed away under Diocletian by an horrible tempest of persecution, but nowe it was corrupted more with tranquility, then when the cruell enemy was at hande to take away their lives. For nowe the simple purity of the Scriptures began to be troubled more and more, the meaning of them not be understood, to be wrested by allego∣ries, and absurd expositions, and any thing almost to be added unto them which mens phantasie would. Did not the Arian faction, which wee heard in chap. 8, 10.11. infect the third part of the rivers and fountaines with her wormwood, strive to drawe the Scripture to their side, and by their au¦thority to proffer their wicked opinions to the world? So all Heretiques for the most parte are wont to doe, but the governement of the Magistra∣te was never added before, to the furthering of so wicked opinion. The Scriptures then for good cause did put on sackecloath, when they were
constrained so against their meaning to defende and stablish those errours which they hated chiefly and above all things. Neverthelesse they were not covered by and by with this mourning apparell, but they began in that ioy fulnesse to change the garment, which they afterwards did openly weare. That, and the ages comming after had indeede some learned and holy mē: but these were both fewe, and also every one knoweth, how great a blemish the corruption of the times did cast upon them. Indeede in their conflict against the Heretiques, they polished the trueth most subtilly: but their o∣ther workes being voide of this care, did for the most part much erre frō the marke. Although the gowne was then also spotlesse in comparison of those uncleannesses wherewith afterward the trueth of God was stained: the honouring and worshipping of reliques defiled the assemblyes also of the faithfull, and religion being put in holy places, and times, and other frivolous & trifling things of that sorte, clothed them as it were with sacke For the beautifull attire of these, is when they shine in the simplicitie of Gods ordinance. But the ages following did more deface them with dust and ashes, wherewith at length they being wholly covered, they could be knowne to God onely, unknowne altogither to others by their true fa∣ce. It is a thing certenly to be wondered at, that the Church should under the perse∣cutions of the Emperours shine with the cloathing of the Sunne, but in the cleere skie of her foster father, shoulbe cloathed in sackecloath. 4 These are those two olive trees: There is a double property of the Prophets, one of bountifulnesse towards their owne, that I may so say, in this verse: the o∣ther of power over their enemyes, as in destroying them, in the fift verse, so in troubling them with other evils in the sixt verse. As touching their bounti∣fulnesse, they are two olive trees, and two candlestickes: the type being taken out of Zach. 4.2.12. and very fit for these things in hande. For ever as then God did preserve his Church, and adorne it with the gifts of his Spi∣rit, and bestoweth them most liberally upon the same, not so much by the ministery of men, as by his alone supernall grace beyond all mens expecta∣tion: which thing the oyle signifyed, gotten not by mens industry, but na¦turally flowing out of the olive berries into the oyle cruet of the candle∣stickes: so nowe he would defende the Church being in danger, and reser∣ve to himselfe some burning candlesticks, to which how soever oyle pres∣sed and wrong out of the wine presse should be wanting, he himselfe never¦thelesse would plant them hard by the olive trees, which of their owne ac∣cord and continually dropping out of the berries into the lampes, should minister perpetuall nourrishement to the flame wich is to be maintained. Seeing therefore that in this type the gifts of the Spirit are shadowed out,
the inward, by the flame of the Candlestickes, the outward by the olive trees, among which, the chiefe is the sacred word, not without cause these olive trees, from whose berries oyle is powred to nourish the flame of the candlestickes, may signify the Scriptures, whose office is to minister doctri¦ne to the Prophets, that they may nourish the flame of Godlinesse in thē∣selves and their auditours. For like raison, for which they were compared before to the Sunne, both being ministers of light: this of his owne, those in stirring up a flame by a fit nourishment. Now they are two, in respect of the old and newe testament: God spake in olde time by the Prophets, but now by his Sonne, Heb. 1.1. There are also two in Zacharie, before the Gospell was written: yet it hindereth not the application, seeing it was always in force, before it was written. For there are two chiefe points of the whole sacred doctrine: the Lawe, and the Ghospell, which are those wholesome olive trees, and alwaies have belonged to all times. The Candlestickes doe carrie the candles set in them, by which Christ hath taught expressely that the Churches are noted, chap. 1.20. To wit, because they shew the office of a candlesticke, in the top of which the Prophets being set, not in the high toppe of wordly dignity, doe communicate their wholesome light to the Saincts. The Prophets thēselves are the Candles, not the Candlestickes, as Christ distinguisheth them, neither doe men light a candle and set it under a bushell, but on a candlesticke, and it giveth light to all which are in the house, Mat. 5.15. And before he said that the starres are ministers, where he compa∣red the Churches unto candlestickes in the first chapter, and twentieth ver. But why are they now but two? Doubtlesse most fitly for the present con∣dition of the Church, which had sufferred a pitifull losse of the rest. In the first chapter there were seven, to wit, so many as are the branches of one: after the similitude of the candlesticke in the temple, which representing the Church had one shafte onely, but seven branches coming out of the sides, Exod. 25.31. &c. For there is one Catholique Church, as one shafte: but the par¦ticular congregations are many: which comming forth out of that one, and abiding in the same, as the divers branches of one shafte do stay as it were upon the same base. Where those first seven Candlestickes shewed that there was then a most flourishing Church, as long as the Apostles and their next true successours did burne as it were candles in the same. But at this time, wherein the PROPHETS should goe clad in mour¦ning apparell: the Candlestickes are but two, which lacke five to make up their full number: because the dignity of it was much diminished, and al∣most
brought to an extreme condition. Neverthelesse the elect should have some fatnesse as it were of the olive trees, wherby they should cherish the celestiall flame in their hearts: neither should a candlesticke be wan∣ting, from whence the Ministers should give light aboundantly, howsoe∣ver the companies of the faithfull should be most rare and very small. These thinges yet hitherto doe not peradventure content our mindes, es∣pecially seeing in this space of a thousande two hundreth and three score dayes (which wee have shewed to be so many yeeres, and to have their be∣ginning in the yeere 304) wee have taught that sixe Antitype candiestic∣kes did shine, chap. 2.3. So then I thinke, that the three last, the Sarden, Philadelphien, Laodi∣cen, were not kindled, but after a thousande two hundred, and almost twenty yeeres: and therefore worthily not to come into any accounte, to which so small a number of those dayes agreeth. But as touching the other three, the Smyrnen belonged to the Church de∣caying, the Thyatiren to the same rising againe: but the Pergamen lying in a most deepe pit of all corruption, from it is neither of any reckening but of set purpose passed over. Not that there should be none at all in that state of things, but because none should be greatly in sight at that time. 5 And yf any will hurte them: Nowe followeth the power to destroy the enemies. But why are they clothed in sackcloth but for iniurie received? Doe they then destroy the worlde with fire, doing wronge daily unto thē? Iniurie is double, one more grievous done advisedly eyther by open for∣ce, or fraude: an other lesse of ignorance and lacke of heed taking. They seeme to have worne sackecloth because of this second kinde: in the mea∣ne while continually punishing their more deadly enemies with this de∣vouring fire. It is said to come out of their mouth, by whose threatning & prayers such a iudgement is exercised. Even as in olde time at the signify∣ing before of Moses, a fire comming from the Lord consumed the two hundred & fifty men, which rose up against him with Corah, Numb. 16. Or as at the prayers of Eliah fire came from heavē, & consumed the Captaine & his 50 men, which Acha¦sia sent to kill him, 2 Kings 1. God defendeth these Prophets after the same maner, that he did those auncient ones: yea rather he will have these pro∣vided for in a more notable manner, by how much he regardeth more his owne trueth, and whole assemblyes of the Saincts, then singular persons. The Holy SCRIPTVRES therefore, pronouncing most certen punish¦ments against all ungodlines, and transgression, doe sende, as it were, fire out of their mouth, whereby they doe utterly consume and devoure the unrepentant.
For it cannot be, that one tittle of Gods word should perish, Mat. 24.35. But chiefly they doe vomit fire upon them, who will hurt them, that is, who dare cor¦rupt their most syncere trueth by humane inventions patched unto it, threatning that, Jf any man shall adde unto this Prophecy, that God will lay upon him the plagues that are written in that booke, chap. 22.18.19. Not because they doe estime the sacred authority of the Revelation onely ratifyed by so great a punishement: but because there is the same regard of the whole trueth inspired of God, as Yee shall put nothing to this word which I speake unto you, neither shall yee take away therefrom, Deut. 4.2. Put nothing to his wordes, least thou be reproved, & founde a lyar: Pr. 30.6. Frō hēce in time past came the horrible slaughter of the Baalites, 1 Kings 18.40. 2 King. 10.25. and so ma¦ny most grievous calamities, which did come with force upon the world all these two and fourty moneths, because almost nothing was done accor¦ding to the true meaning of the scriptures, but now the whole world was taught by traditions, despising Gods trueth, either altogither, or wresting it, onely for the confirming of their fables and trifles. Therefore these Pro¦phets being so evill intreated, burnt up the third part of trees, and all green grs∣se with fire mingled with haile: killed the third part of the creatures which were in the Sea by a burning mountaine cast into it: turned the rivers and fountaines into worme wood, by a starre that fell, and did burne like a torch: yea they gave power to sende the Locusts and the Euphratean Angells, as hath ben declared already in the trūpets: from every one of which, either fire, or hellish smoke did issue forth. All which evils wer no other thing then the flame going out of the mouth of the Prophets, sorely punishing the wicked contemners of the trueth. There is the same reason of the Candlestickes, that is, of the assemblies of the Saincts: For God sufferreth not the Churches to be oppressed without rewarding the wicked, but moved with the prayers of it, requireth meete punishements of the oppressours. Diocletian giving over the Empire, de∣termined to spende the rest of his life quietly. But he escaped not so. For his house being wholly consumed with lightning, and bright burning fire that fell from heaven, he for feare of the lightening hiding himselfe, dyed shortly after. So Constantine the Great himselfe hath writen in his booke, commonly called the fift booke of Eusebius, of the life of Constantine, leafe 168. Although Eusebius, Nicephorus, and others, doe tell of a farre more hor∣rible death. Maximinian Hercule his conpartner died his wezand being broken with an halter. Maxentius his sonne was drowned in the river Ti∣ber. Galerius is destroyed by horrible torment of diseases. Maximinus also is taken away in the same manner: Lucinius often overcome, and often put to flight, at length is killed. What should I recite others? Valens fighting
against the Gothes in fortunately, & flying into a base cottage, was burnt togither with the house it selfe, by a fire throwne upon it by the enemies. But these were but alone persons: but also the whole multitude were oftē, and very sorely punished by famine, pestilence, and warre, as might be de∣clared plenteously, but that it would be longe, and not greatly needfull. These thinges may shewe sufficiently that howsoever these Prophets might then seeme to be wretched, raged, and vilely apparelled, were yet notwithstan∣ding armed with a power not to be despised The same is the condition of the rest of the Prophets 6 These have power to shutte heaven: He cometh to another very great pow¦er, and wonderfull, wherein they are equall to the olde even the chiefe Pro¦phets. Renowmed is Eliah, at whose praiers God did shut the heaven, so that for three yeeres and sixe moneths: the earth was not watered with any showre of raine, 1 King. 18.1. Luke 4.25. But wee have not reade any such thing done of these Prophets. It is true it may be, if wee take the wordes proper¦ly, but if wee transferre them to spirituall things, after the manner of other thinges, which have ben spoken before, how great a proportion shall wee finde? That drouth was for three yeeres and sixe moneths at the prayer of Eliah; so the time of this power granted to these Prophets should be for so many great yeeres and moneths. For two and fourty moneths, or a thou∣sand two hundred and three score dayes doe fulfill this distance of yeeres and moneths: but great ones as I have said, and hath ben already proved sufficiently before, not those common ones such as were those of Eliah, e∣very one containing three hundred three score common yeeres: and the halfe one hundred and foure score yeeres. How great drouth, and lack of spirituall dewe was there all this time, through want of which, godlinesse withered in every place? But they that bring every thing to the letter, and will have the three yeeres and an halfe to be meant of common yeeres, doe they dreame also of such a staying of rayne, which they must needes doe? Surely they get for Antichrist a Kingdome ill favoured, hungerstarven, every way wretched, and unhappy: altogither contrary to that excesse, wherewith the Spirit saith that he should abounde. Neither shall Anti∣christ have any leasure to carrie about armour to subdue the nations, but rather shall leave droves of beasts and cattell to the water, as wee read that Ahab did long since. But it is no marvell that they fall into many such ab∣surd things, who had rather followe their owne conceived opinions, then the trueth it selfe. ¶ And they have power over waters: As Moses, who turned the waters of E∣gypt into blood: and as these Prophets have done in very deede, when the
third part of the Sea became blood, chap. 8.8. For all this power was shewed forth in those plagues, of which wee heard in chap. 8.9. It is iust with God that all that will not beleeve the trueth, should beleeve lies, 2 Thes. 2.11. Which indeede is noe other thinge, then to have their pure and cleare waters tur∣ned into blood. The next wordes which follow, and 10 smite the earth with all maner of plagues, as often as they will, in a short summe comprehende the other plagues, which are not mentioned in this place, to wit, of the Sunne smitten, of Locusts sent, and the foure Angels loosed. From which power is ma∣nifest that which wee have taught in the beginning, that this whole Pro∣phecy of the temple measured, of the court cast out, and of the two Prophets, doth apperteine to the same time, of the sixe former trūpets: which doe recite one after an other the plagues in that order, wherein they came to passe. But this Prophecy rehearseth the causes, to wit, the puritie of the Scriptures viola∣ted, and Gods worship in the assemblies of the faithfull defiled. These thinges call forth scourges upon the world: and come not either by chance or by fortune. These have power to afflict the earth with any kinde of plague whatsoever as often as they will. Because God ruleth and governeth the world according to his will revealed in the scriptures, and all things for the benefite of the Church. In the beginning he delivered the earth unto Adam uncorrupted: and now againe he will have all thinges to doe servi∣ce to his children, which are restored in their integrity through Christ. 7 But when they have finished their testimony: The second limited time, as wee have distinguished them in the Analysis, taketh his beginning after that of profecying went out, to wit, in the yeere one thousand five hundreth fourtie sixt. Howe farre the thousand two hundred and three score dayes doe extende, every ech one being taken for one yeere, as wee have said at the second verse, and if wee count from the yeere of the Lord three hun∣dred and fourth, in which CONSTANTINE tooke unto him the rule of the Empire, as Cassiodorus saith, prooving that the yeeres of CON¦STANTINE should be reckened from thence, and as Onuphrius ha∣ving made a most exact account, seemeth to have collected. For a thousand two hundred threescore yeeres, eighteene being taken out, how many the coun¦ting of yeeres which the Angell followeth laketh of the Iulian, as before at the second verse, doe make a thousand two hundred two and fourty Iulian yeeres: which from the beginning of the reigne of Constantine, doe ende in the sayd yeere 1546. ¶ That Beast which cometh out of the bottomlesse pit: So expresse a noting by Articles, sheweth that this Beast knowne, and declared long since, which can be no other, then the Angell of the bottomlesse pit, of whom wee
heard in the ninth Chapter and eleventh verse, to wit the Bishop of Rome. For wee reade of noe other comming out from the bottomelesse pit, when he sent the Locusts out of the pit being opened, but that hee rose up long before, wee shall understand from the things which follow. Therefore he shall not be a Beast onely of three yeeres and an halfe continuan∣ce. He hath gained 5 moneths mor at the least, wherin he should reigne with the Locusts. From hence there is an other argument also to confirme this Prophecy to belong to the former trumpets, because the Beast with whom the Prophets have to doe in the last course of their time, perteineth to the fift trumpet. Furthermore also that of the thirteenth chapter belongeth to the same period of the trumpets. For this and that is the same beast, and both againe is the same Angell of the bottomlesse pit of the nine chapter. ¶ Shall make warre against them: Shall the Beast now first of all call unto wea¦pons? He shall assay to doe violence the whole thousand two hundred threescore dayes, chap. 13.5. But this battell which he shall make when that time is finished, deserveth before others the name of warre, both for the very kin¦de of preparation and hostile cruelty, and also for the notorious slaughter done to the Prophets. And the thing it selfe proveth that at this very time there was very little warre. For as touching the Scriptures the Councill at Trent began in the yeere 1546, the 7 day of February, to wit, after those thousand two hundreth and three score dayes were ended, in their third session the eight daye of Aprill, pierced and murdered them most pittiful∣ly. For here the Hebrewe and Greeke fountaines were refused, and the Latine cor∣rupt translation established for Authentique. Here unwritten traditions were placed in equall dignity with the Holy Scriptures: Here the Interpretation of the Scri¦ptures was taken away from the Scriptures, and made subiect to mens pleasure but chiefly to the Popes. Ever since the world began the Holy and Sacred Scriptures were not so much abused both openly and by publique authority. ANTIO∣CHVS in deede a good while since inflicted a grievous wounde in com∣maunding the Holy Bookes to be burnt in the fire: Likewise DIOCLE¦TIAN, and other Tyrants. But the iniurie of these TRIDENTINE FATHERS, is farre more grievous. For they were Ethniques, enemies stricken with a certen fury and madnes, wholly repugnant to all the trueth. These alone wilbe counted CATHOLIQVES, very great and chiefe friends, the thing a long time, and much consulted of, guided by mature and ripe iudgement, the very PIL∣LARS and upholders of the TRVETH, and upon whom noe spotte of errour can be cast.
How must it needs be, that their act was of no authority, and these men of very great? neither is there cause why any should obiect Marcion, the Eucratites, Cataphrygians, and such monsters, of which some reiected one part of the sacred Scriptures and some another, at their pleasure. There is ve∣ry great difference as touching the greatnes of the hurt, betweene the do∣tages of obscure Heretiques, and the deliberat actes and Decrees of an ga∣thered Councell, especially which chalengeth to it selfe to be credited with out exception. It is therefore a thing especially worthy remembrance and worthy that the Church should be put in minde of by so notable a Prophe¦cy. The event and time doe consent so wonderfully, that every equall arbi∣tratour will easily acknowledge, that I have not willfully sought this inter∣pretation, but that I have ben lead as it were by the hande, to the same by the very order and disposition of the matters. As touching the assemblyes of the faithfull, which in these last times did first appeare in Germany, they were assailed with a most cruell warre the same yeere. The same Beast made this warre likewise by the help of the Emperour Charles the fift: otherwise a no∣ble man greatly to be cōmāded, but obeying the Pope too much through the common errour of the Princes. From whence not without cause, that is attributed to one, which being proceeded from two or more, yet not∣withstanding is done by one ioint endevour. The overthrowe in this warre was received about the two and twentieth day of Aprill in the yeere follow¦ing, to wit, 1547, when the armies of the Protestans were put to flight, & Iohn Frederike Duke of Saxonie himselfe, Ernestus of Brunswick the Lāt∣graves sonne, and not very long after the Lantgrave himselfe were taken. Which calamity stayed not in these fewe, but also afflicted many others, both Governours and Cityes, which partly yeelded themselves of their owne accord, partly were wonne by force. In one moment, sayth Beza, be∣wayling the misery of that time, seemed to be overthrowne, whatsoever had ben builded up in so many yeeres, and with so great labours: and they onely were counted happy of the most part, whom sudden death had taken away from these hurlie bur∣lies, such are his wordes. The remembrance of that time is sorrowfull to all the godly: when the holy and wise Princes inflamed with a desire onely to defende the trueth, not themselves alone, but the Churches togither with them, which as newly borne, did lament among the weapons, came mise∣rably into the power of the enemies. But now was the time of darkenesse, in which these two Prophets must be killed, and made a mocking stock. Although wee must reioice in the same adversities, which ar a calling to re¦membrance of the divine Prophecies, confirming certenly the confidence and faith of our hope, as saith Tertullian in his Apologie.
8 And their corpses shall lie: There is this difference betweene Antiochus & the Romish Beast. He in burning up the bookes of the Lawe, would not ha∣ve so much as the karkeises to remaine: This sufferred the dead corpses, but onely for a mocking stocke, and for a greater ignominie. The cruell Beast is not satisfyed with blood, but desireth some more grievous tormēt. For their pierced corpses are cast forth into the streetes of the great city, that they might be a spectacle to all men, and an ornament to the triumphe of the Romish Beast. And what other thing of these Scriptures now remained, then a very karkeise, wholly without all authoritie, power, and life, when all interpretation was brought to the Apostolique Chaire, neither might they mutter any thing at all, which the Bishop of Rome should not breath into them? The Spi∣rit speaketh so exactly, that he may leave them noe tergiversatiō. He knew that the Pope of Rome, whatsoever he should doe against the truth, would boast neverthelesse, that to him nothing is better, of more account, and more inviolable then the Scriptures themselves. But that noe man may be deceived with a bare name, the Spirit speaketh evidently, that after the Tridentine Councill, noe Scriptures should be in the possessiō of the Roma∣nes, but a dead carkeise of noe strenght and power. ¶ In the streetes of the great citie, which spiritually is called Sodome and Egypt; This great City is that whole dominion of which Rome is the mother Ci∣ty: in which sense the tenth part of the city falleth after in the 13 verse. A street is some part of the Romane dition, wherein this spectacle is exhibi∣ted to be seene, the ioy whereof spreadeth it selfe through the whole Em∣pire. But the great citie it selfe togither with her chiefe citie is described in the rest of the verse, and that by two expresse names, a notable marke also being added, least any perhaps should mistake the city. And also for a grea¦ter assurance wee are admonished that these names are not to be takē pro∣perly, but spiritually, that is, aenigmatically, figuratively, allegorically. The first name is Sodom, a city once very famous for her filthines, nowe for her punishement, a most fit exemple of the tower and chiefe habitation of this great citie. For is not the city Rome become famous for her horrible lusts, above all the whole world: In the iudgement of all the Poete Mantu¦an hath truly songe of her in these wordes; Shame get thee to the country townes, if they als' doo not use The same corrupted filthines: Rome now is all a Stewes. Which is no lesse declared by an other taking his leave of Rome, thus; Rome farre well nowe I have thee seen, ynough it is to see: Jle come againe when bawd, I meane, knave, brothel, beast, to be. But that you may the better acknowledge Sodome, heare what a certē
man answered to one asking a question touching Rome: Say, what is Roma? Amor, Love; if backward you it spell: Rome loves the male kind. Say no more; J know thy meaning well. Hath not Hieronymus Zeged Mutius declared this plainely in his Cy∣nedicall bookes defending this horrible villany, and approved by the Bul∣les and lettres patents of Iulius the third him selfe. With whom Iohannes Casa associated himselfe, being Archbishop of Beneventum, but a bird of the same foule neast, greatly extolling that thing, which peradventure So∣dome would have ben ashamed of. But it would be an infinite and irkeso∣me thing oven briefly to touch those thinges, which might be spoken of this matter. Thyne opprobrious lusts O Rome, have taken away the re∣proch from thy Brothel houses, which the most holy Father cherisheth in his bosome by a wise pollicy, to wit for the avoiding of a greater evill: but while he pretendeth to avoide, by the iust iudgement of God he runneth headlong into more grievous, being given over into a reprobate sense: Rom. 1.26.27. as it may be manifest to all men, who are not willingly blinde. And noe lesse is Rome a spirituall Sodome, then a corporall mother and a shoppe of all monstrous Idolatry, as of the worship of the breaden Masse God, of Images, of Reliques, & other most wicked impurity of that sorte, as is more knowen to all men, then that it needeth wordes. The second name is Aegypt, not any city, like Sodome, but a whole coū¦trey and Province. From whence this name is not proper to the mother ci¦ty it selfe, but common to that whole dominion, declaring most plainely the disposition of the whole Kingdome of the Papists, on which side soe∣ver her large possessions doe extende. For it sheweth noe lesse the notable spirituall fornication committed alway throughout this whole Empire, then Sodome declareth the bodily and spirituall, practized continually in the city of Rome. It is reported of many, howe great the blindenesse of Aegypt was longe a goe, both in worshipping a multitude of Gods, & also in adoring most base & filthy things, to wit, Cartes, Crocodiles, and other things of that kinde. Spirituall Aegypt with all her provinces aboundeth in noe lesse plēty, nor of more vile Gods; wherto perteined the rehearsing of so divers Images, before chap. 9.20. and the cleare testimony of daily practise maketh it manifest. For whither can you turne your eyes, where you may not see windowes, walles, lofts, full of a multitude of their Gods? What temple can you goe unto, where you may not finde such as worship every day their breaden God? And as if Idols inough did not stand out in a publique place, to satiate their spirituall lust, they get privately for them selves Crucifixes, and Agnos Deises, which they hide in their bosome, that
they may never be without some thing, with which they may defile them∣selves in whoredome. It was an horrible thing once to have increased their Gods according to the number of their cityes, Ier. 11.13. But in this Kingdome they have multiplyed their Gods, according to the number almost of the persons. And whither is it lesse impious and filthy, religiously to worship a certen foreskinne, a shirt, breeches, a little braine, bones, peticoates, gir¦dles, shooes, and infinite such other thinges, then a cowe, a catte, Croco∣dile &c. The Idolatry is not to be esteemed so much the lesse, by how much the excellency of the thing which is worshiped is greater: for when one hath ben sacrilegious once against God, in attributing to the creature that which is proper to him, it is as well Idolatry to worship the highest Angels as the lowest, vilest, and most abiect creeping thing. Neither is it Aegypt a∣lone because of Idolatry, but also for the notable cruelty, wherby the ovē and fornace became nothing milder to the true faithfull, then Aegypt was once to the Israelites. Such are the names: the Property belongeth to the place where our Lord was crucifyed: but ubi being put without interrogatiō, sendeth us back to some former thing set downe in the sentence, that is to say, unto spirituall Aegypt. For the Lord was not crucifyed in Aegypt taken properly, but in that spirituall one, whose whole lande, dominion, & em∣pire is full of cruelty and Idolatry. Great is the force therefore of this pro∣perty, which bringeth those former common names of Sodome & Aegypt to a striecter and sure way. For there are many cities abominable for mon¦strous lusts. Many also whose outward power over the people, farre and neere, respecteth nothing so much as to practise and stablish Idolatry. But that Sodome which is also spirituall Aegypt, and that Aegypt within whose boundes and Empire the Lord was crucifyed, can be no other, then one defi∣nite, most manifest and certenly knowne. From this light therefore any man may perceave most clearly, what that city is, which hath killed these two Prophets, and in whose streetes they lay unburied. For that city which by her chiefe city is spiritually Sodome, in her whole dominion Ae∣gypt, in which dominion the Lord was crucifyed, is the city that hath commit∣ted this vilanie against the two Prophets. But noe mā can doubt, but that very Rome is Sodome, both spiritually and bodily: and in her whole King¦dome Aegypt, and that under the power of this Kingdome the Lord was crucifyed. For they shall deliver him to the Gentiles, saith our Lord, that they may mock, and scourge, and crucify him, Mat. 20.19. That noe man may thinke that he was hanged on crosse by the power of the iudges. Which thing al∣so the very Iewes acknowledged saying, it is not lawfull for us to put any man to death, Iohn 18.31. Therefore Pilate the Romane Pretor, exercising the Ro¦mane iurisdiction in Iudea, condemning Christ unto the crosse and execu∣ting
the sentence given by his souldiers, crucifyed the L. in spirituall Aeg. the Rom. kingdome being thē heathenish, & defyled with foule Idolatry. From which thinges it is to be observed, that these two Prophets were not to be slaine in the same speciall City, where the Lord was crucifyed, but in the same spirituall Egypt, an ample and spatious country, conteining not o∣nely many speciall cityes, but also a great number of Provinces. Frō whēce Bellarmine avoucheth foolishly, that the two prophets were to be killed at Ierusalem, as if they who are killed in some one most mighty Kingdome, must needs all be killed in one and the same city of that Kingdome. More over thou mayest observe, that the Popish Rome is no lesse spirituall Egypt in her dominion, then was before time that Heathenish, howsoever the Ie∣suites will have them to be most unlike. But let them now goe, & reioyce greatly in that place: and let Bellarmine bragge, that Chytreus and other of our men doe passe over these wordes with silence, having as it were no∣thing to answere to these things. I hope that their Rome shalbe founde here farre more clearly, then that either he or any other of his company can be able to take out of our sight by any darkenes of theirs. 9 And men of the kinreds shall see &c. The whole Popish nation should tri∣umphe for victory over the Scriptures made feeble, and weake. But where is this company of Kinreds, people, tongues, and nations more manifest & clea∣rer, then in the Councels assembled and gathered togither, whither they came in flockes from every country to one place. Certenly unlesse the An∣gell had named in expresse wordes the Tridentine Councell, he seemeth not to have ben able to speake more plainely: By the same providence of God it come to passe, that the Emperours forces were gathered from sundry nations, Germanes, Hungarians, Italians, Spaniards, and others, that the corpses of the Prophets should be set for a thing to be looked on of all mē, as it were in the scaffold of the whole world: Sleid. in the yeere 1547. 5 Three dayes and an halfe: Some will have this to be the same space, with that of two and fourty moneths, and a thousand two hundred three score dayes. But the wordes doe shewe plainely that they are diverse spaces. For this distā∣ce of three dayes and an halfe taketh not his beginning before the thousand two hundred and threescore daies be accomplished. For so before in ver. 7. And when they have finished: Afterward, these three daies and an halfe the Pro¦phets lay slaine and unburied. But that space of a thousand two hundreth and three score daies, is a time of Prophecying in sackcloth: so as by no meanes they can be referred to the same time. Let us therefore give unto them their owne pla∣ce, and set them next to the moneths. Which after the likenes of the former dayes, doe signify three yeeres and an halfe: in which the Papists should re¦ioyce in their owne behalfe, for that the Scriptures were vanquished, and
the Churches subdued, as they thought, to their Angell of the bottomelesse pit, as it came to passe partly at Tridentum and Bonnonia: partly in Germany. There after the deadly sentence was given against the Scriptures in the yeere 1546, the 8. of Aprill, from thence for three whole yeeres and an halfe, the Fathers triumphed in the mixed assembly of all nations, as if the mat∣ter had ben executed manfully and excellently, and prepared themselves to suppresse the rest of the trueth, untill at length by the death of Paul the third, the Conventicle was interrupted. Which thing fell on the yeere 1549. the 9. of November, that is, on the third yeere and an halfe after the Scriptures were trode under foote. The very fewe weekes that remaine hin∣der not the agreement, seeing the Spirit thought not good to devide the matter into smaller portions, then into three daies and an halfe. In Ger∣many the Church, which by the confederate armies of the Emperour and Pope, seemed to have ben put downe for ever in mens opinion, lay as it were halfe dead for the same space, to wit, from 22. of Aprill in the yeere 1547, unto the first day of October of the yeere 1550. when at Maiden∣burg it began to lift up the head againe, being nothing afraid neither of the Emperours proscription, or conspiracie of the Princes, or whatsoever any enemies could doe against them, Sleid. booke 22. and 23. You may observe further, how vaine a thing that is, and in noe place agreeing with it selfe, which every where is spread abroad concerning the three yeeres rei∣gne of Antichrist. For these three daies beginne not before that the two and fourty moneths shallbe finished: both which spaces yet neverthelesse he shall raigne. From whence after their owne account, that wee may graunt unto them the moneths to note three ordinary yeeres and an halfe, he shall ru∣le seaven yeeres at the least. Although this be small also to cōtaine so great tyranny, as wee before have declared. But wee see how almost every word by it selfe doth disproove that invention. ¶ And shall not suffer their carkeises to be put in graves: They shall deprive them of all common honour, which wee owe one to another by the right of humanity. And surely when the Ministers of the Ghospell desired ear∣nestly, that all things might be done according to the rule of Gods word, the Emperour obtrudeth to the world that ungodly Interim, the Scriptu∣res commaunded to be silent, and not to mutter against it. But in what a chafe was the Bishop of Artois, when the men of Auspurg, Trevers and Ba¦sell alledged for their excuse, that they had not receaved the forme of do∣ctrine, because it disagreeth from the sacred scripture? Doe you thinke, saith he, that the Emperour may not make lawes, and prescribe a certen rule, as of civill, so also of holy thinges? Sleid. booke 23. In the very Councell of Trent, what in the name of the rest āswereth Pictavius to the Mācilane Ambassadours?
For when they required that the same order might be taken for them, which before time was for the Bohemians, according to the forme of the decree of Basell: That the Scriptures in every controversy might be in stead of a iud¦ge: Pictavius obiected to them againe, that the Scripture was a vaine and dūbe thing, as also are the other politique lawes:, and that unto it must be added the voice of the Iudge, that it may be wel understood, Sleid. booke 23. He graunteth that the Scripture nowe is nothing, but a vaine and dumbe thing, that is, altogi∣ther a carkeise. And why should he not so boast, being privie to himselfe, that it was lately slaine by his labour, and of the rest of the Tridentine Fa∣thers? But while they deny to give this honour to the Scriptures, that they would not suffer them to obtaine that authority, which a fewe and con∣temned worshippers would have given them willingly, it was like as if they should forbidde their corpses lately thrust through pitifully, to be buried. Pilate, when Ioseph & Nicodem{us} asked the body of Christ, gave them leav that they should bestowe what cost they would upon it. But when the Protestants made humble request that they might at least wise burie the car keises of the Scriptures among themselves, although not in any solemne gra∣ve, but onely under the simple turffe of their cottages, the Scarlated Fathers denyed it stiffely. The Church was handled in the like manner. For after that the Duke of Saxonie and the Lantgrave were taken prisonners, the ci∣ties put to a fine, and very many noble men utterly cast out of favour, the Emperour proscribeth the people of Maidenburge by writings spred a∣broad, the sentence whereof after the usuall forme is this: let noe man aide them by any meanes whatsoever, neither acquaint him selfe with their case: they which shall doe otherwise, shall put themselves in perill of their goods and life. What is this else, then that noe man should dare to make the funerals of the w∣retched Church cruelly murdered? Maidenburg was left as a remnant of the poore miserable, where assemblies of the faithfull were kept. But might noe man helpe this firebrand reserved from the burning, without danger of his life? Doubtlesse it is apparant, seeing they suffered not the duties tou¦ching burials to be performed to their slaine carkeises. 10 And they that dwell upon the earth shall reioice over them: The citizens of the false Church, as before chap 7.1. &c. These should reioice over them and be glad, and should sende gifts one to an other, as in common ioy. And surely not without cause, being nowe freed from the great trouble, wherewith the Scriptures and the most pure Churches, as tormenters and execu∣tioners vexed them while they lived. Nothing is so grievous to the world, as that their uncleane lusts should be bridled, their filthines reprooved, & all their actions tryed by the rule of the same trueth. But the Churches be∣ing
now tyed to the interpretation of the Scriptures, that is, to the Pope of Rome: why should not the Papists hope, the Pope being of such gentle¦nesse to his servants, that they shall henceforth be no more made sicke by the scriptures? Without doubt the most holy Father would smite out their teeth, least perhaps they should restraine his little pretie darlings. A iust cause of exceeding ioy, and great triumphe. 11 But after three dayes and an halfe: In the yeere 1550, the first day of O∣ctobre, after three yeeres and an halfe from that destruction inferred upō the Churches of Germany. For at this time the Prophets revived, and the estimation of the Scriptures, & congregations of the faithfull increased, maugre Antichrist, head and all enemies. For the people of Maidenburge, who all this time were proscribed of the Emperour, and utterly destroyed in mēs iudgement, a fewe daies before by George Megelburge: at length raising up themselves, or rather stirred up of God, by a writing spread abroad, te∣stify openly to the world, their unquailed courage, and invincible constan¦cy. They detest the Councell of Trent, and noe lesse reiect the decree of Ba¦sil, made by the Princes, and the Emperour himselfe. They exhorte all to fortitude, and shewe themselves to be ready, if neede shalbe, for this cau∣se not to refuse death. This surely was the Spirit of life, who comming frō God restored againe heart to the Church, set up on their feete the slaine Prophets, and endued them with such courage, that they were straiteway a terrour to the enemies. For beside that bolde profession, the authour whereof was the heavenly Spirit given to them, they stood on their feete in resisting valiantly Mauritius, who being sent of the Emperour, and ordai∣ned Captaine in that warre by publique authority, first assaulted them ve∣ry fiercely. They tooke also that George Megelberge, & kept him in their power in the Citie, who had lately given them a great overthrowe. And at length when they could not vanquish them by any force, peace being ma∣de with Mauritius, they obtained a very famous name among forraine na∣tions, because almost they alone of all the Germanes had taught by their example what constancy can effect. So therefore the Church nowe againe stood up on her feete. Which thing doubtlesse put the enemies in very great feare. For as Sleidane writeth, That which was an ende of miseries to the people of Maidenburg, was an entrance and beginning of warre against those themsel¦ves, by whose aide and councell they had ben afflicted. For Mauritius, partly to deliver the Lantgrave his father in lawe, partly to defende the trueth, and to have free leave to walke in it, which he sawe to have ben holden under some space of time by the iniustice of the enemies: prepared warre against the Emperour him selfe.
But how great trembling arose from hence? First the Tridentine Fathers, whē even a false rumour was brought them that the citie Auspurge was taken, scarce taking their leave of the rest of their fellowes in office slipped out & ranne away. But when Mauritius proceeded, and approched Oenipous, where the Emperour himselfe abode, he strooke so great terrour into him, that he fled away suddenly with great speed togither with his brother Fer∣dinand. More over feare drove him against his will to give leave to depart to Iohn Friderike Duke of Saxonie, whom before wee said to have ben taken prisonner, least the enemie should referre it to his owne glory. Was this a small feare, which made the Emperour, and the King of the Romanes to flee, and dispersed the Tridentine assembly of Bishops? Nowe therefore feare came upon the enemies, that they should fly away as farre as they cā from her sight, whom of late they scoffed at without danger. 12 Afterward they heard a great voice from heaven; Aretas and Montanus read, and I heard a great voice from heaven saying to them, come up hither. To a∣scende into heaven, is after labours dispatched, to be adorned with excee¦ding honour and glory: after the example of Christ, who after death over∣come, was taken up into heaven. But whereas a voice was heard bidding them to come up, thereby is signifyed that the Prophets should not attaine to this honour by their owne power, but should be placed in that dignity, by the authority of other men, that is to say, by some decree of the Prin∣ces. As wee knowe it came to passe at Auspurge the seaventh of the Kalen∣des of October, in the yeere 1555: when by a publique decree the Empe∣rour Ferdinand, the King, and other Princes bounde themselves, that the religion comprehended in the Articles of the Augustane confession, should be per∣mitted free for all men: Sleid. booke 26. This decree was the voice saying to the Prophets, that they should goe up into heaven. And not in vaine, but they harkened to the same most willingly, chaunging with most desi∣rous mindes their former miseries for a newe granted dignitie, as is here said, and they went up into heaven in a cloude. The enemies sawe this, & were grieved: especially the Pope, as was meete, tooke it grievously, who was thought to solicite the Emperour, that he would make voide againe that Edict, Sleid. booke 26. 13 And the same houre there was a great earthquake: Aretas. the Complut. Edition, and other read, and there was in that day. It is a common thing for an earthquake to signify an alteration of things, as wee have observed at chap. 6.12. And doubtlesse a great change followed after this decree, all Europe through. The people of Austria require earnestly of Ferdinand their King, that the same should be graunted to them, which was to the
confederates of the confession: the same the people of Bavaria crave im∣portunately of their Prince Albertus. Which Princes when they sawe, that it was scarse safe to be utterly against so fervent desire of men, both of them yeeld some what to their people, though with an ill will. Like things come to passe in many other places: whence one might see daylie newe defecti∣ons from the Papisticall Kingdome, ¶ And the tenth part of the city fell: The City in this place is the whole po¦pish Kingdome, which was diminished in a great part of it, when the Ger¦manes forsooke the same. I doubt not but the Pope himselfe will confesse willingly, that by this fall he was deprived of a large part of his city: but togither with this ruine and earthquake were slaine seven thousand men. But that which is translated heads of men, is in the Greeke, names of men: for the men themselves, as in chap. 3 4. But the kinde of speaking is very signifi∣cant, teaching that God doth not strike men after the manner of Blinde Fighters, but to appointe certenly and by name, whom he will have to be slaine by his scourges. These seven thousande Papists are slaine, their bo∣dies being not killed, but they deprived of their great revenues, of Mona∣steries, Collegies, and such yeerly rents without any hope of recoverie. Was it not as death to those idle bellies to be bereaved of their delights, & that men who lately gave their mindes to feede themselves onely, should be constrained nowe to feede others by word, life, or some profitable la∣bour, or themselves to be an hungred? But by the Angustane decree, the right of such possessions was confirmed to the Princes of the Protestants: and that afterward without danger the same might be bestowed upon the Ministres of the word, Schooles, the poore, and other godly uses without any feare of extortion. This doubtlesse was the thing that slewe them, that nowe they should be brought to poverty in trueth, who before aboun∣ding in all riot, onely counterfaited the same. But to what ende is the num∣ber of the slaine lesse, then according to the certaine portion of the falling city? For seven thousande onely were killed, but the tenth parth of the ci∣ty falleth: surely because the calamity of the ruine should be greater, then that of the death. For that perteined to the whole multitude of the Popish name; the killing was peculiar to the Ecclesiasticall men, whom this altera¦tion vexed most of all, bringing with it the losse of their goods. The com∣mon people who suffered the losse onely of their former opinion, bare it more patiently. Therefore whose griefe was small, noe death of theirs is mentioned. Howe doeth the Spirit declare unto us these events one after an other, and conveniently? He doth all things alone, who before the things come to passe, doth tell the condition of them so distinctly and ex∣quisitely,
The rest of the Popish religion before, acknowledging the iust vengeance of God in the destruction and calamity of those Church men, gave glory to the God of Heaven, that is, were converted to the true crea∣tour: in whose stead they worshipped late Images made of some matter, and Idols. And who knoweth not that almost an infinite number of men stirred up by these scourges, & opening their eyes to the shining light did forsake their former superstitions? Wee see thē from the beginning to the ende howe this whole Prophecy agreeth exactly with the event. The seven last bookes of Sleidans Commentaries, doe afforde a more full declaration both of the battell and death and resurrection of the Prophets. The whole Prophecy is of about a thousand two hundred fifty Julian yeeres from Dio¦cletian unto the yeere 1555. how farre also Sleidane proceeded both in writing and living. Analysis. And thus farre is the sixt trumpet, & second Periode: the last followeth, decla¦red by the seventh trumpet, which is declared summarily in the rest of this chapter, afterward particularly through al the rest of the booke The sum¦marie exposition commendeth the Kingdome of Christ, partly by word, par¦tly by a signe: that is, both of the Rulers of the Christian assembly, ver. 15. and also of the foure and twenty Elders, whose gesture is mentioned in ver. 16. Secondly their speach, ver. 17. which setteth forth the glory of this Kingdome by the rage of the enemyes, the manifest wrath of God in sub∣duing them, and finally by the rewarding of the good and evill, ver. 18. Last of all the signe is the temple open, the Arke seene, lightnings sent forth, and voices, ver. 19. Scholions. The second woe is past: A transition from the second more grievous trum∣pet to the last. But whereas he saith that the second woe is past, it is not to be understood, as though nothing of it at all should nowe remayne, but onely that the strength of it was broken, and much weakened, which should decay more also every day, while at length it should be utterly de∣stroyed. For those foure Angels of the ninth Chapter, whom wee have shewed to be the Turkes, are not altogither destroyed at the sounde of the seventh Trumpet, but are onely hastening to destruction. So they came after the LOCVSTS, not expecting till not one Locust should remaine, but when they waxed olde, rushing in furiously: as wee have shewed in the ninth chapter at the 12. verse.
And beholde the third woe willcome anon: Why is the last Trumpet called a voice, which shall give a full and right forme to the Church? In regard of the wicked whose ende nowe appeareth, and the rewarding of all their sin∣nes, both by punishements begun on earth, and also eternall in hell. It is said to come anon, because of that small delay which should come betweene that resurrection of the Prophets which even nowe he spake of, and the last sound of the Trumpet: and also because shortly the last calamity of the wic∣ked is brought to passe, which shal not stay so long a time, as the former Trumpets, but shall come quicly with swift winges. 16 Therefore the seventh Angell blewe the Trumpet, and there were great voices in heaven; Blewe the Trumpet, to wit, in the yeere 1558. as the events doe make manifest, for then were there great voices in heaven, that is great ioy a∣rose in the reformed Church: for so the word heaven doth signify, as often before: neiter are these voices terrible, such as are ioyned with the thun∣der and lightnings after and else where: but of praise, and thankesgiving, as their argement is shewed in the next following wordes. Whose voices they are, is gathered from that which is said by and by, that when they were heard, the Elders fell downe upon their faces, in the next verse: which they are wont to doe at the voices of the foure beasts, chap. 4.19.20. Therefore they are the Rulers of the Churches, who for some notable benefit, which the sound of the seven Trumpet brought, doe provoke their flockes to the praysing of God. They shewe what manner of benefit this is, when they say, the King¦domes of the world are become our Lords, and his Christ &c. What meaneth this? Doth Christ nowe first reigne? Surely he shall reigne alwayes, even in the middes of his enemies. But nowe chiefly his Kingdome is to be prai∣sed, when he maketh his maiestie visible after a sorte in the very Kinges, in so fashioning and forming their harth, that they cast downe their crownes and scepters at his feete, and wholly doe give their minde to the promoo∣ting of his glory. But neither is this any newe thing. He raigned so in olde times by Con∣stantine, and other godly Emperours. Also in these last ages, those famous Princes of Germany, had restored this Kingdome long since. Tho whom may be ioyned Gustavus King of Suevia, and Christian King of Denne∣marke, who in the yeere a thousande five hundred thirty eight, changed away the Antichristian impiety, for the Ghospell. I answere that the Pro∣phecy meaneth not, that the Kingdomes nowe first became of the Christian name, but onely that they should be greatly encreased, at the sound of this Trumpet: for then especially wee doe say that one doth raigne, when wee see the boundes of his Empire enlarged:
albeit it is proper to this time, that the Kingdome of Christ begun from hence, shall never againe be darkened, as in the former raignes it came to passe, which in pro∣cesse of time fell into utter decay. For so it is said, that he shall raigne for ever more. Therefore the first entrance of this Trumpet should be famous for the ac∣cesse of newe Kingdomes: as it came to passe in our England, to which Christ at the sound of the seventh trumpet, in the yeere one thousand, five hun∣dreth fiftieth eight, gave the most gratious Queene Elizabeth, who againe gave her Kingdome to Christ, in rooting out through all her dominions, the most part of the Romish superstitions, and in restoring to her people the syncere and wholesome trueth, that wee might worship the Lord our God according to his ordinance. King Edward her brother, as an o∣ther Iosias, performed the same thing with an upright heart the whole ti∣me of his raigne, but that his raigne was shorte. For the Angell had not yet soundeth the trumpet, when Christ should raigne for ever. Therefore the stor∣me of persecution in Queene Maries time seemed to cast downe from the lowest foundations, that which began notably to be built. After this at length appeased, and a faire skie appearing againe, when the comfortable and most beautifull starre Elizabeth arose, then the Christian Empire was encreased, with England and Ireland: the next yeere was Scotland added, that all Britannie with the Ilands might be Christs. Howe famous an in∣crease was this to be augmented with so great nations? But this glory is greater, because it shalbe eternall. For so the voices speake, who shall raigne for ever. The former Kingdomes of Christ after a sorte perished, either a∣bolished by the trouble of warres, or chaunged into Antichristian bonda∣ge: but after this beginning, Christian Princes shall never be wanting who should maintaine the trueth whole & sound in their dominions. For now that time is begun, when Christ shall rule in all the earth, his enemies subdued on every side; of which Daniell speaketh in chap. 2.44. and the Prophets eve∣ry wherein so many places so honourably. Wee shall see from the things that follow, that this dominion over the Gentiles shalbe continued unto him, till it be infinitely encreased among the Iewes, and at length be tran∣slated from hence into heaven. And is it not a cleare proofe of the eternall Kingdome, that so great entreprises of so many and so mighty enemies a∣gainst one country England and our most gratious Queene doe vanish a∣way as the smoake? He whose scepter they fight against, lagheth at their foolish and vaine endevours. And I hope that he who hath begun his eter¦nall Kingdome, will make the Queene also a type of his eternall Kingdo∣me. Every good man doth earnestly desire it in all their prayers. Onely wee must beware, least whose singular power and trueth wee have had ex∣perience
of in defending us, his truth wee suffer to be corrupted, and his maiesty to be offended by Antichristian superstitions brought in againe a∣fresh. Wee have Christ angry with us, because wee are farre from a perfect reformation: but if wee returne to our vomite, how mightily shall he rage against us? Therefore they who favour the Papists secretely, and labour to get liberty for them to pollute the holy Kingdome, by bringing in againe their ceremonies hated of God, they endevour the overthrow of our King∣dome, and which my hart dreadeth to thinke the death of our most sa∣cred Queene, For howsoever Christ hath begun his eternall Kingdome, yet he hath not bound himselfe to certaine countries: he shall not want a Kingdō, though he shall remove his court to another place, which doubt∣lesse he may doe at his pleasure. But I hope that this Revelation shall decla¦re by such certen arguments, that the Bishop of Rome is that Antichrist, that if any yet be not persuaded thereof, when the thing at length shalbe more plainely perceived, he will runne away from him, as a most certen and in∣fernall pestilence. But that I may returne to my purpose, wee see now why those voices reioyced, to with, that the Kingdome of Christ was increased by the accesse of newe people. Surely it could not be, but the whole refor∣med Church should have reioyced soundly for our ioy. Neither can it be doubtfull, but that the first beginning of this Kingdome was farre most pleasant to our country men comming out of Queene Maries raging sour¦ges of persecution: let us gsse by our selves, who although wee have seene noe other Kingdome at any time, yet desire noe mortall thing more then a very long use of this. And therefore according to that regard of our du∣ty, which is meete, wee solemnize that yeerly day, which was unto us the beginning of this benefite, in which wee come togither publikely, & with ioint affections, doe give as great thankes as wee can to our God by Chr. After that manner which is foreshewed in this place, where the chiefe Ru∣lers of the wholy assembly praise God in conceived wordes, and the Elders give their consent, who are in the stead of the rest of the congregation. Al∣though, that I may not hide any thing, it came into my minde to merveil why contrary to the manner of other places, as chap. 4.9. and .5.8. and 7.11. and 14.3. and 19.4. in this one onely they are not called Beasts by their owne names. Whither is it because the Beasts are a type, as wee have shewed, of such Ministers as are approved of God: but our doe erre so gleatly from Gods ordinance, that the Spirit of purpose refused to give them the name of Beasts? Surely the things that wee have spoken of the La∣odicean Church confirme this doubte. I wish that this one thing were not wanting to the rest of our happinesse.
16 Then those foure and twenty Elders. The faithfull congregation by the conduct of their Ministers worshipped God, as in our wonted Ecclesiasti∣call assemblies, chiefly in that yeerly assembly where of I have spoken. 17 Because thou hast obtained thy great might: For all this time, in which Christ sufferred hitherto his Church to be afflicted, he seemed to the world to be weake, and of noe strength: nowe he would put on his might, and would manifest to all men his supreme maiesty over all things. 18 And the Gentiles were angry: This verse setteth before us a short a∣bridgement of the whole last period, which consisteth in three things; in the wrath of the Gentiles, in the beginning of Gods vengeance, & in the full reward at length of both good and evill. The wrath of the Gentiles is that rage and furie, wherby they grudge and grinde the teeth tegither, for seeing the King∣dome of Christ so marveilously to be increased contrary to their desire. In howe great a fume was the Pope, when liberty to enioy a purer religion was granted to the Germane Princes by a publike decree? But because at the sounde of the seventh trumpet, the dominion of Christ should especially shewe it selfe, the chiefe wounding of the whole Popish nation was reserved to this time. Which after they heard of our England and Queene, overthrowing the Romish impiety, burst out altogither, devising for us by what meanes soever they could, a finall destruction. And many wordes are not needfull in this matter. Known to the whole world are the Popes curses against us, our peo¦ple being stirred up often to rebellion, the bloody Iesuites sent privily daily, hired traitours, privie murtherers, sorcerers, the Popes armies set out in Ireland: the Spanish navie, then which there was never any stronger and better appointed: Neither yet with weapons and armour more for fight, then with scourges, and haltars, and things of that sort for torment, the desirous inquiry of Philip the Father (lately wakened almost from very death) concerning our England, as though he were to goe by & by into that place, where the teller of our evill should be noe lesse pleasant to o∣thers, then to himselfe. Rages certenly meete for wicked mindes. For these are onely the beginnings of furie although famous & notable: then chiefly the Papists shall storme, when Christ shall enter upon his full King∣dome, as after more at large. The Pope and Turke shall purpose the last de∣solation of the whole Church: for which cause they shall gather very great armies. But the rage of men shall turne the greater glory of God, as the Psalmist singeth. For by how much the danger shalbe greater, by so much his honour shall shine the more in delivering his. As touching the second, Gods punishement begun, which these wordes signify: and his wrath is come, that conteineth the summe of the Vials, which
therefore are called the last plagues, as shall be said in his place. The full re∣ward, and first of all goods, as great as can be on the earth, is found in these wordes, and the time of the dead, that they should be iudged. Which things per∣teine to the Iewes, yet strangers from Christ, and therefore without salvati∣on, and dead in deede: but at length they shall be iudged, and shall come to the trueth. Which Interpretation I have taken out of Daniell, Ezechiel, and some places of this Prophecy following: of which how great is the weight, it shall appeare after more clearly. The recompensing of the evill in the last wordes, and shouldest destroy them that destroy the earth. To wit, The Pope and Turke, and all their servants, yet mighty robbers of the whole earth. And so is the short summe of the things to be declared afterward more plenteously. 19 Then the Temple was opened. Therefore it was shut before, when it was measured in the beginning of this chapter, and because the elect were sealed. But now it should be opened, noe more to be used to the receaving of a fewe faithfull, but that is should extende to an huge multitude of Saincts. Nei∣ther onely should the Temple be opened, but also the most holy place, in which was set the Arke of the covenant. Into this once it was lawfull for the High Priest onely to enter, and that but once in a yeere. Now it should be gone into of all Saincts in likewise, all the mysteries of salvation being as plaine, cleere, and manifest to every one, as before time they were to the learned and skilfull men, all whose study was bestowed in them. And who but a very envious anthankefull man acknowledgeth not a most rich encrease of trueth, which is come to passe in these last times since the yeere 1558. in which the seventh Trumpet sounded? The doctrine was made lightsome in many points, more clearly known, delivered more distinctly, then hath happened in many ages past. Neither doe I speake this to boast, but to praise Gods bounteousnes, and to shewe forth the trueth of the Prophe∣cy. Surely God hath begun to consume in his mountaine the forme of that veile which covereth all people, and that covering which is spread upon all nations, Isay 25.7. He began, I say, because it shalbe taken away more fully, when it shalbe taken from the Iewes also. ¶ And there were lightnings: The third part of the signe, which declareth what should follow after the opening of the Temple, great evils should fall u∣pon the world from the Church increased and abounding with so great ri∣ches of divine knowledge. The world waxeth leane throug her prosperity, and by howe much the Sunne shineth more brightly upon it, so much the more are the sicke eyes of it grieved.
Therefore it desireth that this were abolished, and endevoureth as much as it can, but prevaileth nothing by endevouring, unlesse to call forth light∣nings upon it selfe, and those evils which are rehearsed. But this is onely a briefe foreshadowing of the things, the patterne shalbe mote lively set forth afterward. CHAP. 12. AND there appeared a great wonder in heaven: a woman clothed with the Sunne, under whose feete was the Moone, and upon her head a crowne of twelve starres. 2 And being great with childe shee cryed traveiling in birth, & was pained that shee might bring forth. 3 And there appeared an other wonder in heaven: for beholde there stood a great red Dragon, having seaven heads, and ten hornes, and upon his heads seaven crow∣nes. 4 Whose taile drewe the third part of the starres of heaven, which he cast to the earth. And that Dragon stood before the woman, being ready to bring forth, that when shee had brought foorth, he might devoure her childe. 5 And shee brought foorth a man childe, which should rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her childe was taken up unto God, and his throne. 6 But the woman fled into the wildernes, where shee should have a place prepared of God, that they should feede her a thousand two hundreth and three score dayes. 7 And there was a hattell in heaven, Michaell and his Angels fought with the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels. 8 But they prevailed not, neither was their place found any more in heaven. 9 And that great Dragon, that olde serpent, which is called the Devill and Satan, was cast out, which deceaveth all the world: he was cast, I say, into the earth & his Angels were cast out with him. 10 And I heard a loude voice saying in heaven, nowe is salvation and strength, and the kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ; because the accuser of our brethren is cast downe, which accused them before our God day and night. 11 But they overcame him by the blood of the lambe, and by the word of their te∣stimony: and they made no accounte of spending their life even unto death. 12 Therefore reioice ye heavens, and ye that dwell in them: woe to the inhabitans of the earth, and of the sea: for the Devill is come downe unto you, full of great wrath, as who knoweth that he hath but a little opportunity. 13 When therefore the Dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, he persecuted
the woman which had brought forth the man childe. 14 But to the woman were given two winges of a great Eagle, that shee might flie into the wildernes from the sight of the Serpent, into her place, where shee should be nourrished for a time, and times, and halfe a time. 15 And the Serpent cast out of his mouth after the woman, water like a flood, that he might cause her to be carried away with the flood 16 But the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, and swalow∣ed up the flood, which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth. 17 Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, & went and made warre with the remnant of her seed, which keepe the commandement of God, and have the testi∣mony of Iesus Christ. 18 And he stood upon the Sea sande. Analysis It hath ben spoken summarily concerning the seventh trumpet. The parts of it are a calling to rememberance of the time past, in three chapters, 12.13.14. and the Prophecy touching future thinges, from thence to the ende of the booke. The calling to mind of the time passed, relateth the thinges done, either by the enemies, the Dragon in this chapter, the Beast in the fol∣lowing: or by the Citizens chap. 14. The history of the Dragon is of things which were done partly in Heaven unto the 13. verse, partly in Earth in the rest of the chapter. Those are the persecution and warre. The persecutiō hath a description of the persons, both of the woman against whom it is under∣taken, ver. 1.2. and of the Dragon, who inferreth it, ver. 3.4. Afterward the Event. wherby the woman neverthelesse bringeth forth a Sonne, who without harme and being endued with excellent power, is taken up to God, ver. 5. then also she flyeth without hurt, ver. 6. The warre which is made in Heaven is described by the Captaines themselves and Armies, ver. 7. The overthrowe of the Dragon, ver. 8.9. and the Saincts song of triumphe, vers. 10.11.12. The things done on earth, first against the woman, is the perse∣cution renewed both against her being present, where the assault of the Dra∣gon is rehearsed, ver. 13. And the escaping of the woman, ver. 14. and al∣so against her being absent. Here the assault is made by a flood powred out, ver. 15. the helpe against it is givē by the Earth, which swallowed up the flood, ver. 16. Secondly against the seed of the woman there is a warre, ver. 17. All which thinges are concluded with a transitiō unto the battell of the Beast in the chapters following, ver. 18. Scholions.
1 And a great wonder appeared in heaven: As touching that wee told in a word in the Analysis, that the three next chapters togither perteine unto a continuall History of the time past: peradventure it may seeme strange to some body, why the Spirit should doe that which is already done, & re¦hearse againe the former History, set forth sufficiētly as it seemeth, in those thinges that have bin said before: especially in this place after the blowing of the seventh trumpet, when shortly there should be an ende of all thinges, as wee have learned from the tenth chapter. There are most iust causes of both: for no man beholding separated and dispersed partes here and there of a building, scarce comprehendeth in minde any fashion of the whole frame, much lesse perceiveth he the handsomnesse, which would be of them ioy∣ned togither, every one set in his owne place, and couched togither in fit order. The former handling was a certen preparation of devided partes: but this continuall narration doth properly ioyne all things togither in one, and setteth before our eyes the whole frame, that wee may see to what summe at length that singular building commeth. But it is reserved to this time, because before the last Trumpet, there could not be a full com∣prehending of these thinges. The events came forth by peecemeale & di∣stinctly: the knowledge whereof the world received a part and by little and little, after the manner of folded tapestry: but all things at length being ended, nowe there was time to behold the whole unfolded cloath, and of appropriating togither the universall building. But chiefly by this rehear∣sall wee are taught, that such an History of all those thinges under the last trumpet is to be made, as is instituted typically in these three chapters. Which thing came to passe about the yeere one thousand five hundreth & threescore, certaine learned and skilfull men framing that excellent worke of the Centuries at Maidenburge. In which thirteene Centuries, whatsoe∣ver from the birth of Christ unto the yeere one thousand three hundreth is founde here and there among the auncient Churches, or politique wri∣ters, is brought into one body, and as a built house all things fitly ioyned togither, is placed to be seene at once. From which our coūtrey man Iohn Foxe, and Iohn Sleidan receaved a great light, who continued the Histo∣ry unto the yeere 1555. that is to say, unto that time which by two or three yeeres went before the blowing of the seventh Trumpet. For this cause, to wit by the force of the restored Church, and of that commandement in chap. 10.10.11. the former times are repeated under the last trumpet, because nowe at length all thinges should be declared most copiously by the stu∣dies of the learned which had come to passe never before. The like indu∣strie of learned men about the ende of the sixt trumpet brought foorth that
continuall narration, whereof wee spake in the former chapter: but that was more generall, and obscure in consideration of that time: but this most full and aboundant, obtained by a greater knowledge of things, thē ever before this time. These thinges are to be observed touching the order of the Prophecy, to the ende that wee may see the more easily, not as some suppose, these things to be set in an other place, but most wisely and fitly to be reserved unto the last Trumpet, as to their naturall and most proper place. Yet neverthelesse there is noe cause why in this repetition wee should fea∣re a twice sodden Colewort. For wee shall nowe beholde that face of things ioyned togither by their ioints, of which before time there could be noe looking upon. Therefore, as touching this great wonder, it is seene in heaven, a type of the true and heavenly Church, whose condition he fet¦ched from the beginning, to wit, from the beginning of the seales, & the time of the Revelation given, containing in the sixe first verses, what was her state from thence to Constantine the Great, in whom the sixt Seale also ended, as wee shewed at the sixt chapter. And it is manifest that the same space of time is reckened up, by the description of the woman & the Dragon, with the event of the persecution, and of that open warre, which is made with Michaell, as shalbe shewed in their places. The woman which is seene doth rightly beare the image of the Church, which so often times in the Scrip∣tures is called the Spouse. The cloathing of the Sunne, is the excellent bright∣nes and purity of that time, as touching the doctrine of lustification, and the syncerity of the whole faith: for the garment, as wee have shewed in other place, is the imputed righteousnes of Christ. The Sunne noteth the light of the Scriptures. Therefore the cloathing of the Sunne, is such a confi∣dence in the righteousnes of Christ alone, as the scriptures teach. Which is a most comely ornament of the first Church, which the opinion of our strength had noe whit yet darkened. In other places of the Scriptures this cloathing is of white and pure linen. But the glory of any later time doe not attaine unto this most excellent glory of the Sunne. The MOONE under her feete: This is commonly and ordinarily re∣ferred unto the despised and troden under foote vanity of worldly things, which are as variable and changeable as the MOONE. In which respect the Woman hath noe greater regard of such earthly things, then of that which commonly men doe trample and treade upon with the soles of their feete.
But from the former things wee have learned, that the Moone doth signify the light of truth and doctrine borrowed from the Scriptures, which now being put under her feete, may shewe that all the steppes of this Church are directed and disposed according to the onely rule of the one of these. For it is not inough to shine rounde about with the Sunne, unlesse the step∣pes be set in the way of Godlines. As therefore the cloathing of the Sunne is the doctrine of faith, so the Moone under the feete is the doctrine of manners: which are either publike or private. They comprehende the whole manner of worshipping God, and revoking of those that erre, which is called Di∣scipline commonly. These private are seen in the common life of every one. Great was the glory then of the woman, before whom the heavenly light of trueth went in all thinges, whether publikely or privately. I take rather this latter applying, because it is more fit to abide in the signification once re∣ceived: albeit I would not have utterly reiected the former interpretation, as being godly and learned. The crowne of twelve starres on the head signify∣eth the shining administers of the doctrine, the twelve Apostles, by whose preaching the Church was founded, and also the Apostolicall men, who re∣ceiving the word from them that sawe the things don their selves, preser∣ved the Church chast and undefiled. But it is to be observed that the womā doth carry the starres in an other manner then Christ: hee being Lord of all carried them as it were servants in his hande, chap. 2.16. shee beareth them as her chiefe ornament on the crowne of her head. Such then is the par∣ticular explication. Which descriptiō, howe well it agreeth to that church, noe man can be ignorant of, who hath ben even but meanly acquainted with the History. She was most glorious by the cloathing of the righteous∣nes of faith, in retayning faithfully the doctrine which shee had received from Christ, the Apostles, Evangelists, and other Apostolike men. Nei∣ther was shee yet defyled with the uncleanesse of humane invention, but in the whole worship, discipline, life, manners, shee had the Moone under her feete, following the sacred trueth as her North-starre: in all thinges there was one forme of governing in all Churches, the very same which is taught in the Actes of the Apostles, and their other writings. Or if any mā will referre the Moone to the vanity of wordly things, how free was shee from ambition, and desire of honours? How greatly did shee abhorre the cove∣ting of riches, and contention for dignity? How syncere is the History of that time in Eusebius? The Bishops are reckened by name, excellent for their manners and doctrine: their conflicts, labours, and sufferings are declared; but as yet the proude names of honours and dignities were un∣knowne to the world: the burning mountaine was not yet cast into the Sea: nei∣ther
had Satan brought in arrogancie and pride: but the Pastors used sin¦gular modestie, being very carefull for the good estate of their flocke, not heaping riches and Lordly titles for pompe. One Paulus Samosaten{us} is called Magnifique Lord and , as a forerunner of Antichrist, garded with a great company of men servants, whereof some went before, some followed after: see the Synodicall Epistle in Eusebe, booke 7. chap. 30. But when this insolency was hated of all the rest, then the time nowe drewe neare, when this vaine glorious Bishop rose up, in which the womā hid her selfe. I am not ignorāt but that pride had sprung up in some other sorts; but the Spirit describeth the womaa by those markes, which were yet evident, not by those which grewe up about the ende of that florishing e∣state, and secretly. Such was this Church, & such ought every one to be, but of which sorte none hath ben since that time. For wee shall finde those that followed, not cloathed with the Sunne, but with the night: not trea∣ding under foote the Moone, but the earth: neither having the shining star∣res on her head, but golden ornaments. ¶ A Crowne of starres. This crowne of starres is wonderfull. Among mor¦tall men Gold is wont to be appointed for this thing. But to what ende should she have Gold on her head, under whose feete did lie whatsoever is pretious in this world? The glory therefore hereof is the integrity of the Ministers, noe mortall dignity. The faithfulnesse of these is the glory of the Church: which is in a mourning estate when these loose their light. 2 And being great with childe shee cried travailing in birth: The fourth pro∣perty: her traveiling with childe, having in the wombe, as Mat. 1.18. Aretas & the common translation have shee cryeth being in labour with childe, pained to bring foorth, that is in bringing foorth, or that shee might bring foorth, by a syntaxe not unlike to that wherby wee saz faire to see, valliant to fight. The Church had exceeding great paine for along time, as it were of a woman tra¦vailing with childe. And shee desired in all her prayers, to be freed at length from that most afflicted condition wherein she was under the Heathenish most cruell Emperours. Which thing she knew that she should obtaine, if sometime at length shee could bring forth one who should rule the com¦mon wealth, and have the chiefe menaging of things. For the woman was not barren before this time, but happie for issue in very great number: but one sonne was yet wanting, who might be able to defende her from the in∣iuries of the enemies: whom while shee is in labour with, and prepareth a defender, shee sufferred most sharpe paines, before she could obtaine that which she desired. 3 And another wonder appeareth. So is the description of the woman, the
rest of her condition is made apparant from the description of the enemy, to wit the Dragon: both from the things inherent, in this verse, and also frō the effects in the verse following. Those first are his red colour, hornes, heads, crownes: before all which is set the place in which the Dragon appeared, to wit, in heaven, not so called properly, (for what hath the Dragon, that is, the Devill, to doe in the heavenly pallace, from whēce he is banished for ever?) but in the heaven which is in earth. But this Dragon is not onely the De∣vill in his owne proper person, but also men being the Ministers of his fu∣rie, especially the Romane Emperours, whom from that time in which Iohn wrote, persecuted most grievously Christ in his members, as Traiane, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius, and Verus, Commodus, Severus, Decius, and at lēgth Diocletianus, open enemies, who make a professed warre, are called in this booke Dragons, of which sort is at this day the Turke. Others, who in name are Christians, but fight against the truth secretly, and by indirect subtili∣ties, are called Beasts, which doe prey upon men onely for to satisfy their hunger: whereas the Dragons forced by noe want of meat, are carried to our destruction because of that hatred which is betweene man kinde and them. This Dragon was once in heaven, as long as the open enemies held the Empire of the world, exercising dominion over men named Christiās, which wer dispersed through all places of their Empire. He is called Great, being the highest Prince on earth: and red being most furious against Chri¦stians, wholly red with their blood. The seaven heads are seaven hilles, and seaven Kinges, after chap. 17.9.10. unto which place wee deferre the more full handling of these thinges. In the meane time, for this matter which is in hand, it shalbe sufficient to understand, that by this circunstāce of wordes, the city is noted, where he should place the seate of the Empi∣re, to wit, Rome, famous for the seaven hilles and Kings. For the Beast recea¦ved the Throne from the Dragon, chap 13.2. Therefore if her seat shalbe at Rome, so shalbe his. The tenne hornes are so many Kinges, or Provinces go∣verned of Pretors like to Kings. So Strabo declareth it in the last wordes of his last booke of Geographic: That Augustus Cesar devided the whole Ro∣mane Empire into two partes: the troublous and warlike Provinces of which he tooke to himselfe, the other peaceable and quiet ones he gave to the people. Who devided theirs in ten Pretories, the exterior Spaine and her Ilands: The interiour containing Baetica, now called Granata, and the countrey of Narbon in France even unto Alen¦cem Sardinia, with Corsica: Sicilia: Illyricum, Epyrus being adioyned. Macedo∣nia. Achaia even unto Thessalia: Aetolia and Acarninia, and certaine nations of Epirus to the borders of Macedonia, Creta, with Cyrenaica: Cyprus: Bithynia with Propontide, and certaine parts of Pontus. Suetonius also maketh mention of
the like disposing of the Provinces, but telleth not the number; to Aug. in chap. 47. Moreover the same Strabo reporteth that Dicharchies doe and alwaies have belonged to the Emperours portion. For Cesar held the rest distingui∣shed also in tenne Prouinces: to wit, Afrike, France, Britannie; Germany: Dacie, Mysie, Thracie, Cappadocie, Armenie: Syrie, Palestine, Judea, and Aegypte. And this is the same thing which Cyprian writeth to Successus: that Valeri∣anus wrote an answer to the Senate, that all belonging to the Emperour, whoso ever had confessed before, or shall now confesse, should be seised upon, and bound, shoulb be sent enrolled into the Emperours possessions, that is, into those farre countries which wee spake of, belonging to the Romane Empire. Therefore whither wee respect the countryes which the Emperour held in his owne possession, or those which he yeelded to the people, they were the tenne hornes, the pow¦er and strength of the Dragon, in which all his might consisted. Yet the number remained alwaies the same, but was altered according to the pre∣sent occasion. But it was sufficient for the Spirit to describe the enemy by any certen marke, then which there is none more cleare, then the large∣nesse of this dominion, and this so notable a decree of the Provinces devi¦ded. But he beareth the crownes on his heads, not on his hornes, because the supreme maiesty did abide at Rome, to which all the rest of the Provinces submitted their dignities. 4 Whose taile drewe: Considering that the Dragon is of such a disposition, how doth he carry himselfe towards the Church? Two effects of him are re¦hearsed, one upon the Starres, the other against the woman. As touching them, he shall cast downe many from the heavenly profession by sharpe persecutions, who ought to have shewed light to others. For this is to cast the starres of heaven to the earth, see Euseb. booke 6. chap. 41. See also before in chap. 6.13. ¶ But the Dragon stood before the woman: He watched her diligently that noe maintainer of the Christian religion should be borne. He rolled every stone for to cut of this hope. Add certenly assoone as Maximinus the Dra∣gon sawe Alexander of Mammea to be somewhat favourable to Christiās, so as he was thought to have ben instructed in their ordinances, he forth∣with devoured him. Decius also the Dragon did swalowe downe the Philips, both the Father and the Sonne: he himselfe shortly after being swalowed up in a marsh. But the thing is made manifest most clearely in Cōstantine. at whome chiefly the Spirit pointed the finger. Diocletianus & Galerius with whom hee lived being a yong man in the East, perceaving his singular towardnes and vertue, left nothing untried, that they might kill him pri∣vily. So Eusebius writeth upon his life, in his first booke. Pomponius Lae∣tus
reporteth that he was sent with an army against the people of Sarma∣tia, most fierce nations, and accustomed to murders: from whom, when contrary to the opinion of Galerius, he brought backe not death but the victory, by the persuasion of the same man, under a colour of exercising his valour, he fought on the Theatre with a Lion. For Galerius sought, to destroy the unwarie yōg man, as of olde Euristheus did Hercules. Neither was ther here an ende of the treacheries. Maximian Herculius that red Dra¦gon, devoured him almost afterward by snares set to intrappe him. But he which laide a snare for an other, through the iust iudgement of God, pe∣rished himselfe in the snare. Constantine escaped many other privie as∣saults, not by humane wisdome, but by divine revelation from God, as Eu¦sebius writeth upon Constantines life, in his first booke. For the Dragon knewe that it concerned him much, that no such a one should arise: whēce it is no marveile if he did labour so greatly, to devoure this childe assonne as it should be borne. 5 And shee brought forth a male childe; The event of the persecution: at length the Church howsoever the Dragon strove against her with all his might, bringeth forth a male and strong defender, by instructing Constan¦tine the Great in the Christian faith. For he was that male childe, who first of all the Romane Emperours, tooke upon him the defence of the trueth. Wee have made mention of the Philippes both Father and Sonne, which were both Christians. Although if wee must beleeve Pomponius Laetus, fained∣ly and not truly, but onely that they might cover their wickednesses with a honest name. But is i like, that they were so hated of Decius, for a con∣terfaited name? But I dispute not of that. This is certaine that they little or nothing helped the state of Christians. The male childe was not borne before Constantine. He was the first of all that delivered the Church vali∣antly from the tyranny of the enemies, he maintained and defended the same strongly, increased and enlarged it wonderfully, he brought the pea∣ce so greatly longed for, established it for ever. How greatly shee labou∣red before that this Emperour her sonne was borne, all the History both holy and prophane doe tell it. ¶ That should rule all nations with a rod of yron: For Christ bestoweth on his people this his peculiar power according to that promise, If any shall over∣come, J will give him power over nations, and he shall rule them with a rod of yron, chap. 2.27. The trueth whereof shained forth in Constantine. For he over came the Sarates, the Gothes, & all the natiō of the Scytes in sūdry bat∣tels. Yea God rewarding his godlines, as Eusebius speaketh, he subdued all sortes of Barbarians under his feete: every where he did set up his enseignes of victory, caused
most famous victories among all men, and made him to be feared of all adversaries: In the first orat. upon the life of Constantine. Whereupon the Ambassa∣dours almost of all nations ranne togither to his Court continually, nei∣ther did the distance of place let either the Indians or Aethiopians, which two wayes are divided the fardest of all men: as the same Eusbius writeth out of Homer, that they should not bring their gifts to get his favour. For he ruled with a rod of yron, who so repressed all enemies with force and ar∣mes, that no man durst even to lift up his finger against the Church. ¶ And her sonne was taken up unto God: How taken up? whether by death wherby Constantine being taken from the earth, was received up into hea¦ven? Or rather by a great earthly dignity, which God bestowed on him, being delivered from the lying in waite of adversaries, and conspiracie of enemies. The thing it selfe seemeth rather to approve this latter: especial∣ly seeing the Magistrates are called Gods; by which proportion the Throne of supreme dignity, is called rightly the Throne of God himselfe. Also in the for∣mer chapter the two Prophets reviving, and recovering their former honour, are said to goe up into heaven, ver. 12. Neither is it like to be true, that he whose power should be so great over the nations, should have his birth & death ioyned togither, not any notable great acte being mentionned, that hee might give some shewe of his received power. Therefore to be taken up un¦to God in this place, is to be placed in the highest toppe of dignity amōg men, That is to say, be made an Emperour. But he is saide to be taken up, because the Empire was not so much sought of him, as given to him thin∣king no such thing. He had escaped the conspiracies by flying to his Fa∣ther, whom he found dying assoone as he came. Who at lēgth being dead, he tooke all that power by inheritance, under the shadow whereof he de∣sired to be covered whiles his father lived. Shortly after he is desired with earnest requests of the people of Rome, whom the great tyranny of Maxē∣tius oppressed, they exhorte and beseech him that he would not lurke in a certaine corner of the earth, but would take upon him the governement of the whole world being offered unto him. There was added a heavenly token, and a voice commanding him to doubt nothing of the victory. How great was this force from God, taking up a man to so great dignity? Vndoubtedly hee could gladly have ben at rest in his fathers bounds of Fraunce and Britanny, in which he kept himselfe quiet the five first yeeres, unlesse he had ben taken up perforce of God in heaven, to a greater Em∣pire then that which he had purposed in his minde. 6 But the woman fled: The other event is in respect of the woman, who by and by after the birth of her male childe fled away. Which flight is decla∣red
from the place whither shee went, from the condition wherein shee was in that place, & the space of time which shee remained there. All which things are declared somewhat more largely afterward, from vers 13. where a con¦tinuall Prophecy of her is made: here they are mentioned in fewe words, as in their proper place, to the ende that wee may the more easilie under∣stand to what time this flight properly pertaine. The place is the wilder∣nesse, that is, the Temple measured of God, chap. 11.1. where a fewe elect ly∣ing hid, was a mere wildernesse, in cōparison of that great assembly which possessed the holy city and the uttermost court. Yet this wildernesse is a place prepared for her of God, as wee have seen from so exact a measuring of the Temple. For God had a care of her and provided for her a cover to hide in, howsoever hee suffered her to want a publike assemblie. The condition of her lying hid is such, that shee should be nourished by the meanes of cer∣ten men:  so he sayeth, that they should nourish her there. But who are these? Two Pro whereof wee have heard in the former chapter, ver. 3. power given them to prophecy, was the ministery of nourrishing the woman. For as God raining Manna from heaven, fed the Israelites once in the wilder¦nesse, so he prepared meate in the wildernesse for the woman. Further∣more he would rather have committed the office of feedind to the ravens, as we see that he did to Elaja, then that he would have sufferred her to pe∣rish through famine. This is therefore that time, when they that overcame did eate of the hidden Manna, as we have said in the Church of Pergamus, chap. 2.17. The space wherin she should be darkely known in the publike is a thousand two hundreth and threescore dayes, the same that those two wit∣nesses prophecied clothed in sakecloth, chap. 11.23. The concurring of all which things teacheth, that this wildernesse is that temple, and that this se¦iourning in banishement in the wildernesse, is that dwelling in the sanctuary. Whence it is, that the same beginning is to be attributed to both, to wit, the sixt Seale, as we have shewed more at large in chap. 11.2. Vpon which time did fall that sealing in chap. 7. All which doe most strongly confirme, that our interpretation, which wee have hitherto given. But why fled the woman being increased with so mighty a sonne, who before being succour lesse, and labouring with great paine to bring forth, did withstande so mā∣fully the rage of the Dragon? Certainely the feare of the enemie did not put her to flight, but the lothing of some domesticall evill. And so indeede it came to passe, that the security that such a sonne was borne, tooke away all regard of true godlines. For now the tyrants being driven from their neckes, they were at good leisure to follow after contē∣tions and ambition. Now there was leisure to search diligētly the reliques
of the saincts, to consecrate Temples to Martyrs, and to pray in all Tem∣ples. No outward griefes did hinder, but that men might freely give them∣selves to the corrupting of all religion. Therefore that simple integritie, which Christ appointed, the Apostles practised, and which was also faith∣fully kept, by their next successours, whiles the crosse suffered not their mindes to be wanton; began wholly to be defiled and violated with idle & impure ceremonies mixed with it. The cloathing of the Sune, which was whol¦ly wovē, as in the warpe so also in the wourfe, of the threedes of the sacred verity, began to be altered by the holines of our workes. The Moone which governed their pathes, was driven out of her place by the invocation of Saincts in the publike worshipe, and by the violating of the whole sacred discipline. The shining starres in the crowne of her head, were changed in∣to honourable Lords. Which the woman seing, endured not the griefe, but by and by getting her selfe away, fled thither, where at least shee might be freed from the torment of seing, that is to say, no publike assemblies were found, wherein Gods ordinances did florish entire and whole. For the faithfull one by one are not the woman, but the whole congregations of the faithfull. So the Sonne brought more hurt then the enemie: not of a will to hurt, but by the wickednesse of men, which abused shamefully so hap∣py a peace to all impiety. 7 And there was a battell in heaven: Hitherto of the persequution, whiles no man through all this space of the Seales, did withstand the rage of the Dragon: now at length warre is made Michaell being risen, who should take up armes for the defense of the Church, and delivered her from the pow∣er of the enemies. But as touching Michaell, this name it may be belōgeth properly to Christ alone: which yet is communicated to the faithfull, in as much as they are able by the strength of his spirit to carie some image of this name, even as he giveth to them that overcome his power to rule the natiōs with a rod of yron. For the chiefe Captaines doe not make this battell with their armies on both sides, in heaven it selfe properly so called (for howe can the Devill appeare in heaven, which was throwen downe from thence at the beginning, never to returne thither afterward.) But this battell is made in the Church upon the earth, in which sense the Dragon was seen in heaven, above in ver. 3. In this wrasseling both the Princes doe exercise their strength by ministers, who are noted by their names. Therefore Mi∣chaell by communication of name is Constantine, the faithfull souldier of Christ, who even now was called the man childe. But the Dragon is Maxen∣tius, Maximinus, Licinius, by whose tyranny the Devill powred forth his hatred against the Church. The Angels are the armies warring under the
banners of both the Captaines. Wee have shewed before in the 6. chap. ver. 15. that Christ began the warre against the Dragon, when he did cast downe from the high Empire Diocletian and Maximin Hercule, by a shew of a voluntary giving over, and drove Galerius to a recantation by an hor∣rible torment of diseases. But then Christ fought by his owne strength a∣lone, bringing a wōderfull helpe from heaven: but in this warre wherein a lawfull victory was to be gotten, & the Dragon to be throwen altogither from heaven, it seemed good to him to use the labour of his Servant. This therefore is that warre, which first Constantine tooke upon him against Maxentius the Sonne of Maximinus Herculeus. Afterward which he made against Maximinus in the East by Licinius: & lastly which he made against Licinius himselfe, endevouring the same things, which the other tyrants did. For that wee may understand under whose conduct these warred, Con¦stantine miraculously is appointed the Emperour of the holy warre. For behold the heavenly signe of a most bright crosse, which he sawe in heaven about mid¦day: by this doe thou overcome; the meaning of which, a vision in the night when he was at rest, opened more fully. Wherby it was plainely testifyed that he was not made Governour over this expedition, so much by the e∣lection of the people, as by the voice of God himselfe. For I like not to take away the credit of the miracle: Constantine himselfe confirmed the thing by an oth to Eusebius. Although there is no matter of weight from hence to establish the Romish Idolatry: for the impiety of worshipping the Crosse was not yet knowne: neither was this signe given to that ende, that it should be worshipped religiously, or that it should be any religious thing: but onely as a token of the faith, and a certaine pledge of he victo∣ry, wherby Constantine yet a yong Christian, might goe forward more cheerefully, and fight with greater hope against the enemies of the death of Christ. But the craftines of the Devill, & the corruption of mans minde, turned this signe given, not long after, into destruction, as of olde also the Brasen Serpent commanded by God. Maxentius contrariwise made warre under the conduct and power of the Devill onely, he being a most wretched worshipper and consulter of Devils, ripping women great with childe, that he might looke into the bowels of the children not yet brought forth Maximinus & Licinius were Princes of the same impiety, so as there is no man, but beholding these Captaines set in the place of them that were dead, may easily see Mi∣chaell to stand on the one side, and the Devill on the other. 8 But they prevailed not: The event of the warre; the happines of the for∣mer time, did now forsake the enemies. Before they trode under foot the Church at their pleasure: now fighting with her man childe they are slaine
with a finall destruction. Maxenti{us} the Dragon was drowned in the river of Tiber. Maximinus prevented a banishement by Licinius through a suddē death: Licinius himselfe more then once or twise being put to flight in of∣ten battels, was at length beheaded. So the Dragon was now utterly over∣come and driven out of heaven, where lately he held a place by tyrannie. For their place was found no more in heaven, the open enemies being sub¦dued and destroyed, much more removed from the government of the common wealth, without any hope to recover it afterward. For from this time the Devill was bound for a thousand yeeres, as in chap. 20.2. Nei∣ther then being loosed shall he have rule over the Christians, but the hurts which he shall doe, shalbe onely the bitings of the heele: in the meane while that it should be manifest to all men, that now the Dragon was whol¦ly conquered and throwen downe from heaven, God governing every thing by his eternall providence, would that a token should be set up opē∣ly in the eyes of men of this most excellent victorie: from whence Constā∣tine before the gates of his Court, provided that a table should be set up on high, wher¦in a Dragon was painted, thrust thorough with a dart, and layd under his and his peoples feete: see Euseb. upon the life of Constantine, in the third oration, leafe 137. a. 9 And that Dragon was cast into the earth: That is beiond the boundes of the true and holy Church, not onely among the prophane nations, but al∣so all other people altogither without true godlines, howsoever peradvē∣ture they pretended a shewe of it, and are marked with the names of Chri∣stians. That which is here called the heaven and the earth, was in the former chapter called the Temple and the Court. In that, the Church lay hid, in this the Gentiles ruled, a people who because of their vicinitie, did take to themselves the name of the Church. Therefore the Devill being cast unto the earth, he is thrust out togither with his Angels into this court, having recea∣ved power to vexe the whore, who lately exercised all his strength against the true spouse. 10 And J heard a great voice: The Song of triumphe of the Saincts, celebra¦ting God for his great benefit: which first of all is declared by those things wherein the benefit it selfe consisted, in this verse: afterward it is set forth by his causes, ver. 11. & by his effects, ver. 12. The benefit it selfe in respect of men, is safety, the tyrants being destroied, who did labour to satisfy their hatred with the destruction of the Christians: in respect of God it is the glory of his might, of the Kingdome and power of Christ. For then his power doth appeare when he utterly destroyeth & abolisheth his enemies. Also his visible King∣dome is seen after a sort, when he placeth godly Princes in the governe∣ment
of the common wealth: from hence likewise the power of Christ was much declared, which before seemed weake, being so troden under soote by the enemyes, neither punishing them according to their deserts. But Christ now by taking unto him the Kingdome, declared sufficiently that the former want of punishement and sufferance came not from imbecilli∣ty, but onely from patience. In respect of the Devill, this benefit was a iust reward of his ungodlines, who cōtinually accuseth the godly before God. But we must observe that the servants are noted with the same names, wher with the Pc himselfe is named, because there is an equall good will to hurt in both, although hi power be greater. But this accusation, are those taunts, reproches, & railings, with which the spitefull enemies overwhel∣med the Saincts continually, obiecting unto them the suppers of Oedipus, in∣cests, adultery, mutuall lusts, murders, conspiracies against Princes, pestilences, fa∣mine, burnings, and whatsoever publike calamity there was: of which and the like things the auncient History is full. Surely the children learned of their fa∣ther the Devill, that auncient false accuser, so as it is not to be wondered at, if wicked men doe excell in the same arts. 11 But they overcame: Who? The Angels of Michaell: for now the strēgth of the souldiers is commended, the praise of the Emperour being celebrated in the former verse. But as touching the causes of the victory, the principall is the blood of the Lambe: the instrumentall is, the synceritie of the faith, and a very great constancy, even unto death. The blood of the Lambe is the fountaine of all the benefits, which the elect enioy, either in this life or in the life to come. For his sake alone God both delivereth his people from all the mi∣series of this life: and at length will make them ioyfull with eternall felici∣ty. The integrity of faith is shewed in the next wordes, by the word of his testi∣mony, that is, by the truth of the Ghospell, which they professed freely & boldly. Before it was alwaies called the testimony of God, or of Iesus, as in ch. 1.2.9. ver. &c. here it is called the testimony of themselves, which kinde of speaking neverthelesse commeth to the same ende. For it doth not respect the subiect of which, but in which. In the last place is their constancy, because they esteemed more of the truth and faith in Iesus, then of their owne life. It seemeth to be a comparative speach, as if he should say, they loved not their soules even unto death, more then God. But this last member of the comparison is wanting, ūlesse perhaps they loved not, be put for they despised. But even so the force of the comparison remaineth, to with, they despised, in comparison of the truth. This is a notable constācy of the Saincts, that by no tormēts they could be remooved frō faith in Christ. For which cause at lēgth God gave ūto them the reward of victory. But observe, how this sōg
of tiumphe addeth those things which were wanting to declare the cōditi¦on of the first Church: we have seen by the description of the woman, that shee was famous for soūdnes of faith, purity of actions, sincerity of the teachers: al∣so we have understood that she was destitute of a ptron, for because that in great sorow and griefe shee brought forth a sonne. Adde to al these from this triumphant song, that the enemies of the truth, heaped all repro¦ches upon the Saincts: they used a great violence to their power: yet the faithfull could not be remooved evē with the losse of their life, frō their ho¦ly profession; wherby it came to passe that those times were made famous by almost an infinite number of most couragious Martyrs. 12 Therefore reioice yee heaven &c. The fruict of this benefit is the ioy of the Saincts, & the sorrow of the wicked. For why should not they triūphe having attained safety, & seeing the glory of God so notably amplified? But many calamities doe remaine true, but these shall not touch the Saincts, whome God hiddeth in his tabernacle. And therefore he seemeth to say, yee which dwell in them, because, this, is heaven, that, the temple or tabernacle, wherein the Church lyeth hid, from whence at length it shall goe into the holy moun∣taine to an everlasting habitatiō, before in chap. 11.7. &c. 2 Cor. 5.1.2. &c ¶ Woe to the inhabitans &c. The effect in respect of the wicked is a very great sorrow, for these are the inhabitans of the earth and the sea. And from hēce may be confirmed this metaphoricall signification of these wordes. For if the earth be properly taken, the Devill should be in like sorte trobelsome to all the Saincts, who dwell togither with the wicked and unseparated. Moreo∣ver who are the inhabitans of the sea besides men? The Devill doth not spit out his poison upon the whales. Neither doe good and bad men dwell to∣gither lesse in Ilands, then in the continent land. Thus therefore we doe di¦stinguish, that the inhabitans of the earth are every wicked multitude, either of Heathen or Christians, who have onely a counterfait shew of religion: But the inhabitans of the sea are the Church men, as they call them who pro∣fer to their false Christians grosse, foule, saltish and bitter doctrine, which doeth rather bring to the hearers, sterility of godlines, and a gnawing of their bowels, then a quenching of their thirst, or yeelding of any other fruict. The Devill being berest of power to hurt the Saincts, did nowe vexe these with all manner of stormes, as we have read that it came to passe in the East under Constantine, Constantius, Valens, Iulianus and the rest. In part wee have already shewed before what sturres the Devill made a∣mong the BISHOPS. But it belongeth not to my purpose to prosecute the thing more at large. Let him which pleaseth looke into the History, and he shall behold wonderfull Tragedies.
Surely noe Godly man can without great griefe runne over those conten∣tions, discords, reproches, false accusations, wherewith they raged one a∣gainst another. Neither doe I doubt, but whosoever shall reade their acti∣ons, will freely confesse, these men to have ben moved by the furies of hell: they troubled and confounded all things with so mad affection. But these were but flea bitings in comparison of the calamities of the West. I let passe the civill warres of Constantine and Constans brethren, of the new risen tyrāts Magnetius, and Vetranior, and others such light evils; how great desola∣tion I pray you came from the Barbarians, Goths, Vandals, and the rest of the uncleane persons, and at length from the Lōgobards? All countries were spoiled in a miserable manner, and Italy once the Ladie of countries, above the rest. With how lamentable songs did Gregorie the great and o∣ther writers bewaile the calamities of those times? The plague of the Sara∣cens succeeded this, which troubled the world with most grievous afflicti∣ons for many ages. To which if any shall ioyne the monsters of superstitions and errours, which followed afterward, swarmes of religious men,, apparitions of Spirits, and familiar communing with Devils, lying signes, monstrous miracles, & many other things of that kinde, it shall not peradventure be hard to de∣fine who are those inhabitans of the earth and sea, against whom the Devill in this his banishement, raged so furiously. Especially if any shall cast his eyes upō Rome, and shall see that the most high Popes, who doe boast thē∣selves to be Christs Vicars, all from Sylvester the second to Gregory the seventh about sixteene in number, were most wicked Magitians. But we have spokē sufficiently of this perturbatiō of things, which the Devill brought in being expelled from heaven in chap. 8. and 9. This short denuntiation of calamities, is that Prophecy of the trumpets. Moreover also that is to be declared more at large in those things which follow in this chapter, which is here touched but in a word. ¶ As who knoweth that he hath but a little time: The Greeke worde signi∣fyeth often, fitnes of time, which peradventure may better serve to the purpose in this place: for there was yet much time, which at length after a thousand yeeres should be small, chap. 20.3. a short time. Where the Spirit see∣meth purposely to have used a word for difference sake, which noteth mo∣re properly a distance of time. But the Devill had now but a small oportuni∣ty, being thrust downe into that prison, which before time belonged to his dominion. Envy rather delighteth to poure out her poison upon the Saincts, then for noe necessity to tormēt men, who are already inough ad∣dicted and made subiect to him: he would spare this labour gladly, and would make triall of it rather in them, whō he is grieved to have bē pulled
out of his iawes. Furthermore the word knowing, may be an argument to prove this thing, the future moments of times, are without doubt hidden from the Devill. Especially the last day of all, which also the Sonne knewe not. But he could not but knowe his present oportunitie. This therefore see∣meth to be the cause of his fury, that being cast out of heaven, now he must needes bring forth his rage against his owne citizens: when he desired ra∣ther to hurt the elect: whom he could not touch, being driven out from their company: which large field of his furie being taken from him, he thought that which remained to be but small. 13 When therefore the Dragon saw that he was throwne: Hitherto the things done in heaven, where the sixt seale endeth. Nowe follow the subtill wor∣kings of the Dragon cast forth into the earth, belonging to the same time of the trumpet. And first he beginneth a persecution against the woman which brought forth the male childe. Which persecution taketh place, when the one part sufferreth violence and wrong, and is not able to defend it selfe against the iniustice of the enemy But what like thing was to be feared of the wo∣man, seing the Devill was now throwne from heaven? Can there come a∣ny evill from the earth belowe unto heaven? But this heaven is not separated from the earth by the distance of places, but by the holines of faith & mā∣ners. Yt neverthelesse from whence sufferreth she persecution, as it were destitute of a defender, who lately brought forth a man childe, and had Mi¦chaell for her most puissant maintainer? Surely from hence, because the Em¦perours chiefe care was to expell the open enemies, which thing at length having attained, they cared not much for other things: neither considered they, at least so diligently as was meete, that the Dragon had many other wayes to hurt; which they unawares made more easy by their meanes, so farre of was it that they set themselves valiantly against his enterprises. From hence therefore the Dragon first sowed privie bitternes of mindes a∣mong the Bishops, which having sprung up togither with Constantine, be∣fore the trumpets began to sounde, caused a sorowfull perceiving of the future trouble, as we have noted at the eight chapter, ver. 2. For this spar∣cle grewe in short time to a flame, but most of all after they began to con¦tende about the essence of the Sonne. In all which debates the trueth was al¦wayes in worse case. But the rage of persecution waxed most fierce, when Constance, Julian, & Valens exercised tyranny against the Orthodoxe in an hostile manner. Certes Constance & Valens differreth nothing from the most cruell tyrāts, except in name onely. They were counted Christian Princes, but under that name they carryed the cruelty af the Ethnicks. Therefore the Dragon graunted noe truce, but being expelled from heaven, vexed the
woman foorthwith by other meanes. This persecution is that which wee spake of in the exposition of the first, second, & third trumpet, in chap. 8. But see how profitable this repetition is, which giveth knowledge of an other cōioyned cause of those trūpets. There we learned that they in the iust iud¦gement of God, were inflicted upon the world, because it embraced not the truth with that faith, holines, and love that was meete: and therefore the coales of the altar thrown into the earth raised up that burning flame: from hence wee are taught what was the instrument, to wit, the Dragon him∣selfe, who did cast men headlong into that madnes, that by their meanes hee might scourge the woman. 14 But to the woman were given two wings: The avoiding of the assault which the Dragon made, besides which none other was left, namely, to provide for her safety by flight, as soone as possible can be, to withdrawe her selfe from these sturres. Whiles therefore the assemblyes of the faith∣full are filled with superstitions, the Bishops hate and contende one with another. Constantius & Valens shew rigour by fire and sword. The auncient verity flyeth wholly away (for lōg since she had prepared her flight in some part,) neither is the true face of a Church seen any where. For swiftnes of flight are given two wings, yea that more is, of that great Eagle God once de parting from the temple, went away leysurely & by little and little, Ezech. 9.3. But the woman a little before delaying, goeth not away slowly & at leisure at this time: but vanished away as it were at one moment. Yet shee fled not because shee feared the cruelty eyther of Constantius or Valens, or a∣ny other mans, (for shee had learned long since to contemne both sword, and fire, and also racke, or any other most exquisite torments): but when shee had seen Christ to be propugned under the pretēce of the name of Chri∣stian, and not onely the bodies to be killed, but soules also to be caryed in∣to destruction, shee thought that this was to be sufferred by noe meanes. Shee flyeth away therefore for hatred of this indignity, whom noe other dangers made afraid. For shee is wont to dread heresie more then tormēt: and to tremble more at wicked and obstinate errours, then at bloody dis∣membrings in peeces. Shee knoweth that the blood of the Martyrs is the seed of her fielde, and that every droppe of blood so shed, doth beget many other Christians: but that absurde opinions doe, as the sowing of salt, ma∣ke her land barren; partly by killing that which flourished, partly in letting that nothing may growe. Wherfore it is not inough for religious Princes to procure peace by the name of Christian: but chiefly they must regard, that the syncerity of doctrine, and purity of worship may be preserved: least as it be∣fell these Emperours, the Church flie away, which they desire to retaine, &
they become miserable through the absence of her, whom being present they neglected. But when fled the Church away? Were here no faith full now left in the whole East? Wee ought to remember that the woman doth both generally represnte the state of the whole Church, and also the particular assemblies, in which is found the same adorning, which made the woman her selfe to be esteemed in the beginning of this chapter. Her flight therefore is either the dissipation or depravatiō of particular assemblies: in such wise that God is worshipped purely in none of them after his own will: which when it hath come to passe, the Church fled, perceived now in no publike congregation: not but that there be many apart among the multitude, whom God doth acknowledge for his owne: see in the sixt ver. of this chapter. The place whither shee fld is the wildernes, and her owne place, that is, prepared for her of God, as before in ver. 6. and wee have shewed that this wildernes is the temple. But where this Desert or Temple was placed, should peradventure be unknowne to us, unlesse the Dragon, being a most skilfull searcher out, did bewraie it: for that way and thither dobtlesse shee fled, whither the Dragon converted his furie. But into what region he turned his rage, wee shall see from those thinges which follow in this next verse. ¶ For a time, and times, and halfe a time: These words set by themselves cannot be understood, seing it is a number of time: and there be infinite nūbers, which may be devided into three or more whole ones & an halfe. But they are cleere from the former things. For it is the same time, which before the thousand two hundred and threescore daies did make in the sixt verse. Or the two and fourty moneths of the eleventh chapter ver. 2. Frō which it is manifest what is the time, what the times, and what halfe a time. For the time of dayes, are three hundred and threescore dayes; times, are twice so many, to wit, seven hundred and twenty: halfe a time, an hundred and fourescore. So he time of moneths, is of twelve moneths: the times, foure and twenty: the halfe, sixe: he alludeth to that of Daniell in the seventh chapter ver. 25. But it is not the same space: for there it is spoken of the people of the Iewes: here of the Church of the Gentiles, as the whole intent of this Pro∣phecy declareth. But by the allusion peradventure Iohn sheweth that a li¦mitted number is set downe somewhere, frō whēce that of Dan. might be expoūded But now I may not digresse thither. Only let us remēber that this flight of the womā is the same thing, with the sealing of the 7. ch. & the privie places of the temple in the 11. chap. Furthermore let us obsrve, that the same time is noted diversly according to the divers persōs. In regard of the Gētils & Beast alwaies by moneths, in the 11. chap. and 5.13. & 15. ver.
In consideration of the Prophets, by daies, in chap. 11.3. In respect of the woman, both by daies, in chap. 12.6. & also by times, in this place, to wit, because in the woman all those daies should not passe away in one cōtinuall tenour, but a threefold mutation should come to passe: of a neerer depar¦ting a way under the time: farther of under the times: drawing neere againe, and returning under the halfe. The event maketh this manifest, as may be understood both from those things which have ben said before, & which shalbe said hereafter. 15 And the Serpent cast out; The second persecution is against the woman now put to flight: for the Dragon thought it not sufficient, to make her flee, but desired also to put out her name cleane. For which purpose he powred out the barbarous nations after the manner of a flood spreading over all, that in what corner soever shee should lye hidde, shee might be overwhel∣med by this deluge. For as Herod, to the ende that the childe Iesus might not escape, commaunded all the children of Bethleem from two yeere olde and un∣der to be killed; so the Dragon, that the woman alone might not remaine safe, caused every place to be covered with a most violent flood, where he could suspect that shee might be hid. These peoples most unknowne unto her, Francons, Alemans, Burgundes, Gothes, Vandals, Hunnes, Trebals, He∣ruls, Longobards and such like Northerne nations, about the yeere 400, the dammes, as it were, being taken away, did runne furiously over all Eu∣rope, and overflowed, as it were, with waves a great part of Afrike. And surely it is a thing to be wondred at, that the Church was not utterly de∣voured of those most deepe gulfes, unlesse this shippe had learned already long before in the universall flood, to swimme in the Sea, without being drowned. But seing it is nowe evident, that the Dragon cast out of his mouth after the woman, so great abondance of waters into Europe and A∣frike; it is also apparant enough that the woman fled from the East into these countries. And certenly during those troubles concerning Christ to be of the same substance with the Father, the state of the Church was here more quiet. But that wee may not thinke that it was any happy condition, the Spirit calleth our Europe expressely a desert place and wildernes. For the woman going into the west, fled into the wildernes. For superstitions did so growe in use in those times, that assemblies of the faithfull rightly established, were no more ordinary in this part of the world, then there are frequent habitations of men in a wildernes: here and there some more apparant marke was left, but very rare, as is the meeting of men in a desert. 16 But the earth holpe the woman: Not his earth which we treade on, but a counterfait and earthly religion and the lovers thereof, as alwayes be∣fore.
This, such as it was then every where in the world called the Church (while the true was not in the sight of men, but was hidden in privie pla∣ces) brought much helpe to the woman. For those Barbarous nations, the which at home practized the impietie of the Gentiles, bred and brought up in the same, after that they had come into these more learned coūtries, yeelded to that religion, which thy sawe to be there received of the greatest number. The Vandals & Gothes abiding first about Thracia, where the Arriā plague had disteined all things, were converted in name unto Christ, but in very truth to that fained and counterfait one whom Arius had fashio∣ned. The other route of Barbarians in Germany, Italy, Fraunce, & Spaine, followed the Romanes in all things. Which did much tame and softē their cruell mindes. For while they gave their names even to this religion, and suffer themselves to be enrolled citizens of the same, they were not so spite full against the Christian nation, that they would purpose to roote it out. Wherby it came to passe, that when they ceased their anger for a newe pro¦fessions sake, and were at quiet in those countries which they had posses∣sed, this flood at length was swalowed up; and the expectation of the Serpēt notably deluded. This good the earthly Church brought once to the hea∣venly, being afterward about to heape upon the same infinite evils. 17 Then the Dragon was wroth &c. Thus farre the persecution, which when the Dragon seeth to have ben in vaine, yet he will not desist, but at∣tempteth an other way to hurt. He purposeth to assaile the remnant of her seed with warre. But why moved he warre against them, and persecution against the woman? Because persecution is, as wee have said, when the one party sufferreth wrong, and repelleth it not, of which sorte was the womās condition, as from her first beginnings: so after Constantine for some spa∣ce: for whose safety no man did fight, nor maintaine her purity against su∣perstitions springing up. But warre is when violence is repelled by violen∣ce, which at length the seed of the woman should undertake, that it may de¦fende the selfe against manifest tyranny. But if the woman be the Church, what is this her seede? Even nowe wee said that the woman was the holie assemblies of the faithfull, which publikely doe worship God himselfe by his word, sacraments, prayer, discipline, as he alone hath appointed. Ther¦fore her seed are the faithfull being of a right iudgement, who by reason of the daungerousnesse of the times cānot meete togither openly to worship God: but apart doe bend themselves to those studies, by which every one privately may cherish godlinesse. Against them the Dragon prepareth war∣re: when as there should be congregations in open place, which did pro∣fesse pure and syncere godlines, as long as the woman was absent in the wilder¦nesse.
And so at length it came to passe. For after that overflowing of the Northerne barbarous people, & that the flood was swalowed up by the helpe of the earth: the Devill raised up about the yeere 630, the nation of the Sara∣cens, which should make a most grievous warre upon the remnāts of the Church lying hidde here and there in the confused multitude. Malice suf∣fered him not to graunt them any breathing time, but assoone as he had prceiued that this former entreprises were of noe effect, he turneth him∣slfe to an other purpose, coveting rather that he should be alwayes mise∣rable through continuall labours, then that the fewe elect that were re∣maining should be without miseries even for a small time. Therefore first, he mooved the Saracens to fall away from the Romaines; Secondly he or∣dained Mahumet their Captaine: then he sent him into the whole world to destroy all. Who can declare the Iliad of miseries, which flowed from thence? From that time there was continuall warre, for a whole seven hū∣dred yeeres, untill the Turkes a viperous breede, a generation worse then their parent, destroyed utterly the Saracens their mother. This warre was farre and large: such a there was never the like in any other time. It extē∣ded from Persia even to the furthermost Iles of Gades, and almost from Lybia into Fraunce. And how grievous was it, that in fewe yeeres was sub∣dued Arabia, Syria, Mesopotamia, Persia, Aegypt, the Iles of the Sea, A∣frike, and Spaine? Surely the Christian world was very greatly afflicted her by. For the Devill spared not his owne, so that he might destroy that lur∣king seed in the common calamity. This warre was shewed before, partly by the Locusts, as wee have expounded in ch. 9: partly by the Euphratean Angels, that is, the Turkes, who in these dayes accomplished that which the Saracens had begunne. Neither ought it to seeme a strange thing, that so cruell a name is now given to the thing which long agoe was an armie of small vermine: other is the outward face of a thing already accompli∣shed, such as is mentioned in this place: and other of a thing in hand yet to be finished, of which sorte it is there. Nowe therefore wee may see frō the persecution in the East, the overflowing of the barbarous people in the West, and the warre of the Saracens common to both, by which miseries the Dragon troubled the world, after that he had lost heaven, and howe iust cause there was to denounce a woe to the inhabitans of the earth, as wee have heard at the seventeenth verse. And this whole Chapter may be in stead of a Commentarie, shewing howe that the Prince that ruleth in the aire, is the Spirit that worketh in the chil∣dren of disobedience, as wee have it in the Epistle of Paul to the Ephesians, chapter second and second verse. Such then is the History of the Dragon,
so farre as he assaileth with open force; for this office he taketh to him∣selfe. The other of fraude and craftines hee giveth to his Vicar the Beast, of the which enemy wee shall speake in the Chapter nex following. The whole Prophecy is more or lesse, of a thousande two hundred yeeres from Iohn the Apostle, unto the yeere 1300. Where also the Centuries doe ende, being set forth under this last trumpet, of which wee said that this repetition is a type. ¶ And he stood on the Sea sande: A passing over to the Beast: Aretas, the Complutent edition, and all the Greeke copies doe so reade as our trans∣lation, and I stood: the common translation hath, and he stood, but falsly. For he attributeth it to the Devill, who even now went his way to make warre with the rest of the Saincts, and for madnes was not able to stand still in any place. Neither is there any other intent of standing on the sande, then that the rising up of the Beast might be seen, which concerneth nothing the Dragon. Therefore the wordes are to be referred unto Iohn, in which there is a transition unto the enemy, set in the place of him that is dead: to the contemplating of whose originall Iohn saith that he was set in a most convenient place. In which he declareth that it doth appertaine to them onely to beholde the Beast rising up, who after they have escaped the Sea of false doctrine, are set at least on the shore or banke of the truth, howsoever it may be, that the mooving of the waves, and the ebbing of the Sea casteth upon them also many brinish errours because of nigh∣nesse: as after they that doe get victory of the BEAST, are said to stand at the GLASSIE SEA as wee may see in the fifteenth Chapter and second verse. For that these things doe pertaine and are to be refferred to the event, may be gathered from the like place in the seventeenth Chapter and at the third verse: where IOHN is carried into the Wildernesse for to beholde the damnation of the WHORE. For what need were there to change the place, unlesse the remooving had a Mystery? Here therefore some god∣ly men are to be viewed, to whom, being set as it were on the shore of the Trueth, the originall of the SEA BEAST should be certenly knowne: and that also at that time, in which the Devill went for to make warre against the seed of the woman. For neither is this place attributed rashly to this transition.
Which wee see to have ben performed in them of Maidenburg, who ha∣ving attained at length to settle the soles of their feete on the dry groūd, after they had swomme out of the Papisticall Sea, manifested to the whole world in their Centuries such a beginning, growing, and ripenes of this Beast, as is here described of Iohn. Which doubtlesse many learned men also before painted out in lively colours, but all their labour was bestow∣ed about one or two parts, none made a perfit image before the seventh trumpet, which procured us these Centuries. To this ende tendeth the transition: how correspondent the event is, the application of every seve∣rall thing will make plaine. CHAPTER 13. THEN I saw a Beast rising out of the Sea, which had seven heads and tenne hornes, and upon his hornes ten crownes set, and upon his heads was set a name of blasphemy. 2 And the Beast which I saw, was like a Leopard, and his feete as the feete of a Beare, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lion: and the Dragon gave him his power, and his throne, and great authority. 3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wonded to death, but his deadly wound was healed: and all the earth wondred and followed the Beast. 4 And they worshipped the Dragon, which gave power to the Beast, and they worshipped the Beast sying, Who is like unto the Beast? who shall be able to warre with him? 5 And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great thinges, and blasphe∣mies: and power was given unto him to doe two and fourtie moneths. 6 Therefore he opened his mouth unto blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his name, and his Tabernacle, and them that dewell in heaven. 7 And it was given to him to make warre with the Saincts, & to overcome them, and power was given unto him over everie kinred, and tongue and nation. 8 Therefore all that dwell upon the earth, shall worship him, whose names are not written in the booke of life of that Lambe, which wa slaine from the beginning of the world. 9 If any man have an eare, let him heare. 10 If any leade into captivity, he shall goe into captivity: if any kill with a sword, he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience and faith of the Saincts. 11 Afterward I beheld an other Beast comming up out of the earth, having two hornes like the Lambe, but he spake like the Dragon.
12 And he exerciseth all the power of the former Beast before him, and he cau∣seth the earth and them that dwell therein to worship the Beast, whose deadly wounde was healed. 13 And he doeth great wonders, so that he maketh fire to come downe from hea¦ven on the earth, in the sight of men. 14 And he deceaveth them that dwell on the earth, for the signes which were permitted to him to doe in the sight of the Beast, saying to them that dwell on the Earth, that they should make the image of the Beast, which was wonded by the worde, but did live againe. 15 And it was permitted to him to give a Spirit to the Image of the Beast, so that the image of the Beast should speake, and should cause that as many as would not worship the image of the Beast should be killed. 16 And he maketh all both small and great, rich and poore, free and bound, to re∣ceive a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads. 17 And that no man might buy or sell, save he that had the marke, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name. 18 Here is wisdome: Let him that hath understanding, count the number of the Beast. For it is the number of a man, and his number is sixe hundreth threescore and sixe. Analysis. THVS farre hath ben the battell with the Dragon; the combate with the Beast followeth; which is double: the first, and the second. The de∣scription of the first is from the beginning of the chapter to the 11. verse. And first from the causes, that he arose out of the Sea: then also from his in∣tegrall parts, his hornes, heads, and their decking, ver. 1. his whole forme, feet and mouth, ver. 2. Furthermore from his authority, wherby he doth excell, which is threefolde, at the first received from the Dragon; a while after dimi∣nished; afterward recovered againe his wonde being healed: which is more amplifyed then that first, as declare, both the honour which the worshippers give to him, ver. 4. & the power both to blaspheme and also to make warre, ver. 5.6.7. Last of all, the largenesse of his Empire, ver. 7.8. All which things ar concluded with a pleasant shutting up of the matter, for a greater heede taking and consolation, ver. 9.10. Such is the first Beast: The second decla∣reth his stocke by his rising out of the earth, and also by his likenes to the Lambe, and Dragon, ver. 11. The power also of this is great, as appeareth in subduing men to worship the first Beast, ver 12. and that partly in deceaving by great wonders, ver. 13. and lying ver. 14. partly in compelling both by punishment of death to worship the living Image, ver. 15. and also
by the losse of their goods, to receive the marke that should be printed u∣pon them; which is declared, both to whom it belongeth, either men, or members, ver. 16. & how manifold, to wit, the marke, the name of the Beast, the number of his name, ver. 17. Which number is set foorth, both by an ex∣hortation to count it; and by a noting partly to whom it is proper, to wit of a man; partly how many it is, to wit, sixe hundreth three score and sixe. Scholions. ¶ Then I saw a Beast: That the whole next treatise may be more cleare, two thinges briefly are to be considered, before wee come to the unfol∣ding of every severall thing. The first is the kinde of this Beast, the other of the time wherein he ariseth. As touching that first, this Beast is not the civile Ro∣mane Empire: either Heathenish, or Christian, corrupt with heresy. For if wee regard the Heathen Emperours, they reigned when Iohn wrote: but this Beast was not yet come, whose first beginning he sawe in a type. For no∣thing whose originall he had represented unto him, was past but to come, according to that saying, J will shewe thee the things which must be done hereaf∣ter, chap. 4.1. But the Angel afterward affirmeth playnely, that he was not yet come, saying five are fallen, one is, and an other is not yet come, chap. 17.10. It is manifest that he that was not yet come, is this Beast, ver. 12. Are ten Kings who have not yet received the Kingdome: but shall receive power as Kings at one houre with the Beast. Furthermore this Beast received his thro∣ne and power from the Dragon, ver. 2. who nowe before time had perse∣cuted the woman, that is, the Christian Church. But the Heathen Empe∣rours received their throne and power from none, especially which was be¦fore this time a chiefe enemy to the Christian name, seeing the Emperours themselves are more auncient then the birth of Christ himselfe. Finally the Beast is of the same time that the flight is, and solitarines of the woman. But the Heathen Emperours under the name of the Dragon were togi∣ther with him in heaven, as wee have shewed in chap 12.3. But there is nothing in the worke of nature, which hath his being before & after him∣selfe, and is both the originall to it selfe, and the image thereof, (which must needs be) if wee referre this & the seconde Beast to Antichrist alone. It is true indeede that nothing is before and after himselfe, and both the originall to himselfe and image thereof, in the same, in respect of the same thing, and at the same time; yet in one & the same man infancy goeth be∣fore olde age, and the latter age may be compared to the likenes of the former. Therefore wee conclude that by no meanes this Beast is the Ro∣mane
Heathenish Empire, much lesse the Christian. Which in the Throne did not succeed the Dragon, but alwayes had his palace either in Constā∣tinople, or in France, or in Germanie. Neither did the whole earth follow with admiration the Empire restored, as in ver. 3. nor received his mark, as in ver. 16. but after the renewing, it was limited with small boundes, first of France, Jtaly, and some part of Germany: secondly, in short time af∣ter of Germany alone, having no jurisdiction over Spaine, Britannie, Hū∣garie, Sclavonie, and the other countries, which yet belonged to the Ro∣mane Empire under another name. Neither to acknowledge the Christi∣an Emperour to be such, as he chalengeth to himselfe, that is to say, the highest Magistrate in the countries subiect unto him, is an argument of one ap∣pointed to destruction, as in the 8. verse. For Paul professed himselfe to be a Romane, and appealed to Cesar, Act. 25.10. Yea Christ acknowledged the Heathen Emperour, and commaunded that he should be obeyed by giving to Cesar the things which are Cesars, Mat. 22.21. Seeing therefore it agreeth not at all to the Emperour, it must needs be that Antichrist is signifyed: whose one and the same person is described under a double figure of two Beasts, as may be manifest from the 17. chap. where there is taught a declaration of this Chapter, and no mention made of the second, but of the first onely. But why so I pray? VVas it not needfull that wee should be instructed tou¦ching the second, whom all men thinke to be either the very Antichrist, or at least his Minister no better then himselfe? Not at all: but because he that knoweth one, knoweth both: neither doth the second make an other person, but doth pour ray the same image: somewhat more playnely set∣ting the colours upon the lineaments. And why should not the Beast be double, when one Antichrist is a double head, the seventh and eight? of which that answereth to this first Beast, this to the second. The reason why a dou¦ble type is used, is the notable variety, which could not be represented fit∣ly inough by one. This Beast hath a double rising: from the Sea and from the Earth. He hath also a double power: Civill and Spirituall. In respect of the Civill, he is the first, in regard of the spirituall, the second. VVhich dou∣ble tyranny is most plaine in the one Pope of Rome, so as wee can not doubt but that he is both the Beasts. It is knowne how Boniface the eight in his first Iubile, vanted himselfe openly in the Temple of Peter and Paul, one day coming forth girded with a sword, and cloathed with an Emperours corselet: in the second day with a Prelats apparell,, and with a key crying with a loude voice, Behold here are two swordes, that is, Behold here is a double Beast. VVhich double power Mantuan doth expresse by an elegant car∣me in these wordes:
He is mighty and very strong, with the two swordes girded, Magnificent Keisers and Kings, have his feete worshipped Let then this be the first thing, that the Pope of Rome is this double Beast, be cause of a double beginning and power: neither is the same so much celebrated by the wordes and meanes of those of our side, as by the Popes themselves, as it doth more clearly appeare from the exposition following. A second thing is deman∣ded touching the time of his beginning: which I thinke is to be set in the very giving over of Diocletian and Maximin Hercule, when these two seemed of their owne accord to give over the Empire about the yeere three hundreth and sixt, as be∣fore hath ben declared. But because none peradventure fetcheth Antichrist from that head spring: and because Bellarmine affirmeth that all our men doe place the comming of Antichrist after the sixe hundreth yeere: and after the death of Gregory the first (although this is to be understood of his birth: for our men doe make his conception to be more auncient) that I may not seeme alone to have enterprised to doe a thing unheard of, I will yeeld rea¦sons of this my judgement, which seeme to me to be most strong. First this Beast ruleth all that time, wherein the woman lyeth hid in the wildernes, and the two witnesses prophecy cloathed in sackecloth, as is manifest after, from the fift verse, where power is givē to him to doe two and fourtie moneths, which is the same space of the woman and Prophets. Now wee evince by necessary arguments, that the woman went into the wildernes, and the witnesses tooke mourning apparell at that time which wee have said, when Constantine began his raigne: & ther¦fore also the Beast began in the same time to arise out of the Sea. Further∣more what other thing meaneth that of Socrates, who lived when Theo∣dosius Iunior ruled, in the times of Celestine Bishop of Rome, about the yeere 424. foure score yeeres after Cōstantine; The Romane Bishopricke, like∣wise that of Alexandria, being advanced long since beyond the Priesthood, unto a Princedome: booke 7. chap. 11. Had he promoted himselfe beiond the boundes of the Priesthood? Whither else I pray, then unto an Antichristian ty¦ranny? Had it done this long since and of a certen long time? Certenly So crates commeth to my accounte, or rather I to his, or, as it is more agrea∣ble to the trueth, both of us to the reckening of the Holy Ghost himselfe. But he speketh no more of the Romane, either here, or before, in book 7. 7. then of the Alexandrine. That is true indeede; he in common toucheth sharply the ambition of both; but the Romane Bishop had many more pe¦culiar properties of the true Antichrist, which in no sort did belong to the Alexandrine: and therefore although at the first they ranne togither it may be with equall steppes, yet in short time the Romane got afore, and left the Alexandrine many miles behind him. Hereunto more over is ad∣ded
the third Carthaginean Councill, about the times of Syricius, to wit in the yeere three hundreth ninetie, which decreed, that the Bishop of the first seate, should not be called the Prince of Priests, or Chiefe Priest: or any such thing: but o∣nely the Bishop of the first Seate: but universall, let neither the Bishop of Rome be cal∣led, Can. 26. as it is cited in the ninetieth distinction. Wee learne frō this Decree, what those times had brought forth; otherwise it had ben foolish and superfluous to make an ordinance touching this matter. Neither is the confession of the Papists in this thing to be passed over. Dost thou thē aske the cause why the Romane Bishops were never present at the generall Coun∣cills in the East part? Bellarmine declareth that it came not to passe by chāce in his first booke of the Councill, and of the Church chap. 19. but for a certen consideration. Which howsoever it was not knowne peradventure to many others, yet it ought to be throughly understood of him, a man that is a secretarie of the Popes Kingdome. He rendreth two reasons of this absence: the first, It seemed not to be convenient that the head should follow the members &c. The second, because the Emperour was alwaies present at the Councils in the East part, or some Ambassadour of his: who challengeth to himselfe the first at least materiall place, otherwise then was meete. That either this therefore might not be tolerated, or a tumult mooved, he went not to those Councils, but sent on∣ly his letters. Such are his wordes: he hath hit the nayle on the head. For the Pope disdaineth to be present at those Coūcils, in which the Emp. should sit before him. How fayre were words givē both to the Emp. Constantine and also all the Nicene Fathers? The good men thought, as Eusebius spea∣keth, that olde age was a let, that the President of the Lady City of Rome could not be present: and therefore were content with the Elders, which supplyed his place. But the true cause was, that he could not abide, to give place to the Emperour. For I beleeve Bellarmine rather then Eusebius, tou∣ching the minde of the Bishop of Rome. VVherefore in the times of the first Nicene Councill there was a man at Rome , that lifted up one; who albeit not yet openly, neverthelesse within and secretly with him∣selfe was exalted, above all that is called God, 2 Thes. 2.4. Not that he vaun∣ted himselfe to be superiour to God in Heaven (for that is not the mea∣ning of the Apostle) but to all the Gods in earth, to wit the highest Magi∣strate, who is called , Imperiall, from whence , that is worshipped, seemeth to be added in stead of an exposition. But why doe I be stowe much time in these things? The matter is out of controversie from chap. 17. afterward. The seventh head of the Beast succeedeth next after the Heathen Emperours; for these make the sixt, as shalbe said in his pla∣ce. But Antichrist is that seventh head, and therefore hath his beginning by
and by after the Heathen Emperours. Shall I then thinke that all from Miltiades are utterly cast away, as who doe make this Beast, that is, the ve¦ry Antichrist? Farte be from mee so great rashnes of judging. This Beast is the state of a Kingdome, as I hope shalbe most cleare after. And therefore God could deliver from the common destructiō some peculiar men, whō he thought good though furtherers and ministers of this Kingdome. The impiety was not so wicked at the first: and the yong Antichrists did not knowe for what mischiefe they prepared a way. Therefore wee leave these to the infinite and unsearcheable mercy of God, yet wee doubt not, but wee have found out the originall of the rising Beast, which nowe wee see to have fallen on that time, in which the Dragon was cast unto the earth, ch. 12.9. For being about to leave heaven, he provided himselfe of a Vicar, who in his absence should governe his affaires: whose busines he looked unto, nor carelesly, as wee shall finde afterward. These things being thus set in order, wee see how from this fountaine, every each thing will flowe most easily; every part of this Prophecy agreeing most fitly one with ano∣ther. The true original doubtlesse not being perceived of the Interpreters, disordered all consideration of the times, made a harsh, constrained, and absurd exposition, and tooke wholly away the right searching out of the event. Now as touching the words, the cruelty of Antichrist is signifyed most fitly by a Beast, as often in the Scriptures Tyrants are compared unto Wolves and Lions, equall to them in fiercenes, but for hurt worser, by how much iniquity in men is more armed, because of the force of reason. He did rise out of the Sea: because he hath his originall from corrupt doctri∣ne, to wit the authority of Peters Chaire, falsly bragged of, wherein the Bishop of Rome glorieth almost in every word, and which the auncient ho¦ly men Tertullian, Cyprian, and the rest, knowing not for what impiety they prepared a way, extolled with excessive praises. But then chiefly the Sea was visible, and the rising out of water might appeare to mens eyes, whē the Nicene Fathers cast the burning mountaine into the Sea; as hath ben said, in the 8. chap. ver. 8. that is when they confirmed by their Decree, that whatsoever preeminence there was, should be given to Rome, over the neighbour Bishops. For the Sea noteth togither with the Doctrine, the Clergie, whose office is to take paine in ministring the Doctrine. Those holy men were farre from bringing in the Tyranny, which was after stabli∣shed: yet they unwares gave a notable increase to it, by this their consti∣tution. Before the Nicene Councill every one lived to himselfe, and little regard was had to the Church of Rome: as Aeneas Silvius confesseth. This then especial∣ly was the rising of the Beast: not that he began not to rise up before, but
because now first he could be seen and marked of men. ¶ Which had seven heads: Such was his rising. His integrall partes are, first his Heads, which are as many, and the same which the Dragon had in ch. 12.3. For there is the same seate & dignitie of them both. For these heads are Hilles and Kings, as in chap. 17.9. 17 He hath also ten hornes, as the Dragon, and ten crownes set on his hornes. Which ten crownes, are ten Kings, chap. 17.11. Yet neverthelesse differing in two sorts from the hornes of the Dragon. First, in the crownes with which these are adorned, as which doe note out Kings, not to be subject to the Empire of an other man, but who should have a free and supreme mena∣ging of things. The Hornes of the Dragon had no such adorning, but this ho¦nour did belong onely to the heads, as in chap. 12.3. Whence commeth the difference? Because the Heathen Emperours placed the seat of the Em¦pyre at Rome, whereof they are the seaven heads: establishing her the Empresse and Queene of all. And therefore the crownes being taken away from all other Kings and Provinces, they have imposed them upon the seven heads or hills of this. But nowe there should be an other face of things, Antichrist at length shewing himselfe. For the maiesty of the Empire should not remai¦ne at Rome, but should have her seate in some other country: for which cause the crownes, which before did belong to the heads, now for a newe res∣pect are tranferred to the hornes. Secondly, they differ in time. For the hor∣nes of the Beast were not yet bred, when John wrote, chap. 17.12. The hornes of the Dragon, even before Iohn was borne, were lifted up on high, spread with many branches, as wee have seen in chap. 12.3. Therefore although they agree in nūber, yet they are not the same in all things, neither should one doe well, if he should apply to the head of that, things that belong to this. But finally, what are these hornes? All things being diligently cō∣sidered, I thinke that they were the ten first Christian Emperours. Of counting whom there may be a double way: one, of every severall by himselfe, and of them onely in whose power was either the universall Empire, or that of the West. Into which Catalogue doe come Constantine the Great, Constan∣tine, Costans, Constantine his sonnes, IVLIANVS, Iovianus, Valentinianus, Gratianus, Valentinianus the second, Theodosius. And so there is a great consēt of the things done and of the Prophecy. For while these ten did raigne, the Beast was defended excellently, & his dignity much increased. Which at length being taken away, the hornes being as it were broken for a time, the succeeding Emperours were not able to maintaine the same authority of the Romish Beast, which those predecessours had gottē. Honorius the sōne of that Theodosius sufferred Rome to be taken and spoiled of the Gothes.
And although for the space of two yeeres it was beseeged by Alaricus, he abiding at Ravēna, either was not able, or durst not succour it, the strēgth of the Hornes was so much abated. VVhere was his Fathers valiantnesse, which killed and put to flight enemies in so great numbers, even in the furthest boundes of Rome? But neither from the East was there now any aide, but the hornes being as it were broken, wherby the former Empe∣rours removed so farre of the Barbarous people: the Beast with his Rome was a pray to the most contemptible nations. But there seemeth to be a more full accord, and in every part more agreable from a conjoyned rec∣kening of the Emperours, both of the west, and of the East, after the usu∣all manner of all the Chronicle writers. Thus they are numbred: 1, Con∣stantine the Great: 2, Constantine, Constans, Constantius his sonnes: 3, Iulianus: 4, Iovinianus: 5, Valentianus and Valens: 6, Gratianus, Valen∣tinianus the second, and Theodosius the first: 7, Theodosius the first with Arcadius and Honorius his sonnes: 8, Archadius and Honorius alone: 9, Honorius and Theodosius the second: 10, Theodosius the second and Va¦lentinian the third. Concerning whom there shalbe a more large declara¦tion in the 17. chap. 12. ver. In the meane time let no man trouble us with words out of season, and cry out that it is a thing haynous, wicked, and unheard, that I make those first Christian VVorthies, the Hornes of Antichrist. Shall he now at length become a member and maintainer of Antichrist, who of late came forth with the Seale of the living God, who stood at the Altar with the Golden censer, who was the man childe of the Church, and that Mi¦chaell who drove the Dragō out of Heaven? But that the malitious detractour may holde his peace: it is one thing advisedly and of set purpose to doe a thing, an other unwittingly and through ignorance. Constantine advan∣ced the state of Christians to his power: neither was it in his minde to fur∣ther Antichrist even the least that might be; but rather wholly to stop up all the passage against him: yet neverthelesse by adorning, advauncing, & defending the Bishop of Rome, he made a more ready way for him igno¦rantly and contrary to his meaning. Is this any strange thing, that a man not knowing what he cherished in his bosome, should lend him his help? VVere not his first beginnings hidden even from the most sharpsighted? Certenly seeing most holy men have offended some time most grievously, and that deliberately, it shall not, I thinke, be strange, that both he and other men have ūwarres bestowed their labour ill. I desire not to detract the least that may be from any most excellent men, & that deserved well. But I am not mine owne, but the Spirits Interpreter, who bendeth the whole description of the hornes to this point, as it shall appeare in his
places: I will follow him gladly, who can finde out, to whom they may a∣gree more fitly. I seeke the trueth, and not slaundering: But I doubt not, but whosoever shall view every thing with indifferent eyes, he will confse that the Spirit hath set these ten first Emperours as images, by which both the beginning and proceeding of Antichrist might be the more apparāt. ¶ And had set on his heads a name of blasphemy: That an ornament might not be wanting to the heads, for the crownes were belonging to the hornes, to wit the Emperours: in their stead is put a name of blasphemy. Which name is the arrogant bragging of the Romish particular Church, That Peters Chaire cannot be sundred from Rome: That the Romish Church is the foundation, and forme of the Churches, from which, all Churches tooke their beginning, none of them that beleeve truly, is ignorant, as speaketh the Pope Vigilius in an Epistle to Entherus. Likewise. that they cannot but erre, and be counted Heretiques, who thinke otherwise of the Sacraments and articles of the faith, then the Church of Rome thinketh, as Martine the v. published in a Bulle given at Constance: & Six∣tus the fift against the Articles of Peter of Oxford. Many such names, which were too long to rehearse, Rome beareth on her heads, hath them for her owne, and glorieth in the same, as her chiefe ornamēts. See Caus. 24. q. 1. and Bellarm. in his 4. booke of the Romane Pope, chap. 4 2 And this Beast which I saw was like a Libard: The whole forme is of the Libard, which is the female of the Panthers: an untamed beast, most ad∣verse to man, leaping up to his eyes, and in great rage, and tearing his I∣mage in paper: see Basill in his Serm. of the accept. of pers. Like unto the Devill, hating with an unfained hatred the image of God in man, as the same Basill writeth. This and the Tygre onely of all Beasts almost, are di∣scerned by the variety of spottes: the reste have ech one their proper co∣lour, according to their kinde. These spottes seeme to touch those vices, and foulenesse of all villanies, which cleave fast to those Bishops. Can the Blackamore chang his coulour, or the Libard his blewe spottes? then might yee also doe well, oh yee that are taught to doe evill, Ieremy chap. 12.23. Are not the Romish Bishops the greatest enemies to true Christiās? whose image they cannot beare, themselves being most foule worshippers of other images? Are they not deformed above all other men, with all kinde of vices? Who by and by after their first beginning were found forgers, belying falfly the Ni∣cene Councill, for to stablish their tyranny. Furthermore afterward Simoniacks, Homicides, Atheists, most wicked Magitians, most foule Adulterers, and tea∣chers of all uncleane lusts: finally covered with all those abhominatiōs, which a modest man would be more ashamed to relate, then they to commit. Neither are these the reproches of adversaries, but true crimes, touching
every of which, and farre more, there are extant most cleare testimonies of their owne men. Therefore this is a spotted Beast, shewing no greater hope of forsaking his turpitude, then the Leopard to chang her spottes. But besides the diversity of spottes, the Libards, otherwise called Pāthers, are very skilfull to get their pray. For as Plinie writeth; They report that by their sweet smell, all beasts are enticed, but are terrifyed by the crabbed looking of his face. Wherfore that being hidden, he taketh them suddenly, being allured by his other sweetnesse. Doth not Rome likewise by a certen reverend maiesty, as it were by a sweete favour, allure them that beholde a farre off, hidding the difor∣mity of her countenance, that is, the monstrous filthinesses, which shee fostereth, untill shee hath brought the Proselites in her snares? The Beares feete are smoothe, long, broad, tearing the earth with his nayles, or going; they attribute to him a certen stabilitie ioyned with cruelty. Neither hath any Monarchy, no not that of the Assyrians, thou of long continuance, e∣qualled the yeeres of this. Yet shee standeth by her Beares feete, continu∣ing so long a time by cruelty. His Lions mouth, noteth his terrible fierce∣nes, devouring up all things, which the lamenting of the whole earth can declare more plainly then my wordes. Therefore the cruelty of many Beasts is found in this one, neither was the Panther sufficient to expresse his outragiousnes. Therefore is he compact of all ioyned togither, which once did compete to all the Monarchies severally. Dan. 7.4.5.6. ¶ And the Dragon gave him his power, and throne: Thus farre the naturall forme of the Beast: the power followeth; and that in the first place, which he received first. The Dragon gave him his power, his throne, and great authori∣ty; Power is an inset strength. Authority is that which is exercised towards o∣thers: the Dragon gave him both, and his throne besides. And this is Rome, the city with seven hilles, as wee have seen before in the 12. chapter ver. 3. VVhich the Dragon Diocletian and Maximian being to be thrust out of heaven, gave to the Beast the Pope,, that he might performe his businesse at least by his Procurour, when he could doe it no longer by himselfe: & be∣times indeede the Dragon, as soone as he perceived that he must depart, tooke order for a Successour, putting the Beast in possession, before his expulsi∣on. For Diocletian lived at Nicomedia, Maximian at Mediolanum, in the which places both of them gave over the Empire: leaving in the meane ti∣me Rome empty for the Beast. Maxentius held it after for a fewe yeeres, but onely as one that hath the custodie of a thing upon cōditiō to restore it, as the event hath declareth; who should not have the Throne for him∣selfe, but should keepe it for the Pope. Constantine comming to visite Rome afterward, and finding the Throne possessed of an other, went to
Byzantium called since Constantinople, and there appointed a place for himselfe to dwell in. The other that followed, Emperours of the VVest part, when as the inrodes of the Barbarous people did molest continual∣ly, that they might be neerer to bring aide, and more ready for every o∣portunitie, abode at Mediolanum, or at Ravenna, as the most commodi∣ous places. So they by little and little left the Throne to the Beast. Wherby at length that which letted was wholly taken away, and the man of sinne was revealed to all men, as in the second Epistle to the Thessalonians chapter 2. vers 6. From which nowe it is perceived that this Beast is not the Romane Hea∣thenish Empire, which received Rome by the gift of none; neither doeth account his power and dignity as received of any, unlesse peradventure the Dragon did pursue the woman of whom wee spake like an enemy, be∣fore the Heathen Emperours were begotten. Furthermore, the Pope of Rome is the Beneficiarie of the Dragon, and not of Constantine: neither hol¦deth Rome by his Donation, as he boasteth falsly and impudently: but on∣ly by the assignement of the Dragon. Thus therefore the Throne being gotten, Rome began from that day to be famous, rather for the Popes Pa∣lace, then for the Emperours Court. And indeede it grewe very quickly, and her power waxed great in a short time; as Prosper witnesseth in his booke de Ingratis, in these wordes, Rome is the Seate of Peter, which is become the Head of Pastorall power to the world: whatsoever shee holdeth not by force of ar∣mes, shee holdeth it by religion. And againe in his second booke of the calling of the Gentils, chap. 6. Rome by the soveraigntie of Priesthood is more increased, by the tower of religion, then by the Throne of power. Vnto which is added Am¦mian Marcellin, in his 27. booke, as he is cited by Bellarmine, that he mar¦vaileth not, though men contend with so great desire for the Romane Popedome, se∣ing the riches and maiestie of it are so great. But that the Dragon gave him this power appeareth from hence, that the name of Rome was honourable to all men, because of the auncient Empire, of which once it was the Seate; and therefore that they easily yeel¦ded to any promotion of hers; but of this more largely at the 6. verse. 3 And I sawe one of his heads, as it were deadly wounded: Montanus & Plan¦tines Edition doeth omit I saw, as though the Dragon, togither with the throne & power, had given also, one of the heads wounded: which is contrary both to the faithfulnesse of the other Copies (for Aretas & the Common translation read I saw, & all other) & also to the truth of the history. For the Beast had not a wounded head at his first beginning. For first he was, afterward he is not, in chap. 17.8. as at that place wee shall shewe more ful∣ly. In these wordes he commeth to the second condition of the BEAST.
The dammage consisteth in the wounding of one of his heads, which now once or twice wee have advertised to be sevē hills and Kings, from chap. 17.9.10. VVhether then of these kindes should suffer this calamity? Surely if the wounde inflicted, be to come into the power of the enemy, scarce can one of the hilles receive a wound, but all wilbe wounded togither. VVherfore more properly it belōgeth to the Kings, any one of which being afflicted with this wounde, the rest abide whole from the same. Although this hurt cannot be so proper to a King, that it should not also be common to the Hills. And these Kings are seven Governements, or Principalities, by which the City of Rome hath ben governed, to wit, those celebrated by all, Kings, Consuls, Decemviri, Dictatours, Tribunes, Emperours, Popes, as wee will make plaine at the 17. chap. If now it be demaunded to which of all these this calamity should happen, the place which even now wee spake of declareth it evidently: to the seaven head, namely, the Popes. For so speaketh the Angell, and another, that is, the seventh is not yet come: and when he shall come, he must continue a short space: being hurt with a wound, as it were quite killed with the same: for Iohn saith, as it were wounded to death, as Aretas well puts us in minde, for he should not be altogither destroyed by this blow. But now after that it is manifest touching the Heads, this wound was inflicted, when Rome forsaken now a good while of the Emperours, abiding partly in the East at Byzantium, partly in the West at Ravenna: & beginning againe to flourish under a newe Governemēt of Popes, was smit∣ten with an exceeding great storme by the Gothes, Vandals, Hunnes, and the rest of the Northern people. Which vexed most miserably the whole VVest part. In this common calamity, that late Empresse of the nations, & Queene of the whole world, escaped not scotfree, but sufferred a greater destruction, then almost any City besides, oftener taken by assault, sacked, wasted, & for an hundred two and thirtie yeeres, at the lust of the Barbarians. First, Alaricus about the yeere 415 besieged and tooke it: Of which thing Hierome spea¦king: but after he saith, the most famous light of all countries is cleane put out, yea the head of the Romane Empire cut off, and to speake more truly, the whole world is destroyed in one Citie &c. In his Proheme of Ezech. But in more wordes & eloquently in an Epistle to Principia a Virgin: The Citie is taken, which tooke the whole world &c. In what lamentable manner would he have bewailed, if it had befell him to heare of the oftē conquerings and spoiling thereof, which followed? For Rome now was consumed not once, but was taken a second time by Adaulphus, who gave her such a deadly wound, that she was minded to change her name, and to be called afterward Gothia. The third time Gensericus the Vandal tooke it. The fourth time, Odoacer Rugianus
reigning there fourteene yeeres. Theodoricus the King of the Gothes slewe him whom at length Totilas followeth by a ceren order of succession. He the fift time overthrew and rased it, bringing it to that wildernesse, that nei∣ther any man, nor woman could be found in it by the space of fourty dayes, according to that of the Sibyll: Rome shalbe a perpetuall ruine, and shee that hath ben seen, shall not be discerned. Albeit I thinke not that shee hath yet endured that calamity, which Sibyll speaketh of, although that now past, may be a notable proofe of that which is to come. Who in those times, would not have thought, that the seven hilled Citie had utterly perished? VVho would not have supposed that the dignitie of the Popes, to wit, the se∣venth head, had bin past remedy? Therefore the Constantinopolitane Bi∣shop, and he of Ravennas, the authority of Rome being as it were utterly gone, laboured greatly, as the next heires, to drawe the same to their Chur¦ches. But they were both much deceaved. The head was not wounded un¦to death, but as it were, unto death. Therefore the wound waxing more fierce, Zozimus, Bonifacius, Celestinus, about the yeere 420. having supposed a Nicene Councill, chalenged the Primacy: and they did moove so much as was sufficient to shewe, that some life was left: but they had a shameful repulse; because this was the time of the wound on every side. Pelagius also not long after, before the skarre had closed altogither, wrested the scrip∣tures to the same ende, but his endevour comming to no proofe, declared that both the head remained alive, and also that it was of no power. For the raigne of the Gothes, darkened the light of the Popes dignity: neither could now any acknowledg her the chiefe, who at home being the basest, and ser∣vant of the Barbarous people, scarce had a place where to abide. For at once the Emperours dwelling at Rome, at what time the Apostles were in authority, restreined Antichrist, that he could not come forth, to be seen abroad: so the new erected Kingdome of the Gothes in Italie, was an o∣ther thing with holding, which did repell his put out hornes for a time, & compelled him againe, to hide him selfe in his shell. Rightly therefore now, the head did seeme to be wounded, which was not able to shake off the yoke, neither by any strength of his owne, neither by any hope that he had from the East; seing the Emperour had graunted of his owne accord, Italy to the Gothes, which he had no hope to be able to retaine. VVhat could he expect from the VVest, every country wanting helpe; so farre off were they, from being able to succour others? Therefore O Pope, thy woūd was deadly, whereof no remedie appeared from any place. ¶ But this deadly wound was healed: The third condition of the Beast, cō∣sisting in his dignity recovered, by the healing of the head. VVhich began
at the yeere 555, when Iustinian being Emperour the Gothes were destroy¦ed in Italy b the valiantnesse of  & Nr. The Emperour play¦ed the Physitian maniestly; for first he tooke away the noxious humours, by pressing, yea rather utterly abolishing the Barbarians; afterward he powred in, wine & oyle. That Decree of Iustinians new constitution 131, ws a most pleasant ointemēt: Wee ordaine that according to the Decrees of the holy Counlls, the most holy Bshop of auncient Rome, shallbe the chiefe of all Priests. H much was the wound amended hereby? But Phocas the Parricide, af∣te  yeeres more or lesse, that is in the yeere sixe hundreth and sixe, fi∣nih the cure, bound up the wound, healed it up into a skarre: Hee did gaunt unto Bonifce the third, that the Romane Bishop should be counted Vniver¦sll: not onely that he should goe before the rest in order & honour, as Iu∣stnian decreed, limitting the Primacy with the bounds of holy Concills, bt who should have the whole world for his Diocesse: the Bishop of Cō∣stantinople strove afterward in vaine, from whom the Primacy was given, by the sentence of the Emperour. Now he perceived that the wound was healed, and that therefore it was superfluous to pleade any more for this matter. And certenly not very long after, the Pope Leo second, shewed that he had recovered health, when about the yeere 680. by the warres of the Emperour, he compelled Felix the Bishop of Ravenna, to acknowledge the Bishop of Rome for his Lord: and that the Bishop of Ravenna should not rise up any more, it is ordained by the authority of the Pope, That af∣terward the election of the Clergie of Raenna, should not be of force, unlesse the con∣sent of the Romane Pope were added to it: Sabellic. Ennead. 8. book 7. Thus was the wounded head cured, which being healed did more hurt the Christi¦an world, then before he received the wounde. ¶ And all the world wondred & followed the Beast: Now he declareth how great the recovered dignity should be: & first by the honour which the wor∣shippers of the Beast should give to him: this honour is in admiring, in this verse, & also in worshipping both the Dragon & the Beast, in the following. And he speaketh significātly after the Hebrewes manner, to wonder after the Beast, which is as much as in wondring, to follow the Beast: that is to give up thē¦selves wholly to be ruled by his Empire, as the Israelites going a whoring after their Idols, forsooke the true God, & cōsecrated thēselves to the worship of them. They who so admired the Beast are the earth, that is men savouring the earth, altogither strāgers frō the heavēly city. But how many is the nū∣ber of them? All without exception. For he saith, the whole earth. Therefore it should come to passe that the Beast after the head was healed, should ru¦le with farre larger boundes, then before. Prosper said that Rome was
more ample, at the first receiving of this dignity by the tower of religion then by the throne of power. Which seemeth to be understood rather of the con∣sent of the trueth, then of the dominion of the Citie of Rome, although then it was doubtlesse large. The trueth was propagated further then the Romane Empire: But Britanny had not yet acknowledged the authoritie of Rome in the matter of religion, till under the Pontificate of Gregory the fift, that is, after some hope that the wound should be cured: Augu∣stine the Romish Munke forced our countriemen, to take upon them the yoke: neither did France, Friseland, Denmarke, Germanie, Sclavonia, de¦pend much of Rome, before Bonifacius, or Venefride an Inglishman a∣bout the yeere 720. brought these countries or the chiefe parts thereof unto the obedience of the Pope of Rome. Now therefore was the time, when the whole earth should admire the Beast: when besides these and other Princes of Europe, countries also most remote, Ireland, Scotland, Nor∣way, Gothia, Sueveland, Luten, and other nations of Sarmatia, honoured the same as some God. Let therefore the Pope glory in his universality: by how much he hath the greater multitude, by so much a surer argument is he that Beast. But as touching the admiration, it was indeede great some ages before, and that of the most famous lights of the Church: who carry¦ed away with the too much honour of the Beast, and not regarding suffici∣ently to what mischiefe at length the matter would growe; did exalte too proudly the preheminence of the Apostolike Chaire. Yet did they not won∣der after the Beast, so as they thought they must embrace all whatsoever he should ordaine, but they had one rule of godlinesse and duty, to it, the sa∣cred trueth. Neither were the commendations of those times, any thing to that admiration which followed the healing of the wounde. Heare Ber¦nard: Thou, saith he, speaking to the Pope, art the great Priest, the chiefe Pope, thou art the Prince of Bishops, thou art the heire or the Apostles, thou art in Prima∣cy Abel, in governing Noe, in Patriarchat Abraham, in order Melchisedec, in digni¦ty Aaron, in authority Moses, in iudgement Samuel, Peter in power, Christ in an-annointing, &c. in the 2. booke of Considerat. Verily o Bernard, thou hast played the foole through admiratiō. Yet neverthelesse I dare not put thee among those, who wonder after the Beast, considering that I heare thee else where reprooving boldly and sharply the wickednesse of the Popes, Cardi∣nals, Bishops, and other Clergie men. The times deceaved thee: but there was in thee, I thinke somewhat borne of God, which at lēgth did overcome the world. But of what sorte was the woūdring of other men, who were more blinded & lesse fearing God? Heare what the Ambass. of the Emp. of Sici¦lia being prostrated on the groūd, cry; which takest away the sinnes of the world hav mercy on us: which takest away the sinnes of the world, give us peace: P. Ae. b. 7.
VVhat also Simo Begnius Bishop of Modrusium speaking to the Pope Le∣on in the Councill of Lateran, sess. 6. Beholde, here cometh the Lion of the tri∣be of Iuda, the roote of David, thee, o most blessed Leo, wee have expected for Savi∣our. Adde unto these Cornelius the Bishop of Biponte, who shewed his astonishmēt in the Coūcill of Trēt in these words; The Pope being the light is come into the world, and men have loved darknes more then the light: for every one that doth evill hateth the light, and commeth not to the light: O Blasphemous Fooles, is it not enough for you to adorne the Man of Sinne, with the praises of the Saincts, unlesse yee load him also with the spoiles of Christ himselfe? But learne from these, that did speake by publike autho∣rity in their Generall Councills, what was the voice of the whole world? In the same route of wonderers are the Iesuites at this day, & all the Papists. Neither can it be otherwise, but that they must thinke, that he is to be fol∣lowed in all things, and worship him as God, whom they judge for a surety to be free from errour: hath not the Englis man written justly in his Poe∣trie, that the Pope is the astonishment of the world? Especially if one set before his eies the Emperour leading his horse by the bridle, and holding the stirrop, while the Beast mounteth on horseback. 4 And they worshipped the Dragō: That is, men acknowledged the power of the Beast to be by right the chiefe, because of the auncient majesty of Rome, which the Heathen Emperours, who are those Dragons, procured unto it. For was not this to adore and worship the Dragon, for his sake to give the supreme dignitie to his successour? But this was the first foun∣datiō of the Romane Primacy, because this Citie was a fore time the head city of the Empire. From hence every where in Eusebius and other Eccle∣siasticall writers, it is called the raigning Citie. But most clearly doth the Councill of Chalcedon shew this, in the 16. Act. For the Fathers in order gave privilegies to the Seate of olde Rome, because of the Empire of that Citie. An hundred and fifty Bishops, most loving to God, and of equall Seate, moved with the same intention, gave privilegies to the newe Rome; iudging according to reason, that the Citie adorned with the Empire, and Senate, should enioy the like privilegies of the auncient Rome: and in Ecclefiasticall affaires to have authority as shee, and to be the next after her &c. Therefore the Empire and Senate did bring forth the Primacy to the elder Rome: which being graunted unto her by those first Fathers, because of the Heathen Emperours, who raigned there afore time: the Successours afterward, did for the same cause, amplify the digni¦ty graunted, and prostrate themselves all shamefully before the Dragon, worshipping him as the authour of this honour. By the same argument the Bishop of Constantinople would have obtained the like dignity. But
the Dragon sufferred it not, who had made the Bishop of Rome his heire of the whole. Wherefore the Legates of the Romane Bishop withstood that Decree. Neither would Pope Gelasius, who in other things approved the Concill of Chalcedon, confirme this one Canon, concerning the privile∣ge of the Church of Cōstantinople. Therefore that Decree was of noe for∣ce, especially when the same Gelasius, to whom the Dragon had commit∣ted his power, had ordained wisely before, and warily; that no Act of any Councill whatsoever, should be of any force, unlesse it were confirmed the Bishop of Rome. ¶ And they worshipped the Beast saying, who is like to the Beast? who can warre with him: Such was the worshipping of the Dragon: now followed of the Beast: which consisteth in the extolling of his power above all; that wee may not thinke, that adoration is in the gesture onely. And was there not iust cause of boasting so highly of the Beasts power? Leo Isaurus the Empe¦rour of Constantinople fought unfortunately with Gregory the second, excommunicated by the same, and put from all the Empire of the West. Childericke the King of France, was too weake for to encounter with the Pope Zachary: wherefore forced by his authority, he gave over his King∣dome to Pipine. The Longobards not using the Beast well, when he was sicke of his wounde; at length whē he began to be recovered, and to waxe well, were cast into the jawes of this Leopard, by the helpe of Pipine and Charles the Great. Neither lost Charles his cost, being made Emperour for his labour. Great indeede was thy power ô Beast, who wert able at thy pleasure to take away, and to give againe, that which is the highest in mēs affaires. Lamentable is the History of Henry the fourth, who in the heart of a terrible winter, bare foote, and fasting from morning to night, for the space of three dayes, waited for sentence, craving pardon before the gates of the Canusine Castell of the Romane Bishop: who yet prevayled no∣thing, eyther by his owne or others teares, or by the intercession of any Sanct, save onely of a certen whore, whom the Holy Pope had made his dar∣ling The Emperour was deceived, who thought that the Pope could be pacifyed by prayers and fasting: this God required an other kinde of sacri¦fices. But that is horrible that the Pope drove rhe Sonne of Henry to that wickednesse, that he should assault his Father with warre, spoiled him of all dignity, and at length constrained him to ende his life in extreame mi∣series. Frederike Barbarossa, a man of an heroicall disposition, hath set foorth greatly the triumph of the Beast, being troden upon with his feete, while he in the meane time did sing this verse of triumphe: Thou shalt walke upon the Aspe and Bisiliske, and tread upon the Lion and Dragon. What should
I rehearse Frederike the second, Lodovike of Bavaria, contemning indeed at the first the Popes, but at length having tried their strength, prooving all meanes to winne their favour againe? Our England hath affoarded us a sorrowfull exemple of King Iohn. From all which may be perceived how unequall a conflict any Prince on earth had with this Beast. Therefore Ru∣dulphs Halsbergensis the Emperour, when the Princes desired earnest∣ly that he would goe visit Italy, not dissembling that he did wholly abhor∣re this voyage, answereth wisely that he was made afraide, by all men footstep∣ps tnding toward it, and none backeward from it. What was this else but, Who shall be able to warre with him? 5 And there was a mouth given unto him, speaking great things: Hitherto the honour of the Beast, now followed his power of blaspheming, and doing. Of which both, the power given is first recited, afterward the execution of blsphming, in the sixt verse, of doing in the seventh verse. It is profitable for u to understand that those horrible impietyes doe enter into the world, not by any bline force of fortune, but by the most just judgemēt of God. Who doth so punih naughty acts, and especially mens despising of his trueth. The power of blaspheming, is the freedome from errour, which the Romane Pope chalengeth to himselfe, and his Seate, and that men of a blin∣de and perverse minde, doe willingly graunt unto him. What blasphemies may not he proffer to the world, every one of whose Decrees are held for Oracles? The power of doing is that exempt, and most free ability to doe all what one will, without rendring a reason to any man. Wherein notable is the power of the Romane Pope above all other. For such Decrees doe they or∣daine: No man shall iudge the first Seate, desiring to moderate iustice; for the Iudge shall be iudged neither of the Emperour, neither of all the Clergie, neither of Kings, nor of the people. Againe, God would have the causes of other men to be ended by men. Likewise: The whole Church through the world knoweth, that the holy Ro∣mane Church hath right to iudge concerning all men: neither may any iudge of her iudgement. This is called a power of doing for excellency sake, such as in¦deede belongeth to no Emperours, who refuse not to he refrained with the boundes of lawes, and all their actions to betried by the rule of equi∣ty and justice. As touching the wordes Aretas readeth: And power was given him to make warre moneths &c. In like manner also Montanus, and Plantines Edi¦tion: The Common translation absolutely, as also Theodorus Beza, and the rest of the Greeke Copies. The like use of this word in a like matter in Daniell, favoureth this reading, He shall cast downe, saith he, the trueth to the grounde, and shall doe, and he shall prosper, in the eight Chapter, the twelve &
foure and twentiest verse: and he shall prosper wonderfully, and shall doe. So in the eleventh chapter verse twentie eight, He shall doe, and shall returne to his owne lande. In which places is signifyed a certaine free and chiefe power of doing, which should not feare the iudgement of any. The time of doing are two and fourty months: the same space wherein the temple remaineth measured, the two Prophets mourne, and the woman lyeth hid in the wildernes, as in the 11 chapter second verse, and 12. chapter sixe verse▪ from whence the beginning of all these is to be judged the same. At one time the Church is banished, the Prophets weare sackecloth, and the Beast or An∣tichrist is borne: to wit, in that first refreshing after the publike persecutions about the yeer 300, as before hath ben said. But shall there be also the sa∣me ending? Shall the Beast be deprived of all power to doe, and the womā returne our of the wildernes togither? This peradventure is against it, that after the two and fourty moneths ended, he maketh warre with the two Prophets, and overcometh them: which is a thing of no small power, as wee have shew¦ed in the 11. chapter verse 7. Furthermore there remaineth yet a warre farre a way the most grievous, to come long after those moneths, as wee shall see after in the 16. chapter. Last of all if there be the same ende of the moneths in regard of the Beast, which there is of the woman, how shall he have power to doe two and fourty moneths, seeing some great parte of them did lay sicke, yea as it were dead by meanes of his wounded head? This space then seemeth to containe the whole tyranny of Antichrist, so as that time when the wound was greene be taken away from it. But wee have already shewed that this sickly time was ended with the raigne of the Gothes, in the 3. ver. which continued an hundred and fourty yeeres. Therefore if wee take away these yeeres from the moneths of the womā lying hid, wee shall finde that at the ende of this lurking, to with at the yeere 1546. that 37. moneths & ten dayes only of the flourishing Kingdome of Antichrist wer past. There are wanting therefore to this, 5. moneths & 20. dayes, which if wee shall count from the yeere 1546. the last ende of Antichrist shall come out at the yeere 1686. or there about. For so wee shall learne from other scriptures that he shall utterly perish about that time. It may be that his destruction shall prevent this terme: for neither doe I now reckē curiously, neither peradventure doe the History-writers nūber the yeeres so faithfully as is meete. But it shall not be graunted him to proceed fur∣ther, the furthest space being set downe by mee. But peradventure these moneths are not the space of time from the first beginning unto the last ende of the Beast, but onely the former yeeres of his raigne: as many as may suffice to manifest him aboundantly to all men.
In which respect as they begin togither with the moneths and dayes of the woman and Prophets, so also they have an ende togither. The mention of the warre with the Sancts beneath in the 17. verse, confirmeth this sense: which warre wee have declared to have befallen at the ende of these moneths, in chap. 11.7. From which exposition the Beast is said to have power to doe two and fourty moneths, of the most part of these moneths: because that small di¦stance of time, in which he should hide himselfe by reason of his wounded head, should have a very little reckening made of it, in respect of the whole number: neither is the power which shalbe afterward, like to that of for∣mer time; as the experience of this time proveth sufficiently, wherein wee see the Popes forces, since that warre was made, that is, since the Coun∣cill of Trent, are become a great deale feebler and weaker: so that his pow∣er is almost nothing to that, which it was in former ages. This latter is more plaine, wherfore it pleaseth mee the more. Yet notwithstanding I would not hide any thing, as much as in mee lay, where I should see the least doubt, that either my selfe might finde out the trueth, or at least wise might stirre up others to search it out. 6 Therefore he opened his mouth to blasphemy: Hitherto hath ben the given power: now the thing it selfe is performed: these two are distinguished, be∣cause the heigh of impiety should not be looked for the first day, but he should come to it by certene degrees and in processe of time. But first he prepareth himselfe to blaspheme God and his name: afterward his Temple: last of all those that dwell in Heaven. He blasphemeth God, by vaunting himselfe to be God, not as other Princes, but sacrilegiously beyond the condition of mortall men, as to whom power is given in Heaven and in Earth, who shall rule from Sea to Sea, and from the River to the endes of the world, as may be seen in the first booke and 7. chap. of the Ceremonial. pontifical. And as the Pope Sixtus confirmed openly in these wordes, Whosoever accusth the Pope, shall never be forgiven, because he that sinneth against the Holy Ghost, shall never beforgiven, neither in this, nor in the life to come, See the first Tome of Councills. in Purgat. of Sixtus. Thence followeth that, which Boniface the eight singeth so loude, thus, Wee declare, define, and pronounce to every cre¦ature, that it is upon necessitie of salvation, that they be subiect to the Pope of Rome: Extrav. of Maiorit. & obed, one holy. Secōdly he opened his mouth against the Tabernacle: That is the true Church of God, lying hid, and being as a stranger on the earth. For this Taberna∣cle is the same that the Temple was in chap. 11.1. the dwelling place of God, conversing with his people in the desert: which sheweth evidently at what time chiefly he should cast out these blasphemies, to wit, when the
Church should dwell in the wildernesse, and should be knowne onely to a fewe obscure citizens. And that I may not rehearse these many blasphe∣mies: Could not Antichrist in his chiefe pride having a desperate mouth, raile against the humble and despised Church, when hee being now with∣out Spirit, and almost halfe dead, stayeth himselfe from no reproches a∣gainst the same, shee being by the grace of God restored and florishing? Thirdly, hee blasphemeth them that dwell in Heaven. These are Citizens & mē∣bers of the true Church on earth. His opened mouth barked at the Taber∣nacle, against the whole congregation of the faithfull. But the blasphemy is intended chiefly at those which dwell in Heaven, against particular holy men His foule mouth revileth them with all manner of reproches. Are not all that set themselves against the Romish impietie, defamed as if they were Schismatiques, Heretiques, Rebells, most wicked men, unworthy to enjoy the light in common with other? Read that one Bulla of Leo the x. agan t Luther, and thou shalt have a most oboundant proofe of these blas¦phemies. But all Papisticall bookes are full of them: yea their tongues doe scarce talke of any other thinge. 7 And it was given him to make warre with &c. This is that warre which was made in the 11. chap. ver. 7.8. To wit, the Tridentine Councill, and that lamntable battell of the Pope and Emperour against the Protestāts in Germany. This is also that victory, wherby he triumphed over the two Prophets that were slaine. For the Beast warreth his whole fourty & two moneths, as before in the 5. ver. but at the ende of that time, this warre should be the most memorable of all, whereof he maketh here mention. Therefore this Beast, is the Angell of the bottomelesse pit, in chap. 9. ver. 11. and 11.7. There remaineth yet another warre, but in that the Beast shall not overcome, but be overcomed. ¶ And power was given unto him over every Tribe, and tongue, & nation: The third part of his power, as wee have distinguished in the Analysis, which consisteth in the largenesse of his dominion. This should spread it selfe farre and neere, as before time, the Empire of the Dragon. For there is the same Throne of both, the same Kingdome also, and Empire: see be∣fore in verse 3. upon those wordes the whole world. 8 Therefore all that dwell on the earth shall worship him, whose names &c. A set¦ting forth of the large jurisdiction, from a description of the subiects. Of which sorte are all, whom God hath not accounted in the nūber of those that shalbe saved. Which words have prevented that doubt, whereby one peradventure might thinke that it were past remedy, as concerning the salvation of all, seeing all almost did seeme to be servāts of the Beast. Feare
not, saith the Spirit, none of the elect shall perish: I have all these written with mee by name: onely they shall be permitted to worship the Beast, who are not written in this Catalogue. But thou wilt say, it is as hurtfull a thing to worship the Heathen Emperours. But hat is not the matter how daungerous it is to worship either him, or those, but onely the Beast is de∣scribed by the multitude of the reprobate, whom he hath for his worship∣pers, as though he should say, this Beast is he, whom all the reprobate of the earth shall worship: that is, to whom they shall give Divine honours. To which propositiō if thou shalt adde; But the Pope of Rome is he, whō all the reprobate of the earth have worshipped, giving unto him divine ho¦nours, it will followe that he is this Beast. Some Heathen Emperours ar∣rogated to themselves a Godhead, but evē the Heathen men derided this madnes, so farre off were they from approoving thereof by worshipping. Suetonius reporteth how great a mocking stock the Dodecatheos, that is, the secret supper of Augustus was, in which twelve ghests sat downe in the habite of Gods and Goddesses: but Augustus himselfe in the apparell of Apollo. The hoasen, the golden beard and lightening, the ensigne of the Gods, which he bare, were despised. But assoone as the Pope had taken to himselfe the name of God, his worshippers by and by consented unto it. Wee heard in the thirteenth verse of the Adoration, which the Ambassa∣dours and Bishops performed in their generall Councills. With whom the Canonists accord, as in a certaine Glosse printed at Lions in the yeere a thousande five hundreth fiftie five, in Extravag. Ioann. 22. VVhn it was counted an Hereticall thing, to beleeve, that our Lord God the Pope had not ben able to ordaine, as he hath ordained. In Sixtus of Election, and the foundtions of Elect. In the Glosse, The Pope is not a man. Clement in the Proheme in the Glosse, Neither art thou God, nor man, thou art, as it were, neither btween both. Finally when they preach, that the Pope is all, and above all: that his power extē¦deth it selfe to thinges in Heaven, in Earth, and Hell: That he can commande the Angels, that he hath such power in Purgatorie, and lso in Hell, that he can deli∣ver by his Indulgences, as great a number as he will, of soules which are tormeted in those places, and set them by and by in Heaven, and in the seates of the blessed. VVhen, I say, they attribute these and many such blasphemous thinges unto him, who seeth not, whom the reprobate of the earth doe worship, and adore with divine honours? Not that all who some time have adored the Beast are reprobates (for it may be that they did repent, and were conver∣ted to God) but because all the reprobate doe worshipe him. Neither let any prate foolishly, that there are many countries in the world, in which even the name of the Romane Pope hath not ben heard. I doe not other∣wise
take the whole world and all the reprobate, then the Holy Spirit himselfe; if the Papists have any thing, wherby they may cut the throate of this V∣niversality, let them strike at it. Seeing therefore that these things are so▪ now let the Pope cry out, that it is altogither of necessity to salvation, to be subiect to the Romane Pope. The Spirit contrariwise saith, that to be undr the Romane Bishop, is to be ioined wholly with the losse of salvation; if any doe so di without repentance VVhether of these two must thou beleeve? He will hae it that he cannot erre, but how foo∣lish is it, to bring the tryall of the same thing thither, where if thou shalt erre in beleeving, there shalbe given thee no leave to correct the errour. This Beast is worshipped of all the reprobate, whom as long as thou con∣spiret with in worship, who will seclue thee from the condition of the reprobate? He therefore breaketh not nitie, who departeth from the Ro¦mish Synagogue, but he procured unvoidable destruction to himselfe, whosoever is ioyned to her and repented not. O yee most wretched recō∣cilers, who seeke to bring back againe the people to Rome. Is it not e∣nough for your slves to perish, ulesse you increase your condemnation, by drawing others with you into the same destruction? But let no godly man be offended, if hee see the reprobate to returne to their Beast: the Spi∣rit hath foreshewed that this loade stone shall draw unto it this refuse, that hereafter they may not marvaile Why all of ungdly and dissolute life, are more prone to the Pope, thn to the trueth. ¶ Of that Lambe which was sline from the beginning of the world: VVithout cause Aretas will have a transposition of the wordes to be here, so that this should be the sense: Whose names are not written from the beginning of the world, in the booke of life of the Lambe, which was slaine. He will have the na∣mes to be written from the beginning of the world, but not the Lambe to have ben killed from thence. But the things are not well devided, which the Spirit ioyneth togither. For if the Lambe be from the beginning of the world, it must needes be also that he was slaine from the beginning of the world. But CHRIST is not a Lambe, but for sacrifice, neither can he be a sacrifice otherwise then by death. As therefore by the eternall Decree of God, he was the Lambe appointed for to save the Elect: so by the same Decree he was slaine, from before the foundations of the world. VVose force was noe lesse available to deliver the Elect, before his death was ac∣complished in the flesh, then after he had endured and sufferred the same in the crosse, and in the grave.
9 Let him that hath an eare heare An acclamation, the sense whereof is: That this Beast is to be knowne with all diligence; howsoever there shallbe many, who will not hearken, and will deny a thing, so perverse are they, more cleare then the Sunne at noonetide. But all yee elect, give eare, and with as great diligence as you can, flie from this plague. Which by these markes is so proposed before your eyes, as that you may see her, not as by the nayles, but by the whole frame of her body. 10 Yf any leade into captivity: These things pertaine to the consolation of the godly, who were to fight with this monster: the first confirmation is ta¦ken from a certē punishment which shall come in his time: that is to say, although they shall see the Beast mighty for a longe time, and carying ma¦ny by companies into bondage, yet they should be of good courage. For at length they should see him also ledde into captivity. He shall perish with the sword, although now he kill with the sword whom he will. The confort is like to that in Esay: Woe to thee that spoilest, who thy selfe is not spoiled: and to thee traiterous man, against whom they dealt not traiterously, when thou shalt cease to be a spoiler, thou shalt be spoiled &c. chap. 33.1. ¶ Here is the patience and faith of the Saincts: A second consolation. All those thinges serve for the Saincts, for the exercise of their faith and con∣stancy. And surely a great courage is required in so great daungers: but by how much the dangers shalbe greater, so much the more shall the praise of the godly be brighter: therefore let no man quake for feare of the dan¦ger, but let him minde that this Beast is the occasion for him to get glory by. 11 Afterward I saw an other Beast: Thus farre of the first Beast, the second followeth. an other indeede in beginning and originall, but in nature and disposition altogither the same. Whereupon the seventeenth chapter ma∣keth mention of one onely; under one comprehending both, as was obser∣ved at the fift verse of this chap. For which cause also the Spirit doth not make a particular description of every member: but rehearseth those thin¦ges onely, which are proper to the new rising; other things, as farre as it seemeth, being common to this with the former. First, he ascendeth out of the earth, both augmented by the authority of earthly men, and those of the laity, as they call them, whom chiefly the earth signifyeth, and also ex∣ceeding in honours those very men by whom he was advanced. For that which commeth up from the earth, is lifted up above the earth, having it put under his feete, by whose weight he was lately oppressed. So the former Beast rose out of the Sea, having sea men put under him, out of whose com∣pany he came, and plunged up. This ascending fell out upon the times of
Gregory second, about the yeere 726, when the Pope trusting in the aide of the Longobardes, smote with the lighning of excommunication Leo Isaurus the Emperour, and withdrewe Rome it selfe and Italy, and all Hes¦peria, from hi obedience. For now indeede, the Beast began upon the earth, who not onely exercised a powre over the Ecclesiasticall route, but also bridled the lay men by his authority, & their chiefe head the Emperour: who although before time he had given a great power to the Pope over the Clergie, yet he pressed downe the same even till now by his maiesty, as it were by a certen weight, more heavie thē the Hill Aetna; that he should not lift up his crests above the Emperour. But now the earthly dignity yeeldeth to the Beast, to be troden under foote of him at length, who grew up so farre onely by the favour of the Emperours. Therefore Zacharias the next, that it might be manifest to all men that the Popes were now loosed from the prison of eartly dignity, deposed Childericke the King of France, and com∣maunded Pipine the Father of Charles the Great, to be created King in his stead. But yet it was more cleare in Leo the third, who translated the Empire frō the Grecians to the Germanes, and annointed Charles the Great for Em¦perour. VVhat a more great proofe can there be of the supreme power on earth, then to take away the Empire from whom he will, and to bestowe the same againe upon whom he shall thinke good? The Popes following persisted in the same steppes, esteeming the Emperours as it were balles, in reiecting the same from their office, and appointing other in their roome at their pleasure. VVhereby Bellarmine being moved, wrote indeede tru∣ly, and agreable to this Prophecy. All the Emperours who have ben since Char∣les the Great, are bound to the Pope for their Empire: in his 5. booke of the Pope of Rome, chap. 8. For ever since that time the Beast rose up from the earth, being higher then all earthly power: to which are added earthly dominiōs and possessions of landes ioyned with this originall: which the Pope be∣fore time either wanted altogither, or at least enioyed but small & fewe, as great as were sufficient to maintaine a Bishop, not which should make any shew of a Kingdome. For in former ages, Italy was tributary to the Emperours, which at length the Gothes possessing, made it to pay tribute to them: when they were slaine under Iustinian, it returned againe to the Empire, administred by Captaines. The Romane Pope had yet noe Pro∣vinces, untill this earthly rising up, had given him landes sufficiently. For is it likely that the Pope by whose persuasion other men fell from the Em∣perour, and were made richer, became not more enriched by the spoiles of the same? VVould not he provide himselfe, and Sainct Peter of some little gobbet? But it is a sufficient argument, what he got thereby, that a
while after, that the Longobardes converting their forces against the Ro∣manes, sought to take away from them those cities, of which they had spoi¦led the Emperour. Which being taken away, Zachary the Pope recovered them againe by faire flattering wordes with great increase, if wee must be∣leeve the Papists. For he obtained of Luitprandus by gift for blessed Peter and the Popes besides, a fewe cities taken away, the inheritance of the Sbins, and the Citie Narnia, and Ancona, and Humana, and the great valley of the towne Sutrium: Moreover all those thinges, which Luitprandus had taken to himsf from Ami∣lia and the people of Rvenna, within the space of two yeeres: Blond. Decad. 1. booke 10. But without controversie the munificence of Pipine, and Chrles the Great, and Ludovike farre surpassed. For Romanie was now called a Prince∣dome, that even by the very name it might acknowledg her Lord. There∣fore the Beast began now to glory in the Kingdomes of the world, which boasted before of the title of dignity and honour, rather thn in any pos∣sessions, of cities and townes. ¶ Having two hornes like the Lambe: These two hornes are Pipine, and his Sō∣ne Charls the Great, by whose weapons as it were by hornes, the newe Beast chased farre away all enemies. Pipine aided the Pope Stephan 2. flying in∣to Fraunce, against Aristulphus the King of the Longobardes; whom, he passing twice over the Alpes with an army, compelled first to yeeld the things taken from the Pope: Secondly to deliver to the chaire of Peter Ra¦venna, the Princedoome, and whatsoever almost he had taken in Italy: see Volat booke 3. Charles the Great for Pope Adrians sake, repressed Deside∣rius King of the Longobardes: yea tooke away wholly the Kingdome frō that nation, that they might not afterward cause any trouble to Rome. Moreover againe when Aragisus a Captaine of Beneventum put Adrian in some feare, he fled into Italy, brought him by constraint to his duties, and set Adrian free from all feare. Leo the third also, being expelled by the Ro¦manes, hasting into Italy the third time, those seditious being punished se¦verely, hee restored him unto his Chaire. The Popes of Rome never had so great deffence, since their ten first hornes, in any as in these two. Therefore these two notable hornes made famous the originall of this second Beast. Which are said to be like the Lambes, because the Popes whō they aided did seeme helplesse, afflicted, innocent like Lambes. How lamentable Epistles doe Stephanus the second, Constantinus, Stephanus the third, and Adrian Popes sende to Pipine, and Charles the Great? How full are all things of complaints, of lamentations, of teares, and of most vehement callings upon them for succour? See before your eyes, what cruelty those letters doe attribute to the enemies, but what innocency to the Bishops. Surely thou wilt call
those wolves, these Lambes, and that he hath an hart of iron, who would not deliver them, being in daunger, from their most cruell awes, if he be able Yet neverthelesse in this miserable estate the Beast reteined his for∣mer minde, and loftily and terribly as the Dragon. I let passe Gregory the se∣cond, striking with lightening, and terrifying Leo Isaurus. VVhose voice I pray, was it, when Zacharias tooke away the Kingdome from the lawfull King, and bestowed it upon Pipine his servaunt? VVhat manner of voice was that of Leo the third, which proclaimed openly, and consecrated Charles, Emperour of the VVest? VVas it not that of the olde Dragon, who according to that very great power whereby he prevailed, made and depo¦sed Kinges whom he would? Desiderius the Longobard felt the force of this voice, who being allured by the Lambelike shewe of the Popes, he en¦tered quickly into their possessions, for to recover whatsoever things they had wrested away by fraude from his Ancetours. But this voice brought to passe, that while he strove for some one citie or towne, he lost his whole Kingdome, and that not from himselfe, but also the whole name of the Longobardes. These are wonderfull great actes of the Earthly Beast, taking away and bestowing Kingdomes at his pleasure. And that which is more, not so much by armed force, as by his voice, by which he exercised the power of the Dragon: although he bare yet the shewe of a tender Lambe, who was not able of himselfe to drive away the wolfe from his owne necke. ¶ And he exerciseth all the power of the former Beast: Such is the rising and forme of the Beast. His power is equall with the former, a great proofe whereof is given in this verse. As touching the equall power, whatsoever that first could doe, this second doth exercise all the same in his sight. But whence had he this so great power, but from the Dragon who gave it to the first above in the second verse? Wherefore both are the same, both for amplenesse of power, and also for the same authour himselfe from whom they received it. But as touching that some will have this second to be as it were the Chalbard man and esquire for the body of the former, is it to be thought that any is to be compared with Antichrist, either for power, or will to doe wickednesse? Surely he shall have noe felowe, but he shall sur∣mounte all men in naughtines, and wickednes by many degrees. There∣fore this Beast, is not any servant of Antichrist, but he himslfe, endued with no lesse power to doe mischievous deeds. But thou wilt say, they seeme to be distinguished, one of them working in the sight of the other. But this kinde of speaking sheweth not a diversity of person, but onely that the first remai∣ned alive after that the wounde was healed.
Albeit they are worthily set as two devided, because of the notable variety which the same person should obtaine in his growing. In which respect he is called both the seventh & also the eight King, chap. 17. Not because there are eight Kings, for there be onely seven heads, but because the seventh hath so great diversity, that for good cause he may seeme a newe one, and the eight. And if the second Beast be diverse, why would he procure honour rather to the former, then to himselfe, who hath equall power, and like notable lewdenes? It is necessary therfore, that the honour of the second cō¦sisteth in the honour of the first, which he thrusteth upon the inhabitans of the earth with so great endeavour, not so much through a desire to in∣crease an others, as his owne glory. ¶ And he causeth the earth, and the inhabitns &c. The effect of his power tendeth to that ende, that he may compell all false Christians to worship the first Beast, which the Spirit describeth diligently by his deadly wounde healed, declaring that this adoration agreed not to him, before that he re∣covered health from his wounde which he had. He was of great authori∣ty before he received the wounde, as wee have shewed; but of farre greater after the hurt was amended. VVhich order the Spirit observed before in the 3. and 4. ver. adding after his head was cut and healed, both admiratiō, and also adoration. And that adoration is this same which is now gotten by the labour of this. But why seeing the second is no other then then first revi∣ved, urgeth he not worship in his owne name, but onely in the name of that? This is a singular cunning of the most crafty hypocrites, to wit, a fained name of antiquity, wherby he might get estimation to himselfe in the world. For in this onely he should wholly labour, that the first might be worshipped, as though he chalenged no new thing to himselfe, but that onely which his Ancetours had left unto him by succession. From hence the Epistles of most auncient Popes were corrupted most impudently, cō∣terfait put in the place of true, and true wholly chaunged with strange ad∣ditions and detractions for their owne profit. From the same shop came the feigned donation of Constantine. Likewise the Decrees, which in their title have a shew of greater antiquity then trueth; and sixe hundred of that sorte. Neither is any other thing at this day so greatly laboured for, as that the auncient honour may be given to the Pope, that is, that the first Beast may be worshipped: it would be an unpleasant ambition openly to endevour to get honour to himselfe (though the Pope is not ashamed of this) wherefore he obiecteth the first Beast, under whose name he may serve himselfe more secretly. 13 And he doeth great wonders: Now is shewed by what way he decei∣veth
men, and obtaineth that worship for which he fighteth, as for heaven & earth: to wit, by working Miracles, in the which Antichrist should be wonderfull, whose comming is by the effectuall working of Satan, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders, as Paul hath forwarned, 2 Thes. 2.9. Which thing if Ireneus had observed in his 5. booke, chap. 28. he would not have called this Beast so much the Armour bearer of Antichrist, as Antichrist himselfe. No miracles of the former are rehearsed, but onely power, & great authority; of which there may be a distinct force from signes. It is manifest to all men how this Beast is commended for a notable fine worker of mi∣racles, by and by after he waxed whole of his wound. Beholde one or two (for it were an infinite thing to recite every one.) The Christians have ben protected wonderfully from the Devill in the Temple Pantheon, after that Boniface the 4. had consecrated it to all Saincts. Theodorus the next hea¦led with a kisse one diseased with the leprosy. No man in the whole army of Eudo, to whom but even a very small pice of the blessed Spongie had come from the POPE Gregory 2. was either killed or wounded in the battell against the Saracenes. The body of Formosus brought from the river Tiber into the Church of S. Peter, is saluted and worshipped with great reverence of the Images of the Saincts, in the entrance of the tē¦ple. A white dove like snow, whose necke was shining as Gold sate upon the right shoulder of Gregory the 6. whiles he celebrated Masse Whē the same was to be buried in the Palace of Peter, the doores of the Temple ta∣ried not the comming of the doore keeper, but of their owne accord lea∣ped backe at the bringing of his dead body. A certen lame woman by drinking the water wherewith Vrbain 2. had washed his handes after the Masse, was healed. Infinite are the things of this sorte, in which the Ro∣mane Pope glorieth, both olde and newe. For both are of like force to cō¦firme his authority. Which Zacharias knewe well, who translated into the Greeke tongue the foure bookes of Gregory the Great, concerning the miracles of the Fathers, that the miraculous power of the Popes might be come knowen as well to the Grecians, as to the Latines. But, wilt thou say the miracles of other men are not fewe. That is true in deede: but who ar all the slaves of the same Pope: of whom whatsoever wonders are done, they are referred to the defending, preserving, and increasing of his digni¦ty, as to the centre. From whence all these done of his servants, are wor∣thily said to be his, for whose honour alone they make. ¶ So that he maketh fire to come downe from heaven: His power to doe mira¦cles being shewed summarily, now he descendeth to some certen kindes, which the Papists will have to be three, the first, whereby Antichrist shall
seeme to rise from the dead; the second wherby he shall make fire to descende from heaven; the third is, the power of speaking given to the Image: which things seeing they are not founde in the Pope of Rome, as Bellarmine will have it in his third booke of the Romane Pope, chap. 15. it followeth, saith he, that he is not An¦tichrist. His rising from the dead, is gathered from his head deadly wounded, and healed againe, ver 3, of this chapter, and from that which is said after in the 17. chap. ver. 18. he was, and is not, and ascendeth out of the bottomelesse pit. Which rising againe wee have shewed to be found most plainely in the Po¦pe of Rome, when he was eased, and delivered from those miseries, wher∣with by the invasion of the Barbarians, he lay overwhelmed and buried, in mens opinion. For, that it cannot agree to the death of one man, fai∣ned for some fewe dayes, it shalbe manifest from the person of Antichrist, which the seventeenth chapter after will proove evidently, to be a long suc¦cession of many, not any certen and singular man. Especially also seeing that this wound was very sorrowfull, not inflicted on himselfe willingly, and in jest, but made by his enemies, where could be no place for counter¦faiting. Which faining of death was brought in by a false coniecture of men, and besides the trueth of the matter, and the very wordes of the scri¦pture. Therfore the Rom. Pope is famous for the first miracle, which if they please, they may call a resurrection, to which it is not unlike. Now what manner of one is he in regard of the second? Certēly those miracles seeme to be very great, which are done from heaven, or in the very heavens, whē as men have very little power over these bodies: as when a fire of the Lord falling from Heaven, consumed the burnt offring of Eliah: 1 King. 18.38. Like∣wise also when the Captaine over fifty men with his whole bande was destroyed by fire from Heaven, at the prayers of the same Eliah, 2 King. 1. Therefore Anti∣christ that he might not seeme inferiour to the famous Prophets, would set foorth himselfe by this sort of miracles. Gladly doe the Iesuites heare this, from whence they judge for a surety, that the Pope is not Antichrist, of whom, say they, not such miracle is read But Hildebrand granteth otherwise, who in his Epistle to the Germanes, said, that Henry the fourth being smit¦ten with his excommunication, was blasted with lightening. And not at all ad¦ventures, the Spirit doubtlesse ruling his tongue as before time of Cai∣phas; wherby the world might understand, how the Beast should make fire to descende from heaven. But there is no neede that wee should seeke a metaphoricall sense, when the History ministreth most plaine demonstra∣tions. Of which sort was that thing that Pope Zacharias in the moneth of Iune journeying twards Ravenna, in the day time was covered with a cloude a∣gainst the heate of the Sunne, & in the night time armies of fire went before him in
cloudes, Centur. 8. from Polych. booke 5. 25. In the same place is rehear∣sed that a Songe of Felix Archbishop of Ravenna, placed by the Pope Constantine in the most sacred confession of blessed Peter the Apostl , after a fewe dayes was soūd blacke, and burnt with fire, see it in the booke of Pontifical. they would make men beleeve, that it was blasted from heaven. But that is more cleere that a certaine Bihop shaking up with many taunts Hildebrand, for his privie grudge against Henry, was destroyed with lightening, and dying cryed Alas I miserable wretch bund with a chaine of fire am drawne to Hell: goe yee & shwe the Emperour that he may repent, and make amendes by duties▪ for his hinous offense committed agist od, against S. Peter, and against his Vicar, unlesse he had leiffer follow after mee going before to everlasting punishments. The same day al∣so the Bishop of Spira bearing some evill will to Hildebrant, gave up the Ghost. Cēt. 11. from Avent. booke 5. of Chronicles. Did not the Ambassadours of Armenia see upon the head of Pope Eugenius, while he celebrated the Masse at Viterbium, a beame of the Sunne shining with most cleare brightnes, and in it two doves ascending and descending? Centur. 12. In the City Barra when Innocentius was saying the Masse, and Lotharius the Emperour being pre¦sent, there appeared a golden crowne, wheron sate a white Dove: under the crowne hanged a smoaking Cnsr, and beside it two burning firebrands: In the same pla∣ce from the Chron of Saxe. What can be more cleare then these thinges? Wherefore now I thinke that the Iesuites will not deny, how that nothing doth here hinder, but that the Pope of Rome may well be the Antichrist. Concerning the third miracle wee shall see in his place, in the 15. verse afterward. 14 And he seduceth the inhabitans of the earth: Therefore these wonders ar not true, but false, and lying, such as are Antichrists according to that of Paul, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders, 2 Thess. 2.9. Although they are not called lying therefore, because they are meere delusions, in which there is nothing beside a bare shewe onely, but partly because they differ very much from true, howsoever they shalbe wonderfull, as which exceede not the powers of Nature, done by the power of the Devill, by a way unknowne to us, whereupon they affect the beholders with great ad∣miration: partly for that they pertaine to the establishing of errour and lying For whatsoever belongeth to the commendation of any thing what soever, which is contrary to the sacred trueth of the Scriptures, it is that lying signe: howsoever it is permitted of God to be very marveilous, both for to try the elect, and also to delude the wicked: whom God by his just judgement giveth over, that they should beleeve lyes, which would not receive the love of the trueth, as in the second Epistle to the Thess. secōd chap, 10.11.
To which rule that cannot deceave, if wee examine those apparitiōs which are said to have bene done at Spandavia, Birthinum, & other places in Ger∣many in the yeere 1549. those glorious Angels shalbe Devils trāsformed into Angels of light, as 2 Cor. 11.14. Let it therefore be true, which the Papists boast of their miracles, and admit that it were done in very deede, which is put in writing by their men. Yet neverthelesse while all those things doe carry away men from the trueth to errours and superstitions, they are wicked, they are lying, wholly of the same kinde, of which is this fire that the Beast bringeth from heaven. ¶ Saying to the inhbitans of the earth, that they should make the image of the Beast: These wordes as they are in the Greeke, may be referred to the Beast himselfe, as thou he should say, speaking to the inhabitants of the earth, that he had made an image of the Beast & c: as though he would render a wonderfull reason of his workes, declaring that he had done all thinges for this intent, that the former image of the Beast might be revived. Or they may be referred to the people, as all Interpreters doe translate, saying to the inhabitants of the earth, that they should make &c. as though it were writ¦ten, saying that they should make &c. Which is the ende of all these miracles, that the first Beast might be placed in honour with men, and it is in the power of the people to make this Image. For unlesse they give honour, there should be no glory for this Beast. But to make an Image to the Beast, is with the Greekes spoken in the third case  not , there is this difference, that a man maketh an image of some body, as a Painter, or Carver of Images, who fashioneth an Image for gaine, or for his minde sake: but he maketh an Image to some body, who maketh it for the sake, or honour of some body. But this Image is not any colou∣red picture, or image made of any matter. For all must be slaine, that will not worship this, in the next verse; but an Image made cannot come unto all men, unlesse either it be carried through all countries, or if it shall have a fixed place, all leave their dwelling places, for to goe thither into a strāge country. Furthermore this Image shall effect by his owne strength, that whosoever shall refuse this worship, he may be killed, as in the next verse. But this power is greater, then can agree either to a picture, or Image, howsoever wee have read that some have spoken at some time by the cunning of the Devill. Neither are the Images of living men wonte to be thrust upon the people to be worshipped: Images indeede may be set up for living men, but onely for civill honour, not religious worship. Therefore this Image is not any picture of the body, but a lively and expresse figure of honour, Kingdome, power, which the second Beast should carry of the former. For
this is that which the second striveth for, that in his person the first may be revived. VVhich his wicked ambition is declared most significantly in this kind of speaking. For first, when he desireth earnestly an image to be put to the first Beast, by the same he sheweth, that he doth require no newe thing, but onely the shadow of that olde thing, the trueth whereof had bin in for∣mer times. VVhich cunning wee called before, the fained name of Antiquity, above in the 12. verse. From whence also it may be manifest, that the first Beast was not the Emperours, but onely the Pope. For it had ben an un∣iust and impudent request, if the Pope had chalenged openly to himselfe, the honour of the Emperours; but he requireth nothing but that which was proper to the former Popes; who would not thinke that he ought to condescende to so reasonable a demande? Furthermore this image decla∣reth what manner of honour he desireth to obtaine among his worship∣pers, to wit, such as the Idolaters doe give to their Images, for he will sit in the hearts and consciences of men, as an Jdoll, as it appeareth manifestly from the adoration, and admiration whereof wee spake before. He desireth him selfe to be esteemed God; but the Spirit calleth him by a true name, a false God and an Image. The Spirit acknowledgeth not that foolish difference betweene Image & Jdoll, which of late the Idolaters have forged. But is it not more cleare then the light, that superstitious men have exalted these latter Popes to be certen divine maiesties, and not simply unto the former glory of the auncient Popes, which seemed to have bin utterly abolished by the warres of the Gothes, and their dominion in Italy? Doe not the sa¦me men worship this newe framed Image, as an Idoll? See those thinges which wee have spoken at the 6. and 9. verses. VVhereunto many other might be added, unlesse it were needlesse in a matter apparāt inough to the whole world. 15 And it was given unto him, to give a spirit to the Image: After that men began to worship the revived Beast, an image of the former, as it were an Idoll, to the ende that this who is his crafts maister might the more be∣witch the people, he should endue the Image with a vitall faculty. He alludeth to the Devillish arts of the Idolaters, wherby they effected that the Idols should utter oracles with distinct voices, that they might wrap the mindes of men in greater superstition. So the Pope having once gotten with men the honour of a divine power, played no longer the part of a dumbe per∣son, but forthwith began to speake, bid, forbid, set up, plucke downe, to blesse, to curse, to bragge openly, by mee Kings doe reigne: as Hadrian in his Epistle to the Archbishop of Trevir: Mogent. Coloniens. Whence hath the Emperour his Empire but from us? therefore he raigneth by us. Againe, that
That which the Emperour hath, he hath wholly from us. And also, Beholde in our power is the Empire to give it to whom wee will: being therefore appointed of God o∣ver nations and Kingdomes, that wee should destroy, and plucke up, builde and plan∣te. A terrible voice of the Image, and surely farre more terrible, then of the olde Beast, whose Image he is, which never durst mutter any such thinge. No marvaile though the Canonists quaking at this voice, doe freely pro∣fesse: that in these thinges which the Pope will, his will is to him for a reason, & that yet it may not be sayd; why dost thou so. At chap. quanto, of the translat. of the Bihop. And this is the third miracle, farre more wonderfull indeede, thē if some image or picture should utter a lowde voice: for this is noe newe thing, both renowmed from those heathen oracles much spoken of, & al∣so being the accustomed play of the Magitians: but that this image of the Papists should thunder with so terrible a voice, it was a thing which the world for good cause should be astonied at. In this wise therefore wee see this Pope a miracle worker, famous for these three sortes of miracles, by the which even the Papists themselves graunte, that Antichrist should be no∣tably knowne. ¶ And should cause that as many as will not worship the image: Now unto his fraude he joyneth violence: for, whom he cannot bring by miracles to wor∣ship him, he compelleth by punishements. But who is he that should cause, that as many as will not worship the image of the Beast, should be killed? Doubtlesse the Image. For there is the same nominative case of both the verbes, should speake & should cause. If the Greeke be translated word for word, they are more plaine, then as they are expressed commonly in latine; and it was granted to him to give a Spirit to the image of the Beast, that both the I∣mage of the Beast should speake, and should cause that as many as would not wor∣ship &c. From which it is manifestly apparant the image is the supposite of the verbe should cause. By which argument wee have proved before, that these thinges are not to be understood of any image made with hande, which to be of so great power is a thing uncredible, but of a lively image, which before wee said spake terribly, who would put to death any, which should refuse to acknowledge his Godhead. Neither is any ignorant, how great butcheries were made through the whole world of Christians, be∣cause men were not obedient to this Image. The Emperours themselves be∣ing squamish in this matter, sufferred punishement for refusing this ado∣ration, by the losse of their dignity, yea of their life. What shall wee thin∣ke came to the other multitude? It would be an infinite thing to recken up, and the matter is knowen well inough: Montanus and Plantine read, and doth cause; against the trueth of all other bookes.
16 And he maketh all small &c. The other punishement is of goods, in which they are punished, who will not receive the marke. And this marke briefly comprehendeth all that way, wherby any is kept in subiection to the Beast in any sorte. And it is to be observed, how the Beast requireth, that his vassals should be tyed to him by a stronger bande, thē God those of his houshold to him A Seale was sufficient for him to touch the toppe of the skinne, with some light signe. But the Beast will have his marke to sinke in more deeply; whereupon he useth a Character to be engravē on the very flesh according to that affection wherby he is wont more earnestly to urge obedience to man, then to God. In this verse therefore he declareth to whom it doth belong to take upon them the marke, & also in what parte. They are all sortes of men, as sheweth both the note of generalitie, and also the distribution of the same. For he passth over none, how contemptible soever and abiect, whom he hath not bound to him in some manner. Wi∣sely indeede, seeing small sparkles doe kindle a great fire: Cities are taken in that part very often, which was in least feare, and evē the underminings being neglected, doe overthrow the strongest and highest walles. Are not the Princes constrained to follow the multitude? Therefore very warily he thought that regard was to be had of small men, poore, and bond. Which so vigilant and exquisite carefulnes doth the more set forth the glory of Christ in destroying this Kingdome. As touching the wordes: And ma∣keth all that he may give them a marke &c. It is a short kinde of speaking, but very significant: all one as if he should say; he bringeth all into that case, that they willingly receive the marke from his hande. Wherefore in the translation I thought that I was not to departe from the very wordes. ¶ That he may give them a marke in their hande &c. Montanus, that they may give them markes: so Aretas. As though the Beast should compell men to imprint the markes in thēselves: but to make this sense good it should be written, that they may give themselves. Yet Aretas maketh no other sealer then the Beast. But after he hath shewed who are to be marked, now he de¦clareth in what parte, to wit, either in the right hande, or in the foreheads: In the right hand, to the ende that they should fight valiantly for the Beast to their power. For the marke is not to be received in the left hande, but in the right hande, being the stronger, and more ready member. In which manner are marked Emperours, Kings, and all Magistrates; furthermore the whole Clergie, also the universall troupe of religious men, Professours in Schooles, Canonists, Lawyers &c. All these are souldiours set in the rereward of the bande garding the Captaine, and the principall champions of the Beast. The marke is set in the foreheads, that all may see playnely, to whom obediēce
is due. In which part all the rest of the common sorte beareth the marke. For although they be not of so great strēgth as the former, to defend the Beast, yet it is needfull, that they confesse him openly, to whose tuition they be∣long. VVherefore the marke in the right hande, is a bond of nigher fami∣liarity, both because defence is some greater thing, then a bare professiō, and also because it goeth before it in order and honour. Although the or∣der is changed in the chapter following in the 9. verse, but as it seemeth to aggravate the thing, as wee shall see there. 17 And that no man might buy &c. The force of this marke is, that it may be a passeport for entercourse of marchandise among mē. How great losse then must they needs suffer, who because they shall want this privie token, may have to doe or make any bargaine with no mā? VVhich thing is ratified expresly in the Decrees: That no man ought even to speake to these mē to whom the Pope is an enemy, Caus. 11. q. 3. Yf an enemy. And againe Distin. q. 3. Gratian; That obedience is due from all men, to the chiefe Pope, that none may have any fellowship with him, to whom he shall be an enemy for his actes: nei∣ther shall he be able to remaine in the Church, who forsketh his chaire. To confir∣me which things, a forged Epistle of Clemens is alleaged; Neither must wee here tarry till one be excommunicated: but if that Clemens be an enemy to any for his naughty acts, doe not you expect that he should say unto you &c. That is, his bec∣kes are to be observed, that without warning wee turne away our selves frō them, with whom wee are able to conjecture that the Holy Fathr is angry. VVhat more plaine prohibitiō can there be to bargaine with them which wante the marke? The practise of this time confirmeth the same, but more evidently the former times, when the whole earth wondred at the Beast: for then he that wanted the marke, had no leave to exercise marchandise with any man. ¶ Save he that had the marke, or the name & c: A distribution of the marke into three kindes, the marke being put for all, as it commeth to passe in di∣visions, the name of the Beast, and the number of his name. The marke is the first and principall token proper to his defenders, and such as are famili∣ar with him, as it seemeth, consisting partly in ordaining the Clergie men, in whom is imprinted an indelebile marke of their perpetuall Romish bon∣dage, the divine providence so governing their tongues, that they should note the strength of their forged sacrament in those wordes, by which the marke of the Beast might be plainely seene of all mē. Partly in the othe, wher∣by the chiefe Emperours, Kinges, the other Magistrates, and every condi∣tion of men of something a superiour degree is bound to the humble ser∣vice of the Romish Pope. So Otto the first in the yeere 942. sware to Pope
Iohn the XII. That he would exalte to his power the holy Church of Rome, and Iohn the Rtour thereof, Distinct. 63. chap. To thee Lord. More fully in the booke of Pontificall. wherein expresse words the Emperour promiseth, free∣ly undrtkth, and warranteth, and sweareth before God and blessed Peter, that he from henceforth would be the Protector, Proctour and defendour of the chiefe Pope, and the holy Church of Rome &c. Clement. booke 2. Title Of the Othe. The Name is the proper naming of the Beast, given to the rest of the people, as a name derived from the Fathers or Ancestours, to whom the othe and ce¦remonies of ordaining did lesse cōpete. For the marke eyther of the othe, or ordination and such rites, is not printed in all the people (for these be∣longe to the Clergie, Great States, and others who execute a publike of∣fice) but there is an other easier, and readier way, wherby the multitude may professe themselves to be among the proper goods of the same Lord, to wit, so taking upon them his name, as in olde time servants did: that e∣ven as the Prince himselfe is called Catholike, Prelate, Pope: so they Catholi∣kes, Bishopists, Papists. Of olde some of these names were common, but at length the Pope chalenged them to himselfe; neither will he have any o∣ther to be Catholikes now, save those that are of his heard. And although these names doe flow to all his subiects withot difference, yet the common sorte are knowne by this badge onely, the other being marked with a pecu¦liar marke beside. But what need is there nowe of a third note? The two former containe the whole company of vile persons of this Kingdome. There is an other kinde of men somewhat further removed from the Em∣pire of the Beast, then that which even nowe I spake of. VVhich unlesse it will be marked at least with the number of his name, must knowe, that they are restrained from the use of any kinde of marchandise with the subjects of this Beast. But these seeme to be the Grecians, who unlesse they would ta∣ke upon them the number of this name, should be esteemed banished men from this Empire, and all the emoluments, which might be gotten in the same. The Number of his name is the very same that a name expressed by a number, or, that I may so say, a name of number. VVhich seeing it shalbe ma∣de manifest to be Latinus, from those thinges which shalbe spoken on the next verse, the trueth of this Prophecy is wonderfully well knowne, even from this part also: for the Beast before time did pursue the Greciās with so great hatred, that although he sawe them miserably spoiled of all their neighbours, would suffer no aide to be carried to them from the VVest, untill Michaell Paleologus about the yeere 1273. at Lions in Fraunce, a∣greed with Gregory the X. to make himselfe and all his people subiect to the number of the name of the Beast, that is, promised that all his people here∣after
should give all soveraigntie to the Latine Pope. Therefore of the three markes the Character pertaineth to great States and the Clergy, as Sonnes. The name to the people and common sort, as boundmen. But the number of his name to the Grecians being strangers. 18 Here is wisedome: he that hath understanding &c. Now he exhorteth us to number this name. From which exhortation, if wee shall consider it di¦ligently, some things may be learned, by which wee shallbe lead into the true knowledge of the name. For first, why should he require diligence ra∣ther in the number of the name, then eyther in the marke, or in the name of the Beast? It is manifest that this exhortation belongeth to the third member. But the Character, or name of the Beast had served for a more certaine know∣ledg, and made more plaine. VVherefore their affection was to be stirred up rather to the searching out of these things, from which they might hav hope of a greater fruit. The reason why these are omitted, and that alone is set before us to be considered, seemeth to be this, because the number of the name might beginne at what time Iohn wrote. The Character and the name had not yet taken beginning, even as neither the Beast himselfe, as wee have shewed: from whence they came under no accounte, or under∣standing. The names indeede of Bishops were common, even in those first ages: but the state of them then was of an other sort, then after that they were turned into a name proper to a certen man. The exhortation hath respect to the same ende: Here is wisdome: let him that is endued with un∣derstanding count the number: How great a torment had it ben to learned mē of that age, to assay a thing altogither impossible? VVould they not for just cause have abstained from the labour of seeking of that thing, to finde out which they could have no hope? The ēdevour of divers of them shew¦eth, that this opinion prevailed not in time past, as though this wisdome should belong to the time to come, in no wise to their time. Let this then be the first property; That the number of the name might be knowne, even to that age in which Iohn lived, not onely to himselfe by revelation, but also to another by searching out and study. Secondly it is expressely delivered that it is the number of a man, that is, such a name of a man, from whose letters of number, ariseth this number. VVhich yet is not the proper name of the Beast. For it was the number of a man, before the Beast was. Neither could it remaine in one person of a mā flourishing at that time, when Iohn was. For then the counting had bene uncertaine, doubtfull, and impossible. But it is the name of a nation, passing from one man unto some whole peo∣ple. Thirdly, the number shewed obscurely and darkely, declareth that it was dange∣rous
at that time to publish this name before all the world. For to what purpose is this darke shewing of the matter but to avoide an unnecessary offense? Whereunto Paul agreeth: but now yee know what withholdeth, 2 Thes. 2.6. From which it appeareth that the Apostles taught secretly the Churches cōcerning Antichrist, the which was not expedient for to be carried foorth into the wicked world. Not because through feare of danger they thought it were to be concealed cowardly, but because before the Beast rose up, when his name yet was not necessary, they would have the Church to be without needlesse troubles. A fourth common property ought to be ad∣ded from the former verse to these three, which are taken out of this verse; to wit, that this number doth loose them from the bond of prohibited entercourse of marchandise, who doe suffer themselves to be marked with the same. All which now being ioyned togither have this summe: That the number of name is a nume∣ral name of some mn, making the number of sixe hundred three score sixe, that might be numbred, at that time, when this Prophecy was first set out in writing, yet never∣thelesse shewed but darkely for to avoide unnecessary perill; by which at length they ar delivered from the prohibition of buying and selling, who doe receive the marke ther∣of. Which description will not suffer any more this name to be wandering, and uncertaine, but shall distinguish some one certaine, and true from all the rest. For assoone as the names shalbe examined by this rule of certaine trueth, which are brought of Interpreters, wee shall finde how all beside one are absurd. Some by a certen property doe resemble this number: of which sort I have knowne two. The first which Franc. Iunius a most fa∣mous man, and a great light of the Church bringeth, who will have this number to be the Popish learning, and the Canon lawe, as he calleth it, especially in the sixt booke of Decretales, added to the five former by Boniface the eight. For this number is perfect, and divers times rebounding perfectly from his partes: neither is there any part of the Popish lawe, which is not referred to his head, or contained therein. The Beast teacheth this name also, and maketh it, as it were a marke of his people. Yet notwithstanding seeing this name belongeth to the Beast farre spent and very olde, and not that auncient one, which was before his be∣ginning, neither the name of any man, it seemeth lesse to agree: especially seeing here is no danger, why a covert speaking of it should be necessary: neither lastly doth this name appertaine to thē, who least doe cleave to the Beast, of which sorte is the nūber of the name above ver. 17; but to the Beasts darlings, the Canonists, whō the Pope setteth much by. The other is of our most learned coūtrey man H. Broughton, Adonikam God is risē up, the name of a mā in Ez. 2.13. whose posterity ar coūted there 666. as though Iohn did say, there is the same name of the Beast, which is of that mā, whose posteri∣ty are read to be 666. that is, Adonicam.
A name surely very fit, seeing Antichrist vaunteth himselfe above every na∣me on earth. But seeing this name signifyeth no more then that which Paul had taught before evidently, saying, exalting himselfe above all that is cal¦led God, 2 Thes. 2.4. It is not likely that that now should be concealed by a darke speach, which before was noised through all the Church. VVhat troubles also were to be feared, if this name had ben published? that in the meane time I may say nothing of this, that the posterity of the same Adoni¦kam, afterward in Nehemiah are numbred sixe hundred three score & sea∣ven in the 7. chap. ver. 10. The rest of the names , in Aretas: in the later writers , and the like, partly are not the names of any man, or at the least not of a people, partly nothing was to be feared from them, to whose knowledge soever they should come: Romith or Ro∣magnus Romane come nighest of all: but the fourth property reiecteth this also, which could not be of force inough to recover the favour of the Beast. The Grecians willingly acknowledged themselves to be Romanes, and of a long time boasted of this name. Constantinople was commonly called, New Rome: yet in the meane time they were greatly hated of the Beast, un∣till at length they did shew their consent with the Latines, and yeelded the Primacie to the Latine Pope, Therefore all accounts being cast▪ I thinke that Lateinos is the name which the Spirit here biddeth us to number. Which is a name, whose letters after the account of the Grecians, doe accomplish this number, and unto which all the other properties doe agree: and so much the more, because from the Apostles times it hath ben extended to us, and the event hath so confirmed it, that it is now more cleare then the light at noonetyde, which was darke before. For so Ireneus in his 5. book chap 29. against heresies, But, saith he, the name Lateinos conteineth the num¦ber sixe hundred threescore and sixe: and it is very like to be true, because the most substantiall Kingdome hath this name, for they are Latines who now doe raigne. But wee will not boast of this. Such are his wordes. As though this were not the opinion of him alone, but he had received it frō another: but from what other man is it likely, then from Polycarp, whose scholar he was, and he Iohns scholar? Such therefore are these Beasts, whose lively image wee see in the Romane Pope, who according to the plaine interpretation of the wor¦des, the events of the times, and agreablenes of all things, so fitly without any violence casteth himselfe into every part of this first paterne, and that even to the least appearances, and likenesses, that I thinke the very Papists themselves cannot doubt any more, who is Antichrist. And thus farre cō∣cerning the Dragon and the Beast, according to the consideration of know∣ledg
encreased, which should come under the blowing of the seventh trumpet, for Hitherto doe the thirteene Centuries extend, ending in the yeere 1300. to wit, in the number of the name of the Beast, that is, a little after that the matter was brought to a point with the Grecians, who submitted them∣selves to the Latine Pope: with which number of his name the Spirit also cō¦cludeth this Prophecy of the Beast, shewing a very great consent of the is∣sue in every part. CHAP. 14. THEN I beheld, and loe a Lambe stood on mount Sion, and with him an hun∣dreth fourty and foure thousande, having his fathers name written on their fore heads. 2 And I heard a voice from heaven, as the sounde of many waters, and as the sounde of a great thunder: and J heard the voice of Harpers harping with their har∣pes. 3 And who did sing as it were a new song before the throne, and before those foure Beasts, and those Elders: and no man could learne that song, but those hundreth four¦ty and foure thousande, to wit, those which were bought from the earth. 4 These are they which are not defiled with women, for they are virgines: these follow the Lambe whither soever he goeth: these are bought from men, being the first fruites to God, and to the Lambe. 5 And in whose mouth was founde no guile; for they are without spot before the Throne of God. 6 Then I saw an other Angell flying in the middes of heaven, having an everla∣sting Ghospell, to preach to them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, & tribe, and tongue, and people. 7 Saying with a loude voice, feare God, and give glory to him: for the houre of his iudgement is come, and worship him which made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of waters. 8 And there followed an other Angell, saying, it is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great Citie, because shee gave the wine of the wrath of her fornication to drinke to all nations. 9 And the third Angel followed them, saying with a loude voice, if anie man shallworship the Beast and his image, and receave his marke in his forehead, or in his hande 10 The same shall drinke also of the winne of the wrath of God, of the pure wine, I say, which is powred into the cuppe of his wrath, and he shalbe tormented in fire & brymstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lambe.
11 And the smoke of their torment shall ascende evermore: neither shall they hav anie rest day and night, which worship the Beast and his image, and whosoever re∣ceiveth the printe of his name. 12 Here is the patience of the Saincts: here are they that keepe the commandemēts of God and the faith of Iesus. 13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying unto mee, write, blessed are the dead which dye for the Lords sake, from henceforth: even so saith the Spirit: for they rest from their labours, and their workes follow them. 14 And I looked, and beholde a white cloud, and upon the cloude one sitting like un¦to the Sonne of man, having on his head a golden crowne, and in his hande a sharpe sickle. 15 And an other Angell came out of the Temple, crying with a loude voice to him that sate on the cloude, thrust in thy sickle and reape: for thy time is come to reape; for the harvest of the earth is ripe. 16 Then he that sate on the cloud did thrust his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped. 17 Then an other Angell came out of the Temple, which is in heaven, having also a sharpe sickle. 18 And an other Angel came out from the Altar having power over the fire, and cryed with a loude voice to him that had the sharpe sickle, saying, thrust in thy sharpe sickle, and gather the clusters of the vineyard of the earth: for her grapes are ripe. 19 Then the Angel did thrust in his sharpe sickle on the earth, and cut downe the grapes of the vineyard of the earth, and cast them into that greate wine presse of the wrath of God. 20 And the wine presse was troden without the citie, and blood came out of the wine presse, unto the horses bridles, by the space of a thousand sixe hundred furlongs. Analysis. VVEE have spoken of the thinges done by the enemies, it followeth in this chapter concerning the vertue of the citezens, declaring what was the condition of the true Church, since the time that the battell was ended in heaven, the Dragon cast foorth into the earth, chap. 12.9. and the Beast began to come out of the Sea, chap. 13.1. Which condition is double, the first is of an host: where the happy lot of the Saincts is declared, from the Captaine, the Lambe standing upon mount Sion. Likewise from the souldiers both defined, and also selected, ver. 1: furthermore from the ioy of the Spi∣rit, expressed by a newe song, ver. 2.3. and the holines wherewith they are
endued, ver. 5. And this multitude of the Saincts is that seed of the wo∣man, scatered here and there in the world, whith whom the Dragon ma∣de warre, after that the woman in flying into the wildernes disappeared, chap. 12.13. The second condition is of fighting, wherby they goe forth in∣to the army: wher some ar Emissaries, who the breaking in being made, do skirmish with Antichrist, and first by the word: which is done three man∣ner of waies by three Angels following one an other in order. The first of which doth cast upon the earth a generall light of the Ghospell, ver. 6.7. The second foresheweth the ruine of Babylon, ver. 8. The third dispoiled the Beast of his coverings, and setteth him in the open light, by threatning a terri∣ble iudgement against them, who setting light by the judgement, doe ne∣verthelesse cleave unto him, ver. 9.10.11. But when as the weake are apa¦led at the afflictions and torments which they are cōstrained to undergoe, while they returne to the trueth, a double consolation is added, one of Iohn, ver. 12. The other of a voice sent from heaven, whereby the former is confirmed, ver. 13. And so the first coping is performed by the word. The second skir¦mishing is by deed, which is also double: The Harvest, and Vintage: unto the harvest the servant is furnished with an instrument, ver. 14. with a com∣maundement ver. 15. and goeth about the worke, ver. 16. Vnto the grape ga∣thering, the Angel cometh forth prepared and in a readinesse, ver. 17. re∣ceived the commaundement from an other Angel, ver. 18. and dispatched the bu¦sinesse, ver. 19.20. Scholions. Then I looked, and behold there was a Lambe standing: This Prophecy begin∣neth at that time, wherein the Dragon being cast into the earth, drove a∣way the woman into the wildernes, chap. 12.13. &c. where more fully the condition of the Church lying hid is declared, in regard of the clearer knowledge of the seventh trumpet, as hath ben observed at the beginning of the 12. chap. The eleventh chapter toucheth the state of former thinges, as it were in one word, spending all the rest of the Prophecy in the suffe∣rings of two witnesses, as the chiefe members: but here more largely is un∣folded in what state the affaires of the whole body wer in the meane time, both as touching the safety, and also in respect of the fortitude of some, by whose cōduct a ioyfull victory is begun. Iohn therefore repeating the mat∣ter from thence, saith, that he sawe a Lambe standing on Mount Sion. Which Lambe is Christ, the Sonne of God, as is manifest from his correlative in this verse his Fathers name. He playeth the Lambe all this time, patiently sufferring the Dragon and the Beast, neither punishing them with that seve∣rity, that both he was able, and also they had deserved. And yet notwith∣standing
he lyeth not downe carelesse, neglecting the safety of his people, but standeth in readinesse to defend them, covering under his winges the woman, and her scattered seed, that they should receive no hurt from the enemies. Mount Sion on which the Lambe standeth as on a tower or high hill, is the Church it selfe, which standeth firmly like Mount Sion against all the force of adversaries. Before it was the Temple, and the holy Altar, but a small covert to hide in, chap. 11.1. Afterward a wildernes, and desert, be∣cause it had noe cleere outward face on earth, chap. 12.6.14. Now it is called Mount Sion, because it persisteth invincible in the middes of these tē¦pestuous stormes. A notable confort against either the paucitie, or defor∣mity. ¶ And with him an hundred fourty and foure thousande: This bande of men is the same, which was before of the sealed, chap. 7.4. Aretas thinketh it to be an other, because the article having relation thereto is wanting. But it is wonte to be omitted in things very well knowen, as the woman in Iohn J knowe that the Messias shall come, which is called Christ, chap. 4.25. and ma∣ny the like. Verily these, beside the concurrence of the number, have also a name written in their foreheads▪ but what is this else then to be sealed? further more, they sing also a song, which no man could learne but they, ver. 3. There∣fore they are chosen out of the whole company of them that perish: upon whom alone, while those troubles of the Church continued, Christ be∣stowed the wholesome knowledg of himselfe. Wherefore in all things they are those sealed ones togither with the measured temple, and the womā sly∣ing into the wildernes, to be referred unto that time of the seaventh chap¦ter. From hence then see with how great a traine the woman was in the wil¦dernes: and how great a company of Saincts were in the temple with the two Prophets, chap. 11.1.2. Although it be very small, if it be compared with that, which possessed the holy city, and the court. But as before time there were unknowen to the world seaven thousand men▪ whih never bowed their knee to Baal, so of late in these last ruines of the Church, there were an hun¦dred and foure and fourtie thousand Saincts in Mount Sion, who when the rest of the whole world ran after the Dragon and the Beast, were conver∣sant alwayes together with the Lambe, never departing from his side. ¶ Having his Fathers name: Aretas, the Complut. edition, and another to the same ende read thus, having his name, and his fathers name: so also the old Latine translation. Which reading, as being more expresse, seeing wee are by Christ adopted to be sonnes, & so many copies agreeing, I thought is rather to be followed. As touching the chiefe point of the matter, there is no difference; yet one is more significant then the other. But from hence
there is light to illustrate that in the 7. chap. ver. 3. where mention is made of sealing, but no shewing what manner of make was imprinted; from this place wee learne, that there was writtē in their foreheads, that God by Christ was their Father. For iust cause is this made the badge of the Saincts, wher∣by most of all they are discerned from the wicked of the world, whose mā∣ner is, as wee see in the Papists blaspheming the sacred trueth, to condem∣ne of arrogancy, the filial confidence. But thou must observe, that there was not any sensible marking, or if that were granted, that yet it was not the signe of the Crosse, but his Fathers name written in their foreheads. 2 And J heard a voice from Heaven: from Mount Sion, where the Lambe stood with this multitude, from the Temple, to wit, from the Church. The sa∣me thing is signifyed by divers names. In this Mountaine onely they did bend themselves with all their power to praise God, the rest of the world following their wicked, and vaine studies. The voice which was heard, is set foorth by a triple similitude, of waters, thunders, & Harpers. Which three fold similitude noteth the progresse of the Church. The first voice belon∣geth to the Church declining, being confused, and not distinct, such as is the noise of waters: which signifyeth nothing, teacheth nothing, but beateth the eares with a certen unprofitable roaring. For when the woman went first into the wildernes, although farre most learned men flourished in the Church, as Athanasius, Basilius, Nazianzene, Chrysostome, Ambrose, Hie¦ronymus, Augustine and others, whose very learned workes made a great noise through the whole world; how notwithstanding was all this doctri∣ne in every place not understood, not perceived of many men, every one neverthelesse earnestly inclining to their superstitions? Yea the teachers themselves did not speake distinctly, and plainely, sometime preaching righteousnes by Christ onely, sometime attributing the same to their own workes: sometime taking away free will, sometime leaving the same whole: in word condemning Idolatry, in very deede stablishing it by the invoca∣tion of Saincts, worshipping of reliques, and such wicked superstitions. Certenly there was scarce any point of doctrine, which they did maintaine constantly alwayes in the same manner. Therefore that was a disordered noise, which rather oppressed the sense, then informed the minde with pro¦fitable knowledge. For as the wordes of a man giving up the ghost, die in his iawes, and make no distinct sounde for the understanding of the hea∣rers, so the trueth being now readie to die, sounded so confusedly in the conflict of contrary opinions: that scarce any word of it could be under∣stood. Yt notwithstanding in this disordered noise, the Saincts learned some thing, which avayled to the furthering of their salvation. If wee fol∣low
this interpretation, which the event maketh good, you may observe, what is the judgement of the Spirit concerning the writers of that age, tht pure doctrine can no more be drawen from their writings, then any profitable knowledge be gathered from the noise of the dashing toge¦ther of waves. I would have nothing taken away from their prayses: for that which they wanted was long of the time, not of their learning & wit, wherein they excelled. But I cannot but wonder at the daintinesse of our age, that the good corne being found out, it would feede againe with a∣kers. The second voice is of thunder, roaring, terrible, making a cracking by certaine respites. This voice is proper to the Church reviving, uttered by the Waldenses, the Albingenses, VVickliefe, and Husse. These did thun¦der vehemently, and the world was abashed with the great noise, but all feare vanished away togither with the roaring, while a newe violent soūd came suddenly upon them, as it is in thunder, at which men quake no lon∣ger, then their eares are filled with the noise. The voice of Harpers belon∣geth evidently to the trueth restored, immediately before the woman went out of the wildernesse, Confessions being made of the Churches everie where, the Augustane, that of Strasburge, of Basile, of the Swisers, of Sa∣xonie, most sweetly consenting all to one trueth. Therefore this threefold voice generally setteth before our eyes the whole course of the doctrine, from the first lurking of the Church, through all that long raigne of Anti∣christ. From which wee see, how every latter Prophecy is more cleere thē the former. First the assembly of the faithfull was shewed by the sealing, ch. 7. Afterward by the covering place in the Temple, chap. 11. Thirdly, by the flight into the wildernesse, chap. 12. Now more fully in this manner that wee have heard, and shalbe more evident in the particular exposition. 3 And which did singe as it were a new song: and doe sing, by the defect of the article, and which did sing, for and singing. A new song, is the praysing of God by Iesus Christ, through whom the elect are made children. It is called new, not because men now first began, to be, and to be counted the sonnes of God, but because in the true Christian Church this grace is communi∣cated to farre moe, then in any place else before the cōmunicating of the Redeemer, and confirmed by more plentifull arguments. In which man∣ner wee are said to have received the Spirit of adoption, Rom. 8.14. not because wee first have received it, but because more plentifully then before this ti∣me. Or there is a double song, ever since the first beginning of things, an olde, and an dewe. The first praised God, because wee were made sonnes by creation as Adam before his fall: the second extolleth God with praises, for that wee are made children by redemption. This is a new song, because it is
latter, although all the elect have used the same from the beginning. It is sunge before the Throne, the Beasts, and the Elders; because chiefly this pray¦sing is done in the publike assembly of the faithfull: although this assem∣bly was in the wildernesse, and not perceived of the world. Or it is sunge before the Throne, because whosoever professeth this faith in trueth, he be∣longeth to the assembly of the elect, although the difficultie of the times, sufferred not publike congregations to be gathered, in which they might acknowledge the same thing freely. ¶ And no man could learne that Songe: Through all the space that the Church lay hid chap. 12.6. For now the multitude of the faithfull was certen, definite, and that might easily be numbred, they being picked out from every Tribe, which should sing this new song, above in chap. 7 For as once God separated the twelve tribes of Israelites to be his people, frō the rest of the whole world, neither could any stranger ioyne himselfe un∣to that company, untill the partition wall was broken downe: so nowe hath God disjoined the false worshippers from his, by the strong walles of the courts: of which these are thrust up into the inward temple, as into a certen straight and narrow prison; they in the meane time reioycing in their outward and larger court, chap. 11.2. VVo could not, or at least would not conceive, what the Saincts did sing within: but with a certaine bastard melodie, made a great noise, praising God for their adoption, but made partly by Christ, partly by their owne strēgth: shewing by this thicke Sibolth of what kinde they are, Iudges. 12.6. There should be thē a very small nūber in respect of the other multitude of them that did sing this song for a certaine time. Yet after Antichrist should beginne to de∣crease by little and little, the number of the faithfull should increase day∣lie, in so much that at length it could not be numbred, chap. 7.9. In this wise is the joy of the Spirit; their holines is described in the other words, and first, that they are bought from the earth, that is delivered of God from the false and counterfait Church, as it were out of the middes of a burning fire, to wit, by the woonted signification of the word earth. 4 These are they which are not defiled with women: VVell hath Aretas obser∣ved, that these thinges are not spoken against marriage. For what defiling can be there, where the bed is undefiled? Heb, 13.14. VVas this company unmaried, and onely of Priests? Nay mariage in time past was not forbīd∣den even unto the Levites, neither is this number made of the Tribe of Le∣vi alone, chap. 7.4. &c. Certenly neither were the Christian Elders with∣out wives untill Hildebrand, who to the ende that his Clergie might not be defiled with chast mariages, opened a way to Sodomitry. But perad∣venture
there was none in this multitude, defiled either by the spottes of unlawfull company, or by the infirmity of the flesh. Shall wee thinke that repentance is waxen so fraile since Christ came, which before he tooke u∣pon him flesh, had such power to cleanse? Wherefore it cannot be that wo∣men should be taken properly in this place: but to be defiled with women, is as much as to worship Idols: whereunto wee knowe that, to commit fornica¦tion, is referred every where in the scriptures, as, they goe a whoring after their Gods, Exod. 34.14. And in Ezechiell, thou hast played the whore with the Sō∣nes of Aegypte; that is, thou hast worshipped the Gods of the Aegyptians; and so in many other places. According to which rule, not to be defiled with women, is the same, as not to worship the Gods of women. Who then are these women? the Locusts, the people of the Angell of the bottomelesse pit, the army of the Romne Pope, which had haire, as the haire of women, chap 9.8. These bought from the earth, consented not to the same Idolatry with the Locusts women, neither worshipped their King, adoring either the Beast, or his I∣mage, or in receiving his marke in their forehead, or hand; or if peradventure for a time they were carryed away with the common errour, yet at length they renounced the same by repentance, which doth so wipe away all sin∣nes, as if they had never ben defiled with them. ¶ They followeth the Lambe, whither soever he shall goe: Obeying their Cap¦taine Christ in all thinges, and hearkening to his commandements onely. Montanus inserteth for, thus, for whither soever he shall goe &c. ¶ These are bought from men: By the merit of Christs blood, saved from the generall contagion, and chosen out of the multitude of those that pe∣rished; least any should attribute salvation to them from that integritie, which was mentioned even now. That purity was not sufficient to salvati∣on, so farre as it is inherent in themselves, but the price payed by Christ. ¶ The first fruites to God: In respect of the exceeding great multitude, which at length should embrace the trueth, darkenesse being put away, chap. 20.5.6. &c. 5 For they are without blasme: God seeth noe uncleannesse in them, upon whom he putteth the most pure robe of his Sonne; in him doth he behold the elect, in the imputatiō of whose righteousnes consisteth this most pure integritie of theirs, not in the perfection of their owne vertue. Aretas o∣mitted before the throne of God, and putteth in the place of it, that which is taken from the former wordes, these are they that follow the lambe. 6 Afterward I saw an other Angel: Hitherto the generall constitution of the whole Church, in as much as it pitched the tentes with the Lambe: now followeth the battell begun by a few citizens: and first by those who
doe set upon the Beast by the word. For about the ende of a thousande yee∣res, after the first flight of the woman into the wildernes, as shalbe clearly ma¦nifest from the twentieth chapter, the Lambe sent foorth some light har∣nessed souldiers, who riding about the campe of Antichtist, should pro∣voke him to battell; and should endure his first assault. These three ar An∣gels, the first of which were those famous men, who rose about the yeere 1300, Ockanus, Marsilius Patavinus, Iohannes de Ganduno, Arnolds de Villa Nova, Dantes, Petrarcha, and especially Iohn Wicklefe an En∣glishman, whose doctrine was more fruitfull, then of the rest, did sinke in more deeply, and tooke such rootes, that it could never be rooted out sin¦ce that time: one Angel onely is here rehearsed, the type of whom I doe ap∣ply to many learned men, because in such signes of future things, the agree¦ment rather of the thinges is regarded, then the unity of the persons: he flyeth through the middes of heaven, because the trueth now at length after a long time being revived, drew with it yet much filth of the earth, by which burden being pressed downe, it could not straightway fly up into heaven, that is, it could not attaine at the first to the celestiall purity, but shaking the winges it abode in the middes betweene both: see chap 8.13. Hence it was, that, that holy man, although he knewe assuredly the trueth in ma¦ny thinges, by whose swift winges he flying up aloft, left the common sort of men farre beneath on the earth, yet he was blinde in some thinges, and much deceived, so as he sate in the lowest seates of the Saincts hitherto. Therefore the first beginnings of the Church rising againe seteth this An∣gel in the same place, where Gregory the Great was set, about the time al∣most of her greatest ruine, as wee have shewed at the 8. chap. ver. 13. Having an everlasting Ghospell: That is, the doctrine of salvation by faith in Christ onely, as God hath ordained by his eternall decree. It is called e∣ternall, as though purposely the Spirit would meete with the offēse of those times, that the trueth restored should in every place be condemned of no∣velty: but he declareth that it is eternall, whatsoever men prate; which should now shine upon the world by their labour: togither also he signi∣fyeth by the same, that the eternall trueth had ben banished frō the earth before, thrust out by humane inventiōs. Let men therefore see how much they are deceived, who doe traduce, as newe sprunge up, that which was before all ages: but doe often vaunt that their owne dreames, which the Kingdome of darkenes brought forth but yesterday, are as it were of very great ātiquity. This Angel hath the Ghospell to the ende that he should preach it to the inhabitans of the earth, that is, to the earthly citizens, and before this light was brought of that whorish Church. To whom now power
should be given to open their eyes, and to harken to the Heavenly trueth. ¶ Saying with a loude voice: Now he commeth unto the sermon of the Angel, so much the more to be observed, because it is the first of the voi∣ces, which the seaven thunders uttered in chap. 10.4. for it belongeth to the same time. Those Tunders followed the Turkish tyranny, to which they are added in the tenth chapter, or rather began with it, and are con∣tained within the compasse of the second woe, as appeareth from the ele∣venth chap. ver. 14. This combate of the Angels began at the same time, as wee shall make more plaine at the 20. chap. ver. 4.5. But in this very chapter, of that threefold voice, whereby is noted the proceeding forward of the Church, the second is like a thunder, ver. 2. Which second voice is begun by this battell undertaken of the Angels, as hath ben observed be∣fore: and so reioyceth in the name of thunder, whereof mentiō was made in the 10. chap. ver. 4. The Spirit would not have these wordes to be rela∣ted before, thereby shewing the deafenes of those ages (to which these voi¦ces belongeth) which in hearing heard not: which yet at the sound of the se∣venth trumper, when they were past, should be knowne most plainely: for which cause they are reserved to this time. 7 Feare God, &c. The argument of the sermon was most fit, when all re∣verence toward God lay wholly quenched, in comparison of that which the commaundemnts of mn did teach: according to that of Isaiah, This people draweth neare to mee with their mouth, and honoureth mee with their lippes: but they have remooved thir hrt frre from mee, and their feare toward mee is that which they have ben taugh by the commaundement of men, chap. 29.13. So when VVicklefe came forth into the middest, they trembled in every pla∣ce at the commaundements of men, but the commaundements of God were despised with out feare. Yf any had not ben present at the sacrilegious Masse, had not numbred certaine prayers upon beades, nor abstained frō meates forbidden on set dayes, and had not performed other such foolish and ungodly ceremonies, he thought he had committed some hainous wickednes: but if the same man knewe not God and his sacred trueth, had no trust in his mercy through Christ, went to Saincts for refuge, and after as he was in any distresse, defiled the holy name of God almost at everie word, and violated other duties of true godlinesse, he fell no sting of con∣science. From hence therefore for iust cause the holy Angel began his prea¦ching, that he might revoke mē from a false feare, to the knowledge of the true God. Consider the doctrine of Iohn VVickliefe condemned in the Councill of Constance, thou shalt see how greatly he laboured to over∣throw humane toyes, and to teach necessarie godlines.
¶ For the houre of his iudgement is come: So the Angel in chap. 10.7. avou∣cheth that the finishing of the mystery was at hande, from which wee see how this Angel soūdeth againe as an Echo to the very great crying out of him, as in the same place ver. 3. And it could not be, but that he should vehe∣mently admonish men of the most grievous iudgement of God hanging over their heads, when he saw horrible impiety to beare sway every where. VVhich iudgement began to be shewed in that same houre in that first re∣surrection, of which in chap. 20.5. At which the Papists for iust cause might have trembled, unlesse they had hardened their harts, seeing they might have acknowledged from that slipping away of men to the trueth, which they sawe to be every day more and more, both their olde impietie, and al¦so that most iust punishmēts wer prepared for thē, ūlesse they repēt betime. ¶ And worship him that made heaven. An other chiefe point of the sermō, that men forsaking Idolatry would convert unto the true God. Whom he describeth by the workes of creatiō, who at that time should finde the world, the Creatour being despised, giving divine honour to Gods made with handes, to wood, stone, painted Images, as chap. 9.20. And many har∣kened to the Angell. For from that monstrous Idolatry mē perceived the foulenes of that whole corrupt religion. But when the rest would not be amended, God sent the Turkes into the world, as wee have shewed at that place even now spoken of. Yet see his exceeding great mercy, who before he would let loose the raines unto them, sent this Angel, who by wordes should turne men if it might be from their ungodlines, to the ende that by their repentance he also might turne away his scourge. Should he yet af¦ter so long patience deale by admonishing, rather then by striking? But such is the incomprehensible goodnes of our God, that he punisheth not before extreame necessity doth plainely compell him. He bridled there∣fore the Turkes, which then began to be dreadfull, that they should bring no great dammage to our Europe, untill the Angel had executed his of∣fice. Which when it was in vaine with the most part, what should stay the rodde any longer? ¶ And an other Angel followed: The Complut. edition and the Kinges bible have, and another second Angel followed. The second Angel propheci∣eth of the fall of Babylon, that is, of the city of Rome, and Romish power, as is manifest frō ch. 17.5.9.18. He speaketh of futur things, as of those that wer past, after the māner of the Prophets, because it is no lesse certē, which is foreshewed to be hereafter, thē if it had bin already effected. Though he doth not only give knowledge of a future thing, but also sheweth a thing begū at this sermon. This Angel are those Ministers of the following age.
The chiefe among which were Iohn Husse, and Hierome of Prage, who fought valiantly against the Primacy of the Pope, as we may see in the Arti∣cles condemned in the Councill of Constance. Him they desired to thrust out of his Antichristian throne, togither with whom Babylon Rome must needs fall downe. Neither could it be that the Pope should longe escape, whose beginning was wicked, his increase worse, and his ripenesse no lon∣ger to be borne with, as these two holy men made apparant. They prea∣ched about the yeere 1414, and did shake the Romish tyranny somewhat more forcibly then Wickliefe: which also the Spirit did signify should be, making every Angel following, a more fierce enemy then the former. Worthily did they cry out that Babylon was fallen, when Bohemia being in∣lightened by their sermons, forsooke straightway the Pope of Rome, and destroyed every where the Monasteries, the habitations of the Romish su¦perstitions. Which beginning was a famous proofe of the whole ruine at length, which they saw would be shortly, whereof they should receive a most sure pledge in this first beginning. Because of the wine of the wrath: That is, the wine of fornication, whereby shee hath provoked God to wrath. This wine is Idoltry, which superstiti∣ous men drinke up no lesse sweetely, then most pleasant liquor. Rome gave this wine to all nations. VVho knoweth not that Rome vaunteth that shee is the mother of all Churches? VVhich thing is most true, if wee regard supersti∣tions, errour, Idolatry, and all the other corruption, all which in generall the whole VVest part sucked from Rome, as it were from the mothers brestes. But shee shall be punished shortly for her wickednes, which tho∣ught it not inough to corrupt her selfe, ūlesse shee poysoned all the rest of the nations with the contagion of her impiety. The Complutent edit. and the Kings Bible doe omit the coniunction causall for, evē as also the word city in those that goe next before, with which agreeth the common transla¦tion, but that it hath the relative in stead of the coniunction. Aretas rea∣deth as our copies: but this diversity chaungeth not the meaning. 9 And the third Angel: and an other third Angel, as some copies have it. The third should be the strongest of all. He should not onely nippe An¦tichrist with most grievous wordes, but also most severely threaten destru∣ction to all, who will not depart from the humble service of him. This Angel was Martin Luther, that began openly to traduce Antichrist, about the yeere 1517, who detested this infection more bitterly, by how much through the revelation of the Spirit of God he had more sure knowledge of the filthinesse of the Romish Beast. The Spirit here attributeth to him a troublous sermon, and full of tumult. And indeede there is no man, who
hath tasted the workes of that holy man, to whom they seeme not to cast a savour of the heavenly trueth: they are in every place so hot and earnest, and doe flame with a certen fiery heate: yea he came some time to that fer∣vency, that he could not stay himselfe from foule and unchast similitudes. Many desired a greater moderation and modestie: but from hence we may see, with what inward motion he was carried. The world was sicke of a great drowsie disease; which could not be shaken of unlesse he had spoken vehemently, dealt roughly, and stung them. Of which labour he received happie fruit. Men were wakened out of sleepe by his warnings, and seeing in what great daunger they were by worshipping the Beast, they delivered themselves from his snares, assoone as they could. Therfore they forsooke the authour of their evill, and fled unto the salutary trueth. A matter of a great troble and sturre. But a wheele is not turned about without noise, & the Spirit in some part doth manifest the trouble that followed by this ve∣ry great earnestnes of the sermon. ¶ Yf any shall worship the Beast: He dealeth in earnest, and cutteth to the quicke. The summe of the sermon is contained in this conditionall propo¦sition, if any shall worship the Beast, he procureth to himselfe eternall destruction: The antecedent parte is found in this verse, the consequent is declared by the two sequents. As touching the worship, it is set foorth first by a double subject, the Beast & his Image. The Beast, simple and unskilfull men doe worship, who are carried with the present glory of thinges: His Jmage, the more learned and skilfull, who see further, and worship the present Beast, for the reverend antiquity of succession, and that auncient image renew∣ed in this that is present. Both are in the same state, unlesse they repent. Be∣fore, the worshipping of the Image was common to all, chap. 13.15. but where in some respect it is distinguished from the adoration of the Beast, it seemeth to consist in this diffeēce of learned and unlearned. Afterward the manner of worshipping is declared: which is done two wayes, by re∣ceiving the marke, either in the forehead, or in the hande. In the forehead are marked the cōmon sorte of men, who by a naked profession doe acknow∣ledge their humble service. In the hande, the Princes, Peeres, the whole route of Ecclesiasticall men, and the rest of that sorte, whose dutie is to maintaine the Beast to their power. Why then is the order changed, & the first place given to the marke in the forehead, to which the second was before, as which place belongeth to men of lesse reckenning? chap. 13.16. Sure∣ly that the greater condemnation of those defenders may be shewed, as though he should say, Every one shalbe tormented with fire and brymstone, who hath but received the marke in the forehead, much more they which have received
it in their hand. But why is noe mention made of the number of his name? Be∣cause this token is proper to the Grecians, who should worship the Beast by their consenting with the Latine Church, chap. 13.17. But this An∣gell was appointed for the people of the West part: especially Greece also being destroyed by the desolation of the Turkes. But thou must observe, that this worshipping is performed not by falling downe on the ground, but by acnowledging a soveraigntie, in which māner they may worship, who never sawe the Beast. 10 He shall drinke also of the wine of the wrath of God: The consequent part of the conditionall proposition describeth the destruction of them who worship, both by the kinde of punishement in this verse, and also by the eterni¦ty thereof, in the verse following. That first is set foorth allegorically in the beginning of the verse; after it is declared by proper wordes in the other parte. To drinke of the wine of the wrath, seemeth to be a metaphore made by antanaclasis or reciprocation unto the wine of fornication: wherby idolatry is si∣gnifyed, wherewith men are delighted no lesse, then with the pleasantnes of wine. As therefore men reioyce in their sinnes, so God shall reioice no lesse in punishing them: for he shall mixe for them the wine of his wrath, according to that in Deut. 28.63. Or the reason may be taken from them that doe kill wicked men by poisonned drinkes, as once the Athenians, & other people, and at this day the Turkes. But what is this pure wine mixt? These thinges seeme to be contrary: a thing is said to be mixed, which is powred in for him that shall drinke, although it be not allayed with wa∣ter: but that exposition seemeth to mee to be more probable, which will have divers pure wines to be mixed togither; which mixture doth much sooner cause drunkenesse, and maketh a greater disturbance of the body. Water being mingled alayeth the strength of pure wine; which tempering is not fit to signify the very great severity of punishement. Let therfore the mixt pure wine be iudgement without mercy to the unrepentant. ¶ He shalbe tormented in fire and brymstone: These thinges more properly doe note, that the punishement shalbe like that, which of olde was of So∣dome. A sorrowfull spectacle whereof is yet at this day to be seen in the world in the ashy earth, and in the stinking lake. A visible marke doubt∣lesse of an eternall punishement. This punishement shalbe taken before the Angels and the Lambe, that the torment may be the more grievous, by how much it is more known to their enems. ¶ And the smoke of their torment: These thinges doe declare the eternity of the punishement: for the smoke of the torment shalbe eternall. But the smoke is taken for fire, of which it is a token. Here it is used, for to teach
that the worshippers of the Beast shal not only be tormēted for ever, but al¦so that their torment shall never be hidde from the Saincts, who at least shall see alwayes the smoke thereof. As touching that he saith they shall hav no rest day nor night, by the same he sheweth that their torment shalbe con∣tinuall also, beside that it shalbe eternall. The repeating againe of the an∣tecedent of the conditionall proposition, belongeth to the earnestnesse of this sermon: where he maketh mention onely of the mark of his name, it is because this badge is common not onely to them who are marked in the forehead, but also to them who receive the marke in their hand. Where∣fore ô yee Papists consider diligently, how horrible punishement abideth you, unlesse you forsake the Pope of Rome. These stinging wordes of Mar¦tin Luther were not of a man, and of an angry adversary, but which the Ho¦ly Ghost ministred unto him. Ye see that the man was sent from the cāpe of Christ himselfe. And thinke not that these threates are dead with him, but let your eares ring with the same continually. For they live at this day, and shall no lesse have their force for ever, threatning eternall destru∣ction to every one who doe yet worship that Romish Idoll. Yea a more grievous punishement is prepared for men, by how much the ungodlines of the Popes chaire is more apparant: let every one heare, who regardeth his eternall salvation. 12 Here is the patience of the Saincts: These thinges perteine to consolati∣on, which the Angel useth with the same as a conclusion shutting up his sermon. Albeit they may be the words of Iohn, adding these things after his manner like an acclamation. But it skilleth little whose of these two they were. The speach is defective, for, here is the tryall of the patience of the Saincts: here is the tryall of them that keepe the commaundements of God. For now it should appeare, who were endued with true patience, and who perfor∣med the duties of unfained godlinesse. Antichrist should be driven into such rage by the preaching of Luther, that it was neddfull for men to be godly indeede, that would endure stoutly his assault, and yet not forsake their profession. Of which furie Germanie is witnesse, which from hence did wholly abounde with murders, & the blood of the godly, chap. 11.7. And no lesse our Englād for her part, which thē every wher did burne with the fires of the faithfull. VVhat wer the horrible sloughters of France? the ashes of Merindoll & Cabrieres are a signe of most outragious cruelty. Now was there need of vertu, without which none could stande. And that we may know in how great dāer things were, we read that the very Cap∣taines & stāderd-bearers quaked for feare. How timorous was H. Melanc∣thō, untill Luther raised him up, & cōforted him? The like feare without doubt apaled many men.
13 Then I heard a voice from heaven: The other consolation is of a voice sent from heaven. For to the ende that the Saincts should be more prōpt to undergoe danger, it is avouched from heaven, that the utmost trouble which the wicked can bring upon the faithfull, is present happines to them: and that it shall not be in vaine, although it seemeth otherwise to the world, that they doe throwe themselves into so great perils for the trueths sake: for their workes should follow them, of which they should receive straight∣way a most sweete fruit, and obtaine at length a most blessed and ample re¦ward. Neither is it without cause, that there is so expresse mention of the time, from this time, from now, that I may so say: the common translation hath, from now. Theod. Beza thinketh that this member is to be ioined ne¦cessarily with blessed, to which he addeth next, blessed from hence foorth &c. But it seemeth that it is not to be put out of the place, which the Spirit ad∣visedly giveth to it, ioyning it with which die, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from hencefoorth. Not but that the dead in former ages also were blessed, but because these times required necessarily this speciall comfort. As long as they had to doe with the Heathen persecuting Christ in his mē¦bers professedly, no man could doubt, but that he ought to spend his life in that cause. But in the combate with them who boasted that they alone were true Christians, iustly the more simple might doubt, whether they should resist unto blood. Therefore to the ende that the Spirit might take away this scruple, and that the faithfull should not doubt to die in this cō¦flict, he pronounceth them happy who die from hencefoorth, as though he should say, a crowne of celestiall glory doth remaine no lesse for all those who die in the fight against the Beast, then for those who for Christs sake were slai∣ne before time by the Heathens; wordes full of confort. And so indeede it came to passe in the Church restored after the yeere 1543, after the Parlia∣ment of Aquen, against them of Merindoll and Cabriers, & many others having sufferred calamities in Fraunce: when a rumour also was spread a∣broad, of the entreprises of the Emperour, and of the Pope against religi∣on: for then many weake brethren being amazed at the dangers present and expected, began to thinke by dissembling their religion, to provide for their goods and life. Which thing feare persuaded them to be lawfull by the example of Nicodemus. Against this great feare, a voice sounded from heaven, when certē writings full of holinesse were published by Iohn Calvin, of avoiding superstitions, and an excuse to the Nicodemites: in which by most strong arguments he disprooveth that weakenes, and proveth a necessitie of testifying our religion openly, whatsoever daungers shalbe neere at hande: that the glory of God ought to be more pretious to us, then this fraile life, which to speake pro∣perly,
is no other thing then a shadow. VVhich iudgement other holy men also confirmed by their writings, Philip Melancthon, Martin Bucer, Peter Mar¦tyr, and the whole Church of Zuriche, as wee may see in the Opuscules of Calvin. This is that voice from Heaven. 14 And J looked and behold a white cloude: Thus farre the three Angels fighting by the word; now a fact is added, and engines are brought forth to beginne the ruine of Babylon. VVhich preparatiō is double, the Havest & Vintage: The harvest is the gathering of the good, according to that saying of Christ, the harvest is great, but the labourers are fewe: pray therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he would send foorth labourers into his harvest: Mat. 9.37. And it is set foorth in three verses: the preparation whereof is in two Angels, one the Prince ver. 14 and the other an Administer ver. 15. VVhose la∣bour is ioyned togither as a double thūder apaling with a double crack, one by & by following an other; afterward followeth the executiō ver. 16. As tou¦ching the words, a cloude hanging aloft signifyeth a certaine highnesse, such as are honours, dignities, Magistrates, Principalities, and such like: to which an high place is granted among men, though not the highest, see∣ing the cloudes doe stay beneath the skie. VVhich signification is confir∣med by that which was spoken before of the two Prophets, who rising from the dead, went up into the Heaven by a cloude, that is, were earryed unto the due height of dignity, by the helpe of certaine inferiour Princes, chap. 11.12. A white, cleare, and cheerefull cloude betokeneth gentle, mercifull, and comfortable principalities. One setting like to the Sonne of man, is a certen chiefe man placed in this high degree of dignity. The ambiguity of which phrase hath carryed away some Interpreters into a contrary opinion. Cō∣monly it is wont to be taken of Christ, but by prefixing the articles, of which here are none. Furthermore seeing this like to the Sonne of man doth nothing, but at the commandement of an other, it cannot agree unto Christ: he is therefore a man of our state and condition: whose forme be∣ing represented to Iohn, resembling the Image of a future man, worthy∣ly is said to be like to the Sonne of man. The golden crowne noteth his Kingly dignity, which is of a larger dition then a Magistrates of a city. The sharpe sickle in his hande sheweth a faculty and readinesse to cut downe. VVee shal see the application straight way, after the unfolding of the generall mat∣ter and sense of the type. 15 And an other Angel: An other beside the three former; and the fift in number from him sitting in a cloude: this cometh out of the temple, a citizen, and as is likely, a Minister, and Pastour of a purer Church, whose office is not so much to reape with his owne handes, as to stirre up him that sitteth
on the cloude to the labour, both by the faculty given him of God, and also by the opportune ripenesse of the corne. Hereupon he biddeth him to put in his sickle, and reape. For now the time to reape is come. The thing being attē∣pted before, obtained no ioyfull issue, because yet the time was not fitte; but now God would prosper their godly endevours. It is to be observed, seeing that this Angell commeth out of the inner temple, not the exteriour court (which partition was made in the eleventh chapter) that the Spirit is yet employed in a more full declaration of the same time, to wit, of the Church lying hid, and shut up in a narrow place, as wee have shewed at the first verse of this chapter. 16 Then he that sate on the cloude thrust in his sickle on the earth: The thing is put in executiō, and wanteth not successe, the corne falling of his owne accord before the sickle through the great ripenesse of it. The word earth was taken before commonly in the worse part. In which signification it may note that those, who before were inhabitans of the earth, that is, mem∣bers of the earthly Church, which is very farre off from the true and heaven∣ly, shalbe gathered now at length into the bundels of the more pure cor∣ne in this harvest; or if the harvest be onely of the reprobate, so as that these alone are cut downe with the sickle: the meaning of the vision com∣meth to the same ende, but that former sense is more naturall. For it de∣clareth that at length there should arise confortable Princes and Magistra¦tes, who by the persuasion and exhortation of godly Ministers, should ga¦ther from Antichristian superstition, their subiects into the true Church, and the syncere profession of wholesome doctrine, but should drive away the contrary impiety and the practisers thereof out of their coasts. Such white cloudes were Saxonie, Misnia, Hassia, Prussia, the free cities, Stras∣burge, Zurich, Berne, Geneve, Basill &c. They that sate on these cloudes were Frederike of Saxonie, Mauritius, Philip the Lantgrave, Ioachimus of Brunswike, Albert of Brandeburg Princes. The Senate of Zuriche, of Aus∣purge, of Berna, of Geneva, and the rest. The Angel comming out of the Temple, is Iustus Ionas, Philip Melancthon, Nicolas Amstorfius, Iohn Dulcius, which wer persuaders of Frederik Duke of Saxonie for to abroga¦te the private Masse, and to beginne reformation. Likewise Zuinglius, Bu∣cer. Capito, Blaverus, and the other holy men in their places. The sickle put on the earth, are the handes of Princes and Senatours of cities, put foorth for the amending of corruptions: to wit, when the Masse was abrogated at Wittenberg, in the yeere 1521. the Idoles, Images, and Altars being ta¦ken away out of the whole dominion of the Tigurines, in the yeer 1523: and more over a few yeeres after when there came a more perfit reforma∣tion,
the day and yeere of superstition abolished, were written on pillars with letters of Golde. When in all the places above rehearsed the reapers did bend to the worke stoutly, striving who might doe best in cutting downe wicked superstition, and in pulling up darnell by the rootes, for which before, they were not able to see the corne, they did so beare sway in the whole fielde. This harvest was begun about the yeere 1521, & was hotely applyed by the space of tenne whole yeeres next after and more: it folowed Luther by and by, who a little before the reformation was begū, thought it needfull for feare of the Emperours proscription, to hide him∣selfe in a more secret place. While he then lay hid, an other Angel tooke this office upon him to exhorte him that sate upon the cloude, to thrust in his sickle on the earth, by taking away Idolatry, and gathering toge∣ther the godly as handfuls into holy assemblies, as hath bene declared. Neither is this an allusion like to be true, but such an application as the regard of the time requireth necessarily. The Church lay hid yet in the tē∣ple, as is manifest by the Angels, which come out from thence. But about the ende of the limited time of a thousand two hondreth and threescore yeeres should be the harvest & vintage following; to which moreover the last place is given in this Prophecy, because after all the former thinges were finished, these also should be performed in their time. And all these thinges most fitly agree to that application, which I have brought: neither shall any by searching out finde either any other Angel, or harvest also, that every thinke may agree necessarily with themselves. 17 And an other Angel. So was the harvest, the vintage followeth as it is wonte. But this is proper to the wicked, as that was to the godly. For the Saincts are well compared to wheate and corne, the profitablest thinges, and most necessary thinges: which by the solidnesse of their fruite, resem∣ble fitly the soundnesse of good men, who are more profitable for their u∣se, then goodly in outward shew. But the full, and swelling dainties of grapes doe most aptly declare the present felicity of the wicked. The Har∣vest belonged to Germany, and brought us to the yeere 1520: this vin∣tage is proper to our England, so wonderfully agreeing to the things here done, both in the course of time, & cōgruēcy of all the matter, that it is not to be doubted, but that the Spirit pointed with the finger to these grapes. Which that we may perceive more easily, every thing is to be cōsidered a∣part. There is both a preparation & also an execution of this vintage. That be∣lōgeth to 2 Angels ver. 17.18. ioined togither in labour, as those in the harvest, which in like sort doe thūder with a double crash. The executiō is done first by pruning the vine, & casting the clusters of grapes into the wine presse, v. 19. after by treading the wine presse, v. 20.
The shredders are two Angels companions, conversant in the same Temple, that is, both free citizens of the true Church yet lying hid. For it was not yet freed from her narrow straights, although the Gentiles in the meane time reigned in a great assembly in the court, and holy city. Which is dili∣gently to be observed, seeing the place of the Angels manifesteth also the time when the thinge was done, and as it were beareth a candle before us, to put away darkenesse. Touching the first Angel mention is made parti∣cularly in this verse, that he had a sharpe sickle, that is, power to cut off the clusters of grapes, and to prune the vine, in which thing he should carry himselfe couragiously, as the sharpe sickle declareth. But he neither sitteth on a cloude, neither hath a crowne on his head, as the Angel of the harvest, ver. 14. Whether are these thinges set downe once in common, to be trāsferred hither? Or whether rather this Angel doth not attaine that de∣gree of dignity in which the former was: but that it is of a somewhat low∣er classe and degree?, So it seemeth, seeing it is not a safe thinge to adde a∣ny thing to the wordes inspired of God, but upon most certain reason. Therefore this Angel is Thomas Cromwell, in the dayes of K. Henry the eight most mighty Prince, a man with us most famous, Earle of Essex, kee∣per of the Great Seale: who came out of the Temple, which is in heaven, a syncere favourer of pure religion. He had a sickle, being appointed the K. deputy in matters Ecclesiasticall, did apply the same sharply and lustily to the worke: yet not endued with any either crowne or diademe, being ra∣ther a minister of anothers power, then an authour of his owne. 18 And an other Angel came out of the Altar: The second Angel is descri∣bed by a threefold property, that he commeth out of the Altar, that he hath power over fire, and that he exhorteth his fellow Angel to cut the vine. Touching the first, it is said significantly to come out of the Altar. For so the Greeke hath out of the Altar. Theod. Beza translateth from the Altar, which expresseth not the force of the speach sufficiently. A man commeth from a thing, nigh to which he was: but out of a thinge, within the compasse whereof he was contained. But how can he come out of the Altar? This may be un¦derstood from chap. 6.9. I saw, saith he, under the Altar the soules of them, which had bin killed. This kinde then of speaking declareth that this Angel is an holy Martyr, such as they are who have a place under the Altar. But they that lye under the Altar, must needs come out of the same, when they goe any whither. But whereas there are many kindes of Martyrdome (for some are consumed by sword, some by an halter, some by wilde beasts, o∣ther some by fire) that it may be understood of what sort this Martyr is; it is added, that he hath power over fire, that is to say, that he sufferring and o∣vercoming
the torment of fire (for this is to have power over fire) he gave te∣stimony to the trueth. But that in the third place he crieth to him that hath a sickle, it is taught that this Martyr is described to be such an one, rather be∣cause of the future combate, then passed victory. For a Martyr that is dead cannot exhorte to any excellent great act. The example of his constancy, may stirre up the minde to the like courage: but it is not granted him to instruct by word unto any peculiar actions, as this of pruning the vine is, unlesse he were living togither with us. This exhortation therefore puts us in minde, that Martyrdome was at length to be endured of him, not that he had sufferred it before, whē he exhorted to these things. All which circunstances ioyned togither, lead us unto Thomas Cranmer Archbishop (as they call him) once of Canterbury. This was a notable Martyr, having power over fire, to which he gave his body to be burned for the trueth. Whose power over fire was so much the more famous, because first having fallen by humane infirmity, in subscribing to a wicked opinion, repenting by and by, and revoking his subscription, when he was brought to the fire, he would have his right hande first to endure the burning flame, be∣cause it had ben so ready an instrument of wickednes, which being consu∣med at length, he gave his body to be devoured in the same flames. He cryeth with a loude cry to him that had the sickle, because in the time of King Henry the eight he stirred up Thomas Cromwell by his wordes to make this grapes gathering. For being excellently learned, and burning with an ardent zeale, he could not but hasten forward the worke to his power, & inflame him, whom he saw to be endued with the power to doe it. 19 Then the Angel thrust in his sickle. Thus farre the preparation, now the execution is accomplished in cutting downe the grapes of the vineyard. Which Vine is the shining and Princely glory of the Popish Church: the felicity whereof was great among us in time past, even as in every o∣ther: it swelled with full and redde grapes, it hung on railes aloft & made fast togither, overshadowing the whole earth on every side with large branches, and thicke clusters of grapes. For it is knowne (the rubbish doe yet testify) how all fruitfull hilles were planted with these wilde vines all our Iland through, how deepe rootes they tooke, & with how farre spread branches, they did so stoppe up the Sunne, that it could no where shine on the corne. But when it pleased God at length to punish this wicked peo∣ple, he raised up Henry the VIII, who for iust causes being angry with the Pope both shooke of from himselfe the Antichristian yoke, & also tooke it from the neckes of his people. Neither content with this ministery of the Angels, partly of Cromwell with his sharpe sickle, partly of Cranmer having
power over fire: In the yeere 1539. he laboured that this whole vine should be not so much cut, as plucked up by the rootes and utterly destroyed. For hence the Abbeys and Fryeries were pulled downe, the Nunries layed evē with the ground, and the landes and revenues of olde appointed to wic∣ked superstitions, were brought againe to the common treasure, and at length being set forth to a publike sale, they were solde to divers persons. And this is the cutting of the clusters of grapes, and the casting of them into the wine presse, a thing indeede memorable, if wee shall consider it di¦ligently, according to the noblenesse thereof. 20 And the wine presse was troden without the city: This city is the holy Church of God, which the Scriptures doe note often times by the name of a city, beyond the territories of which, this presse was troden; how wō∣derfully doth this agree? For howsoever England spoyled the Papists of their goods and riches, and according to their demerits put them from al their dignity; yet neverthelesse shee had not as yet attayned for that time such reformation, for which rightly it could be called a wholy city. The Pope was banished, but the Papisme was retained, as is manifest frō those sixe articles made the next yeere after that the Monasteries were broken downe. Wherein it was thus ordained: That under the forme of bread & wine there is the true and naturall body and blood of Christ, and that after the consecrati∣on, the substance of bread and wine remaineth no longer. That the receiving of the whole supper of the Lord, is not necessary to salvation, and that under whether of the formes you will, whole Christ is contained. That it is not lawfull for Priests to marry. That the vowes of chastety are to be kept. That private Masses are to be retained. That auricular and secret confession of sinnes is profitable and necessary. These un∣cleannesses defiled Englād, that it could not be the dwelling place of God at that time. ¶ And blood came out of the wine presse: Blood by an elegant metaphore is the juyce of grapes; but it commeth neerer to the iuyce of these who are now spoken of by a certē property of speech. For it is that calamity which came of the overthrowe of the Pope, which was so great, that not onely the whole countrey was moist therewith, but also it overflowed to the hor¦ses bridles. Wee have heard that they, to whom this businesse was com∣mitted of destroying the dennes and to confiscate the goods, riding with a great traine, visited almost all the houses through the whole countrey: which office while they execute, so great havock was made of the Papists riches, that horses might seeme to swime in their spoyles, as it were in a deepe river of pressed grapes. But beside this, I suppose an other greater thing to be signifyed, to wit, that not onely the common sorte of men,
who were no lesse cheerefull to execute this busines, then horses are to the battell, became greatly enriched and increased by these meanes; but also the Noble men themselves and Peeres of the Realme, who are as it were the raines to governe the common people, made also very great gaine thereof. It is knowne well inough that the beginning of many mens No∣bility came from hence, and other mens farre greater abundance. For thē was ther scarce any, at least of any value and reckening, who went not to pur∣vey wood when this oke did fall. ¶ By the space of a thousand and sixe hundreth furlongs: That is, through the whole countrey of England A thousand sixe hundreth furlonges, make two hundreth English miles. But the length of the countrey from the fur∣thest part of the South to the farthest ende of the North part is more by an hundreth miles: but if wee shall take away the Northen wast ground, where the countrey nigh the boundes is desert and unhusbanded (which these grapes, that is, religious nation dreaded greatly, as too colde an ayre, delighting in the Sunnie and most pleasant places) wee see also a mervai∣lous consent even in this parte. In this wise therefore is the vintage of En∣gland, so manifestly declared by the agreement of all thinges, that it is not to be doubted, but that this alone is the naturall application of this type. And nowe wee perceive, with what singular skilfulnes the Spirit hath des∣cribed all memorable thinges, which should come to passe in the Church, even till the yeere 1556. In this chapter he stayeth at the yeere 1540. but the eleventh chapter hath supplyed that which is wanting here since that time. The thirteene Centuries describe most cleerely even to the yeere thirteene hundred, the acts of the Dragon and of the Beast. From thence our countrey man Iohn Foxe beginning at Weckliefe, with whom you may ioyne Iohn Sleidane and Gaspar Peucer, followeth on the thinges re¦mayning, even to the seventh trumpet. Because of this their more aboundant and greater knowledge of things past, which the diligence of these should bring to men under the blowing of the seventh trumpet, the Spirit hath made this repetition now agreeing with their narrations. The whole Prophecy of these three chapters is from the time of Iohn unto the yeere one thousand five hundreth and fourty, that is, of a thou∣sand foure hundreth fifty yeeres.
CHAP. 15. AND I saw another sign in heaven, great & marvelous: seven Angels ha∣ving the seven last plagues; for by them is fulfilled the wrath of God. 2 And I saw as it were a glassy sea mingled with fyre: and them that had gotten victory of the Beast, and of his Jmage, and of his mark, and of the Num∣ber of his name; standing at the glassy sea, having Harpes of God. 3 And they sung the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb; saying, Great and marvelous are thy works, Lord God almighty; just and true are thy wayes, King of saincts. 4 Who shall not fear thee, ô Lord, and glorify thy name? For thou onely art ho∣ly; for all nations shal come and worship before thee; for thy judgments are made-ma∣nifest. 5 And after these J looked, and loe, the Temple of the tabernacle of testimony was opened. 6 And ther came forth the seven Angels which had the seven plagues, out of the temple, clothed with pure and bright linen, and girded about the brests with gol∣den girdles. 7 And one of the fowr Beasts gave to the seven Angels, seven golden vials, ful of the wrath of God, which liveth for evermore. 8 And the Temple was fylled with the smoke that proceded from the majesty of God, and from his power: and no man was able to enter into the Temple, til the se∣ven plagues of the seven Angels were fulfilled. The Analysis. HITHERTO have been the things past of the seventh trompet, so farre forth as under it they were more fully known, then at any time here∣tofore: now folow the things to come; of which, the common type is in this chapter, and then the special execution, in the rest of the book. The type first summarily sheweth, how seven Ministers are prepared, which should take vengeance on the enemies; verse 1. Also what should be the state of the Church conversing among the Gentiles, until the Angels executed their office. The pourtraiture whereof, is set forth by the glassy sea, mingled with fire: and in the victours, and the Harpers: ver. 2. Then by the Song; the au∣thors wherof are Moses and the Lamb: the argument of it, is, the prayse of Gods omnipotency and justice; ver. 3. and the gathering to him of al the elect, ver. 4. After this, it sheweth in special, a more ful description, partly of the An∣gels prepared to their work; as of the place whence they come, vers. 5.6. of their
clothing, ver. 6. and the instruments, namely the vials wherewith they ar fur∣nished, ver. 7. Partly of the whole Church; both in respect of the chosen Gē∣tiles, by whose meanes it shineth with glory, and the presence of God: and in res∣pect of the rest, unto whom it continueth shutt, untill the appointed time. Scholions. 1 And I saw an other signe: These wordes are used in sted of a passage to an other matter; wherby, this prophesie following, is distinguished from that which was erst explayned in the three former chapters. And now re∣mayneth the third and last period, divided from the former, by the kind of events, which therfore have a new instrument, of vials: but yet agreing with them, in as much as it is a part of the seventh trumpet, as may easily appear by the things spoken before. For the Tabernacle in heaven, is not opened be∣fore the seventh trumpet; chap. 11.15.19. But the Ministers of this work, which have charge given them to power out the vials, doo come out of the Temple opened in heaven; as after in the 5. and 6. verses of this chapter. Moreover, the Angel foretold that the ende should come, when the seventh trumpet sounded; chap. 10.7. Now these seven vials, doe bring the end with them; their Ministers being sayd, in this verse, to have the seven last pla¦gues; and therfore they necessarily belong to that trompet. For if the first vi∣al, answered to the first trompet, and then the rest in order, so as every one should be of the same time that the trōpet is, wherewith it is ioyned: there were no reason why they should be called the last plagues. But the thing is not so: especially seing the first vial, brings evil on the men, which were branded with the Beasts mark; chap. 16.1. which mark we have seen to be the invention not of the first Beast, but of the second, chap. 13.16. whose birth days fell out under the fift trompet. Wheras by this reason, the mark should necessarily goe before al the trompets; the first whereof, should not so much imprint the mark it selfe, as afflict the men on whom it was already printed. Moreover, the Saincts triumphe is sung in this chapter, for the victory gotten of the Beast, before the vials are powred out, or the An¦gels take their work in hand; ver. 2. &c. But the Beast dyeth not under the first trompet, but is then born, and from thence forth, flourisheth until the harvest and vintage; chap. 14. and the two Prophets rise up from the dead; chap. 11.11. which things fel out about the end of the sixt trompet, as we have shewed. Yea but there is a great similitude, between the trompets & the vials; there is in deed; but to this ende onely, that we may know how men ar punished, in the same degrees and steps that they have sinned. Yet they dif∣fer,
both in time, and in manner of punishment: for the vials are onely punish∣ments, wheras the trompets be offenses. It is therfore manifest, that the whole distance of time, from Iohn, to the coming of our Lord, is divided into three periods; and every of them agayn, into seven more particular seasons, or articles; so, as under the last of that which went before, beginneth the first of that which foloweth; that is to say, as from the last seal, doo arise the seven tronpets; so from the last trompet, doo arise the seven vials. Which distribution of the time, maketh this prophesie easy unto us; which ells would be very intricate. ¶ In heaven: That is, in the purer Church. For as of olde, the Lord was wont to rore out of Sion, and give his voice out of Ierusalem, Amos, 1.2. so the evil by which al his enemies now shall utterly perish, shal come out of his holy Church, wherin he wil shew himselfe an avenger, in punishing al the reprobats. And great and marvelous is this signe, because of the wonderful change of the course of things, the Beast and Dragon being overcome and abolished, and th'eternal happines of the Church procured; as we shal see in the things particularly to be handled. ¶ Seven Angels: According to the manner of the former periods. These be men, citizens of the purer Church; as appeareth by the place from whē∣ce they come; and their attire: of which hereafter. Theod. Beza expresseth it thus, the seven Angels: but ther is no article in the Greek; neyther were these eyther seen or mentioned before the temple was opened. They are sayd to have, the seven last plagues; because when these are doon, ther shal∣be happy times onely, until the end of al things be come: as the next words shew. For they are not caled the last, as if they should come a little before the ende: but because by them Gods wrath shalbe fulfilled, in abo¦lishing the enemies and tempests of the Church. They have their begin∣ning togither with the seventh trompet, about the yere 1560. in respect of which, we say they are to come, and not in respect of this time onely, wherin we now live. And he sayth the wrath is fulfilled, in sted of shalbe fulfilled: ( for :) for the certainty of the Prophesie, maketh him to speak in the time past, of things that are to come. 2 And I saw as it were a glassy sea, mingled with fire: Hitherto generally of things to be doon, and the Ministers of them: now foloweth the estate of the holy Church in the mean while. The Church is described by the things or substance of it, and the persons. The first is a sea, that is, doctrine; as before: the divers manner whereof, maketh also a divers sea. The one heavenly, like that in chap. 4.6. which also was glassy and like to Crystal: the other earthly, turned into blood, and void of al purity; chap. 8. Here we have a third, hea∣venly
also, as the former verse sheweth; for this signe was seen in heaven: and glassy, as the first was; with which it wholly agreeth in nature, however ther be some litle difference in quality. For, in sted of that Crystal, here fire is mingled: a glassy sea, saith he, mixt with fire. That therfore, was clear as glasse; and most simple, without al colour, as Crystal is: this also is clear as glass; but coloured with fyrie rednes; not shining with the simplicity of Crystall. And what other thing doth fyre signify, than fervent strifes & cō∣tentions, burning with hatred? I am come to send fire on the earth, sayth Christ, and what is my desire, if it be already kindled? Luk 12.49. This inseparable cō∣panion, must the heavenly truth of the last period, have ioyned with it: the doctrine should be glassy and clear, through which we may behold the gra∣cious countenance of the Father in Christ Iesus; yet not in al respects pure as Crystal, but coloured with the fyre of contention. Which thing verily, all godly men to their great greif, doo find at this day too true. That un∣happy strife about sacramental signes, how great sturres wrought it in the Church? which yet had not ynough it selfe alone to trouble all things: but it must bring forth also (as an evil bird an evil egg) that unheard monster of Vbiquitie. The sparks hereof were cast into the sea, by Luther himselfe; but quenched agayn, both by his own modesty and godlines, and by Melanch¦tons & others that have wel deserved of the Church. Til afterwards Iohn Brentius, and Iames Andrewes, about the year 1561. did again with much payns as with bellowes, styrr up the flame. Neyther was the conten¦tion about these cheif points onely; but about Gods grace, Predestination, Baptisme, and other things also: as errour for the most part never goeth a∣lone, without some company. The Churches which are further off from the brenn of this fyre, doo burn with an other no lesse fervent flame of am¦bition: wherupon have arisen very sharp contention for dignities and ho∣nours, as for necessary ornaments of the Church; though purer times doe sufficiently teach, that nothing ever brought more certayn destruction therunto. Neither doth ambition suffer, so free a preaching of the word, as should be: nor manners to be restreyned with that bridle, which being taken away, a liberty foloweth to al manner wickednes, or such at least, as abolisheth Christian pietie. This kinde of fyre, raungeth throughout the whole renewed Church; and eyther consumeth many, or molesteth the rest; whiles they labour to quench it. Neither is ther sound quietnes in a∣ny place; this wild-fyre living even in midds of the waters. Which thing the Spirit diligently here dooth intimate; least any man for the contenti∣ons, should reject the truth. For thanks be to our God, who, although fyre be mingled with our sea, dooth yet vouchsafe it to be glassy still, that is,
transparent and clear; through which we may beholde the most sweet gra∣ce of salvation, obteyned for us by Christ. We ar farr from the Christian purity that should be: yet let us be glad for this good we doo injoy, and earnestly begg of God, that he would give us that which is wanting. But it is to be feared, he wil take away that which we have; such be our sinns: as we have shewed in the particular Churches, chap. 3. ¶ And them that had gotten victory of the Beast: Hitherto of the things: the Persons are the victours, in the latter part of this verse; and the Harpers, ver. 3. The Greeke phrase  is from the Hebrew, Goberim mechajah: for  answereth to the Hebrew min, which is often joyned with gaber, and noteth out a comparison; as mearajoth gaberu, they were stronger then Lions, 2 Sam. 1.23. so wicked deeds got victory of me, that is, prevayled against me, Psal. 65.4. In like manner they that get victorie of the Beast, are such as prevayl against him, his image, mark, and number of his name. These al are set downe severally, for that the victory should be ful and ab∣solute: though the Beast remayn yet a litle while. For they should not o∣nely reject Antichrist himselfe, but abhorre also al his mark, yea and not suffer themselves to be called by the number of his name. VVe have shewed, that the number of his name, which is, to be called a Latine, is the least bond of society, wherewith men are tyed to Antichrist: which was proper to the Greeks, who by admitting this symbol, obteyned mutual trafique. But the inhabitans of the VVest, which long agoe easily sufferred themselves to be made his marked soldjers, and to be called Papists, and of the Popes reli∣gion; doo now detest the very name Latine, which the Greeks so hardly & lately received. This victory therfore is full, as is signifyed by this particu∣lar rehersal of Image, mark, & number of name. But, thou wilt say, when fell out this victory? At the sound of the seventh trompet, when the Protestant Prin¦ces in Germany, which had wrong out from Charles to have their proffes∣sion of religion free; did soon after his death, get it to be confirmed & sta∣blished by th'Emperour Ferdinandus, in the yere 1558. at which time, our gracious Queen Elizabeth, being also crowned, did manifest to the world, that the Beast was overcome in England; who a few yeres afore had begun to reign a fresh; and was never before fully vanquished, but reserved of God unto this time, for to honour the charrot and triumph of our good Queen. The yere next after, they trode down the Beast in Scotland. Be∣fore these times the truth did fight, but in doubtfull battel: now it did plainly beat down and overthrow the enemies. Vnto these, many other are to be added, as in France, Sweveland, Denmark, Suecia, Prussia; al which being joyned togither, doo make up this company, that stand at the glas∣sy sea.
¶ Standing at the glassy sea: Holding the true and syncere doctrine; to the voice whereof, they stand and hearken continually. He alludeth to the Is∣raelites which stood on the sea shore, beholding the marvelous salvatiō which God had given them, their enemies being destroyed. Seing therfore wee all whom God hath freed from Antichrists tyranny, doo yet stand on the brink, newly escaped out of danger: what evil fury vexeth us, that wee should rave, brethren against brethren, with al kinde of reproches, ray∣lings and contumelies? How shamefull, yea how wicked a thing would it have bin, if the Israelites for whose sake the waters were cleft asunder; and whiles they escaped by a passage unheard off, through the midds of the sea, so soon as they came safe to the shore, their enemies were drowned: if they, I say, should have stuck and killed one an other? Yet this ungod∣ly prank doo we play at this day. VVhich seing it is most unworthy them that are adorned with so notable and singular a good: I intreat by God our avenger and saviour, that we may seriously weigh the thing; and let∣ting passe our brawles and contentions, may get us harps with one con∣sent to sing prayses unto God, rather then to strike up terrible drumms, for to move intestine warr. VVe stand on the shore, but the enemy is not yet altogither drowned: and if he were overwhelmed, yet should they be no place for this bitternes. But unawares I have strayed from my purpose; how be it, I trust, not without reason. ¶ Having harpes of God: That is, divine, sweet and excellent harps: ac∣cording to the manner of the Hebrewes, who call al that of God, which is in it kind most cheif and excellent; as a Prince of God, Gen. 23.6. Moun∣teyns of God, Psal. 36.7. trees of God &c. for most excellent men, high moū¦tayns, noble trees. See the observations of the learned Ian Drusius. Or, be they not caled harpes of God, because God gives the joy of his Spirit into their harts, wherby they give God meet thankes for this his notable mer∣cy? Perhaps this is the righter. But both of them doe signify alike, the great pleasure that is felt by this victory; such as we have shewed was in the Tigu¦rines, who wrote upon a pillar with letters of Golde, the year and day when reforma¦tion began among them. With what precious stone should this day be gra∣ven, of much fuller victory and triumph? But we are in special to respect the Confessions set forth in this time: for these are most sweet harps, & that of God; whose strings he hath tuned, and with whose melody he is much delited. Whiles the Temple was shutt, the voice of the Harpers sounded with sweet harmonie, when the Churches testifyed their consent of doctri¦ne, by the writings published and offred to Cesar; as we have shewed on chap. 14.2. But now after the yere 1558. a much sweeter symphonie is
made, by the accession of the French, English, later Helvetian, Belgian, Bohemian, and Scottish Confessions. Al these agreeably singing one tune togither, doo make a most grateful song to godly ears; but drive the ene∣mies out of their witts. 3 And they sung the song of Moses: Such a triumphal song, as Moses and the Israelites sung of old, when they were delivered from the Aegiptians, Exod. 15. For this deliverance out of the jawes of Antichrist, is of no lesse power and good will of God towards his, then was that from Pharaoh. No marvel if the same benefit, be celebrated with the same song. It did not playnly appear before these times, what yssue things should have: the peo¦ple was indeed gone out of Aegipt, but camped as yet before the jawes of Chi∣roth, and was perplexed in the country, closed round about with the wildernes. The Pope & Emperour made ready their charrets, and thought to bring them back agayn to their ancient bondage: but after that the sea had given way to the Protestāts in Germany; (the Emperour being by death drowned with his charrets;) and that their strength was more confirmed by the coming of England, Scotland, Netherland unto them; now was the time of sin∣ging to Iehovah, that he hath excelled gloriously, the harse and him that rode upō him, he hath overthrown in the sea. ¶ And the song of the Lamb: The same, as I think, which was mentioned before, chap. 4.3. wherin they celebrated God the Father, for the grace of adoption in Christ. This joy of hart, which figuratively is called a song, ariseth from the beleef of Christs justice imputed unto us; and the feeling of that fatherly love, wherewith God loveth us for this cause. Which al∣wayes hath been the song of al the elect in every time & place; and name∣ly of them that lay hidd for 1260. yeres, chap. 14. but now at length is cō¦municated with many moe, about the beginning of the last period: & shall no more be muttered in corners, but be sung without fear in al streets & opē places. No song, doth the Pope of Rome more hate: he curseth it with al direful execrations: but the wretch never tasted the sweetnes of it; nei∣ther can any of his servants, whiles so he persisteth, learn the same. ¶ Great & marv. &c. In deed great, & beyōd al exspectatiō Luther whē he begā, thought nothing lesse thē such an innovatiō: & not without cause. For who durst ever hope, that the least part of his dignity could be thrown down; unto whose feet, so many Emperours of old subiected their necks? A wonderful work verily, & farr exceding the straigfhts of the mind of mā. Lord God almighty: God, for  O God: or by want of a word to be sup∣plyed. which art God, which art almighty. ¶ Iust and true &c. Just they are; for he hath done vengeance on the wic¦ked:
True; because that is now performed which was promised. For in his holy word he hath taught that it shalbe wel with the good, & evil with the wic∣ked. According to which general promises & threats, he governeth the world; manifesting unto all his truth, in performing the same. 4 For al nations shal come: By this deliverance ther should arise to the faith∣ful, a more ample hope of the universal caling of the whole world, A thing not now first signifyed; but wheras a more plentiful knowledge should in∣crease dayly in the later times; in the ages before, because of the long delay & great difficulty of the thing, at the expectation therof, lay quite dead. But the thing is here but generally touched: & is after more largely to be handled in due place. ¶ For thy judgments &c. By these which thou hast begun, it may be mani∣fest ynough to every one, what thou wilt doo at last. O Rome, why lookest thou not to thy selfe in time? Wilt thou not yet be wise, before thy last de∣struction come; when it wilbe too late? Doe not these documents of the w∣rath of God, make manifest unto thee, what he iudgeth of thee? Remēber Pharaoh, to whō Gods iudgments were manifested, but he would not be instructed. Take heed least thou, walking in the same stepps, fal not at last into the same pit. The word , besides that signification of cere∣monies which the Greek Interpreters give unto it, denoteth also an argumēt or example of iustice: see Th. Beza on Luk 1.6. Which signification agreeth fitly to this place: as if he should say; Arguments of thy iustice, are manife∣sted: thou hast opēly declared to al the world, that thou art a most iust iudg 5 And after these &c. He now beginneth in special a more large declara∣tiō of the Angels: & first of the place frō whēce they come, namely the Tē∣ple opened. Which was opened ch. 11.19. & wherof mentiō is here made a∣gaine, as oft times cometh to passe, because of the lōg commemoration of things past, which came between in 3 whole chapters. The temple, before was shutt, as long as the woman was in the wildernes. Sometimes ther came An¦gels out frō thence; but but the veil being hāged at the dore, suffred none to look in; wherupō it remained stil hidd, to them that were without. But now being open; they which are in the court, may look in if they will. ¶ The Temple of & c: Hereby is meant the most holy place. The two tables of stone, are caled the Testimony; because of the law written in them, which testifyed the wil of God. Hereupon the Ark hath the same name; because unto it, these tables were put. And then the name more largely was ascri∣bed to the whole tabernacle, in the inner place wherof, the Ark did reside. Num. 17.23. Moreover, that which is here sayd, the temple of the tabernacle of testimony was opened: is the same in effect with this, & the Ark of his covenant was seen in his temple, chap. 11.29.
The Tabernacle seemeth to be ioyned with the Temple, not because the law was alwayes kept in the Tabernacle, which continued not to the ende in the Temple, as neyther did the Ark, after the overthrow of Ierusalem by Nabu¦chodonosor; as the Iesuite supposeth: for did not the Tabernacle also loose the law, when it lost the Ark, wherein the law was kept? especially when the Ark was never after, placed in that Tabernacle? 1 Sam. 4.21. This ther¦fore is no sufficient cause. But there two seem to be ioyned togither, for to shew that this Temple was yet a pilgrim, and the Angels that came out frō thence, were burgesses of the militant Church. But some man may say, if they come forth out of the Temple, it may seem the Church is yet in secret: by which argument, we have serched out the time of the former Prophesie, chap. 14.15. They in the former chapter, came out of the Temple being shutt: these, out of it being opened. The Church alwayes dwelleth in the Tē¦ple: for what other fitt hospitage can she have? But this Temple is not al∣wayes after one manner. Some while it is shutt, in the time of mourning & solitarines; which was the condition thereof, when those reapers & grape-gatherers came out of it. Some while it is open & manifest, when the day shi∣neth more cheerful and pleasant: and in this estate it was, when after the victory over the Beast, the seven Angels came out of the same. 6 Clothetd with pure and bright linnen: These Angels have a more ioyful at∣tyre, then had the two witnesses, which were clad with sackcloth, chap. 11.3. for this time carieth an other hiew Yet these garments are common to all the elect, though they be fitter for some times then for othersome. For they are the garments of Aarons sonnes, Exod. 28.42. And all the elect are made Preists. Al the faithfull now doo dwel in the Temple, wherinto of olde none might come but the Levites. By this attyre therfore is signi∣fyed, the cleannes of the Angels; through the imputation of Christs righ∣teousnes alone. And least any should despise this imputation as a base thing, and not fit for any to stand in Gods sight arayed with it, as the blas∣phemous Papists at this day persuade their people: therfore he sayth, these garments are both pure & bright; wherein the maiesty of God neyther sees any spott, nor any thing that may hinder the highest perfection of glory. ¶ And girded about the brests with golden girdles: These garments are to be tyed about every one in particular, by faith, as with a golden girdle: & the girding is about the brests, because this apprehension and application is no∣thing at all, unlesse it have place in the hart. So Christ himselfe was girded before, chap. 1.13. not for that he needed so to be, but onely for to teach us▪ and to represent the Church of that time, which was in that part very comely.
7 And one of the 4. Beasts: It doth not appear, which of them by name it was: especially seing one of the Beasts may be eyther of order, or of distri∣bution: of order, as when it signifieth the first, at chap. 6.1. J heard one of the four Beasts, that is, the first, to weet, the Lion. Of distribution, when in usual manner of speech, it may perteyn alike to any of the fowr. But it skilleth not which of thē it be. That agreeth unto all, which belōgs to every one; al whose vertues being ioyned togither, doo give us a pattern, what manner of man every faithful minister ought to be, as is observed on chap. 4.7. Here the intendement is, that we may know how these seven Angels doo draw out of the precepts and institutions of some holy Minister of the Ghospel; that which they after doo turn and apply, unto the bane of the enemies of the Church. Not that this some Minister, is to be understood of any singular man; but of many that agree in one faith and doctrine: as Phi¦lip Melanchton, Martin Bucer, Peter Martyr, Henry Bullinger, Iohn Cal∣vin, and the other servants of God, which flourished about that time. Out of whose godly and learned writings, so many have drawen very excellēt and golden understanding of holy things, that they have been made fitt therby, to combat with Antichrist; and to finish the remaynders of that warr, which the others had so happily begun. ¶ Gave to the seven Angels, seven golden vials:  (a vial, sayth Athene∣us) is so caled by changing of a letter, as it were Piálee, that is, conteyning in it (to piem hlis) ynough to drink: for it is bigger then a cup. book Dipnosophist 11 Yea he makes it a wide and ample vessel like a cauldron, which importeth very great wrath to be appointed for the last times. These vessels perhaps are used here in such respect, as God of old, opening the foud-gates of hea∣ven, destroyed al the earth with the floud: or as when he consumed So∣dom and Gomorrhe with a shore of brimston from heaven. For then he seemes to powr out on the heads of men, destruction as out of vials. Most fitt weapons for the power of God, which needeth no forces for to over∣throw the enemies, but can take them al away, even with a small aspersiō. And now behold, how fit instruments are attributed, to every sort of e∣vents. In the first place were Seals, because the first events were confirmations and pledges of those that were to come. Then came Trumpets, signifying evils ssayling men with great noyse, and denouncing also some heavier thing to be expected, yf they did not repent. Now last are made ready the vials, large vessels to conteyn Gods judgment, and mst fit to accomplish the perdition of reprobates. Neither is ther any noyse in the powring out, as was in the sounding of the trompets. For Gods judgements to come,
doo make afrayd, (for they ar threatned that they may be avoided:) but when they are present, they fal on men privily, & are not perceived. What are these vials then, and of what sort? First, they are the holy minds of the seven Angels, intelligent & capable of the will of God: out of which this baleful liquour is powred upō the reprobates. Secondly the Beast giveth them; by instructing and informing the same minds with holy institutiōs. Thirdly they are ful of the wrath of God, not wherwith God is angry against them, but by which he executeth iudgment upon the wicked. Finally, they are golden; that thou the judgments be most severe; yet are they most just, pure, and precious. But mark, how dreadfull is this wrath, which is of God that liveth for evermore: which words are added that we may know, the w∣rath shalbe eternal. For the wrath is such as is his power whose wrath is kindled. 8 And the Temple was filled with smoke: Hitherto hath been the prepara∣tion of the Angels; that which foloweth upon it in respect of this renew∣ed Church, is a manifest signe of Gods presence; such as was of olde in the Tabernacle, Exod. 40.34.35. But, thou wilt say, the time of the Gos∣pel, requireth some more evident token. In deed so God deal more opē∣ly with us by many degrees, then he did under the law: but whatsoever cā be bestowed on us, whiles we are on earth, though illustrated with the light of the Gospel; is but smoke and obscurity, in respect of that revela∣tiō, which at last we shal have in heaven. But here he teacheth, that Gods presēce is clear in the Church though the enemies count it but as smoke, and can see no more into it, then mn when duskish smoke dooth take a∣way their sight. And who but the blind, perceiveth not God present in our Churches, which he so marvelously defendeth against so many enter∣prises of the adversaries. But the Papists eyes cannot peirce this smoke; wherfore the weary themselves in vayn, fighting against God. But becau∣se smoke signifieth also wrath, the Temple filled with smoke, teacheth that God testifieth his presence, with manifest arguments of his indignation against the enemies, whom now he wil vexe with continual torments, which out of the Temple and Church of God, shal dayly fal upon their heads. ¶ And no man was able to enter into the Temple: This sheweth the conditi∣on of the rest, what it should be in the mean time, while these plagues cru∣shed down the enemies. To weet, they should remayn without the Tem∣ple, not able to enter in for smoke, as Moses could not enter into the Taberna∣cle of the congregation, whiles the cloud was upon it, Evod. 40.35. Alike ther∣fore, in some sorte, shalbe the condition of the Church when it is resto∣red, as it was when it lay hidd. As long as the Temple was shutt, & the saincts
pitched their camp in mount Sion, the Lamb being their Captayn: no man could learn the song which they sang: chap. 14.3. It belonged to a few elect; into whose number, none of the rest of the world, could joyne himselfe. Even so, when the Temple is opened, although the Church be much more no∣ble and conspicuous, yet shal not al betake them selves unto the bosome therof, until the seven plagues be fulfilled. Which is first to be understood of the Iewes; whose ful caling shal not be, until the vials be poured out. Ful, I say; because during the plagues, ther shalbe some beginning, but not an absolute perfection, before they be altogither past. For, Rome drives thē from entring in; which when it shalbe taken away, then the Iewes, and o∣ther nations many, al impediments being removed, shal flow even with strift unto the Church, and shal thenceforth continue the faithful nouris∣sons of the same. For we see that al ar not by this smoke quite shut out of the Temple. Seven Angels come out from thence; which should not come forth, but to execute their office: wherupon the rest of the Saincts, abide therein. This smoke therfore, hindred not al the elect of the Gentils from entring in: but the Iewes, and ful number of the Gentiles onely. CHAP. 16. AND I heard a great voice out of the Temple, saying to the seven Angels: Goeye and powr out the seven vials of the wrath of God upon the earth. 2 And the first Angel went, and powred out his vial upon the earth: & ther came a noysom & greevous soar, upon the men which had the mark of the Beast, and which worshiped his Image. 3 And the second Angel powred out his vial upon the sea; and it became as the blood of a dead-man: and every living sowl died in the sea. 4 And the third Angel powred out his vial upon the rivers and upon the foun∣tayns of waters: and they became blood. 5 And I heard the Angel of the waters saying; Iust art thou, O Lord, which art, and which wast, and which shalt be; because thou hast judged these things. 6 For they shed the blood of the Saincts and Prophets; and thou hast given them blood to drink: for they are worthy. 7 And I heard an other Angel from the altar saying, even-so Lord God almigh∣ty, true and just ar thy judgments. 8 And the fourth Angel powred out his vial on the Sun; and it was given unto him to torment men with heat by fyre. 9 And men boyled-hott with great heat, & blasphemed the name of God which hath power over these plagues: and they repented not to give him glory.
10 And the fift Angel powred out his vial upon the throne of the Beast; & his kingdome became dark: and they gnawed their tongues for payn. 11 And blasphemed the God of heaven, for their paynes and for their soars, and repented not of their works. 12 And the sixt Angel powred out his vial upon the great river, to weet Eu¦phrates: & the water therof was dryed up, that the way of the Kings that come frō the East, might be prepared. 13 And I saw three unclean Spirits like froggs, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet. 14 For they are the spirits of Divils working signes, & which goe unto the Kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battel of that great day of God almighty. 15 Behold J come as a theef: Blessed is he that watched and keepeth his garmēts, least he walk naked, and men see his shame. 16 And he gathered them togither into a place called in Hebrew Armagedon. 17 And the seventh Angel powred out his vial upon the ayre: and ther came a great voice out of the Temple of heauen, from the throne, saying, It is doon. 18 And ther were noises and lightnings and thonders: and ther was a great earth∣quake, such as was not since men were upon the earth, even so great an earth-quake. 19 And the great city was rent into three parts, and the city of the Gentiles fell; and that great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to give unto her the cup of the wine of the feircenes of his wrath. 20 And every Ile fled away, and the mountayns wer not found. 21 And a great hayl, as of talent weight, fel out of heaven upon men: and men blasphemed God, because of the plague of the hayl; for the plague therof was excee∣ding great. The Analysis. HITHERTO hath been the common type: now foloweth the spe∣cial execution, distinct with the parts therof, in this chapter: and then more at large & continued, in the rest folowing. The execution is commanded ver. 1. then the parts ar set down; both the common, the effect of the work, and the event; and the particular, seven distinct vials, (according to the mā∣ner of the former periods,) for those seven notable plagues, wherwith the enemies are to be smitten. The first of them is powred out upon the earth, ver. 2. The second upon the Sea, ver. 3. The third upon the rivers, ver. 4. whose secondary event is a twofold testimony: first of the Angel of the wa∣ters, ver. 5. & 6. secondly of the Angel from the altar, ver. 7. The fourth is
powred upon the Sun, ver. 8.9. The sixt, upon Euphrates; of which ther is also a twofold event; first the drying up of the waters, ver. 12. secondly, a pre∣paration to warr, wherof ther be three princes, authors; and as many Mini∣sters, froggs, ver. 13.14. Then a warning given to the elect. ver. 15. and the gathering of the enemies into the place Armagedon, ver. 16, The seventh is powred out upon the ayre: whose first event is a ful end, ver. 17. the second, noyses, lghtnings, eartquake. Also the destruction of the enemies, ver. 19.20. of cities, of nations, and of men; in the beginning of the 21. ver. and a hayl of talent weight, causing men to blaspheme, ver. 21. Scholions. 1 And J heard a great voice out of the Temple: In the commandement, we ar to consider, whence the voice cometh, to whom, and to what ende. It com∣meth out of the Temple, as it did in chap. 9.13. from the foure hornes of the altar: sometime from the Throne, as after in chap. 19.5. The difference is, that the voice from the Throne, cometh as it were immediately from God: from the Temple, whē any thing is obteyned by the prayers of the saincts: who here are sayd to command; that we may know how great force faith∣ful prayers have; which as if they were authors of the thing to be doon, doe so boldly bid the matter to be taken in hand. And in deed, it could not be, that men inlightned with so great light of the truth, should not earnestly strive with God in prayer, to destroy Antichrist very speedily. Aretas hath not these words, out of the Temple: but al our books agree, as doth al∣so the vulgar Latine: and in other places it is usually told, whēce any voice cometh. They to whom it came, are the seven Angels. But what need was there of it, (may some say;) seing they were appointed before unto this bu∣sines, and furnished with things needful, in the former chapter? Verily, they stood ready at the barrieres, and wayting for a signe: but unto a cō∣mon commandement, ther must also come a special, if any would have ful power to doo a thing. For this therfore doo they wayt: shewing that not so much as a finger may be moved, without Gods wil & providence, wherby al things are governed. The commandement is, that they goe and power out their vials upon the earth. But some of them are poured upon the sea, rivers, sun, aier: It is true, yet al their force redoundeth upon the earth. The other elements have not a chaunge for their owne sake, but to affect the earth therby, as that which is the common basen for the liquour pow∣red out. But how then is this proper o the first, (as the verse folowing sheweth,) which is common to all? We shal see in the particular explicati∣on
that the first belongeth indifferently to the common multitude of the inhabitans of this earth: the other, unto some certayn sorts, of chief note. 2 And the first went, and powred out his vial upon the earth: We have seen the commandement: now beginns the particular execution. Where the effe∣cting of the work, is the powring out of the vial upon the earth. VVhich words, must not be taken properly. For the vial is not any material vessel; nor full of very liquour, but of Gods wrath, as in the former chapter, ver. 7. Ney∣ther is the earth, this ground which we tread upon; but first it signifieth, men; and then not al, but Antichrists marked servants onely, as the event straightway teacheth, for ther came a soare on the men that had the Beasts mark. In which sense, it hath been often used before: which we doo therfore cō∣stantly reteyn in al out explication, that therby we may the better see, how the whole prophesie agreeth with it selfe. The event giveth a noysome & grie¦vous soare, that is malignant and incurable, as Physicians use to cal it, wher ther is so much ranckling and venimous matter in it, as it wil never suffer it to heal up. But neither is this a soare truly and properly so caled: whose procreant causes, we see, are figuratively borowed. And like events must we minde to be in the other vials also: for to expound them according to strict property of speech, as doth the Iesuite; is not to explayn, but rather to confound al things, so as the light of the truth shal never appear. They which have this ulcer on them, ar men. There came an ulcer against the men, (as Th, Beza translateth it,) or in the men, as the vulgar Latine saith, in ho∣mines: according to that phrase of sitting in the Temple, , 2 Thes- 2.4. But the preposition with the fourth case signifyeth, as if the boyles tormented them, not so much by cleaving in the body, as by afflicting it outwardly: which doth more agree to figured soares; as if he should say, those things shalbe doon against Antichrists bondmen, which shal prick and vexe them no lesse then noysome soares. Of what condition these mē are, is declared by the mark of the Beast, and worshiping of his Image. VVe have shewed before, chap. 13.17. from the threefold note wherwith the Beasts worshipers are signed; that the first, hath the name of the whole, & is cal∣led a Character or Mark, the place wherof is in the right hand. VVhich was the propre note of his chief worshipers, the Noble men, Clerks, Scholars, &c on whom, as upon propps, the Beast doth chiefly lean. VVherefore these should specially be plagued with this soare. But not they onely that have his mark: but also they that worship his Image. And this is chiefly of the learned men, and such as are wiser then the common sort, as is shewed on chap. 14.9. although the worshiping of the Image, is in some sort, common to al; chap. 13.15. and therfore should this soare, molest the whole crewe
of them; yet specially those which think they ar furnished with the cōsent of al antiquity, for to give that honour to the Beast. But hence we may observe, how it can not be, that the first vial, should be alone with the first trompet; seing the vial is powred onely on this kind of men, wheras there were not any such, before the second Beast, whose beginning is not anciē∣ter then the fift trompet: which point we noted, on the first verse of the former chapter. These things thus explayned, doo al lead unto this, that this ulcer is nothing else but spite & envie, then which no greater torment could Siculan tyrants feel; as sayth the Poet. And herewith were the Papists marve¦lously tormented, when the vial was powred out. Which sicknes is right∣ly caled an ulcer, the nature whereof it resembleth by a twofold accident. For it forceth them that ar troubled therwith, to keep in and not come a∣broad; so that they flee the sight of them, for whose prosperity they ar stri∣ken sick; as of old the Aegiptians, who togither with their Sorcerers had by the sprinkling of the ashes so many blisters al over thē, that they could not stand before Moses, Exod. 9.10.11. Then also in private they are so afrayd to be touched, that they use al the means they may, to keep the soa∣re, least it be squised. Which kind of evil, came upon the men that bare the Beasts badge, straight after the opening of the Temple, chap. 11.19. (to which, these vials, as I have shewed, are to be joyned; which the repetition of things past, hath severed with so long a space between:) namely about the yere 1560, where the former Prophesie ceased. For then our gracious Q. Elizabeth, being bidden by the voice out of the Temple to powr out her vial upon the earth; that is, being admonished by the counsels of godly men, about the end of the first yere of her raigne, she removed many most worthily out of their Prelacies, and other ecclesiastical dignities and bene∣fices, who glorying onely in the mark of the Beast, denyed due obedience to their lawful Prince. Among them was the Archbushop of York; the B b, of London, Elie, and 14. others, besides men of meaner note, Dens, Archdeacons, Parsons, Vicars and the like. How needs must men be vehe∣mently burned, when they saw their dignities, lands, fearms, faculties, ho¦nours to b btowed on their adversaries; and themselves in the meane time to  desised and contemned? Many could not bear the sorow; but fld ver sea because therof to sek so much ease as not to behold it: o∣ther at home, payning away with greif in secret places; al of them sleeing the light and sght of men, whom to behold so merry and joyful, was as yll s a bitter death. And though they changed the aier, yet was not their payn asswaged; when the Pope himselfe, and that whole nation, by but hearing it onely, were very sorely tormented. Which he abundantly testi∣fied
by his Bulls against our most noble Queen, severely commanding all subjects to forsake their allegeance unto their Prince: neyther could they be stayed by any religious regard of oath, wherof that violatour of al Law both of God and man, did discharge them. But, thanks be to God, he yet laboured in vayn, wherby his torment is much the more increast. For thus sayd he with himselfe, as Saul did of old; Have ye al conspired against me? Js ther none of you that is sory for my sake? Wil no man ease my boyle, with the blood of that Queen, which hath wrought me so much woe? Have pa¦tience, good Pope; this is the time of thine ulcer, not of thine ease. But his sicknes suffreth him not to rest. Therfore he rageth felly, with venemous libells; he incenseth the Kings with al earnestnes, to wage warr; he privily sendeth Iesuits, the bellowes of al seditions, to betray their country; he se∣cretly suborneth ungracious cut-throats, to kil their sacred Prince: final∣ly he applyes himselfe by whatsoever means he can, to styrr up troubles, wherby he may work the utter destruction of the realm, and of us all. But having tryed all wayes in vayn, through the mercy and goodnes of our God, these two and fourty yeres; both he the Prince and head of mis∣cheefs, and his desperate children, doo scarce refrayn from tears, because they nought worth tears doo see. In France about the same time, (that we may see this soare was universally spred among the Papists;) when Charles the 9. began his reign, and dayly the Papists authority did more and more de∣cay: a great part of Nobility, joyned themselves to the purer doctrine, of the Peers of the realm very many; the Queen mother (for fear, I suppose, of her English neighbour,) was much busied about religion, and not ob∣scurely favoured the professours therof, or at least feigned it; some of the Papists wēt more seldom to their wōted temples; many which stuck more fast to their old opinions, kept themselves so within their private wall, that they durst scarce be seen in publik meetings For what other disease, I pray; then for the payn of this ulcer? Germany had angred the Thracian stock, long before. But at the same time, the wounds erst inflicted, now growing more full of atter, were changed into ulcers. The decree of Charles, as we sayd before, was heavy, wherin peace and liberty was granted to religion; but the lesse hope they had to repele the same, the sharper did it prick thē dayly. For Emperour Ferdinandus succeeding his brother, thought it best to rest in the former decrees, wherto he had consented at Augusta, before he was Emperour. Maximilian his son, did alwayes mislike that manner of propagating Christian religion, with armes, or compelling any to re∣ceive it, that were unwilling. How untollerable was this moderation to the ulcerous Papists, that burned with desire of revenge? But now let us
see in a word, how this ulcer wil not be touched. Which the Council of Trent verily shewed, in the second session under Pius 4. in the yere 1562. where this busines was committed to some chosen men, for to consider of divers censures and books, eyther suspected or pernicious: that is, that by al meanes they should have care ther went out nothing among the peo∣ple, that nipped the Popes authority, and Romish superstition in any one word. Doubtlesse the ulcer is very egre and virulent, that can indure no∣thing that is rough or hard. Therfore whatsoever is layd to it, let it be ten∣der and soft. For this cause did Pius the 4. set forth an Index of the for∣bidden books; which Sixtus the 5. afterwards augmented, and Clemens the 8. lately recognized. VVherin it is appointed, which books men must quite absteyn from; and which one may use, so they be corrected. (Certain¦ly the Pope prescribes a diet, for his botchie patients.) Among other ru∣les of correcting, this is one, that al things be wel lookt to, and attentively noted, not onely the things that offer themselves manifestly in the course of the work: but if ther be any that secretly doo lurk in the Scholies, in the summaries, in the margins, in the tables of the books, in the prefaces or epistles dedicatorie. Instruct. de correct. book D. 2. How suspicious is sicknes? Verily this fear of running upon a∣ny thing that may offend, hath shred off in many late writers whatsoever was in them of soundest iudgment, and more free truth. But the bookes are in al mens hands, wherby they may perceive, what it is that payneth these brand-marked persons, and where. Although one purging Index set forth by Philip the 2. King of Spain, in the year 1571. may be in sted of many And least thou mightest think perhaps, that they are troubled cō∣cerning late writers onely, or the marginal notes of others: they doo vio∣lence to the very words of the ancient Fathers. For example, in a certaine edition of Augustine, which Iohn Gibbon an English Iesuite, Doctor of Div. & Professor at Trevers, perused in the disputatiō about Saincts, Thes. 207. there these words are no more read, yet doo not we constitute temples, preisthoods, holy things and sacrifices to the Martyrs &c. as the ancient true co∣pies have, in the 8. book of the City of God, chap 17. but contrary thus; we doo constitute temples, preisthoods, holy things and sacrifices to the Martyrs, becau∣se not they but their God is our God &c. O impudent falsers, which make Au∣gustine to affirm, that, which he openly denyeth: that I speake not how unapt you feyghn his words to be, that sacrifices are to be constituted to the Martyrs, because they are not God. The Ratts doo perish by their own bewraying. Francis Iunius in the yeere 1559, saw at Lions with Trelloni∣us some pages of the true Ambrose cancelled and rased by two Franciscan Friers, and other new ones substituted in place of the former, after their
own wil, against all faithful evidence of other books. An unhonest prank, and an impious: but not new with the Romists; who shewed themselves such artizens long since, in the Council of Nice. But what doo they mean, by adulterating the writings of the ancients? Would they stop the mouth of this age? They cannot: ther are left, thanks be to God, true copies, by which their sacrilegious impudency is cōvinced. Or, as is more likely, doo they provide for time to come? Foolish Popelings, which now get anciēt writers to succour you: when shortly ther shal not a Papist be left for them to yeild succour unto. Your cause, within these few yeres, shalbe tried, not by the Fathers, but by fyre and sword: as this Revelation wil manifest. In the mean while we may observe, both how dāgerous it is, to depend now on the Fathers imprinted by others: and how ful of botches the Popish crew is, which is so afrayd of nayles, as it pareth them to the quick; & not herewith content, wrappeth woll also about the Fathers fingers, that they may the softlyer handle their scabby bodyes. 3 And the second Angel powred out his vial upon the Sea: The second vial puts forth his force against the sea; to weet, figurative, as was the earth: for ther is the same respect doubtlesse of every one. And seing the overthrow of Antichrist is here in hand, what great dammage should he suffer, more then al other men, by the sea properly so caled, turned into rotten blood? For this is the first effect of this vial: neither would the second hurt him a∣ny whit more, wherby al living things dye in this sea. The earth affordeth him infinite daynties, so that he may easily bear the want of fishes, though they should dye every one. Wherfore we must not stick in the native significa∣tion, but take that which we have seen often used before. It meaneth ther∣fore Doctrine, the notable change wherof, should fall out under this vial; of corrupt, being made most corrupt. In former ages verily it was turned into bloud: but now it changeth into much more grosse and royled filthi∣nesse, then ever before: until at length it becometh like the bloud of a dead man, that is, rotten, clammy, grosse, black bloud; not liquid and fresh, such as floweth from a living body. The first Council of Trent therfore, is this sea; being no lesse conpounded of a hotchpotch of al Popish errours, then the natural sea is of the gathering togither of many waters. VVhich Council was begun some yeres before, (as we have shewed, chap. 11.7.) but at length was made an end of, and confirmed by the definite sentence of P. Paul the 4. at the request of the Cardinals Moronus and Simoneca, in the name of the rest of the Council, in the yeare 1564. Into this sea of errors, the yere after, and the eight next folowing, the second Angel Mar∣tin Chemnitius powred out his vial: who began and composed a Trial of
this Tridentine Council, and found it to be nothing but an horrible con∣fused Chaos of many monstrous opinions. But this occasion, forthwith upstarted many doughty Papists to mainteyn the same: who behaved thē∣selves so fortunatly in this service, that by defending the bloud, they turned it into rotten bloud; that is heaped up many more pestilent errors, to thē that were before. Among the rest, there rose up handlers of controver∣sies at Rhenes, Doway, Loven, as frontier Captaynes; by whose industrie it came to passe, that al the durt which lay stinking about here and there in many ditches, was scraped togither into one channel, that therof at length mought exist this rotten sea. But above al, the heaping togither of waters most fowl with carrayn bloud, was playn to be seen, when P. Gre∣gory the 13. in the yere 1571. procured two ample Colleges to be built at Rome, for to corrupt youth beyond the Alpes; and made Robert Bellar¦mine master of this worke; that he should ūfold the controversies of faith, unto the students of those Colleges. For he, that he might the more pro∣vide for his auditors, that is, the sooner destroy them; thought it not best to labour about any one point, two or three; as many others had doon be¦fore; but to bring al controversies into one body as it were, which he saw was yet wā¦ting, as himselfe confesseth in his Epistle to the Pope. Wherby, through Gods good providence, it came to passe, that an intyre and perfect body of Popish doctrine, absolute in al points, which never was before, being largely disputed in these books of controversies, did now come forth in publik: that they which willingly shut not their eyes, might see the Sea playnly turned into filthy bloud. ¶ And every living soul dyed in the Sea: But how can this be, (may some say,) seing every sowl liveth not in the sea? This, it may be, caused Theod. Beza to transplace the words thus, and whatsoever thing lived in the sea, dyed: But the natural order of the words hath a meaning agreable with al other of this book, and of this kinde. For we are to know, that the whole crew of the malignant Church is divided eyther into the Clergie, or into the rest of the Laitie. Those clergie men are the proper living things of this sea: these laie folk are cheifly earthly, and denoted by the earth. Now if he had sayd, every sowl living in the sea, dyed; some would perhaps have gathered, that this death was proper to the Clergie & Doctours: but when he sayth, every living sowl dyed in the sea, he teacheth, that the popish litie & people, pe∣rish in this blood, togither with the Clergie. But, thou wilt say, the words perteyn alike unto al, which any way live: therfore this death seemeth to be common unto al. I answer; al verily, which before seemed to live, so soon as they came down into this sea, straight way were choked & dyed.
But al the elect, have their dwelling in the Temple, and the Temple is pla∣ced in heaven, chap. 15.6. so that they need not to be afrayd at al of this earthly sea, whose rotten bloud shall kill onely the men of the same kind. And here all unlesse they leave their earth, that is, unlesse they forsake the Popes religion; shal finde destruction in this sea: for no other waters shal they have to drink, but these thus filthy; nor be informed with any other doctrine, then that is drawen out of the Council of Trent, and controver¦sal books of the Iesuites. How can they then but dye presently, if they drink of those waters, wherin al the foundations of salvation, are turned into deadly poyson? Most miserable therfore is your estate, ô yee Papists, which drink in filthy bloud, as most sweet heavenly liquour: and settle your sal∣vation, in most certayn destruction. But it is Gods just judgement, that they which despise the pure waters of life, should miserably perish in this bloud: draw out, ô highest God, those whom thou hast destinate to the prayse of thy mercy. But besides let us know, that it is not safe to swimm in this Sodomitish lake, as many doo, which make no conscience to assēt unto any religion. This then is the estate of this filthy sea: which wel beco¦meth the ulcerous flock, to be fed with the rotten bloud therof, as it were with rivers. 4 And the third Angel powred out his vial upon the rivers: Th'effect of the third vial, belongeth to the fountayns & rivers. The event turneth the same into bloud. Fountayns and rivers, are as the breasts wherewith the sea is nourrished, and which borow their nourishment from it againe. And the sea, being the Doctrine: the Fountayns are the Masters which have charge of the doctrine; and these, no mean fellowes, and footstools, so to speak; but principal Doctours, on whose mouth the rest of the troup doo depend. These now, by al mens iudgment, are the Iesuites: from whose distributiō, the rest of the multitude gathereth, like babes taking the meat into their mouthes, which they chewed for them. Dominicus of old appeared unto Pope Innocent in his sleep, to hold up with his shoulders the Lateran Church, that was in danger of ruine: but at this day, the Iesuites be the chiefest propps of the Popes throne: which neverthelesse they shall not hold up long; who long synce have begun to faulter and fayl as overcharged with the weight. For under this third vial, the rivers shalbe turned into bloud; that is, those Masters of Popish doctrine, the Iesuites, shalbe put to death; that the Chur∣ch of Rome, which in time past was wont to kill with the sword, may at length be killed her selfe, as the Spirit hath foretold, chap 13.10. Which power this vial began to exercise about the year 1581. when in our realm of England, by the common decree of the States in Parliament, it was e∣nacted,
that whosoever should goe about any manner of way to draw the mindes of the subiects from obedience towards their lawful and natural Prince, unto the Bi∣shop of Rome, or unto the Romish religion for the same end: they should be put to death as guilty of high treason. What is this, may some say, to the Iesuites? Very much when they al mind nothing els, indevour nothing els; being traytors to their country, killers of Princes, seducers of subiects, the plagues and bane of al Kingdomes and common weals. Therfore the powred out vial wan∣ted not effect, but in the same yere Everard Ducket, Edmund Campion, Ralfe Sherwin, & Alexander Brian, Iesuites and nourissons of the Seminaries, be∣ing convincted of the breach of the law, were worthily punished. And af∣ter them folowed Iohn Paynes, Thomas Ford, Iohn Sherret, Robert Iohnson, & many other of that leven. Thus by Gods grace, the wickednes of wret∣ched men was somewhat restreyned: that though it were not quite taken away, (for who can require of the Leopard to change his skin?) yet did it not so freely range abroad, but was forced to lurk in darknes, to disguise it selfe, to counterfeit & dissemble al things; that so both the venim might be dispersed more secretly, and the mischeevous heads therof, be provi∣ded for. 5 And I heard the Angel of the waters: We have seen the first event: the se¦cond is a twofold testimony wherby the fact is approved: of which the first is by the Angel of the waters; who is not one of these rivers & fountayns, as the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, before, chap. 9.11. but one that is over the rivers and fountayns to execute this iudgement of God. In which res∣pect the rest may be called the Angel of the earth, the Angel of the sea, the An∣gel of the sun, &c. to whom power is given over these things. For in that he saith in the next verse, & thou hast given them blood to drink, he playnely exē∣pteth him from the number of them. This Angel therfore is some civil Ma¦gistrate, which had power, or rather which was author and Counsellor for turning these waters into bloud, namely for killing and putting to death the Iesuites. Whom if I should note by name to have been that noble mā of blessed memory, S. William Cicil, late high Tresurer of England: the words folowing wil shew, I doe it not without ground. ¶ Iust art thou o Lord: This testimony adorneth God with the prayses of his Iustice & Truth: and annexeth a reason from the present thing, in put∣ting the murtherers to a deserved death. And a like celebration of Gods iustice, was verily made by him whom even now I named, S. William Ci∣cil. For he in the yere 1584. to stop the mouth of gaynsaying raylers, ren∣dred a reason in a book set forth, of putting the Iesuites to death among us. VVhich book is intituled the Iustice of Britany; wherby is clearly mani∣fested,
that some lewd fellowes in England were for shamefull treasōs put to death. He published the book almost in all languages, that all might hear the Angel celebrating Gods iustice; and others that would procure the safety of their realmes and peoples, might be stirred up by this most worthy president, to doo the like. The book hath the very same argument that these two verses have; neither can the summ of it be comprised in any words more fitt. ¶ Which art, ad which wast, and which shalt be: Thus dooth Theod. Beza set it down, out of an ancient hand-written copie. Aretas, the vulgar La∣tine, and Montanus, in sted of  shalt be, doo read , holy. The former celebrated God for cōstancie in his promises, that he is alwayes like himselfe, avenging wicked deeds in like sort now, as he punished thē in ages past. This latter togither with cōstācie ioyneth holines; as if he should say, which for thy constancy and holines canst let this wickednes goe no longer unpunished: but where a title is used, from the distribution of ti∣me, the two first articles are not wont to be put without the third; there∣fore the first reading seemeth to be the more true. ¶ Because thou hast judged thse things; That thou hast shewed such a iudg∣ment, that is, hast inflicted such a punishment on the rivers & fountayns: Ac¦cording to the Hebrew metonymie; for with them, to iudge, signifieth to punish and avenge: as the nation whom they shal serve, I iudge; that is, I will punish, Gen. 15.14. So Deut. 32.36. 1 Sam. 25.39. 6 For they shed the bloud of the Saincts: These words shew reason, of the for¦mer celebration. But where have the Iesuites shed bloud? As though this were hard to know? Are not these the spyals for the holy fathers of the Inquisition, as they that for the most part cary Christians to their bou∣cherie: from whence, no not the guiltlesse, as they say is let goe, but eyther it costeth him his life, or at least al his goods? But besides this, al the world now knoweth that these men are the plotters of al treasons against Prin∣ces, and the troublers of publike tranquilitie: which absteyn not their hands, no not from sacred Princes, for whom they devise death sundry wayes, as we with great danger have often tryed; and other Princes also, by their owne proper peril, have by this time learned. But though these things were not, seing they ar bound by oath to the Bishop of Rome, whoe most feirce defenders they undertake to be: they are worthily guil∣ty of the bloud of al the Saincts, which the Pope hath shed in so great abū¦dance. So Christ condemneth the Iewes then present, of the death of Za∣charie, whom their ancestors killed many yeres before; because they allow¦ed the same things that their Fathers, which had wrought that mischeif,
Mat. 23.35. ¶ And thou hast givē &c. As Tomyris did to Cyrus. To giv on blood is to give one to death; as I will give thee the bloud of gealousie and wrath, that is, I will cause thee to be cruelly killed, as they that are slayn in the heath of w∣rath and gelousie, Ezech. 16.36. By which it appeareth, that the fountayns & rivers, are men, as we interpreted at the first: unto whom the murder of the saincts is attributed, whom they agayn must make amends with their owne bloud. 7 And I heard another from the altar: The second testimony is of an An∣gel from the Altar.  properly is an altar of slaine Sacrifices; & some¦time the altar of incense, as chap. 8.3. because it is likewise a signe of Christs death. Theod. Beza translateth it, out of the Sanctuary; which doth not suf∣ficiently expresse the force of the sentence. Perhaps he so turned it, becau∣se of the preposition , which for the most part is of place, and of that which conteyneth any thing; which might seem not to agree unto an altar; but a like place before, wher an Angel came,  from the altar, chap. 14.18. may open the meaning of this. VVe shewed that this maner of speach be¦longs unto them which ar killed for Christ, which have a place given them under the altar, chap. 6.9. Therfore this Angel is one of that flock, which sufferring calamitie for Christs name, dooth by his sentence approve the fact of killing the Iesuites, and for that cause celebrateth in like sorte the justice of God. Even as it is manifest to have fallen out in the yere 1586. April 4. when the States of Holland and of the other Provinces confede∣rate with them, did decree, that none of the bloudy sect of the Iesuits, or that then was a student with the professors of it, whither he were born within the confederate Provinces, or a forreyner, should creep into those provinces, eyther by sea or by Lād, under payn of hostility and losse of his life. By which decree they give their ver∣dict against those ungracious men, and subscribe to the sentence erst givē by the Angel of the waters in England. And who seeth not them lying under the altar, who so many yeres suffered so many and horrible things of the cruel Spaniard, for the profession of Christ? Although they now by use have learned, that ther is more confort in these calamities, then in al Spa∣nish deynties, which in time past they injoyed, when they wanted the holy truth the while. VVerfore, you noble Hollanders, cleave stil with perfect harts to him, by whose defense you have hitherto been kept safe. Beware of the Romish wiles; doo not so deal, as that now by hearkning to Popish Sinons, your constancy past avayl you nothing, save to let you have tryall of your new feigned freinds to be noysome foes. Think yee that the Ca∣tholik King could be more addicted to the Antichristian religion, thē the
Prelate and late Cardinal of the same? VVould he more desire to take Christ from you, then this man? Take heed; be not dismayed with fear of any peril, though al men should forsake you. The time is short: stand stil, and behold the salvation of Iehovah, which he wil work for you within these few yeres. But what doo I? I could not chuse but by the way to warne in a word my brethren that are in danger. I come againe to the matter. Two yeres before that decree was made by the Hollanders, when the French King Henry the 4 was wounded, by Iohn Castell a Iesuite, who had decreed to kill him: this worthy sentence was uttered in the Session of the great Chamber, both against this Castell, and the whole hierd of Ie¦suites; namely, that all the Priests of the College of Clermont, and all others that wre addicted to the foresayd societie, should, as corrupters of youth, troublers of the publik tranquilitie, enemies of the King and Queen; depart within three dayes after the proclamation of this Edict from Paris and other cities and places where they held their Colleges, and within fifteen dayes folowing, get them out of the whole Realm. And if they did not, but were found any where, after the time prescribed: they should be punished as guilty of high treason &c. A holy and wholsome decree: but ô Father of mercies, rear up, I beseech thee, thyne altar among them, that the Roman Antichrist being quite abandoned, they may injoy with the rest of thyne elect, the syncere worship of thy name. 8 And the fourth Angel powred out his vial upon the Sun: Hitherto have bin these times wherin now we live; for unto this vial have our ages come: the other foure ar by us to be looked for, so that the serching of them out is the more difficult. Notwithstanding we trusting in his guidance alone, by whose conduct we are come hitherto; and being holpen by the light of those that ar passed, which we have drawn from the former explication: doo hope that we shal bring somwhat, which may be profitable for the il∣lustration of them that are to come. The proper force of this vial, is tur∣ned upon the Sun: wherof ther is a tow fold event; first, a power given to the Sun, to scorch men by fire; in this verse: secondly, a very great heat of men, blas∣phemie and obduration; in the 9. verse. As touching the Sun, the borowed speech is like the former. For the same men complayn of the greatnes of this heat, which felt the former calamities; as in the next verse, and they blas¦phemed the name of God which hath power over these plagues. But if it be under∣stood of any Sun-burning properly; how dooth it afflict the bad, more then the good, seing both of them dwel togither on earth, and the one sort ar no more covered from the force of the heavenly bodyes, then the other? But ther is no other Sun to be thought of, then the vial which is powred out upon it: which we have shewed to be caled so, rather for simi∣litude,
than for any respect of proper nature. Let the usual signification therfore of this word remayn, wherby it denoteth the holy Scriptures: with whose light the dark minds of men are no lesse illustrated, then the eyes of the body are with the beames of the Sun. Vpon these is this vial to be pow¦red, not for to hurt them, as the former vials did the earth, sea, & rivers: but for to give them a kind of force and edge, wherby they may prick the shar∣per, and peirce the deeper. How notable the goodnes of God is in this res¦pect towards these last times: ther is no man, unlesse he be shamefully un∣thankfull and envious, but doth acknowledge. For by the paynes of some very excellent, (for why may I not so cal those learned men, which have so greatly holpen Christian religion with their studies?) many things are made unto us most easy and playn, in which the ages past, have been much deceived. Neither is this a vayn boasting of our times; but a true preaching of the bounty of God. Notwithstanding ther shal be a time at lēgth whē the light of the Moone shalbe as the light of the Sun; and the light of the Sun shalbe se¦ven fold like the light of seven dayes; in the day that the Lord shall bind up the breach of their wound, Isa 30.26. as partly by the things that folow, wil appeare more manifest. Many things ther are in the Scriptures, not yet sufficiently explayned: but the neerer we come unto that day, the more copiously wil the light increase dayly, by the neer beams of the rising Sun. That I may tel the very thing; Antichrist is in deed layd open, now long agoe through the grace of God, in marvelous manner: but seing in these yeeres wherin now we live, and wherunto the order of time hath brought us, the way∣ting men of the seat of Rome, have felt nothing heavier, then that their Ie¦suits should be put to death, which was the sentēce of the vial next before; this burning heat of the Sun is to be expected ere long, even some greater perspicuity of the Scriptures, wherby the man of sin may be more vehement∣ly scorched. His filthines shalbe discovered yet more, wherupon men will the more hate him; which wil drive him and his unto such intemperance, that he wil gnash and rage against the Sun which hath manifested to the world his so horrible hiew, that himselfe shal not indure to behold the sa∣me. Wherfore I am to exhort you, yee learned men, whom God hath a∣dorned above others with a singular facultie of perceiving and illustrating the truth: that ye would diligently employ your selves in this noble work for the Church. You hear what a garlond God hath reserved for these last times. Great is the prayse of our Ancestors, which first plucked off Anti∣christs vizar: no lesse will theirs be, which shal utterly hysse him and drive off the stage. Yea they are wont in special, to make the triumphe, which doo make an end of the battel. This onely conflict seemeth to be left for
learned men: the more are they to be styrred up to apply their studies. That which further dooth remayn, fyre and soword shal performe; and shall not be accomplished by ynk and pen. ¶ And it was given unto him to torment men by fyre: The first event, it shall torment men with heat. But what men? why is nothing here added, as the mark of the Beast, or some such like, wherby we may know unto what flock it perteyneth? Shall others also be burned with this Sun, besides the hous∣hold of Antichrist? verily so it seemeth. Hypocrites and all others that ar not indued with true godlines, whatsoever religion they professe, cannot endure that their wickednes should be manifested, and reproved by the light of the heavenly truth. Wherupon it is no marvel if many other earth¦ly men also, which are not of the Popes profession, be molested by this heat of the Sun. But the words of the next verse, which hath power over these plagues, seem to be of those men, as I sayd, which have felt the former scour¦ges also. But to what ende is this added, by fire; seing the word  burn, doth sufficiedtly expresse the burning of the Sun? It is that wee may know, that the heat wherwith they shall boyle, shall not be heavenly but earthly; such as is fire, to weet, envy, contention, strife, and al bitternes of minde. For fire is here metaphorical, which playnly sheweth that this is not the proper Sun, seing it worketh not by it own but by an others ver∣tue. Such then shalbe the first event, that men shall boyl in heat, not one∣ly by a secret exacerbation of their mindes, but even by open brawles and reproches. But shal the Angel of the Sun, receave such a reward? It had bin better for him to have stopt his vial, that it might not distill such trouble unto him. But let him not be discouraged: God will prepare him a secret place with himselfe; to keepe him from the virulence of tongues. The same hath been the condition of al the Prophets alway: so it is with the holy book, that being tasted, it is sweet in the mouth as honey; but being eaten, it ma∣keth the belly bitter: chap. 10.9. Wherfore let ungratious men reproch free¦ly; so as the manifestation of their wickednes doo move their choler. 9 And men boyled with great heat: The second effect shalbe marvelous & unusual vexations; when ther shalbe no shelter no not in the thickest for∣rest, that men can use to alay their heat. Therfore they blaspheme the name of God that hath power over these plagues: like the men of Atlas, which curse the Sun with al execrations, because it parcheth them with too much heat; as Herodotus relateth. These last words seem to make this plague peculi∣ar unto them, that were vexed also with soates, and whose fountains were turned into blood. Notwithstanding we are not to think that it shalbe o∣pen blasphemy against God, so as his holy name shalbe manifestly viola∣ted
after the manner of the Hethens, and them that know not God: but that then men doo also commit this wickednes, when they difame his truth, and use cursed speaking against it; such manner of indirect blasphe∣my, it seemeth it shalbe. ¶ And they repēted not to give him glory: A defective speech; which is more full, in chap. 9.20. as if he should say, And they repented not of their workes, to give him glory; and so after in ver. 11. Now therfore see what this greater light and heat shal effect: it shal drive men to blasphemy; but they shal per¦sist in their wickednes, no lesse then before. Least perhaps thou shouldst look, that they being convicted in conscience, should submitt themselves to so manifest truth. This therfore take thou knowledge of before; that thou be not offended at the obstinacy of men. 10 And the fift Angel powred out his vial upon the throne: This vial upon the Beasts throne, hath for the first event, the darkning of his kingdome: for the second; rage, blasphemy, darkning, of the Beasts brood, ver. 11. VVho this Angel is, we shal see in the next chapter, upon ver. 17. wher the decla¦ration of this thing is purposed. What the Throne is, the things that wee have heard before, doo sufficiently teach us: for it is the City, which the Dragon gave to the Beast, chap. 13.2. which wee have shewed to be Rome, and wilbe playner yet, by the things that folow. Therfore after the evidēce of the Scriptures, wherby the Beast swelted in heat in such marvelous mā∣ner: that which now next is to be looked for, is calamity that shal come u∣pon this very city. Not any light adversity wherby her former dignity shalbe a little lessened: but her last overthrow, wherby shee shall utterly be ruinate, as after shalbe manifest: when that saying of Sibylla shall come to passe: Then (Rome) shalt thou be wasted quight, as thou hadst never been. This therfore toucheth Antichrist, neerer then the former. The farr-dar∣ting Sun did scortch, but it was from farr: now, the tops of his sacred Pal∣lace shall fal down; wherby the brightnes of the Popes Kingdome shalbe turned into darknes. For how should it not be covered with mournfull blacknes, when the Princely Court is cut down, and Chaire overthrown, which they were wont to vaunt should be eternal, and that Hel gates should not prevayl against it? To prove which point, Bellarmine bringeth many rea¦sons: but the speedy event wil teach, how he was deceived. Although some Iesuites, being forced hereunto by the truth, doo now beginn to speak of the destruction of it. VVich yet they wil have to be, not because of Anti∣christ; but before his birth, or at least before he shal begin his reign. But this fiction, we wil take away in his place. We may hence observe, how lōg-suffering God is, and slow unto wrath. A thousand times hath he now alrea∣dy
convinced this whore of her filthynes: yet will he not quight destroy her until he hath set out her wickednes in a clearer light. VVhich when it also shal be doon in vayn; what remayneth but the last punishment, when ther is no hope at al of any amendement? But after the ruine of the City, the Beast shal remayn a while; not to recover his former dignity, but to pe¦rish soon after, with a greater destruction. And therfore he sayth, his king∣dome was made darke, not altogither extinct, but bereft of the former bright¦nes. ¶ And they gnawed their tongues for payn: The second event; they shal gnaw their tongues for rage and madnes. Huge and intolerable shalbe the payn; such as is noted elswhere, by weeping and gnashing of teeth, Mat. 22.13. Vn∣lesse perhaps by a proverbial manner of speaking, so great anguish be signi¦fied, as wil they, nil they, they are compelled to refreyn their malapert tō∣gues, to renounce their own writings, and speak thenceforth more mo∣destly; which is commonly caled the biting of the tongue, and eating of ones own words. But because in the next verse it is sayd; they repented not of their works, the former exposition is more simple. Although they may faighned¦ly and for fear, temper their evil speakings, so as they repent not from the hart and truly: yet I choose rather the former. That speech of Zachary see¦meth to agree fitly with this; Their tongue shal consume in their mouth, Zach. 14.12. And that phrase  for payn, is an Hebraisme, mehhamal;  answereth to the preposition min: as elswhere, for sighting, Psal. 102.6. 11 And they blasphemed the God of heaven: Infinite is the hardnes of mās hart, which cannot be tamed by any afflictions. Graunt that the Papists be not convicted by the increased light of the scriptures: will not the destru∣ction of their holy city move them to acknowledge the truth? VVil they now burst out agayn into blasphemy; wher ther is no hope but by asking forgivenes? But it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth. God stri∣keth and softneth, what harts he thinketh good. And where it is sayd, for their soares; by it is signifyed, that these are the same men, on whom the former vials were powred. But mention is made specially of soares; because every calamity, caused not sensible payn. The Sea changed into blood, was so farr from working any sorow: that it rather ministred matter of reioycing to men that knew not their misery. Furthermore it is hereby manifest, that the former vials doo yet reteyn their force; and vanish not streight way, when new ones come in place. But above all, Envie, which we sayd was the soares, doth most torment: which causeth greater greif by the felicity of their enemies, then by their owne destruction. VVho would look for any feeling of the former soares, when the sorow for their wasted throne was u∣pon
them? O envy, great is thy power. ¶ And repented not of their workes: For this Beast is the Pantheresse, chap. 13.2. it cannot change the skin. But the power of God should not have bin so eminent in times past, if Pharaoh had repented at the first miracles. So shal ther be many subtil devises after the throne is overthrown: Antichri∣stian religiō shal stil be reteyned amōg the Papists. But let none be afraid: the Beast is reserved onely for the triumph. 12 And the sixt Angel powred out his vial on the great river Euphrates: This ri∣ver is not eyther the Tyber or any other fortresse of Rome; (whose destru∣ction was taught us by the former vial; and why should the thing doon, be now doon agayn?) but it is that which runneth through Mesopotamia Eastward from Iudea, as before, chap. 9.14. which notwithstanding is u∣sed figuratively for any impediment, that may hinder the passage into this country. The first event is, the drying up of the waters therof, as of old the Red Sea was by the Eastern winds, and as Iarden was to the Iewes when they passed into the Land of Canaan, Exod. 14. Ios. 3. The end of drying up these waters is, that the way of the Kings from the East may be prepared. But who be these Kings? Are they those foure Angels spoken of chap. 9.15. The counpt of the time wil not bear it. For the trōpet sounded many yeres agone: but this vial is not yet begun to be powred out: it foloweth after Rome is wasted, which yet flourisheth, and which the trompet saw flouri∣shing long. Are they those Kings of the earth and of the whole world, mentio∣ned in the 14. verse of this chapter? But, these to whom Euphrates giveth place, are the Kings of the Est onely, not of the whole world. It would be long to recken al the interpretations of other men; much more to re∣fute them. It seemeth unto me, that they are here meant, for whose sake a∣lone the scripture mentioneth the waters of old to have bin dryed up; na∣mely the Iewes, unto whom the read sea yeilded passage, and Iarden stayed his course, til every one were gone over, journying on foot through the deep. This miracle is proper to this people onely: for that which Iosephus writeth that the sea of Pamphilia gave way to the Macedonians, when Alexan∣der led his host that way: (Antiquit. b. 2. chap. 7.) Other writers doo playnly shew, how the thing is to be understood. Plutarch, (in Alexand.) sayth that Historie-writers amplifyed the thing beyond al credit: and that Alexā∣der himselfe never boasted of any such wonder in his Epistles. Arianus writeth that usually ther is no way to passe through the sea neer Phaselis, but when the North winds blow; which blew vehemently when Alexander went that way, that they seemed, not without Gods power, to have yeilded them an easy passage. But Strabo book 14, writeth most playnly, that the soldiers tra¦veiled
al the day even up to the navel in the waters. So then Alexander passed through the waters that were shollow, and not quite dryed up. Neyther doo I think can it be found in any record; that such a thing did ever hap∣pen to any other people then the Iewes. The vanity of writers may feign many things: but the Scriptures doo challenge this, as peculiar to this na¦tion onely. I will say, sayth God, to the deep, be dry, and I wil dry up thy flouds, Isa 44.27. And againe, Art not thou the same, which dryed up the sea, even the waters of the great deep: making the deeps of the Sea, to be a way for the redeemed to passe over? Isa 51.10. And least some should thinke this miracle was one∣ly for the time passt, and not such to be looked for ever after: he addeth in the next verse; So the redeemed of the Lord shal returne, and come with joy into Sion &c. And in Isa 63.11. where should he be that brought these up out of the sea with the shepheard of his flock? which cleft the waters for thse, to make himselfe an everlasting name? which led these through the deepe, as an horse in the wildernes, so that they stumbled not? It is no marvel therfore, if the peculiar note & en∣signe of this nation onely, be putt for the men themselves. But what need there a way to be prepared for them? Shal they returne agayn to Ierusalē? Ther is nothing more sure: the Prophets playnly confirme it, and beat of∣ten upon it. Yet not to the end that the ceremonial worship should be re∣stored: but that the mercy of God may shine unto al the world, in giving to a nation now scatered over al the face of the earth, & dwelling no where but by leave; their fathers habitations, wherin they shal serve Christ pure∣ly and sincerely, according to his owne ordinance onely. A thing of old commonly spoken of by the ancient Iewes, which they understood by the Prophets, although but narrowly and through the lattisse. Wherupon it was berayed with old wives fables, both in ages past, and so is now at this day. The feighned Esdras saw some sparkles of this truth; which he over∣whelmed with so many and great fictions, that he had need be a wary and attentive reader, and one of no mean judgement, that would gather gold out of that confused heap. They entred in, saith he, speaking of the ten tri∣bes that were led captives, at the narrow passages of the river Euphrates: for the most high then shewed them signes, and stayed the springs of the river, til they were passed over, 4. Esdras, 13.43.44. A Iewish fable: but neerer to the truth is that which there foloweth, ver. 47. The most high shal hold stil the springs of the river agayn, that they may goe through: &c. which agreeth with this pla∣ce, & may both of them be understood metaphorically: though nothing letteth, why it may not please God agayn to shew his ancient power of drying waters up extraordinarily. Seing therfore it is certayn, that this na¦tion shal earnestly flock unto the Gospel, and that in the last times, as
Paul teacheth, Rom. 11.25. and the last period of things is of the vials: & it is not likely that such a wonderful matter should have no mention at al in this clear Prophesie: unto which also here is added the proper ensigne of this nation, for whose onely sake, both sea & river (as we read) were dri∣ed up: I am not altogither unadvised, in supposing, that this is the onely matter here in hand: which must eyther be foūd in this place, or be whol∣ly omitted in this book. VVherfore after Rome is overthrown and cut off there shalbe a common bruit of this new Christian people: at the hearing wherof the Gentiles shalbe astonished. But what, are the Iewes Kings? why not? seing al Christians are Kings, Rev. 1.6. and the fowr and twen∣ty Elders, which represente the whole company of the faithful, doe all wear crownes: chap. 4.4. And this magnificent name doth the Spirit give them, because it shalbe very honourable, after so many ages, and so stiff stubbornes of that nation; for them to come againe, as it were by recove∣ry of law, unto the truth; and religiously and holily with al observance to honour the same, having their incredulous and obstinate harts subdued. But besides this the whole East shal obey them, that not without cause ar this people caled Kings, in respect of their long and large dominion & Em¦pire. But they seem to be called playnly Kings in Isay 24.21. if we diligent¦ly mark the words and meaning of the place: And it shalbe, saith he, in that day the Lord wil visit the host of the high, in the high place; and the Kings of the earth, upon the earth. And they shalbe gathered with a gathering as a prisoner into a pit, and shalbe closed up in the close-place: and after many dayes shal they be visited. And the Moon shalbe abashed, and the Sun ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in mount Sion, and in Ierusalem: and shalbe glorious, before his Ancients, & the Kings of the earth, are al one; who after are gathered into the pit, after many dayes are visited; and at whose deliverance, the Moon is abashed &c. VVhich last words are certenly meant of the ful restoring of the Iewes: wherfore the first words intend also the same. VVhom God, in heavy indignation, because they refused his Son, did thrust into the pit or dungeon, for many ages togither, and kept them closed up in a very hard prison. But at length after many dayes he will visit these prisoners, and bring them out of the gayl: for whose fervēt zele and singular study of true godlines, the Church∣ches of the Gentiles as the Moon & Sun, shalbe abashed at this greater brightnes. They ar caled the host of the high, in the high; because the Iewes were the peculiar people of the high God, and of his Church which is heavenly: wherupon they ar often caled in Daniel, qaddische hheljonin, the Saincts of the high; Dan. 7.22. &c. But this is inough to find out the mea∣ning of this place: I may not now stand longer upon it. I have handled it
the more at large, for to give occasion unto our men to mind these things more diligently. These Kings come from the East, because the greatest multitude of Iewes, is in those countries: and these first of all shal see the truth, and embrace the study of it. But, thou wilt say, The Temple is shut, until the seven plagues be fufilled: which we shewed to be spoken in respect of the Iewes, chap. 15.8. But that is to be understood of their universal ca∣ling: and here onely the beginning of it is taught, as we shal declare after more at large. And by these things we may see, how the sixt vial, answereth to the sixt Trompet. The trompet, sent from Euphrates, four furies into the world: the vial shal minister great joy from the same place: which shal yeild new huige troupes of Christians, by whose vertue those furies shalbe sent back to hell. But as Romes Idolatry, caled for those cruel Turks: so after that Rome is utterly abolished, straightway this cōfort shal appear. 13 And I saw out of the mouth of the Dragon: The second event is first a preparation unto warr; wherof there are three Princes Authors, & as ma∣ny Administers, three unclean Spirits like froggs; in this verse; whose work is described in the verse folowing. The Princes are, the Dragon, the Beast, & the false Prophet. The Dragon always throughout this whole book, is the o∣pen enemy: which were the Roman Emperours, so long as they continu∣ed hethens: in these last times, the Turks doo cary this person. The Beast is the more covert and crafty enemie, Antichrist sitting in the Temple of God; as in the 13 chap. The False Prophet is now first named, and often henceforth after the fift vial. But ther must needs have been some descri∣ption of him some where before: for Iohn speaketh as of a person wel known. And this verily we shal find in that subtil and crafty second Beast; of whom we heard in chap. 13.11. &c. who wrought signes and wondrous lyes. Both of them perteyned to the constituting of the same Antichrist; but with this condition, that the first signifyed the temporal and civil ty∣ranny: the second, the spiritual fraud and malice, as is sayd before. This se∣cond Beast is now plainly caled the False Prophet, by reason of the more ma¦nifest revelation, which shalbe under this sixt vial. For though he reteyne yet with him many attendants, yet the better part of men, and they of his former worshippers; shal know him for a crafty lying hypocrite, and de∣test him as a lothsome creature. For now the event wil teach, after Rome is destroyed, how glorious lyes those were, about Peters Chaire; the Holines of the Church of Rome, the invincible stedfadnes and perpetual constancy of it, a∣gainst the practises of al. Wherfore the Beast and False Prophet is one Anti∣christ; but having a double power, al which he wil now use, both civil & spiritual; to deceive the unskilful, and draw them agayn to be of his side.
He wil open his treasury, he wil spare no charges, he wil levie huge bands of souldjers, and other things that perteyn to force. Neither wil he be lesse diligent to catch the simple, by al spiritual fraud, counterfeisance, fallacies, and other like legierdumain of lyes and errours; wherby he may abuse their payn and help unto this last battel which he now prepareth. So the Turk, the Caesarean Bishop, and Pope-Balaam; are these three mouthes, which at last wil belk out the Froggs in their time. ¶ Three unclean spirits like Froggs: The Ministers of these mischeevous heads. To weet out of the Dragons mouth; Turks, Bashshnes, Agnes, Bgoes, and the other officers of his army. Out of the mouth of the Caesarean Bi∣shop; his Captayns also of warr. Out of the mouth of the Pope false Pro∣phet, he hath the Iesuites in special, and the other toades of his wicked Hierarchie. They come forth out of the mouth, because by their maysters cō¦mandement they take this work in hand; as is manifest by the vow of mis∣sion, wherby the Iesuites are bound to the Pope. But why are they called Spirits? Is it because they ar like the breath which comes out of the mouth and have very neer alliance to them of whom they are breathed, both re∣freshing and animating them, and agayn borowing of them heat & stink? Verily these three Emissaries, ar joynd in neer alliance with these their ma∣sters: they draw from them heat and life; and life they give unto them a∣gaine. Or is it perhaps because they shew themselves no lesse diligent & mighty in executing their busines, then the Spirits bee? Surely the world hath now experience of the singular vigilancy and almost incredible indu¦strie of these three Emissaries; and it is not likely that they wilbe more slug∣gish in the last combate. They are like to Froggs; because they reioyce in their most filthy and unclean pollutions, from which they draw begin∣ning and life. They refuse to be clothed with Christs righteousnes, boa∣sting themselves to be clean ynough before God in their own myre. And when before, the Sea was made like dead mans blood: what other thing cā take pleasure in such a fowle Camarine-puddle, than Froggs, Toads, and other like fennish and execrable filth? But besides their uncleannes, they have also an importunate croaking: for no means doo these stirrers up of troubles, and fighting furies, leave unaptented; for to set al the world to∣gither by the ears. But why is ther no difference between the Ministers of the Pope and of the Turk? Because albeit nothing is more common with them than the name of Christ; (wherupon they wilbe caled Iesuits;) never∣thelesse, whiles they hope for life and salvation by their owne merits; they differ nothing from heathens, which despise Christ altogither. 14 For they are Spirits of Devils: He describeth yet more largely the na∣ture
of those Spirits, by their Lords, their monstrous works, and their Am∣bassage unto all the Kings of the earth. Their Lords are the Divils: because the Princes whom they serv be the vassals and Feoffies of the Divil himselfe, chap. 12.9. and 13.2. Signes they work, by the force and power of the Di¦vil, for of them is he a marvelous artizen, and with such faculty did he fur¦nish the second Beast, 2 Thes. 2.9. Rev. 13.13. They goe forth to gather the Kings of the earth unto battel: for after that Euphrates shalbe dryep up, and the way prepared for the Eastern Iewes: the Turk fearing himselfe, wil pre¦pare warr against them, with as great furniture as he can; as is more large∣ly declared in Daniel, chap. 11.44. Nor wil the Romish Beast togither with the false Prophet in the West, be lesse studious to abolish utterly all them that favour pure religion. He wil prudently take his oportunity, when the Turk shalbe imployed in the Eastern warr. Wherby it shal come to passe, that in one & the same time, the safety of the whole Church shall be in very great danger. This is that warr, whose alarme these Froggs doo sound unto the Kings of the earth. 15 Behold I come as a theef: These words doo trouble the learned man Th. Beza, as if they had crept in hither amisse from some other place. But feing these times shalbe very calamitous, as in respect of the Iewes Daniel foretold, chap. 12.1. neyther is it likely that our Christian nations shalbe in better case: let not this warning seem superfluous or importune unto a∣ny. The greatnes of the peril, may deterr even the strongest man. But least any should hitt against this rock and make shipwrak; Christ biddeth him be of good courage, and not through any fear, to forsake the righteous∣nes of faith, (which here he calleth garments, and which the adversaries will most seek to bereav us of:) promising that he wil come as a theef unwares, and doo vengeance on the enemies above al expectation, and defend his Church. A like comfort ther was, chap. 13.10. & 14.13. that we may know, such hortatorie voices must needs be new, and are not fruitlesse, but seasonable & very necessary. Neither are these words brought in abruptly; but wher∣as in the words next before, mention was made of God almighty, these ar for more force related in his person. ¶ His garments: The hope of forgivenes of sinns through Iesus Christ a∣lone, wherby our sinns are covered, Rom. 4.6.7. Neyther be there any other garments, wherwith al our nakednes can be covered. The purity of the Saincts or of our selves, wil not so much as cover our shoulders, so farr is it from hiding our more deformed parts. These garments are in deed ca¦led afterward,  the justifications of the saincts, chap. 19.8. wher
we shal see what is the force of these words. 16 And he gathered them togither into a place: Here is the third branch of the second event. But who is this that gathered them? Christ verily; and therfore he speaketh not as of many they gathered, to weet those three spi∣rits. Whatsoever the Kings shal purpose, Gods secret providence shall so governe them, that themselves shall feel the same destruction that they in¦tend to others. Vnlesse perhaps that which this verb answereth unto, be the Spirits in the 14. verse, which there are sayd in the singular number (ac∣cording to the property of the Greek tongue) to goe forth, : unto which these words may be joyned  and they gathered them togither: for the 15. verse is interposed by a parenthesis. But by whose means soever they be gathered; governed they are by the secret providen∣ce of Christ. For being led by the hand of God, they come togither of their own accord into that place, from whence there shalbe no way to es∣cape. Which place is caled in Hebrew Armagedon, as Montanus and Plan¦tins edition readeth it with a single d; as also doth Aretas, save with diffe∣rence of a letter, Ermagedon And perhaps these had doon right, if they had kept the aspiration Harmagedon, for so I suppose this word shoul be writ∣ten, as, (if I be not deceived,) wil appear by that which foloweth. Th. Be∣za wil have d to be doubled thus, Harmageddon, as also the vulgar Latin; as if it were made of Har and Megiddo, which is the place where Iosias was slaine, 2 Chron. 35.22. But this place was pernicious to the Church, pros∣perous to the wicked: but Armagedon here seems the contrary. Iohn Fox our countryman of blessed memorie, bringeth a fitter application, as me thinketh, for he saith this place hath not respect unto Josias, but unto that notable victory which Debora and Barak with a smal company, got over the huge host of Sisera, at the town of Megiddo situate on a mountayn, Iud. 5.10. &c. Notwithstanding whiles I consider the thing attentively with my self, ther seemeth no such matter here to be meant; but that an allusiō rather is made unto that of Daniel, chap. 11.45. And he shal fix the tents of Aphadnon between the seas (Lehar tsebi qodesh) in the mountayn of holy be∣autie. By many arguments it may be shewed, that this prophesie of Dani∣el, and that of Iohn, doo perteyn to the same times namely to this sixt vi∣al, as at some other time, if God permit, we wil manifest. The difference onely is, that there particularly it is spoken of the Turk, the enemy of the Christiā Iewes: here jointly it is meāt of the enemies of the whole Church, as wel of Gentiles as of Iewes. And the place is designed by name, where the Iewes enemy shal camp, namely lehar, tsebi qodhesch, in the mount of be∣auty of holines, that is, in the holy land, between the Siriak sea and Euphra∣tes,
which is also caled, a sea, in the Scriptures. But in this Prophesie, wher the Spirit universally doth describe the place of that warr, he could not use that name which is proper to the Iewes. Therfore he made a new word which should be common to ech people, and come very neer unto that in signification. For Harmagedon is made of Har a Mountayn, & meg∣hadhim of delites; or with an affix in the singular number maghdo, of his de∣lite. The very same that Har tsebhi is, the mount of the Roe. For tsebhi a Roe, signifieth also pleasantnes or delite. A word of paramours, when they would speake to their loves most amiably; as in Salomons song, my beloved is like a Roe &c chap. 2.9. By these things then it doth appeare, that the place is foretold by name in Daniel, where the Turk shal fight with the Iewes: but here, where the Beast shall combat with the Church of the Gentiles, the same is onely intimated generally. As if Armagedō wer the common na¦me of both, distinguished into har tsebhi qodhesch, the mount of holy bewty; & the western place without name, save the name of the whole. Which not∣withstāding teacheth that this warr shal there be made, where the Church flourished with greatest purity. For this is the mount of delites unto Christ: which place we shal see somewhat more distinctly manifested, in the expli∣cation of this time, chap. 19. But let us observ to our confort, that the ho¦ly Church among us Gentiles, is no lesse a mount of pleasures unto God, thā that which is to come of the Iewes. God respecteth not persons: in every nation they are dear unto him, that truly honour him in Christ. 17 And the seventh Angel powred out his vial upon the aier: This vial shall have a common event, a being powred into the aier, which compasseth the earth & seas round about. Which yet is not this clementish aier wher∣in we breath, but some other thing signifyed by this manner; after the mā¦ner of the other vials. And we know that the Divil is caled in the Scriptu∣res, the Prince that ruleth in the ayre, Ephes. 2.2. wherto perteyn those chai∣nes of darknes, which Peter speaketh of, 2 Pet. 2.4. and Iude in his Epistle ver. 6. Seing then the Aier is the place of his dominiō, this last vial shall import most greivous calamitie upon al the Divils Kingdome. The former vials nipped some parts therof severally: this, shal undoo the whole body of the impious, with a common destruction. ¶ And there come a great voice out of the Temple of heaven: The first event, is a great voice, which is described by the place whence it cometh, and the thing that it speaketh. The place, is not onely the Temple of Heaven, but also the throne it selfe; the description wherof, was in chap. 4.2. The Temple is the dwelling place of the Saincts, as we have seen before: this Throne is the seat of the highest Maiestie: which being placed in midds of the com∣pany
of the faithfull, shineth with the incomprehensible brightes of the most holy Trinity. Wherfore this voice commeth immediatly from God in respect of the Ministery of the Church. Wherby is signifyed, that God under this vial, wil in extraordinary manner and almost beyond exspecta∣tion, provide for his; shewing forth his power from heaven, for the destru¦ction of al the enemies, which were gathered, (as even now we heard) un∣to the place Armagedon: which interpretation we shal see more fully cō∣firmed by that which foloweth, where a larger explication of this vial is hā¦dled. The voice uttered is, It is doon: : most fitt for the finishing of things, as we know it was used in the creating of them, Gen. 1. & it hath this meaning, as if he should say; Al things now have bin, which I decreed to be doon; neyther remayneth any more of my promises, the complemēt wherof should be exspected on earth. For this same, Is doon, hath referēce unto that in chap. 10.7. In the dayes of the voice of the seventh Angel, when he shal sound the trompet, the Mysterie of God shalbe finished. Now shal ther be an end of al prophesies, when both al the enemies are utterly extinguished, & there is one sheepfold made throughout the earth, of al the elect, Iewes and Gentiles, under the one Pastor Iesus Christ. It is certain that this king∣dome of Christ, thus begunn, shal be eternal; never to be interrupted a∣gayn: and shall at last be translated from earth into heaven. But of the time, wherin this translation shall fall out, which is to be performed at his second coming: I find no mention in this book. This prophesie pro∣ceeds no further, then to the last destruction of al the enemies, and ful re∣stitution of the Iewish nation: the estate of which people so restored, and of the whole Church of al nations, he telleth shalbe most happy, but set∣teth down no moment of time, when they shal leav the earth, and goe to their heavenly heritage. These things shalbe made manifest by the inter∣pretation folowing: some tast wherof was here to be given, least any per∣haps too much attending unto the whole order of things, should slip in∣to that errour of setting down the certain time of the last day: which thing I see some godly and learned men to busy themselves about; as if by this vial some very neer moment therof mought be assigned. Which thing, u∣pon more diligent examination, we find to be wholly layd up in exspecta∣tion of hope, and not at al put in any comhrehension of sense. Now the a∣greement of the seventh vial with the seventh trompet is, that in this, Christs Kingdome is begunn, the enemies being in part abolished, as chap. 11.15, wherupon a voice there sayd, the Kingdome of the world is become Christs: but in the other, Christs Kingdome is consumate, al enemies being quite taken away; wherfore the voice of this is, It is doon.
18 And there were noyses and lightnings &c. Of the second event ther are three branches; first, by what things the execution of the judgement was doon; in this vers: secondly, upon what; in verse 19.20. Thirdly, what effects, in respect of the reprobates; verse 21. Lightnings, thonders, voices, shall come from heaven: the earth, shalbe moved & shaken: wherby is taught, that both heaven & earth shal cōspire, for vengeance on the impious: both which shal powr out whatsoever direful-punishment it hath, upō the wic∣ked crew. And this not after the usual manner of former times; but with such horrible terrour, as never was since the world was made. For nowe ther shalbe a visible semblance of the infernal punishment, which it shall feel at length, in the last judgement. Moreover these kinds of punishmēts doo declare, that the enemies shalbe destroyed rather by the extraordina∣ry power of God, than by any work and endevour of men; which after ap¦peareth more clearly, in chap. 19.20. and 20.9. 19 And the great City was rent into three parts: The second branch of the second event, upon what this iudgement shalbe exercised; which partly are places, partly men. The places be cities & nations. The cities are three, in this verse; the great city; the cities of the Gentiles, & Babylon. But what is this great City? We have heard before, that a city signifieth not onely some towne cō¦passed with walls, which many cityzens dwell in, conioyned togither by the bonds of the same lawes and right: but also the whole dition & empire of any city; as the tenth part of Rome fell, when Germany withdrew it self from the yoke of the servitude therof; chap. 11.13. Is it then the Romane Empire onely? In deed so this was caled before, the great city, chap. 11.8. but forasmuch as in this place, the ful destruction of al the wicked is handled, (for the vial is powred into the aier, as we sayd;) it compriseth whatsoever Dominion and Empire the foes and enemies of the Church, have in any place. It comprehendeth therfore the Turkish tyranny also, which togi∣ther with the Romish, constituteth this great city, as is more evident by the destruction of this city. For it is rent into 3. parts, proportionable to the three Princes, by whom it is ruled; namely the Dragon, the Beast, & the False Prophet, before in ver. 13. Wherfore by this three fold declaration, ther falleth togither, al the Turkish and Mahumetish tyranny, that is, the Dragons: al the power of the Beast, that is, of the Caesarean Bishop: all the authority of the False Prophet, that is, of Pope Balaam: for this man of syn, after the ruine of his throne, remayneth even unto this last overthrow. The first vial, was but a preparative for the warr: this seventh, is of the last destruction. ¶ And the cities of the Gentils fell: VVe heard of the universal Empire of
the impious. But not this onely shall fal in common: but also in particu∣lar al the confederate cities and provinces, both Turkish, Mahumetish, & Popish. For Gentils be al they that are aliants from the truth: whither they be farther of from the same, as the Barbarous nations, or neerer as the Pa∣pists, who by a false title are counted Christians. For we have seen before, how to the Gentiles was given the Court which was ioyned to the Temple, as also to them was given the holy city: which were the places of that rowt which boasted to be Christians, by a vayne tytle, without substance. ¶ And that great Babylon: The third place which shal utterly perish, is that great Babylon. But did not that perish before, under the fift vial, when Rome, the Beasts throne did fall, verse 10? For so we saw it caled before, Fallen Fallen is Babylon the great city; chap. 14.8. In deed Rome did perish before: but it was new Rome, new Babylon, to weet, Constantinople. For every mighty, proud, Idolatrous, bloudy, impious city, may be caled Ba∣bylon: but specially next after Rome, Constantinople; the onely daughter and heyr unto a farthing of her mother Rome: whose natural disposition as she drew by stock; so did she deservedly take the name, being caled new Rome. And surely it seemeth the same order of things shalbe here: first that al the Turkish & Popish forces shalbe beaten down and destroyed: second∣ly that al the cōfederate cities & provinces, if they also doo not quite perish, shal yet at least be under new Governours: thirdly, that the chief city of the Turks, this Babylon, shal bear the iust punishment of her impiety. And it may be, the VVest Christians, after that the Popes name is extinguished, and that the Turk is overthrown in the East; wil shew forth their wrath on Constantinople, and execute the iudgement mentioned in this place. By which now we may understand, that al our enterprises against the Turk, shalbe vain; until Rome be overthrown. For she at the first caled for the Turk, as we have learned from chap. 9.20.21. nor shal his scourge be re¦moved, til the cause be quite taken away. But after that the Beasts throne is consumed with fyre, & the last Popish warr is doon: then shal this horri∣ble tyran, without any trouble of ours, be thrust down into hell: neyther shal we ever need to fear any more molestation from any reliques of him. ¶ Came in remembrance before God: Now both the cause is mentioned of the destruction of the Constantinopolitan Babylon; and the punishement which shalbe inflicted on it. The cause is, Gods remembrance: who is sayd to remember, both for mercy and for iudgment, when he performeth in deed, what he decreed to be doon. So long as he deferreth vengeance and wrath; he seemeth to forget, and to have no care or respect of our affaires and actions,
And this dooth very wel expresse the horrible cruelty of this Babylō, wher with God suffreth them that are called Christians, to be pressed: & dooth not in the mean time punish the adversaries, nor yeild any defense from injury. Who wil not acknowledge that God turneth away his eyes from beholding our miseries: when without punishment he suffreth us to be beaten, robbed, vexed with al reproches and contumelies, virgins & wives to be defiled, whole flocks of men to be caried bound and chayned into bondage; infants to be plucked from the brests for to be instructed in Ma∣humetish blasphemy, and the parents to know that they bring forth chil∣dren unto eternal destruction? VVho, I say, minding these and many moe things, al which, Idolatry hath brought upon us: may not worthily say, that God hath quite forgotten our misery? He winketh therfore at Baby∣lons wickednes, that he may drive her to encrease calamities on the men, which wilbe taught by no warnings. And at length when our mens impie¦ty shal cease, the shop therof being burned and consumed: he will cast his eyes upon Babylon, and cal to mind al her wickednes, for to mesure meet punishment unto her. But thou mayest observe, that the Spirit dooth not exaggerate the iniquity of this city, with so many words as her mother Romes: because the sinns of Hethen men, although they be very heavy, ar lighter then theirs that abuse the grace of God. As touching the words,  was remembred, is used passively, as Act. 10.31. so also , that the cup might be given &c. The punishement shalbe the cup of the wine of the feircenes of wrath. A Cup is a part or portion; as, the Lord is the part of my portion, and of my cup; Psal. 16.5. & 11.6. a metaphore taken from Gover¦nours of feasts, which were wont to part unto everie one that which he should drink; wherupon Homer mentioneth a distributed drinking; Iliad. d. Like unto which are the judgments of God, inflicted on every man in just weight and measure. And judgements are a cup of wine, because they shalbe as pleasant to God, as wickednes was to the men: that is, he will take delight in destroying them; as chap. 14.10. Vnlesse it be therfore of wine, because the severity shal take al sense from Babylon, as over much quaffing in of wine, is wont to doe: wherupon, shee shal no more escape the evil, then a man that hath lost his senses through drunkenes. In which respect it is sayd in Zachary, I will make Ierusalem as a cup that causeth slomber, and I wil smite every horse with stonishment, and his rider with madnes, Zach. 12.2.4. And this heaping togither of the feircenes of his wrath, signifyeth grei∣vous and most sharpe punishements: although it be not shewed expres∣sely, whither it shalbe so pluckt up by the roots, as old Rome was befo∣re. It is very like, that after the great calamity which it shall suffer, the
city it selfe shal stil remayn, possessed of Christians; and alwayes thence∣forth shal obey unto them. 20 And every Ile fled: VVe have seen the calamity of the cities and next pro¦vinces: these words now respect the nations further off; whom distance of place, shal help nothing at al. This desolation shall passe over the sea, and consume them in their Ilands. Nor shal it ought avayl them, that dwel on the firm mountayns; for these also shalbe plucked up by the roots, and pe¦rish for ever; as before in chap. 6.14. Notwithstanding, this trouble shal be farr heavier than that. For there, the Mountaines and Iles were onely mo¦ved out of their places: here, they are so utterly abolished, as no footsteps of them doo remayn. But an Jle in this place, is not onely a land compassed round-about by the sea: but also the continent or mayn land, after the He¦brew manner, which cal al countryes beyond the sea, Ilands; Psal. 72.10. and so it compriseth Aegipt also, and Africk. 21 And a great hayle as of talent weight: Hitherto hath been the calamity of the places. Now on the men, it rayneth hayl of talent weight, as of old in Ios, 10.11. And as they fled from before Jsrael, and were in the going down to Beth-horon, the Lord cast down great stones from heaven upon them, until Azekah; and ther dyed more of them that dyed with the hayl stones, than they whom the chil¦dren of Israel slew with the sword. But here he speaketh of stones of huge big∣nes, which would not onely be ynough to kill, but also to crush the men to powder; For never before, was there seen or heard, such an horrible vē∣geance, as this shalbe. ¶ And the men blasphemed God: The effect of all these, as touching the re∣probates, who yet wil spew out their blasphemy against God. This there∣fore is not the end of all things, when the wicked shall with their appro∣bation subscribe to the sentence of the law, and say, Amen; acknowledging their condemnation to be most iust, Deut. 27.15. &c. But ther shal stil remayn some wicked ones in the earth, but for to bear the yoke onely; for never shal they be able to hurt the Church more: which now shal have the cheifty throughout al the earth. And thus have we a breif and distinct representation, both of things present and to come, even until the end. CHAP. 17. AND ther came one of the seven Angels which had the seven vials, & talked with me, saying unto me, come, I wil shew thee the damnation of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters. 2 With whom the Kings of the earth have committed fornication, and the inha∣bitans
of the earth are drunken with the wine of her fornication. 3 So he caryed me away into the wildernesse in the Spirit, and J saw a woman sit u∣pon a skarlet coloured Beast, full of names of blasphemy, which had seven heads and ten hornes. 4 And the woman was arayed in purple, and skarlet, and gilded with golde and pretious stones, and pearles, and had a cup of golde in her hand, full of abominations, and filthines of her fornication. 5 And in her forehead was a name written, a Mysterie, that great Babylon, that mother of whoredomes, and abhominations of the earth. 6 And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saincts, & with the blood of the Martyrs of Iesus: and when I saw her, J wondred with great marveile. 7 Then the Angel sayd unto mee, wherfore marvailest thou? J wil shew th eeth mysterie of the woman, and of that Beast, that beareth her, which hath seven heads and ten hornes. 8 The Beast that thou hast seen, was, and is not, and shal ascend out of the bot∣tomlesse pit, and shall goe into perdition, and they that dwel on the earth shall wonder, (whose names are not written in the book of life, from the foundation of the world,) when they behold the Beast that was, and is not, and yet is. 9 Here is the minde that hath wisedome: the seaven heads are seven mountaines, wheron the woman sitteth. 10 They are also seven Kings, five are fallen, one is, and an other is not yet come: and when he shall come, he must continue a short space. 11 And the Beast which was, and is not, is even the eight, and is one of those se∣ven, and goeth into destruction. 12 And the ten hornes, which thou sawest are ten Kings, which yet have not re∣ceived a Kingdome, but shal receive power as Kings one houre with the Beast. 13 These have one minde, and shall give their power and authority to the Beast. 14 These shall fight with the Lambe, and the Lambe shall overcome them: for he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are on his side, called and cho∣sen, and faithful. 15 After he sayd unto mee, the waters which thou sawest, where the whore sit∣teth, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues. 16 And the tenne hornes which thou sawest upon the Beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eate her flesh, & bur¦ne her with fire. 17 For God hath put in their hartes to fulfill his will, and to consent and give their Kingdome to the Beast, until the words of God be fulfilled. 18 And the woman, which thou sawest is that great citie, which reigneth over the Kings of the earth.
The Analysis. THVS farre hath bin the distinct Prophecy of the last Period, divided in to his seven articles after the manner of the Seales and trumpets: ther fol∣loweth a continual narration, and more large explication of the three last vials, as which are of greatest waight and special moment. The fift of which is handled in this chapter, and also in the whole chapter following, and in the first five verses of the nineteenth: the sixt is comprehended in the next fifteene verses of the same nineteenth chapter, unto the twentith verse. The seventh is continued through chap. 20. and 21. and unto the sixt ver. of the two and twentieth. And from thence followeth the conclusion of the whole book. It maketh much for perspicuity, to know what things agree to the time, and nature of the matter. As touching the fift, it is wholly be∣stowed against the throne of the Beast (as in the chapter afore ver. 10.11.) partly in declaring what and of what sort this throne is in this whole chap¦ter: partly in relating what things doe goe togither with the ruine of it in the chapter following, and in the beginning of the nineteenth. The decla∣ration of the throne hath first a preparation inviting to know the damnation of the whore, ver. 1.2. And the better to know it carying him away into the wildernesse, ver. 3. Secondly a description by a double type, one of the Beast, ver. 3. the other of a woman setting on the Beast, sumptuous, and most filthy, ver. 4. the mother of all whoredomes, ver. 5, a Murtherer of the Martyrs, ver. 6. The interpretation wherof is set forth by the occasion of it, which Iohns wondering ministred, ver. 6.7. afterward it is propounded in very deed, shewing what the Beast is, in respect of his whole ver. 8: attention be∣ing stirred up, the disclosing might not passe without fruit, ver. 9. Secōd∣ly in respect of the parts and heads, ver. 9.10.11. and hornes, whose rising up is shewed in verse 12. the humble service which they shall giv to the Beast, ver. 13. and at length their overthrow by the Lambe, ver. 14. Such is the Beast. Of the woman, the interpretation is first of her dominion. both flou∣rishing, ver. 15. & also afflicted by ten hornes as instruments, and the will of God as the principal cause, ver. 16.17. afterward of her palace ver. 18. Scholions. 1 Then came one of the seven Angels: We sayd in the Analysis that this cō¦tinuall declaration which is contained in the chapters following, even un∣to the conclusion of the whole booke, belongeth onely to the three last vials. Which how true it is, the thing it selfe will shew. In the meane time it may be demaunded, why the explication of the former is omitted?
The reason wherof seemeth to be this, because those former partly were before past, partly present, at what time the vial was powred out upon the throne: and therfore had no neede of a larger exposition then eyther the late memory or present use and condition of things should give: but the other to come did need a more ample declaration, and for the same cause all the labour remayning is converted to that point. Therfore as touching the Angel, one of the seven, this is the fift, who shall bring calamity to the throne, chap. 18.10. Of which calamity neverthelesse there be certaine de∣grees, so as by the labour of some, certaine easie sprinklings are made, before that the whole vial is powred forth. Who yet all are reckened in the com∣mon name of the fift Angel. VVhich thing appeareth from that chapter, which is wholly spent in declaring the damnation of the whore; although her last destruction is reserved unto the next. These things set downe in this wise, let us consider the matter it selfe. First the Angel prepareth himselfe a way to that which he intendeth, both by inviting Iohn to learne, and also by carying him to that place, where he might most conveniently beholde the whole matter. He inviteth him partly by compelling, , saith he, that is, hither, for  come hither, a defective kind of speech among the Greeks: as if Iohn desired to understand the matter, but went not the right way to finde it out. For so we are wont to call backe them that are desirous, and that goe out of their way, to shew them the path, or whe∣ther they themselves desire to goe, but in vaine: partly by increasing in him a desire, the greatnesse of the thing being rehearsed, saying I will shew thee the damnation of the great whore. VVhich damnation notwithstanding is not a present destruction, but to come by and by after. And  proper¦ly signifyeth iudgement, which solemnly being pronounced in this chap∣ter, should a little after be executed: but the damnation of what whore I pray? We have had no where before expresse mention of her: shee must notwithstanding be known, whose iudgement he calleth for to see, as be∣ing a thing greatly desired. Certenly shee is that Jezabell, of whom wee heard in the Church of Thyatira, that noble harlot lying sicke now a long time in her bed, now at the last to be punished with death, and to be thrown out of the window, least shee die of a disease, rather then by pu∣nishement, chap. 2.20. Shee is that great Babylon after in verse 5. of this chapter, whom wee have heard nobilitated the mother of fornications & ab∣hominations of the earth, chap. 14.8. Therfore shee is not any new or late whore, but the olde strumpet, now almost stale, in a most apt abridgment containing whatsoever Sodom and Egipt did note out; without controversie the ring leader to both sorts of fornication, both spiritual and corporal,
chap. 11.8. A breif description of whom the Angel delivereth here to be tasted before, and the manner of the place where shee sitteth, and of her fornicatours with whom shee had to doo. Her seate is upon many waters, that is, upon people, multitudes, nations, and tongues, as after in ver. 15. VVherfore shee is no common harlot that wilbe hired for a farthing, but a Princely whore, worthily called Iezabell & that great one, being of so large and spatious a jurisdiction. The fornicatours are the Kings of the earth, who consented to the same Idolatry with her. A most usual metaphore in the Scriptures, because spiritual adultery is of equal, yea of greater, both fil∣thinesse and wickednes in departing from the true God. Neither onely did shee commit fornication with the Kings, but also with the other inha¦bitans of the earth, Peeres of the Realme, Earles, Marguesses, Governours of Cities, (for her lust refused none;) whom shee made drunken with the wine of her fornication, so throughly making them foolish with the de∣lights of her superstitions, that being utterly bereft of al sense of true god∣linesse, they suffered a certaine unsensiblenesse of drunken men. These few things may be sufficient to manifest this whore, and which is the throne of the Beast. For is not Rome that great Beast? Have we not convinced her before to be Iezabell? Doth shee not set upon many waters? Hath shee not entised unto I∣dolatry by her craft, the Kings & inhabitans of the earth? Such are not in doubt, that iudge the thing i selfe by the trueth, and not by affection. Yet not∣withstanding that there may be left to the adversaries no place of halting, the Angel resteth not contented with these common markes; but having made him selfe this entrance, promiseth yet more evident ones. As tou∣ching the words to be drunken with wine, is an Hebraisme, as heare this, thou miserable and drunken, but not with wine, Isaiah chap. 51.21. Although he speaketh the same in an other place without a preposition, as they are drun¦ken, but not by wine, chap. 29. After which manner the Grecians speake  or . 2 And he caryed mee away into the wildernes: Such was the inviting. Now Iohn is transported into that place, wher he may beholde the thing most playnely. He is caried into a desert and wildernesse: but thou wilt say, what neede was there of a place not inhabited, being already in Pathmos, and in banishment? Iohn here representeth the person of the faithfull, the cary∣ing of whom into a solitary place, signifyeth the event: in which respect al∣so he stood before on the sea sand, chap. 12.18. VVherby is taught, that the manifestation of this throne is to be fetched and received of the faithfull, from some men set in an obscure place, as it were in a desert and wilder∣nes, from whence no such thing was expected. For as once the first light
of Christ arose among the people dwelling in darkenesse, and sitting in the regiō and shadow of death, Mat. 4 15.16. So the counterfait Vicar, as touching his seate, in some part should resēble our Lord herein. Not but that he should be known before to the world in part, but because the wildernesse should give yet a clearer light, so as he scarce should abide to looke upon the fa∣ces and countenances of men. We know that the Whore some fewe yeeres since hath layed shame aside, but there shall come out of the desert a newe dishonour, wherby shee shall be constrayned to hide her face, unlesse per∣adventure shee hath learned to blush. Therfore my brethren set upon the whore with a new assault: neither let any be discouraged because his name is of no estimation: God will have some light to come out of darkenesse. Neither let any hereafter marvaile, why Antichrist or the Whore cannot be seen at Rome. There was need of a wildernesse for this thing. The famous∣nesse of the place and great resort of people, take away the beholding of the Papists. If they desire to perceive the thing cleerly, let them goe thi∣ther, where onely leave is given to see. ¶ And J saw a woman sit upon a skarlet coloured Beast: Thus farre the prepara¦tion, now he entreth into the description, propounding a common type, a woman sitting upon a Beast; which both joyned togither, doo give a certaine and undoubted knowledge of the Throne, which is the onely drift of this chapter. Although according to the proportion of the clearer knowledge of this, necessarily also will follow a more ample knowledge of the Beast, when his denne hath bene examined and viewed narrowly. For the womā and the Beast sheweth to us the place; more over the time will declare whē that place is to be counted the Throne. Which two things are necessarily required to this matter. And the Spirit prosecute both most playnly (as by his helpe wee will open the things,) as it were of set purpose, meeting with the fraude of the Iesuits; whom by his most wise providence he fore saw, that being convinced touching the place, they would wrangle about the time. But by this so exact description, he taketh away all halting frō them. Therfore as touching the Whore, her so expresse nothing out by Babylon, seven hills, seven Kings, flourishing power, and at length destruction, the rest of the world being safe; finally by the name of the city, used in stead of an in∣terpretation, doo most strongly prove that the universall City of the Divill is not meant, but some special city, and namely Rome: and so much the more because this whore is the Throne of the Beast. And we know that the Thro∣ne of the Divill was attributed to a certain City, to weet, Pergamus, before in the second chapter and thirteenth verse. Therfore worthily Bellarmine, that opinion being rejected, sayth, It is better in his iudgement, that Rome be
understood by the whore; as Tertullian expoundeth in his booke against the Iewes, and in his third booke against Marcion. And Hierome in his 17. Epistle to Marcella, and Quaest. 11. to Algasia. Bellarmine touching the Romane Pope, in his third booke, and in the thirteenth chapter. Here then wee have our adversary confessing. What therfore letteth that they should not agree with us about the Antichrist? They have invented a dou¦ble crafty shift for themselves, one of the place, an other of the time, of the place, that albeit Rome be the Whore, yet is it not the seate of Antichrist, but Hierusalem. Of the time, that Rome was the VVhore, when the Hea∣then Emperours ruled, but now shee is not, since she became Christian, and therfore that shee is not the seate of Antichrist, seeing he shall not come but a little before the last iudgement. But the Papists are holden with their owne snares; for granting Rome to be the whore, they must al∣so needs grant the rest. First of all, that not Hierusalem, but shee is the seate of Antichrist. For is not this Beast the very Antichrist? This also Bel∣larmine yeeldeth, and though he had not yeelded it, the truth wil force him to cōfesse it, as we shal see. But he affirmeth that Antichrist shal hate Ro∣me, from v. 16. after, wel acknowledging that the Beast is Antichrist: but how truly he spoke of hatred, wee shal examine at that place. From his cō∣fessiō we have, that both the whore is Rome, & the Beast Antichrist. Frō which it is of necessity, that Antichrist shal have his denne at Rome, seeing he is the very Beast, on which the whore is caried. Doth not the Spirit shew a ve¦ry great coniunction & nigh familiarity of both, of the whore in setting upō, & of the Beast in bearing? Ther is none but he wil say that a man is neerly joyned to the horse on whō he sitteth. Certēly if Antichrist was to raigne at Hierusalē, Rome being set so farr frō her saddle, should walke on foot hum∣ble & base, who had so little aide frō the Emperours, after they removed to Byzantiū wher they were not farr. Secodly as touching the time, how absurd is this distinction that the whore should be Heathenish Rome the first 300 yeeres after Christ; but that Antich. the Beast should not come ū∣til about 3. yeeres & an halfe before the last day. Shal shee sit on the Beast not yet borne, yea not conceived a very long time after. For shal the Beast whē he cometh beare the whore, being dead so many ages before? For the whore shal cease to be 1300. yeeres, & how much more we know not, be∣fore Antich. shal come. These ar dreames & wholly mōsters of bearing & sit¦ting upō. The Spirit hath takē frō you al such subterfuge, coupling these 2. things by so ūseparable a band, wherby he forbiddeth both to seeke Anti∣chr. els wher then at Rome, & also to think her to be this whore at any other time, then when Antichrist should have his seate there. Needs ar these two things to be ioyned togither, both in place & time.
But when shall this time beginne? for this yet hath some doubt. Surely when wee shall see the whore to have ben caried on this Beast; & by his helpe, and authority placed in dignity, and lifted up on high VVhich though I holde my peace, Leo will confesse to have ben done in the 1. sermon of the Nativity of the Apostles, when the preheminence came to the Popes, and Rome began to excell through the opinion of her religion. Rome, sayth he, being made the head of the world, by the sacred Chaire of S. Peter, hath more ample authority through divine religion, then earthly dominion. For although being inlarged by many victories, thou hast extended the fraunches of thyne Empire by lād and by sea, yet notwithstanding it is lesse, that which warrelike labour hath put un∣der thee, then that which Christian peace hath subdued. Likewise Prosper in his booke de ingratis: Rome is of Peter the Seat which in honour Pastoral Is made of the world head, what by the right Martial Shee doth not possesse, yet shee, by religion hold free. Therfore this one common type ministreth a necessary argument, both of the seat and Kingdome of Antichrist: which alone might be sufficient to take away all controversie; were it not that men loved themselves more then the truth, and would not cesse to barke against it, till that their mou∣thes be altogither stopped. VVherfore the Spirit stayeth not here, but go¦eth on yet to clearer things, that for whom the morning light is not suffi∣cient, they may have the Noone Sunne an helper, if peradventure they wil then see. The sitting being in such wise declared peculiarly, afterward he de¦scendeth to both, and first to the Beast, which is described by the colour, names of blasphemy, heads, and hornes. The colour is of skarlet, made readde by the little worme Coccus. VVherfore this Beast is honourable, shining with the same colour with Kings: and no lesse wicked and bloody. For this same colour is attibuted to most grievous sines: Yf your sinns were as skarlet, sayth Isaiah chap. 1.18. Not onely because it is a deep colour which cannot be washed of: but cheifly for the cruelty of shedding blood; which wickednes among the rest seemeth most horrible. VVo seeth not that this Beast is at Rome, where the Pope sitteth, whose feete Kings doe kisse; and who doth most cruelly murder Christians, not acknowledging his divine power both in the city and also through all the Dominion? But that colour hath not pleased chiefly the Romish Court at all adventures; which hath come to passe by the providence of God, that the Fathers might set before the world a visible shew of this skarlet coloured Beast. Tou∣ching which thing see a most fine Epigrame of Theod. Beza. Secondly, this Beast is full of names of Blasphemy. How fruitful an increase of a naughty
thing? Long agoe the heads did beare the names of blasphemy, chap. 13.1. now the whole body is full of the same. And first of all the Primacy was chiefely a blasphemy; and therfore it was well carried on the head, but the time ad∣ded dayly others, the heape whereof grew every day, until at length they came to the Councill of Trent, and Masters of controversies, by whose pai¦nes now the whole Beast is so covered with most wicked errours (the whol sea of doctrine being turned into deadly blood, as hath ben sayd in chap. 16.3.) that thou canst see noe place free from some newe blasphemy. Let an indifferent iudge consider so many horrible errours as in three great vo¦lumes Bellarmine deffendeth by the Popes approbation, and let him speak sincerely, whether every haire almost of this Beast is not spotted with som notable blasphemy. Thirdly he hath seven heads and tenne hornes: of which, what is the meaning, the interpretation wil declare, which the Angel will make by and by. In the meane time let it be agreed of, that this Beast is the same, which wee saw in the thirteenth chapter, and to be the former of the two. For of the second are rehearsed onely two hornes, there in the 11. verse: he maketh mention but of one in this place, because both make but one Antichrist, as in the chapter even now spoken of we have shewed: and of the former onely, because it is his intent to set before our eyes whole An∣tichrist from his first original, of whom the second Beast representeth onely the half figure; but now because in the last times, in which the Beast should be fully discovered, Rome the whore should depend more upon the civill au¦thority of the Pope, of which that first is the type, then upon the spiritual; we see at this day, that the patrimony of Peter avayleth more, then the do¦ctrine, which they faine to be Paules; that neither Spaine, nor France, nor others very many have any regard to Rome, but in so much as her autho∣rity serveth for their profit. There is no man but knoweth that Italy des∣piseth her now a long time at home, howsoever shee hath ben content to suffer her to be worshipped of strangers like a God. For these causes ther∣fore the former Beast onely is set forth. Frances de Ribera the Iesuite avou¦cheth that this Beast is not that of the 13. chapter, but a new & new first seen. Why so I pray? because no article, saith he, is prefixed before Woman, or Beast, as it is wont to be done in things known. Certenly if he should conclude from the new forme, wherein they now first appeare, it might have some weight which he sayth; but seeing he gathereth that therfore neither of them was simply and absolutely before, because they were not seen before in this forme, to which onely thing, the defect of the article hath respect; he dealeth either foolishly, or fraudulently, after the māner of the Iesuits. So J saw, saith Iohn, ond behold a Lambe stood upon mount Sion, chap. 14.1.
where also the article is wanting. Is this therfore a new Lambe? If any should say that there was new forme of him standing upon mount Sion, and ac∣companied with and hundred fourty and foure thousand, he should say nothing contrary to the truth: but it is the same Lambe in very truth, of which mē¦tion was made before, chap. 5. After the same manner a new shew is here brought in, not a new person, as is manifest in the woman; which being called in the first verse a whore, had the emphasis of the articles, which did manifest the olde whore. So now the same comming forth in a new dec∣king, wanteth the same articles. The woman then and the whore are al one; and this Beast is the same with that in the thirteenth chapter, having the sa∣me seate, blasphemy, heads, hornes, worship among men, the cause of the like eternal destruction, and partaker of all his properties: unlesse that some of them should now be more increased in processe of time, and all things under this fift vi∣al more evident, then they were when they began. For now he appeareth full of that blasphemy, which before possessed the heads onely. And was that former Beast Antichrist; and shal not this be hee, which is more blas∣phemous? The wonderers also at whom, are no lesse reprobates, then they that wondered at that? VVhat shal the Iesuite then gaine, if that former being sent away to Hierusalem, he hath left this more pernitious Beast at Rome? 5 And the woman was arayed with purple and skarlet: Such is the Beast: now of what quality the woman is, whom we shal see adorned most sumptuous¦ly: of which thing Tertullian spake wittily: Who hath deserved the name of an harlot at the Lords hande; shee is made equal to her name in her attire. Shee sitteth verily in purple, with skarlet, and gold, and pretious stone, which are cursed, without which a cursed woman and harlot could not be described. These things spake he, but peradventure somewhat too severely, in his booke concerning womās apparell. The attire is altogither Princely, and belonging to triumphes, such as Belshazzar promiseth to them that should read the writting, saying, He shalbe clothed with Purple, with a Chaine of Golde about his necke, and shalbe the third Ruler in the Kingdome, Daniell chapter fift verse seventh. Attire surely fit for her, which raigneth over the Kings of the earth, as after in the 18. ver. But purple was sufficient for dignity: To what ende is there also skarlet? That it might note out great cruelty ioined togither with it. Shee is of the same disposition with the Beast redde with the murthers of the faithfull, in the twelve Chapter and third verse. There are many Cities made fa∣mous for their notable cruelty: but togither therewith the dwelling pla∣ce of Antichrist ought to flourish in exceeding great Maiestie, which
might be discerned from all the rest. Both which victories even the Iesui∣tes themselves cannot deny to be due to Rome. But there is added also Gold, Pretious stones and Perles; which beside the Maiestie, note also most excessive riot: which is an other token of this wo∣man. And who can recken the infinite costes of this City, bestowed on Tē∣ples, Theatres, Galleries, hote Bathes, Palaces, Obeliskes, Pillars, Arches belon∣ging to triumphes, Private houses, and other ornaments? Into this one City, hath bin laid up in store the glory of the whole world, taken from very ma¦ny other: to let passe auncient things, what an huge summe of mony be∣stowed of late Pope Sixtus the fift, in the yeer one thousand five hundreth foure score and eight, upon a conduit which he built on the mount Quiri∣nal? It is recorded that two hundred and threescore thousand crounes were spent upon this thing. Neither did any necessity wring from him this charges, but that the Pope might sommer the more pleasantly in that mountaine. The Vaticane Library renewed of the same Pope, scarse perad∣venture stood him of lesse. Yet notwithstanding the same man brought fifty hundred thousand peeces of Gold into a new treasury, which he ere∣cted in the Castle of Sainct Angel, that thou mayest understand that the Popes are not yet brought to beggerie. But this Gold & pretious stones doo not onely seeme riots; (for Rome hath bene farre more riotous, and weal∣ty in former times, then at this day: but to what ende should he cast in her teeth now her immoderate decking, of which he spake nothing when it exceeded by many degrees?) but also to be tokens, to whose riches shee should leane in these last times: for wee shall see after in the eighteen chap¦ter and two and twentith verse, that this Purple, Skarlet, Gold, Pretious sto∣nes, & Pearles, consist in those wares, wherby Spaine is signified. Therefore let this braverie be to this end, to shew that Rome shal most of all glory in the aide of the Spaniards, at what time the vial shalbe pow∣red out on the Throne of the Beast. Otherwise the Spirit would have mē¦tionned the former ages, when her cloathing was more sumptuous and exquisite. And whither is not SPAINE at this day, and hath not bene also since CHARLES the fift, the cheife upholder of Rome, leaning as readie to fall? If any peradventure knoweth not these things, let him know at length the things to be so by the testimony of the Pope Clement the eight, governing at this day the Romish Church, who of late in the yeere one thousand five hundred and nintie sixe, being about the creating of some newe CARDINALS, protested openly before, that although
he did this creation of his owne proper motion, yet that he had not ben able to deny this duty to the King of Spaine, but that he should create some Spanirads, because he is the stay of Catholike religion: to whom in this decrepite age that was not to be de∣nyed, but rather we ought to gratify and content him in this thing, as Iansonius doth relate en his Italiques. This therfore is the reason of the adorning proper to this time, whereat Iohn wondreth, as if it were new, as after in ver. 6. ¶ Shee had a golden cup in her hand:, Now the fowlenesse of her dishonesty is revealed, which is twofold, one which shee useth towards men known & more famous, whom shee speaketh to as it were by name, and reacheth thē the cup of her fornication: the other regardeth those that are unknowne, whom shee allureth by the name written in her forehead in the verse fol∣lowing. For shee desireth that no man should avoide her snares. Shee com¦meth forth with a cup, as a fit instrument of her lust, as once at Rome everie one carryed a token of that trade which he practised. For the Spirit hath made mention before of the wine of her fornication: and drunkenesse & glut∣tony are most apt stirrers up of lust. From whence the whore in Salomon extolleth her prepared dainties, Proverb. 7.14. Shee hath therfore this cup in her hand, reached out to most famous Kings and Princes, to whom shee sendeth Ambassadours, Cardinals, Iesuits, and other uncleane Spirits of that sorte, who may draw them in and retaine them in the fellowship of the Romish Idolatry. In which thing the most vehement desire of Rome is known, which spareth no, either labour or coast, so that shee may by flat∣tery allure them to this wicked society with her. Which that shee may be able to doo the more easily, the cup is golden, very pretious without, and in the estimation of men; the Romish impietie being set forth with all pōpe of wordes, by consent, multitude, antiquity, perpetual succession, the ve∣ry Chaire of Peter, and such faire painting, wherby it may seeme more pre¦tious then any gold to the unskilfull. But within, this cup is full of abomina∣tions, and filthines of fornications, that is, if the doctrine be tryed and exami∣ned, and cut to the quicke, nothing is so filthy, but the fowlenesse of this will surmount it. For to expresse this horrible filthines, the Spirit hath cho¦sen that kinde of dishonesty, which blushing suffereth not speake. In one word this whore is of this kinde of Heretiques called Borboritae, of whom see Epiphanius in Panario, and Oecumenius on Inda. 5 And in her forehead a name written: An other kinde of filthines, wher∣by shee carrieth written in her forehead most impudently, that shee is a common harlot. Shee would not have any man to passe by unknown and uncalled, but from the inscription to know where he may turne into a
whore. It can scarce be spoken of how monstrous lust those little sacring belles, and sance belles of the stewes were instruments, which this same whore Rome used long since; as Socrates declareth in book 5. chap. 18. But this name written passeth that impudency. For they were silent some time, and sufferred the sense to rest from the foule provoquer: this inscription giveth no rest to the eyes, alwayes running upon them and provoking unto disho¦nesty. Therfore apparell is not inough for her to declare her profession, ū∣lesse also this signe on the forehead be joyned with it, which Ivie bush should make her wine vendible. O impudency! The whores before time were covered with a vaile; thou in thy forehead discovereth, & a tittle w∣ritten upon it manifesteth thy dishonesty. But what is this name? Not this word Mysterie, as it seemeth, which Aretas joyneth with the word written, without any distinction of a comma in this manner: And upon her forhead a name written a Mysterie: great Babylon &c. As if the word a Mysterie were the abstract, instead of the concrete  Mysticall, as though he should say, and upon her forehead a mysticall name written, Babylō &c. Surely this syntaxe requireth that a noune ioyned with a noune without an article, should passe into the place of the predicate, as they speake. As, and in the forehead a name written, which is a mystery. From which it is manifest that the word Mysterie is not to be written with a great letter in the beginning, as if it were a part of the name, and the marke of the fore∣head, but to be read togither with those thinges, which goe before. But the meaning is all one, teaching that a certaine mysterie lyeth hid in this name, which is otherwise to be expounded, then it sheweth outwardly. Wherfore the name written on the forehead is the whole period of these words: Babylon that great, that mother of fornications and abominations of the earth. But thou wilt say, that no City doth vaunt so to be in expresse words. Neither doth the Spirit say so, but declareth that this is her true name, which Iohn saw written on her forehead, in so many letters and syllables, howsoever the true Babylō should have a name writtē on it, which should signify this same thing in other words by a mystery, to wit, the Empresse Rome, the Pillar of trueth, a looking glasse and paterne of all Churches, from whose statutes, whatsoever shee ordaineth, wee must by no meanes departe: Distinct. 19. Enimvero. This is that name painted with great letters on the whores for∣head: whose meaning if thou shalt search diligently, thou shalt see that by a mystery it cometh to the same end, to which that did which Iohn saw. For whatsoever auncient corruption either hath ben long agoe, or is yet left in these our Westerne and Northerne Churches, all that floweth from Rome: in which respect shee vaunteth that shee is the Mother of the Chur∣ches
or rather the stepmother, which hath mixed deadly hemlocke to her daughters. Such then is this name, which yet notwithstanding remaineth mystical in this last period, as the Spirit sheweth manifestly, prefixing be∣fore it the word Mystery. And therfore neither shall it now be manifest to all men, as wee may see in the Papists who doo worship this name as Ho∣lines to the Lord. The Iesuits confesse by constraint, that this Babylon is their Rome, as a little before we have seen: yet what windings and turnings in & out doo they seeke, wherby the Popish turpitude and impiety may vanish away? Bellarmine will have the Heathen Rome to be meant, such as it was once under the Emperours that were enemies to the name of Christ. Frā∣ces de Ribera would rather that a future time should be regarded, when by An∣tichrist, as he dreameth, the Pope should be driven from Rome. So are they blinded in this name, which soundeth any thing to them, rether then that which the thing is. But we have shewed sufficiently, that these inventions are no lesse foolish, then pernitious to the embracers of them: and the things that follow in this very chapter, will make it more manifest; that no other Babylon is here mentioned then the Rome belonging to the Popes at this present time, and as it hath bene for many ages past. Did the Heathen Em∣perours labour to impose the Romane Idolatry on the conquered nations? Or if they had strove to doo it, should this impietie have had any myste∣ry? It was playne that the Heathenish superstition was detestable to Chri∣stians; but this Babylon should infect Christians by the contagion of her superstition, which thing cannot belong to any other Rome, then that of the Popes. But let it be to come, and let the Pope be driven from thence, and let all impiety come on with force openly, which ô Ribera thou must necessarily grant. Where then shalbe this Mysterie. VVho can be igno∣rant of your great naughtinesse joyned with impudency? Therefore, that which you imagine, abhorreth all likelyhood of truth. Therefore Babylon is that ROME, which should deceive her people with an outward shewe of godlines, which should be counted a Holy City, and should pos∣sesse the uttermost Court, as wee have shewed in the eleventh chapter, verses first and second: which unlesse it nowe deceived you Papists, I should not ac∣knowledge her to be Babylon: but your, either witting or ignorant obsti∣nacy, maketh the trueth of the Prophecy cleare. Let us take up from hence that which the very words doo yeeld us manifestly: That the Whore shall not make warre against Christ openly, but shall fight against him privily and secretly, through a Mysterie. Which thing, what force it hath to finde out Anti∣christ, wee shall fee after. 6 And J saw that woman drunken with the blood of the Saincts &c. The third
property is notable cruelty, wbich did wholly swimme with the blood of the Martyrs. Yee shee killed our Lord Jesus, as before in chap. 11.8. Frō whence the beginning being made, how much Christian blood shed the wicked Emperours afterward? VVhatsoever slaughter was any where through the whole world almost, that came eyther from her commaun∣dement, or exhortation and approbation. It cannot be spoken, how ma∣ny and how great warres the horrible Popes stirred up in the times follow∣ing, setting all the Kings of Europe togither by the eares. And beside the slaughters of publike warres, how many holy men lost their life, because they agreed not with Rome? VVho were banished as Heretiques, and co∣sumed with the torments of the flames. Shee continueth at this day in the same stepps, which not long agoe in the yeere 1595. at length burnt alive a certaine English man for smiting to the ground out of the hādes of the Archbishop of Ambronen, their sacrilegious sacrifice of the altar, after his right hand cut off, and the rest of his body, being drawen through the ci∣ty, was burned by the tormenters in sundry places with burning torches. Beholde, I pray you ô English men, whither you flee, thither assuredly, where so great impiety raigneth; that if so be there be any seed of electjon in you, yee would rather die a thousand deaths, then beare with it by your silence. Is not the same Rome at this day the shoppe of rebellions, the pla¦ce where Christian Princes are tormented? Certenly this assembly of fu∣ries doth first decree the murthers of Princes, and then sendeth by stealt Iesuites privie murtherers and poisonners: who execute the same after ma∣ner that they desire. It were an infinite thing O Rome, to reckē up all thy butcheries. Thou art drunken surely with blood, tumbling thy selfe in thy sur¦fet, which thou hast spued out through exceeding much devouring. Now then all these common properties ioyned togither, doo shew unto us such a whore, to weet, augmented, upheld, by the Beast, Princely, rich, gay. that great Mother Citie, and spirituall Babylon, the authour of allsuperstitions, yet deceiving craftily by her vaine shewes, and finally a cruell Martyrs-murtherer: which all, if togither they can be found no where else, saving in Rome a∣lone; let us acknowledge that damnable Citie, and let every one betimes provide, that her society hurt them not. least he perish togither in her de∣struction, that shall come shortly. ¶ And I wondered: Hitherto the typicall description; now he passeth un∣to the interpretation, the occasiō wherof is related in these words. But how doth Iohn wonder, seeing this belōgeth to men that are reprobates, after in v. 8. This is an āgry wōdering for so great prosperity of the wicked who¦re, whose destructiō had bin iust in the first cōceptiō, or at least in the infācy
But the wicked have in admiration and wonder at the same woman with a certaine reverence, from an opinion of a certaine excellency, even as they are sayd to wonder after the Beast in chap. 13.3. But whither was he igno∣rant of the Beast which he saw in the thirteenth chapter? In no wise: ney∣ther is he said to wonder at the Beast alone, but at the woman ioyned with it, both which he had not seen before in this new forme, and whole apparell. And who would not be abashed at this, that the Dragons throne, which Iohn saw after the Dragon was thrust out, in some sorte become the sheep fold of the Lord, had ben able againe to clime up to this heigh of impie∣ty. But wee may not rest in the onely person of Iohn, who now represen∣teth the common type of the faithfull: but wee must understand that cer∣taine godly men under the fift vial, considering the horrible blasphemy of Rome, which they are very sure of, and also therewithall minding this her felicity such as it is, wil greatly wonder with themselues, how so great im∣piety can abide so long unpunished. Which admiration did move the An¦gel to undertake a full declaration of these things. 7 Then the Angel said unto me, wherfore marveilest thou? The interrogation hath a certaine blaming of negligence and unskilfulnes; as though he should say, unlesse men had shamefully despised the observatiō of former times, now they should not have had need to wonder at the Whore, be∣cause they saw her flourishing in this whatsoever felicity. But the merciful father, who pardoneth all sinnes to his children for Christs sake, forgiveth also this carelesnes. And therfore he sendeth his Angsl, to make the whol thing most plaine. For this is that which followeth, I wil shew thee the miste∣ry &c. yet warning, not darkely, that also the interpretation it selfe shall not be cleare to all men, but shal remaine yet hidden to all that are harde∣ned, as before at verse 3. & 5. 8 The Beast which thou hast seen: The first interpretation is of the Beast ac¦cording to the whole in this verse, as we have distinguished in the Analysis, wherin is declared his divers condition according to 4. alterations of ti∣mes, such as at length he should be known to be most playnely under this vial. The first time wherin he was; the second wherin he is not; the third wherin he ascendeth out of the bottomlesse pit; the fourth wherin he shal goe into destruction. As touching the first, it is not to be understood of any time which went before the age of Iohn, or this Prophecie given to him. For the Angel avoucheth plainely that this Beast was not yet come, ver. 10. that is, that he was not yet, when Iohn received this Prophecy, but should receive power at the same houre with the ten Kings, who in Iohns time had not yet received a Kingdome, ver. 11. Therfore this Beast is not properly the Devil,
as some of the auncient Fathers expound it; and the Iesuite Ribera snat∣cheth it greedily. Of him it could not be said, that he was not yet come, or that he had not yet received power: whose Kingdome then both flourished ve¦ry greatly, and did flourish before Christ came in the flesh. Afterward we shall see, that the original of this Beast is to be set at that time, wherein the Dragon was thrust out of heaven, and gave him his Throne. And so there are two and fourty moneths of his cheife power, which same is the space of the woman lying hid in the wildernesse, and of the two Prophets cloa∣thed in sackcloth. These chapters 13.5. and 12.6. and 11.2. will chal∣lenge the same beginning to all these. Which wee have shewed to have fallē about the times of the beginning of the raigne of Cōstantine the Great some ages after, that Iohn was dead. After which beginning the first part noteth, that there was a time when the Beast flourished for a season, to weet, at the end of the publike persecutions by open enemies, whom the prowesse of Constantine put to flight. The second, that after that prospe∣rous tranquility, a new tempest arose, which afflicted the Beast so vehe∣mently, that for iust cause men should say, that he was in time past, but that now he is not, as whom they should thinke to have perished utterly in those troubles, as it came to passe, after that refreshing under some fewe Empe¦rours, (in which time the authority of the Bishop of Rome increased marvei∣lously,) when the invasion of the Barbarous people spoyled miserably all Italy; cruelly destroyed Rome it selfe, the Throne of the Beast; and did cut off almost to the very roote, the authority of the Pope, growing too ran∣kely. Should not men then have cryed out by right, that the Pope was, but is not: whose not onely authority, but also seate, they might thinke to ha∣ve ben altogither past recovery? This second time was caled the wounded head, in chap. 13.3. which did bring with it, the knowledge of the former, of which there could be no knowledg, until this alteration had befallē. But the Beast lay not alway in this destruction; he rose out of it againe, as the third member declareth, he came out of the bottomlesse pit: which came to passe, when he lifted up his head againe, after that Barbarian storme of adversi∣ty was mitigated. This time comprehendeth both the curing of the woūd by Iustinian and Phocas; and also his rising out of the earth, or out of the bottomlesse pit by Gregory the second; of both which in chap. 13.3.11. & 11.7. and 9.2.11. This Gregory exercised that power, which his Ance∣stours had obtayned of the Emperours, yea a farre greater: not onely as an Vniversall Bishop, but as the highest Dictatour, taking away and giving the Empire to whom he thought good. It is sufficient in this place to ob∣serve the first beginning of things. Who first bestowed the name of an Em¦perour
upon men in the West part, wee have shewed in an other place. Therfore the Beast ascended then, when the Popes had gotten this terrene power to themselves, as in chap. 13.11. hath ben sayd; which earth he cal∣led here the bottomlesse pit; as elswhere in the Psalmist; and makest me to as∣cend from the depthes of the earth: Psal. 71.20. And so is the third time. The fourth is, shall goe into destruction, which declareth that this dignity revived shall not remaine for ever; but be diminished by little and little, and lea∣surly consumed, while it be at length utterly abolished: as wee have heard before in the second chapter of Jezabell lying sicke in her bedde, the paramour of this Beast, and languishing of an incurable consumption. Even as at this daie, thankes be to God, wee see in Rome, and in the Pope: but the buriall, & funeralls are yet to come: about what time, the Revelation will shew us afer. These are the foure notable changins, wherby the Beast might be∣come known to men being not blind willingly; from which wee have a most strong argument to prove both the time, when Rome is the whore, & of the person of Antichrist. For that City is the whore, in which reigneth An∣tichrist, to weet, the very Beast which was, which is not, which ascendeth out of the bottomlesse pit, and goeth into destruction. But Rome is the City, in which frō Constantine the Great, the Pope hath reigned, which was, which is not, which ascē∣deth out of the bottomlesse pit, and goeth into destruction: Therefore Rome since Constantine is the whore; and the Pope of Rome since the very same time is the Beast, and Antichrist, in whom wee see all these alterations at this time, so farre as doubtlesse may be done, the same being not wholly takē away: From whence it is not to be doubted, but that he is that adversary, that man of sinne, that great Antichrist, whom all ought to flee and to feare greatly: and to wish dstruction to him, and procure it to his power. If any thinketh the Beast cā∣not be knowne before his last destruction, (which surely is to know too late,) let him observe that the Angell doth stop in the ende of the verse in the third member, seeing, saith he, the Beast, which was, and is not, and yet is. Whereby he declareth, that a sure knowledge may be had at this third chaunging. ¶ And the Inhabitans of the earth shall wonder: In giving all honour and service to him, being astonied with the renowne of his false dignity: which before was sayd, to wonder after the Beast, chap. 13.3, Yet notwithstanding least wee should thinke, that all men should be caryed away into this de∣struction, he numbreth among this cōpany the inhabitans onely of the earth; to weet, the citizens of the false Church, whose names are not written in the book of life. O good God how much concerneth it you ô yee Papists, to deliver your Pope from all likenesse to this Beast? If he be found covered
with his hide, which this chapter will make more cleare then the light at noone tide, you are utterly lost; unlesse you shall flee very quickly all fellow¦shippe with him. I pray you, as you regarde your owne salvation, that ly∣ing aside all hatred, preiudice, and bitternesse of mindes, you weigh the matter with mee in equal ballances. A great matter is in hande, either the vantage or losse of eternall life. See you not that the Pope and the Beast, did tread in the same steppes alwayes, even hitherto? Attend to those things which follow; wee finde both of them to walke in the same path, which the Spirit hath marked out, with equall pases and hand in hand. But you will cry out that this is a new interpretation: yet appointe not the Spirit at your pleasure; he stistributeth most wisely, according to his pleasure, a measure of knowledge to every time. Rather regard the con∣sent of the whole Prophecy, which will yeeld a most cleare proofe of the truth; and esteeme that most auncient, which you shall finde true. VVhy doo yee suffer your selves to be deceived with the names of them, whom the most certen event declareth to have bene verie greatly deceived in ve∣ry many things of this Revelation. This is the notable craft of the Iesuites to call foorth cheifly those witnesses, and Interpreters, by whose reverend i∣gnorance, they may cover and hid the impiety of the Pope: there was not so much danger from him, to those auncient Fathers, living eyther before Antichrist, or by and by after his beginning. They understood sufficiently, that which perteined unto them; other things, God would have to be wrapped in darkenesse, while the fore ap∣pointed time should come, that the reprobat seing might not see, & a way so be made opē for his decree: awake yee therfor at lēgth, & opē your eyes to the shining truth, which if yee shall behold glistering more clearly, then that it can be obscured by false remote calumnies; remember that those are not written in the booke of life, which have the Beast in great admiration: & then take advise, according to the greatnesse of the thing. You also my brethrē, (for so I esteeme you, as long as any hope remayneth,) I would admonish in a few wordes, who through lightnesse of minde & desire of novelty, wi∣thin two or three dayes space, become Papists. It seemeth a pastime to you casting away the truth, to fall to the Pope, but take heed that in your sport yee perish not in earnest. And willingly wipe your names out of the book of life. You pretēd, that you will be Catholikes, but cōsider that whom you hold for Catholiks, are reprobates, unlesse they shall escape at length frō these tents, into which yee fly for salvation. But these pretenses of salvation are toies. I know what grieveth you, eyther want, or dishonour at home, or a greater reputation of other men. But what gaine shalbe even the most am¦ple stipend, if yee shall loose your soules?
What dishonour can be greater, then to be added in the company of cast awayes? Or who hath not honour inough which is counted the childe of God? Minde, I pray you, these things, & such like, and think it not a light matter, forsaking the true God, to associate your selves with the Divill. Behold also what mischievous persons yee doo nourish in your bosome, who gladly doo intertaine the Iesuits. He which ioyneth you to the friend¦ship of the Pope, procureth unto you certen and undoubted destruction. How miserable a thing is it, with the hazzard of this life, to seeke an un∣doubted losse of eternall life? Doo not iudge any longer, a thing of so great moment, rather by the painted lies of those men, then by the very manifest truth. Neither doo yee despise my admonition. I am ad adversa¦ry onely to your errours. I desire from my hart that your selves shoul be saved by Jesus Christ. Try the things that I say; I require not otherwise to be beleeved; and when the things are throughly knowen by searching, ac∣knowledge the fraud of the Iesuits; thrust them out of doores, detest these pestiferous men; perceive your owne danger, and if you have any regard of salvation, now at length be yee wise. ¶ From the foundation of the world: So before was shewed the eternall De∣cree, touching the death of Christ, and the force and efficacy thereof in chap. 13.8. Now the same kind of speaking noteth out the eternall ele∣ction of them that shalbe saved. Which two things are most neerely cou∣pled togither. ¶ Beholding the Beast, which was, and which is not, and yet is: Those last words,  and yet is, seeme that they are thus to be read, , and is present. The difference is, that those signify, that the Beast remaineth alive in the very destruction, as though he should say; although in mens opinion he is not, yet he is: and so both members are referred to the same time, as before Iohn saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, which yet was not wholly killed in chap. 13. The other reading noteth out more plai¦nely the third time, in which after the hurt endured, the Beast should re∣cover; which thing Aretas, the Complutent edition, and other copies di∣stinguish plainely, which reade , and shall be present: and as Prima∣sius translated, shall come. Yet that former reading of Theod. Beza may ca∣ry the same sence; albeit in mens opiniō, the Beast of late was not, yet now he is. In which sense they are to be taken, that they may have respect to the Beast comming forth from calamity, not continuing in the same. For they are answerable to the third distinct time in the beginning of the verse, and shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, as is cleare from the men admiring the Beast, who admire not the same contemned and afflicted, (which should
be necessary, if the words respected the same time with the member going next before,) but recovering his dignity contrary to mens expectation, and the same greater then he had before; as it came to passe in his third change, after he was recovered of his wound, chap. 13.3. Wherfore the vulgar Latine reading corruptly, passeth over this third member, making men to wonder at the Beast when he is not: which is contrary to the truth of the thing. Furthermore, it is certaine, that it is not to be read in the future tence, but in the present: because admiration belongeth not to a fu¦ture, but to a present dignity. From which let us observe, what wondring, is a token of reprobation, to weet, of a Beast reviving after the hurt received, which is the second Beast, in chap. 15.11. Even until that time he was not so desperately impious, but that he might easily deceive the Saincts: but at length he came to that naughtinesse, that he must be banished from the Kingdome of God, who will acknowledg him to be such an one by admyring, as he professeth himselfe to be. But wheras the Angel in these words, prosecuteth not his variable condition beyond the third time, therby he sheweth, that he shalbe openly knowne to the world before his last ende shall come. 9 Here is the mind: Thus farre the Beast hath bin shewed us according to his whole; now he entreth into the interpretation of some chiefe parts: wherunto he prepareth himselfe a way by this Preface. Which yet is un∣certaine, whither it is to be referred to that which went before, or to this which followeth: it seemeth being set in the midst, to have respect to both alike, for to cause attention. The speach seemeth defective, and to be sup∣plyed after the manner of that in chap. 13.18. Here is wisdome, let him that hath wit, count &c. So here is wit, let him that hath wisdome understand: as in the Epistles to the seven Churches, let him that hath eares, heare: or it may be a perfit sentence of it selfe, here is the minde that hath wisdome; as though he should say, consider the foresaid chaunges: likewise consider the inter∣pretation; the understanding of which things is true wisdome indeede, wherby a man may avoide eternall destruction. But these are the wordes not onely of exhortation, but also of Prophecie, which declare that in the most open light, in which the Beast shalbe set, every one shall not acknow¦ledge him, but they onely who are endued with wisedome, and have their eyes inlightened of God. The Beast is like in this thing to the whore, whose name written in her forehead was a mysterie, which should be hidden from very many, no lesse then some obscure and inexplicable riddle. For Pro∣phecies fulfilled become not manifest to all men, as we wil after shew that Bellarmine trisleth, but unto some certaine men, to whom it is given to
understand, the rest remaining in their former blindnes. Which short ad∣monition, confuteth a threefold errour of the Papists, one touching the com∣mon name Antichrist: the other, of the doctrine: the third of the publique persecu∣tion; of which wee will speake more at large, in the refutation at the ende of the Chapter. ¶ The seaven heads are seaven hilles, upon which the woman sitteth: as tou∣ching the partes, first he teacheth what are Heads, both permanent in this verse, and transitory in verses 10.11. wherby it may be knowne what is this whore, in regard both of the place, and of the time. Those heads are seaven moū¦taines upon which the woman sitteth, that is, seven hilles of the city of Rome, Palatinus, Quirinalis, Aventinus, Caelius, Viminalis, Aesquilinus, Janicularis: by which this City is renowmed through the whole world; and thereupon called of the Grecians , seaven hilled by Varro. And this circum∣locution seemed fitter for the eloquent kind of speaking of the Poets, then the specifying of a proper name. Virgil in the second of his Georgiques toward the end, hath these wordes, to weet Rome is become the most beautifull of things, which hath enclosed her seaven towers with one wall. Likewise Ovid in his first book de Trist. Eleg. 4. speaketh thus of it; But Rome is the Seate of the Empire and of the Gods, which from seaven Mountaines vieweth the whole world. And againe in the third book ver. 7. And while Rome the victorious shall beholde the subdued whole world from her seven Mountaines, I shall be called Martia. And God would have the thing testifyed, not onely by the verses of Poets, but also by a publike festivitie. For the Romanes kept the Fest cal¦led Septimontium, because of the seventh mountaine ioyned to the city, and Rome become therupon Septicollis, as Plutarch relateth in . These things are so manifest, that the Papists themselves ar now cō∣strained will they, nill they, to confesse them. We have shewed that Bellar∣mine preferreth this sense before the rest, in his 3. book. ch. 13. of the Pope of Rome. Ribera the Iesuite yeeldeth also the same, cōfirming it with ma∣ny words, on the 14. chap. of the Revel. num. 30. frō whēce no cōtroversie could now remaine of this thing, if onely men were in their right wits: but wee hav touched before their madnes, who doo separate the things which ar ioyned togither by an ūdivided bād. They grāt that the whor is Rome, yet by no means doe they abide her to be the seate of Antichrist: as though they could be sundred, of which the one sitteth upō & the other carryed: but if this cōjoyning be too weake, behold a straighter, yea a most straight, such as of the head with the body, so as they which shal remov the Beast to any other place thē to Rome, must make him to be without his heads. Frō hēce therfore I thus cōclude demōstratively: The city where remaine fixed the heads of
the Beast or of Antichrist is the seat of Antichrist: Rome is the city wher remaine fi∣xed the heads of Antichrist: Therfore Rome is the seate of Antichrist. By no mea¦nes can yee giv mee the slippe ô ye Papists. This argument must needs be as firme & sure as ar the very mountaines of your Rome. Yet what you ar able to obiect against it, we wil discusse by & by in confuting your devised Antichrist. 10 And they are also seven Kings: Such ar the permanent heads: the transitorie, which ar seven Kings doo follow. Ther is a double application of this one type, teaching that ther is an inseparable ioyning togither of the mountains and Kings. From whence is ministred an other necessary proof of the seate of Antichrist, thus; The seate of seven Kings is the seate of Antichrist: Rome the citie of 7. mountaines, is the seate of 7. Kings, for the heads are both mountaines & Kings: Therfore Rone is the seate of Antichrist. But who ar these 7 Kings? not so many singular persons, as Victorinus would have it, but soveraignties & regimēts. For if every several head should note out singular mē, 5. of which wer fallē in Iohns time; to wit Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasianus, Titus: Titus Domitianus the 6. ruled then; Nerva the 7, was to be expected; whom re∣maining alive but for a little space, should succeede straighway Traianus the 8. & togither also the 7. If I say, the heads ar to be so counted; it must needs follow that this Beast should have ceased in his last head Traiane, & that the world should not now feare that he should doo any mischiefe. Vn¦les perhaps we think, whē all his living heads ar cut off, he yet remaineth a∣live, or they being cut off, other, as it were a new Hidra, spring up, of which yet Iohn made no mētiō. But that we may not thinke that those 7. are ta∣ken figuratively; where are the ten Kings that arose togither with Nerva? It must needs be that these were togither with the seventh head in the twelft verse beneath: or how when Nerva was dead, seemed the Beast not to be; especially seing before his death, he had adopted Traiane? or for what cause wer they rather reprobats that wōdred at Traiā, then those former: for such is the cōditiō of the seventh head, that the followers of him are reprobates, before in ver. 8. Many things of this sort doo not suffer any peculiar men to be meant. Hereunto is added the manner of speaking, which is such, that it bewrayeth that the Kings are so long the heads of the city, as long as the mountains ar. Otherwise for some short time perhaps, the heads wer, both the mountains & Kings, but to a farre longer time, they neither were nor should be; if there should be made a separation of the heads, which the Spi¦rit ioyneth togither, the mountaines onely remaining after the other be dead. Therfore the Kings, howsoever they al wer not togither, as the moun∣tains, yet shall obtaine as long continuing a name of heads, as those.
But concerning the person, the time shall yeeld a demonstration in the e∣leventh verse. But if the Kings be Dominions of what sorte are they? Ri∣bera the Iesuite being privie to himselfe, that the thing cannot be touched so lightly, but that the soare wil be renewed therewith, flyeth unto the se∣ven ages of the world: the first of which he maketh from Adam to Noe: The second from Noe to Abraham: The third to David: The fourth to the transmigration into Babylon: The fift to the comming of the Lord: The sixt from thence to Antichrist: The seventh from him even to the day of iud¦gement. Which wit of his bringeth into my remembrance, that of the Poe: If the foolish Painter will conioine unto a mans head, The neck of a horse, & so of birds feathers over spred: &c. For to see being let in, freinds keepe your selves from laughing. The Iesuite passeth the Painter, who hath framed an head, which may be applyed alike to all and every city of the whole world. The Spirit would deliver a certaine marke, wherby the Throne of the Beast might be known: the Iesuite, as the houpe, faineth the griefe to be in an other place, that he may withdrawe from the neast, I know notwhither. But understand Ribera, that the seven mountaines belong to the city of Rome alone: But that those seven Kings appertaine to the same city, to which the mountaines. For the heads are both mountaines and Kings, and therefore that these Kings belong to Rome alone: so doo we free thee from the great labour of seeking; proving by a most cer∣taine argument, that he is found at Rome; to finde whom, thou hast com¦passed all landes in vaine. But the time is spent to no profit in confuting thy toies, which yet I could not passe over wholly, but would admonish the Papists at least by this small labour, that they should not suffer them∣selves to be deceived any longer by the trisles of the Iesuites. The thing it selfe is thus. These dominions are proper to that city, whereunto belong the mountaines, & the seven regiments are those, by which the citie hath ben no lesse famous, then for her seven mountaines. And Cornelius Taci∣tus in the beginning of his history nūbreth these regiments in this wise: Kings held the City of Rome at the first: L. Brutus instituted freedome, & the Consulshippe: the Dictatourshippes were taken up for a time: neither continued the power of the office of the Decemviri, above two yeeres, nor the Tribunes authority pertaining to Consuls, was of force any long time &c. The power of Pompey and Crassus went quickly to Cesar. By which wordes he declareth plainely, that sixe kindes of government had held at Rome, from the building of the City even unto his time, Kings, Consulls, Dictatours, Decemviri, Tribunes, of the souldiers, Emperours: the seventh of Po∣pes he knew not, being taken away from the living before he could see it.
¶ Five are fallen: Kings, Consuls, Dictatours, Decemviri, Tribunes: For those five kinds of ruling had ceased wholly and vanished away before Iohn his time. ¶ One is: the sixt kinde of governing by Emperours, in whose power was the chiefe rule of things when Iohn lived, ¶ And an other is not yet come: The seventh King, the Pope, was not yet a Governour of Rome, when the Apostle lived. And not without cause hath he shunned the adjective of order: for he saith not, the seventh is not yet come, but an other is not yet come, by the same signifying that this seventh shalbe very greatly unlike the former. All these were Political Kings; the seventh should be spiritual; or of a mixt kinde, unlike to every one before; from whence it is manifest that the Christiā Emperours are not the sevēth King. For they differred nothing in civill governement from the former, onely they tooke unto them the Christian religion. And in auncient times new religions were often added; the forme of governement in the meane time nothing altered. Furthermore the seventh King ought to governe in the same place, where the seven mountaines are, as hath bene declared in the former verse. But the Christian Emperours never had the seate of their Empire at Rome; But the whole use of the citie was the Popes; from whom alone after the seventh King began, her glorie did grow. That member is not yet come, teacheth that there was a very short time remaining to the cō∣ming of the seventh King. For so we are wonte to speake of things that will come not very long after. Therefore foolish is Ribera the Iesuite, who as∣signeth the sixt kind of governing after the comming of Christ, even unto three yeeres and an halfe more or lesse before the last day, and together with him all the Pastists, who will not have Antichrist to be expected be∣fore that same very time; as though the Angel saying is not yet come, should speake of a man, whom the world yet seeth not after a thousand five hun∣dred yeeres. ¶ And when he is come: After the seventh Kingdome, to weet of the Popes, shalbe begunne, the Dragon being cast out of heaven, and Constantine the Great being Emperour. ¶ He must tary but a short time: About an hundred yeeres after Constan∣tine, then to be overwhelmed for a time by the overflowing of the Goths and Vandals, who so evil entreated Rome, the tower of the new domini∣on, that it might seem to hav perished utterly. Gensericus bereaved it whol∣ly of every dweller, see Blond. in his second book of his first Decad. And Totilas againe brought it to a wildernesse, so as neither man nor woman was left in it, as the same Blond. writeth in his second book of his first
Decad. See chap. 13.3. 11 And the Beast which was and is not: That is, and that seventh King the Pope, which had come, and was as touching the rising and originall of his power for the space of an hundred yeeres after Constantine. And is not, after that time ut¦terly perished in mens opinion by the invasion of the Barbarians: this Beast, I say, is the eight, and one of those seven. Wherby it is to be observed that the seventh King by himselfe alone doth obtaine the name of the whole and to be cal∣led that Beast, whose description was in the eight verse by foure succeeding courses of times. All which chaungins are proper to this one, from whēce now at lenght after the second mutation, wherof he made mention in the former verse, he addeth a double condition of him in the very words of the first description: shewing in the same that these words, and when he cō∣meth he must continue a short space, are all one with these, the Beast which was, and is not. ¶ And he is the eight: to wit, King. For here octavus the eight agreeth not in gender with Bestia, the Beast. The common translation translateth amisse , the eight Beast. For there are not eight Beasts, but eight Kings, the seventh of which is this Beast. The pronoune relative  hee, seemeth in this place to be a demonstrative, as sometime also else where, he is the eight King, that is, the eight King. Also the whole antecedent member of the sentēce maketh the supposite of the verbe substātive, as though he should say, The Beast which was, and is not, is both that eight Kinge and also is one of the seven. This eight King is the same Pope after his dignity recovered from that maine overthrowe which the Barbarians did make, when his wounded head w ced, as in chap. 13.3. or when the Beast which is not, did ascēd from the bottomlesse pit, as at the 8 verse of this chapter: or when the se¦cond Beast aros from the earth, chap. 13.11. When Gregorie the second & his next successours did appeare with two hornes, Pipine and Charles the Great. For we have shewed already before, that all these things pertei∣ned to that third mutation. But from whence then is this eight, hath the Beast eight heads, which even now were but seven? In no wise, but this eight is the same with the seventh of the same nature, purpose, soveraignty, (wher¦upon it is added, and is one of those seven) onely of a greater impiety, blas∣phemy and sacrilege, wherin he passeth the seventh. The Popes in their be∣ginning after Constantine were not so wicked, as after Phocas. But more & lesse doo not distinguish the kinde. Therfore the Pope revived is the eight, most worthy of all to be pointed at with the finger, and to be sayd that it is hee. From which now the reason may be apparant, why in chap. 13. one An¦tichrist
is painted out by a double Beast: to wit, because he is the seventh King & the eight. ¶ And goeth into destruction; To be destroyed utterly in his due time; this last member is the fourth time of the Beast fetched from the general inter¦pretation in ver. 8. And so that which there is sayd was, and is not, and shall ascend out of of the bottomlesse pit, and shall goe into destruction, here is expressed in words some what divers, so as to the first member these are answerable, when he shall come: to the second, he must continue a short space: to the third, and he is the eight King, and one of the seaventh: the fourth is the same in both places. Wherfore that which was spoken generally of the Beast, wee may see perteineth to the speciall mutation of the seventh head. Seing then this Beast is the seaventh King, who should have the next place after him who bare rule in Iohn his time, and the regiment of the Popes at Rome fol∣lowed by and by that Heathen Empire, by a second most sure demonstra∣tion wee have found out both Antichrist himselfe, and also the time wher∣in he was borne. Which that it may become the clearer, may be propon∣ded after this manner. The seventh King succeeded next after the Heathen Emperours who made the sixt King reigning at that time, when Iohn wrote, ver. 10. Five are fallen, one, that is, the sixt is. But Antichrist is the seventh King, ver. 10.11. Therfore An∣tichrist succeeded next the Heathen Emperours: and seeing the Pope of Rome after the time of the Heathen Emperours is that seventh King, as before we have ma∣nifested, it followeth also necessarily that the Pope of Rome from the time of the Heathen EMPEROVRS, is that chiefe Antichrist, of whom the Scripture forewarne us so diligently, and that the City of ROME from the same is the whore. See now yee Iesuites, from how necessary principles the argument pro¦ceedeth; apply what engins you can to overthrow the same, you shall doo more good, then if you should bring ladders to conquer heaven. But your things which you doo treate off concerning the time of Antichrist, are divised, are absurd, and more foolish then any toyes, as wee shall after declare. 12 And the tenne hornes which thou sawest, are ten Kings. Thus farre tou∣ching the Heads: Now followeth the Hornes, which by their consent, doo bring yet a more full light of time. For by how much thinges are neerer togither, they are so much the more clearer, and the more perceived and observed.
Therfore to the end that, that seventh head might become knowē by more tokens, and his first beginning more undoubted, it is furnished with these hornes, as it were with a certen pompe and company of servants, by whose noise, as it were, we should be stirred up to regard his comming. The Angel expoundeth these hornes to be tenne Kings; which afterward are described of what sort they are, both by their Kingdome in this verse; and mind in verse 13. and the warre which they shall make, verse 14. Their King∣dome is declared by a double or twofold time, the first of it, not yet received; Who, sayth he, have not yet received a Kingdome. The second of it received, but they shall receive power at one houre with the Beast. The first meeteth with a doubt, wherby some body peradventure might thinke, that these Kings reigned at the very same time, in which Iohn wrote: no, saith he, they reigne not yet, but shall reigne shortly. For otherwise the warning had bene superflu¦ous, if they should not come but about three yeeres and an halfe before the last day. The second time exhibiteth yet a clearer knowledge of the thing, by a certaine mutual bewaying, which the hornes and the Beast doo one for an other. They shall receive power as Kings at one houre with the Beast; for so I translate  in the accusative case; in which these words are taken some time for the space of time, as, these last have wrought but one houre, Mat. 20.12. Also, watch with me one houre, Mat. 26.40. after the same manner in Marcke 14.37. And so the best Greeke writers every where, thou art in busines watch g the whole night: Xenoph. Paediae 2. Sometime they are takē for the terme of time, when, as in the 70. Iterpreters, behold to morrow this very houre, I will ruine a haile: Exod. 9.18. So to morow about this very houre, J will deliver them all wounded: Iosh. 11.6. In the New Testament, yesterdy the seventh houre the fever left him: Iohn 4.52. The ninth houre of the day, Act. 10.3.30. What houre I will come: Revel. 3.3. It is doubtfull therfore whe∣ther the words note the continuing of the power, or the terme of begin∣ning it. The former signification containeth the second. For if unto one houre they shall receive power with the Beast, it must needs be, that they receive it both togither at the same houre also, and not the contrary; se∣ing the power of one may be continued longer then of the other; of which both there was altogither the same beginning. The Historie also accor∣deth with the former wonderfully, clearer by a double and more general marke, and giving a greater knowledge of the Beast; whom seeing the Spi¦rit without doubt would have to be most surely known, let us iudge of right that there is this onely meaning of the words. The vulgar Latine trās¦lateth the following words  with the Beast,  after the Beast, against the authority of all copies, and contrary to the trueth it
selfe. For in the rising of the Beast the hornes are reckened in the first place, yea also before the heads, or any other shape of the body; which thing, had not bene done at all, if they should grow up after ward, chapter 13.1. Ribera will have the sense to be all one, whether wee read with the Beast, or after the Beast, as though to beginne their reigne togither, and after were the same time. But he referreth neither of these to the time, but unto service. But this also is unlike, and absurd, seing to receave power either with or after the Beast, cānot be one with to deliver power to the Beast. Beda deceived with the vulgar Latine, seemeth to expound it so. But I re∣quire a fit exemple of reason. To commit fornication after Idols is to serve the same: but if to receive power after one, hath the same consideration, doubt∣lesse the Pope of Rome serveth the Divill, after whom he received power. Se∣ing therfore the words are so, from hence let us observe a double marke of these Kings; one, that together with the Beast they rule; the other, that they shall enioy this power for a short time onely. For that, a short space in ver. 10. the Angel expoundeth to be one houre. And that which there was spoken of the seventh King onely, here is attributed in likewise to all the ten Kings. Not because having reigned this one houre, they should exercise no powr ever after (for how shall the Beast, of whom together this is spoken, enioy onely one houre of authority, which hath two & fourty moneths to tyrannise? chap. 13.5. But because the first power after a few yeeres should be inter∣rupted with some notable hurt for a time; & the ten Kings in their begin¦ning should have tryal of the same adversity with the Beast, to the ende that he might be more cleare and manifest to all men by this token. Ther∣fore that now we may see the very thing, we have sayd in chap. 13.5. that thse Kings are the first Christian Emperours: which now shalbe made plaine by the applying of every thing. First the hornes are Kings, neither of the common and inferiour sorte, but Monarches and of very great authori∣ty, who have crownes, wherin they differ from the hornes of the Dragon as hath bin observed in chap. 13.1. He also hath tenne hornes, proper to the heads, to wit, the City Rome, where abode the Maiesty of the Highest Em∣pire, the other Provinces being subiect to this Queene. But now the case being altered in the first rising up of Antichrist, the chiefe Empire should be in an other place, then at Rome, as we know it came to passe when the Christian Emperours lived at Byzantium, or Millane, or Ravenna, who retained in their owne power the chiefe soveraignty over the whole Chri∣stian world. For hetherto they spake as Lords, We, because thou art a Christi¦an, have iudged thee worthy of the Bishoprick of our City, as Constantius sayd to Liberius the Bishop of Rome, Theod. book 2. chap. 16. Yea some ages
after. In the sixt Generall Council at Constance, Act. 1. Constantine him∣selfe gave for a gift his Holy, as they spake, in these words: I give to the Arsh¦bishop of our auncient Rome. Which thing also the Popes gladly acknowled∣ged. Boniface to the Emperour Honorius in Distinct. 97. of the Church: Rome is the City of your gentlenesse. Gergorie unto Mauritius signifyeth his obedience in proclaming his law, though he approoved not the sentence of the law. As for mee, being subiect to your cammaundement, J have caused your law to be sent through many parts of the world, book 2. Epist. 61. at the ende. And Agatho speaking of Rome: This is the servile citie of your Maiesty. in the Council of Const. 6. Act. 4. Where then al this time was the Donati∣on of Constantine. Although even the very donation, if a good and lawfull should be granted, would bewray sufficiently in what place then the Em∣pire was. Secondly these Kings are the hornes of the Beast, by whose means the dignity of the Pope of Rome increased, while they drove farre away al the violence of the enemy, which might seeme to be able to detract anie thing from it. Neither onely gave they it leave to grow by their warres, but also inriched it with exceeding wealth. For although the Papists bragge impudently of Constantines donation, as wee touched even now; never∣thelesse it is certen that they adorned both the citie, and Pope with many privileges, and that they which followed, tooke away nothing; but rather to have added to the heape. Thirdly, they are sayd tenne, because so many of the first Emperours should be notable for their care, and diligence in subduing the enemies of the Romanes. Through which oportunity the Beast lately bread, might get strength; and might grow up to his perfect sta¦ture. And these were 1. Constantine the Great; 2. Constantinus, Constās, and Constantius his sonnes; 3. Iulianus; 4. Iovinianus; 5. Valentinianus, and Valens; 6. Gratianus, Valentianus secundus, & Theodosius the Great; 7. Theodosius with Arcadius and Honorius; 8. Arcadius and Honorius alone; 9. Honorius and Theodosius Iunior; 10. Theodosius & Valentini∣us third. For so Hierome, Prosper, Victor the Bishop of Tunise, Marcelli∣nus Comes, and al other writers, both Greek & Latine, whom I hav read, doe recken for one the Emperours that reigned togither; for the Romane Empire was but one, though devided in states, & Governours, as also the Image in Daniel ch. 2.40. shadowed out one Kingdome by the leggs & feete divided. As long as these reigned, the Beast risen up of late flourished; much indeede, and grievously afflicted when they were gone; when as ther was no horne for a long space, that was able to keepe away, & remove the enemies from their neckes. Although all the hornes were not certē∣ly of an equall strength; but the two last were weaker, Rome being twice
taken under Honorius; Alaricus and Arnulphus being Captaines; and neverthelesse the Head of the Beast not yet deadly wounded, when as the overthrow was more ignominious then dammageable,) Pompon. Laet. on Honorius,) being repaired by and by againe, when the horne began to exercise his, and Honorius to be stirred up, the Gothes being expelled out of Italy, and Attalus their King triumphed over Rome; and then af∣ter his right hand cut off, by the commaundement of Honorius caryed in to Lipara, Sabel. En. 8. book 1. Doubtlesse Constantius & Aetius employ∣ed their endevour valiantly afterward, & nobly delivered the maiestie of the Empire from all barbarousnes; howsoever the chiefe rulers Honorius and Valentinianus were slouthfull & cowardous. But after these tow last hornes were fallen, how many & how great calamities were accumulated daily, when ther was no aide either from the West or East part, that could represse & thrust away the malepertnes of the enemies running furiously upon him? Therefore by the want of his hornes, he came into that state, that men thought he had perished and was not, as the second part of his time doth manifest, ver. 8. Therefore are they tenne for iust cause; in which nū∣ber is contained the defending of the Beast, which afterward failed for a time, assoone as that number was ended. This is that one houre, for which the Beast received power, and not he alone, but those tenne Hornes toge∣ther with him; which togither also fell downe, when as there was after∣ward no strong or manlie thing in the West for a long time, which was a∣ble to resist the fiercenes of the enemies. For the rest that followed, Avi∣tus, Maioranus, Severianus, Anthemius, Rethimer, Olymbrius, Gliceri∣us, Nepos, Orestes, Augustulus, to wit the last of the Emperours, were of no lesse continuance, force & power, then they ar at this day of no fame, scarce known either from the speach of men, or by Histories. Fourth∣ly the time of the Kingdome not yet received was the time when Iohn lived, and when this Revelation was made. The Heathen Emperours yet kept the stage, to wit the very Dragon, while in the meane time the woman not yet strong enough, or in time not yet readie to bring foorth her childe, en∣dured grievous paine in travelling, as in chapter twelve ver. 2. &c. For howsoever in some ages next after Iohn there were some men a little more enclined toward Christians, yet the Dragō forthwith devoured al the new hope, lying in wait most vigilantly for the woman travailing with childe, until the ful time to bring foorth a valiant issue should come. Fiftly, the time of receiving power is the same houre with the Beast. For wee have shew∣ed that the terme also of beginning is included in the space of cōtinuing. But seeing this is a large houre, in what moment of it was this power givē?
Truely in that, wherin the Lambe cast downe from the Empire Diocletiā, and Maximinian, chap. 6.15. for we shal finde that the Beast did appeare at this time, as it is made apparant from the elect then sealed chap. 7. From the burning mountaine cast into the Sea a very little after, chap. 8. From the Church going into the inner Temple, while the wicked have sway in the court, chap. 11. From the space of fourty two moneths, all which she lay hid in the Temple and wildernes, chap. 11.3. & 12.6. From the same time of the power given to the Beast, & from the Throne, which he received as a gift from the Dragon chap. 13.25. But chiefly from the next succession made to the sixt head, to weet the Heathen Emperours, ver 10. of this chapter. The common terme of all those dependeth from the Dragon his driving out of heaven, when after so wonderful a manner, the Emperours resigned their authority. For what other cause is there, why the Church then should be in so afflicted state, but for that the Beast was risen up? Therfore the woman trembling more for feare of him then of the Dragon, brought forth, and together fled, that is, after she had procreated the Christian Emperours, among whom Constantine obtaineth the first and chiefe place, hating the ambitious and fraudulent Popes introducing shadowes and images of godlines, instead of a solid and expresse paterne more then professed enemies, shee hidde her selfe in the darke straight way, chap. 12.6. Therfore these alone are those hornes, to whō onely all these properties agree most fitly. The Kings that arose after the dissipation of the Empire, began not together with the Beast (as we have given him a rising like as other men every where, in the yeere 606.) but almost two hundred yeere before. For the Suevians, Alanes, Goths, Vandals possessed Spaine when Honorius reigned. The Vandals also held Afrike, the Goths, Burgonians, Francons, obtained France; the English men Britannie, the Hunnes Pannonia; and others cha¦lenged for their owne other countries. These Kings flourished, the Beast in the meane season being almost consumed with a most grievous woūd. Neither received they power for an houre, as the true hornes, but by succes∣sion of their heires, the which dignity being once gotten, they hold it cō∣stantly even unto this very day: the glory, I say, of the Kingdomes never decayed, howsoever the families peradventure were often changed. Final∣ly, neither succeeded they next the sixt head: but they have the Popes and Christian Emperours placed between, and in the midds. By the same ar∣guments all things fall down, which are brought by Ribera the Iesuite cō¦cerning the tenne hornes, Revel. 12. num. 11. as may be evident to him that weigheth the thing on both sides, that I may not spend time in refu∣ting his toies. If any obiect that some of those Emperours were godly, &
holy, let him againe take this answer to himselfe, that the good Princes knew not what monster they nourished, even as very many learned men, who had no lesse care to set foorth the Beast by their writings, then they to defend him by weapons. From whence it is no marvaile, though both strove to their power to adorne him, whose counterfait shew had a certen maiestie; but his filthines yet was more hidde, then that it could be seen o∣penly. Neither is it needful that al the hornes should be togither, more then the heads, which succeeded one after an other. And the Beast himselfe is a rew of Popes, as wee have shewed, which a long order of succession cō∣cludeth, not any one person limiteth. Yet these first Emperours are so the hornes, that togither they containe the whole order following, but there∣fore before the rest elected, as it were by name, both because the traveile of these should be famous, and the first in advancing the Pope, who be∣ing destitute of the same for a time, should be contemned: and also be∣cause the certen, definit, and excellent number of these in the very first be∣ginnings of iniquity, should leade men straight forth to the extolling of the Beast in the ages following; and should more aboundantly instruct us for to understand this whole mystery. For these hornes which shall eate the flesh of the whore, and at length burne her with fire, are farre off from the times of the first hornes a thousand two hundred three score yeeres at the least, as appeareth sufficiently from those things which have ben said be∣fore. Necessarily therfore is a succession to be understood, to al which the name of tenne hornes agreeth, because the first of this number were nota∣ble. Which things now in this wise declared, wee have the third demon∣stration, of those that are taken out of this chapter, both of the Antichrist and also his comming. For the Beast which received power at one houre with the tenne Kings, who had not yet received a Kingdome in Iohns ti∣me, but should receive it straightway when the sixt head was gone and then present, is the Antichrist. But the Pope of Rome is the Beast, which a thousand three hundred yeeres since received power at one houre with those tenne Kings, as wee have made it plaine. Therfore a thousand three hundred yeeres since he is Antichrist. So al things agree most fitly with themselves, and doo marveilously levell at the same marke. 13 These have one minde: Such was thē the beginning of the Kingdome. The intent of these Kings is, with one purpose of minde to bestow their strength & pow∣er in maintaining the Beast. Which in few wordes, but cleerly inough doo shew how the Emperours should be affected towards the Pope of Rome, chiefly for the space of the two & fourty moneths of his flourishing tyrā∣ny. For the defection should not beginne forthwith at this terme: but
shortly after the former good wil should decay, and abate somewhat by little and little of the former heate. But who may not wonder, at so great consent of mindes, through so lōg a succession, that all in like wise should desire, that the chiefe dignity, should be in the possession of the Pope of Rome, and should let passe nothing, that might pertaine to the advan∣cing and making famous the same? The thing is manifest to every one in the first tenne hornes. Onely Iulianus holpe also somewhat at least in van¦quishing the enemies of the Empire. Neither in the destructions of Rome and when the Popedome was almost abolished, was ther want in the Em∣perours of a care to reserve the former authority to old Rome, when it see∣med meet to translate the Primacie to Constantinople, the seate then of the Empire; especially the Bishops of Constantinople chalenging to themsel∣ves the same with exceeding great contention. Yea at length they restrai∣ned this ambition of theirs, and commanded them to be subiect to the Romane Pope. New Hornes at length arose in the VVest, Pipine & Charles the Great; they fought farre more fiercely for the Beast, then any before, in chap. 13.11. Moreover at length it came to this point, that by an othe of fidelity, the Emperours were bound to the Pope, and should now doo necessarily, that which before time they did of their owne accord, and vo¦luntarily. It seemed to the Beast to stand with wisdome for his greater se∣curity to use this marke afterward, as wee have shewed at chapter 14.17, VVhich custome must descēde to the posterity, until the words of God should be fulfilled, as after in verse 17. Some few Emperours indeed had great strife with the Beast: but in everie one of them this is to be marveiled at, that they though they had to doo onely with a man, not with the Pope. They hated him peradventure as an enemy: but the Popedome they ador∣ned in the meane time very studiously. But neither thē had the Pope need of those hornes, who prevailed so much by his owne forces, that he com∣pelled the Emperours struggling with him, to be subiect in spite of their teeth: and themselves nowe to undergoe the yoke, by whose helpe be∣fore he brought others under the yoke. Or graunt that some one, who sawe more then the rest, hated also the Popedome, yet one swallow maketh not the spring. As touching the wordes, Montanus readeth in the ende of the verse  doo give in the present tence, doo give their power to the Beast: as in the beginning of the verse  have, albeit the speach be of that which is to come, but this is usuall in narrations. Theodorus Beza hath  shall give. 14 These shall fight with the Lambe: Now he declareth the warre of these
hornes, which they should make against the Lambe. But did Constantine & the other good Emper. ēdevour any thing against the Lord, for whose sake they take up weapons against others? Certenly men fight against the Lambe, when any thing is defended earnestly, which is contrary to his or∣dinances. And if any looketh into that manifold superstition, which was brought in when even the best raigned, by the same, if not the authours, yet the favourers thereof; he shall easily see this battell, although the ho∣ly men thought nothing lesse, (for so I may call them, whom God pardo∣neth for his Sonnes sake, and sinning not of purpose, but through igno∣rance,) then to oppugne the Lambe, whom alone they desired to beare rule. This, I say, may be called a battel against the Lambe: yet those first Emper. were farr from that warre, which was at length to be made with the Saincts after the two and fourty moneths were finished. For so wee heard before, when the two witnesses have finished their testimony, the Beast that com∣meth out of the bottomelesse pit, shall make warre against them, and overcome them, Chapter 11.7. VVhich wee shewed to have bene done, partly by the au∣thority of the Pope himselfe, when at Trent he subdued the truth by his purpled company: partly by the weapons of the Emperour Charles the fift, who togither by a most lamentable warre, persecuted the Princes of Ger¦many craving liberty to worship the Lambe; who had begun a little be∣fore to shine againe upon the world after long darkenesse. The Angel speaketh in the plurall number, as though all the hornes should make warre togither with ioyned forces. But it is no newe thing that it should be said done of all, which is done of any one of the same degree. Many were the entreprises before against the Lambe, but this one deserveth the name of warre above all. ¶ And the Lambe shall overcome them: See how with this warre he ioyneth the victory of the Lambe; which may be understood of this alone. But the Emperours got the victory in that warre; that is true indeede, if wee res∣pect the very time of darkenes, by the space of which the two witnesses must lie slaine and unburied. But after those fewe fore appointed dayes were en∣ded, they which of late triumphed as conquerers; now the case being alte¦red, were overcome. Mauritius put to flight the Emperour, and at length compelled him to graunt liberty to true religion, as we said in chapter 11 11.12. This free profession of the trueth is this victory, which the Lambe wrong from the Emperour against his will. And not from him a∣lone, but also from the rest which followed; Ferdinandus, Maximilianus, Rodulphus, who seeing that they kicked in vaine against the pricke, cau∣sed noe trouble to the reformed religion.
I would to God at lēgth the Emperour would set forth the victory of the Lambe, not onely by resisting, but also by detesting the Romish impostures. and by embracing the wholesome trueth it selfe. Why mindeth he not, that he now followeth unwares the Lambes charriot? For it happeneth not by chance, but belongeth to a mighty conquerer, to make great sta∣tes of a realme favourable to his Church. But whether were it not better, to accompany the triumphant charriot, a fellow and partaker of the victo¦ry, then a prisoner and miserable spectacle of the disconfiture received? God open his eyes, that in rewarding the whore from his vertues: he first of the hornes may receive the price of that victory, which if hee shall not re¦gard, neverthelesse some other shall have it shortly. ¶ And they which are with him, called, and chosen faithfull: The Christian sauldiers Mauritius, and the armies of the Protestants, by which the Lābe got the victory. For it pleased him not by sending fire from heaven to o∣vercome the enemies by his owne power alone, but by the labour of his faithful servants. So then we have these hornes declared by this warre, no lesse notable marke toward their ende, then the number of tenne was at their beginning: so the beginning and ende being known, here can be noe doubt of the other race that commeth betweene. 15 And he sayd unto mee, the waters which thou sawest: Hitherto the expo∣sition of the Beast: that of the whore followeth: and first in respect of the whole dominion, & the same flourishing in this verse. Waters which he mentioneth in the first verse he expoundeth to be people, multitudes, nations and tongues, that is, nations of every tongue obeying Rome the Empresse. So the Prophets are wonte to signify a great multitude of people, as waters doo come up from the North, and become a swelling flood, Ier. chap. 47.2. And of right doo they attribute this name unto them, because of the notable varietie, inconstan¦cy, and often chāging of their opinions, as of waves tossed with the wind: whose troublous motions are greater, then of any arme or straigth of the sea, as saith the Oratour. These therfore are the waters of the whore ruling farre and neere, what kinde of dominion shee had once, while her age & favour was flourishing: in the last times, when olde age should disfigure her forehead with wrinkles, they should become farre more shallow, & narrower, as followeth in the next verse. ¶ Where the whore sitteth: That is, upon which the whore sitteth, as in the first verse. But nations & tongues are said two for one, as though he should say, nations of divers tongues. 16 And the tenne hornes which thou sawest on the Beast: Now he commeth to the afflicted condition of the whore; declaring by whom it shalbe brought
upon her, and how: to which he addeth a common cause, the will of God in the next verse. As touching the words, in stead of upon the Beast, the Compl. edition, which Montanus and Plantine followeth, doth reade, and the Beast, as if the Beast himselfe at length should hate the whore: contrary un¦to Aretas reading, the vulgar Latine, and Theod. Beza from the authori∣ty of very many copies, and in very deed contrary to the manifest trueth: for, by the desolation of the whore, which he foresheweth here, the Spirit understandeth that calamity that shalbe brought upon the Kingdome of the Beast, by the vial poured out upon his Throne, chap. 16.10.11. Therefore how can the Beast shew himselfe a helper for to abolish and roote out the whore, as it followeth from the false reading, whose fall he shall take so grievously and immoderately, that he shall gnawe his tōgue for exceeding great griefe? Furthermore, Iohn saw the woman sitting upon the Beast, at what time shee commeth forth to condemnation and punishment. When then shalbe this se∣parating of company, which they would have, when so great a concorde remaineth even to the last destruction? VVherfore it is a vaine thing, which Bellarmine endevoureth to stablish from this place, that Rome is not the seate of Antichrist, because Antichrist shall hate the whore, which he granteth to be Rome. For he shall not hate, saith he, his owne seate. But the whole assumption is manifestly false, and leaneth upon no other thing, then a corrupt reading. But why dareth he now depart from the vulgar Latine, which with so great praises hee extolleth elsewhere, and the Coun¦cill hath decreed to be authenticall alone? The force of the trueth hath compelled him to seeke all corners, which if by any meanes he could a∣voide, he knew pardon would easily be gotten of the Councill. VVhere∣fore they which shall hate the whore are the tenne hornes, not the Beast together with them. For the relative of the neuter antecedent is masculine, because by these hornes, men are to be understood. But as in the warre against the Lambe, that was attributed to the tenne Kings, which was done onely by the labour of one, ver. 14. So all are said to hate the whore, and at length to torment her with the last slaughter, which neverthelesse is peradvēture the commendation of one of these. For there are not wonte to be many Emperours togither of the same dominion. And it may be, that even at the rising of the Beast, the tenne first Emperours were famous for good will toward the Pope: so contrariwise, nigh his ende the tenne last shalbe for a certaine peculiar hatred to the whore; the last whereof shall burne her with fire. But I say the last, not as though they should cease when the Pope ceaseth, but because they shalbe no longer his hornes, whose nowe they are counted: from which it is manifest, that the Turke is not hee, by
whom Rome shall utterly perish: but one of the Emperours, to whō these hornes agree in beginning, progresse, and end. Neither indeede would the Turke, if he knew to provide for himselfe, attempt any thing against Rome: as long as shee shal cōtinue safe, our armies shall doo him no har∣me. Take yee an example o Christians, from that victory at Karesta, a few yeeres since, to wit, in the yeere 1596. What was the cause that overcom∣ming, ye ranne away headlong by a sudden terrour? Why when the Turks sled, and left their campe and tents three whole dayes in the fieldes with∣out any keeper, on the other side you should runne with violence into a most desperate flight? Some men in time past knew not to use doubtfull victory; but after the enemies slaine and disconfited and undoubted victo¦ry, for the conquerrers to betake them to their heeles; this exemple, I be∣leeve, may be the first, not seen, nor heard before. A thing to be greatly wondered at, but the reason wherof is not unknowne. This rodde is not to be burnt, untill both the Idolatry of the West be forsaken by repentance, and Rome the fountaine & beginning of this impiety, be destroyed with the last punishment. The cruel enemy was sent into the earth for this cau∣se, as wee learned from the ende of the ninth chapter. Neither was any o∣ther fruit of the Hungary expedition to be expected, when the standart of the chiefe Captaine Archduke Maximilian was marked on the one side with the Image of blessed Mary, with the inscription of the Patronesse of Hungary. Impiety doubtlesse drawen from the cup of the fornication of Rome: but learne now by experience, how litle it is to your profit, the true Patrone of hea∣ven and earth being left, to take unto them other Patrones, with excee∣ding great iniury to the Saincts. Certenly this Patronesse made you con∣querers to runne away. Be ye wise at length, and convert your wrath a∣gainst Rome, which maketh you a pray by this fraude. This cuppe of for∣nication, and shoppe of Idolatry being taken away, there shalbe no need of our armies to punish the cruel Turke: but destructiō shal come to him frō some other place; so as he shal cause no trouble even after, to the Chri∣stian name. Neither doo I speake these things of my selfe rashly, but part∣ly those things which have ben said before in chap. 16.13. & in other pla¦ces, partly those things which folow, declare to be most certaine. Where∣fore, thou most High Emperial Maiesty, to whom it shalbe peradventure very profitable to be delivered from this enemy; and you the rest of the Christian Princes, understand at length, by what way you may procure, as to your selves honour and tranquility, so quietnesse and ioy to the whole Christiā world. You have failed hitherto in setting upon the enemy. Draw your swordes against Rome; and Constantinople shal never procure you
any trouble. Burne ye the whore and bring her to ashes; then shall ye see the brethren to come from the East part, whom the world yet litle or no∣thing mindeth, of which the Turke shalbe punished with the last univer∣sal slaughter, for all their abominations and horrible cruelty. The fift and sixt vial of the former chapter, gave some tast of this thing, of which the first declareth the desolation of Rome, the second, that the caling of the Iewes, shal come by and by after. Which, what it availeth to that thing which I speake of, shall appeare in his places more cleerly. At length, weigh dili∣gently the things that are written. I would not dare, being unknowne, and even at home of no fame, speake unto most famous Princes, the lights of the countries, concerning a matter of so great moment, unlesse confi∣dence in the divine trueth had encouraged mee. Which I submit to the cē∣sure of all equal iudges. Wherfore if after diligent tryall, ye shal find out that which is brought, to be true & certen, deliver at length, by the name of God the most afflicted Eupope, both from the firebrand of civil warre, which this whore carrieth about, and also from the most iust matter of ex∣ternal warre. Addresse your selves against Rome, and destroy her, as being a most certen destruction both of the bodies and soules of all those, who are trained up in her wicked ordinances. ¶ Shal hate the whore: Hitherto by whom the whore is to be tormented: now by what meanes; wherof there be five degrees, hatred, forsaking, naked∣nesse, eating, burning. As touching hatred, why should they not worthily de∣test the Sorceresse, who hath made the Kings of the earth mad with her Cir¦cean cuppe? Which is the butcheresse of the Saincts, the onely fortresse of the Turkes, very Sodome, Aegypt, and the City which crucified Christ our Lord? Of all which things this Revelation hath convinced and condē∣ned her most evidently. But they shall make her desolate and naked; partly by forsaking her, partly by ministring no aide against the assault of the ene∣my. They shall eate her flesh, by taking cleane away her yeerly revenues, and in prohibiting afterward the Romish markets in thir countreys: perad∣venture also by taking againe Romandiola, the countrey Picenum, now called Marca de Ancona, and Sena, commonly called Peters Patrimonie, & the rest of Italy being of the dominion of the Empire, wherof the Beast once wiped the Emperours by fraud and subtilty. The Venetians in the di¦vision of the Empire were left free, by the consent of both the Emperours, counted of neither of their iurisdictions. They of the Citie Bononia, they of Florence, they of Genua, they of Luca, and some others, bought their freedome with money; but by what right doth Rome chalenge her territories? Have the Emperours given them unto her?
In such wise, as Constantine the Great gave to blessed Silvestre and his suc∣cessours his Palace, the Citie of Rome, and all the Provinces, places and Cities of Italy, or of the Countries in the west part. But graunt that Pipin & Charles gave them through ignorance; for the weale, as they thought, of Christian piety: but after that it hath bene knowne by experience, that nothing hath redounded more to the destruction therof, why may they not take their owne againe, and get frō the whore the wages of her whore∣dome? But the Princes have no need to be taught what is their right, if o∣nely they would open their eyes, that they might acknowledge the whore such as shee is in very truth. And who seeth not that these things were be∣gun ever since the time of Charles the V. whom I suppose to be the first of these tenne last hornes; especially from that moment, in which he was over∣come of the Lambe by the armes of the Protestants? Of him God would have that Rome, though a fewe yeeres before, should be taken, and mise¦rably sacked, by the Prince of Borbon, as it were for an example, & pledg of those things, which at length shee should suffer at the hands of one of the tenne hornes, of which he leadeth the ranke. Ferdinandus, Maximilia∣nus, Rodulphus, who at this day enioy the Empire; if they have done no∣thing more grievous against Rome, they left her certenly forsaken & na∣ked. Tooke they up weapons for her sake? Suffered they not frely their subiects, the Romish superstition being reiected, to professe true religiō? But now they shall succeede next, who shall eate her flesh, that is, who shall not onely suffer her to lie naked and forsaken utterly, but also shall deale with her by violence, and shall no longer provide for her profits in their dominions, but shall hold it sufficient for subiects to pay tributes to their lawfull Princes; yea peradventure shal enter an action against her, requi∣ring againe the things, that I made mention of even now. And at length shall one rise up, who shal consume her with fire, as which cannot be purged with any other nitre; which day commeth with speed, as may be under∣stood from the things before spoken: but wee shal heare of a nigher term from the things following. 17 For God hath put in their harts: Now he sheweth the fountaine, & wher∣upon the Emperours should be for so long a time, so obedient, and why at length they should alter their mindes; both commeth from him, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings. He in his iust iudgement blindeth whom he will, and bestoweth the light of trueth on others, whom he will embra¦ce with his trueth. But, which thing is almost incredible, that the elect might be more assured of this future iudgement, he setteth before their eyes the remēberance of the time past, saying, God hath put into their hearts
to give their Kingdome to the Beast, until the words of God be fulfilled; as though he should say, as ye know for a surety that overpassed consent of the Em∣perours unto humble service, so certen is this future alienation of their mindes, and at length that final destroying, which I spake of: There is one and the same authour of both. Neither let us take it grievously, if the iud∣gement seeme to stay long; the divine wisdome hath set a time, which to accuse of too much slackenes, would be a token of overhastie desire, and importunate wish: for until, saith he, the words of God be fulfilled, that is un¦til the decree shalbe ended and accomplished, which by his word he hath foreshewed to be hereafter. VVherby is signifyed the time of the fift vial, at the powring out wherof, shalbe fulfilled all those things touching the whore: which wilbe shortly, seing our times have reached unto the fourth, as wee have shewed in the former chapter. 18 And the woman which thou sawest: So was the interpretation of the Dominion; now of the Palace: which, all circumstances omitted, declareth most playnely that this woman is the great City, which raigneth over the Kings of the earth. Therfore this Citie is not the whole state of the wicked, whose dominion is no more famous over the Kings, then over the multitude of people: but a City in deed wel knowen for her rule over the highest among mortal men: and so much the more because these words are in stead of an interpretation; neither is the Spirit wont to give an exposition darker thē the things that are to be expounded. Therfore it is a city properly so cal∣led, great indeede, and the Lady of other Princes; there can be no other such Head City in the Christian world then Rome, an abridgement of the whole world; the Queene of the nations, Lady of Kings, and once in warres, now in superstition the chiefe: to whom, even in this decrepite age, her former large possessions being greatly minished, the Emperours, Spanish, Frēch. and Polonian Kings yet submit themselves, besides other Princes of infe∣riour degree. Therfore this whore can no longer be hid, shee is found out at length, shee hath ben warned to come to her tryal, shee hath appea∣red, her cause is heard, shee is found guilty, shee is condemned to be burnt. I have exhibited unto you the sealed writings of the publike actes; neither doo any thing now remaine but the last punishement, which is to be left to them, for whom God hath reserved this glory. So at length wee have now seen the true face of the whore and Antichrist; it remaineth that wee examine in few words what the Papists teach concerning these things, and especially because if this one cause be throughly knowe & try∣ed, the discerning of all other things shalbe easie. For if the Pope of Rome be Antichrist, what need is there to contende about the Church of Rome, a∣bout
the seven Sacraments about free will, about good workes, or about any o∣ther point in controversie? It is evident inough to all men, that the do∣ctrine of Antichrist is to be suspected, avoided, detested. Therfore my brethrē strike at this roote, throw your axes against it with al your might. This one controversie is inough for us. All the branches shalbe cut down togither with the tree, with much labour spared; in which respect I will not be loth to digresse to this point a little while. A refutation of the Antichrist which Bellarmine des∣scribeth, and confirmeth by such arguments as he can, in his 3. book of the Bp. of Rome. Chap. 1. Of the common name of Antichrist. ALTHOVGH, I suppose, it cannot be obscure unto any, that dsirous of the trueth, hath diligently marked the things before written, but that the Pope of Rome is the great Antichrist, and how long he hath so been: yet least the mist, wherby the Papists endevour to hide the trueth, should dazel the sight of any; I have thought it expedient, be∣fore I goe on with the rest of the interpretation, to scatter it all into thinn aier; that so the Sun may henceforward shine with clear beams on whom∣soever. Bellarmine deduceth this whole question into nine chiefe points: of which the first is Of the nme of Antichrist; the second, whither Antichrist be one man, or a kind of men? The third, of the time of his comming, and death; The fourth, of his proper name; The fift, of what stock he is to be born, and by whō he is cheifly to be received; The sixt, where he shall fixe his seate; The seventh, of his doctrine and manners; The eight, of his miracl s; The ninth, of his reign and warrs. What is to be minded of these all, and how the desperate Papists ar deceived in every of them, may be manifest to any, by the things which the Angel hath taught us in the former chapter; touching the condem∣nation of the whore. For if Antichrist be come, and hath fixt his seate at Rome, ever since the Empire was taken away from the hethen Emperours: then can it not be doubted, but Antichrist, in a common name, is a secret adversary; an impious Kingdome, and not one singular man; that the time of his coming is past, and not now to come; that his proper name is
Lateinos; that he is not to be born of the Iewes stock, nor to reign other∣where then at Rome; that his doctrine, is in name, Catholik and Christian; & that his mitacles, reign, and warrs, ar no other then we have had experi∣ence of these many ages But Antichrist came at the sayd time; for the An∣gel hath taugh us, that Antichrist is the Beast which was, and is not, & should ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and goe into destruction: chap. 17.8. And wee have shewed, that the Bp. of Rome, from the time of the Hethen Empe∣rours, hath long since undergone the three first of these fowr notable chā∣ges, giving most sure documents of the fourth also. Secondly, Antichrist is the sevēth head of the Beast, which next succeeded the hethen Emperours, who made the sixt, which then was when Ihon wrote; Rev. 17.10.11. Therfore so soon as they ceased, came forth he that had the dignity of the next head. Thirdly, the then hornes, which are ten absolute Kings, had their soveraingntie after that the sixt head was fallen; that is, after that the Hethen Emperours were expelled. For from the time that the Beast begā first to reign; they never wanted crownes, chap. 18.7. And crownes have place no where ells, but on the heads and hornes: therfore of necessitie so soon as they be taken away from them, they are transferred unto these. But seing the seventh head, that is Antichrist, receiveth power at the same howr, with the ten horns: it foloweth that then began he to exist, when the Roman Hethen tyrants ceased. Fourthly, the woman fled into the wil∣dernes, when the Dragon was cast out of heaven, that is, when the Hethē Emperours were deposed; as is largely declared in the 7.11. and 12. chap∣ters. And whom should she more fear and flee, than Antichrist? Therfore she getting her selfe into the wildernes, at his rising up: it plainly shew∣eth that Antichrist came at the same abdication of the Emperours. Fiftly, since the Hethen Emperours have been doon away, Rome hath most vā∣ted of the defense & patronage of the Pope. And at that time should this City be both the whore, dnd seat of Antichrist, when she should be caried of the Beast, and shine cheifly with his dignity. Sixtly, the consent of the whole Prophesie confirmeth it; which according to this account, very wel agreeth with it selfe, both in the whole, and in al the parts therof: wheras otherwise, as it were with members rent and torn asunder, it yeildeth a pourtrature of inexplicable confusion. Lastly, even the Papists themselves unwares doo acknowledge, that Antichrist hath drawn his original, frō this very beginnin. For whiles they boast of Constantines donation, and the whole West to be subiect to the Bishop of Rome: they shew sufficiently, by their own cōfession, about what time this Adversarie of Christ came forth. Now was poyson sown in the Church, as a voice from heaven said, as Platina
recordeth in the life of Sylvester. And if any doo obiect, that after this time ther were some godly Bishops, or at least weise tollerable: I answer, that Antichrist is not paticular men, but a certayn Kingdome and successiō; from which God may exempt according to his owne wil; wherin he shew¦eth the riches of his immesurable mercy. But al these things, we hav more largely handled and unfolden, in opening the words of the Apostle: now we would but gather them into a breif summ, that the things which were spoken dispersedly, being set under one view, might shew more clearly, how by the Apostles few words, al Popish and Iesuitish subtilties, as toucht with lightning from heaven, doo fly on fyre, and come to nothing. These therfore be the common arguments, and to be applyed unto al the chap∣ters of the disputation folowing: which we thought good to warn thee Reader of, that thou mayst set them rather from hence, unto every questi∣on, than that we should often repeat them. Things that properly belong to every place, we wil relate, as the matter shall require. Now therfore let us enconter with Bellarmine hand to hand, and not baulk any of his de∣maunds: that he may the better see how in vayn he hath tried his strength against the truth. The first cheife point is, of this common name of Antichrist: which he en¦forceth to signify one contrary to Christ; and not contrarie in what sort soever, but so, as that he striveth with him for seat and dignitie; that is, one which is Christs envious adversarie, and would be accounted the Christ, when he which is indeed the Christ, is cast down. The first part of which interpretation I easily grant, that Antichrist is one contrary to Christ: but wheras not content with this, he requireth such a contrariety as was between Marius & Sylla, Pompey & Caesar, that openly warred one with an other; the Spirit convinceth that of falshood, teaching that the Beast hath two horns like the Lamb, Revel. 13.11. that he is a false Prophet, and that it is a point of singular wisdome, to knowe and perceive the Beast; Here is the mind, saith he, that hath wisdome: Revel. 17.9. Can any man be so blockish, that if opē warre be waged against Christ, he should not know his enemie? Need any man be deceived, wher the matter is carried by professed force? The great Antichrist shal deceive more than he shal compel: he shal come with al deceaveablenes of unrighte∣ousnes among them that perish, saith th'Apostle, 2 Thes. 2.10. wherto the A∣pocalypse agreeth, and he shal seduce the inhabitans of the earth, chap. 13.14. Shal this seducer have his deceits and sleights in open view? Nothing is more contrary to his disposition. Be it therfore that ther is some Anti∣christ, which wil openly vaunt himselfe to be Christ: yet is not this the pro¦perty of the Great Antichrist. But think not therfore that any goeth be∣fore
him in wickednes. The Divil hurteth more under the shape of an An∣gel of light: then under the horrible hiew of a Dragon. But you goe about to prove the thing, three manner of wayes. First be¦cause the name Antichrist, cannot by any meanes signify Christs Vicar. For Anti in composition, never signifyeth subordination, as is manifest by the exemples of all such names. But a Vicar signifyeth not opposition but subordination: and the Pope is Christs Vicar; and therfore not Antichrist. I answer; Though I should grant you that Antichrist cannot signify Christs Vicar: yet were the Pope no whit the further from being Antichrist. For the argument is framed of an aequivocation; and therfore concludeth nothing. In the first proposition, you put a true and proper Vicar, such as Antichrist in deede cannot be; who is a malicious, although a secret enemy; that it is a true name wher∣by the Scriptures doo describe him, of Adversary, Man of sin, Angel of the bottomlesse pit, & Beast. In the second, you assume a Ʋicar, not naturall & lawful, but one that is such by wicked ambition, sacrilegious usurpation, and false boasting. From which no other thing can be concluded than this, that the Pope is not Antichrist by his own confession; which I easily graunt you. For we reason not, I trow, by what name Antichrist shal call himselfe: but, what name he is worthy of, and what the Scriptures give unto him. It is not to be exspected, that he will bewray himselfe, and free∣ly confesse that he is the man of sin, the son of perdition, the Angel of the bottom¦lesse pit, the Beast, and the like: which if he should doo, verily he should not play the false Prophet. Fayrly therfore have you freed your Pope, in ar∣guing that he is not Antichrist by his owne testimony. Secondly I answer, that it is false which you affirm of the signification of this word Anti, (though now it be little to the purpose what force it hath;) which I will make playn also by examples. Antimist hotos, is one that is hyred in an o∣ther mans sted; Antibasileus, is a Vice-roy, or one in the Kings stead: Anti∣strategos, is the Lievtenant, or he that is in stead of a Captayn; as H. Ste∣phen sheweth in Thes. Graec. even the same that Hypostrategos is with Ap∣pio in Anabaic: and the same that Propraetor, as Budaeus teacheth, from Demosthenes. Antuputhos is the Deputie or Proconsul. In al which Anti signifyeth subordination. But, say you, Hypostrategos, is an equal Captaine, even as with the Latines Propraetor and Proconsul signifyeth not the vicar of the Pra¦tor or Consul, but he that is the same in a Province, which a Praetor or Consul is in a City: and that herein Musculus was deceived, who because he read that Antistra∣tegos signifyed a Propraetor, thought that it signifyed a Vicar of the Praetor, which is false. I answer; the first Proconsuls had but a deputed Magistracie in sted of others, as witnesseth L. Fenestella de Magistr. Rom. lib. 2. cap. 11. All
which time, saith he, the Proconsul exercised not an ordinary but a delegated juris∣diction: though after through custome it came to passe, that this Magistrate got a proper jurisdiction. And this is that which Dionys. Halicarnas. sayth in Ant. Rom. lib. 11. that the first Proconsuls were created in the third yere of the 84. Olympiad: though he had before made mention of T. Quintius created Pro∣consul in the second yere of the 79. Olympiad; that is, 21. yeres before; lib. 9. To weet, because these Proconsuls, as T. Quintius and the like, exercising but a power of thrust; were not to be reckned among the ordinary Magi∣strates, but those that after the limits of their governance proroged, had proper authority. And then of right caried they the dignitie granted, & the name of Magistrate. Yet those Proconsuls of-trust, were called An∣thupatoi, as appeareth by Dionysius speaking of this T. Quintius. Wher∣fore Musculus was not deceived in this as you say: but your selfe are egre∣giously beguiled, who through affection of oppugning the trueth, see not the thing that is most certen. Secondly, you prove it by scriptures, from which you rightly judge the signification of this name is to be cheifly fetched. And first you alledge, that he is caled Antichrist. which is exalted above all that is caled God, 2 Thes. 2.4. which certes, say you, is not to be the Vicar, but the enemy of Cgrist, the true God. I answer; First seing here is the same aequivocation in the word Vicar, which was before: this argument hath like force with the former, that is, none at al. Secondly I say, that to be exalted above all that is caled God, is fi∣guratively spoken, not properly. For the true God, is never caled al God, but one, as th'Apostle sayth, 1 Cor. 8.5.6. For though ther be which ar ca∣led Gods both in heaven and in earth, (as there are Gods many, and Lords many,) yet to us ther is but one God even the Father, and one Lord Iesus Christ. The other Gods which are many, are often caled, all; as Psal. 97.7. worship him all ye Gods. Therfore to be exalted above every God, is not above the one God in heaven, but above every God on earth, that is, above the civil Magistrate, to whom the Scriptures doo attribute the name of God. VVhich also is e∣vident by the word which foloweth (Sebasma) worship. For if God be takē properly, how is that set after, which is lesse? In distributions, that which is lesse, is wont to be set before; so that one can not rightly say, who is exal∣ted above every King or every subiect; but contrary, he that is exalted above e∣very subiect, or Ring. But taking God figuratively, the speech encreaseth ele∣gantly, thus; who is exalted above al Magistrates, and not onely the infe∣riour sort, but also above every worshipful Maiestie among men, even the highest Caesars; which are caled Sebastoi & Sebasmoi, 1. venerable. Finally, as touching the true God, how should Antichrist, acknowledging no God
but himselfe, sit in the Temple of that God? as the Apostle teacheth, 2 Thes. 2.4. Doubtlesse he would abolish the Temples of all those, whose names, and much lesse their worship and honour, he cannot abide. Nei∣ther should he be subtile, if he boasted himselfe superiour unto God in heaven; but in al mens iudgement, most doting and fanatical. Wherfore by these words, Antichrist should exercise his pride against the civil Ma∣gistrate, whom he would tread under his feet, as by too many lamentable examples your Pope of Rome hath doon. But this supreme eminency a∣bove al earthly powers, makes no necessity of open warr against Christ, but may very wel consist togither with the feigned humility of his Vicar. The second place is from 1 Iohn. 2.22. that he is caled Antichrist, which denieth Jesus to be the Christ; that is, say you, which denieth Jesus to be the Christ, that he may vaunt himselfe to be the Christ. I answer; this interpretation is Iesui∣tical, that is, quite from the purpose of the holy Apostle. You wil have this denyal to be open, manifest, impudent: the Apostle seemeth to signi∣fy no such matter, but rather al things contrary. For it was of men which newly and privily had crept in, of whom the faithfull scarsely suspected a∣ny such thing; but had need to be warned, that many Antichrists were come already, ver. 18. It was of them which went out from us, but were not of us; ver. 19. that is, which bare the name of Christians, as did Ebion, Cerinthus, and others of that leven, who reteyning Christs name, could not openly deny him, but onely privily and trecherously. Finally, it was of such an An¦tichrist, as should deny alike the Father and the Son, as ver. 22. But he would not openly deny the Father, for so he should manifest himselfe un∣to al, to be altogither Godlesse, contrary to that which the Apostle tea∣cheth, that he should sit in the Temple of God. Therfore, when the Apostle speaketh of a privie denyal, and you would wrest it unto that which is put before al mens eyes: you shal get nothing from this place, but a proof un¦to us of your egregious skil, to conclude from any thing, whatsoever you lyst. The third place is from Mat. 24.5. For many shal come in my name, saying, J am Christ: and againe vers. 24. For ther shal arise false Christs: from which you gather that he shal affirme himselfe to be Christ, which surely, say you, is not the part of a Vicar, but of an adversary. I answer; this Vicar is very fertile unto fraud, that corrupteth so many arguments with the ambiguity thereof. For here it dallyeth as it did before, with the divers acception of the word. But besides that, why doo you not observ, that many shal come in Christs name? and that false Christs shal arise? Our Lord treateth not of one singu∣lar man: but sheweth that many shal arrogate to themselves his name of
Christ. If these things therfore be spoken of the very Antichrist, then sure∣ly he shalbe no one singular man. So this place, in sted of gayn which you hoped for, turneth to your dammage. Our Lord chiefly noteth out the Antichrists of the Iewes: whose impudency, though it should be greater, yet the hurt by them should be lesser, then that which should redounde from the great Anichrist. But we shal hav occasion hereafter to interpret this place: in the meane while, these Scriptures doo help your cause no∣thing at all. Your third argument, is from al authors which have written of Antichrist; & from the consent of al Christians: And in sted of them al, you mention of the ancients Damascen, and Hierom; and Henry Stephen of our writers. I re∣turn to you agayn, of the ancient Fathers, this one S. Ephrem, (whom Ie∣rom celebrateth with the praises of an high witt) that hence forth you boast no more so lavishly of al authors. Thus speaketh he in his sermon of Antichrist: Jn this habit shall the foul theif come. For that the deceiver and deceit∣ful speaker, may deceive al men; he wil feighn himsefe humble, courteous, despising unrighteousnes, shuning Idols, making a shew of piety, benigne, poor, studious, fayr beyond al admiration, gentle, cheerful unto al men. These things saith he. Where now is that open warr, with this notable Iugler? where is that manifest pride, wherby this deep dissembler of humility, should lift up himselfe a∣bove every God? where is that manifest tyranny, with this iust, pious, be∣ningn, poor, and courteous fellow in shew towards al men? If I would serch the iudgements of the rest; I doubt not but you should wāt much of your summe of al authors. As for H. Stephen, he acknowledgeth the word to have this force, that he iudgeth them also to be reckned by the name of Antichrists, which thou they professe the name of Christians, yet are in deed the e∣nemies of Christ, whiles they adulterate his doctrine with many forgeries. For how∣soever they boast of Christ with their mouth, yet in hart they desire his overthrow: and especially they which with wicked boldnes doo invade his royal seat: and likewise they which derogate from his godhead. These be his words; none of which, but doo very well fit the Bp. of Rome. From al which thus disputed, you now gather up your first argument against us adversaries: and least the whole should not agree with the parts, you conclude with the same fine equivo∣cation, that you trimmed al the former with, after this manner: The name of Antichrist signifyeth an enemy and rival of Christ: But the Pope of Rome profes∣seth himselfe Christs servant, and subiect to Christ in al things: Therfore he is not Antichrist: to weet, by his owne confession: which who so yeildeth not, let him be Anathema. For so you might more rightly have established this most sure conclusion, than the Fathers of Trent, doo their canons. But
know, I pray you, Bellarmine, that continual equivocating, is intolera∣ble trifling. Chap. 2. That Antichrist shal not be any one certayn man. THE second chapter maketh Quaere, whither Antichrist properly so caled, be one certayn man: or a singular throne, and tyrannical Kingdome. The Pa∣pists al doo think, he shalbe one certayn man. But those cōmon argumēts, which we set down in the beginning of this disputation, doo evince the contrary. For if Antichrist have reigned from about the 300 yere of our Lord, unto this day, as is sufficiently shewed; then is he no one singular person. Moreover, if any wil but mind those streights of time, the ampli∣tude of this dominion, the multitude of things that are to be done, togi∣ther with the greatnes, which the Papists doo in their fiction apply to An¦tichrist: he wil wonder that men can so dote, as to thinke that all these things are to be found in one person. But besides, a part of his reigne is a thousand yeres, as shal after be shewed, chap. 20.4.5. Let us see therfore, with what reasons you confirme your opinion. You alledge for this purpose, Scriptures and Fathers. The Scriptures are five; the first out of the Gospel of Iohn, 5.43. J am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if an other come in his owne name, him ye wil receive. These words, you say, are to be understood of the true Antichrist, and that both by the testimony of certain Fathers, and by the propriety of the words themselves. I answer; as touching the Fathers, I like not to discusse their opinions. It would be long, and not much to the purpose: for al men doo confesse, which are not wilfully blind, that in this matter of Antichrist, they erred much, through darknes of the times. Let us insist upon the sure way of finding out the trueth by the Scriptures, which neither can deceive, nor be deceived. What therfore is that force of the words, which requireth to have him one singular person? This you endevour to shew fowr wayes. First, because our Lord opposeth to himselfe, an other man; that is, person to person; as appeareth by his words, J, an other; in my name, in his owne name; me, him. As therfore Christ was one singular man: so shal Antichrist bee. I answer; the force of this Argument lyeth in three opposite words, an other, in his owne name, him: of which the two last depend on the first: for what respect this hath, the same the other wil have, seing al are referreth to the same thing. But an other, denoteth not one singular person, as Grammarians teach, which
give this rule, that  the other is spoken of twayn: but  an other, of more then twayn. Ammonius de simil. & differ. vocabulis. Therfore frō this certayn and true rule it necessarily foloweth; that one certayn man is not here meant. Neither is this a decree of Grammarians onely: but the custome of speaking in the Scriptures dooth also confirme it, to omitt in∣finite other examples: as One soweth, and an other reapeth, Is here meant one sower, one reaper? Nay, Christ sayth, J have sent you to rep that, wherin yee laboured not: others have laboured, and yee ar entred into their labours: Iohn 4.37, 38. So, to one is given the word of knowledge, to an other faith, to an other the gift of healing, to an other power to doo great works, to an other Prophesie, &c. 1 Cor. 12.8.9.10. You wil not say, I trow, that these gifts were proper to singular men, but common to many. In like sort Paul sayth, Jf anie other see¦meth to have wherof he may trust in the flesh, much more J. Phil. 3.4. He com∣pareth not himselfe with a singular man, but with any one of many. You provide very evil for your cause, to fetch confirmation from thence, whēce it is most overthrown. Secondly you say, Christ here saith, that Antichrist shalbe received of the Iewes: and it is evident, that the Iewes doo exspect one certayn and singular man. I answer, ther is nothing at al sound in this reason. For neyther is this great Antichrist, whom the Apocalypse speaketh of, and of whom we intreat; he whom the Iewes shal receive; as is playn by the things spoken before, and shalbe mor largely declared hereafter: neither is the Antichrist of the Iew¦es, one certayn and singular man: for manie shal come, saith Christ, in my name, saying I am Christ: where he speaketh chiefly of them that should rise among the Iewes, Mat. 24.5. Also their own History sheweth, that more than one, have been counted for the Christ, which have sacrilegiously cha¦lenged the name of the Messias to themselves. And as touching their exspe¦ctation, this dooth no more prove one singular person, then the Papists exspectation proveth him to be one certayn man. We doo exspect, that you should bring forth some thing more firm, than your foolish exspe∣ctations. Thirdly you say, that Al false Prophets have come in the name of an other, not in their own name; Therfore Antichrist, which shal come by a special manner in his owne name, is one singular person. I answer, Antichrist shal come in no other manner, as touching his name, than al the other false Prophets. For name is not an appellation or title, but authority; as is manifest by the opposite branch therof, to weet, the name of the Father: J am come, sayth Christ, in my Fathers name, that is, not with the Fathers appellation, as if I were the Fa∣ther, but by the mission and authority of the Father. So, to come in his
owne name, is not to boast of the proper title of his name, but to come in his own authority, no lawful power being given him of God. And thus doo al the false Prophets come both in the name of an other, & in their owne name. In the name of an other feighnedly and counterfeitly; in that they falsely boast of a sending: but in their owne name, in very deed: be∣cause they have none but their owne authority, and run when they are not bidden, as sayth the Prophet. Wherfore there wil be no difference in this thing, between Antichrist; and the other false Prophets his companions. Fourthly you say, Our Lord would not have sayd, If an other come; but many come; if he would have spoken of false Prophets. I answer, Christ by this word an other, signifyeth that many shal come: for it is a nown partitive of mul∣titude, as we have shewed. Neither could that swarm of False-Christs, which he mentioneth in Mathew, be intimated more breifly and signifi∣cantly, than in this maner. But as you, by your supposed silence, (which yet perhaps you now perceive is lowder uttered than you would,) doo en¦devour to establish one singular person: so give me leave, I pray you, by Christs true silence, to overthrow most certainly, the same singular per∣son. For doo you think, that Christ in Mat. 24. instructing his Disciples so diligently of future evils, even until his coming, and specially of False Prophets, from whom much danger should arise: would not so much as one word make mention of this one singular man, so cruel a plague, of whom it behooved them most of al to beware? It is certayn therfore that this whole dream of one singular Antichrist was an errour in the ancient writers, and is madnes in you, that wil persevere in the errour. Hitherto of the first Scripture. The second is that of Paul, 2 Thes. 2.3. Except ther come a departing first, and that that man of sin be disclosed, even the son of perdition &c. and afterward ver. 8. and then shal the wicked man be revei¦led, whom the Lord &c. where, you say, the Apostle speaketh of a certayn & par∣ticular person, as appeareth by the Greek articles . For the Greek articles draw the signification unto one certain thing: and therfore you marvel that our men, which boast of skil in the tongues, perceived not this. I an∣swer; it is true in deed, the Greek article hath his force, to recal & restrein so unmeasured & uncertain a motion, unto some certayn thing: but this certayn thing, is as wel a certayn genus, as a certain individuum or singular, according to the nature of the thing in hand. Wherupon we novices doo think this new and unheard of, that the Greek article should alwayes si∣gnify some singular individuum. Shal  be one singular sower, one singular reaper? Iohn 4.37. or  one particular sin entring into the world; and  one singular death? Rom. 5.12. or  one theef?
Ioh. 10.10. We are furnished now by master Iesuite with a new rule; which no Grecian, I think, did ever so much as dream of. Our dull men observed not this thing: doubtlesse this garlond was reserved for you, whose name is worthy, for this notable observation, to be registred in the next edition among the Jnventors of things. But, you say, Epiphanius teacheth this same, Her. 9. which is of the Samaritans, saying, that  signifieth a man in common: but , a singular man. I answer, this iniury of yours is not to be suffred, that you doo to the learned man, whom you would blemish with so notorious ignorāce. Epiphanius teacheth no otherwise in this thing than al other learned men.  &c. Where the article, saith he, is adioined to anie one definite and most evident thing, there is verilie a certayn Emphasis, or force, for the article: but without the article, the word is to be taken indefinitely of any cōmon thing. Even as, if we should say  King: we expresse the name, but doo not cleerly shew anie definite one. For we say King of the Persians, and of the Medes, and of the Elamites. But if with apposition of the ar¦ticle, we say  the King: it is out of doubt what is signified. For by the ar∣ticle is intimated that King of whom the question, or speech was, or which is known, or which ruleth in any country. In like manner  God, and  the God:  man, and  the man,  dead, and  the dead, and so in the rest. Epiphanius therfore meaneth that by the article ther is denoted some¦thing spoken of before, famous, wel known, being in questiō or in speech, but it never came into his mind, much lesse did he ever write, that everie word is by this circumscription of the article, alwayes tied to a singular person. An article, like a Iesuite, can put on any habit, according to the variety of time and place. Wheras therfore you marvel that our mē which boast, as you say, of skill in the tongues, could not perceive this: I mar∣vel rather that you, a man exercised in learning, famous in scholes, a pro∣fessor of controversies, on whose mouth almost the whole popish nation dependeth: should so misse, in a childish rudiment. But desire of getting victory, letted you from seing the truth. One way ther is to wipe out your reproch, if you wil be a mean to persuade your men hereafter, to conclu∣de any thing rather from these articles, than one singular person. The third place is 1 Iohn 2.18. Yee have heard that the Antichrist () shal come, and even now are there many Antichrists: wher the article you say, is set before Antichrist properly so caled: but none before him as he is cō∣monly taken: and therfore, that the first is one certayn person, but this later in ge∣neral is al heretiks. I answer, the greatest succour of this cause seemeth to consist in this new feigned force of the article; and therfore have wee the coleworts twise sodden set againe before us. But we have sufficiently refu∣ted
this your eyther ignorance or craftynes, in the argument nex before, with which this is altogither one and the same. Yet least you should com∣playn that you have no answer; Be it, that  the Antichrist with an article, is some diverse thing from  Antichrists without an ar∣ticle; must it therfor by and by be one certayn persō? I deny such an ill co∣herent cōsequence. It may note out a singular kind of Antichrists, of whō the Apostles taught the Church so diligently: even as  the wicked is often a kind of wicked mē,  the tempter; and so in other. In which the article respecteth not one singular, but some thing common, & egre∣gious in his kinde. This might have bin manifest to you by Iohn himself, whiles he warneth that  the Antichrist was in his time: For ma¦nie deceivers are entred in the world, saith he, which confesse not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, he that is such a one is  the deceiver & the Antichrist, 2 Iohn. 7. where yet he speaks not of that chief Antichrist which was to come, but of some such like sorte. By which it sufficiently appeareth, that Antichrist with an article, is not a singular person. The fourth place is Daniel 7. and 11. and 12. Out of the 7. chapter, you take those things which are spoken of the little horn, ver. 8. &c. which, you say, are to be expounded of Antichrist, and that for two reasons. First from the authoritie of certain Fathers: then from the words of Daniel himselfe. I answer; as touching the authority of the Fathers, I know many learned men doo interprete these words of Antichrist: but this Apocalypse dispelleth the darknes, which taking away the sight before, suffred not to behold the thing it selfe. For it teacheth that that little horne, differeth much frō this Antichrist whom Iohn describeth. For Antichrist is one of the heads of the Beast, which is of many formes, both in Daniel and in Iohn: but a little horn, is onely some addition ioyned to the head. Moreover, this ariseth af¦ter the ten hornes: but Antichrist riseth togither and at one houre with al his. That, subdueth three horns under it; the other unsubdued, are eyther foes of the same, or at least freinds of equal power: but Antichrist is over al the 10. horns, which willingly serv him, until the appointed time. Fi∣nally, that is caled little: Antichrist is not litle, who hath power over every tribe, tongue, and nation: Apoc. 13.7. who also beareth the whore, to whom peoples, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues doo obey, and which reigneth over the Kings of the earth, Apoc. 17.15.18. But, you wil say, it may be it is caled litle in the beginning, not in the full age. I an∣swer, the chiefest heighth of dignity, when he shal most flourish, shal lift it self no higher, then over the 3. horns, which he shal depresse. Doubtles the Spirit would have made mention of moe, if he had had power over
moe. That horn therfore is not this Antichrist: but if we wil rightly consi∣der the thing, it is that Dragon of the sixt vial of this Apocalypse, chap. 16.13. namely the Turk; for of him and the other enemies that should oppress the Iewes, doth Daniel onely speak, without any mention of the Western Antichrist; as it may be, occasion wilbe given elswhere, to decla∣re more fully. This disparitie therfore, wil by no means suffer these two to convene in one. Wherupon you may now see, that we ar not so much to look, either who or how many they be that say a thing: as with what rea∣sons, they so perswade themselves. Secondly you say from the words of Daniel, chap. 7.24. that this An∣tichrist, (whom ancient writers wil have to be meant by the little horn;) is a singular person: for he is not caled one Kingdome, but one King: who of ten Kings that he should find in the world, should take three quite away, and subdue the other seven un∣der him. I answer, first, these last words and shal subdue the other seven under him, is a very bold comment, seing no footstep of them appeareth in Da∣niel. For he onely sayth, ver. 8. so that three of those former horns were rooted out from before him: and againe ver. 24. and three Kings shal he depresse: but of the subduing of the other 7. he no where maketh mention. And how, I pray you, should he be a little horn, if he should destroy three, and have cō∣mand over al the rest? These things are unadvisedly brought in by some old writers, but worse reteyned by you, for to darken the truth. But this is little to the purpose, for the force of the argument. Therfore, second∣ly I say, that it is false to affirme, because he is caled one King, he is one person: for the Angel before speaketh thus: These great Beasts which are fowr, are fowr Kings, that shal rise out of the earth: ver. 17. which yet are not fowr sin∣gular persons, but so many Kingdomes: as your self can not deny. The other place of Daniel is from chap. 11, ver. 21.— 36. where literal∣ly is treated of Antiochus Epiphanes: but allegorically (as Calvin, and Ciprian, and Jerom you say, doo interpret it,) of Antichrist, whose figure Antiochus did bear. Therfore seing he was one certayn and singular person; Antichrist also must be one certayn person. I answer; great in deede is the agreement of the wicked, and needs must many things in them be found alike, who are governed by one and the same Spirit; for which cause, those learned men avouched him to be the type of Antichrist, after a common sort: but that the Spirit inten∣ded him for the type properly, as he is wont in the other scriptures, I see not how it can be rightly said It hath not such agreement with that which they make the truth therof, as is wont to be found in other types. For ex∣ample: this Antiochus is the litle horn of the Goat, of whom it is said ch. 8.14. that he should rage two thousand and three hundred dayes. Shal this
be the type of Antichrist? Then shal he not reign onely three yeres and a halfe, but six yeres and more then an halfe; and so an other Antichrist is to be looked for, then yee yet feighn. Or if you wil have it, that al things are not so exactly answerable in the type and antitype: yet in a wise master-builder, this, I trow, must needs be required, that he make not the portch bigger then the house; that is, that the type reign not longer then the truth. I remember, that 390. dayes were given to Ezechiel for a signe of so many yeeres: but no where so many yeres to be given unto any for a si∣gne of so many dayes. Secondly I answer, let Antiochus be the type, yet can not one person be from thence cōcluded: seing one singular type may as wel note out many persons, as many persons one; as we see in that row of Levitical Preists, who al had relation unto one Christ, as unto their pro¦posed end. The third place of Daniel, is from chap. 12.11.12. wher the Angel saith, From the time that the dayly sacrifice shalbe taken away, and the desolating a∣bominatiō set up, ther shalbe a thousand two hundred ninetie dayes. Blessed is he that waiteth and cometh to the thousand three hundred five and thirty dayes. Of this place you add nothing, but rest in some mens interpretation, which have applied it unto Antichrist. These dayes you would have to be taken pro∣perly, and therfore that he is one singular person, whose reign is defined in so short a time. I answer, this number perteyneth nothing at al unto An¦tichrists reign for three yeres and an halfe, before the second coming of our Lord. For Daniel asketh, when the end shalbe of these marvelous things? wil you have the answer to be this: After the end of 1290. dayes, or at most, of 1335. before the last end of al things? what would such an answer teach? If one that is in a farr coūtry should ask which way he must goe to Rome; and an other should answer, when you come at the tenth stone from the city, you must turn this way or that, to the left hand or to the right: might not he wel think himself to be mocked? Or, if one should ask of any climate, how long the day is in that country; and answer should be made; about half an howr after sun setting: would he think himself sa∣tisfied? Even such an answer doo yee attribute to the Angel, whiles ye iud¦ge these to be common dayes, and to goe immediatly before the end of al things. Farr be it from us to think the holy Angel would so jestingly close up this divine vision, and specially the whole Prophesie. In none of these places therfore doo we find Antichrist so properly caled, much lesse his singular person. So much of the fourth Scripture. The fift and last is Apoc. 13. & 17. Which places, you say, are meant of Antichrist, for so teacheth Jreneus lib. 5. and
it is evident by the similitude of Daniels wrds and Iohns: who both of them make mention of ten Kings, which shalbe in the earth when Antichrist reign shal dure three yeeres and an half. As Daniel therfore speaketh of one certayn King: so dooth John in the Apocalypse. I answer, Ireneus iudgeth rightly, that the Apocalypse in the sayd places dooth treat of Antichrist: but you ar wrong, that would have such an Antichrist to be meant, as is in Daniel. I have shewed that these two doo differ many wayes, so as the one cannot be the other. Those ten hornes in Daniel, are not this Beast. Answerable in deede they are to the Dragons hornes; but the Beast hath not horns common with the Dragon. Moreover, that time, times and part of time in Daniel, is not the same space, with the like manner of speaking in Iohn. There it agreeth to the litle horn; here, to the Beast: which being divers, as we have shewed; it is not necessa¦ry that one and the same space should agree to them both. That designa∣tion of time in Daniel, answereth to that howr, momenth, & yere, Apoc. 9.15. al which space, is but a little part of this time, times, and halfe a time in the Apocalypse, as is sufficiently proved before. VVheras you urge the si∣militude of the words; it is even like as if one would conclude that the Pope is the Turk, because both of them be men, and have dominion over ma∣ny. Moreover, if I should graunt that one thing is handled by them both: yet speaketh not Daniel of one certayn King. You went about to prove such a matter even now; but in vain, as we have seen: and the thing it selfe, openly proclayms the contrary. For if the litle horn were a singular person, such as by your opinion the other ten must needs also be: what manner description of the Roman Empire were this, which omitting so manie a∣ges, should onely touch the estate of the last three yeres? Nay not of one of the three yeres indeede; seing you wil have this Empire to be quite de∣stroied, before Antichrist come. Therfore the Scriptures afford you not one word, wherby you may with sound reason conclude that Antichrist shalbe a certain man: but we have by them most certenly shewed, that it is the apostatical seat of those that wil dominier in the Church. Your second argument is from the Fathers; unto whom how should a∣ny give credit when they affirm him to be a certain and singular man: se∣ing some of them knew not, whither he should be a mā at al, or no? Some wil have him to be the Divil; some, a Divil incarnate: some Nero; & others, I know not what. And think you that we must beleeve these men, if they say he shalbe a certain person? Moreover, seing by the scriptures, no such thing, but the contrary dooth appear: what account should we make of the uncertain coniecture of men, who ar bidden not to be wise above that which is written? 1 Cor. 4.6.
These therfore I wil leave unmedled with; and very wel might I doo the like with your answers unto our men, seing they touch none of those things which I have set down concerning this matter: yet that you maie perceive your self to be no lesse weak a fenser, than you have been a foiner; I wil bestow on you a little payns in the examining of your answers. You propound three arguments of our men: two of Theod. Beza; the third, of Iohn Calvin. First, Beza reasoneth thus, that Antichrist is not a∣ny one man, because the mysterie of iniquity wrought even in Pauls time, and Anti∣christ is to be killed at the coming of Christ. You answer, that Antichrist began to range abroad in the Apostles time, not in his owne person, but in his forerunners, to weet, Simon Magus, Nero, and the like. VVherto I say, that Theod. Beza and al our men doo confesse the Antichrist properlie so caled, was not in the Apostles time, but onely his fore runners. For that which he sayth, Let them shew me some one that continueth alive from Pauls time, unto the day of iudge∣ment, is spoken after the common manner, as by way of large amplificati∣on; and is to be understood of some one that should come soon after, that age. And was not he to be born shortly after, whose forerunners made such a tumult, while the Apostles lived? The Apocalypse speaking of Antichrist, under that seventh head, saith, and the other is not yet come: cha. 17.10. which manner of words we are wont to use in things so neer as they may seem to be come, though as yet they are not come: and not of things that are to fal out fifteen hundred yeres after. Idle therfore are all those things that you gather of Peter and Paul to be Antichrists; and of Simon, and Nero to be Christs. Why prove you not, I pray you, that the rising of Antichrist was not then neer? Is not this ynough to refell his sin∣gular person, if he were to beginn a few ages after Paul? But you, like a rude fenser, bear off with your bukler from the part which you ar not layd at; but where you are beaten even unto death, you leav your self unfensed and bare. The second argument of Th. Beza is, that by the singular names of Beasts, the Bear, the Lion, the Libbard in Daniel chap. 7. ar not meant singular Kings, but singular Kingdomes, wherof one did conteyn even many Kings. After the same manner therfore Paul 2 Thes. 2. who marvelously agreeth with Daniel: by the man of syn, and son of perdition, meaneth not one singular person, but a certen bo∣dy as it were of many tyrants. You answer two things: First denying that Daniel alwayes by singular Beasts, dooth mean singular Kingdomes: for in the 8. chapter, by the Ram, he meaneth Da¦rius the last King of the Persians: by the Goat-buck Alexander the Great. Second∣ly, you deny the consequence of the argument: because Paul, by the man of sin, mea∣neth not any of the 4. beasts described by Daniel, but onely that litle horn.
I answer to the first: It is false that which you say of the Ram and the Goat-Buck. For by the Ram is meant the whole Kingdome of the Medes & Per∣sians, and which ended in Darius: by the Goat-Buck, the Kingdome of the Greeks, which began by Alexander. For so, saith he, ver. 3. there stood bfore the river one Ram with two hornes; and his two horns were high, but one was higher than an other, and the highest came up last. These two hornes, at the two Kingdomes of the Medes and Persians; of which that was first & smal∣lest; this, last and largest. Have these things place in Darius onely, or in the whole Kingdome? Then it foloweth in the next verse; I saw the Ram pu¦shing against the West, & against the North, & against the South: so that no Beasts might stand before him, neyther did any deliver out of his hand, but he did what he listed, and that very great things. What did Darius of these things; who in the second yere of his reign, being provoked unto warr by Alexāder, wēt to ruine dayly? Last of al, explayning this vision in the 20. verse, he saith; The Ram which thou sawest with two horns, are the Kings of Media and Persia: he saith the Kings, not Darius onely. So also the Goat-Buck is the King∣dome of the Greeks; not Alexander alone. He is caled in deed King of Grae¦cia, ver. 21, but it is playn, that King there is taken collectively, as in other places, namely for Kingdome; as in the end of the verse it is taken partitive∣ly, when he saith, the horn between his eyes, is the first King; namely Alexan∣der; who seing he is the horn, he is not the whole Goat. Wherfore no where in Daniel is a singular person designed by a Beast, but a whole Kingdom. Vnto the second I say. By the Man of Syn, is not meant the litle horn, but the Beast. For Antichrist is the seventh head, which also is a Beast, as Apoc. 17.8.11. And although this Beast be none of those that ar in Daniel; yet the argument from the like is firm. For by the same reason that it is a whole Kingdome in Daniel, it is so likeweise in the Apocalypse. Our third argument is Io. Calvins; who thus gathered that Antichrist is no singular person; because, the head of the universal Apostasie, which du∣reth moe yeres than can be fulfilled under one King, is not one certain man. and An¦tichrist is the head of such an Apostasie. You answer five waies, that Calvins impudencie, as you say, may the more ap¦peare. First, that by the Apostasie, may rightly in Paul be understood the Antichrist himselfe. Secondly, that by the same may be meant the defecti∣on from the Roman Empire. Thirdly, that ther is no need it should be of many ages. Fourthly, that it requireth not one head. Fiftly, that it is yet a question, who have departed from the faith and religion of Christ, whi∣ther the Papists or the Lutherans. I answer to every of these: and first, where by the Apostasie you unner∣stād
by a metonymie Antichrist himselfe; you confirm the same thing that Calvin saith: so is your wont, to represse his impudency. Vnto the second, I say, that the Apostasie is not a defection from the Roman Empire, but frō the true faith, to weet, from the love of the holy truth, as Paul openeth it, and as shalbe made playn after, chap. 5. and 14. Vnto the third, concer∣ning the durance of the Apostasie, we have already learned by the Apoca∣lypse, that it hath prevailed more than a thousand two hundred & sixtie yeres: and this more evidently, than that any of your subtil reasonings cā elude the thing. Vnto the fourth, if you can find any other multitude be∣sides that of the whole earth, which foloweth the Beast: I wil not hinder you from setting up as many heads of the Apostasie, as you wil, Apoc. 13.3.8. Vnto the fift, namely that the question is not yet decided, as you say, whither Papists or Lutherans have made defection; we make this offer, let al holy men be iudges. With whom ther is found Idolatry, let them be con∣demned of defection, as the Scriptures every where teach. But if any cre∣dit be to be givē unto the most holy oracles of the Scriptures, al that your worship of Images, invocation of Saincts, adoration of the feighned bo∣dy in the sacrament, veneration of reliques, and many such like things, is horrible Idolatry, and therfore Apostasie. But Idolatry is spiritual whore∣dome: and therfore as the way of the whorish woman, which eateth, and then wipeth her mouth, and sayth, I have doon no iniquity; Prov. 30.20. so is the way of Idolaters: by no means can they be brought to acknow∣ledge their impiety. This, Bellarmine, shalbe the true trial, both of you and of us, before God & his holy Angels. The things that you propoūde, are ridiculous. You wil have it, that we have made defection, because we have departed frō the superstition of our predecessours, both in doctrine, and rites ful of Idolatry: as though we were not bidden goe out of Baby∣lon, and to have no communion with her at al. We have made defection from the whore, defection from Antichrist, namely defection from your Pope of Rome: but thanks be to God, we have made defection unto the one true God; who of his infinite mercy wil crown our defection with e∣ternal glory, and your constancie, if you speedily repent not, with sempi∣ternal ignominie, among them which obey not the truth. Now therfore cast up your accounts, and gather the summ; then see, forasmuch as Anti∣christ is an impious and Apostatical Kingdome, and the Popes of Rome have been principal Apostates, and many; whither Antichrist be a singular person or no.
Chapt. 3. which sheweth that Antichrist is come. OF Antichrists coming we gave demonstrations in the beginning of this refutation; which serve to moderate al the questiōs in this cause, that they may manifest the truth of every of them. Yet least this place, where the thing is purposely handled, should complayn that it is naked & empty: it shal not be unprofitable, to add unto the former, one reason or two, in sted of th'advantage. And these we draw from 2 Thes. 2. and first from the 3. verse, wher it is sayd, except ther come a departing first, and that the man of syn, the son of perdition, be disclosed. In which words the Apostle set∣teth down, that both of these shal goe before the coming of our Lord; & also that the departure or Apostasie shal come before the disclosing of Anti∣christ. For that former is the cause of this latter, drawing this evil with it, as afterwards he teacheth, that Antichrist shal therfore come, because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved; ver. 10.11. Neither should the disclosing stay long after the defection, wherunto it is straight an∣nexed, the Apostle saying, except ther come a departing first, and the man of syn be disclosd &c. but the impediment being taken away, which we hav shew¦ed to have been doon shortly after: forthwith came this mischief to light. But this departure began secretly even in the Apostle time; which is not a defection from the Roman Empire, but a neglect and contempt of the truth received, as the same Apostle there interpreteth it, and it hath pre∣vailed now through many ages, to be seen in the veneration of reliques, the invocation of Saincts, and worship of Images, as was said erewhile. For by such manner of Idolatry, the Lord is forsaken, and men fal from him unto other Gods, as Ieremie saith, chap. 16.11. where he is biddē to speake thus to the people; Then shalt thou say unto them, because your Fathers have forsaken me, saith the Lord, and have walked after other Gods, and have ser∣ved them, and worshiped them, and have forsaken me, and have not kept my law: After which manner the other Prophets also speake continually. Needs therfore must Antichrist be come long a goe; seing the conioined signe & cause of his coming, hath reigned now in the world many ages. Secondly; that impediment is now long since taken away, which onely hindred in the Apostles time, that the man of sin was not reveled, ver, 7. Which was not the Roman Empire, but the sixt head of that Empire; which had the supreme government of things whiles Iohn lived; for thus spea∣keth the Apocalypse, chap. 17.10. Five are fallen, one is, the other is not yet come. That one, which the Angel saith was then, was the sixt King: with
whom the Roman Empire should not fall, because a seaventh King & head should after succeed. Neither did many reign togither with one head: wherupon the seventh should as wel susteyn the Empire, for his part, as a∣ny one other of the former. Therfore so soon as that present regiment should be changed, which fel out about two hundred yeres after Iohn, then that weighty burden, which hitherto did restreyn, being removed, Antichrist should come forth, and converse in al mens sight. Thirdly, if the mysterie of iniquity wrough whiles the Apostles lived, of necessity the birth could not be farr of, whē the paynes of bringing forth did vex so betimes 2 Thes. 2.7. Otherwise what a monstrous thing is this, that one should be a breeding in the body these fifteen hūdred yeres, and yet the yongling is not brought forth; and when at last he shal come forth, he shal be but a King for three yeres and six moneths? But these ar dreams. If the Apostles scarsely repressed him, much lesse did they keepe him in which came after, and which had lesse piety, knowledge, studie, di∣ligence: whose gifts also decaying daylie more and more, made way for the speedy rising and increasing of the Man of syn. These things being thus layd down, now come we unto yours: which is but one onely argument about this matter. Long inough in deed it is, for it reacheth from the beginning of the chapter to the end: but it is no lesse weake and feeble, then long and tedious. Thus it goeth: Antichrist is not yet come, because he came not at the time which some both of the ancient & la∣ter men have supposed. The ancient men you mention are the Thessalonians, Cy¦prian, Ierom. Gregorie, one Iudas, Lactantius, and a Bishop of Florence: the later are, the Samosatenians of Hungarie, and Transilvania, Jllyricus, Chytreus, Lu∣ther, Bulinger, Musculus. And in folowing this matter, is the whole chap∣ter spent. I answe twofold; first false it is, that he which cam not in the ti∣mes spoken of by the sayd authors, is not yet come. It was not necessary that they should know the first rising & original of Antichrist. The Beast remayneth a Mysterie after his disclosing, Apoc. 17.7. whose person was manifest, but not his wickednes and original. Eor the Mysterie were taken away, if that which lay hidd within, should lye open unto al men. And as Gods Kingdom, though foretold by the Prophets, came not with obser∣vation, Luk 17.20. so neyther dooth Antichrists Kingdome. The tares are sowen, whiles the husbandmen sleep, Mat. 13.25. neither were they perceived in the first springing: but were they not therfore, because the husband-men knew not which way they grew? Shal we not acknowledge the motion of the sun, because we perceive it not as it moveth? Doubtlesse the craftie enemy, of his ingenious disposition had much rather that his
Vicar should invade men privilie, wherby he might oppresse the moe un∣wares: than that rushing upon them with noise and tumult, he should give men a sign for to looke to themselves. Moreover, when you conclu∣de that he is not yet come; you should have comprehended al the other ti∣mes, and not those few onely, which the said ancient and later men doo mention. Is not one come in some day, because he is not come in the first, or second, or third houre therof? It is a fault in reckning up the parts, to passe by anie one: and seing you have omitted manie, your proposition is made diverse wayes absurd, and the whole argumentation that hangeth thereon. Secondly I answer severally to the rest; and first concerning the ancīet Fathers, from whose words, we doo more then probably conclude, that Antichrist is come. For thus saith Cyprian, lib, 4. Epist. 6. You ought to know, and for certayn to beleeve and hold, that the day of vexation is begun to be u∣pon our heads; and that the fal of the world and time of Antichrist is at hand. Ierom in his Epistle to Ageruchia, concerning Monogamie, saith, He that did hold is taken out of the way, and doo we not understand that Antichrist is neer? Also Gregory lib. 4. Epist. 38. All things foretold, are come to passe; the King of prid is neer. For if Antichrist were neer thirteen hundred yeres agoe, or a thou∣sand at the least; as is evident by these testimonies: how can it be that he is not yet come? You answer, that the ancient Fathers were deceived, with opinion that the worlds end was neerer, than in deede it was: and that therfore Antichrist was then neer in false opinion, not in very deed. Wherunto I say, If the anci∣ent Fathers had grounded their sentence upon the persuasiō onely of the worlds end; it must needs have been, as they erred in this, so also they had erred in Antichrist: but seing they persuaded themselves so by other argu¦ments, and gathered, not so much that Antichrist was neer, because the end of the world was at hand, as that the worlds end was at hand, be∣cause Antichrist was neer; needs must that be firm and stable which they avouched of this thing, unlesse beside that vain opinion, you can prov the other reasons also to be light. But it is manifest by their words, that they had suspicion of the worlds end, by Antichrists coming, not contra∣ryweise. For Ierome reasoneth from the impediment taken away, that Anti∣christ was neer. He that held, saith he, is taken out of the way; and doo we not un∣derstand that Antichrist is neer? Gregorie by the fulfilling all things that were foretold: than which, what can be a more certayn argument? And you con¦fesse, that al the ancients, minding the evilnes of their times, suspected that Anti∣christs times were at hand. They did not therfore upon suspicion of the end, conclude of Antichrist. For the last end is never made a signe of things
going before, but the things that goe before are determined to be signes of the last end. The end seing it is the last and the most unknown, even to the Angels in heaven, and to the Son of man himselfe Mark 13.32. can give no fore-perceiving of things that are before & more known. By sure argumēts therfore they knew that Antichrist was at hand: but that which they joyned therto of the last end, relyed but upon an unsure & humane conjecture. They had received from Clemens Alexandrinus Strom. lib. 1. a false Chronologie of five thousand, seven hundred, foure skore & foure yeres, two moneths and twelve dayes past from Adam unto the death of Cōmodus the Emperour. Therunto was added an opinion of the worlds durance six thousand yeres: wherupon Cyprian in the preface de exhort. Martyr. saith, the six thousand yeres are now almost fulfilled, since the Divil impu∣gned man. And Lactantius lib. 7. cap. 25. Divinar. Institut. All exspectati∣on seemeth to be more than of two hundred yeres. Add unto these, the conjecture of the worlds speedy end, after Antichrists coming, and then it will easily appear, that great difference ther is, between those things which are han∣dled of Antichrist, and of the end of the world. The first they had found out by many Prophesies, and undoubted signes: the later they did persu∣ade themselves, by some likelyhood of truth, and the infirme authority of men. The like we doo see in Christs disciples, which exspected as we knowe a temporal Kingdome. Yet when they preached that Christ was come, & that the Kingdome was thē to be restored to Israel; should any which saw not the Kingdom restored; disanull their faith touching Christs coming? surely he should doo them wrong. For that Christ was come, they knew by most sure arguments, which could not deceive: but their opiniō of the temporal Kingdom, they drew from the dreggs of the common error. E∣ven so, the ancient Fathers, understood by true signes from the Scriptu∣res, that Antichrist was at the dores: but that which they affirmed of the last end, was of their own; & should not diminish the credit of that wher∣with it is joyned. Therfore you have not escaped by this your answer, but by the sentence of the ancient Fathers, it remayneth firm and stedfast that Antichrist is come: and therfore it was not for nought, that the Bishop of Florence one of your owne men, openly avouched five hundred yeres agoe, that Antichrist was then come: to stop whose mouth, the Councel of Florence was gathered. But you thought it better, that the fame of this Coūcil should rather come ūto posterity, than that the acts therof should come unto their knowledge. As touching the later men, in the first place you mention the Samosate∣nians
of Hungary: whith whom I wil have nothing to doo. Whatsoever they think or think not, is al one to me: until they return unto soundnes of mind. The other learned men have a threefold difference: Illyricus, Chy∣traeus, and Luther, make Antichrists coming to be about the yere of our L. 500. Bullinger, at the yere 763. Musculus, about the yeere 1200. Surely the second rising of the Beast, in whose territories they remayned, did cast so strong a smel, to those prudent men, that they could retch their minds to no further thing: even as hownds, which when they fal upon the denn of the wild beast, doo run with ful course and cry, not senting anie more the several footsteps. Therfore for the most part they transfer unto this se¦cond rising, the things which belong to the first, and bring in here some other things that are not to the purpose. Neverthelesse, this light aberra∣tion of the time of his rising, taketh not away his rising: but by their voi∣ces and cryes, we know that Antichrist is; though the moment when first he began to be, was hidd from them. Let us therfore run through your answers unto every of them; that you may perceive how they have not so much erred, as your selfe have laboured in vayn, in oppugning their jud∣gements. Secondly therfore you encounter with Illyricus, who saith, Antichrist was thē born, when Phocas grāted to the Bishop of Rome, that he should be caled Head of the whole Church, which fel out in the yere 606. You an¦swer; that he was not born at this time, for two causes: first, because Antichrists temporal reign of 666. yeres, which Illyricus would have to begin at that arising; should now long since be ended, and Antichrist should be dead. Secondly, that by his spiritual reign, which Illyricus wil have to be of 5260 yeres, the Centurie writers might exactly know the end of the world; contrary to our Lords words Acts. 1. & Mat. 24. I answer unto the first: It is a foolish thing which you gather of Antichrists death, at the end of 666. yeres: when you see they give unto him a spiritual reign of 1260. yeres. Can any one reigne 594. yeres, (for so many is this reign proroged beyond the temporal,) after he is dead? But perhaps your spiritual Pope hath no more vital life without tempo∣ral things, then the serpent hath without dust. Vnto the second I answer, it is as lawful for the Centurie writers exact∣ly to know the yere when the world shal end: as it is for your Papists, to know the very day. Doo not you recken 1335. dayes, from the beginning of Antichrists reign, unto the last judgment? Shal that speech of Christ touching this unknown day, have no longer place than til Antichrist co∣meth? Mark 13.32. How then shal it come as a snare upon al that dwel on the face of al the earth? Luk. 21.33. Your refutation therfore is no∣thing.
We have shewed that that first number is not of his Reigne, but of his nam: & that the other is to be coūted frō the first coming of Antic. not from the second. But I wilbe no longer now about this matter: I return a¦gayn to you, & doo grant that which you strive for. Be it, that Antichrist was not then first born. I ask this onething of you; whither was he then or no? If you deny him then to be; I thus convince it. Then was the im¦pediment taken away, which onely hindred his coming, as Ierom even now affirmed. Then al things were doon, which were foretold should goe before his coming; as Gregorie did avouch. Then was ther an Vniversal Priest, such as the same Gregory confidently sayth, whosoever caleth himselfe, or desireth to be caled, he is in his pride the forerunner of Antichrist. lib. 7. Epist. 194. unto Mauricius. But, if he that desireth such a name be the forerun∣ner of Antichrist: what shal we cal him that hath the name? Seing ther∣fore Antichrist was at that time: now look you how he is not yet come. Jn the third place you answer to Chytreus, who maketh his birth to be a∣bout the same time; especially, because Gregorie at this time stablished prayer to Saincts, and Masses for the dead &c. To this you say, that Gre∣gory was not the first that taught to pray unto the Saincts, and to offer Masses for the dead. For al the ancient Fathers taught the same; and in sted of al you bring forth one Ambrose, which was two hundred yere before Gregorie. I answer, su∣rely Chytreus erred, that though Antichrist to be some yeres yonger, then in deede he was. He was much more ancient, but did so bear his age, that as an other Cupid he alwayes seemed to be a childe. For the man was de∣ceived by his second rising, wherby he revived from the dead: and as Ae∣son of an old man became a yong; so he frō youth returned to his cradle. Neither should it be strange to have him then accounted first, who then seemed to be new. But you so deny his birth, as you add yeres to Anti∣christ, & take none away: as if you should require inheritance for a ward, and be afraid, least he should goe too late out of his wardship. Fourthly you come to Luther, who makes a double coming of Anti∣christ; one with a spiritual sword, after the yere 600. an other with a tem¦poral sword, after the yere 1000. You answer, that the Popes deposed Empe∣rours, and made warrs before the thousand yere. I answer, therfore thou Luther also wast deceived: Antichrist was come before thou supposest. Surely you so defend the Popes, as if one being charged with theft, to avoide the crime should openly crye, that that was not the first thing that he had stollen; but for many other greater things had he plaid the theef before. You feared not, as it seemeth, that any should afterwards come, which would search out the higher origine of Antichrist.
Fiftly, Bullinger so expoundeth that number 666. as to designe the yere of Antichrist coming, after the writing of the Apocalypse, namely the yere of our Lord 763. To which you answer, and rightly, that this is the number of Antichrists name, not of his time. Though from hence your cau¦se have but litle help. For although he were not then first born, yet he mought be born before: which sufficiently sheweth, that you falsly doo avouch, He was not yet come. Sixtly, Musculus affirmeth that Antichrist came about the yere 1200. moved hereunto by Bernards authoritie, who saith after manie other things, wherwith he bewayleth the wickednes of those times, Jt remayneth that the man of syn be reveled. Serm. 6. of Psal. 90. You answer two things, first that Bernards suspicion was false, as was Cyprians, Ieroms, Gregories, in their times. For he suspected by the evils which he saw, that Antichrist was neer. Second∣ly, that ther were worser Popes without any comparison, in the former age than in that. I answer to the first, you fayrlie contradict the Apostle. He teacheth that the Apostasie goeth before Antichrist: and that he should come into the world for mens despising the love of the truth: declaring therby, that ther is no more evident signe both of Antichrist approching & reigning; than that al kind of hypocritical impietie licenciously rangeth abroad. You wil have Bernard to be deceived, and that he suspected by the evils which he saw, that Antichrist was neer. In verie deed he was deceived in that he thought him to be but neer, and not present. Otherwise he iud∣ged more syncerely of Antichrist; than the Iesuites are wont; or any other Papists. Vnto the second I say, seing they were worser in the age before, we grāt you that his first birth did not now beginn, but having been brought forth long before, now onely he was exstant. And thus, when al comes to al, you have disputed this question, as if one should contend, that the Sun is not risen at noon day, though it began to shine in the horison at six a clock in the morning: because it neither rose at eight a clock, as one affir∣med; nor at nine, as the second, nor at ten, as the third avouched By the verie like argument, you and yours would perswade, that Antichrist is not yet come. Chapt. 4. Against the first demonstration, from the universal preaching of the Gospel. THIS question of the time, yeildeth great abundance of light, illustra∣ting al the rest, as the Sun with his beams. Wherupon Bellarmine to darken this same, hath prepared six thick coverings, which he caleth De∣monstrations,
under which he hopeth to be drawn from so many certayne signes, as he sayth, of Antichrists coming; wherof two doo goe before; name∣ly 1. the preaching of the Gospel in the whole world, 2. and the desolati∣on of the Roman Empire: two doo accompany it, namely 3. the preaching of Henoch and Elias, 4. and a very great and known persecution: two doo follow, namely 5. the destruction of Antichrist after three yeres and a halfe; 6. and the end of the world. None of which, saith he, we see as yet to be perfor∣med: we wil helpe therfore this blind man, if God wil, and with a faithful hand, wil pul the scales from his eyes, if so he wil suffer it. For a groundwork of the first demonstration, you set down that which is written Mat. 24.14. this Gospel of the Kingdome shalbe preached in the whole world, for a testimonie to al nations: from which an argument is thus framed; which let me, I pray you, bring into form, that we of the ruder sort may more easily observ the art of demonstration. He that is to come after the preaching of the Gospel in al the world, he is not yet come: Antichrist is to come after the preaching of the Gospel in al the world: therfore he is not yet come. This is your demonstration, wherin we find manie strange and new points, never delivered by any Demonstrating Masters: namely, that principles are used for demōstration, which be neither true nor first. For as touching truth, the proposition is eyther manifestly false, or at least doubtful, as after more plainly shal appear, and therfore not meet for a demonstration. Moreover, if any would doubt of the minor, what strēgth hath it from Mathew? what one word is ther in him of Antichrist to come after a general preaching? How is this an immediate principle, which if it have any credit, must borow it from elsewhere? Pardon, I pray you, this my morositie. I thought it necessary to make trial of some one of your de¦monstrations: of al which, seing we have now a pattern in this first, wee shal not need to deal so exactly in the rest, but may judge of what sorte al are, by the nature of this. But your selfe saw, how trifling and unworthy a demonstration this was; and therfore you flee unto a probable reason, which as a propp you put under that readie to fall. To cōfirme the Minor, that Antichrist is to come after the general preaching, leaving now Mat∣thew, whole name at first was vainly obtruded; Jt may be proved, you say, by reason: because in Antichrists time, the cruelty of the last persecution, wil hinder al publick exercises of true religion. I answer, how truly this is said of the publick ceasing of religion, we shal see after in the chapter of Persecution. In the mean while I avouch that you dispute not so much unskilfully, as in deed falsly. For time is threefold; past, present, and to come: neyther can anie thing be concluded that it is to come, unlesse it be before proved, that it
is neither present, nor past. Wil you then infer that Antichrist shal come after the general preaching, because he cannot be togither with the same? But why, I pray you, may he not be before it? Yea what if by this your de¦monstratiō, he must needs be before it? Surely neither can he be togither with the general preaching, for the crueltie of persecution, as you say: nei∣ther can he come after, because Christ saith, when the Gospel is preached in the whole world, then shal come the end. You see nothing to come between the u∣niversal preaching & the end. Therfore by this your reason, he must needs come before the universal preaching. This is not the least vertue of this undoubted demonstration; that it maketh more for your adversaries cau∣se, than for your own. But, say you, the adversaries admitt not of this reasō. Surely nor your freinds, I beleev, unlesse it be some foxes, that prayse the crow for his sweet sin∣ging. But I am glad for you, that at last your selfe are weary of this demō∣stration. Furthermore you say, Neither is there time now to deduce it from the principles therof, and therfore you wil prove the thing by testimonies of the Fathers. What? Have not you time, which undertake the most copious handling of all controversies? And, which bring not forth one argument of anie weight, in this cause? I know your Iesuitical cunning: what you can not doo, for needynes; that you may not doo for hast unto other matters. But let us goe forward and see, how you folow both parts of the former argument. For the new, as it seemeth, affordeth nothing; but the old nest was to be trimmed, that some shew of building might appear. First therfore you bring Hilarie, Cyrill, Theodoret, Damascen, affirming, that An∣tichrist shal not come, til after an universal preaching. I answer, ther is now no need curiously to inquire into their sayings, seing in this thing they teach agreably to the scriptures. For Antichrist was to come, because the love of the truth was refused, 2 Thes 2. And the punishment is not inflicted before the fault. Neither could the fault be committed, before there was the use of the truth. Here therfore I contradict nothing. Moreover, in some sort I doo grant your proof from the text. For the Gospel was to be preached before that great tribulation spoken of Mat. 24.21. But here∣in you err, that you think this is both the last tribulation, and the perse∣cution of Antichrist. For it is no other than the destruction of Ierusalem; as Chrysostome also dooth acknowledge, though typically he would hav it referred unto Antichrist. Let Antichrist therfore come after the univer¦sal preaching of the Gospel. But what? Hath not the Gospel been noised as yet through al the world? In deede so you say; though the thing it self be otherweise. Christ being to ascend into heaven, bade the Apostles to
goe into al the world, Mark 16.25. And promised that they should be his wit∣nesses unto the utmost end of the earth, Act. 1.8. It can not be, eyther that the Apostles should neglect that which was commanded; or that our Lord should not performe that which he promised. Neither wanted the thing an issue, as the Apostle teacheth, saying that the faith of the Romanes, was published through the whole world, Rom. 1.8. and that the Gospel was come unto the Colosseans, even as unto al the world, Col. 1.6.23. You answer, that the whole world in these places, is not properly and simply taken, but figurative∣ly: but the Gospel should be preached in everie nation properly and simplie, before An¦tichrist come. Which you prove by testimony of Fathers, and by three rea∣sons. The Fathers are Augustine, Origen, and Ierom; besides those fore-alledged. I answer, Ther is no doubt but the Fathers doo accommodate their words, unto the words of the Scriptures; and therfore they often say, that the Gospel should be preached in al the world, through the whole earth, in al lands &c. but whither they speake more expressely or no, & doo signify by name that these kind of speeches are to be taken simply, not fi∣guratively, may wel be doubted. Ierom in his Epistle to Ageruchia saith, He that held, is taken out of the way, and doo we not understand that Antichrist is neer? By which it is playn, that he understood no other preaching thro∣ugh the whole world, than such as was in his time: for otherweise, how could Antichrist be neer? So Gregorie, as is before mentioned, saith, Al things that were fore-told are come to passe: the King of pride is nigh. Therfore this universal preaching was then doon; but not properly as you would have it, which as you say, is not performed to this day. Turn over the Fa∣thers therfore, and weigh their words more diligently: perhaps though these things were very dark unto them, you shal finde no such preaching with them, as you doo dream of. Of the three reasons which you bring, the first is, that, the preaching in al the world, is a signe, Christ saith, of the end of the world: for so he annexeth, & then shal come the end. But if the Gospel should not be preached in the whole world pro¦perly, but by comprehension of a part for the whole, the signe would be of no value. For in that manner the Gospel was preached by the Apostles through al the world, in the first twenty yeres. I answer; wheras from these words you affirme, that the preaching in al the world, is a signe of the end of the world: this is yours, Bellarmine, not Christs. He saith no more but and then shal come the consummation, or the end. That, of the world, he addeth not. Neither is the end or consummation wherof he speaketh, of the world, but of the tē∣ple, & of the Iewish politie: the law wherof was abrogated in Christs death, but now also by dissipation of the nation, the whole use should be taken
away. For the Disciples inquired of a twofold end, ver. 3. of the temple, & of the world. Of the first, Christ answereth unto the 23. verse: of the later, in the rest of the chapter, under the name of his coming. Neither had he satisfied the demaunds, unlesse he had comprehended both. Wherfore that universal preaching, was a signe of Ierusalems destruction, the neerer token wherof was the abomination of desolation, fore-told by Daniel: which being next added, may teach, of what end the former words doo speake. For Christ answereth not so confusedly and intricately, as that from the last end of the world, he would straightway leap back againe to the Iewes affayres. Seing therfore in this place he speaketh of this consummation, and not of any other: ther is no necessity that the preaching through the whole world, should be properly. Your second reason is: that properly al nations are promised to Christ, Psal. 71. All nations shal serv him: therfore the preaching ought to be general properly. I an∣swer; I deny not but all nations shalbe gathered unto Christ, and that by a general preaching properly, before he come unto judgement. For prea¦ching is that silver trumpet which is appointed for the gathering togither of the elect: and I find in the Scriptures a twofold general preaching, fi∣gurativ, and proper; as in the end of this chapter I wil more fully declare. But what is this, to the coming of Antichrist? It is shewed, that he is com a thousand and three hundred yeres agoe. Also his destruction, shalbe a long space before the last iudgement, as shalbe shewed after, chap. 9. Of the end of the world, and in the rest of the enarration of this Apocalypse. Therfore that may be before Christs coming, which shal folow after An∣tichrists destruction. And in verie deed, the general preaching shal not be¦ginn, before Antichrist be at an end; or at least be ready soon after to dye. The times may not be confounded; nor that which is proper to one, be transferred to an other. Your third reason is, That the Gospel shalbe preached in the whole world, for a testimonie to al nations. Therfore a general preaching must goe before the general iud¦gement. I answer; This argument is one with the former, but that it is af∣ter a sort distinguished in the subiects. That treated of the salvation of the elect; this, of the iust condemnation of the reprobates. But the answer is one. For I grant, a general preaching must goe before the general judge∣ment: but when you shal have proved that the general iudgement, and An∣tichrist, are things so conioyned, as that which goeth before the one, must needs also goe before this other: then wil I easily grant you, that a gene∣ral preaching must properly goe before Antichrist. And now as if you had put the matter out of al controversie, you goe in hād to answer unto Paul
concerning those wores Rom. 10.18. Their sound is gone out unto al the earth: the interpretation wherof you bring from Augustine, Ierom, & Thomas. The summe is, that they are to be understood figuratively. VVhich you might easily have obteyned, without so much a doo. Ther is no man but granteth, that the like Scriptures fore-alledged, are not to be taken pro∣perly. But if Paul speak figurativelie, why maie not Christ likeweise? Be∣cause it is not absurd, you say, if we grant that our Lord spake properly, and the A∣postle figuratively. For the reasons wherby we are compelled to take our Lords in a proper signification, have not the same force, if they be applyed to Pauls words; especi∣ally seing our Lord spake of a thing to come, and Paul of a thing past. I answer; Se∣ing that end wherof Christ spake, was onely of the citie, not of the whole earth; to weet, of Ierusalem, not of the world: ther is no reason which more compelleth us to take our Lords words in a proper signification, then those words of Paul, in the Epistle to the Romanes ch. 1. verse 8. Coloss. 1.6.23. spoken of before. For wheras you say, that Paul Ro. 10.18. speaketh of a thing past: you might have remembred from Augu∣stine, that he tooke the time past, for that which was to come, as David did whose words they are, as you wrote a litle before: and that so the Prophets are wont to speake almost everie where, of things to come, as if they wer past. In the other Scriptures, Paul speaketh of that thing performed, which our Lord foretold should be performed. This your first demonstration ther∣fore is altogither lame, having no certaintie, no truth: but it is such a signe, (in the sense that you would have the preaching to be taken,) of Antichr. to come, as the Iewes have feighned to themselves of Christ to come; na∣mely such as mans bold ignorance hath feighned, without anie authori∣tie of the oracle of God. Wherfor seing you have written nothing right of this matter, I wil endvour to shew some surer thing, as even now I pro∣mised, wherby the readers maie have what to think concerning this mat∣ter. Vniversal preaching therfore is twofold; as I said; figurative and proper. The first was given to the Apostles for a signe of the Iewish desolation; & so likewise should goe before the Antichrist, who should not come forth until some ages after al that Politie was utterly extinguished. The later, which we cal general properlie, shal not goe before Antichrist, but folow. For after he is slayn, the Gospel shalbe spredd farr and wide, even unto those nations which as yet never had the hearing of it. For then shal the na¦tions bring their glory and honour unto the new holie citie, Apoc. 21.24. Then shal the tree grow amidds the street of the heavenly citie, whose leaves shal minister cure and health unto the nations, Apoc. 22.2. Then shal the temple be opened, into
which no forreyner could enter during the seven plagues with which Antichrist is con¦sumed, Apoc. 15.8. and chap. 16. Then shal the waters flow out of the temple towards the East, and unto al the countrie round about; by whose wholsomnes, a ve∣rie great multitude of fish shalbe ingendred Ezech. 47. And then after the litle horn is taken away, the Kingdom shalbe given to one like the son of man, that al peoples, nations, tongues, may serv him, Dan. 7.14. which Kingdome is not that which shalbe in heaven, where no distinction is of peoples, nations and tongues: but shal come in earth, and be administred by the scepter of his word. Wherupon after the cutting off of this Horn, (which men commō∣ly doo interpret, partly of Antiochus, partly of Antichrist, but is in verie deed the Turk, who shalbe rooted out within a while after the true Anti∣christ;) ther shalbe a most ample promulgation of the Gospel, with much larger limits, than ever heretofore. For then all the nations indeede shal serve him Psal. 72.11. and Jehovah shalbe King over all the earth; and in that day, shall Iehovah be one, and his name one, Zach. 14.19. These things and many such like doo make it playn, that howsoever the doctrine of salvation surveyed many lands before Antichrist: yet after he is extinguished, the tents of the sacred truth, shalbe much more am∣ply displayed; so that into them shal assemble a very great congregation, in respect wherof the assemblies of former times have been smal, or rather none. These things doo the scriptures teach of the universal preaching, & they are constant, firm, sure, ful of maiesty, power, mercy, if you look un¦to God; and if you turn your eies unto our selves, they are no lesse full of al joy and confort. Wheras on the contrarie, the things which you have brought, are either uncertayn guesses, or vaine fictions: which wil both deceive, at least, your expectation, and in the mean while, lead into error and destruction. Chapt. 5. Against the second Demonstration: from the desolation of the Romane Empire. The second Demonstration, you say, is taken from the other signe that goeth be∣fore the times of Antichrist, which shalbe the utter desolation of the Romane Em∣pire, which seing it yet endureth, Antichrist is not yet come. Hereupon you take in hand to prove two things; first that Antichrist shal not come til after the ut∣ter desolation of the Romane Empire: secondly, that the Romane Empire dooth yet indure. The first you confirm by fowr scriptures: of which, the three first, namely Dan. 2. and 7. Apoc. 17. doo rely upon the interpretation of I∣renaeus, book 5. But let us leav, I pray you, mens names, and let us weigh the thing it selfe, in the ballance of truth. If the matter should be discussed by the contrary opinions of men, which might be found many in these
dark places; ther would be no end. Let us deal rather from such princi∣ples, as may lead and bring us to some certainty. As touching therfore the 2. of Daniel, and that succession of the chief Kingdomes until the worlds end, which the Images sheweth, nothing out by the golden head, the sylver brest, the brazen belly, the leggs, and the feet partly y∣ron and partly clay; the 4. cheif Kingdoms on earth, of the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, Romanes; the last wherof the Romane you say, was a long time parted in two, as the leggs are two and long. Moreover that of the two leggs should spring ten toes, and in them the whole Jmage have an end: to weet because the Romane Em∣pire should at last be divided into ten Kings, of whom none should be King of the Ro∣manes, as no toe is a leg. As touching these, I say, what one word is ther in al this vision, which intimateth that Antichrist should come after the Ro∣mane Empire is utterly defaced? I hear there are tow leggs, and the feet divided into ten toes; but not a whit concerning Antichrist, whither he should come after this division, or before it, or in the time of the divisiō. Doo you goe on thus to build your Demōstrations, without any so much as shew of a foundation wheron they should rely? Yea what if the contra∣ry may from hence most firmly be concluded, that Antichrist shal come before Christ cometh? But the Romane Empire shal not altogither be de∣stroyed, until Christ be come. For thē feet of iron and clay shal dure, un∣til the stone out of the mountayn, cutt without hands, shal smite them & beat them to peeces, as is plainly shewed, ver. 34. thou sawest until a stone was cut out, which is not in any hands, and smote the image on his feet of yron and clay, and brake them to peeces: and agayn in the 44. verse, And in the dayes of these Kings shall the God of Heaven ryse up a Kingdome, which shall never be de¦stroyed &c. But these feet, are the Romane Empire: weaker in deed than it was before, of the leggs; yet is it the Romane Empire notwithstanding. For the Image deciphreth fowr Kingdomes onely: but if the feet should have an other Kingdome than the leggs, ther should be five. Wherupon also that is false which you say, that the Romane Empire shal at last be divided into ten Kings, of which none shalbe King of the Romanes, as no toe is a leg. For thus you bring in a fift Kingdome, which the Spirit by the Image sayth not. Neither is that of weight, that a toe is not a leg: seing no one member is an other, though both be parts of one whole thing, even as the toe and legg, be of the fourth Kingdome. Now therfore you may see, how fayrly you have made demōstration of your nakednes; which the more you seek to cover and hide, the more conspicuous and filthy you doo make it. The second place is out of Dan. 7.7. where, you say, the ten hornes which come out of the last Beast, are the ten last Kings which shal arise out of the Romane Em∣pire,
but shal not be Romane Emperours: as the hornes arise out of the Beast, but ar not the Beast it selfe. I answer, as even now I did to the former argument, which was the selfe same that this. If these ten hornes have a Kingdome divers from that of the Beast: then ar ther not fowr Kings onely, but five; contrary to that the Angel affirmeth, ver. 17. these great Beasts which are fowr are fowr Kings, which shal rise out of the earth. Moreover, doo you think that the 4. hornes of the Goat, which rose up in place of that broken horn, was an¦other distinct Kingdome from the Kingdome of the Goat, to weet, an o∣ther than of the Greeks? Dan. 8.8. If so you think, the Prophet sheweth you are playnly deceived, who teacheth that this Goat of the 8. chapter, is the Leopard of the seventh: and that the Leopard is one Kingdome one∣ly, and the third: chap. 7.6.17. As therfore the Goats horns make not a different Kingdome from the Kingdome of the Goat: so neither doe the ten horns of the fourth Beast make a different Kingdome of the 4 Beast. Ther be also the ten horns of the Dragon, in this Apocalypse, which are not re¦bellious Princes agaist the Dragon, but his cheif defenders, legates, and administrators, by whose help he most exercised his tyranny, Apoc. 12.3. Besides, the ten horns ar not the dissolution of that Empire, whose bo∣dy remayneth after they are risen up. But so the vision teacheth evidently, that the Beast (namely the fourth) should not be slayn and his body de∣stroyed, before the horn, which springeth up after those ten wer broken and taken away, Dan. 7.11. Wherfore the ten horns, doo no way signi∣fy the dissipation and fal of the Roman Empire, wherby to afford us any help, for the finding out of Antichrists coming. Vnto these may be ad∣ded, that which this argument hath common with the former, that nei∣ther is ther any mention of Antichrist here. In deed the litle horn growes up after the rest; and some learned men doo apply it hither: but neither doo your selfe now insist upon this horn; and we have shewed before, in the second chapter herof, that this exposition is untrue. The third place is out of Apoc. 17.16. where the ten hornes you wil have to be ten Kings, which shal reigne togither; but shal not be Romanes, because these Kings shal hate the whore and make her desolate, and so shal divide the Romane Empire among themselves, and utterly destroy it. I answer, It is even marvelous that you see not the playn contrarie to that you intended, here proved. For if this hatred, wherwith the ten Kings shal hate the whore & make her desolate, be the fal and ruine of the Romane Empire, then shal Anti∣christ come before the Romane Empire be desolate. For ther shalbe ha∣tred long before this, and the ten Kings shal serve her a great while be∣fore they shal thus rise up in wrath against the whore, according to that
which is written ver. 12.13. And the ten hornes which thou sewest, are ten Kings, which have not yet received a Kingdome, but shal receive power as Kings at one houre with the Beast. These have one mind, and shal give their strength and power to the Beast. Moreover, these are the hornes of the Beast, not of the Romane Empire divided, ver. 3. Which if they signify any division, the Beast shalbe divided from his first arising. And further, seing they shall rise at the same houre with the Beast, they shal not goe before him, whereby to declare by some praecursion that he foloweth behind them. VVherfore nothing at al can be concluded from hence concerning the desolation of the Romane Empire, as of any signe of Antichrist coming. The fourth place is out of 2. Thes. 6.7. And now ye know what withholdeth that he might be reveled in his time, onely that he which now holdeth, may hold, til he be taken out of the way, and then shal the wicked man be reveled &c. Where the Romane Empire, you say, hindreth Antichrists coming, who shal take his Em∣pire out of the way, for their sinns: and so doo the Greek and Latine Fathers expound this place. I answer, I doo acknowledge that the ancient Fathers (as I hav often sayd,) did not level aright in these matters, for that being farr distāt from the event of things, they were led onely by coniectures. They knew so much as concerned their owne times. Yet remember, I pray you, what manner desolation Ierom understandeth, who wil have him that did hold, to be taken out of the way, in his time; he that did hold, saith he, is taken out of the way &c. as before I cited him. So that by his judgement, the Ro∣mane Empire was then so desolate, that ther was no let, on this behalfe, to hinder Antichrists coming. And surely Gregorie sayd not right, All things are doon that were foretold, the King of pride is nigh, if such a desolation had been to be looked for, as you speak of; or such ten Kings should goe before, as you Papists doo mention. Therfore those Fathers were eyther altogither ignorant that ther was this let: or they so wavered to & fro in a doubtful opinion, as no firme and stable thing can be gathered from their sayings. But the Apocalyps being now very much illustrated by the event, putteth the matter out of controversie, and explaineth Paul most certainly and faithfully, teaching that the withholder is not the Romane Em¦pire, but the sixt Romane King. Five saith he, are fallen; one namely the sixt, is; the other is not yet come, chap. 17.10. that is, the Hethen Emperours, which make the sixt King, doo now reign; which being at length removed, and delivering Rome empty to the Pope, the seventh King shal come, evē Antichrist. The Romane Empire is after a sort one; but the manner of ad∣ministring it by divers Magistrates, and the kinds of governing, was ma∣nifold. Neither could it be said, five Romane Empires are fallen, but five
Kings, which were the Rulers and Moderators of that one Empire. More over Antichrist is the sevēth Romane King; for so the Angel plainly saith, and the Beast which was, and is not, and is the eight, and is one of the seven, verse 11. Should the Romane Empire be desolate, whiles the King therof was alive? nay verilie; but rather by bearing of him, the whore Rome should greatly flourish. Therfore when Antichrist cometh, the Romane Empire is not to be destroyed, but during that time fore-appointed of God, is marvelously to be conserved, increased, amplifyed. We may understand therfore Paul and the Angel to speake of the same impediment: but the Angel more plainly and clearly describing it by place, dignity, and num∣ber; by which most playn and true signes we might be led as by the hand, unto Antichrists cradle. Wherfore Antichrist should come, whiles the Ro¦mane Empire is safe and flourishing: and ther was need that the Empe∣rour should give place to the Pope, and leav his habitation free. You ther¦fore Bellarmine, rely upon a manifest errour, wherby it wil come to passe, if in time you take not heed, that not expecting Antichrist before the last overthrow of the Romane Kingdome, you wil be by him oppressed & de¦stroyed, before you perceive that he is come. Your second propositiō is, that the Romane Empire dooth yet endure, which I grant without contradiction, and now as you see, without any detrimēt to the cause which I have in hand. Although in the head of this Empire, which I wil tel you in few words, you are surely much deceived. You think the Emperour hath this dignitie; and in deed I confesse, he hath it in name and title; but the Pope hath the thing it selfe. For the Romane King must be the head of the whore Rome, which the Emperour is not, but the Pope, who maketh the seventh & eight head, as is declared Apoc. 17.11. Moreover the Emperours, since first the Beast began, have wholly served him, as the Apocalyps also sheweth, saying, and they shal give their power & their authoritie to the Beast; and the practise of al times, confirmeth it. Which servitude proceeded so farr, that they received a marke, and yeilded an oath of fealtie; that I speake nothing of the other most unworthy wayes, wherby the Beast trode under foot the Emperial Maiestie. Finally, the toes of the foot now divided, are holden togither by no common bond of the Emperours name, but onely of the whore of Rome. For what have Spayn, France, Venice, Florence, Naples, to doo with the Empire? Al these toes cleave togither in the common foundation of the Popes authority, which is the onely foot now, wherin these al agree and grow togither; and not the Empire, with which they have in a manner nothing to doo. Therfore the Emperours are in deed the Beasts horns, but neither the leg of the Ro∣mane
Empire, nor the foot, but a toe of the foot, or the great toe perhaps whē it please the Pope. You Papists with certayn painted titles doo dazel their eyes; but they wil at length awake, and handle your Rome, according to their authoritie. The things which you dispute for the Empire and Empe¦rour, are vayn. Ther remaineth yet, you say, the succession, and name of the Em¦perour of the Romanes: and by Gods marvelous providence, when the Empire fay∣led in the west, it remayned safe in the East: and when this fayled, it was erected a∣gayn in the west. I answer; the succession of the Empire remayneth not in the Emperour, but in the Pope. VVhen the sixt head fel, the seventh succe∣ded, to weet the Pope, and not the Christian Emperours, who then recei∣ved a horned dignitie; the succession of which dignitie, and no other, they transferred to their posteritie. They have the name of Romane Empe∣rours, but it is a title without substance: even as the Romane Church is caled Catholik, & many such like. But in refining the truth, we must look to the authority of the holy Ghost, not to the vayn words and voices of men. In deede Gods marvelous providence shined in considering this dignity, such as it was, both in the East and VVest. But this providence is careful no lesse for the horns then for the head: that is, aswel for these that are caled Emperours, as for the Pope. Both of them are by his decree, which appointed, that some of the toes of the foot, should be of yron. Neither dooth he hinder him, you say, from being Emperour, though he wanted Rome, which you prove by the example of Valens, Arcadius, Theodosius the yonger, Charles the Great, and his successours: then by the dignitie of going before al other Christian Princes: moreover by the election of the Romanes: and final∣ly by the Lutherans confession. I answer to everie of these; and to the first, that if Valens, Arcadius, and Theodosius the yonger, wanting Rome, remai∣ned neverthelesse Romane Emperours; then the VVesterne Empire fay∣led not, neither doth the Easterne Empire fayl at this day, though the VVestern Emperours want Constantinople, if right be ynough without possession. But the Kingdomes of this world are his that holdeth them: and although they be gotten for the most part by wickednes; yet God by his just judgement taketh from one, and giveth to another. Yet dooth not this his administration, quitt the robbers of crime: but he punished in marvelous manner, both by abasing one, and contrariweise advancing an other. It is therfore somwhat of more weight to want Rome, for this that any should be the Roman Emperour, than you speake of. Vnto the second, namely that dignitie of going before al Christian Princes, I confesse the Emperour goes before al the rest: notwithstanding, he that goes before al these, comes after the Pope, as none is so unskilful but
seeth, in whom the Maiestie of the Empire truly resideth. Vnto the third, be it that Charles the Great was created Romane Empe∣rour with consent of the Romanes: yet the Apocalyps teacheth, that the Romane Empire is tied to the citie of Rome, not to the clamour of the Romane people. Vnto the fourth, the Lutherans boasting that they have three Prince E∣lectours of the Romane Emperour, doo rather folow custome of spea∣king, then the truth of the thing: or if in deede they so perswade themsel∣ves, it is through the common errour; the meaning of the Apocalypse, not being by them as yet ynough perceived. Wherfore you gull the Em∣perours with a deceitful title, who whiles the Romane Pope possesseth Rome, neither truly are nor shalbe Romane Emperours: and thus you contending that the Romane Empire dooth yet indure, have not found in what place it is, whose both head and habitation you are ignorant of. From this restored Empire by the Pope, doo Luther, Illyricus, and Chy∣treus rightly gather, that he is that great Antichrist. Yet not so much be∣cause Charles the Great was declared Empetour by him, as for that the Empire did revive in the Pope, who being a Bishop in name, was made Emperour in deede. This is evident by this, that the Beast hath a head both wounded & healed; for both these perteyn to the same Beast. Also, the Beast which was not whiles the Barbarians prevayled, is that verie same which is when they are extinguished. Moreover Antichrist is both the se∣venth King from Constantine, unto the Kingdome of the Gothes; & the eight by a new rising up after the healed head by Iustinian, and Phocas, & the rest folowing, as is explayned Apoc. 13.3.11. and 17.10.11. You answer, that the healed head, is not the Romane Emperour, but Antichrist, who feighneth himselfe dead, and by divelish art, shal rise himselfe up againe: and that so almost al the ancient Fathers doo expound it. Vnto this, I say, that you doo not rightly disjoyne the Romane Emperour, and Antichrist: which two, if we would speake properly according to the Apocalyps, doo make one and the same person. Not that he which at this day is caled Empe∣rour, is Antichrist: but because whatsoever is in this name Emperour, it naturally belongeth to the Pope. For both Pope, and Romane Emperour, or Romane Empire, were wounded to death by the invasion of the Goths. For the seventh head which then seemed to perish, was both a hill and a King; that is, Rome or the Romane Empire, and the Pope, Apoc. 17.9. It is true therfore which you say, that the text it selfe playnly compelleth us, by that head of the Beast, which was dead and revived, to understand not Charles the Great, but Antichrist. For Charles the Great, was not Emperour indeede: but how∣soever
he did not dye and live agayne, yet the Romane Emperour or Em∣pire in the Pope, did die and live agayn, as is sufficiently said before. By which also may appear, that that which is commonly spoken of Anti∣christs feighned death and resurrection, is a playn fiction: a feighned death is in sport and voluntary; but Antichrist dyed this death against his wil, and with sore payn; from which death when he began to come forth, very great was the torment of his fresh wound, as witnesseth Gregorie the Great, by his many mournful lamentations. Chapt. 6. Against the third Demonstration, from the coming of Henoch and Elias. HITHERTO of the signes going before: now of them that accompa∣ny him: and first of the coming of Henoch and Elias, who are yet, you say, alive; and doo live for this, that they may set themselves against Antichrist when he cometh, and keepe the elect in the faith of Christ, and at length convert the Jewes: which notwithstanding it is certain is not yet fulfilled. In this cause you deal by three arguments, first from the Scriptures; secondly from Fathers thirdly from reason. The scriptures you bring are four, Malach. 4.5.6. Ecclesiasticus 48.9.10. and chap. 44.16. Mat. 17.11. Apoc. 17.11. As touching Malachy, his words are; Behold I wil send you Elias the Prophet, before that great day of the Lord shal come, and he shal turne the harts of the Fathers unto the children, and the harts of the children unto their Fathers, which cannot, you say, be understood of anie Doctors whosoever, as of Luther, Zwinglius, & the like. For Malachie sayth that the Jewes shalbe converted by Elias, and for the Jewes he shal chiefly be sent, as appeareth by those words, I wil send to you, and in Eccle¦siasticus, to restore the Tribes of Jakob: but Luther and Zwinglius, converted none of the Jewes. And neither can they be understood of Iohn Babptist literally, but one∣ly of Elias. I answer, first, here is no word of Henoch, whose conioyned coming was propounded also. Secondly, no mention neither is here of Antichrist; but that he shal come togither with him, that wholly dependeth on a false supposition, of which we wil speake in due place. This therfore is a nota∣ble Demonstration, that propounding to it self the coming of three, is al∣togither silent of two of them. But let us discusse him whom it speaketh of. The Prophesie, you say, can not be understood of Luther, and Zwin∣glius and the other Ministers of the Gentiles Church: which I also readi∣ly acknowledge. For I doo not thinke it to perteyn unto us which are Gentiles.
But why may it not be expounded of the Iewes? because it agrees not, you say, unto Iohn the Baptist: which is as if you should say, eyther it is to be ex¦pounded of the Baptist, or of none: which maymed and unnecessary dis∣iunction, no adversarie can grant unto you. But to pardon you also this third trespasse, why perteyns it not, I pray you, unto the Baptist? Because, say you, Malachie speaketh of our Lords second coming, which shalbe for to iudge. I answer; if we granted that he speaks of the second coming, may he not withall speake also of the first? Most certayn verily it is, that Malachie dooth so: for he speaks generally of the Lords coming; which comprehē∣deth as wel the first, as the second. And wheras your selfe confesse it of the second, neyther doo I deny it: of the first we have Christ interpreting the words of the Prophesie, where he speaketh of the Baptist, this is Elias that should come, Mat. 11.14. Seing therfore the words are so; behold now, how I fetch from hence a true interpretation, against that literal of Elias. He that speaketh in the same words, of two times: he as he is to be under∣stood of the one time, so is he to be understood of the other: But Mala∣chy speaketh of a twofold coming of the Lord; and of the first, he is to be understood figuratively, for so Christ interpreteth it, saying, that the Bap∣tist is the Elias that was to come. Therfore he is to be understood also figura∣tively of the second; and such an Elias is to be looked for, as the Baptist was before the first coming. But whither he shalbe one singular man or no, is not so evident: it may be ther shalbe one chief, and excelling amōg the rest; although the whole company of Prophets, when it shal please God, to gather his reiected people, shalbe so furnished with the plenti∣ful gifts of his Spirit, that for the notable godlines and zele wherwith e∣very of them shalbe inflamed, Elias may wel seem to be alive agayn in eve¦ry one. For these abiding watchmen on the walls of the Citie Ierusalem, al the day and al the night continually shal not hold their peace; neither shal they that make mention of Iehovah, keepe silence, nor suffer silence to be of him, as saith Esaias, chap. 62, 8.9. Surely these new preachers of the Gospel, shal burn with so great a desire of godlines, that as consecra∣ting themselves wholly to the glory of God, and salvation of his people, they wil doo this one thing onely, nothing at al esteeming in respect here∣of, even the necessarie regard of their body, by sleep and rest. And what a fervencie shal ther be in the Ministers, when among the common peo∣ple, a father & mother which hav begotten a son, shal strike him through when he is found a false Prophet? Zach. 13.2.3. But whither this Elias shalbe one singular man, or more, he shal not be Elias properly, but so as the Baptist was, as we are taught by this necessarie reason which I have
alleged. But you insist and contend that this coming in Malachie, is the secōd onely, (although the interpretation of our Lord ought to have stoped your mouth:) for so, say you, Malachie saith, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. For his first coming is not caled a great and terrible day; but an accepta¦ble time, and day of salvation. Wherupon also ther is added, least coming J smite the earth with cursing. But in his first coming our Lord came not to judge, but to be iud¦ged, nor to destroy, but to save. I answer; you have brought nothing, which necessarily proveth it the second coming onely: the same things which you mention, the Iewes and Disciples knew also, who neverthelesse did then look for Elias, before our Lords rising from the dead. And hereunto perteyneth that question, when the Lord had made mention of this mat∣ter, Why then say the Scribes that Elias must first come? Mat. 17.9. And as for the great and terrible day, why doth it not agree unto his first coming? Loe saith Malachy, the Lord shal come speedily into his Temple. And who shal abide the day of his coming? and who shal endure when he appeareth? for he is like a Fi∣ners fyre, and like fullers sope, Malach. 3.1.2. &c. And these things are spo∣ken of his first coming. And is not that day terrible, wherin the axe is laid to the roote of the trees, and they that are unfruitful are cutt down, and cast into the fyre? How fearful is it, to have among them, him whose fān is in his hand, who wil purge his floor, & gather his wheat into the barn, and burn the chaff with unquenchable fyre? Mat. 3.10.12. But he came not to iudge, but to be iudged? He came not indeed to iudge solemnly in a tri¦bunal seat, as he shal doo at length in the last iudgment: yet in the meane while, the father hath given al iudgement to him, Iohn 5.22. which he both exercised of old, and dayly now exerciseth upon al contemners of the truth, as we may see in the Iewes, that crucifyed him: upon whom e∣ven to this day abideth the longest and heaviest punishmēt of al that ever were since the first mans fal, as it were a visible document of eternal tor∣ment in hell. This time of grace is acceptable to the elect; but to the un∣beleeving and disobedient, ther is none more hurtful, whom the Son of God punisheth daily with blindnes of mind, and hardnes of hart, untill they have heaped up to themselves the iust measure of wrath, in their last and never ending perdition, Heb. 10.28.29. Vherfore nothing hinde∣reth, why the Prophets words may not be understood, both of the first coming, and of the second: wherby that literal Elias faleth, whom you would gather from the same. The second place is out of Ecclesiasticus, chap. 44.16. Henoch pleased God, and was taken away; an example of repentance to the generations. And cha. 48.9.10. which wast taken up in a whirlewind of fyre, in a charret of fyrie horses,
which wast appointed for reproofs in times, that thou mightest pacifie wrath before rage, and mightest turn the harts of the Fathers unto the children, and set up the tri¦bes of Iakob. I answer, it was not to be expected of the Demōstratour; that he should bring those witnesses, whom they against whom he useth them account not of sufficient credit. But I wil not lay this blame upon you too severely, seing the words conteyn nothing contrarie to the Scriptures. But say you, they agree not, save to those particular persons. In deed Henoch was ta∣ken away after a particular manner; but I doo not find the least significa∣tion of his return. For as concerning that example of repentance to the gene∣rations, he is made this by his going away, not by coming agayn. His ta∣king away cryeth opēly, & shal cry unto the end, how great good things doo in deede abide for them that repent. It was also peculiar unto Elias, to be taken away in a fyrie whirlewind: but to turne the harts of the Fathers unto the children, dooth not so agree un∣to him, but it migh, as our Lord also taught, be applyed unto the Bap∣tist; and afterwards unto the like Eliaes, that should come in the last ti∣me, such as the Baptist was. Wherfore here is no one syllable, nor the least title of his returne in his owne person. Which Janson; one of your owne men, saw; at whom you marvel, that one of your selves durst utter anie thing sincerely. A rare liberty in deed it is among you, who are wont not to serch the truth out of the Scriptures, so much as the maintenance of your errour. The third Scripture is from Mat. 17.11. Elias in deede shall come, and shall restore all things. Therfore, say you, the true Elias, not John: who was alrea∣dy come, and could not be said that he was to come. I answer, The Disciples in the former verse, had made mētion of Elias to come; whose speech Christ taking, so speaketh as if he should say; true in deed it is which you say, E∣lias is to come. Are we wont to speak otherweise, so oft as we relate the speech of others concerning one to come? Further, let us suppose, that Christ speaketh of some one to come; yet shal not he be anie other Elias then Iohn was; as the reason before rendred, dooth sufficiently convince. But you would prove it by two arguments: First, that the Disciples mo∣ving the question by occasion of the transfiguration, did speak of the true Elias: and therfore Christ answering, did speak of the same particular Elias, I answer it may be, that the Apostles were not yet free from the Iewes common er∣rour about Elias: notwithstanding it is not necessarie that the answer should alwayes be made according to the mind of him that asketh the question. Which is manifest even in this place, when after it is said, the Disciples understood, that he spake these things unto them of Iohn Bap∣tist;
ver. 13. How understood they it of Iohn; if our Lord did speake of the true Elias? The second argument is from those words, and shal restore all things: that, say you, John did not. For to restore al things, is to cal againe un∣to the true faith, al Jewes, and Heretiks, and perhaps manie Catholiks deceived by Antichrist. I answer, except this restoring of al things did in deed after a sort belong unto Iohn: the Disciples which saw no such restoring, did mis¦understand our Lord to speak of Iohn. But a great restoring did he make, from whose dayes hitherto, sayth the Lord. the Kingdome of heaven suffreth vio∣lence, and the violent take it by force, Mat. 11.12. unto whose Baptisme, re∣sorted both al Jerusalem, and al Judaea, and al the region round about Jordan, and many of the Pharisees and Sadducees; as Mat. 3.5.7. Although I wil not de∣ny, but ther shal be yet a more ful restoring, and that of al things proper∣ly, that al Israel may be saved, as the Apostle speaketh, of which, that resto¦ring by Iohn, was as it were a shadow. But it is not necessary, that the Mi¦nister of this restoring, should be the true Elias; but one so caled by a simi¦litude, as is said upon the place of Malachie. And this Elias what māner of one so ever he shal be, shal not accompany Antichrist, but folow after him: and shal not shew himselfe, before Antichrist be abolished, or his kingdom at least be very much darkned; as this Apocalyps maketh plain. Wherfore we find no foostep in these words, of the true Elias properly so caled: much lesse in those, and if you wil receive it, this is Elias which was to come, Mat. 11.14. Wher even against your wil, you acknowledge that Iohn was the promised Elias, not literally, but allegorically. Which se∣ing it is so, and that now by your owne confession, we have our Lord him selfe interpreting those words of Malachy allegorically: shew you I pray you, by what cōpetent author, they are to be understood literally: which until you doo, we wil rest in that one allegorical exposition, unto which we dare add no other, without some guide, against whom no exception can be taken. The fourth Scripture is Apocalyps Chapter 11. verse 13. And I will give to my two Prophets, and they shall Prophesie one thousand two hundred three score dayes. Which are to he understood, you say, of the singular persons of Henoch and Elias. But in sted of answer, I aske of you, whither also fire shal come out of their mouthes properly, which shal devoure their enemies? For so it is there sayd, in the fift verse of the chapter: and ther seemeth to be the same consideration of this fyre, and of their persons. Which if it be so, then Woe to ANTICHRIST, for whom such companions are appointed and prepared.
One may wel marvel, how he shal fulfil the three yeeres and a half of his reign, and not rather be consumed the very first day, by this devouring fyre. But if these things doo not satisfy you, I have shewed upon that place, that the words can in no weise be understood of their singular per∣sons; wherof I wil yet give you now a more full confirmation. These two Prophets doo come into the world, clothed in sackcloth, straightway af∣ter the Hethen Emperours: for these are clad with sackcloth, and the Tē∣ple is mesured, both at a time. The mesured Temple, is the womans shel∣ter in the wildernes, wherunto she fled, at the rising up of the Beast. The Beast the seventh Roman King, succedeth next unto the sixt, to weet that which reigned in Iohns time. Therfore when the Beast sprung up straight way after the Hethen Emperours, these sackcloth-Prophets began their mornful office: and therfore they are not properly Henoch and Elias. Now see, if ther be any thing foolisher then your dotage of these two to come in their owne persons: your dotage, I say, for the ancient holy Fa∣thers might misse and be deceived; but you continuing in open errour, I see not what it differeth from madnes. But let us goe on to the other rea∣sons. You prove that the Apocalyps speaketh properly of Henoch & Elias, because it is sayd, they should be killed of Antichrist, and their bodies remayn three dayes in buried in the street of the great Citie: and that after three dayes they should rise agayn, and ascend into heaven: which things, you say, have never as yet happe∣ned unto any. I answer, that I have made it playn, by the order of the time, and agreement of al things; that al these things are already performed; namely, when the Fathers of Trent, killed the Holy Scriptures, spoiling them of al authority, and tying the meaning of them unto the Pope. Thē that which Iohn saith of the death of these Prophets, affordeth a necessa∣ry argument against this literal sense of those singular persons. For He∣noch shal not dye otherweise then of old by his taking away; the Apostle saying, by faith Henoch was taken away that he should not see death, and he was not found, because God tooke him away: for before his taking away he had testimo∣nie, that he had pleased God, Heb. 11.5. The like reason ther is also of Heli∣as. For God is alwaies like himselfe, and giveth like things to like persōs, for like ends. Therfore they are not to be killed by Antichrist. But Tertul¦lian, you say, in his book De anima, chap. 28. saith, Henoch and Elias were taken away, neither is their death found, for it was deferred: but they are reserved for to dye, that by their blood, they maie extinguish Antichrist. I answer, Tertul∣lian hath nothing save a gesse, that these whom the Apocalyps mentioned, are Henoch and Elias: but the Apostle evidently & plainly teacheth that
Henoch was taken away that he should not see death. Now the choise is easy. whom we should rather beleev. It becomes not holy men, to avouch their blind opinions, against the open words of the Scriptures. Hitherto hath been your first argument. The second is from the consent of the Fathers; unto all whom I oppose the consent of the Scriptures, which had indeede been ynough for them, if through darknes of the ti∣mes they could have perceived them. Ther is no need therfore to tary lōg in examining their opinions, which they themselves, if they were now a∣live, would with their owne voices condemn. Thirdly, you prove it, because otherweise ther can no reason be rendred, why these two were taken away before death, and doo yet live in mortal flesh, being one day for to dye. I answer, that these last words, being one day for to daye, doo contradict the Apostle, as we shewed even now: and then, that they con∣vince the words next before, of falshood. For if Henoch be not for to dye, it cannot be that he dooth yet live in a mortal body. For that is not mor∣tal, which is not for to dye. But whither they yet live in the flesh or no, is not so manifest, nor indeed necessarie to be known. If it be lawful sober∣ly to inquire about this thing, they seem to be exempted from the com∣mon death of men, as the Apostle speaketh of Henoch, that he should not see death; and not to live as yet in their bodies. For they live not on earth. For seing they are adorned of God, with more excellent good than the rest: they cannot be inferiour unto other soules, in this thing. And the soules in heaven, have greater ioy and more ample felicitie than can be on earth. Neither could they togither with their bodies enter into heaven; the Apostle avouching that flesh and blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, nor corruption inherit the nature uncorrupt, 1 Cor. 15.50. But against this may be obiected, that they had the same change, that those which are aliv shal have at the coming of the Lord, according to that which is written, wee shal not al dye, but we shall al be changed, 1 Cor. 15.51. I grant that ther might have been this change, (though this would no way furder your cause,) if that saying of the Apostle hindred not, And these al through faith, obteyned goo report, and received not the promise, God providing a better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfit, Heb. 11.39, 40. For if they felt that change, how obteyned they not the promise, to weet glorification: which is the felicity of the soule ioyned togither with the body immortall? And if they obteyned the promise without us, that is, before us: what cause can ther be why also without us they are not made perfit? These two things seem openly to be repugnant unto the Apostle. Those two therfore be∣ing cutt off, namely their death to come, and their present mortal body,
both which are manifestly false: and that being let passe which is not suf∣ficiently known, whither they be at al as yet in their bodies: if now you think ther is no other reason why these two were taken away before their death, save that they might come againe to fight with Antichrist; you are willingly blind. The Apostle saith, that Henoch was taken away, because he pleaseth God, walking continually with him: Ecclus. 44. that he might be an exē∣ple of repentance, that is, that he might stirr up men uto repentance, which look and think upon this notable example of Gods singular lov towards his. And doo you think it a light matter, that ther should be unto all a∣ges of the world a most clear document of the immortality of the body, and of the ascension therof at last into heaven? Before the Law and the floud, Henochs ascension confirmed this faith to the men of that age. For unto men at least weise he ascended, for he was not found, as the Apostle sayth, Heb. 11.5. Vnder the Law, Elias ascended; of whom ther is the sa∣me reason. After the Law, Iesus Christ, the first fruits of al that ascend: by whose merit & power, both those former, in what manner soever it was, did ascend, and al the elect shal at length ascend. Onely Antichrist did so stick in your eyes, that you could see none of these things, or any such like. But deceive your self no longer, with vayn exspectation of Henoch and Elias: loose not your labour with the men of Iericho, seeking their bodies upon the earth; what say I? your labour? yea a greater losse han∣geth over your head, namely, be not you found in the number of them, that folowing the Beast, have not their names written in the book of life. Ap. 17.8. Chapt. 7. Against the fourth Demonstration, from the publik persecution. AN other conioint signe you make to be the publik persecution, which, you say, shalbe most grievous & notorious, so that al ceremonies & sacrifices of publik religion shal cease, none of which things we yet see. According therfore to the threefold marke of this persecution, you make a threefold proof; first that it shalbe most grievous, 2. most notorious; 3. that it shal cause a ceasing of religion. And you prove it shalbe most greevous, frō Ma. 24.21. ther shalbe thē great tribulatiō, such as was not frō the beginning of the world neither shalbe. & frō Ap. 20.3. wher we read that thē Satā shalbe loosed, who until that time had been bound. And you cōfirm it by testimonies of Aug. in the 20. b. de civit. Dei, ch. 8. & 9. of Hippolitus martyr, & of Cyril: unto which you add at last, that the persecutiō by the Pope is not the most greevous, & therfore he is not Antichrist. I answer to al, & first as touching the greevousnes of the persecutiō frō the words of Mat. I say, that you care not what you bring for confirmation. Those words perteyn to the calamity of the Iewes, which they felt in the
desolation of their city by Titus, within a few yeres after Christ. Luke ex∣presseth this people by name, saying, for ther shalbe great distresse in this land, & wrath on this people, Luke 21.23. So Mat. then let them that ar in Judea, flee to the moūtayns, ch. 24.16. And what ells meaneth that prayer against flight on the Sabath, but properly to note out this nation? So farr verily is it, that Antichrists persecution is from these words proved to be most greevous, as the contrary may plainly be concluded: for they evidently doo confirm, that no tribulation shalbe to be compared wit that of the Jewes; & therefore, not that which Antichrist shal procure. I know that Chrysostome referrs it ty¦pically unto Antichrist, but not truly, nor advisedlie: for when Christ opē∣ly saith, none shal be like it, he cutteth off al typical interpretation: not ob∣scurely forbidding the words to be further drawn for to signify any thing to come. For the type must needs be inferiour to the truth of it, & a grea∣ter distresse must folow afterwards, contrary to that Christ saith, if so be the words should be expounded by a type. Mathew therfore makes no∣thing for the vehemency of this persecutiō; & the Apocalyps dooth even as much. Satan in deed shal rage when he is loosed, but the outragious∣nes which is mentioned in that place, is nothing to that which he shew∣ed before he was bound. For Satan is the same that the Dragon, Apoc. 12 9. and before his imprisonment, he lived in heaven, drawing with his tayl the third part of the starrs of heaven; which he cast unto the earth, until by Michael he was overcome, and thrown down from thence. That is to say; the He∣thē Emperours, not only lived, but also ruled in the midds of the Church, which they vexed in most cruel māner, til Christ put them out of the Em∣pire; as upon that place I have shewed. From that time the Divil that is the open enemie, was bound for a thousand yeres: which being fulfilled, his bounds should be loosed, & he should be styrrd up agayn, but not with that abilitie to hurt, as before; for here he should have no place in heavē, that is, in the Church, but should abide only in the utmost borders & territories therof, compassing the tents of the Saincts, & the beloved city, as Ap 20.9. wherupō he should not so much raise persecution as warr; neither should the saincts dye lik sheep, but resist lik soljers. How much therfore an inward & noisom enemie is mor greevous than an outward; so much greater is the afflictiō of the former times, thā that when Satā is loosed, in the last age. Morover Antich. reigneth a 1000 yeres, whiles Satā lyeth in prisō, Ap. 20.9. Wherupō if whē he is loosed, this felow doo trobel al: ther should be great trāquility whē he is boūd: & so the greatest part at least of his reign, sh∣ould be void of those turbulēt storms, neirher should Antich. hav an helper of his persecutiō in the other part of his reign: seing he should abid within the Church & Satā without as is manifest by the things forespokē: also that now he was appo∣inted for the scourge of Antic. himself, not for their hāgmā & torturer, whom he should use for the tormenting of others.
For the Divil being now loosed, the four Angels at Euphrates are loosed, whō God sendeth to punish the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, with his infernall crew, which came out of the pit, Apoc. 9.20.21. all which things we hav made playn in their places. Therfore wher Augustine saith, that Antichr. shal most rage when the Divil is loosed; as though he were now first loo∣sed, and should be his helper unto crueltie; he iudgeth not rightly of this loosing: for he was loosed before in heaven, Apoc. 12.3. &c. which could not be a prison and pit unto him, seing he took it heavilie to be cast from thence: unlesse perhaps he went out of prison against his wil, Apoc. 12.10. Neither is Hippolitus to be hearkened unto concerning this persecuti∣on, when he teacheth that Antichrist is no man, but the verie Divil, that should take false flesh of a false virgin. And no better account is to be made of Cyrill, if he though that the Divil should personally range abroad, making Antichrist to be a true man, but one that should be a Divil also, because as he thinks, he should be made man by incarnation. What sincere thing could they utter about this matter, whose minds were possessed by such manner errours? Wherfore this grievousnes of persecution which you speak of, hath no confirmation at al from the Scriptures. A very gree∣vous persecution in deed ther should be but of an other sort then you mē¦tion; even such as should consist not so much in killing of bodies, as in murthering of soules. For Antichrist is Balaam, who though it better to put a stumbling block before the children of Israel, that they migh eate of things sacrificed to Idols, and committ fornication, then to folow thē with the sword, Apoc. 2.14. He is that Beast, wheron Iezebel the whore sitteth, with the wine of whose fornication, the inhabitants of the earth are drun∣ken, Apoc. 2.20. & 17.2. He is the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, who ope∣ning the pit, the Sun and aier is darkned with the smoke, Apoc. 9.2. Fi∣nally he is that man of syn, whose coming is with the efficacie of Satā, with al power and signes and lying wonders, and with al deceit of unrighteous¦nes in them that perish, for that they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved. Therfore God sendeth them the efficacie of de¦ceit, that they may beleev a lye: that they al may be damned, which have not beleeved the truth, but taken pleasure in unrighteousnes. 2 Thes. 2.9.10. Behold the true persecution of Antichrist, being rather pernicious to the soules than to the bodies: although he should not refreyn frō this wickednes of shedding bloud; for he should also cause that whosoever would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed, Apoc. 13.15. And he is that skarlet Beast of bloudy colour, gottē by the bloud of the saincts, springled on him. But that spiritual persecution is the more outragious,
by so much as the sowl is better than the body, and as the conioynt destru¦ction of both, is crueller than the perdition of one. Wheras before you say that ther is no comparison of the Popes persecution of us, whom you cal Here∣tiks, with the persecution of Nero, Domitian, Decius, Dioclesian and others, as if from hence it were certayn that the Pope is not Antichrist; now every mā may see, that it is nothing to the purpose. For Antichrists cruelty, is not to be measured by the privation of mortal life, but by the losse of life eter∣nal. And this is that which surpasseth al prisons, swords, wild beasts, fyres, burning yrons, molten lead, or any exquisite torment that either Nero, or any other of the tyrants exercised. This is that, for the torment wherof, men sought death, but found it not, and desired to dye: but death fled from them; na∣mely because they felt payn sharper than death, Apoc. 9.6. This is that for which straightway at the rising up of the Beast, the woman fled into the wilder¦nes, which could not be put to flight by anie gibbets or flames, wherwith the Emperours raged, Apoc. 12.6. &c. VVherfore though we should grant, that a greater slaughter of bodies was made by Nero and such like tyrants: yet nothing letteth, but the cruelty of the Bishop of Rome may surpasse in an other respect, and be such, as wherby he may manifest him∣selfe to be the great Antichrist. But, say you, many moe of the Catholiks have our Heretiks killed, these 10 or 15-yeres, in France and Flanders; then the Inquisitours have burned of the Heretiks, perhaps in one hundred yeres. And if it may be caled persecution, the Catholiks doo rather suffer it, than the Lutherans or Calvinists. For the Catholiks ar they which being driven out of manie countries, have lost Churches, patrimonies, and countrie it selfe, the new Ministers of the Gospel invading them. I answer: wheras now you ar resisted, & some of you whiles they oppugne the good estate of others, have lost their own: that nothing hindereth the spiritual persecution of your Pope. He rageth yet with no lesse deadly feud against the truth, than at anie time before; yea with greater, if greater may be. But this slaugh∣ter of his men, somewhat mitigateth the corporal persecution. But the Spirit hath foretold, that that shalbe brought at last upō your own heads, which you were wont to doo unto others. For Christ threatned that he would slay Iezabels children with death, Apoc. 2.23. and that they should goe in∣to captivitie, which doo lead into captivitie, and be killed with the sowrd, which doo kill with the sword, Apoc. 13.10. Finally, that the rivers and fountains of wa∣ters should be turned into bloud, and that they should drink bloud, which did shed the bloud of the Saincts and Prophets, Apoc. 16.4.5.6. Neither is this divine recompense to be caled a persecution, unlesse perhaps it be persecution to repell force by force; or to take from theevs & robbers, the goods, which
they have stollen from the right owners, or to drive out of the countrie, them that betray the country, or to drive away the wolves from the folds. Your wickednes is now known unto al, your treasons, murders, poison∣nings, cut-throat boldnes, subtil plottings against Princes, unto which you apply your selves with al diligence, and often accomplish them with overmuch. These things cause many of you to loose your heads, these be the merits of your Martyrs, these be the crowns, these be trophees or si∣gnes of your victories. It is to be wished of al which love the publik peace and safetie, that by the faithful diligence and vigilancy of the Magistrates, this persecution may more increase dayly. And thus much of the greevous∣nes of the persecution: which howsoever it be great in deed, yet you see it is an other, than you supposed. Secondly you prove that Antichrists persecution shalbe most notorious and manifest, from those words Apoc. 20.8. and they compassed the tents of the Saincts, and the beloved citie. And that the Popes persecution is such, as neither they which say they suffer it, nor you which are said to inferr it, can say when it be∣gann. I answer; those words of the Apocalyps perteyn nothing unto anie vexation that shalbe inferred by Antichrist, but by Gog & Magog. Anti∣christ was slayn & cast into the lake of fyre, in the end of the former chap∣ter; wherupon he hath no part in this battel, neither shal the last afflictiō be raysed by him, as you falsly doo often avouch, but by an other that shal for a while survive Antichrist. And that you may understand how An∣tichrists persecution, shal not be most notorious in the doing of it: you must remember that Antichrists propertie is to invade with all guile and fraud, not with open and displayed flaggs. Therfore that he shal cary his matters with verie great silence, and privily, which be arts fittest for secret ambush, not that he should be espied of al. Moreover, when al the earth should worship the Beast, needs must the affliction be of the lesser part, and so not most notorious, Apoc. 13.3. That which is doon by the most, is cō∣monly counted to be doon by right; and to deserv no reprehension. Be∣sides, his persecution is specially spiritual, which easily deceiveth the bo∣dilie sense and eyes: wherupon though it should not be so readily discer∣ned, eyther when Antichrist shal come, or unto whom he shal first appear, or when his persecution shal begin: yet this maketh the thing it selfe no more doubtful and ambiguous, than it is uncertayn that the plague is the plague, because it is not evident unto al, from whence it first proceeded; or that a fyre consumeth & devoureth al things, because it is not found out, how first it began and grew. But howsoever these things have heretofore perhaps been more obscure: see now how much we have profited by this
Apocalyps, by help wherof we ar come neerer unto that beginning which you seek. For from hence we learne, that straightway after the Emperours were for doon, the woman fled into the wildernes, & a burning mountayn was cast into the Sea, chap. 8. For then the barrs being burst, the Roman ambition could no longer be held in: then began errour and superstition of everie sort, speedily to enter: then was instituted the Feast of the Invētion of the Crosse; and Confirmation made a new Sacrament, and that greater, as Bi∣shop Melchiades would have it, than Baptism. Then al the neighbours in their order, strove who might most heap up new adulterate rites: until at length it came to the opening of the Bottmlesse pitt, at what time the whole infernal darknes broke out. Neither yet was this an end of the calamitie, but at last, by the Trident Council, the two Prophets were slayn, the Scriptu∣res being killed, and their bare carkesses cast out, as we have shewed, cha. 11.9. wherupon soon also it came to passe, that by the Iesuits, the Masters of controversies, the whole Sea of Popish doctrine, was turned into abominable & deadly putrifyed bloud, chap. 16.3. This is the uprising and proceeding of your spiritual persecution. The corporal also cannot now be hidd from a∣nie: which beginning after the second uprising of the Beast, excommuni∣cated Leo Isauricus; deposed King Childericus; warre with the Emperours; put some of them from their Empire; fell with noysome signes upon the Al∣bingenses, and almost quite destroyed them; would not helpe the Greeks a∣gainst the Turks, unlesse they would first subject themselves to the Latin Pope; did break Europe with continual warrs, by setting the Princes togi∣ther by the ears; burned Iohn Husse and Jerom of Prage: armed Charles the 5. against the Protestants; consumed manie Christians in France with flames, shewed the same crueltie upon manie in England: made that memorable massacre in Paris: set up the tormenting boucherie of the Inquisition in ma¦nie of his dominions: finally, which sent the Spanish Navie into England: invaded Jreland by force of armes: exposed the Realm of our gracious Queen, to the spoile of any whomsoever: and destinated her sacred persō unto death; her people, to the prey; and the whole nation to most cruel slaughter. These things are now known, and wil ere long be more mani∣fest: but while the matters were a doing, they were dect and covered with so fayr a shew of piety & zele for the house of God, that the injurie which was doon unto anie, seemed not so much to be hatred and persecution, as eyther the just defense of the Church, or punishment of the wicked. This publik knowledge therfore, which may be somewhat when the things are doon, but is very smal or none at al rather, before the yssue cometh; is no note of the persecution of Antichrist.
The third signe you make to be, the ceasing of the publik and dayly Church of∣ffice and sacrifice, because of the crueltie of the persecution. I answer, it is here in special worthy to be observed, that this cessation shalbe not in one coun∣trie alone, but universally in al: which both you urge in manie places, and reason dooth enforce. For if the Gospel must be preached before Anti∣christs coming, in the whole world, and that not figuratively but simply & properly so sayd, as in your first Demōstration you pleaded: needs must the ceasing of al publik religiō, extend as farr, as the preaching did before. Therfore the cessatiō shalbe not onely in these known parts of the world, but in al lands also yet unknown, among the Tartars and Scythians, the Asians, the Indians, and al the Eastern Ilands, in the deserts of Africa, in the Southern continent, in al America, the new Zembla, & al those coasts under the North.Let the studi∣ous observe, that in the whole superfi¦cies of the earth, Archi¦medes hs te∣tragonisme or quarte∣ring, hath the unity of a circle su∣perfluous: wherby per∣haps the true tetragonisme may be foūd out. Al which superficies, as by Geometrical reckning is ma¦nifest, consisteth of a hundred fourtie eight thousand thousand, four hun∣dred fifty thousand, nine hundred and nine English or Italiā miles: which space if we will divide into the severall dayes of your Antichrist that shall reign three yeres and a halfe, he must travel everie day provinces that are a hundred seventeen thousand, eight hundred and eighteen miles over. Surely al Spaine and France, taking the whole length & breadth of them togither, are very smal countries unto the mesured portion of his everie dayes way. And shal he have leysure also to build a Temple, and sit ther∣in? But, I pray you, shal he make this journey togither with his armie, or himselfe alone? It may be, that as the Monk of Oxford, being caried by his familiar Divil through the aier, described in an Astrolobe the whole Northern Climate; so Antichrist may mount on some such like winged Pegasus, and may provide his armie such horses also, and then in every na¦tion whiles he flyeth over the countries, he may with the clapping of his wings onely compel true religion to keepe silence. It may also be, that he wil spare his own payns, and wil goe over the countries by his Legates: yet I beleev he shall have ynough to doo, everie day to give commande∣ments unto so large a dominion as he is to administer. But in this gene∣ral and so deep silence of true religion, wher shal your Henoch & Elias be? shal not they oppose themselves; or shal they doo it in vain, out of whose mouth fyre cometh forth, consuming their adversaries? Apoc. 11.6. But what doo I mean? Are you not ashamed of such monstrous opinions as these? Such strange fantasies are rather to be hissed away, than to be refuted by anie serious disputation. But, say you, Daniel dooth plainly teach this point, chapt. 12. in these words: From the time that the dayly sacrifice shalbe taken away, shalbe 1200 dayes; as the
ancient Fathers doo expound it; and the meaning it, that Antichrist shal forbid all divine worship, that now is exercised in the Christian Churches, and specially the holy sacrifice of the Eucharist. And experience testifieth that this signe is not yet ful∣filled. I answer, that Daniel treateth of nothing lesse in that place, than of Antichrist. The Fathers that so expound it, wil have this number of dayes that is mentioned, to be of his reign: but incōsideratlie, as the words doe sufficientlie shew. For if these be the dayes of his reign, he shal make all publik religion to cease, before his reign beginn. For these dayes take their beginning, from the daily sacrifice being taken away; which therfore must needs goe before. Wherfore eyther these things perteyn nothing at al to Antichrist, or al those things are vayn which the Fathers mention of him, whiles they thrust al his tyrannie into the straights of so few dayes. Ther is no soundnes therfore in this their exposition: the true sacrifice which Daniel meaneth, is the dayly sacrifice, which was taken away befor Antichrist was born; for it was taken away togither with the Temple of Ie¦rusalem, unto which it was tyed by the institution of God. For al this Pro¦phesie is of the children of Daniels people, that is, of the Iewes, as the An¦gel speaketh in the first verse of that chapter. Not so, say you, but this dayly sacrifice, is our sacrifice of the altar, which succeeded in place of that old. Away with this dotage, and sacrilegious sacrifice, which neither Christ instituted, nor the Apostles knew of, nor the purer Church ever dreamed of. Should ther be anie daylie sacrifice now in the Church, besides that of thanksgiving, & of a contrite hart, after that Christ in the midds of that week, as the Angel speaketh, abolished al sacrifice and offring? Dan. 9.27. &c. Should not the sacrifice of himselfe alone, be the onely and perfect sacrifice: as the A∣postle so often testifieth to the Hebrews? chap. 7. ver. 27. But many are your blasphemies that from hence arise, neither to be stood on at this ti∣me. It is ynough for us in this place, that the ceasing of this sacrifice, is without the compasse of the 1290. daies: and therfore not rightly attri∣buted unto Antichrist. But this place is sertile, and three notable points are gathered from it: First, that Antichrist is not yet come whiles the daily Sa∣crifice dooth still continue. I answer; you may as certainly conclude, that he is not yet come, because the Tēple of Ierusalem, dooth stil remayn whole. Secondly, you say, the Bishop of Rome is not Antichrist, but most contrary unto him; seing the sacrifice which he shal take away, this man most adorneth and defendeth. I answer, Antichrist shal take away nothing lesse, than your sacrilegious sa∣crifice: than which, nothing is more contumelious against Christ. For if Christ profiteth them nothing, which bring in circumcision: they are fal∣len from grace, which bring in the dayly sacrifice, Gal. 5.2. But yours, you
wil say, is not the legal rite. I answer, it is so much the more impious, in that it is merely humane and Popish. Thirdly, you say, that the Heretiks of this time, are above al other, the fore-runners of Antichrist, for that they desire nothing more earnestly, than utterly to abolish the sacrifice of the Eucharist, I answer, un∣lesse Satan had blinded your eyes, those whom you cal Heretiks and fore-runners of Antichrist, you would acknowledge them to be the fore-run∣ners of Christ: forasmuch as of his great mercy he useth them, as the Spi∣rit of his mouth to destroy the Pope, who is by al tokēs famously known to be Antichrist; and whom now verie shortly at last, he wil utterly abolish with the brightnes of his coming, 2 Thess. 2.8. But it is no marvel that yow which count Antichrist for the Vicar of Christ: doe cal Christs true servāts by anie name rather than their owne. And now it were to be wished, that Antichrist might no more attayn to the Saincts by persecuting, than yow have attayned to anie part of this question by disputing: for so, his perse∣cution would be tolerable, as your disputation is intolerable. Chapt. 8. Against the fift Demonstration, from the durance of Antichrist. THE fift Demonstration you draw from Antichrists durance, which yow make to be but three yeres and a halfe. But seing the Pope hath now reigned you say, spiritually in the Church, these 1500. yeres, neither can anie be named, that was counted Antichrist, which reigned precisely three yeres and a halfe; the Pope is not Antichrist: and therfore Antichrist is not yet come. I answer, how vayn this opinion of three yeres and a halfe is, I have shewed by most firm argu¦ments from the Scriptures. For if Antichrist have reigned from the time of Constantine the Great, unto this day, wherof the Apocalyps hath givē such demonstrations, as no Iesuit shal ever confute: then is ther nothing more frivolous, than that three yeres reign and a halfe. But the proper ar¦gument of this place, is to be taken from the things that folow, chap. 20.6. whence playnly it is gathered, that some part of his reign shal dure a thousand yeres; for thus he sayth: And J saw the soules of them that were be∣headed for the witnesse of Iesus, and for the word of God, and which worshiped not the Beast, nor his Jmage, nor had taken his mark on their foreheads, or on their hāds, and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand yeres. But the rest of the dead mē lived not, til the thousand yeres were fulfilled. This is the first resurrection. From hence it is evident, first, that Antichrists adversaries doo reign a thousand yeres with Christ, before the first resurrection. Secondly, that Antichrists ubiects, that dyed by his tyranny, lay dead 1000 yeres. But ther can be
no exposition against Antichrist, whiles yet he is not: neither is he able to hold his people dead 1000 yeres, ūlesse his tyrannie should so many yeres endure. Therfore some part of his reign, is for 1000 yeres: a part, I say; for these thousand yeres, are not those whol 1260, dayes, but some part onely, as in their places is more apparant. But let us see, how you cōfirm those three yeres and a halfe. For this thing, you use six arguments. First from Dan. 7.25. and 12.7. Apoc. 12.19. where we read, you say, that An¦tichrists reign shal dure for a time, and times, and halfe a time. For by a time, is meant, one yere; by times, two yeres; by halfe a time, halfe a yere. And that so John explayneth it, for in Apoc. 11. & 13. he confirmeth that Antichrist shal reign 42 moneths, which justly make three yeres and a halfe. And in chap. 11. Henoch & Elias are to preach 1260 dayes, which make up the same time. Neither dooth it lett, that in Dan. 12. it is sayd Antichrist shal reign 1290 dayes, that is, 30. dayes more than John spake of for John speaks of Henoch and Elias, which shalbe slayn by An¦tichrist, one moneth before Antichrist doo perish. I answer, first, that you un∣skilfully joyn Daniel in this thing with Iohn. For that time, times, & part of a time in Daniel, perteyn nothing to Antichrist, and to this time, times, and halfe a time in Iohn, save so farr as some similitude and allusion is be∣tween them. For that in Daniel is of a little horn; which is not the great Antichrist, whom Iohn speaketh of in this place. For he riseth up after the other ten horns: Antichrist is born togither with his ten. Also, he gets do¦minion but over three horns: contrariweise Antichrist prevaileth over all his: as is shewed before, chap. 5. against your second demonstration. Se∣condly I say, that you plainly know not the account in nūbring the dayes moneths and yeres. For wheras you say, that the ful and perfect yere of the Moon conteyneth 12 moneths, and everie moneth 30. daies, as Augustine tea∣cheth; that is not true. For such a yere of the Moon, should have 360. dayes: but the Hebreues yere of the Moon, had onely 354 dayes, & some houres and minutes over; as al the Rabbines, Calendars, & Cycles of the Hebrues doo shew; who are more to be beleeved in the computation of their owne time, than Augustine is, though otherweise a very learned mā. Wherfore, if you wil have these to be the yeres of the Hebrewes; three ye∣res and a half, wil make but 1239 dayes, which want 21 of the number in the Apocalyps. Moreover, wher you make those 1290 dayes in Dan. 12. to be also of Antichrists reign; besides that which we have shewed in the former chapter, how it can no way be referred hereunto, see how great a new contrariety you make in the account. For neither dooth this num∣ber fall under the reckning of the time times and halfe a time, seing it cā∣not be divided into three whole ones and a halfe; neither agreeth it with
Iohn, who numbreth precisely 1260 dayes. But, say you, this number is of the death of Henoch and Elias, whom Antichrist shal survive one moneth. Vnto this I say, then Antichrist shal reign not onely three yeres and six moneths, as Ireneus saith expressely in the end of his 5. book: neither three yeres and a halfe onelie, with an exclusive particle, as Cyril speaketh, Cateches. 25. but a moneth over the number shal now be added, and for 6. moneths ther shalbe 7. Neither shal the halfe of a time prefigure six, as Ierom saith on Dan. 7. but seven. And thus, while you goe about to make Daniel & Iohn agree, you set the Fathers against them both. But let us leave these disa∣greers, and draw the truth out of the true fountains. I confesse that the number of 1290 dayes, is not of Antichrists whole reign, but is ended at the death of the two Prophets, whose names I now stād not upon; & that Antichrist shal survive they two being slain: but not one moneth onely, as you falslie suppose, but manie yeres, the number wherof we have gathe∣red elswhere: which thing verilie is from hence manifested. For the two Prophets are killed under the sixt trumpet, chap. 11.8.14. and Antichr. perisheth under the last, which comprehendeth 7 other plagues caled vi∣als, under the last wherof, he is quite abolished. Shal therfore al the seven vials have their effects in those your 30. dayes? So four daies shalbe attri∣buted for the execution of everie one: for they are not powred out al togi¦ther, and confusedly: but the same order and course is kept doubtlesse in the executing, that is kept in the declaring. Wherfore, to let passe the five first vials, those unclean Spirits of the sixt, which come out of the mouth of the Dragon, of the Beast, and of the false Prophet, and goe forth unto the Kings of the whole earth, to gather them togither unto battel; shal they effect al this in the four daies next before the last? We have heard of Anti∣christs incredible swiftnes, going over the whole earth in so smal a space of his reign: but greater shalbe the speed of these his ministers, who shal both survey the whole earth in foure daies, and bring forth unto battell verie populous armies. Verilie this expedition is most expedite or soon dispatched: and such as onelie deserveth properly the name of an expedi∣tion. Doo you not yet perceive how false, absurd, trifling, and mere igno¦rance the things are which you babble about these matters? When yow shal prove that the seven last plagues shal be al to be accomplished in 30. daies; we wil assent unto you that Antichrist shal survive the two slain Pro∣phets, one moneth onelie; as also that ther is an agreement of these num∣bers in Daniel and Iohn: in the meane while we wil determine that these two have their divers intendements, and doo not Prophesie of the same things by these numbers. Thirdly I say, although that whol indefinite
space did consist with most exact agreement, of those eyther moneths or daies; yet are yow never the neerer for obteining your purpose. For the question is, whither those moneths or daies or yeres be to be taken properly or no, not whither the account doo agree; which may agree alike, whither they be taken properlie or figurativelie: seing there is the same proportiō in the type and the truth; though neither the type be the truth, nor the truth the type. How therfore doo you prove, that they are to be taken pro¦perlie? By testimonie you say, of the Fathers, some of which you bring forth in the answer to Chytreus, and the men of Maydenburgh. I answer. those ancient Fathers are to be pardonned, that being ignorant of the event, thought they should hold fast unto the letter: but seing manie things are now made clear by the issue, whosoever dooth abuse the patronage of their names, to confirm himself in errour, he shal procure on his own head just condemnation. Therfore you must eyther bring forth some thing of greater weight; or freely confesse, that that reign of 3. yeres and a halfe, hath no defense from these Scriptures. Secondly, you prove it by this, that the time of the Divil loosed, and of An¦tichrist should be verie short; as Apoc. 12.12. Woe to the land and sea, for the Di¦vil is come down unto you, having great wrath, knowing that he hath but a little ti∣me. I answer, a little and indefinite time concludetht nothing at al, for a certain and definite reign of 3. yeres and a halfe: so that little help or none rather you get from this place. Moreover, that which you cal the time of the Divil loosed, is the time of the Divil bound: who so soone as he was cast out of heaven, was cast into prison. For everie place is to him lothsome, & like a prison, without the assemblie of the Saincts, among whom he most coveteth to converse, for greater oportunitie to his wickednes: wherupō the Lord saith, that the unclean Spirit being cast out of a man, walketh through dry places, as in which ther is no pleasure for his minde, Mat. 12.43. &c. But these things we have made evident in explayning the Prophesie. Seing therfore the Divils prisonment is for 1000 yeres, & here that time is spo∣ken of wherunto you wil have Antichrists durance to be equal: his reign shalbe much longer by this place, than you are willing to grant. But, say you, how can so manie yeres be a little time? I answer, if the words be rightly in¦terpreted, here is no mention of durance, but of opportunitie. For wher you read, knowing that he hath but a litle time, it is properlie thus, knowing that he hath litle opportunity. So  properlie signifieth, noting the qualitie of time, not the quantitie, wherby it is distinguished from , as Ammo∣nius sheweth. And reason convinceth that so it is to be taken in this pla∣ce. If it should be understood durance, the Divil should be angry for the
thousand yeres of his prison, (in which he liveth, by those words, as we have said;) as being bound for a lesser space than he would. Which how farr it is from his disposition, his diligence night and day to destroy men, dooth sufficiently shew. The time therfore was longer than he desired, but the opportunity litle: leav being now given him onelie over his own, whō he had rather spare, and shew his crueltie on the elect. Wherfore this pla¦ce is nothing to the matter, for many causes. The second is, Apoc. 20.3 he bound him for a 1000. yeres, and afterwards he must be loosed for a litle time. I answer, now in deed he speaketh of time; and therfore wheras before it was  season, whiles he lay in bands; now it is  time, when he is loosed. But how say you, shal this be true, if Antichrist shal reign 1260 yeres? I answer, this is not the loosing of Antichrist, but of the Divil; that his time is short, but Antichrists time long, who reigneth not onely when the Divil is loosed, but also when he is bound; as Apoc. 20.3.4. wher the Di∣vil is bound 1000. yeres, whiles the Beast in the meane time is despised of the elect, but dominiereth over his owne, by his Mark, and other signes of servitude; as upon that place shalbe spoken more at large. Thirdly you say, because as Augustine and Gregorie doo reason, except that greevous persecuti¦on should be very short, many should perish, which are not for to perish, wherupon our Lord also saith, unlesse those dayes were shortned, no flesh should be saved, Mat. 24.22. I answer; this of Matthew, agrees not to the persecution of Antichrist, but to the affliction of Ierusalem. What flight shall ther be under your An¦tichrist, (such as there is mentioned,) when al the world shal plainlie obey him? Or what shal the Sabbath hurt Christians that flee? Or how shall new false Prophets have place, after your great Antichrist, who shal come you say, a litle before the end of the world? how be it after that affliction, the Lord foretelleth that such, shal come a fresh: ver. 24. Therfore what names soever you pretend for this interpretation, ther is no firmnes in it. Moreover, if I should grant that this persecution is both Antichrists, and short: what is this for 3. yeres and a halfe? The Spirit said to the Angel of Ephesus, unlesse thou repent, I wil come against thee shortly, Apoc. 2.5. Was that Angel punished within 3. yeres and a halfe? Therfore here is no probabilitie of Antichrists durance, but this your Demonstration is like your other. This also I wil tel you of in as word, though it perteyns no∣thing to the force of the argument, that you had rather speak amisse ma∣nie should perish, which are not to perish, then to say with the Scripture, that they should deceive, if it were possible the verie elect. For that which the Lord saith, no flesh should be saved, he spake of the destruction of the flesh, with greevous¦nes of the slaughter: not of the peril of salvation of soules.
Fourthly you say, Christ preached onely three yeres and a halfe; therfore it is meet also that Antichrist be permitted to preach no longer. I answer, you are a nota∣ble disputer verilie. Wil you have Christ, to be a type of Antichrist? If it were so appointed, the agreement of yeres would perhaps be meet: but being as you mind, they directly crosse one an other, it is rather meet all things should be contrarie; namely that Antichrist should reign very lōg, because Christ did it opēlie in the world a verie short time. So also should Christs glory appear the greater in subduing this enemie: the longer that his tyrannie hath continued. Enemies doo not set themselves to imitate their enemies: and in manie other things they are quite contrarie. For as Christ was verie poor; so Antichrist is verie rich: as Christ was a subiect, so Antichrist is a King: as Christ patiently suffred al injuries, so Antichrist studiously inferreth them: as Christ had not where to lay his head, so An¦tichrist aboūdeth with so great wealth, as he is also able to carie the whore. Wil you require a similitude of yeres in these? Fiftly, you say, because the summ of 1260 yeres, which the adversaries doo ap∣point, can no way be applyed unto those words of Daniel and John, a time, times, & halfe a time; I answer; I have often alreadie shewed, that we are not much to be trobled about Daniel. But what letteth, I pray you, the applicatiō unto these words of Iohn? Because by a time, you say, without doubt must be understood some one number, as one day, one week, one moneth, one yere, one five-yeres-tide, one Jubilee, one hundred-yeres, one thousand &c. I answer, but you without doubt are egregiously deceived: neither doo I thing that you w∣rote these things waking, but a sleep, or nodding. Doo not you see, that by this reason, you reiect not onelie the yeres of the adversaries, but even the daies and moneths which the Angel himselfe setteth? A time, you say, must be doubtlesse some one number, as one day, one week, one moneth, &c. Be it therfore one day, then times shalbe two dayes, half a time, halfe a day. Now have we the summ of three dayes and a halfe: where then shalbe the other 1256. dayes and a halfe? So let a time be one moneth, times wilbe two moneths, halfe a time, 15. dayes; al which ioyned togither, make three moneths and 15. dayes; wil the 42. moneths be brought at length to these? But I will not aske too lowd least I be troblesome to your sleepy head: I wil whisper to you as low as I can, that a time of dayes, is not one day, but three hun∣dred and sixtie dayes; times, are twise as manie, namely 720: halfe a time, 180. Likeweise also a time of yeres, is 360. yeres; times, 720. halfe a time, 180. So a time of moneths, is 12. moneths; times, 24. halfe a time, six These things, when you are awake, think on, I pray you: and in the mean time dream sweetly those 3400. yeree which by your account you have wrung
out from your adversaries. Sixtly, you say, the 7. times in Daniel chap. 9. are seven yeres; if they should be taken otherweise, so manie dayes for so manie yeres, Nabuchodonosor had lived with∣out his Kingdome two thousand five hundred fifty and five yeres. Therfore one time in Iohn, shalbe one usual yere, and 2. times 2. yeres, and so forward. I answer, it is ridiculous to tie words alwayes unto one signification, except where cer¦tayn reason, and necessity doo constreyn. Daniel himselfe is sayd to have fallen on hes knees three times in a day; I think you wil not have it that he fell on his knees three yeres in a day, Dan. 6.11. And thus now you have dispu¦ted of Antichrists three yeres reign, as besides the bare names of some mē, which are not meet witnesses in this matter, you have nothing which may hold eyther you or any other Papist in this opinion: yea (I may say some∣what more and truly,) wherof you and al Papists may not wel be ashamed, which suffer your selves to be deceyved in so great a matter, with such leight and childish toyes. God grant, the truth be not now also shewd you in vayn, as it hath been heretofore. Ther remayneth one thing in this chapter to be considered, which you answer unto the argument of Illyri∣cus, wher you say, that in the Scripture ther is found indeed & rightly sayd weeks of yeres, but not dayes, for yeres, or moneths of yeres: and that it is rightly ca∣led a week, because it hath the name of the number seven: but moneths and dayes are names of number, but of the course of the man, or time of light. I answer, wher¦as first you say that dayes are not found for yeres: it is manifestly false. Saith not the Lord to the Israelits, according to the number of the dayes, wher∣in you serched the land, even fourtie dayes, you shal bear your iniquities fourtie yeres? Num. 14▪ 34. what can be plainer? Likeweise unto Ezechiel, A day for a yere have J given thee: chap. 9.6. But, say you, he wil not say, for dayes literally are meant yeres, but the dayes are truly taken for yeres, and they are sayd to be given for yeres, because they were a signe of yeres. O witt, worthy of Neesing wort! A day is not a very yere, but onely a signe or signification of a yere: as if any ever thought a day to be a yere truly and properlie? Or if a day might signify a yere in Ezechiel, & other places, but might not in Iohn? But now let us hear the reason why a week may be of yeres, and not a day likeweise: forsooth because a week signifieth number; a day not. To this I say, unitie in∣deed is not number, and a day answereth to unitie, and this verie subtilly. How be it we dullars doo think that number is the gathering togither of unities; & that unities ar such as is the whole it selfe which is made of thē. Therfore as 7 dayes signify 7 yeres; so I pray you with your good leav, let it be lawful for one day to signify one yere: which if you wil let us obteyn at your hands; in thanks for so great a benefit, we wil grant your Pope a lōg lasting reign, even 1260. yeres
Chapt. 9. Against the sixt Demonstration▪ from the end of the world. THE sixt Demonstratiō is taken from the last sign that foloweth Anti∣christ, which shalbe the end of the world. If Antichrist, say you, had bin come long since, the world had been at an end long since; for he is to come a litle before the end of the world: but the world is not yet ended: therfore he is not yet come. I an¦swer, If that of Antichrists three yeres reign, had been certayn; this which you say, should have some weight: but forasmuch as we have proved that to be a vayn fiction, partly by taking away your reasons, partly by pro∣pounding such as you wil never be able to refute; the end of the world maie wel teach Antichrists end, but is of no force at al to demonstrate his coming, if we wil speake of it properlie. From the places by you cited, som perhaps may argue thus. The end of the world is conioyned with the end of Antichrist: but the end of the world is not yet come; therfore neyther the end of Antichrist. But what is this to the purpose? We make question of his comming, not of his end. You might have spared this labour; unlesse perhaps you thought these were to be prepared against a new battel, whē Antichrists case shalbe debated in hell. There this domonstration may hav som weight, wher it shalbe certaynly known whither the Pope be perished, togither with the destruction of al the world, or no. VVherfore the testi∣monies which you bring are quite from the purpose, and make nothing for the matter in hand. Yea what and if they prove not that end which you think? Then wil this your demonstratiō be altogither both without head and tayl. Let us see in few words, that we may also illustrate as it were by the way some obscure places; whose meaning it wilbe verie profitable for to know. First you allege that of Dan. ch. 7.9. J considered the horns & loe an other litle horn came up, & three of the first horns were pluckt away from before him. I beheld til the thrones were set up, and the ancient of dayes did sit &c. And afterwards explaining the vision, he saith, The fou th Beast shalbe the fourth Kingdome: and the ten horns ar ten Kings, & an other shal rise up after them, & he shalbe mightier than the former, & shal subdue three Kings &c. And they shal be given into his hand for a time & times & halfe a time, & iudgement shal sit. I an∣swer, neither is the litle horn, the Antichrist, as we hav shewed neither if he were, dooth his end lead unto the knowledge of that coming But leaving these, let us weigh for what cause this is cited. From these words yow would teach that the end should straightway folow that litle horn. But you ought to have considered withal the words after, in ver. 14. & to him was givē dominiō & glorie & kingdom, that al peoples natiōs & tongues should serve him▪
That is, he which shal obteyn the Kingdom, when the litle horne is de∣stroyed, shalbe an universal King, unto whom al nations shal obey. But shal ther remain a distinction of peoples, nations, and tongues, after the last end? yet is it more playne after, if plainer may be, in verse 27. And the Kingdome, and amplitude, and rule of Kingdomes, shalbe given to the people of the holy most High, whose Kingdome shalbe a perpetual Kingdome, and al Rulers shal serve it. VVher first it is to be observed, that the dominion of this King∣dome, shalbe of the things under heaven: then, that it shalbe the holy Most-High; and finally, that al rulers shal serve this Kingdome: which things cannot have place in the heavenlie Kingdome. The thing s thus; that litle horne is the Turk, who being at last extinguished, the Iewes cō∣verting universallie al of them unto the faith, shal have a perpetual domi∣nation, that shal dure until the coming of our Lord from heaven. For the litle horn in Daniel, is Gog in Ezechiel, who being slayn, the Christian faith shal exceedingly flourish among the Iewes, as is shewed by that ty∣pical building of the Temple & new Citie. The same reason is of the new Ierusalem in this Apocalypse, after Gog is slain, ch. 20.21. These things we have partly taken out of the 16. chap. of the Apocalypse; partly they shal be explayned hereafter more fully. And this is that which Lactantius writeth, lib. 7. chap. 15. The name of Rome, saith he, wherwith the world now is ruled, (my hart is afraid to speake it, but speake it I wll, because it shal come to passe) shalbe taken away from the earth, and the Empire shal returne into Asia; & the East again shal have dominion, and the West shal serve. The second place is Ap. 20.4 After this he must be loosed a litle time: and I saw seats, and they sate upon them, and iudgement was given unto them. I answer, these things are farr from the last end. For they folow not as you think after the Divil is loosed; but these seats are placed during his imprisonment. Againe, there are 1000 yeres before the first resurrection; then they that first rise, doo reign 1000 yeres, as is expressely said ver. 6. Therfore these seats and this iudgement. which you suppose to be of the last end. doo goe before it 2000 yeres at least; such a stranger are you in these mysteries. Then to that which is al∣leged out of Dan. 12. Blessed is he that wayteth and cometh unto the 1335 dayes, that is, say you, unto 45 dayes after Antichrists death, for then the Lord shal com to iudgment, and wil give the crowns of righteousnes to them that overcome. I an∣swer, as touching this place, we are to explain it after, chap. 20.11. and it may be one day we wil take in hand the ful handling of it. In the meane while let us know, that the destruction of Antichrist properly so caled, is not here handled, nor our Lords coming to the last judgmēt, which shall not make al blessed upon whom it cometh, whē manie shal desire that they
may be covered by the mountains from his sight: but the ful caling of the Iewes, where Daniel stayeth his Prophesie; neither doo anie Prophesies go further. Fourthly you come unto Mat. 24. this Gospel of the Kingdome shalbe prea∣ched in the whole world, for a testimonie to al nations, and then shal the end be. I an¦swer, here is no mention of your Antichrist: and again, the end in this pla∣ce, is the end of the Iewish politie, not of the world, as I have shewed ch. 4. against your first Demonstratiō. But you add the words folowing; Straight∣way after the tribulation of those dayes, the Sun shalbe darkned, and the Moon shal not give her light, and then shal appeare the sign of the Son of man. I answer, ney∣ther dooth these make anie thing for Antichrists destruction to be ioyned with the end of al things, seing they speak not of him at al. Yet that wee may see the interpretation of the words, let us discusse them a litle. VVith one consent, as I suppose, it is applyed unto our Lords last judgment. But this Apocalypss teacheth both to think and to speak more distinctly of this thing. For from hence we doo understand, that the Lords coming which is yet to be hereafter, is twofold; the one spiritual (so named for ex∣cellencie,) in the caling of the Iewes; the other corporal, at the general iudgment. And that coming in Mathew, seemeth to be spiritual, which is in deed described to be most glorious and powrful, by the corporal furni∣ture; as that which shalbe both a clear resemblance and as it were a cer∣tayn pawn therof, & also no change shal afterward come between, which may make the corporal to appear as new And that thus the thing is, may easily be perceived, if we mind how the Disciples in the beginning of the chapter inquired of the end of the Temple, of the Lords coming, and the end of the world. VVithout doubt under Christs coming they comprehē∣ded the restoring of their nation: and therfore after the Lords resurrectiō, supposing that this was the coming which he had givē them hope of; they aske him agayn, Lord wilt thou at this time restore the Kingdome to Israel? Act. 1.6. But Christ answering, and by a continued order prosecuting the things to come, teacheth first the destruction of Ierusalem, and dissipatiō of the Iewes: then he annexeth the rest of the course of things, neither a∣nie where mentioneth he anie restoring, before this his glorious coming. Therfore it must eyther be conteyned in this his appearing, or ther wil be none: which opinion, if the Disciples had in mind conceived by this an∣swer, surely they would not have nourished any exspectation of a King∣dome afterwards. Besides, a tribulation next goeth before this coming, for so he saith, immediatly after the tribulation of those dayes, the Sun shalbe darkned; and then shal appeare the sign of the Sun of man &c. But before his corporal
coming, no such tributation shal goe immediatly before. For after the ca¦ling of the Iewes, and the new constituted Church, God wil wipe awaie e∣verie tear from their eies, and death shalbe no more, neither shal mour∣ning, nor crying, nor sorow be anie more, for the former things are pas∣sed away; Apoc. 21.4. VVherfore that coming is not corporal. It may be also that hath some force, which he saith that the signe of the Son of man shall appear; as if purposely he would distinguish between this spiritual coming, and the corporal folowing. Hereunto perteyneth, that those words All the Tribes shal wail &c. Apoc. 1 7. we have there shewed to belong unto the Iewes; and that this wailing is of repentance, which wilbe too late at the corporal coming. Thus much breifly touching the meaning of these words: which though they help your cause nothing, how ever they be ta∣ken; yet was it not impertinent by the way to seek out the truth that is hidd in them. Therfore I answer unto that Thess. 2.8. Then shal the wicked man be reve∣led, whom the Lord shal slay with the Spirit of his mouth, & destroy with the bright¦nes of his coming: ther is the same meaning of this coming, that is of that in Mathew. At the caling of the Iewes, when he shal give a most bright resē∣blāce of himselfe present in the Church, shal Antichrist utterly be destroy¦ed: as we made playn in the former chapter. For after the throne of the Beast is darkned, the way shalbe prepared for the Kings of the East; that is, the Iewes shalbe caled straight after Rome is destroyed. For shee one∣ly hindreth this ioy. Then, after the Beast and False Prophet and Dragō are cut off; that is, after the Bishop of Rome, and the Turk be extinct (as after shalbe shewed more at large;) the mysterie shalbe finished, and the ful caling performed, Your Pope, whom you, Bellarmine, boast to be the head of the Church, shal neither be head nor foot in the holy congrega∣tion of the children of God. And now see how farr these mountayns are under heaven; whose tops, you standing a farr off did think, were hidden among the starrs. The last place is 1 Iohn. 2.18. Children it is the last hour, and as you have heard that Antichrist cometh, even now ther are manie Antichrists, wherby wee know that it is the last hour. I answer, what Iohn here concludeth, we easily see and acknowledge: he proveth that it is the last hour, because then ma¦nie Antichrists were come. For Antichrist should come in the last hour. VVhere is to be observed, that Iohn alluding to the parable of the labou∣rers, Mat. 20.6. of whom some were hyred about the eleventh hour: cō∣pareth al this age from Christ until his last coming, unto this last elevēth hour. Then, that he saith this noysome age shalbe of Antichrist, whom he
putteth not off unto the last minute of this howr, but deferrs him to some indefinite space therof. These things dooth Iohn truly, holily, agreably, to his other writings. But what must you needs conclude from hence; who wil not have Antichrist to be yet come? Even thus, and no other way: He that shal come in the last howr, he is not yet come; Antichrist shal come in the last howr; therfore he is not yet come. I bring it into form, that you may see your usual manner of reasoning, and be ashamed. Your sylogism walks on fowr feet. In the major, by the last howr you understand some litle space, to weet, 3. yeres and a halfe before the last end: or otherweise, if it comprehend al the time from the first coming to the second, the pro∣position is most false. In the minor, the last howr is taken in the sense that Iohn useth it, for the whole time of grace, until Christs second coming: or if it be taken more strictly for 3. yeres and a halfe, it is a foolish begging of the question, and Iohns authoritie is pretended in vayn. You bring a simi¦litude to illustrate Iohns argumēt, namely that he speaketh of Antichrist, as one may doo of the Sun, whose beams when it ariseth he caleth the Sū, and that so his argument is firm. Even as one may raison of the last howr of the night, the Sun riseth in the last howr of the night: the Sun beams doo now lighten the aier; therfore this is the last howr of the night. I answer, the similitude is fitt y∣nough for the significatiō which the Apostle useth: for alwaies in the same howr the Sun beams and the Sun it selfe are seen. Wherupon he that ma∣keth al this last age, one howr; dooth not amisse, to mention his fore-run∣ners in the beginning of it. But you that make the last howr to be 3 yeres and a halfe: what help cā you have by the similitude of the Sun & beams? For if you part the howr into sixtie minutes, Antichrists forre-rūners doe come before him no more than 210. yeres. What are these few yeres, un¦to the 1500. yeres, in al which you grant Antichrists beams have been cō¦spicuous, and yet hitherto he hath not appeared; and when at length he shall appear, he shalbe to be seen but 3 yeres and a halfe? How unlike is he to the Sun? And how unlike are his ministers to the beams? The beams goe scarcely half an howr before the Sun; which straightway arising yeil∣deth it selfe to be seen 12. houres: but these forerunners of Antichrist doe glister 1500. yeres, and Antichrist himselfe is not yet appeared; and when he shal be come, he shal not shine one minute in respect of that space. If therfore Antichrist be answerable to his forerunners, as the Sun is to his beams: he must needs be come now many ages since, seing his fore-run∣ners shined in Iohns time. Take heed hereafter how you have to doo with the Sun. This Delius as his māner is, hideth not vices, but discloseth them. At last, from scriptures you descend to the consent of Fathers, and the cō¦fession
of adversaries. They with their consent wil help you nothing, who al of them verily, if they were this day alive, would with like consent ac∣knowledge that in manie things they erred. I confesse also, that our men doe think Antichrist shal reign til the worlds end: but I pray you, let them have place to change their minde, when they are taught better. In things not yet sufficientlie found out, they think it sufficient to insist in the foot∣stepps of other men: but when they shal see the truth, (to whose voice a∣lone they know for to hearken,) shine from another part, being confir∣med by most sure arguments and use, you shal perceive that they depar∣ting from you, wil leave you naked, of whose confession you now doo boast. These things thus finished, you come to the insoluble Demonstration, fetched partly from Antichrists three yeres reign, and partly from the worlds dissolution conioyned with his death. Antichrist, say you, is not yet come, neither is the Bishop of Rome he: because straight-after Antichrists death, the world shalbe ended, and Antichrist shal not live, after he hath appeared and begun to reign, but three yeres & a halfe. And the Pope hath reigned now with both swords in our adversaries iudgement above 500. yeres, and yet the world dureth stil. I an∣swer, I trust I have alreadie sufficientlie manifested, that that first point, to weet, that the world shal end straight after Antichrists death, is not with anie cō¦petent reason by you cōfirmed; but that the scriptures alledged, doe speak an other thing, farr distant from the last end. Then that the second point also, viz. that Antichrist shal live but 3 yeres and a halfe after he hath be∣gun to reign, is in the former chapter convinced to be most false: and to be nothing els but the efficacie of errour, to deceive them which beleeve not the truth, that at last they may perish in eternal destruction. And ther¦fore that which you gather from these rotten foundations, viz. that Anti∣christ is not yet come, and that the Pope of Rome is not he; is most vayn. Seing albeit the Pope hath reigned with both swords abov 500. yeres: yea and to yeild you more, hath fulfilled 1300. whole yeres: yet nothing let∣teth it him from being the Antichrist; nay he is the more convinced by this to be the wicked man; as we hav shewed by undoubted reasons, groū¦ded on sure and tried principles. Ghapt. 10. Of Antichrists proper name. THE fourth cheif point comprehendeth two disputations; one of An∣tichrists proper name; another of his mark. His proper name, by all mens joint consent, is gathered from that number chap. 13.18. And his number is 666. And this we have shewed in handling that place to be no other than Latinos, it being plainly confirmed by use, and the agreement
of al things. And surely Irenaeus manie ages agoe, (whither led by conje∣cture, or that he had so received from others, the auditors perhaps of the Apostles,) wrote that it was verie like to be this name. His words hereof are these; But the name Latinos also hath the number of 666. and it is very likely, because the most true Kingdome hath this title. For the Latines are they that now reign, but of this we wil not boast. Thus writeth he. I confesse Irenaeus resteth not in this name, but supposeth Titan to be more worthy of credit: yet his conjecture of the Latin Kingdome, came neerer the mark thā he weened. And because you feel your selfe pressed with his authoritie as with a great preiudice; you thought it best first to weaken that; and therfore his conie∣cture, you say, is at this day nothing, because the Latines doo not so much reign, as the Turks, Spaniards, Frenchmen. I answer, this your instance is altogither nothing. For it is not needful that the Kingdome of which Antichrist should spring, should alwayes be most mightie: but it is ynough if it have been so some long time; as the Latine was after Irenaeus for many ages. An¦tichrists Kingdome shalbe weakned by litle and litle, before the absolute and last wasting, until at length it be utterly ruinate. Wee have heard that Jezabel should be cast into a bed of languishment, chap. 2.22. And have yow not read afterwards that Babylon is fallen, is fallen: chap. 14.8. That the worshipers of the Beast were made botchie; his throne darkned, that Antichrist him selfe with his, should gnaw their tongues for rage: chap. 16.2.10. Finall, that the Kings should forsake the whore, make her naked, eat her flesh, and at last burn her with fyre, chap. 17.16. Have you not, I say, read these things; and doo you require notwithstanding that Antichrists Kingdom should flourish unto the last moment of time, even as it did in former ages? Certainlie you take for defense, that which most of al killeth your cause. For unlesse the Ro∣man Kingdome were fallen at last from the highest top unto this so low a step, it should not be Antichristian. Secondly you obiect, that Latinos, for to signifie the Roman, is not written by a diphtong ei, but by simple i, & then it makes not that number. I answer: Irenae{us} doubtlesse knew the orthographie of the word, as wel as Bellarmine. He would never hav said it was very likely, if so be the iust writing of it had disa¦greed frō the iust accoūt. And he that so exactly warneth of the name Tei∣tā saying that the first syllable is writtē by the 2 greek vowels e & i: could he not see what Latinos needed for the true orthographie? And wheras Latinos is at this day writtē by single i? you need not, I trow, betaught that lōg i a∣mōg the Romās was wōt to be pronoūced lik the diphtōg ei, & had litle e included. So Cic. wrote Bini in latine, for the greek binei, lib. 9. Epist. unto Papyrius Paet., in the Ep. which beginneth thus, amo verecūdiā.
And we at this day both pronounce and write Celeberrimi, Vis, primus, Cap∣tiv.: which yet are found in ancient Inscriptions, Celeberrimei, Ʋeis, preimus, Capvi. Although therfore we now write Latinos, yet is it not to be doub∣ted but of old it was written by a diphtong, as Irenaeus hath it without a∣nie stammering. So the ancient Greeks doo indifferently expresse the He∣brues great Chirik or I, sometime by single i, sometime by ei: wherupō in tht complaint of Christ Eli, Eli, &c. some write it Elei, Elei, as Iohn Drusius hath observed. This therfor which yow object about the writing, is leight, and of no moment al al. Thirdly, you say, Antichrists name should be proper unto him, and most usual: for it must be shewed for a sign of al that buy or sell And no Pope was ever caled by this proper name Latinus, neither doo they commonly cal themselves Latines, but onely Bishops or Popes. I answer, Experience in deede dooth very wel satisfy this argument. But, say you, Latinos is not the proper name of any Pope. Wel then, let some Frenchman or Spaniard, or German, or any other, ta∣ke to himselfe the name and authoritie, eyther of the Latine Pope, or La∣tine Bishop, or Latine Patriarche; (for Latine is not a nown substantive, as they say, but an adiective, to which some thing must needs be ioyned;) the Bishop of Rome, I trow, wil be nothing angrie, who looseth nothing by a common name. Or rather wil not the Antipapal warr be renewed: the Romā cursing the mā with al execrations, who shal challenge that which properly perteineth unto his seate? So farre therfore is it, that this name is not proper to anie Pope, as it is proper to al, for the time they hold the chaire: seing Antichrist is a succession of Bishops, not a singular person, as is shewed before. Neyther are Forenames & Surnames onely proper; but whatsoever noteth out a thing plainly, distinctly, certainly, and truly, is to be counted a proper name. Vnlesse perhaps you onely can not tell who is the Greek or Syrian or Aegyptian Patriarch, because none was ever caled by these proper names? Againe, the same use may teach, how this name is shewed of al for a sign. For let ther be some one of us, with yow Papists, and let him openly declare himselfe to be an enemie of the Latine name, religion, Empire; shal he sel anie thing among you, unlesse it be his head? Or shal he buy anie other thing then a sure gibbet? The Greeks are for a proof, of how great moment this name is; which could receive no com∣fort from these of the west, before they acknowledged this name, and sub¦jected themselves to the Latine Pope: as we shewed before, chap. 13. Fourthly, you say, there are innumerable names which make this number. I answer, this name is not onelie to be iudged by the number, but also by al properties ioyned togither, which the Spirit hath fixed as railes, to des∣cribe
the greatnes of it. For ther must be such a number of 666, as should make a numerable and famous name, at that time whē this Prophesie was given to Iohn: which notwithstanding for the Churches good was not then openly to be divulged, least it should procure unnecessarie peril: and finally, by which men which take the marke therof, are received unto mu∣tual traffique. That this is the true and natural description of this name, we have learned from Apoc. 13.18. as upon that place we shewed: & now if al these properties doo agree to innumerable or manie names, let them be al of like account. But seing neither Teitan, nor Arnoumai, nor Lam∣petes or other of like sort; nor Martin Luther, nor Luther, nor Dabhidh Ci∣thraiu David Chitraeus, nor Saxoneios, or anie other like fiction can be fitly applyed unto that purpose: needs must Latinos, not onely for the conve∣nience of the number, but for the agreement also of al the properties, be counted the onely and true name of Antichrist. The last refuge and insoluble argumēt is, that men doo yet strive with great controversie about this name: for if, say you, Antiehrist were come, and the Bi∣shop of Rome were he: his name would be certainly known: for al Prophesies whē they are fulfilled, are made most certayn. Christs name noted of Siby lla by the number 888. was hidd from al, before his coming: but after he was come, al controversie was taken away, and al men plainly know that he is caled Jesus. I answer, that is false which you simply & absolutely doo avouch of the clearnes of Prophesies after they be fulfilled. The Prophesies in deed are clear, when they have their event, but unto them whom they concern, and whose eyes God o∣peneth: as for the unbeleevers and the other wicked multitude, they con¦tinue darke and obscure unto them, no lesse when they are fulfilled, than before. For why doo the Iewes deney Christ to be yet come, when so ma∣ny ages sithens, the thing hath been performed? Why did they not ack∣nowledge Elias in the person of the Baptist: whē as that of Malachie, poin∣ted at him evidently with the finger? Ther is no doubt, but that abominati∣on of desolation which Daniel foretold, and Christ biddeth so diligently to be considered: was fulfilled in the destruction of Ierusalem. But doo all even Christians agree, what this abomination was? As for Sibyll, her Acro∣stik verses might have taught, what this name should be. Yet the Iewes doo neither beleev Sibyll, neither wil they have the name Iesus fitlie to a∣gree unto that number. They strive about the orthographie, (as you ere∣while did for yours;) they take away the last letter, writing the name un∣perfect and maymed Jessu: or if they grant the letter Ain should be joy∣ned therto, yet they ask by what reasō the Greek Sigma is put in the place therof; seing otherwhere it is wont to be expressed by A or by N. Doo
you see then how vayn & frivolous this argumēt is? Doo you, for to prov that Antichrist is not yet come, afford help to the Iewes; that withal you may evince, that Christ is not come neither? But it suteth wel, that Christ should be oppugned, & Antichrist defended, with the same arguments. You cannot, Bellarmine, whiles you ar environned with the thick smoke of the pit, behold with pure eyes the Angel of the bottomlesse pit. You must goe forth into the wildernes with Iohn, from out of the vapour of the in∣fernal cave: & then wil al things appear unto you clearly. Chapt. 11. Of Antichrists Mark. IN what things the Mark of the Beast consisteth; I have largely declared chap. 13.16.17. Against which Bellarmine obiecteth two things; one from the text; another from the antiquitie of the signes by which we define the mark. From the text he gathereth four things. First, that the mark shal∣be one, not many. For alwayes, saith he, the Scripture speaks in the singular num∣ber, as wel of the mark as of the name, and of the Number of the name of Antichr. And therfore sing the adversaries doo make so many marks, as the oth of fealtie, the Priestly unction, the profession of the Roman faith &c. they know not what mark it is. I answer: that which you say of the singular number of the Mark, is verie infirme; seing Aretas, the Compl. edition, and some other copies of no smal authoritie, doo read, that they might give them , Marks, or Characters: ver. 16. Neither is that by reason of the multitude which re¦ceiveth: forasmuch as the same copies with one consent doo expresse the seal of God in the singular number, although they speak of many; as they which have not the seal, , not, the seals, chap. 9.4. Moreover, is it strange unto you that any multitude should be signified in the singular number, and contrariweise, one thing in the plural number? But the name and number of the name, you say, are singular things. Be it so; surely by like reason you might conclude that Musraijn is of the form singular, because Put and Canaan, with which it is ioyned, ar of that form: Gen. 10.6. Who ever urged this, that al words should be of lik force, which ar rehearsed in any one sentēce? But, if Grammar perhaps wil not satisfie you, yet Logike wil constrein you to rest; which teacheth that a mark or character is one in the name, but manifold in the thing. For a mark is that which necessarily al must receiv, ver. 16. but it is necessary that al receiv, eyther the mark pro¦perly so caled, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his name, ver, 16. Therfore these al ar marks; & that which is universally caled a mark ver. 16 we now perceiv cōteyneth moe kinds, & that you falsly affirm the marke to be one.
Secondly, you obiect, that the mark is common to all: the oth of fealtie, and Preistly unction, is of few: I answer, the mark is twofold; the one general cō∣prehending in it al the other ensignes of the Beast: the other special, a part & member of the former. For that which is first caled a mark, ver. 16. is distributed into three members, ver. 17. namely, into the mark, so caled by the name of the whole; the name of the Beast; & the number of his name. Now then see how finely you reason. The mark is common to all: the oth of fealtie is not common to all: therfore it is not the mark. In the major, the mark is taken generally: but then nothing can be concluded therupō, but that the oth of fealtie, or preistly unction, & such like, is not the gene¦ral marke: which I easily grant. Or if it signify a special mark; the proposi¦tion is particular, and so the whole reason, is without reason. After the same manner one may prove that a man is not a sensible creature. For a sē¦sible creature is a thing common to al that have sense; a man is not a thing common to al that have sense; therfore, no sensible creature. Of all the flours of Logik, you seem most to delight in Aequivocations: which yow use so often, as if you relished nothing, that is not seasoned with this salt. Thirdly you say, the mark may be caried indifferently in the right hand or in the forehead: but the oth, unction, profession, &c. belong not to these parts: & ther¦fore ar not marks. I answer, by your sport you make your selfe a sport most of al. Surely no sober man, when he seeth the mark to be caled by a bo∣rowed Speech, would require the places on which it is imprinted, to be ta¦ken in their natural signification. We read that the elect were sealed on their foreheads, Chapt. 7.3. Think you ther was some very brand marke set on those parts of their face? So Ezechiel saw the godly of Ierusalem, signed on their foreheads: yet no man ever beleeved, that the men, (excepting in the type) wer painted with a verie ynken mark, Ezek. 9 4. The like borowed speech is here of the forehead, & hand, & mark. The forehead is the bold & open profession: the hand is the stout and diligent labour: for the performance of both of these to the Bishop of Rome, everie of his servitours according to the condition of his place, is bound by mark. Wherupon this mark is not seen onely in the knees, as you would prettily frump our men: but, that you maie the more marvel, even whiles your selfe in time past ware a cowl on your shoulders, you openly shewed by the mark on your forehead, whose beast you were. Fourthly, you say, in Antichrists Kingdome no man should be suffred to buy or sell unlesse he shewed the mark, or name, or number of his name: but many of the Popes dominion doo buy and sell, which have not yeilded the oth of fealtie, yea in the Citie of Rome it selfe, as Iewes &c.
I answer, the necessitie of the mark for mutual traffique, is required in the subiects onely; not in strangers, such as the Iewes are estemed. For who iudgeth them that are without? But if any that is caled a Christian should shew his mind to be alienated from the Pope of Rome, he can no other∣weise traffique among you, than by procuring to himselfe the danger of his head; as we have shewed more at large Apoc. 13.17. The words ther∣fore of the text, have not yet refuted these which you cal trifles: but plain∣ly doo confirm them to contein one true meaning. Your other reason is wherby you prove that al these signes are more anciēt than Antichrist. Which that it may the more distinctly be understood, we are to know, that Antichrists time is two fold; (for this summarie division is now ynough.) The one, of his first rising, wherby he is the first Beast; the other, of his second rising after his head was healed, wherby he is the secōd Beast. Now the Mark is the ordinance of this secōd Beast, within whose borders it is conteyned, though the foundations were layd before: which began then to get it force, when the Romish ceremonies were obtruded on the Churches, and al were constreyned to undergoe the yoke of them. Wherupon that which you bring of certain rites, is altogither from the question in hand. For the antiquitie of these rites is not now dealt with al; but the time when first they were used for a sacrament of Romish obedi∣ence: which you shal not find to be before the birth of the second Beast, if you wil cast a true account. For wheras in the first place you mentiō the Chrisme of Baptisme, we acknowledge the superstition therof to be ancient; yet Sylvester the Roman, put to it some new thing, not necessarilie used in other Churches; til Augustine the Monk the Roman Apostle about the yere 600. cōpelled the Brittans to administer Baptism after the Romish manner, and to receiv the books of their other ceremonies. Con. Rom. 1. Can. 5. Innocent. 3. Decret. Epist. Beda Histor. Angl. lib. 2. cap. 2. And this Mark once received, the age folowing also imprinted deeper, & propagated larger through al Germanie by meanes of Boniface the En∣glishman, who stablished the Romish rites everie where, and remooved out of their places manie godly and learned men, that somewhat resisted the same. What should I mention other countries, of which it is now suf¦ficientlie known to everie one, both by what beginnings and proceeding at last al were branded with the same marks? Secondly, for the name Catholik, we confesse the Romish Church was in old time Catholik, (so farr as this nam cā agree to a particular Church) whiles integritie of doctrine flourished in the same: and therfore was not amisse by the ancient Fathers often so caled. I confesse also, the first decli∣ning
of this Church not being wel perceived, and Augustine, Victor Vti∣censis, & others spake honourably of this Church. But what is these mens commendation, to excuse the Antichristian loftynes that folowed? It is one thing to be Catholick; another thing to be the onely Catholik. The first, holy men acknowledged because of the consent of holynes: this other, the later Popes chalenged as proper to their seate, after that they could suffer no man, except they had him bound unto them by some sign of servitude. Then boasted they impudently, that it was necessarie to salvation, to be subiect to the Church of Rome: Bonifac. 8. Extrav. de Majorit. & obed. tit. Vni, u∣nam sanctam: and that he was an heretik, which denyed the authority and prero∣gative of that seat: Nicolaus to the Bbs. of Millain, Distinct. 22. Omnes. Which verie thing you chant at this day to the world: but a thing never heard off before, til the Beast came foorth with his branding yron. You ar wont foolishly to skip, at this word Catholik so often as you meet with it, as if it were your peculiar ensigne: but bring forth anie one place of anie approved and sufficiēt author, that made Rome a square and rule of faith, so as your Popes sacrilegiously arrogated to their seat, after the rising of the second Beast, namely after the yere of our Lord, about 600. And if you can not, then acknowledge eyther the Mark, or at least your owne lamen¦table obstinacie. Thirdly, you say, the oth of fealtie is found in the time of Gregorie, lib. 10. Epist. 31. I answer, miserable is your want, Bellarmine; who were neces∣sarily boūd to insist in the first degree, before the rising of the secōd Beast. Could nothing be produced more ancient, wherby you might put the thing out of cōtroversie? But neither dooth this oth profit you any thing; seing it was not compelled, but willingly offred; nor of anie universal or∣der receiving authoritie to doo a thing, but of one schismatik asking par∣don, and returning to the communion of Rome. Wherupon it was not the Mark, so much as a kind of resemblance and image of it to come soon after. In creating of Bishops, I find no oth more ancient than that of Bo∣niface, about the yere 726. after that the second Beast was risen up. And in ordeining of the civil Magistrate, none before that of Otho the first, in the yere 912. Shew you somthing before, or confesse that this sign, wher¦in the chief force of the special mark is conteyned, came not abroad, be∣fore the second Beast had brought it forth. Fourthly, you say, Gregorie Nazianzen mentioneth the anoynting of Preists. I answer, Nazianzen speaketh not properly but figuratively. No writer of that age, makes mention of that ordinance of Anoynting. And Innocēt 3. takes away al scruple, who plainly cōfirmeth that the Greeks used not
this manner of Anoyting in ordering Bishops, before his time. For so Decret. Epist. lib. tit. 15. he writeth to the Patriarch of Constantinople, of a certayn Branditribarense Bishop, who in his consecration had not re∣ceived the holy unction as he caleth it. Because, saith he, with you, Bishops are not wont to be anoynted when they ar consecrated: we have commanded that to be supplied in him, which he wanted, causing his head and hands to be oynted with the holy Chrisme, by the Bishop of Alba, two Bishops moe assisting him, according to the Ecclesiastical manner. Wherupon afterward he exhorteth also the Patri∣arch himselfe, that he would likeweise be anoynted. We warn therfore, saith he, your brotherhood, and diligently exhort, that you also receive the sacred unction, that you maie want nothing to make up the sacrament: and when you are anoynted with the holy Chrisme, that you likeweise anoynt your Archbishops and Bishops: & by them cause the hands of the Preists to be anoynted with the blessed oil: that in or∣deyning Preists and consecrating Bishops, you maie keepe and cause that manner to be kept, which the Apostolical seat observeth. Thus wrote he: By which it is manifest that neither Patriarch nor Archbishops nor Bishops nor Preists received any oincting in their ordination▪ til the Romish mark came unto them. Which also might be understood by Nazianzens words, who spea¦keth no otherweise of the Preists oil, than of the use of the talents, of the care of the flock, and of the oil of perfection: which are all spoken figura∣tively. Fiftly, you bring forth, the sacrifice for the dead, and the worshipping of Ima∣ges: of the beginning of which impieties ther is no need curiously to dis∣pute. VVhosoever was the author by whom first they tooke place, they became the symbols of Rome onely, after that she would have them exer∣cised by her onelie authoritie. For when she had bereft Leo Isaurus of the Empire of the VVest, for being against her Idolatrie; she made manifest un¦to all, both what her marke was, for which she so egerly contended, and with how great perill men did refuse to receive the same. Of these signes therfor, some indeede are before the second Beast, in the beginning of their superstition: but in force of binding to Rome, they be eyther al equal, or in age a litle after. But because to the former marks we have adioyned the numeral name Latinos; least perhaps you should here object the same thing which you doo in the other; I wil speak of it a few words. This name is most ancient: who knowes it not? which notwithstanding lay dead for many ages, til the Emperours translated their seat to Constantinople. Then it somwhat re∣vived, and began to be famous; as appeareth by Epiphanius in his book De mensur. & pond. speaking of the Romans, which are not stil caled Romās,
saith he, but Latines. But this name was not yet so commonly used, or so obtruded on the Churches, as to have the dignitie of a mark. VVherupō Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomen, Evagtius, doo use the same very sparing∣ly, or no where rather, to my remembrance: but so often as they speak of Rome, they cal it Old Rome, & the Provinces they distinguish by the names of the East and West onely. But after when at length the second Beast tur∣moiled al things, and a partition of the Empire was made, & limits were appointed, by Nicephorus of Constantinople, & Charles the Great: then did the name of the Roman Provinces remayn in the Eastern countries: & the VVestern were by a common name caled Latin; as appeareth by Zona∣ras, Nicetas, Gregoras, and Chalchocondilas. Neither was it ynough thenceforward for the Greeks to submitt themselves unto the Roman Pa∣triarch; (for they chalenged this name of Romans to themselves;) but now the chieftie was to be yeelded unto the Latin Bishop, or Bishop of Old Ro∣me; or otherweise no reconciliation could be made, as appeareth by the Council of Lions, under Gregorie 10. However therfore these and many other superstitions were in use many yeres, before Antichrist was known to the world: yet after they were made bonds to tye men for to defend the errours of the Church of Rome, then put they on the nature of Brands & Marks. These things doo you dispute against the true Mark, stablishing rather our opinion by your empty oppugnation, than doing it the least hurt. But what Mark doo your selfe now feign unto us? forsooth some posi∣tiv Mark which Antichrist should devise, but what it is, shal not be known until he come. I answer; if it be a positive mark, and al must receive it, as the Spirit evidently saith; then Antichrist must eyther goe to all, or at least must cō∣pell al to come to him. VVhither of the two we make it, here wil come a∣gaine that admirable journey into al lands in his three yeres space & a litle more; of which we spake in the 6. chapter of this Refutation, against the publik persecution. Or though the performance hereof be committed to his Legats: ther wil, I beleev, be more travel and busynes, than can be dispat∣ched in so litle a space. Chapt. 12. Of Antichrists generation. TOVCHING the generation and stock of Antichrist, you rehearse the opinions of certain Fathers; some of which, you say, are erroneous, some probable, othersome sure and certayn. Erroneous are the opinions of the Author of the treatise of Antichrist, among the works of Augustine, of Hippolitus Martyr, of Origen and Sulpitius. Probable, are those of Damascen, Irenaeus, Hippolitus, Am¦brose,
Augustine, Prosper, Theodoret, Gregore, Bede, Rupertus, Aretas, Richard and Anselmus. The catalogue of whom I now therfore repeat, to put you in mind, upon what authors you rely in this matter. For when you see these whom you esteem for chief witnesses in al questions, partly to be in manifest error, partly to confirm their opinion with no sure arguments: why doo you wholly depend, I pray you, upon their words, as it wree u∣pon some divine oracle, that could not be deceived? It is no wise mans part willingly to folow blind guides, especially such as himselfe ackow∣ledgeth to be blind. Awake then at last, and learn to know Antichrst ra∣ther from the truth it selfe, than from them which have scarcely seen anie shadowing pourtraiture of him. But to let these passe, let us come to those things which you count most certayn; of which the one is, that Antichrist shal chiefly come for the Jewes, and be received of them as the Messias. The other, that he shalbe borne of the Jewes stock, and be circumcised, and observe the Sabbath, at least for a time. Both which, the time of Antichrists coming teacheth to be most false. For seing he hath reigned now manie ages at Rome, to weet since the hethen Emperours were expelled; and yet the Iwes submitt not-unto him: it necessarilie foloweth, that he neither is to be received of thē as the Messias, neither shal he come chiefly for them▪ Yea neither was he to be as appeareth by the testimonie of al memorie past, which never rela¦teth any Iew to have sitten in the chaire of the Pope of Rome, and it is in some sort certayn that ther never shal. For he shal not invade by open for∣ce, and bring in a new regiment. For so he should not be the seventh head, or the eight▪ which is the same; but the ninth; wheras so manie heads the Beast hath not. And it is not likely, considering the sagenes of the Cardi∣nals, especially being holpen by the Porphyrie seat, that ever they willing¦ly wil choose such a one, whiles things remayn as they are. Al these your trifles fal to the ground, by those engins which the Spirit ministreth, and we applyed in the beginning of this treatise. But let us examine what you bring to the contrarie. First you confirm that Antichrist shal come ciefly for the Iewes, and shalbe received of them as the Messias, from the place often cited; J am come in my Fathers name, and ye receive me not: if an other come in his owne name, him ye wil receive: Iohn 5.43. I answer, it is true, that an Antichrist should be received of the Iewes; but the question is of the Antichrist pro∣perly so caled, not taken commonly. The proper Antichrist they would never acknowledge, as is most sure by manie arguments, which may be gathered from the things fore spoken: the other they would readily and studiously folow: as came to passe as we read in Seder Olam Zuta of one Cuziba, and a certayn Syrian mentioned by Paulus Diaconus, lib. 21.
rerum Rom.; and elswhere of other such like deceivers, which vaunted themselves to be the Messias. That therfore which is spoken of the Anti∣christs of the Iewes, is wrongly wrested to the great Antichrist, whom the Apocalypse and Apostles doo describe. Secondly you bring that in 2 Thess. 2.10. Because they received not the love of the truth that they might be saved, therfore God wil send them the operation of errour, that they may belpev lyes &c. This place, you say, the ancient Interpre¦ters doo expound of the Iewes: I answer, as touching the ancient Interpreters, you know their mind being possessed with some preiudice, inclined all their cogitations therunto. Wherupon it came to passe that those holy men, when once they had conceived in mind, that Antichrist should be a Iew, taking it so rather one from another than weighing the thing it self: whatsoever anie where was delivered about this matter, they applyed for the most part therunto. But, say you, the thing it self without the Fathers commentaries proclaymeth that the Apostle speaketh of the Iewes. This in deede is worthy to be considered, for from hence we shal have wherby we may judge of those Fathers testimonie. First therfore you say, Anti∣christ should be sent unto them which would not receive Christ. And who are they which more ought and would not receiv Christ, than the Jewes? I answer, rhat which you first propound, is not firm ynough. For the Apostle saith not that Antichrist should be sent unto them which would not receive Christ, but, because they received not the love of the truth. And ther is a great difference be∣tween these two; as much surely as is between Iewes & Gentiles. For this manner of speaking which the Apostle useth, properly belongeth to the Gentils, who shal bring, as he saith, this evil upon themselves; not for that they altogither refused the truth, but because outwardly professing it, they cary not that studie, zele, desire towards it, that was meet. Even as the Angel of Ephesus is blamed, (& that in the name of the whole Church of the Gentiles, as there we shewed,) for that he had left his first love; Ap. 2▪4. From these words therfore I conclude most firmly against you, that the Apostle speaks of them which acknowledging & professing the truth, did not love the same as became them, which agreeth certes to the Gen∣tiles onely, not to the Iewes: who refusing the whole truth, are not bla∣med for want of love: seing the lesser crime is not wont to be obiected, & nothing said of the greater. Secondly you say, the Apostle speaketh not in the time to come, they wil not receive: but in the time past, they have not received: which agreeth to the Iewes that would not beleeve when Christ and his Apostles preached; when in the mean while the Gentiles received the Gospel most desirously. I answer, the Apostle speaketh in respect of the time of Antichrist, of whom he trea¦teth.
God wil send Antichrist, because before Antichrist came, men studi¦ously folowed not the truth, as became them. Neither could he speake o∣therweise, unlesse he had set the punishment before the offense. For if he had sayd, because they wil not receive the truth, it might seem that Antichrist should come upō thē for the obstinacie that should be after his coming. These ar your reasons, which you say, doo proclaym that the Apostle spea¦keth of the Iewes: but if you diligently mark, you wil confesse that this is not so much as a soft whispering, unto the lowd crie on the other part. For hear what the Apostle saith in the beginning of the chapter, ver. 3. Vn∣lesse ther come a departure first, and the man of sin be reveled &c. Wherby he tea¦cheth that the departure, (or Apostasie) shal goe before Antichrist; and the Revelation of Antichrist, before the coming of the Lord. And whose de∣parture shal this be? not the Iewes: for they received not the truth at all. And defection is from a thing, which one embraced before. Moreover these mens defection could not be to come, seing they from the first prea∣ching of the faith, did resist the truth. Therfore it should be the defection of the Gentiles; and not passed, but to come. For if it had been past, the Thessalonians had seen Antichrist, who had not yet shewed himselfe, be∣ing restreyned by some impediment, as the Apostle after teacheth. But you wil say, this departure was from the Roman Empire. But let the Apostle, I pray you, interpret himselfe, who afterwards expresseth that which here he caleth a departure, by other words, for that they received not the love of the truth, ver. 10. And what other departure, could bring forth this mischee∣vous evil? Was the Roman Empire which crucified the Son of God, so re¦garded of God, as for departure from it, he would send Antichrist into the world? These are the dreams of Romish men that abound with excess and surfetting: not of such as with true desire doo folow the truth. Ther∣fore whatsoever hitherto you have said, it is clear ynough, that they be not Iewes which should receive this Antichrist, but Gentiles: and that for iust causes, Calvin of blessed memorie, and others whom yoy cal Heretiks, did depart from the ancient Fathers interpretation; & also did expoūd these things of you and such like, from whom certaynly, so farr as it seemeth, God hath taken away al iudgement of right and wrong in matters of sal∣vation; because you more esteme the honour and pleasures of this world, than the simplicitie of the Gospel. But, by reason also you would persua∣de that the Jewes are they which shal receive Antichrist, who should joyn himselfe first unto them. For they be ready to receav him, which expect the Messias to be a tē¦poral King. I answer, they are readie in deed to receive Antichrists, and oft-times they have received them, according to that which Christ foretold:
but what is this unto the Antichrist, of whom we speak? For inquisition is made of Antichrist properlie so caled, who because he hath two horns like the Lamb, Apoc. 13.11. they which hate the Lamb, doo hate him also that is somewhat like him. and therfore eschew him as much as they can. Let the Iewes therfore cal the Pope of Rome Heghmon, that is tail, and give him what reprochful names so ever: yet foloweth it not therupon, that he is not the great Antichrist, seing it is no where said that he should be ho∣noured by this people, in anie peculiar sort. For wheras you say Antichrist shal in like manner come from the Iewes to the Gentiles, as Christ came from the Iewes to the Gentiles: surely you either ghesse or dream. Yow prove nothing, unlesse perhaps you would make Christ to be a tipe of An¦tichrist; which impious divinitie of yours we heard once before, in the ch. of Antichrists durance. That which you bring therfore of Antichrist proper¦ly so caled, to be received of the Iewes, is altogither vayn. The second, which you said was also most certayn, is that Antichrist shalbe a Jew, and circumcised: and this, you say, is deduced from the things forespoken: I answer, those things alreadie spoken from which this is deduced, we have suffici∣ently shewed to be most absurd: and therfore this which is builded upon them, is of like strength and authoritie. For that which you annex in sted of confirmation, that the Iewes wil never receive a man that is not a Jew, and un¦circumcised: it makes against you. For hence it foloweth that they wil ne∣ver receive Antichrist properlie so caled, whom by necessarie reasons wee have evinced to be a Gentile and uncircumcised. Secondly, you say, Antichrist feynenth himselfe to be of Davids familie, be∣cause such a one the Jewes doo expect; I answer, either Antichrist shal fein it, or you now feyn it of him. VVhere, I pray you, dooth the holy Ghost, amōg al other notes of the true Antichrist, describe him unto us by this? But it is Gods just iudgmēt, that you which turn the truth into shadows should be deluded by shadowes in stead of the truth. And so as your custome is, being destitute of al scripture and probable reason, you flee to the pa∣tronage of humane authoritie: wherunto, besides the other things alrea∣dy fore mentioned, I oppose this reason in sted of a conclusion. The Iewes shal have no dominion, before they return unto Christ: and therfore the Antichrist shal not be of them; who should be the highest ruler, and as you feighn, by help of the Iewes should subdue the Gentils. The first part of the reason is plainly confirmed by manie scriptures: some of which I wil set down, not so much for your sake Bellarmine, (though for yours al¦so, if so be at last you shal affect the truth;) as for my brethrens: whom I would have to be stirred up by this iudgment, unto a more diligent serch
of manie places, which being commonly counted plain and evident, are yet altogither unknown. The first is Lev. 26.39.40. &c. Where the last plague of the chapter, is this greevous casting of of the Iewish nation, in which they lye for despising Christ, from the time he was crucified unto this verie day: whose solution and deliverance at last, is conjowned with the extreme miserie wherin they shalbe, at the time when this deliverance shal happen unto them. But if that Antichristian glorie, which you doo feyn, doo come between: how shal this bounteousnes of God, finde them so miserably afflicted? The second is out of that excellent song of Moses, Deut. 32.36. &c. When the Lord shal have judged his people, then wil he repent towards his servants, when he shal see that their power is gone, and that the shut up with the left abroad is nothing: and he wil say, wher are their Gods? the Rock in whom they trusted? There Moses singeth of the same times, & tcheth that they shalbe brought unto the lowest ebb, when God shal arise to avenge his people. The third is that of Esay, 49.14. And if Sion say, the Lord hath forsaken me &c. Vnto these shalbe adioyned Ier. 30.8. &c. Ezek. 37. Dan. 12.1. Hos. 3.4.5. Which few places may suffice to open the meaning of many. From which I conclude although the Bishop of Rome be neither at any time a Iew, nor by the Iewes received for the Messias, but rather be by them hated: yet this is no cause why he should not be the great Anti∣christ; yea and unlesse these things were, he should be farr from being the principal Antichrist, as in their places we have declared. Chapt. 13. Of Antichrists seat. IN expounding the words of the Prophesie, we concluded by most firm arguments taken therfrom, that Rome is the seat of Antichrist; and that forthwith, after the Empire is taken from the Hethen Emperours. For the heads of the Beast, abide fixed to Rome, where are both those Hills and Kings that the Angel speaketh of. And wher these heads abide fixed; there must the seat of Antichrist needs be. Moreover seing Antichrist then also shewed himselfe, when Constantine began to reign, as before is proved at large: he hath no other seat than Rome. For wheras he abode a few yeres at Avenion: he did that with purpose to sojourn for a time, not with a mind to change his seat. But on the contrarie, you Bellarmine doo contend, that Antichrists seat shalbe Ierusalem, not Rome: and Solomons Temple, and Davids Throne: not S. Peters Temple, or the seat Apostolical. Which you endevour to prove two wayes: First, by an argument unto the man; then, by the Scriptures and Fathers.
The argument is this: If the Pope of Rome be Antichrist, sitting in the Church of Christ: then the Lutherans and Calvinists, and as manie as are aliens from the Church which is under the Pope, doo live out of the true Church of Christ. For Christs Church can be but one, as Christ is one. And our men doo affirm the Pope of Rome to be Antichrist: therfore our men all doo live out of the Church. I answer, the Proposition is false, and relyeth onely upon the Churches unitie mis∣understood. For the Church is both commonly so caled, and properly. The first, hath pietie corrupted; the word adulterated; the Sacraments de∣praved; is ful of superstition, and humane devises, reteyning Christs name onely, and boasting in the title therof: and also commonly so accounted, whiles any whit of the foundation is remaining. The other is chast, pure, entire, clean, hearkning to Christs voice in al things, and not departing from his praescribed rule any whit at all, so farr as mortal infirmitie suffe∣reth; and this alwayes is the onely and true spouse of Christ: how ever the whore also taketh this name to her selfe. So before, the Temple & Altar was proper to the elect, and mesured by the Angel: but the Court was not set forth with any description, but cast out, and permitted to the Gentils, to weet, the prophane multitude, which for their neernes, falsly chalen∣ged the name of the Temple. To whom the holy city also was given; which having their seat in the sayd court, they trode under foot at their pleasure, during the appointed time. Apoc. 11.1.2. More plainly in the 7. Chur∣ches, which all ar Christs, though Sardis lived but in name onely: and the Angel of Laodicea was neither hot nor cold, forthwith to be spued out, un¦lesse he repented. chap. 3.1.16. Therfore that is not rightly transferred unto the common Church, which perteineth unto it properly so caled. One may be an alien from the Church commonly so caled: and yet be a true citizen of the true Church. If you could shew that the Pope of Rome hath his chair in this, which properly inioyeth this name: you might right¦ly conclude us all to be fugitives and very miserable. But whiles you shuf∣fle togither things disjoined, and contrarie; and dally, as your manner is, with a playn aequivocation; the absurditie which you thought to throw a∣gainst us, is lighted upon your own head. So your argument unto the mā is lying, like him, whose cause you have in hand. Secondly you prove it from three Scriptures, the first wherof is Apoc. 11.8. where, you say, John saith that Henoch and Elias shal fight with Anti∣christ in Ierusalem, and there be killed. I answer, that which is spoken of He∣noch and Elias to come. and fight with Antichrist, is altogither vain; as I have proved in the 6. chapter, against your third Demonstration. But be¦cause it skilleth nothing, for the force of this argument, what the names
of these Prophets be: we let that passe for the present, and doo say, that that which you tell us how they are to be killed in Jerusalem, is false. For the Spirit designeth not Ierusalem by name, but onely by this circumlocu¦tion, where our Lord was crucified: which agreeth as wel unto Rome, seing Christ was crucified by the sentēce of Pilate the Romā Deputie. By which fact, he made his Citie guilty of this bloud, which was shed by this cities authoritie; as we have shewed on chap. 11.8. This argument therfore is worthlesse and weak, assuming that which cannot be proved, yea the con¦trary wherof is plainly evident by the Scriptures. Neither was ther anie cause, why either Chytraeus should purposely passe by these words, as you feyn, where the Lord also was crucified; or why you should so trouble your selfe, to prove against Ierom, that Ierusalem may be caled Sodome: which we acknowledge to be so caled otherwhere. Although in the Apocalypse your Rome onely is Sodom; & you should rather have streyned your sinewes to acquitt your selves of this than have spent your strength in a matter for which ther is no fight. The second place is Apoc. 17. where Iohn saith, that the ten Kings which shal divide the Roman Empire to themselves, and in the time of whose reign Antichrist should come, shal hate the purpled whore, that is, Rome, and make her desolate, and burn her cke with fire. How then, say you, shall it be Antichrists seat, if at the self same time it must be overthrown and burnt? I an∣swer, the Apocalypse easily taketh from you this scruple. You ask, how Antichrists seate can be burnt, he being alive and seing it. The Apocalypse telleth, that the fift vial shalbe powred out on the Beasts throne, and his kingdome shalbe made dark, so that they shal gnaw their tongues for so row, chap. 16.10.11. which vial verily, is no other thing, than this bur¦ning, wherby the ten Kings shal consume the whore to ashes. For you see that this citie which is to be consumed with fire, is Queen of the nations; which agreeth not to Ierusalem, that hath been laid even with the groūd now manie ages since. And if you doubt how the ten Kings should be in∣flamed with such hatred, who so dearly loved the whore before: hear how the Angel saith, that for a time they would yeild themselves wholly to the Beast, but should at length be stirred up of God to destroy her, whom they most honoured before, ver. 16.17. This hatred therfore, wil afford your Rome no comfort. The other things which you heap up to exagge∣rate this argument, are of no weight at all. For that Antichrist the Iewe, we have chased away in the former disputation: and those things that are mentioned of the Kingdome of Asia, are some smal peeces of truth, shi∣ning clearly in the fabulous heap of confuse earth. Certayn it is that the Empire shal return thither again; but which Antichrist shal not consti∣tute,
but Christ himselfe shal build, taking pitie on his people, and decla¦ring himselfe in his Church, to be King of al nations. The third place is in those words, so that he sitteth in the Temple of God: 2. Thess. 2.4. wher you bring four expositions of the Temple. The first is theirs that by the Temple, understand the minds of the faithfull. The second is Au¦gustines, who interpreteth the Temple to be Antichrist himselfe, with his whole peo¦ple, which wil have himselfe and his, to be thought the true spiritual Temple of God. The third is Chrysostoms, that takes the Temple for Christian Churches. The fourth is theirs that understand it of Salomons Temple. Of these four expositiōs you chose this last, worst, and furthest from the truth: even as women when they ar troubled with the green sicknes, doo long for coles & lether more then for wholsome meats. The Temple in this place, must needs be that peoples, whose the apostasie is, for which Antichrist is sent: and this we have shewed to be the Gentiles onely, which came in deede unto Christ, but served him not with such affection as was meet: and that it can not by anie means agree to the Iewes, who never would be writtē citizens of this Kingdome. Moreover, neither did Antichrist come, while the old Temple stood; neither shal he sit therin afterwards, seing it was overthrown long since, never to be reedified more, as the Angel teacheth, And the desolatiō shal continue even to the consummation and end. Dan. 9.27. Besides, how could the Apostle cal that Gods temple, which God would detest, and which shal not be founded by anie authoritie of his, but by Antichrists commande∣ment alone; as you wil have it, vaūting himselfe for the onely God? These and many other things doo teach, that it is least of al to be understood of Salomons Temple. Yet you say, this opinion is the more common, probable and learned. But by what reason, I pray you? Beeause, say you, in the Scripture of the New Testament, by the Temple of God, is never meant the Christian Churches, but alwayes the temple of Jerusalem. VVhich short sentence conteineth two notable falshoods. The first is, that you say, by the temple of God, is ne∣ver meant in the Apostles writings, the Christian Churches. For, Paul in Ephes. 2.21.22. speaketh thus of the Christian Church, Jn whom al the building fitly coupled togither, groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are built togither, to be the habitation of God by the Spirit. And what other thing dooth the Apocalypse mean by that so often name of the temple: but the holy Christian assemblies? Arise and measure the temple of God, chap. 11.1. Then was the temple of God opened, chap. 11.9. And they came out of the temple: neither could any enter into temple, chap. 15.6.8. The temple of Ieru∣salem was destroyed, before this Revelation was made: least perhaps yow should think, that that is meant by these words. This is the first falshood.
The second is, wher you say, the temple of God evermore signifieth the temple of Jerusalem, in the new testament. For what? Are ther so manie Ierusalem tem∣ples, as ther are faithful persons? Vnto the Corinthians Paul speaketh in words commō to everie Christian, Know you not that ye are the temple of God? And if anie destroy the temple of God &c. 1 Cor. 3.16.17. Know you not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost? 1 Cor. 6.19. To let passe the things I mentioned a litle before. You certes are a more speedy builder than Sa∣lomon, which can build so manie temples in so short a space: but what cā not you doo, which make a Christ everie day of Bread? But this is a smal matter, you say, that the Scriptures doo so speak. Therfore you bring some greater thing, namely that the ancient Fathers Latin and Greek, for ma∣nie ages, never caled the Churches of Christians, temples; but Oratories, the Kings-houses, or howses of Martyrs. I answer, the ancient Fathers both Greek and Latine, did speak so as the Scripture speaketh: as Clemēs Alexand. Strom. lib. 7. One temple, saith he, is great, as the Church: an other litle, as the man, who reteyneth Abrahams seed. And Cyprian in his first book against the Iewes, chap. 15. that Christ was to be the house and temple of God, and he had ended the old temple, & begun a new. And lib. 5. Epist. 8. Although love should no lesse enforce us to help our brethren, yet it was to be considered in this place, that they are the temples of God which are taken; and that we ought not to suf∣fer by long delay and neglect of sorow, the temples of God to be holden captives long. But, you wil say, that you mean not either Christian assemblies, or parti∣cular faithful persons, but howses and aedifices wherin they meet togi∣ther for publik worship. I answer, you dispute therfore bravely, who now conclude not the question. For thus you reason. No howses of publik worship were caled temples among Christians for many ages: but some tē∣ple of God are howses of publik worship; therfore some temple was not among Christians for many ages. And what then, I pray you? For though some temple was not, yet some temple was among Christians also in these ages you mention; even such a temple as Antichrist afterward should sit in. Vnlesse perhaps you think that holy howses onely are temples: which if it be so, then Antichrist shalbe no longuer Antichrist, than he shal sit in these material howses: or if so he shalbe out of the holy howses also, the great Antichrist may also be out of the temple of God, and thouh he doo not shew himself as if he were God. For this sacrilegious vaunting of him selfe, shalbe onely whiles he sitteth in the temple of God, as is evident by the Apostles words. And so we shal have a new great Antichrist, such as the Apostles never saw by the Spirit of Prophesie. Great is the force of your argumentations, which everie where bring forth such monsters: but
let us goe forward. Wheras you say, that the howses of prayer had not the name of temple given unto them, til Ieroms time, whom you cite: you may understād that Eusebius who was before Ieroms age, absteyned not from this name lib. Hist. 10. c. 2. whom Ruffinus maketh to speak thus, lib. 9, Hist. Eccl. cap. 10. Renewed places by building to rise up more high and excellent, and high tē∣ples to be lifted up, for the low meeting howses, And again Euseb. lib. 10. cap. 13. by whose industrie a sumptuous temple was builded in Tyrus, the most famous throughout al the nation of Phaenicia. So also in a publick oration which one made of the building of Churches, ascribed to Paulinus Bishop of the Ty¦rians, And thou ô great praise of the new holy temple of God; and afterwards a∣gaine, he constituted this maiestical temple of the most high God. And certainly the Spirit most wisely meeting with your fraud, would have the name of temple, about that time when Antichrist should appear, to be given even to the holy Christian aedifices: that every way it might be evident how he sitteth in the Temple of God. Wheras therfore concluding this point you say, it semeth certayn that the Apostle speaks of Jerusalems temple; that writing how Antichrist should sit in the temple of God, he would say somthing which he would have understood by them to whom he wrote, and they then would understand and well perceive the name of the temple, nothing but the temple of Ierusalem: you may easily now see how false it is, that I say no more, though I speak tru∣ly. The Thessalonians might understand that he should sit in the minds and conscience of men, whom he should seduce by his guile and hypo∣crisie, as Anselmus dooth interpret it; or that he should reign in Christiā assemblies, as Chrysostom, Theodoret, Theophilact & Oecumenius doo expound it: or that he should boast himselfe to be the temple & Church, as Augustine explaineth it: But Ierusalems temple could not come into their mind, which they knew by Christs words should utterly be destroy∣ed, Mat. 23.39. &. 2. and never be builded agayn, seing wrath was come upon the Jewes even to the utmost, as 1 Thes. 2.16. Vnto these you adjoin, as you speak, the common exposition of the Fathers; but the contrarie iudgment of those before mentioned, wil not suffer it to be common: neither ought the ignorance of a few, to hurt the clear truth. Thus have we seen your arguments, whose force I now leave to be iudged by the reader: and in a word I wil consider those your answers, wherby a∣gain you indevour to put away the reasons of some of our side. First, wher our men doo obiect from Apoc. 17. that the chief seat of Antichrist is Rome; because this seat is the great citie, which sitteth upon 7. hills, and which hath reigne over the Kings of the earth, al which ar found in Rome; You answer three wayes. First that by this citie is not meant Rome, but the universal citie of the Divil. But in this answer you rest not, neither is it in deed of anie moment, seing it is
not the universal citie of the Divil, which shalbe burned by the ten Kings, es∣pecially the wicked remaining alive, which shal lament her fall, Apoc. 18.9. For how shal the whole citie perish, whose citizens shal afterwards re∣mayn? Leaving therfore this, you betake you to an other, and you grant that by the whore is meant Rome, but hethenish Rome reigning, worshiping Jdols, & persecuting Christians: but not Christian Rome. I answer, you doo evil disjoin, what the Spirit hath coupled. For Rome is then the whore and seat of An¦tichrist, when it is caried of the Beast: and it was not caried of the Beast whiles the Hethens reigned. For it is caried of the seventh head, which was not yet come, when Iohn received this Prophesie: Apoc. 17.9.10. Moreover, if Hethenish Rome reigning, be the whore: then Antichrist came during that Hethenish Empire. For the Spirit would have thse two to be undevided companions, until the burning of the whore. The Beast caried; the whore sitteh: neither of them hath vital life without the other. Again, if that be true, now she hath plainly left to be the whore, nor should she be found such, when Antichrist should come; because as afterward you tell us, Peters chaire cannot be separated from Rome, lib. 4. de Rom. Pon. cap. 4. And how agreeth this, I pray you, that Rome being Christian, ho∣ly, Catholik, Peters chair, as you wil have her; should at last suffer the pu∣nishment of a whore; which when she was Hethenish, and according to your opinion, played the whore most lavishly, bare no punishment for it? Apoc. 17.16. Surely Ierom seemeth not wel to have affirmed, speaking to Rome, I speak unto thee, which by confessing of Christ, hast wiped out the blasphe∣mie written on thy forehead, lib. 2. contra Iovinian. For Rome hath not wi∣ped away her blasphemie, but imprinted it deeper after she became Chri∣stian, seing now she shal bear the punisment of her fornication. Your se∣sond answer therfore, is no lesse infirm than the first. Let us see the third. And this saith, Although that woman were Christian Rome, yet our argument should have no force at al: because Antichrist shal hate Rome, & fight with her, and make her dsolate, & burn her. Therfore Rome is not Antichrists seat. I answer, that which you speak of Antichrists hatred, & fight against Rome, is plain¦ly false. You borow this from Ap. 17.16. wher you read thus; and the ten horns which thou sawest, & the Beast, these shal hate the whore &c. which reading we hav proved, in handling that place, to be faultie. The true reading is, & the ten horns which thou sawest on the Beast, these shal hate &c. The difference is, that the true reading teacheth, that onely the horns of the Beast, shal hate the whore; the false would hav it, that both the horns, & the Beast, that is, both the Kings & Antichr. should hate the whore. Aretas readeth so as I say; the Vulg. Latine, (to which you ar bound by the decree of Trent,) hath it also;
manie other copies have it so, to which the rest of the Apocalypse giveth approbation, most adverse to that which you bring. Whetfore unless you can find a better answer, you must needs confesse that Christian Rome is the seat of Antichrist. Vnto the second place which our men bring, from 2 Thes. 2.4 that An¦tichrist shal sit in the temple of God; you answer, that Paul speaks of Solomons tem¦ple: and you referr us to the things that you said before: and so doo I the the rea∣der, to the refutation of them. Then, unto that reason, that the Iewes tem∣ple was in deed Gods, but it is now ceased, when the Iewish Sacrifice and Preisthood ceased▪ you answer, that it ceased not by and by to be Gods temple: for the same tē¦ple might have bin the temple of Christians, and so in deede was, whiles it remained, for the Apostles preached and prayed in it. Luk 24.53. Act. 3.1. and 5.20. I answer, and ask, what all these things doo make to confirm the sitting of your Antichrist, in Solomons Temple? Because the Temple of Ierusa∣lem wherin the Apostles preached and prayed, was whiles it continued, the Temple of God: shal therfore the Temple of God wherin Antichrist shal sit, be the Temple of Ierusalem? Surely I could shew you, how after the old ordinances of religion were abrogated, a titular sanctitie at least might remayn for a time in that temple of Solomōs: evē as a boat dooth not by and by cease to move, after the oars be stayed: if it were not vain to spend labour in a thing of no cōsequēce. For you might with as much certaintie conclude, that the temple of God wherin Antichrist shal sit, is Ierusalems temple, because (with a litle change of the Poets words) Yee freinds, admitted auditours, can yee forbear to laugh? as from the antecedent which you have set down. Vnto that of Daniel chap. 9. And the desolation shal continue until the cō∣summation and end, wherby our men prove that the tēple shal not be built again: You answer; it is not in deed to be built again, but in the end of the world; or though it should be built again, yet would it never be but prophane; or finally that it shal not be built again perfectly, but onely begun, and in it being begun, Antichrist shal sit. I answer, we had need of some Gerion, that with his hundred hāds may take this slipperie eel. How doo you wreath your self into manifold boughts & circles? yet though you should change your self into a 1000. saps, you shal not slip away. who taught you, I pray, so to distinguish agai¦nst Daniel? It is not to be built again, say in the end of the world: or being built again, it shal abide prophane, or it shalt be built again not perfectly, but begun. Did you fet these things out of the Popes chappel? Surely the truth inspired of God afforded not this unto you. For, that teacheth that wrath is come upō the Jewes evē to the utmost 1 Thes. 2.16. & that it is in part of this wrath, that God hath bowed down their backs alwayes, Rom. 11.10.
Therfore the Iewes shal never so lift up themselves under Antichrist, as to have the least power to entreprise anie such thing: but shal alwayes re∣maine desolate and oppressed, until they shal say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord; that is, until Christ shal come, and not Antichrist. Mat. 23.39. Fourthly, wheras our men bring forth some places out of the Fathers, affirming that Antichrist shal sit in the Churches of Christians, you grant it is true, and not against you; because the Fathers would not say, that Antichrist shall sit in the Church as a Bishop, but as a God. I answer, your Pope shal not scape away by this ridiculous distinction. The same man may sit in the Church, both as a Bishop and as a God. Antichrist shal sustein the person of both: as we see in your Pope: in word he wil humbly feyn himselfe a Bishop; but he wil arrogate the authoritie of God in deede. He wil forgive synns by some more superiour power than a Minister can; he wil let out of Purgato∣rie: he wil put into the Kalender of Saincts, whom he wil at his pleasure; he wil command new articles of faith; and manie such like things wil he doo that appertein not to this mortal condition, but to the highest Maie¦stie. Why should the Fathers speak of his Bishops office, in this so great a loftines? When great things are mentioned, the smaller matters ar wōt to be hidden with the exceding greatnes of the more excellent. By their silence they denied not that he should sit in the Church as a Bishop: but when the highest pinnacle of pride was to be spoken of, they thought they were not to insist in the lower stepps. Vnto our mens fift argument, taken from the words of Gregorie lib. 4. Epist. 38. The King of pride is nigh, and (though it be heighnous to be spoken,) an armie of Preists is prepared for him: you say, from hence the contrarie is gathe∣red, to that which we collect. For it foloweth not that Antichrist shalbe an univer∣sal Bishop: but the contrary, because the forerunner is not al one with him, whom he runneth before. I answer, neyther is an universal Bishop alone with him that would be universal. The Bishop of Constantinople would have been; but he obteyned not his desire: the Bishop of Rome, asked it of Phocas, and got it. The contrarie therfore is not gathered from hence, as you say, but it is rightly collected that Antichrist shalbe an universal Bishop, which di∣gnitie, none beside Antichrist could obteyn. And to the armie of Priests, you answer, that Gregorie would not say, that the Priests as Priests perteyned unto Antichrists name: but that the Preists as being proud, prepared him an armie. Vn∣to this, I say, that now the matter is past danger: the Popish Preists cā not be proud. I trow when Antichrist shal come, the Preists then wilbe either Popish or proud. What? Shal pride make a new order of Preists? Or if
this haughtines be required in Antichrists soldiers, wil ther be anie natiō under the Sun, prouder than Popish Preists? Cardinals doo excel Kings: Archbishops and Bishops are superiour to Barons and Earls; al in their order, doo goe before the civil honours; neither is ther anie of the basest rowt of shavelings, that wil be under the civil Magistrate. Let Antichrist therfore, seeke him soldjers otherwhere: he shal finde none in this lowlie flock of Popish Preists. Gregorie notwithstanding verie expressly biddeth that Antichrist be looked for as cheif Captain & Emperour of the Preists. And other Preists ther are none on earth, by their own vaunting, besides the Popish Preists. By his iudgment therfore the Bishop of Rome should necessarilie be Antichrist; and not farr from his time, seing by his confes∣sion, armies were then prepared for him. Surely as Gaiphas prophesied that which himselfe knew not: so Gregorie semeth unwares to have told the truth; not by anie power of his seat, but by the mercy of God so governing his tongue, that men might take heed by this admonition, & the wicked world be made inexcusable, as is observed Apoc. 8.13. Vayn therfore is that which is affirmed of Antichrist to sit in the temple of Ieru¦salem: and so farr is it off, that the Pope is not Antichrist, because he con∣tinually tarieth at Rome: as so much the more he may therupon be con∣cluded to be Antichrist. Chapt. 14. Of Antichrists doctrine. THE doctrine of Antichrist, we togither with the holy Ghost, doe teach from the scriptures, to be ful of hypocrisie, fraud, trecherie, which may deceiv even the most prudent, whom the Spirit inlightneth not with his truth. For one had need of singular prudēcy to know this Beast, which hath two horns like the Lamb, and is a false Prophet seducing the earth. Con∣trariweise the Papists wil have this same doctrine to be so openlie impious and blasphemous, that none is so blockish, but he may perceive it forth∣with, and detest it. Which that you Bellarmine may make playn, you reduce this all unto four heads. First that he shal deny Jesus to be the Christ, and therupon shal oppugn al our Saviours ordinances, as Baptism, Confirmation &c. and shal teach that Circū¦cision, the Sabbath, and other ceremonies of the old law, ar not yet ceased. Secondly, he shal affirme himselfe to be the true Christ, promised in the Law and Prophets. Thirdly he shal affirme himselfe to be God, and wil be honoured as God. Lastly he shal say that himselfe is the onely God, and shal oppugn al other Gods, that is, both the true God, and also false Gods and Idols. And from hence you take four ar∣guments,
that the Pope is not Antichrist; because he denyeth not Iesus to be the Christ, neither bringeth he in Circumcision; or the Sabbath: neither dooth he ma¦ke himselfe Christ, nor God, and least of al the onely God: but honoureth even Ima∣ges and dead Saincts. Which what force they have for this thing, we shal af∣terwards see in the confirmation which you bring. The first point therfor you confirm by this, that Antichrist by nation and religion shalbe a Jew, & be received of the Iewes for the Messias: wherupon he shal openly oppugn our Christ. I answer, this foolish opinion of Antichrists stock, we have sufficiently re∣futed before, chap. 12. and 13. for he shal sit in the temple of God, and not in Ierusalems Temple, (which Christ foretold should be demolished, and never built again,) but in Christian assemblies, as is declared at large: and therfore that he shal not be by religion a Iew, neither shal restore the ce∣remonies of the old Law, which were tyed to the Temple, and had no pla∣ce out of it. And how dooth it agree that Antichrist the general plague of the whole earth, should be sent into the world for the syn of one natiō of the Iewes in not receiving the truth, as ye would have it? Surely it were meet that he which should come for the wickednes of one natiō, should be restreyned within the limits of that one nation: but ther is no need of new arguments for this matter. Secondly, you say, it is proved from 1 John 2.22. Who is a lyar, but he that de¦nyeth Iesus to be the Christ? From whence you gather, that Antichrist shall surpasse al Heretiks, and therfore he shal deny Christ al manner of wayes: which is confirmed, you say, because by Heretiks, the Divil is said to work the Mysterie of iniquitie: because they privilie doo deny Christ. But Antichrists coming is caled a Revelation, because he shal openly deny Christ. I answer, as touching that of Iohn, I have shewed before, that this denyal which he speaketh of, is not open, but secret and trecherous; to weet, by men named Christians, which had privily crept in, and of whom the faithfull had need to be warned, be∣ing otherweise in danger to be surprised by them unwares. And though Antichrist surpasse al Heretiks, yet is it not therfore necessarie that he should deal more openly than the rest; seing the cheif reward of wicked∣nes is not to be given to the outward work, but to the power of doing hurt. For otherweise men should surmount the Divil himselfe; who are so foolish in respect of him, as they doo that in the light, which he dooth most covertly. Moreover Antichrists coming is a Revelation, but to the e∣lect onely: the others which beleev not the truth, he shal beguile by his crafty shewes, 2 Thes. 2.11.12. The Angel requireth no common wis∣dome to know the Beast, and the whores name is mystical, as before wee have been taught.
Thirdly you prove it by the sentences of certain Fathers: but no equal jud∣ge wil not confesse, that they are rather to be heard anie where ells, than in the matter of Antichrist. Our Lord should consume him with the Spirit of his mouth, and by his bright coming: wherupon the neerer the Lord should approch, the more was this man of syn to be discovered. I proceed therfore ūto the ceasing of publik offices and divine sacrifices (as you speak,) which you say shalbe in Antichrists time, for vehemencie of the persecution, and that therfore he shal not deprave Christs doctrine, under the name of Christianisme, but openly shal oppugn Christs name and Sacraments, and bring in Jewish ceremonies, as you have shewed in chap. 7. I answer, at the same chapter I have proved that all these are most false: and that you hav not brought forth any thing, which hath so much as any likelihood of truth. And therfore that no other cea∣sing of publik religion is to be looked for, thā such as hath been these ma¦nie ages, to weet from Constantine the Great, unto this day: in al which time Antichrist hath reigned. Whiles the woman lived in the wildernes, and the Saincts lay hid in the temple, ther was in deed a lamētable fewnes of true worshipers: and so great darknes and obscuritie possessed al things, more store of smoke bursting forth daily out of the bottōless pit, that the truth commōly could not be seen. Yet in the mean time Antichrist dominered in the holy citie, and in the utmost court: wherupon by counterfeit religion he deceived egregiously, whiles al mē almost thought, because of his neer¦nes unto the Temple, that he did sit in the true Temple. The second chief point of doctrine, you say, is, that he shal openly and by name cal himselfe the Christ, not his Minister and Vicar: as appeareth by those words of our Lord, Jf an other shal come in his own name, him ye wil receive. And those words in his owne name, you wittily warne to have been purposely added against the Lutherans and Calvinists, which would say that Antichrist should not come in his owne name, but in the name of our Christ, as if he were his Vicar. I answer, you understand Christs words verie perversely. For name in this place, is not an appellation as you would have it, but a mission and authoritie as we hav shewed in the 2. chapter touching Antichrists singular person. By which it may appear, that his own name, and the Vicar of Christ, doo not so contra¦ry one an other, but the Bishop of Rome may boast himselfe to be this vi¦car, and doo it also in his own name, to weet his own authoritie, having no such right given him of God. Moreover if name be an appellation, & An¦tichrist shal come in his own name, and his appellation properly is not Christ: how, I pray you, dooth he openly & by name cal himselfe Christ? See you not, that you speak contraries? Can any come in his own name, & openly cal himselfe an other, whose name he beareth not? Besides, wee
have often answered, that this place perteins nothing to Antichrist proper¦ly so caled, but to those whom the Iewes should submitt themselves unto: who what manner of persons so ever they were, they doo not in al points expresse the great Antichrist. The third chief point of doctrine is, that he shal affirme himself to be God. and wil be worshiped for God, as it is written, so that he sitteth in the Temple of God shewing himself as if he were God, 2. Thes. 2.4. not onely, say you, by usurping some of Gods authoritie, but the very name of God. And here because your vul∣gar authentik Latin text, is too weak to defend the Pope, you flee to the Greek, not  as God, say you, but , that he is God. The Ar∣gument is this, Antichrist shal in words acknowledge himselfe to be God; the Po∣pe of Rome dooth not acknowledge himselfe to be God: therfore he is not Antichrist. Let Oecumenius make answer to the proposition, who thus interpreteth that word of the Apostle , he saith not saying but shewing, that is, by works, signes, and miracles endevouring to shew that he is God. According to his interpretation therfore, a manifest publishing is not necessarie. Yea let the Holy Ghost expound himselfe, who by a like manner of speech in Ezek. 28.2. teacheth how this is to be taken. Thus he saith of the King of Tyrus, Because thy hart is lifted up, so that thou sayest, J am God. No man I trow, requireth that this Tyriā should pronoūce the self same verie words. False therfore it is, that Antichrist should in word professe himselfe to be God. Notwithstanding because your Pope had liefer abound with tokēs, than barely and slenderly to be furnished with such as are necessarie one∣ly: we forgive you the proposition, and pray you to think with your selfe, whither the verie thing proclaimeth not quite cōtrarie to that which you deny in the assumption. For what, I pray you, did P. Sixtus acknowledg himselfe and the other Popes of Rome to be, when he said; Whosoever accu¦seth the Pope, it shal never be forgiven him: because he that sinneth against the holy Ghost, it shal not be forgiven him neither in this life, nor in that which is to come. Concil. Tom. 1. in Purgat. Sixti. What did Boniface the 8 when he said, We declare, define, and pronounce that it is absolutely necessarie to salvation, for eve¦rie creature to be subiect to the Bishop of Rome. Extrav. de Major. & Obed. u∣nam sanctam. I forbear to cite more witnesses; I appeal to your selfe; why doo you dissemble? Doo not such speeches often sound in your ears? But say you, he dooth not acknowledge himselfe God, because he acknowledgeth himself his servant. I am ashamed of your proofs; as if out of the same mouth ther could not come blessing and cursing, horrible blasphemie, and counter∣feit obedience. You know that in words, he is sometime servant of servāts: but again when he list, he is King of Kings,
The fourth point is, that he shal extol himself above al that is caled God, or that is worshipped, 2 Thes. 2.4. that is. say you, he shal not suffer anie God, neither true nor false, nor anie Jdols. To this argument we have answered in part be∣fore, in handling Antichrists name; wher we shewed that the Apostle mea∣neth not the heavenly God, but the earthly, that is, the civil Magistrates, which are venerable: as also that in Daniel 11.37. And he shal not esteeme the God of his Fathers, nor care for anie God, because he shall rise up against all. Ie∣rom interpreteth this sacrilegious pride, to be a kind of immoderate pow¦er over al religion; for thus he saith: And Antichrist shal warre against the Saincts, and overcome them, and shal be pufft up with so great pride, as he shall at∣tempt to change Gods lawes and ceremonies, subiecting al religion to his owne power, Com. in Dan. cap. 7. In which words he finely painteth out Antichrist & the Pope of Rome, although he was farr from this your comment. For, shal a false Prophet lift up himself above everie God? A Prophet is always the Prophet of some God: needs therfore must he professe himself subiect to some God, whom the Scriptures note out by the name of a False Pro∣phet. Again, when he shal sit in the temple of God: whither shal this be in the tēple of an other God, or in his own? If of an other, then he acknow∣ledgeth a superiour: but if in his owne, then the Apostle speaks unproper¦ly, and should not have said, so that he sitteth in the tēple of God as God; but rather, so that he sitteth in his owne temple as God. But by this mā∣ner of speaking, what fruit had redounded to the Saincts? For what man∣ner of sign had this been of this Monster; when it was no where known what manner of Temple he should have, or where? But thus ar they wōt to erre from the right, which reverence their lusts for truth. As touching the Idols, which you say Antichrist shal despise, hereby per∣haps you might shew that the Pope is worse than Antichrist; but it is also false, that Antichrist shal despise Idols. Whoredome in the Scriptures is Jdo¦latrie: and the Citie of Rome the seat of Antichrist, is that Queen Iezabel, the chief whore, the great Babylon, the mother of al the whordoms and abomina∣tions of the earth. Shal Idolatrie have dominion in his throne, and yet him∣selfe not be an Idolater? By whose authoritie dooth the whore worship I∣dols, but by his on whose shoulders she sitteth, and by the maiestie of whose name she is susteyned? Shal not Achab folow the Gods of his Ieza∣bel? They which are killed by the four Angels loosed at Euphrates, doo suffer those evils because of Idolatrie, Apoc. 9.20.21. But the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, King Abaddon with his subiects suffreth that slaugh∣ter by the Euphratean Angels, whom he hath fast behind him, Apoc 9.11.12. &c. And therfore the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, is an Idolater,
who is al one with this Beast, as Apoc. 11.7. & 17.8. But most plainlie, wher Antichrist biddeth an Jmage to be made, and compelleth al the inha¦bitans of the earth to worship it, Apoc. 13.14.15. Doo you think this mā wilbe a breaker down of Images? You are so farr from defending your Pope by this argument, as this is one of the chiefest signes, that he is the verie Antichrist. These therfore be trifles and guegawes, even as the other things which you have disputed of Antichrist. If you would have more certainty of his doctrine, remember the things which wee have often men¦tioned out of this Apocalypse. Here first you shall see, that Antichrist is Ba¦laam, and his seat Jezabel. chap. 2.14.20. And he, how crafty a knave was he? She, how Idolatrous a whore, and Prophetesse; not defacing al religi∣ous worship, but onely promoting and stablishing false worship? Then, you may perceive that the Gentils occupying the utter court and holy ci∣ty, (while the Saincts in the meane time lye hidd in the temple,) are Anti∣christ himselfe and his subiects; chap. 11 1.2. And therfore that Anti∣christ is most neerly joynd in outward shew, to Christ: so as by his neer∣nes he shal deceiv many. Besides, the great Antichrist hath two horns lik the Lambe, chap. 13.11. Wherfore he shal not everie way be contrarie, but shal put on his Image, & sit as his Vicar: wheras he would reioice doubt∣lesse to be most unlike him, if he should shew manifest hostilitie. Finally, seing he is also a false Prophet, he wil not boast himself to be the onely God but shal doo more harm by lying, than by force; and not shew himself to be such as in deed he is. These few things (to keep me within the limits of the Apocalypse,) may teach you the true nature of Antichrist; unlesse you have leifer willingly to be ignorant, that you may the more confidentlie serve him. Chapt. 15. Of Antichrists Miracles. CONCERNING the Miracles of Antichrist, three things. you say, are found in the Scriptures: first, that he shal doo many miracles: secondly that they shalbe lyes: thirdly that ther are three examples set down: al which I easilie grant unto you. But why add you not somwhat to make it plain that the Pope is no kinn to Antichrist, as that the Pope neither dooth many mira∣cles, nor lyes, nor those three exemples which you mētion by name? It seems you feared the triall: but you must needs be brought unto it, though a∣gainst your will. That he wel agrees with Antichrist in multitude of mira∣cles; neither can you, neyther doubtlesse lyst you to deny: seing this is one of the chief notes, wherin your Church glorieth. Of this first branch ther¦fore,
ther is no controversie. But whither those signes be lies, which are doon by the Popes & their Ministers, since Antichrist first began to shew himselfe, let us breifly consider: that therby also may appear, whither the crime be true or false, which our men doo charge you with. I wil not use that argument, which the Spirit maketh to be a sure token of false miracles, namely, that whatsoever is doon for to confirm errour and superstition, is to be counted for a fraudulent sign: (for you doo not acknowledge your errours, although this should be a sufficient argumēt, unto them that have learned the truth:) but I wil bring such as even your selves cannot deny. Let us therfote examine a litle those famous miracles of Pope Sylvester, to whom are attributed cheifly three. One that by sacred Batpisme he cured Constantine the Great, of a leprosie. An other, that he raised up agayn a bull that was killed by Zambri a Jewish sorcerer. The third, that he bound a Dragon after a marvelous manner: As touching the Leprosie, everie mā may easilie smel it to be but a stinking fiction by this, that the ancient writers that lived eyther next after Constantine, or togither with him, speak not anie one word of the same. Eusebius who so diligently wrote his life and heaped up solemly unto his prayse, whatsoever could any where be gathe∣red: would not have conceled this singular benifit of God. It must needs therfore bee that the later writers drew al this out of the third ditch, na∣mely from the Romish fables framed for this purpose onely, to encrease the Popes authoritie. Agayn, seing the curing of this Leprosie depēdeth on Baptisme, and it is certenly known that he was baptised, not by Sylve∣ster at Rome, but by Eusebius at Nicomedia, and that not in the begin∣ning of his reign, but in the latter end of his life: who seeth not this cure to be altogither feighned and false? Eusebius telleth that he was baptised at Nicomedia a litle before he departed this life. Jn Vita Constant. lib. 4. Wherto agree Socrates lib. 1. cap. 39. Theodoret lib. 1. cap. 32. Sozom lib. 2. cap. 34. Ambrose lib. De obitu Theodosij & Hieron. in Chronicis. But you on the othet side obiect Isidorus, Zonaras, and Nicephorus, who be∣ing but late writers in respect of those ancients, what credit deserv they in this thing? Could these later men know the truth more certaynly, which were furder off from al means to find it out? But let us see in a word, what ground every of them doo rely upon. Isidorus in his Chronicle, because perhaps he knew that the Romans boasted of Constantines baptisme; and knew withal what the ancient wri∣ters had said of this matter: that both might be thought to be true, he wil have him baptised at Rome, but rebaptised by Eusebius of Nicomedia the Ar∣rian. But he marketh not wel the ancient Historie, which with one consēt
reporteth that he deferred his Baptisme unto that day, because he desired to be bap¦tised in Iordan. How did he deferr it, if he had received it before at Rome? Moreover he rashly & injuriously chargeth the godly Emperour with the greevous crime of violating his faith: who neither Eusebius of Nicome∣dia, nor any other Arrian could ever lead away from the truth; seing while he lived, he so restreyned them al by his authoritie, as they neither could nor durst move anie thing against the faith established. Socrates lib. 2. cap. 2. But the Ariminine synod abundantly testifieth in an Epistle to Constā∣tine his son, that he persisted constant in the true Nicene faith even to his last end. We have judged it absurd, say they, even then so soon as he being baptised is departed from men, and gone unto his due rest, after him to mind for to goe about a new thing, and to contemn such holy Confessours and Martyrs. These things agree not to a man fallen from the truth. And after that agayn; And this moreover we intreat you, that nothing be eyther taken away from the things which were before ordeyned, nor anie thing added: but that al things may remayn intyre & unviolated, which through the pietie of your Father, are kept unto this very day. Theod. lib. 2. 19. Sozom lib. 4. 18. Farre be it therfore that we should think he made shipwrack of faith, and desired a second baptisme of an Arrian. Zonaras mentioneth but one Baptisme, and that by Sylvester; but his tale agrees not with the truth. For he wil have it that Constantine thē first forsook the worshiping of Idols, and was clensed from his leprosie by the Baptisme of Sylvester, after that, Licinius being slayn, he alone had the soveraignty. But Eusebius a witnesse then living, telleth how straight after that miraculous sight in heaven, he caled the Christians to him, and by them was taught the whole way of salvation, that he gave himselfe to the reading of holy Scriptures; had the Preists in great estimation, & pro∣mised that he would worship no other God thenceforward. Euseb. in vi∣ta Constant. lib. 1. and his promise he indeed performed, as appeareth by those Edicts in the behalfe of Christians, which he togither with Lici∣nius that reigned with him, caused to be promulgated. Euseb. lib. 10. ca. 5. And was not he made a Christian, until Sylvester entred him into that profession; when he made warr with Licinius, because he uncourteously and yll intreated the Christians? And wheras he relateth that Peter & Paul by night appeared in his sleep, and bade him send for Sylvester: and that he asked of him whither Christians worshipped the Gods caled Peter and Paul: it is very ridiculous. Who are witnesses, I pray you, that Peter and Paul appeared unto him by night? To whom did Constantine report this? Was it to Sylvester, and not to Eusebius? Or how could he be ignorant of the Christians God, who had before now so exactly learned of Christians,
and himself read the holy Scriptures, and also vowed, that he would have no other God beside Christ, as we shewed even now from Eusebius? And strange it is that he should not send for Sylvester, but when he was bidden by revelation, who from his first conversion, so familiarly used the holy Ministers, as he had them for companions, even making the Preists of God as∣sistants to him: Euseb. in the same place. Rashly therfore did Zonaras pre∣ferr the Romish Legends, before the more ancient faithful Historie. Nice¦phorus was moved by the authority of the Church of Rome; & the Font which Constantine is sayd to have made at Rome: as also for that the Em¦perour was admitted into the Nicen Synod, which the Fathers, he thin∣keth, would not have doon, unlesse he had been before baptized. But as cōcerning the authoritie of the Church of Rome, and the Font, they shall be of some moment, and have their weight, when the Church of Rome shal have proved that she feighneth not in verie many other things. And that third thing, of place in the Synod, it is too leight for to discredit so sufficient witnesses. For why should they not admitt him into the Synod, whō they ought to admitt unto publik prayers, and the preaching of the word? A synod is as it were an assemblie of Prophesiers, from which, by the Apostles rule even infidels ar not to be excluded. But if all, saith he, prophesie, and ther come in one that is an unbeleever, or an unlearned one, he is rebu∣ked of al, he is iudged of al: and so the secrets of his hart are made manifest, and so he wil fal down on his face and worship God, saying plainly that God is in you in deed. 1. Cor. 14.24.25. But Constantine had obteyned like precious faith with the other Saincts, & therfore also might be partaker of the Spirit, as they on whom it fell before Baptism, Act. 10.44. &c. And wheras he delayed his Baptisme: the Fathers knew he did that not of cōtempt, but of a kind of religion; (of what manner, I dispute not.) They might also think, that neither Moses counted his children aliants from the covenant, though they were not circumcised at the apointed day: neither were the Israelites forbidden to offer sacrifices, and doo other service of the Tabernacle, al∣though they were not circumcised in the wildernes. Wherfore ther was no cause, why entrance should be denied him into the Synod: seing al de∣ferring of the outward sign, taketh not away from the faithful the right of children, either with God, or with men in the common duties of god∣lines. Forasmuch then as it is certayn that Constantine was not baptised til the last part of his life: it is a lying fable, that Sylvester should clense him of his Leprosie by fotce of baptisme administred 20. yeres before at the least. And in deed so Iacobus de Voragine freely acknowledgeth, in the Legend of the finding of the holy Cross, speaking of Constantines ba∣ptism;
It is doubtful, saith he, whither he deferred his baptism or no: wherupon ther is likeweise more doubt of the Legend of Sainct Sylvester. And a litle after, It is evident that ther are manie things in the Historie, which are recited in the Chur∣ches, which are not consonant to the truth. He speaketh of the invention of the Cross: but ther is the same respect of al Legends. This therfore is a lying miracle, which is not confirmed by anie sufficient witnesse, and is contra∣ry to the true Historie. The second miracle is of a Bull raysed up againe by Sylvester, which Zā∣bres a Iew (the last of the twelv which disputed against the truth of Christ) by mumbling some words in his ear, made fall down dead suddenly. This fable is like the former. None of the ancient writers, that either lived in those times, or succeded next, doo speak any one word of this thing. Su∣rly he was not yet born, that should forge this tale from Iustin Martyrs disputation with Trypho. Moreover Zonaras telleth the thing as if Hele∣na the mother of Constantine were togither with her son at Rome. The Legend wil have her to be absent at the conversion of her son in Iudea, & stomaking that he was made a Christian, she hastened thence to Rome, with 149. learned Iewes, to make trial of the truth by disputing. Agayn the Legend is not onely contrarie to Zonaras, but even to it selfe. For in the life of Sylvester, it saith, that Helena went into Judea before her conversion; and in the Legend of the Invention of the Cross, it saith, after her conversiō. For she went to seek the Lords Crosse. And certain it is, she made this journey but once, being also aged, and her nephewes constituted Caesars; as Eusebius teleth in vita Constant, lib. 3. This sign also relyeth upon no other beside such vain witnesses: and whither it be a lye or no, let the rea∣der now iudge. The third miracle is of a Dragon lurking in a great deep ditch, who be∣ing malcontent for the conversion of Constantine and his people, killed dayly with his breath more than 300 men. Vnto this Dragon, did Sylve∣ster descend with two Preists, at the cōmandement of Peter and Paul that appeared unto him: and tyed his chapps with a threed, and sealed with a ring that had the sign of the cross upon it. This miracle it is ynough to re∣peat; it were folly to refute. By these miracles therfore of Sylvester, men may judge of the rest. But, you wil say, these things perhaps are falsly re∣corded of him. I answer, it is al one, whither the Pope himselfe doo false miracles, or that false ones be ascribed to him by his men. Al tend to one end, that the Beast may be worshiped, that is, that the Pope may have chiefest honour. Secondly, I say, that miracles were ceased in the times of Chrysostome
and Augustine: for so Chrysostome on 1. Cor. 2. Homil. 6. renders a rea¦son, why signs were doon in the Apostles time, and in his time not; name¦ly because by how much the more certayn and necessry things are, by so much is fith the lesser: and a litle after, by how much the more certain argume is shew∣ed, by so much is the reward of faith abaed: therfore ther wer no sign don at that present. So Agustine also, De vera rlig. cap. 25. saith; For seig the Catholik Church is spred and founded through the whole world, neither are thse miracles suffred to endure unto our times, least the mind should alwayes seek visible things, and by the custome of them man kind should wex cold, which by the newnes of them was set on fyre. Neither ought we now to doubt that they are to be beleeved, who when they preach those things which few can attayn, yet could they persuade peo¦ples, that they were to be folowed. And again, they say, why ar not the miracles doon, which are reported to have been doon? J could verily say that they were necessa∣ry before the world did beleev, to the end that the world might beleve. Whosoever stil seeketh wonders, that he may beleev, he himselfe is a great wonder, which belee∣veth not, when the world beleeveth. These testimonies doo convince all your Popish miracles, which are almost infinite, of fraude and cousenage; at the least since that time. And surely it seemeth, God of his singular providē∣ce, had put an end to the old miracles, before that age: that Antichrist with his mates might the better be known, when he should come forth, with his new pomp of miracles. Thirdly, ther are not wanting men of your own crew, which have ac∣knowledged the vanitie of your miracles; as Alexander de Hales, par. 4. quaest. 53. mem 4. art. 3. Solu. 2. Jn the Sacrament ther appeareth flesh, som∣time by mans procurement, sometime by the Divils operation. And Nicol. Lyra on Daniel: Sometime in the Church the people are greatly deceived with miracles feighned by the Preists, or such as stick unto them for lucre. Fourthly, examples also prove it, such as (to omitt innumerable others) were in that famous conflict of the Franciscans and Dominicans among the men of Berne, about the birth of the B. Virgin Mary. Certain Monks, as Peucerus telleth, in his 5. book of Chronicles) when they could not prevail by authoritie of testimonies, betook themselves for help unto juggling steights: For hi∣ding themselves in an Jmage of the Blessed Virgin, that was artificially made for this purpose, they counterfeyted in her marvelous gestures: so as they persuaded the people, that she did mourn, lament, complayn, shed tears, and give answesr to them that as∣ked of her. Which fraud being manifested, the authors of it were burned the day be∣fore the Kalends of Iuly, in the yere 1590. Wher is to be observed that this de∣ceit was hid from the ignorant people, before ther rose a contention be∣tween the religious themselves, to weet, the masters of these jugglings,
who knowing wel by what sleight they were wont to deceive the world, did easily find out the authors of such a wicked prank. But let me come unto your own familie; you know that at Rome the nam of one Father Ju∣stinian a Iesuite was famous, who first feighned himselfe a leper, that he might deceiv men by a lying miracle of receaving his health. Then when this succeeded wel with him, he feighned that his Iesuitical habit was stri∣ken through with the bullet of a certain gun shut off; but when the same came to his flesh, by Gods admirable power it rebounded back without anie hurting of him. Why yea, for Iesuits bodyes be brazen walls. These things at the first were beleeved; afterwards they were found false: so that now at Rome, when any impudent fraud is cast in a mans teeth, he is ca∣led the second Iustinian. But this is no new thing to Iesuits, whom many of your owne side doo confesse, (as is publikly reported,) to make no con∣science of sembling, dissembling, feighning, and belying al things, so as it be for their benefit. For this cause they speak shrewdly of the miracles of Ignatius, and your Xaverius, in whom you glorie, not onely as a principal ornament of the order of Iesuits, but also of the whole Popish religion: De notis Ecclesiae, lib. 4. cap. 14. And it is no marvel though Xaverius amōg the Indians, so farr from al trial, did al those marvelous works, which Ma¦phaeus Ribademeirus and Tursellinus make mention of. It is rather to be marveled that he dyed the common death, and was not rather taken away in a fyerie charret, that being reserved with Henoch and Elias, he might come at last to destroy Antichrist. Doo you give credit to these Indian let¦ters, whē as you may remember how that the Iesuits published in a book set out, that Theodore Beza was dead, and before he gave up the Ghost, was converted, by means of one of your men, to your Romish religion; & that by his exemple, manie other citizens of Geneva renouncing their for¦mer errours, embraced the Popish doctrine? You have not forgotten, I trow, (for ignorant you cannot be of a matter so rife in al mens mouthes) how Theod. Beza being marvelously raised again from the dead, did by letters written in French and Latine, ingrave as on a publik pillar for all Christendom, the incredible impudency of your Iesuits. Now therfore you may publish the Indian miracles of Xaverius, when your so egregious pranks be in the open light and eyes of all Europe. Endlesse it were to sail into the sea of al your lying signes; therfore had I liefer to relate one or 2. both publikly testified, and fresh in memorie; than manie other almost forgot with age. Wherfore your Pope dooth so lively expresse Antichrist both in multitude and falsitie of miracles, that none I beleev is so sharp sighted, as that he can discern any even the least difference.
Ther remayn those three special miracles, namely, of fyre coming down frō heaven; of the Jmage of the Beast to speak; and of the resurrection of Antichrist, mē¦tioned Apoc. 13. where I have shewed how these all doo fitly agree to the Pope of Rome. For first we declared that these things are to be expoun∣ded figuratively, not properly; for these are miracles common to a King∣dome, (such as by the Apocalypse we have proved the great Antichrist to be,) and not of a singular man. And that commonly they cannot agree to many singulars, save figuratively. Moreover if these miracles should be personal, and proper to one, how could they so come to the knowledge of the whole world, that it should folow the Beast, with such admiration, as the Apocalypse sayth? Things heard, doo move lesse than those that ar seen with the eyes. And Antichrist should excel with such efficacie of mi∣racles, as he should seduce (if it were possible) the verie elect: therfore it is altogither absurd to interpret these properly. We shewed that the fyre co∣ming down from heaven, is the fear and terrour of Gods iudgement; which Antichrist should strike into men that obey not his will: that his resurrecti¦on, is the curing of his wounded head, when the papal dignitie which by the invasion of the Barbarians seemed to have perished, began agayn to wex strong and flourish: that speech given to the Jmage of the Beast, is the au∣thoritie of commaunding, unto which the relived Pope did aspire, pretē∣ding that al that eminencie which he desired was no more, than the anci∣ent Popes possessed of old; wherupon his dignitie was but onely an Image of the ancient. These are the natural interpretations of these miracles, un¦to which the consent of the whole Apocalypse leadeth: although if yow would strictly hold the letter; we shewed examples of fyre descending frō heaven at the will of the Popes, Apoc. 13.13. Francis Xavier Iesuite, ray∣sed the dead by heaps, a few yeres since among the Indians: and we rela∣ted even now out of Peucerus, that an Image in Berne, by means of your men, gave answers to them that asked therof. Neither need we seek anie other, until you have shewed, that these things must be understood as the words doo sound. Here we have nothing but your bare affirmation. In the mean while ther is no doubt but those three things which the Scri∣ptures mention of Antichrists miracles, are al found in your Pope, both multitude, and fraud, and special examples: and therfore that he is the man of syn, whom the Apocalypse describeth, and Paul foretold to the Thessalonians, Epist. 2. But although you could bring nothing in the whole first part of the chapter, wherby to purge the Pope of this impietie by testimonie of miracles: yet that you might seem to have said somthing, you wil answer our men, which let us see of what sort it is. The writers of
Maydenburgh, say you, doo obiect that manie lying miracles have been doon by the Papists, such as by visions of sowles telling tales of Purgatorie, and begging mas∣ses to be sung for them; and cures of diseases which have happened to such as worshi∣ped Images, or made vowes unto Saincts. And you answer two things: first that these are not the miracles which John writeth that Antichrist shal doo; but to dye and rise again; to let down fyre from heaven; to give the Jmage power to speak: which you require to be shewed, to have been doon by the Pope or Papicts. I answer, that I have shewed the Pope was dead when Rome was taken by the Barbarians▪ who being driven away, and he promoted to his former glorie, he rose a∣gain. That he let down fyre from heaven, after he had persuaded the world, that it was of necessity to salvation, for to be under the Bishop of Rome; for thē his wrath terrified all men, as if it were the wrath of the great God. That he gave the Image power to speak, when he came to such boldnes, as he freely boasted both in deed and word; By me Kings reign. Al which mira∣cles ar also doon by the Papists, which apply their labour for the Pope, wherby he may the more easily delude the world with these persuasions. Though Images also doo speak among you: Xaverius raiseth the dead, & for the Popes sake, flames have appeared from heaven. Secondly you answer, that those three kinds of Miracles, namelie visions of sowls craving masses to be sung for them; healths obteined by worshiping of Jmages, & for vowes made to Saincts, were usual in the Church before that time when the ad∣versaries say, Antichrist appeared. I answer, that which you affirme is part∣ly false, partly of no moment, to prove your Miracles not to be lyes. False it is which you say that the sowl appearing to S. German Bishop of Ca∣pua about the yere 500. was before Antichrists time. For the Apocalypse teacheth that Antichrist was born, when the Hethen Emperours were ta∣ken away, which fel out about the yere of our Lord 300. Infirme altogi∣ther it is which you allege of the like miracles doon before Antichrist, as Eusebius relateth, lib. 7. Hist. cap. 14. of the brazen Statue which the woman that had the bloody yssue erected to our Saviour; and Theodoret lib. 8. ad Graecos. For both before Antichrist, and after his coming, ly∣ing signes should be doon. For now, sayth Paul, the Mysterie of iniquitie worketh, 2 Thess. 2.7. And the Mysterie wrought as wel by Myracles, as by superstition and false doctrine, as appeareth by the Heretik Mark, who made the wine in the Cup to appear bloud, of whom Irenaeus speaketh, lib. 1. cap. 9. So the Montanists also had their miracles, as Tertullian te∣stifieth, lib. de Anim. cap. Nihil animae. And the difference between the great Antichrist and these litle ones, is in more and lesse. For these fore∣runners did Miracles, by a shorter and straiter kind of power: But the
great Antichrist should come with the efficacy of Sathan, with al power, namely to deceive in larger borders Wherupon he should exceed in great¦nes, multitude, and impudency of guiles, and al kind of hurting. Misera∣ble therfore is your defense of the Pope by Miracles, which if in any thing ells, doo plainly shew him to be the great Antichrist. Neither was it, as I think, without the singular providence of God, that you which make mi∣racles to be one chief mark of the Church, should at length know by ex∣perience, that they wil turne to your destruction, who hoped by them to have greatest safegard. Chapt. 16. Of Antichrists Kingdome and warrs. TOVCHING the Kingdome and warrs of Antichrist, we have taught the certainty from the Apocalypse chap. 11.7. and chap. 13. entyre; from whence the Reader may fetch the things that are to be holden of them both; and not from these durty ditches of the Iesuits. But you a∣bout these matters doo propoūd four things from the Scriptures as you say. First that Antichrst coming from verie low degree, shal by fraud and guiles obteyn the Kingdome of the Iewes. Secondly that he shal fight with three Kings, to weet, of Aegipt, Libya, and Aethiopia; and conquering them shal possesse their King¦domes. Thirdly that he shal subdue under him other seven Kings, and in that man¦ner he shal become Monarch of the whole world. Fourthly that with an army innu¦merable he shal pursue the Christians through the whole world: and that this is the warr of Gog and Magog. Of al which things, seing none doo agree to the Pope of Rome, it foloweth manifestly, that he can no way be caled Antichrist. I answer, neither dooth anie of these agree unto Antichrist properly so caled: wher¦fore though the Pope of Rome be discharged of al these, yet never the lesse he wil be the Antichrist. As touching the first, Antichrists base original is onely touched: for that which is joyned with it, of getting the Kingdom of the Jewes, in the cō∣firmation nothing is sayd of it: and reason good, seing it is most vain, as hath been already before declared. His base original therfore is prooved out of Dan. 11.21. Ther shal stand up in his place, a despised person, and the ho∣nour of the Kingdome shalbe given to him, and he shal come privilie, and shal get the Kingdome by frawd. You confesse, being moved by Ieroms authority, that these things are to be understood in some sort of Antiochus Epiphanes, yet by the sa∣me Ieroms iudgement, are to be farr more perfectlie fulfilled in Antichrist, as the
things which are spoken in Psalm 71. of Solomon, are meant verily of Solomon, but more perfectly fulfilled in Christ. I answer, this is altogither unlike; Solomon was appointed of God a type of Christ; but so was not Antiochus of Anti¦christ, unlesse you wil proroge Antichrists reign, and for three yeres and a halfe, grant him six and a halfe; as many as Antiochus tyrannized over the Saincts. Moreover Antiochus was constreyned to be quiet, by commā¦dement of the Roman Legat: shal any in like sort command Antichrist, which shalbe cheif Monarch? Again Antiochus was an Ethnik and alto∣gither an aliant frō the Church: shal Antichrist also be such an one? Learn therfore at last not to take anie thing of anie body indiferētly; but use the ballance, to try what is spoken, if you have any care of the truth. Certain¦ly if you would cast a right account, you wil rather acknowledge the origi¦nal of the true Antichrist to be famous. Doo you not see that he weareth crowns on his horns, so soon as he is born? Apoc. 13.1. Was he not to arise at Rome the Emperial citie: where what can be base, that is placed in any dignitie? The Bishop of Rome, as yee are willing to mention, was of great authoritie, because of the dignitie of the citie, with all Christian Chur∣ches, before the Emperours gave place unto him. And I hope that I have shewed you such signes of Antichrist, as you wil now doubt no more, but this Bishop is even he; if so be you wil freely confesse the thing as it is. Therfore the testimonies which you bring of the amplitude and glorious∣nes of the Bishop of Rome, doo more vehemently prove him to be Anti∣christ, than that which you bring out of Daniel, prove that he is not. Secondly for his fight with the three Kings, of Aegipt, Libya and Aethi¦opia, you relate that of Daniel, chap. 7.8. J considered the horns, and loe an other litle horn came up among them, and three of the first horns were pluckt away be¦fore him: and after explaining it he saith, and the ten horns shalbe ten Kings &c. which three are explained, you say, who they are, chap. 11.47. namely the Kings of Aegipt, Libya, and Aethiopia. I answer, that litle horn, is not Antichrist properly so caled, as I have shewed in the second chapter of this Refutati∣on, and often other where, but the Mahumetan Turk. Wherupon in that your Pope of Rome hath killed no Kings of Aegipt, Libya and Aethiopia, it may in deed be proved, that he is not the Mahumetā Turk: but it dooth no more appear from hence that he is not Antichrist, than that David of old was not King of Israel, because he never subdued these same 3. Kings. The killing of these Kings by the Pope, perteyns nothing to this cause. He is fowl ynough with the bloud of Europe and at home, though he never come into the Libyan and Aethiopian deserts. Moreover it may also be, that these three Kings, are not those 3. horns plucked away: for they are
the horns of the fourth Beast, as is plainly said; three of those first hornes were rooled out from his face. But these three Kings, neither ae, nor e∣ver were horns of the Roman Empire. Aethiopia was never subject to the Romans, who inlarged not their borders southward further than Aegipt. Again, three horns are pluckt away from bfore him: but these three wer not al to be overcome: but the Libyans and Aethiopians should be onely at his footsteps, as peoples ayding him rather than subdued; who should afford him souldjers for his expeditions, and not themslve suffer hostile invasiō. Surely if Antichrist should wage no other warr than this, his mar∣tial power were not much to be feared. The third point of subduing seven Kings, is of like strength. Bu so, say you, Lactantius and Jreneus doe interpret it. But whither should we hearkē to them or to Daniel rather? Certainly the Prophet plainly confirming that three horns are pluckt away, exempteth al the rest from his power: otherweise he should have said that al ten shal perish: or how should he be a litle horn which should get the command over al? But whither seven or three be sub¦iected to that litle horn, this is nothing to Antichrist: unto whom all his ten horns, as we have shewed, doo service from the beginning, not com∣pelled by warr, but willingly and of their own accord. The Fathers in deed perceived not what those three horns should be; but the event hath taught us, that the Turk hath robbed the third part of the Romā Empire, which hath yet notwithstanding sevē hornes left, of which he shal not be Lord, but so farr forth as he may bring upon them some short and sud∣deyn overthrow. Therfore this horn belongeth nothing at al unto this great Antichrist. But where you say he shalbe a Monarch, & shal succeed the Romans in Monarchie, as the Romans did the Greeks, the Greeks the Persians, the Persians the Assyrians: this hath more ground, seing An∣tichrist shal lift up himselfe above al which Is caled God, 2 Thess. 2.4. & the whole earth wondring should folow the Beast, neither acknowledgeth he any his like, or able to fight with him, Apoc. 13.3.4 As also▪ seing he should have for a throne, the great citie, which reigneth over the Kings of the earth, Apoc. 17.18. These and the like doo truly prove him a Mo∣narch But this, say you, dooth no way agree to the Bishop of Rome; for he was never King of the whole world. But were the Romans. I pray you, ever Kings of the whole world? I think you wil not deny it; as these words usually are wont to be understood; or if you like to stand curiously heru∣pon, Daniel teacheth, that the fourth Kingdom, to weet the Roman, shal consume the whole earth, shal crush it, and break it in peeces, chap. 7.23. Remember therfore what a litle before you alleged out of Prosper: Rome by
Principality of the Preisthood was made more ample with the towr of religion, than with the throne of power. And what Leo saith, Serm. 1. de Natal. Apostol. Rome that art made the head of the world by the holy Seat of S. Peter, thou rulest more largely by divine religion, than by earthly domination. And what els mea∣neth the triple crown, but the principalitie over al the three parts of the world? The Popes crown hath more tops, than the Emperours Egle hath heads. It may be, that shortly it wil be quadruple, by the accession of the Indians, that nothing may escape the Popes almightines, though some∣thing for a time hath been hidd from his all skilfulnes. Wherfore the streights of his dominion, neither stand you in anie stead to acquitt the Pope of this wickednes, neither is this remembrance grateful unto him, who dooth so contemn honours and Empire, as he had liefer with large limits of ruling to be counted Antichrist, than to be defended by an argu¦ment of his Kingdome lost or diminished. The fourth branch is the battel of Gog and Magog, Apoc. 20. And when the 1000 yeres are ended &c. Jn this battel, you say, he shal with an armie innu∣merable, persecute Christians through the whole world. I answer, we have obser∣ved already from these words, the wonderful expedition of Antichrist in∣to the whole world properly so caled; before in the 7. chapter of his perse¦cution. And there we allowed for this expedition three yeres and a halfe: but here now it seemeth that this whole space shal not be spēt in the iour∣ney; but then it shal be taken in hand, after the three Kings and the seven Kings be subdued. There also we marveled if he should goe such a iour∣ney himselfe alone, not hindred with anie troup of wayting men: but here furder comes the impediment of an armie, and the same neverthelesse an universal persecution. Surely whatsoever you said before against Hippoli∣tus, you seem plainly to think that Antichrist is no man, but the Divil him selfe. But to let these monsters passe, let us come to the battel: which I mar¦vel you saw not that it should be by the Dragon, not by the Beast. Be∣tween which two, ther is in deed a great societie of wickednes; but no less difference of persons and of things, than is between an open foe, and a se∣cret enemie. Add hereunto that the Beast and false Prophet are both de∣stroyed, before this warre is taken in hand, or at least before it is finished: if that move you not, that both of them are mentioned to be slain in the end of the former chapter; yet consider that the Divil, that is the Dragō was cast into the lake of fire, wher the other have their place, before that the Divil comes thether; Apoc. 20.10. Although therfore Antichrist be a Martial felow and a great warrier; yet shal he wage no warrs after he is dead. But it is one of his miracles to rise againe. Be it so, when he coun∣terfeyts
a death, as you feign of him: but when he is slayn by that hand of God, and deeply drowned in the lake of fyre, he shal not find it so easi to rise again, and when he lay under a coverlet. Separate you therfore those things which touch not Antichrist; and deal not so, as if you would prove one not to be a man, either because he hath not four feet, or because he wanteth wings; & you shal see the rest, so to agree togither among them∣selves in al points, as nothing more. Surely the things which you hav dis∣puted of this Kingdome and warr, are farr from every part eyther of the Kingdome or of the warr of Antichrist: but such stuff as this, are al the things that your men are either wont or able to bring, for to defend the Pope, and to free him from this most greevous crime. Therfore you toyl in vayn: the thing is manifest, it can not be hidd by anie subtilties. Why goe ye about to cast a myst before the Sun? Why frame yee arguments a∣gainst the Spirit of God? Purge rather with flames, those writings of yours, wherwith yow have laboured his defense: and flee out of his denn, as speedily as you can. Here ends the Refutation of Antichrist, Against Bellarmine.
Chap. 18. AFTER these things I saw an Angel come down from Heaven having great Power: so as the earth was bright with his glorie. 2 And he cryed out mightilie with a lowd voice, saying, It is fallen, it is fallen, Babylon that great, and is become the habitation of Divils, and the hold of all fowl Spirit, and a cage of every uncleane and hateful bird. 3 For al nations have drunken of the wine of the wrath of her fornication, & the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her, and the marchants of the earth are waxed rich of the aboundance of her pleasures. 4 And J heard an other voice from heaven, saying, goe out of her my people, least yee be partakers of her sinnes, and receive of her plagues. 5 For her heaped sinnes are come up to heaven, and God hath remembred her ini∣quities. 6 Reward her, even as she hath rewarded you, and give her double according to her works; and in the cup that she hath filled you, fill her double. 7 Jn as much as she lifted up her selfe, and lived in pleasure, so much give yee to her torment and sorow: for she saith in her heart, J sit being a Queen, and am no wi∣dow, and shal see no mourning. 8 Therfore shal her plagues come at one day, death, and sorow, and famine, & she shalbe burnt with fire, for that God which condamneth her is a strong Lord. 9 And the Kings of the earth shall bewaile her, and lament for her, which have committed fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see the smoke of her burning. 10 And shal stand a farr off for feare of her torment, sying, alas, alas, tht great citie Babylon, that mighty citie: for in one houre is thy iudgment come. 11 And the Marchants of the earth shal weepe, and waile over her: for no mn byeth their ware anie more. 12 The ware of golde, and silver, and pretious stones, and pearles, and of fine lin∣nen, and of purple, and of silke, and of skarlet, and of al manner of thynewood, and of al vessels of yvorie, and of al vessels of most pretious wood, and of brasse, and of iron, and of marble. 13 And of cinnamon, and odours, and oyntment, and frankincense, and wine, & oyle, and fine floure, and wheate, and beasts, and sheep, and horses, and charets, and servants, and soules of men. 14 And the fruits that thy sowl lusted after, are departed from thee, and al things that were fatte, and excellent, are departed from thee, neither shalt thou finde them anie more. 15 The Marchants of these things, I say, which were made rich by her, shall
stand a farr off from her, for fear of her torment, weeping and wailing. 16 And saying, alas, alas, that great citie, that was clothed in fine linnen, & pur¦ple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold, and precious stones, and pearles; for in one houre so great richesse are come to desolation. 17 And everie shipmaster, and all the troupe that converseth in shippes, and ma∣riners, and whosoever traffike on the sea, shal stand a farr off. 18 And they shal crie seing the smoke of her burning, and shal say, what citie was like unto this great citie? 19 And casting dust on their heads, they shal crie, weeping and wailing and say∣ing, alas, alas, for that great citie, wherin were made rich al that had shipps on the sea by her costlinesse, in one haure is made desolate. 20 O Heaven reioice of her, aend ye Holy Apostles and Prophets: for God hath punished her, to be revenged of her for your sakes. 21 Then a certain mightie Angel tooke up a stone like a great milstone, & cast it into the Sea, saying, with such violence shall Babylon that great Citie be cast, and shalbe found no more. 22 And the voice of harpers, and musicians, and of pippers, and trumpeters shal∣be heard no more in thee, and no craftesman of whatsoever craft he bee, shalbe found anie more in thee, and the sound of a milstone shalbe heard no more in thee. 23 And the light of a candle shal shine no more in thee, and the voice of the brid¦grome, and the bride shalbe heard no more in thee: for thy marchants were the great men of the earth: and with thine enchantments were deceived al nations. 24 And in her was found the blood of the Prophets, and of the Saincts, and of all that were slaine upon the earth. The Analysis. HITHERTO what and of what sort is the throne of the Beast, as it were the first sprinkling of the fift vial; now foloweth a more copious powring out ioyned with the verie ruine of the throne. Which we distin∣guish into those things, which goe before the destruction, and the things which follow it; those that goe before are performed by the ministerie of three Angels, two of which declare the ruine by bare word. The first a glo¦rious Angel ver 1, more succinctly ver. 2, 3. The second namelesse more fully, both in exhorting the godly to fly out of Babylon, ver. 4.5. and al∣so in stirring up the ministers of this destruction to use deserved severitie, ver. 6.7. afterwards in describing partlie the mourning of wicked Kings ver. 9.10. of marchants, ver. 11.12.13.14.15.16. of Watermen and mariners, ver. 17.18.19, partly the ioy of the godly, ver. 20. Such is the
ministerie of the two Angels: The third beside his word useth also a signe: which both is propounded ver, 21. and also expounded, summarily in the same verse: severally, in ver. 22.23.24. Hitherto the things that goe be∣fore the ruine: that which followeth is a thankesgiving which the Saincts performe, chap. 19.1. 2. 3 4. Scholions. 1 And after these things J saw an Angel come down: In destroying the Citie of Rome God wil manifest to the world his admirable long suffring, who beside al his former warnings, so many, and so divers, cometh not to the last destruction, before three Angels be used, by whose voice men should be warned to avoid the plague coming violently upon it. The first of these is an Angel descending from heaven, that is▪ some excellent and singular mā, who shal come suddenly, and not looked for, even as things which fall down from heaven. The things which are borne with us give some shew of themselves before they wex ripe; but things that come from heaven, may be present in a moment without anie perceiving taken before they come. So in the tenth chapter and Angel came down from heaven, of a sud∣den, when many couragious deffendours of the truth were risen up, of whom before there was no suspicion. VVhich thing other places cōfirm, which may be taken from the former interpretation. This Angel seemeth, that by a sudden converting to the truth, he shall manifest to al men, that he cometh from heaven. Such was that coming down in the tenth chapter, where men brought up in superstition, became suddenly nourrissons of true godlines. This Angel hath great power. But to what end? For no excel¦lent great acte of his is mentioned: it may be he is that man to whom is committed wholly the throwing down of this throne: who shal not so much bring a new Propphecy concerning the ruine of Babylon, as shew himselfe prepared to performe the verie thing, which the divine oracles prophecied often should come. Thirdly, the earth is lightened with his glory, because evē they which are strangers from the true Church shal honour, and admire the glory of his godlinesse and excellent maiestie. He shalbe wel reported off, even of them that are without, as speaketh the Apostle. The like use of words in the things past, doth give us this knowledge of this Angel, though yet to come. VVhich is the onely way to pearse into these things otherwaies hidden from us. But it is to be observed, that this An∣gel, as farr as it seemeth, shal not come forth by and by after that manife¦station of the throne, which we have spoken of in the former chapter; but
at length after some certain and meet time set between. And therfore this vision is divided from the former by that usual stile in writing of a distāce of time somwhat farther of, and after these things I saw. 2 And he cryed out mightily, , in strength, that is, strongly, valiant∣ly, and vehemently. The Complutent edition and the Kings Bible have , with a strong voice: so also Aretas: but the sense is al one. This mighty crying out signifyeth the efficacy and immutability of the things to be done, as Aretas noteth. Although peradventure no such denuntia∣tion to be made in words is not to be expected; but even the very attem∣ting of the thing shall stirre up in the mindes of men that opinion, as if they did heare this voice sounding in the eares of men. But seing this cry¦ing out is of one Angel, to whom the businesse is committed as is like, of destroying, and burning Rome, it may confirme somewhat that which we have sayd in the former chapter; that some one of the tenne hornes, to whom the rest of the multitude is figuratively adioyned; not that whole number, shal bring upon it this last desolation. He cryeth out with a voice dou¦bled, It is fallen, it is fallen Babylon, after the māner of the former Prophets, but yet with this difference, because they denoūced a destruction to come long after, this declareth that it is already present, now at last to be per∣formed, by this his expedition. Babylon that great, the seven hilled citie, the chief Empresse Rome, as once Babylon the head citie of the Assyrians. There is a double Babylon in this book, as we have heard chap. 16., Rome and Conctantinople. But here he speaketh of the first, which belongeth to the fift vial, in which this chapter is employed. The second belongeth to the last vial, to be destroyed in the twentith chapter ¶ And is become the habitation of Divils: The cause of the destruction is not here mentioned, which foloweth after in ver. 3. but the desolation is declared by a dreadful wildernesse, which this kind of inhabitans reioicing in solitary places and folowing them, doo expresse passingly. Or rather wherin they themselves doo not so much take pleasure, but into which they are sent, and thrust even against their wils. From whence that which first is caled the habitation of Divils, is straightway called the hold of every fowl Spirit, that is, a prison or iayle into which they are thrust at the plea∣sure of the Highest iudge. As if by the most iust iudgmēt of God the foule Spirits be tormented in the same places, after they have ben deprived of all company of mortal men, which they have abused, by entising men to abhomination and naughtinesse. Which is like a hell to them, to be so kept from mens societie: whom to draw with them into the same tormēt, they hold it some confort in their damnation. But they are not so shut a∣part
from men into these secret places, but that often times they goe on with rage in verie great meetings of folke, as oftē as it shal so please God, but because such wildernesses are appointed to them for ordinarie prisōs. Wherunto that saying of Christ seemeth to pertaine: When the unclean Spi∣rit is gone out of a man, he walketh throughout dry places, seeking rest, and findeth none Mat. 12.43. Moreover the evils which were brought into the Church by Hermites and Monkes shew aboundantly how much the delusions of Satan doo prevaile in thos foule and desert places, as the most learned Theod. Beza hath observed. But from this place we learn how that of I∣saiah is to be understood in chap 13.20.21.22. and again in chap. 34.13.14.15. unto which the Spiri alludeth manifestly, howsoever he inter¦preteth them not word for word purposely. That is to say, not only of some Beasts and unlckie birds, but also of evil Angels, to whom these names are proper, Divils and fowle Spirits, as the Greeks have translated, partly retaining the Hebrew words  & ; partly translating plain¦ly Schhirim  Divils, in which sense that word is used in Levit. 17.7. And they shall no more offer their offrings to Divils, lishhirim properly signi∣fieth the word goates; but it is translated unto Divils, who appeared for the most part to their worshippers rough and hairie: commonly they are caled Satyrs, , as Aquila translateth in Isaiah. ¶ And a cage of every unclean bird: It is not called a custody, because it should be like a cage, from whence the uncleane birds could not flee out, but because they should be seen continually abiding in those ruines, and to have their most usual place of dwelling there Such are those flesh-de∣vouring, ravenous, and unluckie birdes, the Egle, Kite, Hauke, the Vul∣tur, Raven, the Night-wandring scritchowles, Howlets, &c. Of which sort many are reckned up in Levit. 11.13. &c. And such birds were once counted uncleane by the Law. Such difference hath no place at this day: yet not without cause they are so called to this present time, because they excellently set before our eyes the disposition of uncleane men, who live by stelth, and know no other way to maintaine themselves, except by vio∣lence and injurie. In this respect also those greedie birdes are hated of all the rest, as they shew by gathering a company, as often as they have got∣ten one of these ravenous birds alone, and any occasion shall give an op∣portunity to oppresse them; likeweise also this kind of men is odious to al mortal men. 3 Because of the wine of the wrath. A threefold cause of the destruction is rehearsed, because she was the authour of Idolatry to al men; because she drewe the Kings into the partaking of her wickednes; and increased with honours & riches
above measure her citizens by her riot. These naughtie acts are auncient, and often cast in her teeth by other Angels some ages before. Therfore he de∣clareth that the shamelesse forehead of this whore is stil condemned of the same crime, which can be moved with no warnings to put away her former lewdnesse. As touching the words, the wine of the wrath of her forni∣cation, is a fornication wherby God is provoked to wrath, yet so making wretched men drunken for a time with a certen pleasantnesse, that it ta∣keth away all perceiving of the impiety therof, as in chap. 14.8. ¶ All nations have drunk; Montanus hath it ransitively, thus; hath made the nations to drink: and so her wickednesse is more lively set forth, & more becomming her, which beareth a cup of Gold in her hand, wherby shee may provoke even those that are not thirsty to drink, as before chap. 14.8. It is an horrible sinne to put a stumbling block before the blind: but what is it to thrust and throw him headlong into the pit? But the kinde of speaking seemeth to be changed of purpose, least any man should alledge for his excuse, that he hath not deceived others. Therfore this common reading is to be preferred which our coppies have; which also the verbes neuters which folow eporneusan eploutesan, seeme to require. ¶ And the marchants of the earth of the abundance of her pleasures:  from the force of her riot, that is, from the plenty and immoderate desire to enioy al pleasures. For Rome is an other Zerxes who by rewards offered, stirred up men to devise newe pleasures. There∣fore how should not the devisers and ministers of these things get to thē∣selves great riches? But of what sort are these marchants? not of that kind, as it seemeth who make a gaine by carrying out, and bringing in of wares; for they are in the number of the reprobates, who shal mourne for Baby∣lon: wgose destruction shal bring very great ioy to all the saincts, ver, 20. Neither shal these mēs wares be bought anie more Rome being destroy∣ed: yet notwithstanding gold, silver, and the other things which are men∣tioned, shal not cease to be in account in other places. Hereunto is added, that among them to whom this name agreeth properly, the chiefe digni∣tie is theirs, who fetch wares by sea from farr countries: but these exerci∣se marchandise not so much by sea, as by land; from whence they are cal∣led the marchants of the earth. Furthermore these are the Peres and great men of the earth ver. 13. in a higher place and honour, then they which sell mar¦chandise. Last of al we shal see that the soules also of men are amōg the wares of these men, ver. 13. which by no meanes wil not suffer us to stick to the proper nature of the words. Therfore certaine common marchants are not here to be minded, (although these also shall suffer great losse,) but
the stately Lords Cardinals, Archbishops, Popish Bishops, who exercise a marchandise of soules, and flourish by this marchandise with the glory of Noble men. For we shal see after, that Rome is compared to Tyrus, because she is no lesse noble a marte town of spiritual things, then once Tyrus of al those things which belong to the deligts of this life, as we may see in Pope Alexander, of whom was this sung common: Alexander sels the keyes, the Altars, yee Christ also, First of all he had bought them, then by right he may doo so. But Baptista Mantuan writeth more fully, not of Alexandre alone, but of the whole company, and daily custome of the Romish court: —with us are to be sold, The Temples, Preists, Altars, the Holy things, the Crown: The fyre, Jncens, the Praies, Heaven & God is to sell. Who can desire a better furnished market? Neither mayest thou think this to be the overmuch libertie of railing Poets, but a iust complaint of more holy reformers. Bernard saith, that the sacred degrees are given unto an occasion of dishonest lure, and that gaine is counted godlinesse, in his first sermon of the conversion of Paul. Budaeus in his Pandects saith, the Popes decres are not profitable for the governement of manners, but I had almost said, doo seeme to give authority to occupie a banke for love. Ludovicus Vives on August. of the Citie of God, book 18. chap. 22. saith, though all things almost are sold and bought at Rome, yet thou mayest doo nothing without a law and rule, and also of a most inviolable authority. But it were an infinite thing to sayle in this sea, no shore of which thou canst see, howsoever thou shouldest obtaine a prospe¦rous winde for some few dayes. Such therfore are both the marchants, & wares. Although I wil not deny the huge excesse also of things, which per¦teine to the body, by conveying wherof thither, many have waxed verie rich. But here chiefly the marchādise of soules seemeth to be understood; than which no science hath been more gainful now for manie ages. Augu¦stine the Monk perhaps at home of no estimation, yet because he had brought the Britaines into bondage under Rome, was made Archbishop of Canterbury. Venefride the English man, called Boniface, his name being changed, by this way became Bishop of Mentz, and togither also Governour of the Church of Coloine. Who can recken up all who have made a way for themselves to verie great dignities by this same meane? A∣lan an English man a traitour, betraying the faith, his countrey, & Prince to the Pope, deserved by this trade of marchandise to be amōg the Peeres of the earth, having gained the dignitie of a Cardinals hat. Yea that this trafique might not be cold, whom gaine and profits moved not, those the
crafty whore inflamed, with honours and glory. The King of Spaine was made the Ctholike King: of France the mot Christian King: The Swissers the Defenders of the Church, and furthermore endued with two great banners, both the Cappe & Sword. Some reward is wanting to no man, to the end that they may exercise the more diligently that profitable marchandise. Threefold therfore is the cause of the destruction of Rome; because he is the mother of Idolatry, the corruptresse of Kings and nations, and that may be sffered no longer for her arrogancy and pride, and buying & sel∣ling of soules. By which things this right excellent Captaine being mo∣ved, shal undertake this expedition against her. 4 And I heard an other voice: Such is the first Angel, and the Prince as it seemeth of this warre: the second as an under Captaine dooth his office in counselling and exhorting. But here is no mention made of the Angel, but onely of a voice from heaven, as though this exhortation were without an authour, his name being concealed from whom it commeth. For which cause we have said in the Analysis that this Angel is namelesse. It is in deed an odious argument which he handleth, wherupon peradventure he will conceale his name, which being known would bring no profit, but might procure some danger, the adversaries being of so spitefull minds. His speech is continued even unto the one and twentith verse; so copious shal be the admonition of some faithfull man, which togither with the prepa∣ration to this warrē, shalbe spread abroad, godly and truly warning men of the present punishment of Rome. Notwithstanding that which wee have spoken of his name concealed is not of such necessity, as that it must needs be so, seeing the like voice from heaven did shew his author, as the event declared, chap. 14.13. But it is likely to be true that the name is to be concealed. ¶ Goe out of her my people: The exhortation consisteth of two parts, the first part perteineth to them which live in Babylon, warning them that acknowledging at the length the filthinesse of that citie, they forsake the same, and depart to an other place; that they would no longer for her sake expose themselves to certain destruction. Wherfore some elect lie hidd yet in the dreggs of the Romish impietie, whom God remembreth in the cō¦mon destruction of the wicked. He will not suffer Lot to perish togither with the Sodomits: and he used the like exhortation long since to his peo¦ple, when the mother of this Babylon was to be razed, Ier. 51.45. And this commandement shal not be made in vaine to his people, to whom alone it is proper to obey his voice. Therfore even as the mises perceaving before hand that the house will fall, doo runne away out of their holes,
so they being wakened out of sleep by the Angels voice, shal convey them selves by and by out of this detestable city. ¶ Least ye be partakers of her sinnes: For of what sinners the felowship is not forsaken, their guiltines is conveyed to men. Therfore he saith not, that ye be not partakers of her punishments, but which is farr more gree∣vous, of her sinnes. This feare wil provoke and inforce them to runne away, who are convinced in their consciences of the Romish wickednes, 5 For her sinnes are heaped up: , one following an other as chai∣ned togither, at length they hav reached evē unto heaven. But if through the whole Papistical Kingdome, Rome be the holy city, Peters chaire, which cannot erre, this chained row hath suffered a great interruption: which as it much exceedeth the ages of the Heathen Emperours, so much the more easily it dooth blot out the impietie of that three yeeres space of Antichrist, which they dreame is yet to come, although it were granted, that he should raign at Rome. How can the sinnes in the last times come up even to heaven, from whose full heape so much is taken away by so lōg continuing holines of the Popes? But this Revelatiō hath made the thing manifest, declaring that the Pope received a lampe from the Heathen Em¦perours, and to have heaped up new sinnes upon the former heape in a cō¦tinual row; even as the perpetual order and succession of Popes sheweth; for which onely thing the catalogue of the Popes serveth greatly. We hav seen this heape wonderfully increased in these our times: neither shal they which folow, lesse māfully add to the heape, until they have both brought their sinns unto heaven, and also their wicked citie to dust. The Interpre∣ter Aretas translateth have cleaved to; Montanus, are glued togither, one layed on an other, and as it were soldered with glue. Therfore the filthi∣nes of Rome shal be made yet more manifest to the elect, to the end that they may thinke the more in earnest of flying from her. 6 Reward her even as shee hath rewarded you; The other part of the exhorta∣tiō hath respect to the armies of soldjers gathered togither against Rome. This whetteth their anger and stirreth it up to a iust revenging. Thou say∣est it is a cruel sentence; he should rather convert his speach to the repres∣sing of fury, much lesse excite to the rendring of double. But cursed is eve∣ry one, that doth the worke of the Lord negligently. Neither is it to be feared that the punishment is more greevous then her deserts, to which no sharpnes of punishment can be equal. But these things declare the event, to weet, that men shal use verie great severitie in executing this last desolatiō. And it is to be observed that the citizens now of the Romane jurisdiction shal
be the Ministers of this universal slaughter. For whom the Angel evē now commanded to come out of Babylon, them he now exhorteth to revēge∣ment. It is like that these being mindful of so long continuing tyranny, wherwith they have lyen oppressed so many ages, and having also the late iniuries fixed in their minds, the sting wherof dooth yet greeve them ve∣hemently, wil more freely give licence to their anger, and wil satisfy them∣selves scarce with anie punishment. And this is that to give her the double, & to fill her the double, in the cup that she hath filled: signifying that a huge calami∣tie shalbe brought upon her with verie great cruelty. We have seen befor that there is a double cupp in this book, one of errour, wherby the whore made men drunken with the sweetnesse of her abomination; the other of punishment, wherby it is taught that the wicked shalbe punished after the like manner that they have sinned. 7 In as much as shee hath glorified her selfe: , that which  weigh out to her in equal balances, so much torment as there was excesse in carnal pleasure before. O Rome therfore by so much the more misera¦ble, by how much thou hast bene the most happie of all. Who shal recite thy calamitie, to whose riot, the deliciousnes of the Sybarites, is not to be compared. ¶ J sit a Queen: The greatnesse of the punishment is declared two wayes; both by the like cruelty which shee hath shewed against others in the for∣mer verse; and also from her loftinesse in this verse, wherunto her abase∣ment must be answerable in the verse folowing. But wheras shee vaunteth that shee is a Queen, shee sheweth her selfe to be the natural daughter of her mother Babylon. Neither are these proude words darke, when shee chalengeth to her selfe a Primacy over all Churches, braggeth that shee is the head of Christianity; the beginning of eternal life, and many other things of like blasphemous arrogancy. Which Primacy shee assureth her selfe shalbe for ever, perswading her owne heart that she shal never be de¦prived of this dignity, neither shal have experience of anie calamity. For what other thing is it that her most beloved sonnes doo avouch that Pe∣ters chaire cannot be separated from Rome, nor the seate of the Apostles translated from thence, as Bellarmine affirmeth in his 4. book of the Bi∣shop of Rome chap. 4. Which although he wil not have to be counted among the articles of the faith, yet it seemeth to him by some arguments of so great strength, that at the last he can hadly pe persuaded, but that it is an article of the Papists faith. Francis de Ribera now gesseth that som evil shal happen to Rome, but after that manner, that he sheweth rather his care, then giveth over even the least that may be of his bragging.
8 Therfore in one day: For this thy proud boasting, this threefold kind of calamity shal make an assault upon thee at once. At lēgth thou shalt finde how thou hast ben deceived, and how in vain thy Knaves have sung to thee, upon this rock I wil build my Church &c. The calamities which are re∣hearsed, belong partly to men, whom death, sorow, and famine shal de∣voure: partly to the citie, which shalbe burnt with fire. Which declare that the city shal not be takē at the first assault, but by a siege: while the which continueth, the past (for so death was called before in chah. 6.8.) sorow and famine shal assaile within: and that at length the city shal come into the power of the enemies, who shal make it even to the ground, & bring her to ashes: then shalbe fulfilled that which Sibyl Prophecied: Rome shal be a street, or empty place; and Delos shalbe obscure, or not founde. ¶ For strong is the Lord: He maketh mention of the power of the Lord, because it wilbe almost incredible that Rome borne up with so great ri∣ches, both her owne, and Kings and others her allies can be broght in∣to this miserable condition. But he is mighty, who shal exercise iudgmēt, whose will cannot be resisted by any might. That which here is read shall iudge, some copies have in the present tense iudgeth. 9 Then shal bewaile: Such was the exhortation; the first mourning of the wicked, shalbe of Kings, but of the earth onely, neither properly so called, but onely Romanes. VVhich Kings are the slaves of the Church playing the harlot These shal beginne their lamentable songes, mourning after a wonderful manner, when they thinke of how sweete cōpany of the whore they are deprived by this unlooked for destruction. VVherfore other Kings shal remaine besides those tenne, chap. 17.16 which shal destroy the whore with fyre. Neither is it to be thought, that these ten Kings af∣ter their hatred satisfyed, shal give up themselves to lamenting, being mo¦ved by repentance, as Ribera trifleth. For it shalbe matter of very great ioy to al the elect; of which sorte are these Ministers of vengeance, exhor∣ting al the people of God to depart from the felowship both of her wic∣kednes and punishments ver. 20. and chap. 19.1. &c. Moreover after the time is finished of giving their Kingdome to the Beast, the ten hornes with a constant minde shal detest the whore, so farr off is it that they shal be greeved for her miserable condition, chap. 17.16.17. Therfore that device falleth down concerning the ten Kings, in whose power shalbe the dominion of the whole earth, who, if with ioyned forces (as the Iesuite wil have it) they shal bring the last destruction upon Rome, they should leave no King to bewayle her great miserie. VVe have shewed by truer ar¦guments, that those x hornes pertaine to the onely degree of Emperours,
some one of which at length shal execute this destruction, who yet kee∣peth the name of the whole number; as it is done for the most part, when speach is had of the mēbers or parts of some whole thing. VVhile he shal spoile Rome, some other Kings, of Spaine, Polonia, and the like confede¦rate with the whore, shal make this miserable wailing. 10 Standing a farr off for feare: But what need shal there be then of lamen∣tings? VVhy shal they not rather make hast to help her? They shal not dare to doo it for feare: they shalbe greatly afraid of their own safetie. Therfore they shal behold a farr off her miserie, taking heed that they thē selves burne not with the same fire, if they shal come neere. You therfore holy Princes, take the matter in hande, it shal not be a thing of so great trouble, as peradventure you thinke. Doo you think that Spaine, France, or other, I know not what huge armies, wil come to aide her? These are altogither Goblins, and vaine Scarcrowes. Her friends shal stand a farre off with waitings testifying their love, but taking no paines to deliver her from peril. And who would expect that fornicatours wil undergoe anie dāger for a stale VVhore? Therfore it is onely needful that you take upon you the matters valiantly, the other things shal have prosperous successe. Euphrates shal open away into Babylon for Cyrus, if he cannot break through the walles. ¶ Alas, alas, that great city: A lamentable song of the Kings: the often defect of which, doth verie fitly expresse the truth of the affection. The sentence shalbe perfit in this wise, Woe woe to us, because that great city Baby∣lon, that mighty citie is overthrown, and because in one houre thy iudgement is come. They bewaile the ruine, and the sudden comming of it. 11 And also the marchants of the earth: The marchants doo accord in the lamentations of the Kings, but of the earth, of which sort are the Kings: we have shewed at the 3. verse, that they were marchants rather of spiri∣tual things, then of those which respect the body. For which thing there is an argument from hence. Because, saith he, no man buyeth their wares anie more. Therfore gold or silver is not here spoken of, or sylke, or fine linnen, or spices, or any such thing in the proper signification; the estimatiō wher¦of dependeth not on Rome onely. Vnlesse peradventure then they shall∣be of farre lesse price, whē so greedy a buyer is taken away. But the words are expresse, neither is any such thing spoken of Tyre, from whence this whole allegorie is taken, out of Ezech. 27. VVhere the place no lesse re∣quired an amplification of the matter. VVherfore these wares are labour, study, industry, to adorne and enrich the city of Rome, which thinges shalbe most cheape, and of no price, after shee is fallen. For who then
wil give a rotten nut for them. 12 The warrs of Gold and silver: Even now we said that this whole allego¦rie was taken out of Ezech. 27. where it is spoken of the destruction of Tyrus. Neither without cause, as we have shewed in ver. 3. when as at Rome there is no lesse famous a sale of soules, then was at Tyrus of things necessarie for our use. Ezechiel dooth so recken every nation, that togi∣ther also he rehearseth the proper cōmodities of everie countrey, in which both they abounded, and carried to Tyrus. According to which manner, sundry kindes of wares seeme here to be reckened up, to note out sundry nations, to which either they belong, or at least by whose travell they are brought to Rome. Therfore although the names of the countries ar not expressed in plain words, as in Ezechiel; yet notwithstanding they may ea∣sily be understood according to that rule, from the wares themselves. The wares therfore of Gold, and silver, and the other outlandish things, which are rehearsed in this verse, may signify Spayne, which fetched those things from the furdest Indies, by whose travel they are to be sold in this part of the world. Cinnamon, Odours, Ointments, Frankincense & wine doo note out Italy; not because all these things doo grow in the same place, but because as Spaine by the Ocean Sea; so this by the intern sea affoardeth aboundāce of those things to Europe from Greece, Cilicia, Aegypt, Africk. Her selfe also being the most fertill in all delicious dainties, of all the countries of Europe. Fine floure and Wheate may signify the Ilands of the interne sea Ci∣cilia, & Sardinia, the garners and storehouses of Italy The Beasts, Germa∣nie, abounding with them; even as the Sheepe, our England, being great∣ly frequented with this kinde of cattel. Horses & Charets, the French men, who have great store of horses, and from whence the use of charets have bene conveyed to others. Bodies, the Swisers, who follow an externe, and mercenary warfare; and in which men, Rome chiefly delighteth to make them her guard. The soules of men, are the common wares of all countries, which Rome dooth hunte after by her marchants everie where, desiring the same to be instructed in her superstitions: which that so she may gaine and purchasse for hir owne proper goods, she spareth no cost. The ma∣kers of portsale of these wares, are they, that by their paines have brought these nations to be obedient to Rome. Even as we know special provin∣ces to have bin cōmitted to some Cardinals & Iesuits: whose care though it be bestowed in common; yet it lyeth upon every one severally to decla∣re his diligence in some certain nation. Which if he can either retaine in their dutie, or recall forsaking her, by knitting it againe in friendship with Rome, he bringeth wares of that sort to be sold, wherby that nation is
signified upon which he hath bestowed his labour. As touching everie of the several wares by name, Gold, Silver, Pretious stones, Pearles, they wer be∣fore in the whores apparell, chap. 17.4, And it seemeth to be for that cause that Spaine in these last times shalbe a special ornamēt to the whore. And of fine linnen, and Purple, two for one, the Purple of fine linnen, which is a cloath made among the Indians of that kinde of flaxe: so and of silke and of skarlet, are spoken asunder, for of skarlet silke. Of skarlet we have spoken elsewher. Silke is cloath of most small threeds, which the worme doo draw as it wer from a distaffe out of their own store. It is not made of flowers as Diony∣sius singeth : of the Series, thus: Neither the care of Oxen troubleth them, Neither the flock of woole-bearing sheepe: But in kembing the branches-bearing flowers, Garments they make &c. So Virg. in the second of his Georg. The thin fleeces from the leaves, Doeth kembe the peoples Series. Vnlesse peradventure the Poets, because the wormes doo make silke in trees, therfore doo say, that this is kembed from thence, not because it growes in them, as cotton and the like. See Iul. Caes. Scal. Exerc. 108. 9. ¶ And all thynewood: Thyne signifieth both universally all odoriferous wood, also a special kinde, as Eustathius noteth upon that of Dionysius of Arabia, which he calleth wonderful: Which by burning thynwoods a fragrant smel respire, Eyther of thynewood or Myrrhe &c. Wherein the first place thyne is generally called any spice: in the secōd place a certaine kinde of odoriferous tree But it is used here not so much for perfuming, as for finenes of buildings, (for there is mention of odours in the beginning of the verse folowing,) wherunto it serveth chiefly, as Plinie sheweth out of Theophrastus. Who, saith he, did give great honour to this tree, rehearsing the famous boordings of the ancient temples to be of it, and a cer∣tain everlastingnesse of the uncorrupted timber in houses against all faults: book 13 chap. 16. of his natural History. 13 And Cinnamon: Italy useth such as is brough to them: which shee fetched not from Spaine, but from those places where it groweth: so also she procureth for her selfe Odours, Ointment, & Frankincense by her owne navigations. The chiefe sale of these things is with the people of Syria, Phoenicea, Arabia, Aegypt. To these coastes Italy goeth with all speed pos¦sible, while the Spaniard is occupied especially in forraine navigations: she
hath wine and oyle ynough of her owne. She bringeth fine floure & wheate from Sicilia. ¶ And Beasts: It were tolerable if Rome should note out Germanie with this marke, onely for the richesse of cattel: but the most proude whore scarce thinketh any otherwise of the most famous nation then of very Beasts. Ambrosius Catharinus sheweth this plainly in his book a∣gainst Luther, whom that most foolish Asse calleth a Beast, almost in every verse: and that not so much for hatred of his Heresy (as he calleth it,) as with a manifest reproch of the whole nation. Rome indeed speaketh mor modestly at this time, not daring to provoke the fiercenesse of men by so greate a contumely: but secretly with her selfe she iudgeth no otherweise then before time; and not onely of this people alone, but of al other peo∣ple of Europe: all which, her selfe onely excepted, shee accounteth almost meere brutes. But God hath chosen this foolishnes, if thou wilt so hav it, of our nations, wherby he might throw to the ground thy vaine wisdom, and at length by thy iust punishment, might set forth thy pride to be deri∣ded of all men. ¶ And sheep; a sign of our own England, whose fleece is of gold, excel∣ling in softnes & finenes above the wool of other countreys. Rome hath now a long time vehemētly grieved, that these wares are brought sparing¦ly to her faires; and therfore tryed everie way, that she may enioy the for¦mer aboūdāce of them. For this purpose she maintaineth English youth, and hath made Alan our countrey man a Cardinal. She fitteth for her self these merchants, besides troupes of Iesuits, if peradventure she may be a∣gaine Lord of our sheepe. But we, thankes be to God, know for a surety, that Rome is a denn of wolves, and other most cruel Beasts. Let her chāt as sweetly and pleasantly as shee can, we acknowledge her voice to be of strangers and robbers; neither wil we be taken with the sweetnesse therof. I hope that our people wil no more goe to visite, but with this Angel to the destroying of her. ¶ And Horses and charrets: And of horses, and of charets, and of bodies, to weet the wares. The two first perteine to the French men, renowmed for horses armed on al parts, and for the invention of charrets: this last of bo¦dies is the ware of the Swissers, of which very many villages persisting stil in the Romish superstition, doo defend the Beast with their bodies. He hath these for the ordinary and domestical yeomen of his garde; also he may take up greater armies of them serving for wages, as oft as necessity shal so require. I would God they would learne of their brethren, & con∣federates, not to yeeld their bodies to his pleasure, with which being not
content he also worketh certaine destruction to their soules; neither to take wages for keeping of him, whom if they would utterly destroy, they should bring very great profit to all Christians. But this marchan∣dise shal have an end shortly. Were it not better to forsake the wicked Mistres willingly, then in short time to be forsaken of the same necessari∣ly? The voluntarie sorow of repentance is wholsome; but that is deadly, which stubburnes bringeth forth. ¶ Ad soules of men: These wares are not proper to one country, but cō¦mon to all: which Rome dooth not thing too dear bought for any gold whatsoever. The like thing offers it selfe in Ezechiel chap. 27.13. They of Iavan, Tubal, and Meshech were thy merchants, they used the marchandise of men, and vessls of Brasse in thy marchandise: bnephesch adham, , the soules of men. Tremellius and Iunius translate of men and vessels, de∣claring well the sense. He meaneth doubtlesse slaves set to sale, as in the sa∣me place they doe expound. Therefore why should not the soules of men ob¦taine the same force in this place? The Spirit seemeth to have changed the construction, of set purpose, to note the difference. For these are not rehearsed in the second case with those that went next before, and the wares of horses, and of charets, and of bodies, and of the soules of men: but in these last words, he passeth to the fourth case, and the soules of men, as it is manifest in the Greek, and as we have translated. Wherin is signified, that there is a separated and divers consideration of soules & bodies in this place; and that there is a farre other meaning then of that in Ezech. howsoever in wordes he alludeth to that. 14 And the fruits lusted after: : for the autumne of thy desire (for  seemeth to be causal.) The Interpreter Aretas, and the time of thy desire. It is a manner of speaking of the Hebrewes for, thy desi∣red autumne, as , in the fyre of flame, for, in flaming fyre, 2 Thess. 1.8. as though he should say, thy desired harvest is lost. By which prover¦bial manner of speakidg, we signify, that power to gaine is taken frō one. Or the same hebraisme may be understood, so as that which goeth before may be in the place of the concrete, and the autumnal desire of thy soule: as al∣so in the 2 Thess. 1.9. And from the glory of his strength, for and from his glo∣rious strength. In which sense the autumnal desire, noteth out that wanton greedines of rath-ripe fruits, which the richer sorte, and the dainty ones have, getting the first fruits for them by a great price; the more plentifull store of which afterward they loath: as though he should say: Once thou didst lash out huge costs upō things of little value, but now thou art not so wantonly ready to buye: that thy former strange longing is gone: those
things now would be acceptable, which of late thou despisedst; according to that of the Poet, the empty stomake doth seldome despise cōmon things; which of the two wayes we wil take them, we see that these things doo very well hange togither with the former, wherby the mourning of the merchans is greatly amplified, that buyers shalbe now wanting altogither; whereas lately, when Rome flourished, they had so quick & ready a market. Wher∣of the Spirit tendreth a double reason by this mourning: first, that nowe ther was no lust to buy; secondly, that al ability was utterly lost. ¶ And al things which were fatte & excellent: That is, al plenty & aboun∣ce is departed from thee; which doo more confirme the former interpre∣tation. For seing these things doo signify a rich plenty, it is like, that that which went before, is to be referred rather to lust, that the same thing may not be spoken twice; although so it is wont to be some time, when the lat¦ter is added in stead of a more full exposition. The Compl. & the K. Bi∣ble read, are perished from thee. So Aretas and the common translation: but the sense is nothing altered. 15 The marchants of these things; The cause being declared, now he com∣meth to the manner of mourning, with a breif repetitiō of the cause. The marchants, saith he, of these things, that is, they who bestow al their labour about the associating and retaining of these countreys, & ioyning them to the service of Rome. VVho were made rich of her, getting ample rewards of this their labour. VVe have seen before briefly with how great gaine they travelled about this marchādise, which openeth a way to Bishopriks, Cardinalships, yea evē to the highest Prelateship. And who seeth not men of every coūtry, being either of great wit or learning, of great force either by riches or favour, or famous for noblenes of birth & descent of blood, whose industry may be profitable for the beautifying of Rome, to be hy∣red by what meanes soever, to bend al their cares & thoughts to this po∣int? Wolseius & Polus flourished in our countrey in our Fathers dayes. The first descended of base parents, but ambitious, tumultuous, notably fra∣med for the profit of Rome, and therfore promoted to so great honours, that he was not afraid to vaunt himselfe somewhat above the King. The other of a milder disposition, but of great authority for noblenes of parē∣tage: for which cause he waxed rich by the Romish aboundance, until he gave suspition of a contrary mind, & bewrayed some desire to knowe the truth. Then he perceived that Petoum a certain begging fryar, to be set a∣gainst him of the Pope; whom he should have seen adorned with his spoi∣les & booties, if the thing had come to passe as the Pope wished. This la∣bour is in so great account, as that he who onely begged a reward, should
be equal by & by to the highest States of the earth. But after that Rome shalbe cast down, no man wil hyre this labour, evē for one farthing. This evil shal take these marchants, when they have lost all hope of their gaine. ¶ Shal stand a farre off: To weet, Cardinals, Bishops, & others, which at that time shabe conversant in other places than at Rome. They being set without danger, with a lamentable voice shall bewaile her ruine a farr off, but they shal hav neither ability nor courage of mind to repel the danger. 16 And saying, alas, alas: It is the same concealing, which was in the mour¦ning of the Kings in ver. 10. wherby the truth and greatnesse of the sorow is expressed. The argument is somwhat divers; for they agreably to their persons did lament that so great a power was abolished. These complain that so huge wealth was spoiled, which marchāts chiefly regard. Notwith¦standing seing this fine linnen, purple, skarlet, & the other decking signify¦eth the pride of Rome, upheld chiely by the riches of Spaine, as at the 12 ver. the marchants lament & ar altogither dismayed, that al these richesses have profited her nothing; as thou they should say, how is she come to naught, that was fortifyed by so great aide of the Spaniards, against which if the whole christian world had conspired, worthily might any mā think that they should doo nothing worth the paines taking? 17 And also every shipmaster: The third mourning is of the mariners & wa¦termen, that is of the inferiour ministers of the Romish court, Deanes, Abbots, Priors, General, Iesuits, & such like. These al live of the sea by pro¦moting the ordinances & decrees of the whore. Of which sort were the Spips and Shipmasters in chap. 8.9. ¶ And al the company of them that dwel in shipps: The Complut. the Kings Bible, and Aretas read thus, and every one that sileth in shipps, the common translation, and al that sale in the lake: this is further off, but as it seemeth fetched from hence that ploion is a little shippe rowed with oares, of which there is more often use in Rivers and flouds. VVhich interpretation is not altogither to be refused in so great variety of copies, and declareth more plainly a certain distribution of the general comprehension into cer¦ten classes. And whosoever trafike on the Sea: word for word in the Greek, doo labour on the Sea, as in the Gospel of Iohn, labour the meate, that is, for the meate, cha. sixe, verse twentie seventh. In this last member are comprehended all which doo study to the Popish doctrine, teaching, learning, and setting forth the same eyther by voice or writings, defending the same to their power, or by any other way or meanes whatsoever advauncing and pro∣moting it.
Of which sorte are the Masse Priests, Monkes, Fryars, above the rest at this day the Iesuits, who doo leane upon their cares lustily, and smite this sea with all their strength, without which if the shippe of the fisher man had bin, it had dashed long since on the rockes. Although while they in row∣ing labour to avoide Scylla, they rush upon Charybdis: by disputing they s more openly in the sight of men, the whores and Popes filthinesse, which they strive to cover. 18 What city was like to this great city? As the mariners speak of Tyrus, Ezek 27.32. What city was like Tyrus, destroyed in the middes of the sea? And for iust cause did they astonished, aske this, when they considered with them selves the former riches of the citie, flourishing of late by the commerce of so many, and so great nations, which they thought could be vanqui∣shed by no strength of man. How much trouble wrought it Nebuchad∣nezar? Ezech. 29.18. How much Alexander afterward? Who repented him of the siedge, he so despaired of the winning thereof by force, who yet at an other time thought nothing impossible for him. But these wa∣termen should be dismayed for iuster causes at Rome, late the Queene of the whole world. The most auncient city, the chaire of Peter, which alwyes hath overcome all calamities; and should be mighty and flourishing even to her very old age, both by her owne riches, and her friends. These and many such things wil compel them to cry out, what citie was like to this great city? Who would not have thought that so eminent excellency in all things, should have bin free from destruction? How have we bin deceived, dreaming of her everlastingnesse? How have we deceived others, vanting that this shippe shall never be drowned? How unexpected are all these things, contrary to our persuasion, opinion, and vaunting? Such a force hath this wondering question. 19 And shl cast dust upon their heads; After the manner of mourners, Iob. 2.12. For these shall waile so much the more earnestly, by how much they are lesse able to upholde themselves by their owne riches. But this Angel speaketh in the time past, they did cast dust on their heads: and also in the former verse, and they cryed seing the smoke. Yet these things goe before the ruine, which they have ioyned and knit unto them. For which cause he seemeth to change the time, and not onely for the most certen truth of the thing to come, as the Prophets are wont elsewhere. ¶ Wherin were made rich all: Not onely those chiefe purpled Fathers, but also they who were of the basest state and condition. Behold the whole Hierarchy, how doo all flowe in exceeding great riches? In everie country very much and the best ground came to them. Moreover it is a thing wō∣derfull
to be spoken, they which fained to sustain their life by begging frō towne to towne, lacked nothing, which might serve even for ryot. Misera∣ble common people, who were so deceived that they bestowed money on beggars farre richer, then they themselves, that did give. But such is the cunning of Rome to enrich her friends. In these daies how bountifully & liberally are our traitours, wanting their countrey, goods, & friends, en¦tertained at Rome, in Spaine, and elswhere? They get that reward of their treason abroad, which by honest meanes they could not obtaine at home. A reward is not wanting at home for well doing. But they hate true ver∣tue, the fruite wherof they would receive. Rome maketh these men rich, counting it an unworthy thing (for here the whore wilbe godly) that the maintainers of her honour should not become rich by her wealth alone, howsoever they shalbe destitute of all other aides. These may therfore for iust cause bewaile the destruction of the whore, with whom they found the wages of their naughtinesse: which now they shalbe compelled to pra¦ctise for nothing. For some are too fully minded, never to be thrifty. 20 O Heaven reioice of her: Thus farre the mourning of the wicked, now he sheweth what aboundant ioy shal come from thence to the godly. Heaven is the whole multitude of the Saincts on earth, as often hath bin observed. Apostles and Prophets, are not those famous preachers of the Di∣vine truth, which were in auncient times, but all the godly executing the office of teaching in the Church. For what doo our affaires on earth, per∣taine to the holy soules resting in heaven? The dead, saith the wise man, know nothing at all, to weet, of our affaires, who in the body are strangers from the Lord: Eccle. 9. And therfore the Prophet saith, that Abraham is ignorant of us, and that Israel knoweth us not: Esay 63.16. Therfore they ar living saincts on the earth, whom the Spirit calleth Apostles & Prophets, for a comfort in those troubles which they finde in the world; that although they be in∣feriour by manie degrees in gifts to the auncient Apostles, yet they may know themselves to be in the same state and account with God. He spea∣keth to them by name, because the chiefe ioy shalbe theirs, as their sorow shalbe greatest, because of the more deadly hatred wherwith the whore was inflamed against them. From which we perceive, as hath bin said before, seing the ioy is common to all the elect, that those wayling marchāts are not of this number; and therfore that they are said to be such, raher for likenesse sake, than for the truth of the thing. ¶ For God hath punished her: The Hebraisme is more significant; For God hath iudged your iudgement on her. This kind of speaking dooth shew a pu∣nishment; but yet, iudgment and lawful examination of things going
before, not inflicted rashly. This is the matter of the ioy, because God at length would avenge the Saincts on the whore, which so many ages hath raged against them scotfree, with all manner of iniuries. 21 Then a certain Angel tooke up: Hitherto hath bin declared the destru∣ction by words onely; now a signe likeweise is used, wherby it may be decla∣red that it shalbe sudden and eternal. And this is done by the ministery of a certain third Angel; of whom there is no mention made from whence he came: peradventure because he is that first, whose place from whence he came is shewed in ver. 1: who now is brought in againe to performe that very thing, which thar preparation said, would come by and by. For un∣lesse this casting of a milstone into the sea, be the very overthrowing of Rome, it is not described by what way it shalbe done. In the beginning of the chapter following, we shal understand that the thing is accompli∣shed. And the former Angels went but a litle before the destructiō. Wher∣fore either now is handled the same overthrow, or he wholly concealeth how it should be performed. ¶ A milstone cast into the sea: may be a fit signe of the ruine, as the bur∣ning mountaine cast into the sea, was of the beginning of Antichristian ty¦ranny, chap. 8.8. But yet the thing is darke to us. The event wil manifest it at length. This Angel is caled strong, taking up a stone like a milstone, & casting it into the sea: for by so many degrees is the type proposed. Which things declare an admirable swiftnesse of this ruine, and no more repai∣rable. A great stone by his waightinesse falleth down with a great violēce: yet with a greater if it be cast: but with much more being thrown of some valiant and strong man. Neither is ther hope, that that shal flote againe in the toppe, which both his owne weight, and outward force, have faste∣ned in the lowest bottome So shal Babylon be cast with violence, neither shall it be found any more, Yet these things are not spoken so, as if hee were to be taken at the first assault, which before we have shewed by a pro¦bable reason, shalbe besieged for some space: even as also the old Baby∣lon came not into Cyrus power, but after some long delay: but because after it hath bin taken, and begun to be spoiled, very quickly shall her de∣struction be finished. It may be that this type may signify the manner of taking Rome, which we know was used in Babylon. Of right is the type one, of them both, whose impiety is alike; and like also shalbe the destru∣ction: Ier. 51.63.64. ¶ With such violence shalbe cast: The word is ioyned with the signe, with∣out which the signes are weake. 22 And the voice of Harpers: He declareth this destruction more at large,
after the manner of the Prophets, who are wont to describe a final over∣throw in such words, as Ier. I wil cause to perish from them, the voice of gladnes, and the voie of mirth, and the voice of the bridgrome, the noise of the milstones, and the light of the candle, chap. 25.10. All things, saith he, shalbe destroyed, whih pereine eyther to present delectation and necessity, or to future in¦creasing For hitherto belongeth this special rehearsing. Harpers are they which play on the harpe: Musicians are by a common name, such as singe with lowd voice. The pipe & trumpet are windy instruments. Those former are of a milder sounde and sweetnes: these of a rougher, and belonging to warre: although there be some use of it in solemnities of peace. But al be∣long to mirth, as we learne from Ieremy, from whom these things are fet∣ched: from whence it would be a thing unpleasant and absurd to deale with the Iesuite any further about mourning pipes. ¶ Nor any crafts man: After those things of delectation, he rehearseth the things which appertaine neerer to the life: of which there is a more ne¦cessary use, as of craftsmen and milles. Where there is any society of men, it is needfull that artificers be in the same place: but chiefly it behooveth that there be sufficient victuals, which the milles doo note out, without which no man can continue scarce for one day. Behold whither at length our riot hath brought us, procuring also destruction to those instruments which we have abused to vanity and naughtines: not leaving any commō food there, where gluttony and bellycheere onely were regarded. 23 And the light of a candle: Candles are a confort in the night, the use wherof no man will want, although he be of a most poore condition. But thou wilt say, what great dammage can be in the losse of things of so smal price? Such smal matters most fitly describe the greatnesse of the evill. For if things most common and of most frequent use are lacking, any store of things of some moment, is not to be expected: unlesse peradventure the candles are to be referred to the bridgroome and bride, which follow. They were wonte to be used solemly in marriages. From whence is the parable of the tenne Virgins which came forth with their lampes to meet the bridgroome, Mat. 25.1. Doubtlesse Christ borroweth the similitude from a thing in comm usage and custome. Children in time past were called scotioi, which were born ek ton adadouketon gamon, from marriages, in which no torches were caried before them, as the Interpr. of Homer hath observed, Iliad. E. It was also a custome amōg the Romanes, for a boy that had Father and mother living, to beare before the spouse, a torch of a white thorne, be∣cause they were married in the night, as Plutarche saith in his Problemes. But that is clear which is added concerning the bridgroome & the bride,
to weet, that this calamity shal not lie upon her onely for some time, but that ther shal be no hope of anie better estate in time to come. This is it which the voice of the bridegroome and bride meaneth, as though he should say, never shal any marriages be contracted here, wherby should be made an increasing of posterity. ¶ For thy marchants were the great men of the earth: Here the sinnes of the city are rehearsed to be three; Luxurie, Idolatry, and the murder of the saincts. Her riot appeareth, because they that serve her lust are made the great men of the earth. It must needs be that her excesse in pleasures is ve∣ry wicked, whose servants are advanced unto so great dignity. Wee have shewed before that this is a marchandise of soules, and that these marchāts are the Lords Cardinals. Which who seeth and acknowledgeth not to be these great men, manifest demonstrations of the Romish luxurie? Thomas Wolsey our countreyman in often speach was not ashamed to say, I and my King. Such a Cardinalship is pride. But why may they not vaunt them∣selves so proudly, when they shal see great Princes to sue for this their di∣gnity, or at the least to glory no lesse in the same being given them, then in the chiefe ornament of maiesty? There have bin many of old evē of the Kings stocke, who judged this degree; not unworthy the noblenesse of their race. VVith us in Queene Maryes dayes was Cardinal Poole of a Prin¦cely linage. Among the Franch of late Cardinal Borbon of the blood roy∣all, and of Lorrrain, brother of the Duke of Guise. Albert of Austriche yet flourisheth, but yesterday a Cardinal, and brother of Rodulphe the Em∣perour. Is not this in very truth a great dignity, which so great Princes doo not refuse? May they not of right be called the great men of the earth, which are placed in so high a top of honour? But thou wilt say it yet more if thou shalt see the assēbly of the stately Lords sitting togither at Rome. Let some Prince come, whom the Pope for honours sake wil receive into the company of the Cardinals, what place hath he assigned for him? To weet, before the last Cardinal Deacon, so as if there shalbe a great and ful senate, the Prince himselfe after three score & eight men cloathed in pur∣ple garments, shal sit the last save one, as of late in the yeere 1593. Maxi∣milian the Prince of Bavarie. This is that intolerable pride, yet meet for the Romish court; where even Emperours kisse the feete of the Pope: why should not the Consellers of this Prelate, excell other Princes in dignity? But at length this pride shal cal forth that low estate, wherby Rome shal∣be pressed downe even to Hell. It is manifest ynough from the foresaid things, how from this fountaine, Idolatry hath flowen into all the VVest part. Neither is ther any need of moe words concerning the murders of the
Saincts, which wee have touched before; neither is ther any man to whom they are not most certainly known. CHAP. 19. AND after these I heard a great voice of a great multitude in Heaven, saying Halleluia, salvation, and honour, and glory, and strength to the Lord our God. 2 For true and righteous are his iudgements: and he hath condemned that great whore, which hath corrupted the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood of his servants shed by her hands. 3 And againe they said, Halleluja: and the smoke of her rose up for evermore. 4 And the foure and twenty Elders, and the foure Beasts fel downe, and wor∣shipped God that sate on the throne, saying Amen, Hallelujah. 5 Then a voice came out from the throne, saying, prayse our God all ye his servāts, and ye that feare him both small and great. 6 And I heard like a voice of a great multitude, and as the voice of many waters, and as the voice of strong thundrings saying, Hallelujah, for the Lord that God our almighty one hath raigned. 7 Let us be glad and reioyce, and give glory to him, for the marriage of the lambe is come, and his wife hath made her selfe readie. 8 And to her was given that she should be arrayed with pure fine linnen, for the fine linnen is the righteousnesses of the Saincts. 9 Then he said unto me, write, blessed are they which are called to the Lambes supper. And he said unto me, these words of God are true. 10 And I fell before his feete, to worship him: but he said unto mee, see thou doo it not: I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren, which have the testimony of Iesus. Worship God: for the testimony of Iesus is the Spirit of Prophesie. 11 And J saw heaven open, and behold a white horse, and he that sate upon was called faithfull and true: and he iudgeth and fighteth righteously. 12 And his eyes were as a flame of fyre, and on his head were many crownes: & he had a name written, that no man knwe but himselfe. 13 And he was clothed with a garmēt dipt in blood; and his name is called THE WORD OF GOD. 14 And the hosts which are in heaven followed him upon white horses, clothed with fine linnen white and pure. 15 Out of his mouth went a sharpe sword, that with it he should smite the Hea∣then: for he shal rule them with a rod of yron; for he it is that shall treade the wine-presse of the fiercenesse and wrath of Almighty God.
16 And he had upon his garment, and upon his thigh a name written; THE KING OF KINGS, & LORD OF LORDS. 17 And J saw an Angel stand in the Sunne, wWho cryed with a loud voice, say∣ing to all the foules that did flie by the middes of heaven, come and gather your selves togither unto the supper of the great God. 18 That ye may eate the flesh of Kings, and the flesh of Tribuns, and the flesh of mighty men, and the flesh of horses, and of them that sit on them, and the flesh of all free men, and boundmen, and of small and great. 19 And J saw that Beast, and the Kings of the earth, and their hosts gathered to∣gither to make battell against him that sate on the horse, and against his army. 20 But the Beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet, that wrought mi∣racles before him, wherby he deceived them, that received the Beasts marke, and them that worshipped his Jmage. These both were alive cast into a lake of fire bur∣ning with brimstone. 21 And the remnant were slaine with the sword of him that sitteth upon the horse, which commeth out of his mouth, and all the foules were filled full with their flesh. The Analysis. HITHERTO have bin the things which goe before the destruction, or are joyned togither with it: now those things which follow it. This is a thankes giving in the foure first verses; and that is twofold: One of the mul¦titude without difference, both for the iust punishments taken of the who¦re, ver. 1.2. and also repeated againe, because of the eternity of the same punishment, ver. 3. The other is of the Elders and Beasts, ver. 4. And thus farre is the more full declaration of the fift viall. There remaine yet two, the sixt to be powred out upon Euphrates: and the seventh into the ayre. That former is handled in the rest of this chapter even unto the 20. verse. This last is cō¦tinued from thence to the conclusion of the whole booke. There wer two parts of that former in chap. 16. The drying up of Euphrates, and preparation to warre. Likewise two parts of the declaration are propounded, after the same manner. We have shewed that that drying up did signify the calling of the Iewes which is described in this place, first, by a provoking to praise God, and by the ioy of the freinds of the bridgroome, ver. 6.7. then by the pre∣paration for the marriage, ver. 8. Furthermore by the certenty of the thing, which therfore he commandeth to be written and registred; & the truth wherof he confirmeth, partly from the principal authour, ver. 9. partly from himselfe the minister a glorious and holy Angel, ver. 10. The prepara¦tion for warre, first is of the Saincts, whose Captaine is Christ himselfe, of whō
a divers forme is expressed, and divers names applied to those divers sha∣pes. All which notwithstanding ar referred either unto righteousnes in iudg¦ment, or to fortitude in warre, as is shewed in the ende of verse 11. Ther∣fore he commeth to iudgment furnished, both sitting upon a white horse, and by a fit name called faithful and true, ver. 11. and also with flaming eyes and an unknown name, ver. 12. He cometh forth to the battel, both himself clo∣thed with a bloody garmēt called the word of God, ver. 13. And also a great army following him, ver. 14. and having ordinances of warre, ver. 15. Whose name fit for this shew is King of Kings &c. ver. 16. And in such wise is the Captaine. The Souldiers are gathered togither by the voice of an herald standing in the Sunne, and promising certaine victory, ver. 17.18. The army also of the enemyes is assembled; ver. 19. declared now onely in a word, the preparation wherof hath already bin spoken off sufficiently in chap. 16.13.14.15.16. Such is the larger declaration of the sixt viall, the which proceedeth no further than the preparation of the warre. The se∣venth followeth, partly consisting in the destruction of the enemies, partly in the happinesse of the Church, after they are destroyed. The enemies are two, the Western Beast, and Eastern Dragon: of his destruction it is spoken in the two other verses of this chapter, both of the Prince himselfe, ver. 20. and also of his souldiers, ver. 21. Scholions. 1 And after these things J heard a voice: These first verses we refer in the Ana¦lysis to the fift vial, the ruine of Rome: by which it is declared, how ioy∣ful an argumēt of praising God, her destructiō shall ministet to the saincts. The Angel exhorted them to reioyce, before in chap. 18.20. And now the thing being brought to passe, all the godly shall triumph earnestly. But seeing this executing followeth the destruction, it must needs be that either this throwing of the milstone into the sea, is the very destroying of the ci∣ty, or that the manner of destroying of it is altogither concealed: which yet notwithstanding shal come to passe between that signe given, & this thankesgiving. The first gratulation is of a great multitude in heaven, that is, of the mixed multitude of the Church conversant on earth: for we keepe in the common signification of this word: which beareth not that these things should be referred to any knowledge, which the heavenly soules have of things done with us. The citizēs therfore of this militant Church in every countrey, where the fame shal come, they shal leape for ioy, and shal breake forth into this grateful commemoration.
¶ Hallelujah: Halleluiah is an Hebrew word, praise ye the Lord: wherby the faithfull exhort one an other to give thākes, and prepare their minds as it were with this preface. True joy suffereth not it selfe to be contained in the bosome of any one, but taketh to her selfe fellowes, to whom shee may both impart her selfe, and also may be more stirred up by the joint af∣fection of others. This one word containeth large matter of very great ioy. But why doth the heavenly multitude speake now in Hebrew? Is ther more holinesse in these lettres and syllables than in other? They ar toyes. Are then some Hebrew words kept, as Osanna, Amen, Abba, and the like, which we shal use as tokens of our cōcord with the ancient Church, that both wee beleeve in the same God, and invocate him alone? This indeed is a profitable cause of retaining these words: but especially this seemeth to be the reason in this place, that the Church of the Gentiles after Rome be overthrown, shal provoke their brethrē the Iewes to the faith, that im¦pediment being taken away, which most of all hindred their conversion; it could not be that the crucifyers should acknowledge the same Lord, while this flourished, or was at all, which gave leave to crucify him. This is the cause why the Hebrew word now soundeth againe so often. Praises were not in these words before time: but whē the conversion of the Iewes is at hand ioyned next to this reioycing, for iust cause now the Saincts doe speak with the tongue of one sheepfold. ¶ Salvation, and honour, and glory: That is the prayse of salvation, honour, and glory, and praise of power be given to our Lord. Glory is a certaine very excellent opinion which a man hath of any ones excellency, therfore called of the Grecians doxa. Wherfore in this destruction of Rome so bright a beame of Gods goodnes and power shal shine forth, that al the faithful shal admire it, and be astonied. Honour is that worship both in∣ward and outward, wherby we doo reverence so great excellency. It is & ought alwaies to be ioyned with glory: otherweise vaine is that estimation of one, which no dutie accompanieth: the vulgar latine readeth, prayse, & glory, and powr, be to our God: The Complut. and the Kings Bible have, Sal∣vation, and power, and glory of our God. 2 Because true and righteous: The truth in iudgments respecteth the pro∣mise: righteousnes rewarding according to their deserts. The credit of both these falleth into utter decay with the world because of delaying: frō whence now for good cause God is praised of his people in both these respects; wheras he hath proved sufficiently to the world, that he dooth punish naughty acts, and that he neglecteth not the iniuries which are done to his.
3 And againe they said: An other thankes giving, the thing being more certenly known. The first tidings of the taking of the city, shal cause the first, as it seemeth; but when the faithful shal have learned that the same is utterly overthrown, without al hope of renewing, they shal renew their ioy, and shal give new thankes a fresh. The second is done in fewer words than the former: peradventure according to our disposition, whose first brunt is most vehement. ¶ And her smoke rose up: That is, now is shee delivered up to eternal pu∣nishment to be tormented. For an everlasting fyre is shewed by the smoke ascending for evermore: by which kind of speaking is signifyed, that the con∣tinual remembrance of her punishment shalbe with al the godly alwayes. A token wherof they shal have continually before their eyes, the smoke a∣scending without intermission, least perhaps they should forget it. He al∣ludeth to the eternal torment of the wicked. Therfore the eternity of the punishment shal give a new cause of gladnesse. And not without cause, when they knowe that the insolency of the wicked whore, shal not onely be restrained for the present, but also that none shal have any feare of her for the time to come. 4 And those fowr and twenty Elders fell down: Such was the reioycing of the mixed multitude, ther followeth the assembly of the faithfull gathered to∣gither solemly, which doo labour openly and ioyntly to the same duty of thankes giving. For this multitude of Elders and Beasts giveth a shew of an Ecclesiastical assembly: which God the Father, for his sonnes sake coū∣teth such, as this most holy company representeth. And therfore, as oftē as any thing is performed by a common name, that is shewed by this sa∣cred Senat, as we have shewed in chap. 4. Such therfore shalbe the order of giving thankes, that the end and conclusion of the common thankes giving, be reserved to the publike congregations. And so it hath come to passe, that private reioycing alwayes goeth before the common & publik. Any blast of report is wont to stirr up that first: this is not undertakē but when the things are throughly known and undoubted. But the foure and twenty Elders fall down, when the Beasts give glory and thankes to him that sitteth on the throne. It belongeth to these to moderate the whole action in the publike assembly; the rest of the congregatiō ought to ioine their praiers, and to testify their consent by a common voyce in the ende. According to this custome there are rehearsed here onely two words, A∣men, Allelujah. As though that former were of the Elders; this latter, the summe of the thankes giving which the Beasts utter in conceived words. But this order hath bin declared more fully in chap. 4. from whence this
ought to be understood the same; which now is shewed briefly. But ob∣serve that the last songs of the Church of the Gentiles shalbe gratulatory, which yeeld no other song then Halleluiah. Even as the book of the Psal∣mes is concluded with songs of praises. Shee sunge in time past many la∣mentable songs, and hymnes of a mixt kinde, but the last part of the Co∣medy shalbe doubtlesse a most joyful tryumph. And these are the funerals of the city of Rome, and the rites by which her burial shalbe celebrated. The day and yeere cannot certenly be set downe, in which her funeralls shalbe: yet from other scriptures I think it to be clear, that they shall not be differred at the furdest, beyond three score yeeres The sixeteenth chap¦ter hath taught, that next after that the vial is powred out upon the thro∣ne, Euphsates shalbe dryed up, that is, after Rome destroyed, the Iewes shalbe converted. And other places seeme to confirme, that their first cal¦ling shalbe about the fiftieth yeere above one thousand sixe hundreth. But how much Rome preventeth that time, it is uncertain: it is like, but a very litle, considering that the choosing of a new people followeth it at the heeles. We have seen how farr the vials have proceeded. The next is now to be powred out on the Sunne, which is shortly to be expected: by the heate wherof, after Rome hath bin very hot a short space, shee shall approch the flamme of fyre by the fift vial, which shal burn her altogither; then the throne shalbe destroyed, and this gratulation prepared for the godly. Doest thou then, ô Rome, keepe now a yeere of Iubilé, when thy funerall rather were to be provided for? In very deed, within the space of one Iubilé, that is, about fifty yeres hence, thou shalt keepe Iubilé in truth, not so much thy selfe by reioycing, as by giving occasiō of exceeding great ioy to al the saincts by thy destruction. Doest thou then with Balthassar, abandon thy selfe to eatings and drinkings, Cyrus compassing abou thy walls, and being already entred into the chanell of Euphrates, which is turned aside? I know that the admonition of an Heretique (as thou will have mee to be,) with thee is of no force; but consider diligently the man or the thing it self, if hatred wil suffer thee, least peradventure, whom thou countest an Heretique, thou finde him too late a true Prophet: yet if thou despise my voyce, let the holy remnant here, if any lie hid in thee. Awake yee elect, come yee out, make hast to flee away, yee have lyen too long in the bedds of Sodome, a showre of brimstone will fall by and by, unlesse yee depart quickly, you cannot be safe. Obey the Spirit, who would have you to be warned by this sacred Revelation. Why doo yee hange upon this purpled company, whose eyes God hath blinded by his iust iudgmēt? If my admonition shal have place with you, yee shal refresh greatly the
mindes of the brethren, but the fruit shalbe your owne, to weet the salva∣tion both of soules and bodyes. 5 Then a voice came out from the throne: Hitherto the fift vial; now the sixt is handled. For this exhortation belongeth to new praises, not to the de∣struction of Babylon. For to what end should ther be a commaundemēt againe touching this thing, and a new triumph? Therfore now it is decla∣red, how the waters of Euphrates shalbe dryed up. This folowed next the over∣throw of the throne chap. 16.12. Because the great river shalbe turned into drie ground, from hence we learne that nothing should be a let to the guests, or rather to the new bride, as is plainly confirmed in verse 7. ¶ Because the marriage of the Lambe is come: Which surely was the reason why wee hav interpreted that sixt vial, cōcerning the calling of the Iewes. First therfore the efficient cause of this calling is set forth, a voice coming forth from the throne. Which yet is not of the Father himselfe, but of the Sonne, as it is cleare from that which followeth, praise yee our God. It came out of the throne, because the Sonne shal effect this wonderfull thing rather by his own power, than by any aide of man. He shal take to himself alone the duties of this thing, and shal performe all wholly by himselfe. VVhich way also otherweise, should the Easterne Iewes beyōd Euphrates first em∣brace the faith, which are furthest off from hearing of the Gospel? Yet no sound thundring from heaven is to be expected; but this voice is the effi∣cacy of the Spirit, whom God now shall send into the harts of his people, that being turned to him with all their harts, they may acknowledge, praise, and celebrate the one onely true God, his Sonne Iesus, and the H. Ghost. Now God powreth upon the house of David, and upon the inhabitans of Ierusalem the Spirit of grace, and of prayer, Zach. 12.10. Now he wil build the Virgin of Israel, and shal adorne her selfe with her timbrels, and shal goe before in the dance of them that praise; now he shal say, reioyce with gladnesse for Iacob, & showt for ioy openly before the very Gentils: publish, prayse, and say, save o Lord thy peo∣people, the remnant of Israel. Iere. 31.4.7. But it is to be observed how this calling is ioyned togither with the destruction of Rome. It is severed frō it by no other transition, but as rising from thence forthwith from her fall, becometh cleare to the world. The Temple was full of smoke that no man could enter in, untill God had satisfyed his anger upon the whore; but after he hath punished her according to her deserts, then as it were with a quiet minde, he shal cōvert himselfe wholly to accomplish the salvation of all his elect, and to receiv againe his people sent away from him by so longue a banish∣ment. VVherfore if we have kept a true account of this calling, we shall not wander much from the last destruction of Rome.
¶ Praise yee our God: No man cā praise God, but he that knoweth him, neither al generally, but the whole multitude of the elect on earth, endu∣ed with the knowledge of God, may consent to praise him. Therfore this provocation declareth that calling, and the same general, when as al are bidden to praise, both universally, and particularly, as well the smal of the Iewes, who because of their new comming to the faith, might seeme at that time to have bin scarce borne; as also the great of the Gentils, who being more growen in Christ, have obtained a ful maturity by a long pro¦fession, who shal praise God for their brethrens conversion, when they shal see that which hath not bin told them, and shal understand that which they hav not heard, Isay 52.14. But the Iewes themselves then with ioyful & glad minds, shal heare, that favour at length is shewed them; that their eyes are opened for to know the truth, that they are reduced againe, built, mul¦tiplyed, & stablished more then before time, so as they shal satisfy them∣selves with no praises. Then, faith Ieremy, shal proceed out of them voice of thankes giving, and the voice of them that laugh, then shal the virgin reioice in the dance, the yong men and old men togither, chap. 30 19. and 31.13. and many the like things, perteining to the ioyfulnes of that most pleasant time. 6 And I heard as it were a sound: The voice of a new people converted to Christ, and praising God for this unexpected bounteousnes. This is an exceeding great voice, by reason of the multitude of the people; then also making a noise in the beginning by obscure reports, and more easy to be un¦derstood what it meaneth, then the noise of waters roaring confusedly, which yet notwithstanding a while after shalbe terrible, and apaling like thunder. It may be doubtful, whither this be the voice of the Gentiles, as it were the friends of the bridegroome, or of the Iewes thēselves who embrace the calling. The Gentiles had learned before to found Hallelu∣jah. And now he biddeth them speake to their brethren, and to stirre up them by a new shoute. Also the next verse folowing declareth the exulta∣tiō of friends reioycing in their behalfe. But this terrible voice, as it were of waters and thunders, seemeth to belong to the Iewes. Yet neverthe∣lesse it may be the ioint voice of both peoples. Whose soever it is, either of the one, or of both, we understand from hence an effectual calling. But the voice calleth them to praise God, because now he hath obtained his king¦dome. Christ hath alwaies ruled: but the glory of his Kingdome shal then flourish most clearly, which in former times, partly the infidelity of the Iewes, partly the tyranny of the Dragō and Beast did much obscure. Now a stone hewen out of the mountaine without hands shal reigne, which Kingdome shal not be destroied for ever, neither be lest to an other people. Dan. 2.44. He ma∣keth
mention of Gods omnipotency in getting this Kingdome, wherby in ve¦ry truth he declared himselfe most mighty in destroying the enemies, who with al their strength, wil resist this Kingdome when it beginneth. 7 Let us be glad and reioyce: So the freinds of the bridegroome seeme to provoke one an other to joy. Let us, say they, adorne ourselves most gor∣geously, as it is wont to be done in triumphs and festival dayes, and com∣mon reioycing. And it is a thing indeed very greatly to be triumphed for, to understand that brethren divided from us by so lamentable a divorce, so many ages, are now at length chosen into the same body of Christ with us. Of which ioy the Prophets spake many excellent things. ¶ Because the marriage is come: For as the former comming was called ga¦mos a marriage, Mat. 22.2. wherby Christ ioyned to himselfe the Gentils, and took them into the marriage bed: so likeweise much more shalbe the time of marriage, when he shal draw the Iewes, whom first he woed, to his love, and company: from whence it is not without cause, that in the same place it is said, he made marriages for his Sonne, not one, but moe; the former at his first comming; the second at this calling of the Iewes. Which is more evident in the Greeke, where gamos, marriage, is used in the singu¦lar number. The Latines call every particular marriage, nuptias, marriages in the plural number. ¶ And his wife hath made her selfe ready: Both sisters, as wel the Gentils, as the Iewes, make one wife, being married to the same bridegroome, as once Leah and Rachell to Iacob. Leah indeede more deformed, to weet, wee Gentils have entred first into the company of the bedde, and became also farre more fruitfull; but the chosen and faire Rachell, the people of the Iewes, shal at length also be brought into the bed chamber, and shall become a mother of most sweet children. 8 And to her was graunted: To weet, the new bride, which of late was al∣togither void of this apparell. The Church of the Gentiles was most glo∣rious in her first beginning. A crowne of twelve starrs adorned her head, & all the residue of her was clothed with the Sunne, chap. 12.1. Therfore this fine linnen is not provided for her: but to that other, which before time lay ilfavoured, foule, naked, not covered so much as with ragges, these fine linnen garments are given, wherby shee may hide her deformed nakednesse. And this fine linnen is Jesus Christ, made ours for righteous∣nes and salvation by imputation: which garment the Iewes wanted, while refusing Christ and his righteousnes, they went about to establish their owne righteousnes: but at length being graffed in by faith, they shall re∣nounce their former hope, & shal embrace this salvation, clad with this
glorious garment onely. ¶ That shee should be arrayed with pure fine linnen, and shining: He saith not, fine linnen was given unto her, but, to her was granted, that shee should be arrayed with fine linnen &c. This is the difference, because in that former is signify∣ed, that fine linnen is given immediately; in this, mediately by faith. This fine linnen is pure and shining: pure, in respect of iustification, because it pre∣senteth us unblameable and without fault, free from all spotte & blemish: shining, in respect of glory, both with God, who because of this purity in his Sonne, maketh us heires of his eternal Kingdome; and also with men, to whom it manifesteth our adoption by her most shining fruits, which the Spirit working togither with us, maketh manifest unto them. ¶ For the fine linnen is the righteousnesses of the Saincts: Behold how distinct∣ly and plaiynly the Spirit speaketh: for he saith not that the righteousnesses of the Saincts are fine linnen, but contrariweise that the fine linnen is the righteous¦nesses; neither of the wicked, as when a man is first converted to God, but, of the Saincts: that is, the wholle iustification, yee even of those whose pie∣ty doth most of all shew it selfe, commeth not from themselves, and from things ingraffed, but abideth without in the outward garment, to weet of Christ, whom we put on by faith onely. A most plaine scripture, which, ô yee Papists, consider diligently, that your blasphemous pride being at length reiected, yee may seeke true salvation from thence, from whence alone it may be obtained. Doo yee thrust upon God the merits of the Saincts? Away with those polluted garments, the fine linnen given, is our iustifications: the clothing is not made of our vertues, wherby wee may be able to stand before God. No similitude dooth set more clearly befor our eyes the imputation of righteousnes by faith, then this garment used so often in the Scriptures. But why, wilt thou say, doth he say iustifications rather then iustification? not to destroy the onely righteousnes of faith, but seing dikaioma, iustification is a proofe wherby a man sheweth himselfe to be iust, as chap. 15.4. And there is a double argument to this purpose, one before God by faith, in which respect Christ is the white fine linnen of the Saincts, chap. 7.13.14. Another before men, by the works of sanctifica∣tion; in regard of this double argument the Spirit saith iustifications, that he may containe in one word, that which even now he declared by two, pure and shining. For the works of holines, if they be taken asunder, ar not pure; or if faith be considered by it selfe, it is not shining. For it lyeth hiddē within, farre from the eies of men. Neither of both therfore apart can be called iustifications, both are to be ioyned togither, to expresse the force of the multitude. And to whom this fine linnen is given, both are found in
them. 9 Then he said unto me write: Who said? Not he that sate upō the throne. For the Elders worshipped him, ver. 4. This, it was not lawful, being the felow servant of Iohn. Therfore it is some Angel, to whom were commit∣ted the charge of sealing this Prophecy. First therfore he biddeth him w∣rite: by which so solemne commandement he teacheth that there is in it a great and strange matter. We commit to writing things, the credit wher of we will have to be confirmed unto all posterity: for which cause, lawes were graven once in Brasse, and set up in a publike place. Also God spea∣king to Ieremy concerning this same thing; Write, saith he, for thy selfe all the words which I speake unto thee, in a book, chap. 30.2. As if God providing for our infirmity, should give us sealed writings, from which wee might cal upon him for helpe more freely and boldly, if peradventure he should seem to forget his promise. But not onely Iohn is confirmed hereby, but also the event is respected, as we have seen from the like places before: as if it should come to passe that by the authority of some holy man, some pu¦blike writing should be set forth, which most plainly should cōfirme this thing not to be new, but foreshewed of God from the furthest times, and that therfore the goodnesse and truth of God is to be acknowledged and praised in the same. But the time wil manifest, what at length is to be thought concerning this matter. But what is it which he is commanded to write? That they are blessed which ar called to the marriage supper of the Lābe; a thing indeed wonderful & never heard off before, that al should be bles∣sed which are called. Before time this rule was in force; many are called, few chosen: which thing example also hath prooved true, when the calling fell not out prosperously to the auncient ghests, who being called refused to come. But now it shalbe otherweise. Al the called shal come gladly, nei∣ther shal alledge for their excuse things of smal importance, as did those former, Mat. 22. So great now shalbe the efficacy and grace of the Spirit, that they shal obey at the first hearing. Before, saith Isaiah, shee travailed, she brought forth, and before her paine came, shee was delivered of a man childe. Who hath heard such a thing? Who hath seen such things? Shal the earth be brought forth in one day? Or shall a nation be borne at once? For assoone as Zion travailed, shee brought forth her children &c. So Psal. 110.3. Thy people most voluntary of all men in the time of thine armies in the beautiful places of thy holinesse, frō the wombe of the mourning, shalbe to thee dewe of thy youth. Many such things might be brought, and peradventure it would be profitable; at least weise that oc∣casion might be given to our men to consider diligently of those places: from the true meaning wherof I feare that wee erre, by interpreting the
things that are to come, as if they were past. This sentence therfore, which is commaunded to be written, taketh away al scruple frō Iohn. He might have minded the former obstinacy of the nation, and for that cause have doubted of their conversion. But the Angel commandeth this care to depart. There shalbe so great diligence of the people, that it shalbe suffi∣cient for them to be called away. It is to be observed, that the Iewes both here and elsewhere in many places, are called keclemenous in the preterper∣fect tence, by a certain prerogative of calling, as it seemeth, as who were called ever since the first times of the world. Mat. 22.3.4.8. But the Gē¦tiles kletous Mat. 22.14. because they were first called at Christ coming, or rather after his death. Which difference seemeth to be observed in this re¦velation; from whence chap. 17.14. they, who the Lambe being their Cap¦taine, doo subdue the tenn Kings, are named called and chosen, whom, it is manifest to be the faithfull among the Gentiles. ¶ These words are true: The second confirmation taken from the princi∣pal authour, as though he should say, respect not mee, as reporting any thing of mine owne, but be so perswaded, that this is the decree of the most High God, as thou thy selfe heardest even now with thyne own ears, ver. 5. but the natural placing of the words hath an emphasis, as it is in the Greek, which by the displacing is lost; these are the true words of God him∣selfe, that is, of most divine, most excellent, and most certen truth. True are also some words of men, but there is some infirmity in our most true things. Wee alwayes speake from the earth, Iohn 3.31. Therfore some preferment is attributed to this truth, which appeareth not, if we change the order of the words. It is no strange thing, that the words of God should be true. 10 And I fell down before his feet; VVhy now more then before? VVas he abashed with the maiesty of the Angel? But he had bin accustomed now a long time to wonderful sights. Or was it for ioy of the conversion of his nation? so in deed it seemeth. For Iohn being ravished, as it is clear frō the answer of the Angel, with the sweetnesse of this Prophecy, for sudden ioy, wherwith he was carried away, would give more worship then was meet, to so welcome a messenger. ¶ See that not: to weet, that thou worship mee not, a defective speach, noting out the grievousnesse of the naughty act: for he maketh speed, and finisheth not the sentence for hast. Even as wee are wont to prohibit a thing, eyther by sudden crying out, or by the hand, when the thing per∣mitteth not any time for words. He confirmeth the prohibition by two reasons: first from the equal dignity of the Ministers of Christ: J am, saith
he, thy felow servant, and not onely of the Apostles, but also of thy brethrē which have the testimony of Iesu. Al our office is equal: they who preach Christ, & salvation by him, are in equal dignity with them, which reveale things to come. The office of preaching is equal to the office of revealing: this is the meaning of that which is said in the ende of the verse. For the testimony of Iesu is the Spirit of Prophecy. The second reason is, because ado∣ration belongeth to God onely; Worship him, saith he, to whom alone such worship is due. Doo not ye, ô Popish Idolaters, tremble at these words? Ye take great paines about devising reasons, why the Angel prohibited adoration, as though he himselfe hath not rendred most cleare ones in his own words. But what reasons bring yee? To weet, that after our flesh taken of Christ, the Angels are greatly afraid to see the same prostrate be∣fore them, as Gregory the Great wil have it. Moreover because, beside this dignity, men are also Ministers of Christ, Prophets, and messengers of the Evangelical doctrine, and Martyrs for the same. Be it so, doo ye not perceive that you are killed with your owne swords? If they feare much to see our nature prostrate to them, after the same taken of Christ; why do ye cast down your nature to stones, and painted Images, and put the holy Angels in feare? If they wil not be worshipped of the Ministers of Christ, either at length, cease to doo wickedly, or at least confesse your selves not to be Ministers of Christ. And in this weise is the first calling of the Iewes, that shalbe now shortly, which Daniel describeth by a certen pointing out of the time, chap. 12.12. & c, Ezechiel saw it shadowed out by the dry bones, moving themselves with an exceeding great noise, & shaking, and by and after covered with sinewes & flesh. chap. 37.78. as wee shal heare afterward, God willing more fully. 11 Then J saw heaven open: It being declared how Euphrates must be dri¦ed up, or rather to what ende, that is to say, that nothing may be an im∣pediment to the Iewes returning into their owne countrey, now he pro∣ceedeth to the other part of the sixt vial, the preparation for warre, the Captaine wherof is first described. And such a forme of him is exhibited not onely as is needful for this warre, but also which declareth the whole state of things from that instant moment, even to the end of al things. It is no new thing, that under the person of Christ, a short and brief Pro∣phecy of the whole state of his spouse should be delivered. He is not chā∣ged; unlesse in so much as it is convenient for his Church. Therfore in this new shape as in a glasse, we ought to behold the face of the spouse, by how much it is to be considered the more diligently. This wonderfull sight is seen in heavē open, that is, in the holy Church, whose most bright
glory now most of all shalbe made manifest to al men, as before by a dore open in heaven, the notable dignity and excellency of the first Church, as it was in the Apostles daies, and by and by after, chap. 4.1. But this is more ample glory, that heaven is opened not by some little dore, but by a whole gate; ye whole walles, that I may so say, nothing letting but that her full maiesty now may be seen of men, as farre as is granted on earth. ¶ And behold a white horse: We may not suppose that Christ shal come forth in any visible shape; these things are farre from his last comming, as those things which follow wil manifest; but he wil shew forth openly and evidently such a force in the administration of things, as this figure repre∣senteth. The whole description consisteth of foure parts. In every one of which is to be considered the preparation and name. In this first part the fur∣nishing is a white horse, the name faithful and true. The similitude of which things, with that in chap. 6.2. hath caused that some did thinke this to be the same vision, by which errour they confound all things. They differ much in times, and in argument. That white horse belonge to the first lists. But this to the last goale. That former went forth by and by after Iohn, when Traiane flourished, and his next successours. This last is not seen but after the destruction of Rome. There, the confused multitude of all the belee∣vers was respected. Here, the conversion of the nation of the Iewes onely is intreated off. Yet herin they agree, that the white horse in both places signifyeth Christ triumphing by his truth; but thē the Gentiles being sub∣dued; now at length a stubburne people being reconciled unto him. To which thing he carried a name fitted: wherby he sheweth, that he wil now at last manifest to the whole world how faithfull & true he is, in performing his promises; and that not any thing, even the least shalbe frustrate, which once he foreshewed by the Prophets, concerning the restoring of this na∣tion in the last times. Such a one therfore shal Christ be, notable by these marks, when he shal beginne the conversion of this people. His promise shal seeme to have bin forgotten through long delay; which at length he shal performe, with most plentiful increase of new joy. ¶ And who jugeth and fightest iustly: So Theod. Beza translateth, a rela∣tive being put between, as though these things togither with the former, should constitute the name it selfe: which in the rest is wonte to be shor∣ter: but the sense is al one, seing it is in likeweise, whither a man be coun∣ted such by his name, or found to be of this sort in very deed. The worde have this force properly; and he iudgeth and fighteth in righteousnesse: where the coniunctiō copulative may be a causal, as though these words should render a reason, both of the white horse, and also of the name; & should
be added to the same in stead of an interpretation. He sitteth upon a white horse, because he fighteth righteously. His name is faithful and true, becau¦se he iudgeth righteously. Which words are spoken in respect of his own people, taken, as they seem, out of Psal. 96.10.13. where, to iudge in truth and righteousnes, signifyeth to rule and moderate his people in fra¦ming and ordering their life according to truth and righteousnes, & that not onely as touching their outward actions, but also in respect of inward newnesse of the heart: which dependeth upon the regeneration of the Spirit, wherby we are reformed after the Image of God, as Calvin hath written very wel. These words therfore declare the effectual power of cal∣ling, which Christ shal now bestow aboundātly upō his; and moreover sa∣fety from their enemies, with whom he wil make warre and render them a reward meet for their deserts. 12 And his eyes: The second part of the description: where his eyes are as it were a flame of fyre, and on his head are many crownes: but a name unknowne to all men, but to himselfe alone. As touching his eyes, they are most sharpe, pearsing al things, which as flames of fyre consume whatsoever letteth the sight, make lightsome the darkenesse it selfe, and set most hidden things in the light. What cā hide it selfe from such eyes? Such an one shal Christ shew himselfe in drawing out his people into the light of truth, from the hidden dennes and darkenesse whersoever they lurked, so as this sharpnes of sight shalbe very admirable to the world. I wil say to the North, saith the Lord, give, and to the South keepe not backe, bring my sonnes from farre, and my daughters from the endes of the earth, Isay 43.6. The crownes are many, because of the many singular victories, which the Iewes shal get, when first they shal give their name to Christ, from those sundry nations, among which they live dispersed, striving as much as they can against their conversion. But why is his name unknown? that here we may know that great myste∣ry to be, wherat Paul cryed out, O the deepnesse of the richesse, both of the wis∣dome and knowledge of God! how unsearcheable are his iudgements, and his waies past finding out, Rom. 11.33. &c. There he speaketh of this same thing, of the hardening of the Iewes for a time, & calling at length in their time: which whole matter he concludeth with an admiratiō of Gods wisdome, affirming that no wit of any creature can comprehende the infinitnesse of the mystery. So this vision foreshewing in the calling of the Iewes, a cer∣taine choise and separation of an elect people from others, after the ful∣nesse of the Gentils shal come in, presenteth Christ likeweise in an un∣known name, because no creature can by any reason conceive the excee∣ding greatnesse of this iudgement and mercy. Let us therfore reverence
this name, which because of the highnesse thereof, must needs be hidden from every creature. Onely let us observe the congruency of things, that the conversion of the Iewes doth likeweise come from the unsearcheable wisdome of God, as once the reiection of them and receaving of the Gen¦liles. 13 And he was clothed with a garment dipt in blood: Such hath bin the des∣cription of the Captaine gathering togither his people: now followeth the shape of him making warre: which therfore he taketh upon him, that in fighting iustly, he may make his no lesse secure from all outward feare of warre, then he maketh them happy at home by iudging iustly and mode∣rating al things most conveniently. The figure of this is a bloody garment, and a name that word of God. For after this conversion begun, and a happy increase of the name of Christians for some yeeres, then a huge and cruell warr shalbe raised up, such as the like hath not bin in any time. The Turk shal rage in the East. The Beast and false Prophet in the West part: both of them shal endevour to root out even every footstep of the truth, as Dani∣el sheweth clearly chap. 11.44.45. and 12.1. and Ezechiel chap. 38. & 39. as farre as belongeth to the Turk. And as it is mentioned at the ende of this chapter, concerning the Beast and his companion. Then shall Christ shew himselfe to be seene in this forme clothed with a bloody cas∣socke, and wholly swimming with blood of the enemies. VVhich time I∣saiah seemeth to have respect unto, saying, Who is he that commeth from Edō with read garments, from Bozrah? Wherfore is thy apparell red, and thy garments like him that treadeth in the wine presse, chap. 63.1.2. For very good reason now shal Christ be seen sprinkled with the blood of the enemies slaine. And then shal the Iewes be such in deed, through their tender minds mel¦ting into teares, as the Prophet in the chapters following describeth that they ar to be hereafter. The name is fit for this time, that word of God, which the world then shal finde to be most true, al those things at length being performed, which have bin delivered in the scriptures. Before time it al∣most counted the word of God as a thing to be mocked at, as it doth also in this time, because it seeth both the promises and punishments to be differteth so long. Ye the citizens began to doubt of the truth therof: frō whence is that complaint in Isaiah, the Lord hath forsaken mee, and the Lord hath forgotten mee, chap. 44.14. As though the promises were nothing else then great words onely, or vayne lofty speeches which had come to no∣thing. Therfore Christ shal declare now in truth, that the least title of it hath not bin in vaine. This description agreeth to the seventh vial, under which shalbe heard that saying, it is done, chap. 16.17. And the mystery of
God is finished, chap. 10.7. to which time is reserved the perfection of all things, and the greatest authority of Gods word shal flourish, the most constant truth therof being seen in every thing. 14 And the hosts which are in heaven: The last part of the description: where the preparation consisteth, partly in the souldiers, in this verse; part∣ly, in the weapons and instruments of warre, ver, 15. But the name is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, ver. 16. The army seemeth to be provided, not so much for battel, as for triumph. For what are white horses to warre? What fine white linnen and pure? A helmet & corselet were fitter. And so the thing is in deed. A triumph is set forth, not a battel: for the enemies in the West and East part being at length destroyed in that late foresaid warre; a glori∣ous peace shalbe restored to the Church, & which no tumultuous noise of troubles, shal ever after interrupt. Then al the children of God shall keepe a perpetual triūph, al things being remooved for ever which might procure any trouble, as shalbe made more cleare, from the things folow∣ing. ¶ Which are in heaven: The cityzens of the holy Church on earth: all of them making one sheepfold, shall folow one shepheard Christ: they ar clo∣thed with white and pure fine linnen, for the same cause which we have spoken of at the 8. verse. 15 And out of his mouth went; The victory once gotten, shalbe preser∣ved for ever: neither shal ther be any feare of warre to beginne againe, our Captaine being so furnished, that as he can, so he wil much more restraine the subdued enemies at his pleasure: for the sword comming out of his mouth, shal punish them forthwith, as before he threatned to them of Pergamus, that he would fight against them with the Spirit of his mouth, chap. 2.16. Wher∣by is signifyed, that either the enemies shalbe destroyed according to the iudgemēt of the sacred word, the punishmēts being taken of them, which the word hath appointed against them: or at the least shalbe brought to that case, that wil they, nil they, they shal obey those lawes, which the word shal prescribe. This latter seemeth to agree better to this place, when al nations shalbe obedient to the Church, seeking and receiving from it lawes and ordinances, wherby they may be governed. These therfore shal be smitten after this manner. But if any yet being stubburne, shal refuse to obey, he shalbe subdued with a rod of iron; and shalbe bridled by a rigou∣rous government; but if he shal continue in his obstinacy, neither wil suf∣fer himselfs to be overcome and bowed by an ordinary way, although ma¦ny togither shal conspire to the same wickednesse of rebellion, they shall be cast as clusters of grapes into the winepresse of the fiercenesse of God, and shall he
troden in the same. Wherfore the enemies shal have no power ever to rise up againe: now of necessity the yoke must be borne of them for ever. The Cō¦pl. & the K, B, read a sharp two edged sword doth tread, in the presēt, because punishmēt shalbe no mor differred as before, but the wicked shalbe puni¦shed, presently to be trode under foote with great fury, as grapes in the wine presse, Isaiah 63. Lam. 1.15. ¶ The wine presse of the fiercenesse: VVhich punishment of the wicked shal be no lesse pleasant to God, then the drinking of wine to the thirstie. That must need, be done manfully, in which one is occupied with delight. Hor¦rible therfore shalbe the punishment of the wicked, which by the gree∣vousnes therof shal make amends aboundantly, for the delights of al the former times: See Deut. 28.63. 16 And he hath upon his garment and upon his thigh: This name is written on his garment, because it shalbe manifest then to al men, that Christ is the supreme King: which was not so evident to the world in former ages. The Christian name hath bin spread before now into al contries; but how miserably did the Heathen Romane Emperours vexe that first, when it be¦gan? Since that time, by how sundry entreprises hath the Pope of Rome endevoured to bring destruction unto it? Neither yet at this time doth he surcease from his former practise; having now the Turk also a partner in the same trafick; although both follow a divers way of obtaining their desire. Doubtlesse since that Christ hath bin made known to us Gentiles, he hath not seemed so much to raigne, a to serve a miserable service. Yet neverthelesse he gave alwayes some proof of his Kingdome, even in the middes of these miseries, because he preserved his Church against al mēs willes, howsoever he yeelded her to the lust of the enemies; and to be over whelmed almost with all calamities and miseries. But now at length the contrary shalbe manifest to al men: Christ himselfe wil take the governe∣ment into his hands, & wil give the soveraigntie over the things on earth to his Church; then shalbe the time, when the stone being cut of the mountain without hands, shal breake in peeces the yron, the clay, the silver and the gold: and shal obtaine a Kingdome that shal never be destroyed, neither shal be left to another people, Dan. 2.44.45. VVhich thing is made more apparant from the name written on the thigh, as it were in the lowest parts of the body, and even as though it were in the foote. For the scriptures are wonte to call all beneath the belly, the feete, Gen. 49.10. Isay. 7.20. Therfore he hath this name written in this part, not onely because that which is lowest in Christ, scarce reaching to his feete, is higher then the highest thing in mē, Monarches bearing the titles of Empire on their head, on their crownes,
and Diademes; but Christ carying a loftier title on his thigh, then any Mo¦narch ever hath obtained; not, I say, for this cause onely, but chiefly be∣cause this shalbe the time, wherin his feete, that is, his Church, shal beare rule. Before time they were fine Brasse burning in a fornace, yet free from any hurt, chap. 1.15. But now after the fierie trial, they shal enioy a most noble Kingdome. Now Christ shal honour the place of his feet, Isay 60.13. This is that Kingdome, which al the Prophets doo praise with so great decking of words; of which ther shalbe no ende; but after that it hath flou¦rished a long time on earth, it shalbe translated from hence at length into heaven at the second comming of Christ. So then these foure names cōtaine the whole state of the Church from the calling of the Iswes unto the last ende of al things. Al which time may be distinguished into three parts, the first of which goeth before the battel with the Beast and the Dragon: wherunto the first two names with the whole preparation, are applyed. The second is bestowed in the battel it selfe, signifyed by a third name. The third is al the other space from the victory until Christ shal come, to which the fourth most mighty name agreeth. 17 Then I saw a certain Angel stand in the Sunne: Thus farre the descripti∣on of the Captaine: now of certain soldiers, who must fight with the Beast. These ar mustered by the voice of an Herald of armes standing in the Sunne: who differreth from him that powred out his vial upon the Sunne: for this, by interpreting the Scriptures, shal bring a plague; that other shal provoke the Saincts to warre by exhorting. Neither perhaps doth he that powreth out the vial, stande in the very Sunne, but set in an other place, shal sprin∣kle his liquour upon it. This, sitting as it were in the charet of the Sunne, hath his standing in the very light. But how, wilt thou say, can we con∣ceave any such thing yea by meditating upon it? I think light may be gi∣ven to this Sunne, from the 12. chap. 1. where we heard that the woman was clothed with the Sunne, that is, shining round about with a most cleare light of the Scriptures, with the clearnesse wherof being adorned, as it were with a garment, shee came forth abroad among the people, & shew∣ed her selfe in the sight of the world. But one may be said to stand in his clothing, as the wife standing at the right hand of the King in gold of Ophir, Psal. 45.10. Vherfore this Angel shalbe some cityzē of that particular Church, which shal shine most clearly by the approbatiō of the very sacred truth, & shalbe a natural daughter of the woman clothed with the Sunne. VVe know that there is not the same purity of al particular Churches which professe Christ, but that one doth take out more dreggs than an other. But this Angel shalbe a member of a most pure and chast congregation, which
above others shal shine with this glorious apparell. This is not one of the converted Iewes, of whom he began to speake even now, but an Angel of the VVest part, calling the VVesterne men to warre against the Beast, and the false Prophet, the plagues of our world. And indeed, al the force of this last warre in the VVest, seemeth to be converted against that holy cō∣gregation, which even now I said, did shine as the Sunne. For which cause a cityzen of it, before the rest, shal sound the alarme, and cal togither the rest, not so much to the battel, as to the spoile. Frō which things in some sort may be understood, what is that place Armagedon in the VVest part, wherof we heard in chap. 16.16. To weet, such a particular holy congre∣gation or city, which shalbe the place of this warre. For this is har gbei qodhesch, the hill of precious fruits, which God esteemeth deerer to him then al delights. And it is like that after Rome is overthrown that the Pope will againe place his chaire at Avenion (but I have no certenty concerning this thing, I follow onely coniecture,) but if he shal sit there, where shall he sooner and more gladly streine to doo his uttermost, than against the Genevean people of Savoy hardby; a heart sore, thankes be to God, now for some yeeres, which shal then also be the totment of their eyes? And verily, farre be it that my words should grieve any man, the Sunne of our world shineth there and from thence; & that alwayes it may shine more, every godly man desireth earnestly of God; neither let my repeated admo¦nition be superfluous. Hold that thou hast, let no man take thy crowne. In the meane time our prayers shal not be wanting for thee, that the Sunne of righteousnesse may ever shine upon thee, and drive farre away all darke∣nesse. ¶ Saying to all the foules that did fly by the middes of heaven: It hath bin ob∣served in chap. 8.13. & 14.6. that mesouranema signifyeth between heaven and earth, not mesembrian midde day, which the Astronomers call the mids of heaven, and that therfore the word belongeth to them, who have escaped from grosse superstition through the acknowledging of the truth, and yet have not attained that purity, meet for the inhabitants of heaven. The Angel of the Sunne calleth all these to take part of the spoile, as being nourissons of the same truth, howsoever it flourisheth not among all with the like purity. From which wee understand, that although one or some few congregations shal practize sincere godlines when this warre shalbe moved, yet that very many, and those even of the reformed religion shal∣be found, which eyther never have attained a ful reformation, or by negli¦gence and carelesnesse have fallen backe to that state, that they lack much of the holinesse of a pure and undefiled spouse. And who seeth not, that
mutation to come to passe every day more and more? Obstinate mē will not acknowledge this difference at this time, but they to whom it is grā∣ted to measure every thing by the onely rule of the truth, doo both see & bewaile both many shamefully falling from heaven, and also others as me∣teores, hanging yet in the clouds. ¶ Come and gather your selves togither: He calleth them to a banker, & to mirth. The most worthy destruction of the wicked men, is to God as a sumptuous feast. 18 That ye may eate the flesh of things: It is like that the ten hornes which have hated and burnt the whore Rome, shal also hate the very Beast, once the sweet heart of the whore. Therfore these Kings, who shal ioyne their armies with the Beast, are not in the number of those tenne. Neither shal ther be onely a denary number of Kings in the times of Antichrist, when as beside them others shalbe founde, who doo lend him their helpe. VVhich manner of dreames, how vaine they are, may be understood frō those things which wee have spoken before. These things then being o∣mitted, now the Angel being sure of the victory, calleth to the pray, and biddeth them to flye togither, that they may be filled with the spoiles of the enemies. And because variety in feasts doth very much delight men, he proposeth sundry kinds of dainty dishes, the flesh of Kings, of High Cap∣taines &c. This supper shalbe variable and very costly. Ezechiel furnisheth the like table, but with the flesh onely of Easterne enemies, chap. 39.17.18. 19 Afterward I saw the Beast: Such is the preparation of the Saincts; there followeth of the wicked; and first those in the VVest part, with whom the first conflict shalbe. The chiefe Captaines of these are the Beast, and the Kings. For the Pope of Rome, after Rome is destroyed, shal have his seat in an other place, for a few yeeres, as at Avenion, the Popes city, or Bono∣nie, or elsewhere. But he shal not remaine alive long time after, not abov five and fourty yeeres at the most, as may be gathered by a diligent com∣paring of other Scriptures. Neither indeed being spoiled of his principal Chaire, shal he be destitute of al aide of Kings, but some, to weet, of the earth, followers of wicked superstition shal yet take his part; who al their hosts being gathered and ioyned togither against Christ and his Saincts, shall beginne this battel to try their last chance. They wil assemble to Ar∣magedon that holy city, a hill of pretious fruits, whose Angel standeth in the Sunne, as in ver. 17. From which it is manifest, that that preparation which the Spirit hath described togither in chap. 16. and 14, &c. belō∣geth to divers enemies, whose warre is to be made asunder; first, of the
Beast and false Prophet; afterward of the Dragon. 20 But the Beast was taken: Hitherto the declaration of the sixt vial: that of the last followeth: which first teacheth the destruction of the enemies, and in the first place of the Beast and his armies. The Beast is taken, intraped as it were, with snares upon a sudden; as wild Beasts, which unawares fall into the netts. For so the word epiaste seemeth to note. And we know that the Lord doth raine downe upon the wicked snares, as in Psal. 11.6. by which their feet are taken there, where least of al they feared. The false Prophet is takē togither with him: which two ioyned togither, shew that the Pope of Rome (for he shal retaine this name perhaps, after the city is destroyed,) shal at length utterly perish, both in respect of the civil powr wherby he is the Beast, and also of the spiritual, wherby he is the False Prophet. The Spi∣rit speaketh as of two distinct persons, because of that twofold wickednes wherby that man of sinne is famous: but when I say the Pope of Rome, I doe not onely meane that particular man, who then shal sit in the Chaire, but also the very state and order of Popes, which now wholly shal come to naught; in such sort that no remainders therof shalbe left. Onely a certen hated memory shal continue, that his impiety hath bin the cause of the ruine of so many. ¶ Who wrought miracles; Before there was mention of the false Prophet in chap. 16.13. But because a bare name was there onely; that it might be unknown to no man, whom he speaketh of by this name, he describeth the same here by certain tokens, that all doubt may be taken away. Who, saith he, wrought miracles, wherby he deceaved them, which receive the Beasts marke, and worshipped his Image. By which things he sheweth most plainly, that this False Prophet is that second Beast, of which in chap. 13.13. &c. Therfore, let the Papists now see to it, who wil have Antichrist to raigne three yeeres and an halfe, before Christ shal come to the last iudgement; and he to be a singular person; whither or no, they doo not proclaime o∣pen warre against the truth? All grant, that eyther this second Beast, or that first, is Antichrist. Both which flourished long before, that the digni¦ty and maiesty of Rome the whore, began to be diminished. And also both shal remaine for some few yeeres, after the overthrow therof, as ap∣peareth manifestly from this place. Should we limit al this time, eyther with the space of three yeeres, or with the boundes of one mortal man? But concerning the time of Antichrist, the things that have bin spoken at chap. 17. are so certain and evident, that no man can now be in doubt. ¶ And they were both cast alive: As Coral, Dathan, & Abiran, the earth opening it selfe were swallowed up alive into Hell. The destruction of the
Popedome shalbe horrible. The Spirit putteth a manifest difference, be∣tween his punishment, and the rest of the multitude, which shal warre for him. It were better for him to perish by fyre, as the whore perished, but a more greevous example shalbe shewed in him. ¶ Into a lake offyre: Into the second death, to weet, everlasting, in chap. 21.8. But how can the Papacy be cast into the fire? That which is proper to men, is translated unto the state and condition of men, shewing as be∣fore was said, that not onely men shalbe punished with some greevous pu¦nishment, but also that the thing it selfe shalbe utterly taken away, never for to raise againe: even as they, who are cast to hell, must not expect any returning or setting free. Certenly we may gather, and that not rashly, from this strange and unacustomed taking of vengeance, that God will shew by some visible signe, how damnable and detestable he hath alwayes esteemed the Papacy. And this last is that destruction, of which in chap. 17.18. shal goe into destruction: a iust reward of the Antichristian tyranny. 21 And the rest were slaine with the sword: Such then is the destructiō of the Prince of wickednesse: now of his armies and souldiers. Of whō ther is a differing punishment, not so horrible, at least in shew: they shalbe slaine with the sword of him that siteth on the horse: that is, by the word comming out of his mouth, as though he should say, they shal undergoe the punish¦ments threatned in the word against the disobedient, and such as resist the truth; as in Ieremy: Behold I wil make my words as fire in thy mouth, and this people as wood, and it shal devoure them, chap. 5.14. What singular thing thē shal the destructiō of the Pope have? For he also hath bin slaine with this sword. That is true indeed; but the word threatneth divers punishments, according to the manner of the wickednesses: the most greevous, to the greatest; the lighter, to the lesse. Peradventure because the ruine of the Pa∣pacy shalbe more horrible than wee think, it is exempted from the com∣mon order: not because it is not denounced in the word, but perhaps be∣cause it is lesse regarded of us, and that we suspect it to be lighter then the event will shew. Or, as we have declared in ver. 15. it may be that these souldiers, after the overthrow received, shall yeeld their vanquished for∣ces to the truth, and subiect their neckes to her yoke. ¶ And all the foules were filled with their flesh: The Victory being obtained the foules gather to the pray, & doo fill themselves with the spoiles. That whole late Popish natiō shal be subiect afterward to the reformed Churh. Every country being a nourrisson of the purer truth, shal have some part of the regions, before time given up to superstition, made subiect to them. Which thing seemeth to be signifyed by the foules satiated with the flesh
of the slaine army. Such then is the end of the Romish Pope and Papacy, that remained a few yeeres after the city: yet at length so much the more miserable, because shee had such as did adorne her funerall with their teares, and performed the last duties by weeping. But ther shal be none left for the Pope, to bewaile his misery; but he shal die infamous, without mourners, or other funeral pompe. Wherby at last is accomplished that prophetical parable of the ghests called to the marriage, Mat. 22. Doubt∣lesse those good and evill sent for out of the high wayes, are the Gentiles, that embraced the calling, after that the Iewes had refused it. Among them, the man that had not a wedding garment, is the Church of Rome, which despiseth the righteousnesse of faith, neither regardeth to be clo∣thed with the merit of Christ by imputation. The King comming in, and beholding her clothed with her ragges, but not with that garment which onely he approoveth, now at length biddeth his servants to bind her hād and foote, and to cast her into utter darkenesse, where is weeping & gna∣shing of teeth. For Christ speaketh not there of any one man, but colle∣ctively of a very great multitude, as the sentence added in the end decla∣reth, that many are called but few are chosen, ver. 14. From which at length we understand, that the bright comming of the Lord, with which Paul foreshewed that the man of sinne should be abolished; 2 Thes. 2.8. is not his last coming to iudgement, but that wherby Christ shal take the Iewes into the fellowship of his holy Church: at which time his Kingdome shal flourish most gloriously, and shal exceed by infinite degrees all the bright¦nesse of the ages past, as shal be made more evident from the things fol∣lowing. After the Pope is destroyed, the Dragon shalbe abolished, & ma¦ny other things accomplished on earth. CHAP. 20. AFTER I saw an Angel comming down from heaven, having the keye of the bottomlesse pit, and a great chaine in his hande. 2 And he tooke the Dragon, that old serpent, which is the Divill, and Satan, & he bound him a thousand yeeres. 3 And cast him into the bottomlesse pit, which he shut up, and sealed upon him, that he should deceive the nations no more, til the thousand yeeres were fulfilled: for after that he must be loosed for a little season. 4 And J saw seats, and they sate upon them, and iudgement was given them, & I saw the soules of them, which were beheaded for the witnes of Iesus, and for the word of God, and which did not worship the Beast, neither his Image, neither had
taken his marke upon their foreheads, or on their hands, and they lived and raigned with Christ a thousand yeeres. 5 But the rest of the dead men lived not againe, until the thousand yeeres wereful filled: this is the first resurrection. 6 Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection: for on such the se∣cond death hath no power: but they shalbe the Priests of God and of Christ, and shall raigne with him a thousand yeeres. 7 And when the thousande yeeres are expired, Satan shalbe loosed out of his pri∣son. 8 And shall goe out to deceive the nations, which are in the foure quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog, to gather them togither to battell, whose number is as the sande of the sea. 9 And they went up into the plaine of the earth, and they compassed the tentes of the Saints about, and the beloved city▪ but fire came down from God out of heaven, and devoured them. 10 And the Divill that deceived them, was cast into a lake of fire and brimston, where was both that Beast, and also that False Prophet, and they shalbe tormented day and night for ever more. 11 Then I saw a great white throne, and one that sate on it, from whose face fled away both the earth and heaven, and their place was no more founde. 12 And I saw the dead both great and smal stand before God: and the bookes were opened, and another book was opened which is the book of life, and the dead were iudged of those things, which were written in the books, according to their workes. 13 And the sea gave up the dead which were in her, and death and hell delivered up the dead which were in them, and they were iudged every man according to their workes. 14 And hell and death were cast into the lake of fire: this is the second death. 15 And who soever was not sound written in the booke of life was cast into the lake of fire. The Analysis. VVEE have spoken of the destruction of the Beast: the destructiō of the Dragon followeth: whose history, seing it is the conclusi∣on of the whole warrfare of the Church under the crosse: first he repea∣teth briefly the things before spoken: secondly by a new Prophecy, he decla¦reth the last ruine of him. The repetition is framed according to three ti∣mes: the first, in which the Divell was taken, in the first verse. The secōd,
how long he was bound, in the second verse; the third, when and how lōg he should be loosed, in the end of the third verse. And all these thinges briefly; which after are repeated more largely, by mentioning therewithall the state of the Church, of what sorte it was in the meane time, through e∣very of those periods. In the first, wherin the Dragon was taken, the saints were beheaded, at the beginning of the fourth verse. In the second, wher∣in the Divill or Dragon was bound, there was an unlike conditiō of men: for the saincts raigned a thousand yeeres (which was the time of the prisō∣ment of the Divill,) both in respect of the soules slaine in the former peri∣od, and also in respect of them that were on earth, who strove with the Beast, neither did submit under his yoke by any meanes, in the same verse, The other lived not againe all that time, but being deceived by the frauds and impostures of the Beast, lay as it were dead and buried in their errors, in the fift verse. The third period, which is of the Divill being loosed, rela¦teth both the condition of the elect, and also the furie of the Dragon ra∣ging againe. Those thousande yeeres being expired, the elect lived, not a few, as in the second period, but they rose againe in a farre greater multi∣tude, the errours of the Beast being left, and themselves converted unto true godlines. Which resurrection is called the first and blessed, because of the Priestly and Kingly dignity, & long continuing of the raigne with Christ, in the sixt verse. The furie of the Dragon after a thousand yeeres prisonment, shalbe revived, in the seventh verse. He shall muster souldiers known by name, Gog and Magog, infinite in multitude, in the eight ver. He shall spoile all farr and neare, and shal besiege the tents of the saincts, in the beginning of the ninth verse, and so farr proceedeth the repetition of the former ages. That which dooth follow from thence, is to come, his attempt against the beloved City, and utter overthrow both of the ar∣my, in the ende of the ninth verse, and also of himselfe, in the tenth verse. And thus farre is the destruction of the enemies; afterward the happines of the Saints is handled, wherby the Church shall shine having escaped all these calamities. Which felicity is declared two wayes, both by the gathe¦ring togither of the saincts, in the rest of this chapter, and condition of them being gathered, in those that followe. The gathering hath a prepa∣ration, and execution. The preparation is of the Iudge fitting upō a great throne in the eleventh verse. The execution is partly summarily toward them that are to be iudged, where the forme of iudgement is out of certē bookes, according to the workes, verse twelve, and the māner of standind before the iudgement seate; the resurrection, in the thirteenth verse: part∣ly by name, upon death and hell, and those that were not founde in the
booke of life, in the fourteenth and fifteenth verse. Scholions. 1 After J saw an Angel come down: How great paines the interpreters have taken in this chapter, we may see it by their commentaries. Especial∣ly the Papists torment themselves very much; to whom this is a labyrinth out of which they cannot rid themselves, no more then of all the other things in this booke, in which they wander hither and thither, and erre, neither can finde any comming out any where, as it must needs be where the truth is not for a guide. The former exposition, the rehearsall of a great part of which is here made, will make, I hope, all things easy & rea∣dy to us. First then, in repeating things past, to the end that the thinges spoken of before here and there touching the Dragon, being now propo∣sed to be seen all at once, may the better be understood, he speaketh of his apprehension; which briefly sheweth by consequent, that he was loosed be∣fore, & in that time made those sturres which he is wonte, when he hath the raines loose. From which it may be gathered easily, what was the cō∣dition of the primitive Church, as long as this disturber might confoūde all things at his pleasure. But at length his furie was bridled, & his power weakened by the Angel, a description of whom is here made. Who this Angel is we have learned from the former things, to weet, that it is Con∣stantine the Great, who being borne the manchilde of the Church, & ma∣king warre for his mothers sake against the Tyrants, the Heathen Empe∣rours, the Dragon it selfe. He is said to come downe from heaven, brin∣ging unexpected aide, in chap. 12.6.7. &c. So the Angel being to fight against the whore, and to assaile her unwares, was said to come down frō heaven, in the eighteenth chapter and first verse. He hath the keye of the bottomlesse pit, power to open the same, and shut up the Dragon, but not to cast forth the hellish smoke: in which respect onely the key was givē to the Angel of the bottomlesse pit, chap. 9.1. There is therfore a great dif¦ference between these two keyes. The great chaine, are the foundations of the Christian liberty layd by him, by which he held the Dragon bound as with chaines by a long succession of time, that he could not move him∣selfe to make any trouble. For now the way was stopped up against those Heathen, to the chiefe soveraignty; or if they attained to it by fraud, as Iuli¦an, yet they were so bound & tyed with this chaine, that they could not exercise their former cruelty. 2 Who took the Dragon; Overcame him by open warr, chap. 6.15. & 12.7 For whē those tyrāts were overcome, the strēgth of the Dragō was takē a∣way, neither could he entreprise any such thing as he exercised before.
The Heathen Emperours are noted by the names of the very Divell, as al∣so in chap. 12.9. the articles being also added for the preheminence of the wickednesse, because they may by right be esteemed by his name, of whose poyson, malitiousnes, and wickednes, they have bin the ministers. Worthily doth a man beare his name, whose manners and disposition he taketh upon him. This apprehension signifyeth that whole first period, frō the time of Iohn and before, even unto Constantine, the last part of it be∣ing put for the whole. For saying that now the Dragō was takē, he would have it to be understood that before, he ran to and fro, devising as much evill as he could, as we learned in the seales, at chap. 6. ¶ And hound him for a thousand yeeres: He ordained that māner of ruling, which being afterward extended to a thousand yeeres, left no power to the open enemies to raigne over the Church, as in former time. And this is the second period, in which the Dragon was bound, that is, the Heathē Emperours were repressed unto the yeere 130. But I say this period to be of the Dragon, because it is not that full period, which before the Spirit did set of the whole Prophecy, to weet, of the trumpets. For this is of a longer time, and exceedeth that of the Dragon about two hundred thre∣score yeeres and more. The history of the Dragon hath some thing pecu∣liar to it selfe, neither is it strictly to be astrained to that rule. The binding of him is more ancient, then the blowing of the trumpets, done under the sixt seale, about the yeere 306, as was said in chap. 6.12. and 12.7.8 9. But the trumpets gave their first sound in the Nicene Councill, chap. 8.7. and in their sixt sound, brought to the Dragon a releasing from prison, chap. 9.15. Wherfore wee now understand that this second period is pro∣per to the Dragon; agreeing with the trumpets, neither in beginning nor ende. The Iesuit Ribera measureth the times for the most part by the pro¦per signification of the words, as the five moneths of the locusts; three yeeres and an halfe of the raigne of Antichrist: yet neverthelesse he would have these thousand yeeres to be taken indefinitely, for the whole space, from the death of Christ, even unto the time of Antichrist, to which opi∣nion, at least as touching the beginning of the account, very many both of the old and new writers doo condescende. But why have they not con∣sidered, that the Beast, which is the very Antichrist, raigned this whole thousand yeeres, in which the Dragon was bounde. Therfore his impri∣sonnement was not to be ended at the beginning of the raigne of Anti∣christ, but this rather was to beginn togither with it. That I may not now speak any thing of that barre, which the Spirit hath put at chap. 4.1. I will shew thee those things which must be done hereafter: which forbiddeth to
looke back to the time past, and warneth that all the folowing prophe∣cy, consisteth in things to come, and latter then the age of Iohn. Further more the agreement of the whole Prophecy which wee have seene hither∣to, cā not beare such a biginning to be made, as troubleth all things with confusion, which we cannot rid ourselves of. But shal we thing that the Divell was bound, when he raged most cruelly by the first Heathen Empe¦rours? When may we say that he was loosed, if then he lay in prison, and in the stockes? That which the Iesuite alleageth out of the 12. chap. of Iohn, Now the Prince of this world shalbe cast forth, belongeth nothing to this cause, for so much as this is to be understood of the spiritual power, thē forthwith to be utterly destroyed by the death of Christ: but the bin∣ding which the Revelation speaketh of, belongeth to his tyranny over the bodies of the Saints, as frō the beginning of the fourth verse of this chap∣ter it is manifest, where the soules of the Saints raigning after the Dragō was cast into bondes, pertaine to them, who were beheaded by the same before his bondes, raging most furiously. Which calamity, what other can it be, than that of the cruelty of the Heathen Emperours? Wherfore neither the beginning nor ende of these thousand yeers is set downe right¦ly by the Iesuite. 3 And he cast him into the bottomlesse pit. This bottomlesse pit is the earth, as it is manifest from chap. 12.3. where it is said, when the dragon saw that he was cast unto the earth, which yet is not so called after the custome of the common speach, but to note out earthly men; who in name onely ar coū∣ted citizens of the Church. The woe also is denounced to the inhabitans of the earth and sea, because the Divell is come down to them, as in the same place verse 12. Now he must be conversant among these onely, & his fury must be exercised against these, as hath bin declared in the said place. ¶ And shut him up and sealed upon him: To weet, the doore, or stone, or some such thing, as they made the sepulchre sure, sealing the stone, Mat. 27.66. by which is signifyed, that the Devill was committed to most sure custo∣dy, such as he should not have so much leave as to look out of doores. Not because he should be vacant from busines altogither by the space of the whole thousand yeeres, (for he should cause huge sturres both by lād and sea, as we learned even now from chap. 12.12. & know to hav come to passe in very truth, by those things which are mētioned in chap. 8.12.) but because he should have no power at al over the holy Church, against which he should undertake al his attempts in vaine. He cast out a flood af¦ter the woman, but he lost his labour. For both the earth holpe her, and shee fled into the wildernesse, beyond the chaine wherwith the Dragon
was bound, as in chap. 12.15. &c. ¶ That he should deceive the Gentiles no more: The Gentiles are also the ci∣tizens of the false Church, whose dwelling was in the exteriour court, and in the holy city, two and fourty moneths, chap. 11.2. He speaketh not of these Gentiles now, but of them that wer wholly repugnāt to the name of Christ; such as were those fierce tyrants of Rome, before Constantine. This sorte of enemies should entreprise nothing against the holy Church, by the space of those yeeres, because they should not know wher it should be; yet in the meane time some other cruell enemies should intreate the false Church most cruelly, chap. 12.17. &c. ¶ For afterward he must be loosed for a little season: After those thousand yeeres are finished, the Divell was to be loosed againe; wherin is set the third time, falling upon the beginning of the sixt trumpet: when the most cruel Turke, all feare of the Romane Empire being laid asyde, which he saw to be forsaken of the Westerne armes, and at home drowned with slouthfulnes, riot, and dissentions, began an horrible tyranny also against the Church, and not onely the false, but also the true, which then after a long distance of time, began to shew it selfe, at least beholding a farre off from the wildernes, whither shee had fled, although shee differeth her full returne until some ages after. The Divill being then loosed, graunted not so much as one houre of rest from warre; but as soon as the truth began to come forth abroad, about the yeere 130, straiteway he provoked the e∣nemy, to vexe the same by what meanes he could. Therfore the Turke fly∣eth upon the dominions of the Empire, he passeth over into Europe, he increaseth his victories, he rooteth out the maiestie of the Romane name: he carieth away all things with him as a swift running streame: neither is ther at this day almost found any hold so strong, that can withstand his furie. But the time of this tyrāny is but short, to weet, onely for an houre, a day, a moneth, a yeere, that is, about three hundred ninety yeeres, if wee count the yeere by twelve moneths, and every moneth by thirty daies, af∣ter the account of two and fourty moneths, and three dayes and an halfe, chap. 11. If we follow the reckening of the Iuliā yeeres, the impious king∣dome shal not be prolonged beyond seven yeres more; then utterly to be abolished, without leaving so much as the footsteps of his name after him, as shal be said afterward. 4 Then I saw thrones; Hitherto the brief History of the Dragon: the same now is handled somewhat more fully, there being added togither also the state of the Church, wherin it was in every of those times. The two first of which are shewed elegantly in the same words. For when after the Dra∣gon
is bound, the thrones set are seen, and also the soules of them that were behea∣ded, sitting upon them, and iudgement given to them: by these is signifyed that the primitive Church was miserably afflicted, before that mortal enemie was cast into prison. Then was ther no seat established for her, no iudge∣ment was given, but she lay on the ground trode under foote, every mo∣ment spending the life of many of her members for the truth; whereunto belongeth the cry of the soules, which desired vengeance of their most cruell enemies, chap. 6.10.11. Therfore all that time from Iohn even until the binding of the Devill by Constantine, was a time for the hatched, for fla∣ming fires, for the racke, and all manner of torments, as is very wel shew¦ed here. Againe the same thrones, and iudgement given after that the Dragon was delivered to prison by Constantin, doo shew the notable felicity of the second distance of time which the Church enioyed having obtained Em∣perours for her Defendours. For these thrones belong not to the saincts raigning in heaven, as the Iesuite will have it, intangling himselfe in ma∣ny absurdities; but they which dwell on earth, in a better estate, in regard of the open enemy, then in former time. For why should the raigne in heaven be limited with a thousand yeeres? Or why should they beginne to raigne after the Dragon was bound, as if the raigne in heaven wer not perpetual? Moreover such ar counted in this raigne, who ar dead a thou∣sand yeeres agoe, as in the next verse: which can not be understood of the raign in heavē, in which, unlesse the soules of them that die, fly forthwith, they shal never afterward come thither. But more plainly of this matter at the next verse. ¶ And they sate, , it may be put, and perhaps better transitve∣ly, they did set. So the order of construction runneth easily, being reduced by the accusative cases which folow, et animas, and the soules, et illos &c. and them which worshiped not; in the same sense vidi thronos, I saw thro∣nes, and they did set on them, to whom iudgement also was given; both the soules of them which were beheaded, and also those which worshipped not the Beast &c. who all lived and raigned with Christ a thousand yeeres: and iudgement was given them: they were dealt with according to their righteousnes, themselves being set at liberty, and their enemies suffering the punishments of their cruelty. Even as on the other side ons iudgement is said to be taken away, when a man is oppressed with iniuries, and the doers of them, goe away scotfree as Iob complaineth, God liveth who hath despised my iudgement &c. chap. 27 2, and 34.5. Or iudgement to be given, may belong to the raign, as in the Psalmist, O God give thy iudgements to the King, & thy righteousnes to the Kings sonne: Let him iudge thy people iustly, and thy poore with equity, Psal. 72.1.2. as
though he should say, the Church now is advanced to that dignity, wher∣by shee should give lawes to others, which but lately was accustomed to receive them, being most abiect▪ and obscure, and of no estimation with the world. ¶ And the soules of them that were beheaded. If ekathison they sate, be taken as a verbe neuter, then these words are to be referred to the verbe eidon, & vidi animas, and I saw the soules &c. These are the soules of the godly Mar∣tyrs of the first period, who under the Heathen Emperours, laid downe their lives for Christs sake; who now at length by meanes of Constantine, obtaine glory and honour. But how is this, wilt thou say, they not being on the earth? Their soules were placed on thrones, when they who tooke away their lives uniustly, were iustly punished by Constantine, that is, whē the tyrants were killed, and condigne punishment inflicted upon them for their cruelty. The iust man shall reioice when he seeth the vengeāce of the wicked, and shal wash his footsteppes in their blood, as the Psalmist describeth. And a∣gaine, a two edged sword is in the hand of the Saincts, to execute vengeance on the Heathen, which honour shalbe to all the Saincts, Psal. 149. It is a glorious thing for the Saincts, that their iniuries are nor neglected, but ar at length recō∣pensed with iust punishment. This is it which the soules desired earnestly, chap. 6.10. And these seats are that deliverance which they obtained a promise off in the same place. ¶ And which worshipped not the Beast; These also were placed, or sate in the seates; which are men then living in the second period; wherupon he not onely mentioneth their soules, as even now of the Martyrs, which were in the age past, but the whole man, saying those which worshipped not &c. From which we must observe, seing the godly are described by those marks, that they worshipped not the Beast, neither suffered themselves to be noted with his marke either in the forehead or on the hand, and that in the second peri∣od whē the Devill was bound, which took the beginning at Constantine himselfe, and continued from thence by the space of a thousand yeeres, that the Beast was all this time. Otherweise ther could have bin no praise of the Godly living in this time, if there had bin no occasion and matter for them to get praise by. Wherfore the Beast was bred togither with Cō∣stantine, when the Dragon being thrust out of heaven and going into pri∣son gave his power and his throne and great authority to the Beast, chap. 12.13. and 13.2. He could not suffer that any truce should be granted to the Church, but when he saw his open furie to be repressed, he ordained the Beast his Vicar in his roome, being absent, by whose endevour at least, he might satisfy his hatred. Therfore the three yeeres raigne of Antichrist is
a trifling toy, a part wherof we see here manifestly to extende unto a thou∣sand yeeres. Secondly, let the Papists consider, what a vaine forgerie that Antichrist is, whom they dreame off. For there is no Antichrist properly so called, and for excellency, whom the Spirit in this Revelation teacheth to us, besides that Beast of the thirteenth chapter. But the Papists Anti∣christ is not this Beast, as not being to come, before these thousand yeer of the binding of the Divill be finished. So the Iesuite teacheth that these thousand yeeres are without doubt the whole time frō the death of Christ even to the time of Antichrist. But this Beast ruleth through all the time in which the Devill lay bound. Therfore the are meere toyes, which the Iesuite obtrude to the world, miserably deceaving, as others, so much more themseves: who are altogither carelesse of a present destruction, and quake at some vaine shadowes to come. They rest, I know, in this matter upon the authority of some Holy Fathers, to whom they doo no lesse iniury, then procure danger to themselves. These being farr from the event of things, spake onely by coniecture, which to preferre before most certain events, is not onely foolish, but also greatly contrary to the minds of them, who every where confessing their ignorance, provoked rather to search out the truth which the day should teach, then to rest in their doubts, which even they themselves condemned of ignorance. Wherfore they who will yet holde fast their known errours, are deprived by the iust iudgement of God of all even common sense: that so in flattering & han∣dling themselves gently, they may throw themselves headlong to eternal and unevitable destruction. Furthermore observe from this place, that the two and fourty moneths in chap. 11.2. and 13.5. are not to be nū∣bred after the common manner, seeing the Beast, to whom these moneths belong, was in the view and eyes of men, the space of a thousand yeeres, as it is manifest from his adversaries, who should be altogither none, if he should not be at all. ¶ And they lived and raigned Both the soules of the Martyrs, and those which withstood the Beast, enioyed a Kingdome with Christ this whole time, in which the Dragon was bound. Not that any one continued his life so long, but because ther never wanted a succession of the godly, who embraced the truth, notwithstanding the rage of Antichrist. To acknow∣ledge the truth, is in very deed to live and raign with Christ, even as on the contrary, eyther not to know, or to despise the same, is in living, to be dead, and in the highest top of raigne, to be in a more vile estate, then the most abiect slave. But he maketh mention of the raigne of these yeeres, not because when they were finished the Saints should cease to raign, (for
wee see that the first resurrection doth follow by and by, which should make the former glory more aboundant,) but because the Church in these yeers chiefly, lying hid in the wildernes, and in the secret of the temple, should seeme to the world to have perished utterly, chap. 11.1. and 12.14. he sheweth that the same raigned with Christ all this most sorowfull time. Which doubt could not befall concerning the saints in heaven, who wee know, doo enioy a blessed time, as soone as they are departed out of this valley of teares. This raign of most couragious champions, was shewed before by that holy army of an hundred fourty foure thousand, who cam¦ped in Mount Sion, and followed the Lambe, whither soever he went, ch. 14.1.2. wherof this verse is a rehearsall. 5 But the rest of the dead. Such then was the state of the Saincts by the space of a thousand yeeres of the Dragons binding. Now in a few words is signifyed the cōdition of the multitude in that space. These refused the truth, and snorted a long night, not awaking those whole thousand yeers, that the sunbeame of most wholesome doctrine might shine upon them. And this is that Apostasie which Paul said should come, before the Lord should appeare, 2 Thess. 2.3. and which Iohn expressed before by the whole earth wondring after the Beast, chap. 13.3. and 17.8. ¶ This is the first resurrection: The third period, wherby is taught in what condition the Church should be by and by after those thousand yeeres were ended. More cleare truth should now at lēgth returne to the world: and the elect every where should assemble togither to the appearing light of it. Which earnest desire of theirs, is called the first resurrection, to weet, in respect of the second, ver. 12. as there we shal see. A greater number now then before, and with more vehement affections, should make hast to the Ghospell, as came to passe at the end of those thousand yeeres, to weet, at the yeere 130. when very many, before dead in the Romish super¦stitions, wherwith they were overwhelmed, opened their eyes at the rising of the truth, & so did rise unto life from which of late they were strāgers. Among these wer numbred Marsilius Patavinus, Iohannes de Gauduno, Iohn Wickliefe, and many other excellent men of syncere godlines, and great learning for that time. By their labour others in great number wer recalled from their errours unto the truth, as it were from death to life, as we said before in chap. 14.16. This wonderful conversion is called the first resurrection, under the name wherof Iohn repeateth, and togither also declareth those former times. This is not therfore the resurrection at the last iudgement, as the Iesuite interpreteth, who forgetting himselfe in this verse, extendeth now evē unto the day of iudgement, the thousand yeers,
whose ende lately he did set in the comming of Antichrist. What time then shalbe left for Antichrist, not beginning his raigne before that the Dragon shalbe let out of prison? Shal the first entry into his Kingdome fall on the day of iudgement? It were in deed to be wished, for so neither should he accomplish that three yeeres and halfe space, which the Papists tell shalbe so miserable, and bewaile so lamentably. Furthermore they which were lost before, doo become blessed in this resurrection; which thing shall not come to passe in the last. Moreover, how is this the last, which is called the first, and a latter then which, there is an other, ver. 12? How is the raigne of a thousand yeeres with Christ after the last resurrectiō mē∣tioned for great, which we know to be eternal, nor to be limited with any revolution of yeeres, ver. 6? Shal also Satan be loosed, and shall that warr of Gog and Magog be raised after the last resurrectiō? For certain, this re¦surrection shalbe after those thousande yeeres be accomplished; and this warre shalbe moved, after the same yeeres be complet, ver. 7. The Ie∣suite faineth a strange resurrectiō, after which such sturres shalbe on earth. But it is worthy to be observed with how great unsensiblenes he is strikē. Here where he hath Augustine going before him in a right opinion, he re∣iecteth him. But at other times often, where by reason of obscurity of things, he is manifestly deceived, he runneth after him apace most swiftly. For the Iesuits in seeing see not, being by the iust iudgemēt of God alto∣gither blinded. 6 O Blessed and holy is he: They are blessed who doo embrace from their heart, the truth restored againe to the world. For this is to have part in the first resurrection. As Christ saith to Peter, thou shalt have no part with mee. Iohn. 13.8. as though he should say; unlesse thou suffers these things to be done, which I will have, thou art not indeed partaker of mee. Therfore no man hath part in this resurrection, which either embraceth the truth with a dis¦sembling hart, or hath obtained some certain knowledge therof; but one¦ly he in whose hart it taketh roote, bringing forth fruit unto eternal life. For al that is borne of God overcometh the world, 1 Iohn, 5.4. and Christ loveth his even to the end, Iohn 13.1. suffering none of them to be lost, Iohn 17.12. For, who shall ravish them out of his hands? Iohn 10.28. Which most certen salvation of the faithful, sealed up to them in their harts by the Spirit, being unknowen to the Iesuit, he findeth this blessednes which the Spirit speaketh off, no where but in heaven. But he erreth, as his manner is. This blessednesse is of the life present, necessarily to be published chiefly at the new appearing againe of the light of the Ghospel, seing it should come to passe, that they who should ioine themselves to the truth, should
both be striken with the lightning of excommunication of the Beast; and also should be cōdemned of the world as most wicked men. Who would not tremble to be banished from the onely holy Catholike Church, as the Romish vaunteth her selfe to be, unlesse the Spirit had confirmed those to be blessed and holy who should receive with a syncere affection, the truth raising a∣gain▪ and therewithall had taught that, that Romish Church calling her selfe Catholique, by a true name is a most impudent horlot? This resurrection is onely of those, who forsaking the Romish Synagogues, doo become the true citizens of the reformed Churches: they which still abide in the Po∣pish corruptions, have no part in the first resurrection, neither shal have any in the second, unlesse they repent. ¶ He that hath part: , melaq: A metaphore taken from portions, di¦stributed once by lot, to this ende, that we might acknowledge Gods mer¦cy and providence in every one converted, without attributing any thing to chaunce and fortune. ¶ On such the second death hath no power: The second death is destruction in the lake of fire burning with brimstone, before in chap. 19.20. But why doth he onely exempt them frō the second death? because the partakers of this resurrection have not yet finished the first, to weet, the death of the body: which being inflicted upon them by the Beast, yet shal they be altogi∣ther free from the second, which ought to be a comfort to them in their sufferings. Surely ther is no need of this consolation in the last resurrecti∣on, wher we shall no longer live by faith, but shall behold the very inhe∣ritance hoped for. Therfore this is the comfort of men warring on earth, which are sure of the victory, but have not yet got the crowne. ¶ But they shalbe the Preists of God and Christ: chap. 1.6. and 5.10. It is said in the dative case Preists to God: but this explaneth the other. All the faithfull are Priests & Kings in Christ, that is partakers of these dignities, and in some sorte also endued of the faculty and power of them: but here some greater thing seemeth to be spoken, after the manner of the He∣brewes, who attribute the name of God to those things which are most excellent in their kinde, as a Prince of God, &c. as was noted before. After which sort they seem to be called Priests & Kings of God, for that which is, most excellent Priests. ¶ And they shal raigne with him a thousand yeeres: These thousand yeeres doo beginne where the former ended, to weet, in the yeere 130. In which is promised a cōtinuing of the truth by the space of a thousand yeres, (frō that restoring of it wherof wee have spoken,) in these our nations of Eu∣rope, to which also this first resurrection belongeth. But whither then
againe it shal cease, security possessing men, until Christ shal come as a thiefe in the night, as it is foreshewed in the Ghospel, he to whom all things are known, knoweth. We find nothing wherby to determine any certēty touching this matter. Onely wee have seen three hundred yeeres now to have passed since this first resurrection: and that every day, thankes be to God, the truth groweth mor in use. We must also yet tary som short space before that our brethren the Iewes shal come to the faith. But after that they are come, and Christ shal have raigned some ages most gloriously on earth by his servants, in advancing his Church to most high honour abov all Empire, then also the Nations shal embrace true godlinesse according to that saying, And the Gentils shal walke in the light therof, and the Kings of the earth shal bring their glory and honour unto it, & the glory and the honour of the Gentils shalbe brought unto it, see chap. 21.24.26. For which cause it was promised to the Church of Philadelphia, that shee should be a pillar in the tem∣ple of God, and that shee should goe out no more, chap. 3.12. that is, that it should have a firme & stable abiding in the new glorious Church. VVhich Church of Philadelphia, we have shewed in the same place to be of the Gentils. From which it is proved, that the truth shal remaine for a long time yet among the Gentiles. For this is the Kingdome of Christ, when by the Scepter of his word he ruleth among any people. And this is the most true raign of any people, when it is subiect to the government of Christ alone, and is ruled by his onely disposition. Now at length we per∣ceive of what sort that millenarie raigne is, of which we are a part, thākes be to God; concerning which almost al the Fathers, Papias, Irenaeus, Iu∣stin, Tertullian, Lactantius, and Augustine also in some part, spake so ma¦ny things and so highly. VVithout doubt they would have this Kingdom to be spiritual, whose unmeasurable pleasantnes they expressed by corpo∣rall things after the manner of the Prophets. Yet neverthelesse I wil not deny that perhaps some leaned too much in their opiniōs to the delights of the body: but was it to this end to overfill themselves with them as men altogither lost in riots, and given over to all dishonest pleasures? It cannot be that any such thing should ever come into the minde of lear∣ned and holy men: but because they knew that under this raign of Christ his Church should enioy very great felicity also of this life, they made mē¦tion of the abondance of such pleasures. VVhich we shortly expect, when the Romish Antichrist and the Turke shalbe utterly abolished. Vntill this victory be gotten, the Church yet is in warre, liveth in tents, & figh∣teth with many adversaries. But after this warre is finished, shee shal keep a most ioyful triumph, and shal reioyce with perpetuall mirth. So as they
swerved not much from the truth, who commended the holy pleasures of this raign: unlesse in this, that some supposed, that these thinges should be after the last resurrection; wherin they greatly failed, when they added any earthly thing, to the eternal happines of the saints, which cannot be expressed or declared, by any earthly thing which here we doo enioy. But let us observe how greatly they are deceived, who almost doo determine a certaine yeere, and day of the last iudgement. The truth shal yet raigne among the Gentils for seven hundred yeeres: how long afterward amōg the Iewes, no calculation doth declare, as farre as I can find out: but this is in the power of God alone, altogither uncerten and unknown to every creature, as Christ expresly teacheth, Mar. 13.32. 7 But when the thousand yeeres are expired: Such then was the condition of the godly, in the beginning and during the third period. Now he relateth partly what troubles Satan wrought being loosed; and partly what trou∣bles he will yet cause. First, he sheweth his loosing in this verse, (for he ra∣geth and is quiet at the commandemēt of God,) which loosing was done after those thousand yeeres were accomplished. Not those wherof he spak last in the end of the former verse, but those of which he made mention in the 2.3.4.5. verses: of the beginning and end of which, we spake at the second and third verses. ¶ Satan shalbe loosed out of his prison: The open enemy shal then again in∣vade the Church, as it came to passe in the rising of the Turks, as we shew∣ed at the third verse. 8 And shal goe out to deceive the nations: His first labour, being loosed, shal be in preparing an army, in this verse: the endevour wherof is afterward propounded to be threefold, in the verse folowing. The huge army shal be gathered, from many and sundry countreys, as is shewed by the sower corners of the earth: South, North, East, West: In which foure quarters, seing the whole compasse of the earth is contained, least any should think that this Empire doth extend even as farr & amply, he comprehendeth those foure corners within the limits & bōds of two nations, Gog and Magog; as though he should say, thinke yee not that the whole earth shall mini∣ster souldiers to make this wicked army; so much of the South, & other parts of the earth, as ther are Provinces in the possession of Gog and Ma∣gog, shal helpe to the preparing of these hosts. Therfore this power of e∣nemies shal consist chiefly of these two sortes of people. But what natiōs they are, can not be unknown, the Captaine being known. To the finding out of whom, the time doth lead, as by the hand. For he riseth up after the thousand yeeres of the Divels imprisonment; which time we hav proo¦ved
both often, and in many words, to come out at the yeere 130. And what other Divell, open enemy of the Church, came ther into the world, than that terrible Turke, who farr passed all the former in all cruelty? who notably executeth the fiercenes of the Divell, who knoweth that but a litle time remaineth for him of this loosing. Wherfore the Divell seemeth to rage even visibly in the person of the Turke, whom he hath ordained for his Vice-Captaine. Therfore Gog and Magog are the nations that ar sub¦ject to the Empire of the Turk, or at least those that minister armes unto him, for to performe his wicked entreprises. But yet so, as that Gog be the chiefe nations, and proper to the dominion of the Turk; as we learne from Ezechiel, who draweth his Prophecy chiefly against Gog, chap. 38. and 39. But Magog are perhaps the nations of an other jurisdiction: yet alwaies at hand to helpe the Turke. For Ezechiel inveigheth more lightly against him, as it were against a confederate, rather thē the chiefe authour As touching Gog, a Reubenite is rehearsed by this name, 1 Chron. 5.4. But who besides the name, hath not likenesse to this, as is cleare frō these places of Ezechiel and the Revelation, in which onely, he now spoken off being excepted, mention is found of him. The most learned Tremelius & Iunius doo think, that this name came of Gyge, who killed Candaules the Lydian, and raigned in his stead: from whence the lesser Asia was called Gog; even as afterward Croesus enlarging the boundes of his Kingdome unto Syria, a certaine towne nigh Libanus was called Gygarta, for that which is Gog karta, that is, the City of Gog: for in the time that Ezechiel prophecied, eyther Halyartes or Croesus, both the nephewes of Gyge, raigned in Asia minor. Neither is it a new thing that the countre is should be signified by their chiefe Princes: especially in the scriptures, which de∣clare that every nation toke their names from hence at the first. Yet this perhaps hath place, rather in the first Princes, then in their successours, al∣beit that these also gave names to the countreies. But it was sufficient for the Prophet to note the nation by the name of her first stock, which at that time bare rule in the same place, howsoever perhaps that countrey was not so called every where. These things doo make this sense very pro∣bable. Yet notwithstanding seing Ezechiel, with whom, this place (being wholly taken from thence) doth wel agree, maketh this Gog the chiefe Prince of Meshech and Tubal, in chap. 38.3. that is, of the Capadocians and Iberians of Asia, as Iosephus teacheth lib. 1. chap. 6. of the Antiq. Neither was any of the posterity of Gyge, no not Croesus who raigned last and farthest, ever Prince of these countreies, whose dominion was limited by the River Halys, as Herodote relateth in Clio, ther is perhaps an other
reason of this name. Which seemeth to be such, that Gog is not an usuall name of any nation, but a name made of Magog, that both it may note the great union of both peoples, and also that Gog doth spring frō Ma∣gog. For Magog is the chiefe name of one of the sonnes of Iaphet, who are reckoned to be Gomer, and Magog, and Maday, and Javan, &c. Gen. 10.2. And Gog is made therof by taking away the first syllable, that wee may know him to be a brāch of the same stocke. But the countreys which Ezechiel attributeth unto him, were not subiect at that time to any such Prince, but at length they were to be under the power of some such, at which time that Prophecy should be performed: from which that Gog going out with violence as from the lifts, should make his first assault for the subduing of the other countreyes. As though he should say: behold I come against thee, o people, having thyne ofspring from Magog: but who abidest in the countreyes of Meshech and Tubal. By which he noteth out most fitly the Turks in their first originall. For these are Scythians by birth, who dwelled by the North side of the mount Caucase, as Zonaras writeth in the 3. tom. ad Constant. Pogonatum. VVho after that they were called into Persia against the Saracenes, at length forsaking the Per∣sians, brought under their power the Babylonians, & almost the whole East, Armenia, Iberia, Cappadocia. Therfore the Scythian nation is the Turk, at length made Lord of Meshech & Tubal, of the Cappadocians, & Iberians. In which places he was at quiet until the Divel being loosed, a∣bout the 130. yeere did seduce this natiō, & provoked them to make opē warre to the Church. For Andronicus Palaeologus being Emperour, he slew the Romane army in Paphlagonia, not leaving one alive: which gate being opened unto him, he passed through, even unto Sangarium, and made all the provinces from the sea Poncus and Galatia, even unto the sea of Lycia and Caria, and to the river Eurymedon, to be of his iurisdicti¦on▪ see Niceph. Greg. lib. 5. Byzant. Hist. From hence was the begin∣ning of al miseries; Ottoman rising by and by after, by whom now for a long time hath the calamity of our world bin spred. So then was Gog se∣duced, Prince onely of Meshech and Tubal, when first he began to goe on with rage, but to whom now all Asia the lesse, Syria, Mesopotamia, Ara∣bia, Iudea, Palestina, Aegypt, the Ilands, Graecia, Macedonia, Thracia, & c, obey. Al which Provinces, after this tyrāny increased, do com in that ful largenesse under the name of Gog in the Prophet. But thou wilt say, what alliance hath Gog with Magog, if we grant him to be a Scythian by his stocke? A most nigh, both of kindred and nature. For Magog is a Scythian, and the Prince of that nation, as Iosephus declareth in his first
book and 5. chap. Magog, saith he, was the authour of the Magogites, named of his name, which are called Scythians by the Greeks. But Sibyll descri∣bing his countreyes, seemeth to prophecy another thing: woe woe be to thee ô land of Gog and Magog, compassed with the rivers of the Aethiopians. VVhi∣ther then is Magog between the Rivers of Aethiopia? But we know that these Southerne peoples are bordering on the sea, and that this name a∣greeth not to any natiō neerer the North then Aegypt, which sometime is called Aethiopia, as Eustatius on Dionysius declareth. And without doubt this is that Aethiopia which Sibyll meaneth, which iustly she attributed to Magog. For who knoweth not that colonies of the Cereases Scithyās wer brought into Aegygt? where ther is also a town of their name? And also Ezechiel reckoneth the Persians, Aethiopians, and Putei in the army of Gog, chap. 38 5. Therfore Sibyll describeth not Magog by his proper countrey, but by a colonie sent which shee chiefly maketh mention off, because the calamity of Magog should most of all rest upon that part of the earth. But let it be granted that Magog is a Scythian, how hath the Divell deceived him? In provoking him to ioyne his battels with the Tur¦kes, and togither to attempt the destruction of Christians. When first by the streights of the Caspian sea, new troupes of Scythians had broken by force into the nigher Asia, about the yeere 1250. Iohannes Duca being Emperour at Nice, they were troblesome to the Turkes their kinsmen, who a few ages before came into those countreyes, whom they drove out of the contreyes beyond Euphrates, into those streights of Armenia the lesser, and Cappadocia, wherof we spake even now; so as they were con∣strained necessarily to crave peace of the Roman Emperour, wherby they might resist the inrodes of the Scythians, pursuing them at their backes. And this was the state of things, until the time limited came, wherin the Divell should be loosed from his bondes. But then being let goe out of his prison, he brake off this strife between these two, and made one agree¦ment of their minds, for to abolish the Christian name. Since that time the aide of the Scythians their countreymen hath never bin wanting to the Turk; in whose strength at this day he trusteth greatly, as we see in the late expeditions into Hungary, where he had great armyes of the Tarta∣rians, who ar the natural Scythians, the ofspring of Magog: Therfore the society of Gog and Magog against the saincts, is evident in these dayes: whō not kindred & affinity of a cōmon stock, but onely fraud & deceit of the Divell associated. Such then is the army of the Turks & Scythians, both indeed of the same originall: but of both, these are called Gog, be∣cause they are descendded from Magog, evē as a river from the fountaine,
although now they be the princes of this warfarre, neither retaine they a∣ny thing now of the Scythians, because of their long sciourning in Asia, but onely some footsteps of the former name. But these partly newly come from Scythia, partly the inhabitants at this day, but called into these coū¦treyes, as necessity requireth, delight yet in the name of their first Prince. The number of this army is almost infinite: for it is as the sand of the Sea, that is, exceeding great and innumerable, being defined before to be of two thousand hundred thousand, in chap. 9.16. in both places is signified an huge multitude. But what Emperour but the Turk, goeth to battell with so po¦pulous an army? Scarce all the Christian armies ioyned togither in any expedition, doo equalize the fourth part of it. 9. They went up therfore into the plame of the earth: In the former verse wee spak of a threfold ēdevour of this mustered army: the first of which is this going up into the plaine of the earth; wherby is signifyed the same thing which was expressed before by the third part of men killed, chap. 9.15. But this so expresse mention of the latitude, declareth that this tyranny shal overspred much more in breadth then in length. For Aegypt being subdued, & a great part of Africk, and toward the North, even to the borders of the Tartari¦ans; this their Empire extēdeth no lesse it selfe frō the South unto the Sep∣temtrion, yea farr more, then was once belōging to the Empire of Rome. From the East to the West, they have scarce attained any more then the third part. Moreover they have had so easy and ready a conquest hitherto, that iustly they may be said to go up upon the breadth, who have brought under their power many countreyes, rather by travelling over them, then wearying them with any long and doubtful warre. ¶ And they compassed the tents of the Saints: The second endevour is the assaulting of the tēts, in which the Saints dwel. Whose tent is our Europe; which after the truth restored, the cruel Turk doth hold besieged on the East and South parth these three hundred yeeres. For the Saincts are yet in campe under their tents, and shal not have an end of the warrefare till before that the mariage be come: at the solemnization wherof, they shal cast off their souldiers cassocke, and shal put on more ioyful garments, meet for so great mirth. ¶ And the beloved City: The third endevour, so farre as which, hath pro¦ceeded the repetition of the former Prophecy. This third is altogither to come. For howsoever the holy city was above granted to the Gentiles to be troden under foote a thousand two hundred three score dayes, chap. 11.2. and the same againe was renewed (after that time was past) in the CHVRCHES, which in these last times are reformed according to
the rule of the divine truth; yet it is not to be doubted off, but that the be∣loved city is for excellency sake, that multitude of the beleeving Iewes, who now at length shal shortly be ioyned to the company of the true be∣leevers in Christ. The iudgment that followeth, doth require it should be so, wherby the Turk endevouring to conquere this city, shal upon a sudden be overwhelmed. But where and when this siege shall happen, may be gathered from those things which have bin spoken before. The place shalbe Hartsebhi, the mountaine of beauty, the Oriental armagedon, the very land of Iudea. So Daniel chap. 11.45. and elegantly Ezechiell chap. 38.8. After many dayes thou shalt be visited. For in the latter yeeres thou shalt come into the land that is come home safe from the sword, and is gathered out of many peoples, thou shalt invade the mountaines of Israel, which have long bin wast: with it being brought out of the peoples, all shal dwel safe. The time shalbe at the end of a thousand three hundred thirty five yeeres, of which Daniel speaketh in chap. 12.12. when the houre, day, moneth, and yeere of the Turks tyranny shal come out, to weet, at the yeere a thousand sixe hun∣dred ninetith more or lesse. But of these things now briefly, perhaps oc∣casion shalbe given at an other time to declare them more at large. ¶ But fire came down from God: The last destruction followeth, and first, of the army, in this verse; which God by some extraordinary way, shal de¦stroy utterly. For from heaven he shal powre out his wrath upon the ar∣myes of the Turkes; as before chap. 16.21. and more largely in Ezechiel chap. 38.18.19. &c. 10 And the Divill that deceived them: The Emperour himselfe the Turk not onely in respect of his owne person, but also of the whole state & suc∣cession of his Empire. For ther shal not be any more, either Emperour or name of Turke. But the word Divil is used by a figurat if kind of speach of the principal cause, for the instrumental: which is very significant in this place, shewing that not onely this one enemy the Turk shalbe destroi∣ed, but that no opē enemy shall arise ever after. For the Divell, by whose labour they are raysed up, shal not be thrust into prison againe for some time, but for ever he shalbe cast into the lake of fire, never to goe out for to raise up any such new troubles. ¶ Where was also that Beast and that false Prophet: Therfore all ar in a like condition, which are punished with the like punishment. The name of Christian maketh no difference between the Turke and the Roman Anti¦christ, unlesse perhaps for to encrease his punishment, for asmuch as he had a greater meanes of truth and grace. But observe, that the Beast & the False Prophet were already destroied, as also their destruction hath bin
declared before, to whom at length that Divell is added, a partaker of the same punishment. ¶ And they shalbe tormented: The vulgarlatine translation omitteth the copulative coniunction, and ioyneth the verbe, shalbe tormented, next with Beast and False Prophet: but amisse, considering tha it is no lesse necessary to understand that the common punishment of them all shalbe eternall, then that the punishment shalbe one and the same. 11 Then I saw a great white throne: Thus farre concerning the destruction of the enemies; the happines followeth, which the Church shall enioy after all these stormes are driven away. The first part of it is, the gathering togi∣ther of the Saints, in the rest of this chapter. Which gathering is represen∣ted by the resurrection of the dead, and the iudgement given touching them. For, by the most learned mens leave, I doo think that this resurrection, common∣ly beleeved, so farre as I see, of all men, to be that last resurrection of the bodies of all men, who since the death of the first Adam doo sleepe in the graves, perteineth to no other thing, then to the full restoring of the Iew∣ish nation. Not that I desire to set a broach new opinions, & profer them to the world, or because it delighteth mee to goe against the consent of al men, (I hope that such proud & impudent rashnes is farr from mee; and God is my witnes how I detest that itching desire of searching out & for∣ging new errours, through a loathing of auncient truth,) but onely be∣cause the whole order of things, & the merveilous consent of the rest of the scriptures doo compell mee to follow this interpretatiō. Which thing I have thought good to relate in a few words, that it may appeare to all men by what meanes I am brought into this opinion: that if they shall have any weight for the truth, wee may gaine the knowledge of a thing not sufficiētly known before: but if they shal not be firme and sound, they may be thrust through by the censures of the godly; and I my self at lēgth may be freed from this errour, of what sorte soever it be. First therfore, when I diligently weighed those things, which in the next chapter follow∣ing are rehearsed to be after this resurrection, I saw that they agreed by no meanes to the heavēs properly so called, but to have place onely on earth. Of which sorte are that this holy city commeth down from God out of heaven: that shee is a spouse prepared onely, and adorned for her husband, not yet givē: that the hope of reward is put off unto the time to come: ver. 7. that one of the seven An¦gels sheweth her to John, ver. 10. of which sorte of ministery, ther shall be none in heaven. The very name also of which Angel being but heard, see∣ing that he is one of those seven which ar appointed chiefe actours in the last plagues, ch. 15. may declare within what bounds we ar conversant.
VVhither also shal the Apostles make the foundation of the wall of the holy city in heaven, when Christ delivereth up the Kingdome to his Father? Or whi∣ther shall the Kings of the earth bring their glory to the Church in heaven? Or shal any thing redound from hence to the health of the nations? These things there∣fore, and many other of the like sorte, considering that they shalbe after this resurrection, drove mee to another interpretation, and chiefly to that which the natural force of the words manifested. For I remembred, that the calling of the Iewes openly and often in the scriptures, is called the re∣surrection of the dead, as in Paul, for if the casting away be the reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving be but life from the dead? that is, as Oecumenius saith, among other interpretations, what shal the receiving of them be, but tha wee say, that he quickeneth them being dead in sinnes which receiveth: to weet God. VVell and agreably to the Apostles mind, iudging that the very receiving of the Iewes should be life from the dead. Most learned Theod. Beza so interpreteth, as if the Apostle should say after a proverbial manner of spea¦king, that it shal come to passe, that when the Iewes shall come to the Gospel, the world shalbe as it were revived, by an argument of things cō∣pared. But I forbeare to heape togither interpretations. The very words of the Apostle are plaine ynough of themselves. The second place is out of Isay chap. 26.19. Thy dead men shal live againe, my dead bodies shal rise a∣gaine: awake ye that dwell in the dust, for thy dew is as the dew of hearbes, and the earth shall cast out the dead. In the former chapters the Prophet hath fore∣shewed the desolation of the whole earth: severally of certaine nations, from the twelft chapter, and of al togither in the chap. 24. But seeing this renewing of the Iewes which he speaketh of, shalbe after that Babylon is overthrowne, and the same such, as wherby the Lord will swallow up death into victory, and wipe away teares from all faces, as chap. 25.8. it must needes be that this ful restoring is yet looked for to be fulfilled, and not to be e∣steemed past in those smaller deliverances, which came to this people lōg agoe. Especially considering that ther is a more expresse noting of the time in those things which follow next, where the Lord saith, that in that day he shall visit Leviathan, that long and crooked SERIENT, and the DRA∣GON which is in the Sea, in Isaiah chapter 27. ver. 1. by which words he signifyeth not the Babylonian, (for he was farre remooved from the sea) but without all doubt the Turke, whom likeweise our holy Apostle Iohn agreably unto it, calleth a SERPENT and DRAGON. This, is worthy¦ly called a long SERPENT, the boundes and limites of his Empire being spread and extended so farre abroad: and no lesse instly said to be crooked, if an doo consider well the Provinces of his Iurisdiction.
For we may consider the knob head to be in Greece, Macedonie, Thracia and the other nations of Europe; his some what stretched out body to be in Asia the lesse, called at this day Anatolie: afterward his belly bowed & going in circuit by Syria & Phoenicia: as Dionysius writeth most elegant∣ly of the Gulfe Issicus: As a Dragon cruell in lookes is wrapped about round cree∣ping, slowe. Last of all his tayle following with a long train through Aegypt, and the coast of Lybia, and gathering it selfe as it were into a circle. This Serpent goeth not with straite passes, but bowing himselfe into many crooked circuits, thrusteth forward his very body. Who is he that behol∣ding this Empire, not so much stretching it selfe in length, as going for∣ward with a crooked winding, may not perceive the lively image of the crooked serpent? It is not my purpose to hunt after vaine subtilties, but to bring onely the truth, as farr as I see, that figure of the Serpent, which the Spirit hath represented to us. There is added the habitation of this serpent to be in the Sea, for which cause he is called Leviathan or Whale. How wonderfully doth this agree to the Turk, who hath fixed the seate of his Empire in the very mouth of the Sea Pontus and Propontide; to weet Cō¦stantinople? Therfore when God shal call to an account this Serpent & Le∣viathan, that is, when he shal utterly abolish the Turkish name, then shall this resurrection be. For the Prophet ioyned togither these two things, say∣ing, thy dead shall live againe, and at that time the Lord shal visit Leviathan with his most sharpe sword: the next chapter beginning by an opposition of the time, in which he will bestow that benefit, which he mentioned in the end of the former. So Iohn in this place next after the destruction of the Turks, addeth this resurrection. The third place is in the 37. chap. of Eze¦chiel, where, what other thing are the dry bones, the slaine, and the graves, thē the Iewes afflicted and overwhelmed with all kind of miseries and calami∣ties? Who should have no greater ability to deliver themselves from that ruine, than have the dead and buried to rise out of their graves. And what other thing are the sinewes, flesh, skinne, Spirit, than a future restoring at length? Which shalbe no lesse acceptable an wel come, as almost is a new life of a sleep in the graves. Behold, saith the Lord Iehovah, I will open your gra¦ves, and draw you out of your sepulchres, my people, and bring you backe into the lād of Israell: that you may know, that J am the Lord, when I doo open your graves, & bring you out of your sepulchres, ô my people, ver. 12.13. To what end should they be brought againe into the land of Israel after the last resurrection? our dwelling place shal then be in heaven, not in earth. Moreover, that resurrection which Ezechiel speaketh of, shalbe by degrees, and by little and little, ver. 8.9.10. But the general resurrection shalbe in a moment, in
the twinckling of an eye, 1 Cor. 15.52. Furthermore these bones are the whole house of Israell, ver. 11. and now shalbe the uniting togither of Iudah & E∣phraim, which those two peeces of wood ioyned togither into one doo declare. Which things belong properly to the Israelites, neither also past, but to come, as that happines sheweth, which is mentioned in the ende of the chapter, greater then any, that the dayes past can chaleng. But how doth that agree, that togither with this resurrection, is conioyned the cō¦quering of Gog and Magog, chap. 38. and 39? unles that here the resur∣rection goeth before; in Iohn in this place, it followeth, the cause wherof wee will shew by and by. Neither doo I doubt, but Daniel hath meant the same thing by those many of them that sleepe in the dust of the earth awoking, some to everlasting life, some to shame and perpetual contempt, chap. 12.23. For many are not all: but this word seemeth to have bin used of set purpose, that a difference might be set between the generall and this resurrection. He attributeth also the chiefe honour to them that teach and iustify others, not so much for labours past in their life time, as for their present travell and industry. For they that teach, saith he, shall shine, not they which taught long a goe. None of which things, wee know, shalbe after the resurrecti∣on. For brevity sake I will not examine, how that of Hosea 13, 14. belō∣geth also to this. Seeing therfore the scriptures doo so freely use so expres a similitude of the resurrection, to signify the restoring of the Iewes, ney∣ther doo wee find a thing of so great moment else where fully declared in this book; wee hope that wee doo no violence to the truth, if that we shal ioyne this place unto the meaning of other the like. But some man wil say that wee have made mention of this calling in the former chapter: it is true, but that of the sixt viall was but begun, not perfit and absolute, as that of the last viall shall be, whē all the enemies shalbe destroyed. VVhich distinction of calling the former words doo manifest, when in that first, Iohn was commanded to write, blessed are they which are called to the marriage supper of the Lambe, chap. 19.9. VVherby it is taught that the first was not perfit, where need was of such confirmation: the office wherof is to seale up a thing not yet sufficiently known, and to come; which, all being called had bin superfluous. But Daniel writeth most plainly, who hath distin∣guished both the callings by their times. He setteth the first at the ende of a thousand two hundred ninetie daies. The second at the ende of a thousand three hundred and five. The distance between both is of fourty five dayes, that is of so many yeeres, as in an other place with Gods helpe wee will shew. Dan. 12.11.12. VVee shall see likeweise in Ezechiel in the place before spoken off, that the dry bones being covered with flesh and skinne, did
move themselves alike, and approach one to an other. Moreover, after some time, during which they were destitute of Spirit, at length being quickened by the same, doo live a true life, and doo performe all those offices of life peculiar unto bodies endued with soules. That approaching of the dry bo∣nes, is that first calling of the former chapter. The comming to of the Spirit, giving to those bones perfit life, is the latter calling, this resurrection to which nothing shalbe wanting unto perfit salvation. Both which, though Ezechiel comprehendeth in the same chapter, yet he handleth the more distinctly afterward. For first, before that warre with Gog and Magog, he mentioneth the resurrection, as also Iohn that which was begun in the for¦mer chapter: afterward when Gog was destroyed, he describeth a most glorious building of the temple in the 40. chapter &c. which is this secōd and full resurrection. Therfore the first resurrection of the Iewes, (of the Iewes I say, for the first resurrection of this chapter ver. 5. is of the Gen∣tiles, into which notwithstanding shal fall at length this first of the Iewes, that every way it may be the first,) shalbe by and by after the destruction of Rome. The second shalbe straite after the Romish Pope and the Turke be destroyed. This resurrection is a power to enter into the temple, which the smooke did hinder to all untill all the seven last plagues were accomplished, ch, 15. the which is spent in destroing the Pope of Rome and the Turke, as was spoken sufficiently before. If I seeme to any, to weaken the gneral re¦surrection, by taking so notable a foundation from it, let him understand that it taketh no dammage from hence. This place hath yet left a most strong ground to confirme the same. For the Spirit doth not deceiv with a fained similitude, but of which ought to be a most certen persuasion a∣mong Christians. Otherweise certenly he had lost his labour, if he had brought any thing lacking credit. Moreover he should have driven to def¦peration, in propounding that which must not be done: for they would have thought, that even so they had bin past hope: but using a tipe of a thing that should most certēly come to passe in his time, he both maketh the calling undoubted, and also declareth the manner, wherby at length the resurrection shalbe accomplished. And thus much of the true sense of this argument: now we wil prosecute the rest, ¶ Then I saw a great white throne: The preparation of God the iudge, set∣ting his people at liberty, taken from a similitude of the general resurre∣ction. For the power and mercy of God shalbe no lesse cleare in the mo∣lifying of men hardened by so long a revolting, and in bestowing salvatiō upon them so past recovery, then at length shal appeare in raising out rot∣en bodies out of the graves. The throne therfore is white, most pure, most
gratious, most comfortable, in the very forme having a demonstration of mercy. Great, to declare the most imperial maiesty of God, which now shalbe made evident in this assembly of his people: he sitteth also upon a thro¦ne, ready to iudge, because ther shalbe no more any delay of rewarding: the stay wherof before brought men into that opinion, as if God regar∣ded not the earth: there fled from the face of him that sitteth on the throne, both earth and heaven: a great alteration of al things being made, both the false Church plucked up by the rootes, and also the true augmented with so great fruitfulnes, that her former sorrowful face may seem to have fled a∣way. 12 And J saw the dead both smal and great: Such then was the iudgment: now at described those that shalbe iudged. These smal and great ar Iewes, who before hated the faith, and were spent with such calamities, that they might seeme to differ nothing from the dead. Now al of them shal ap∣peare before God, every one to undergo the iudgement, either of life or death. For now it shalbe made manifest who ar elect, and who reprobate. They which yet shal resist the truth obstinatly, shalbe numbred amōg the last sheepe. No remedy shalbe used afterward, wherby their stubburne minds may be subdued. But why saith he small and great? Whit her in the last resurrection, according to the maner wherof, al things are here ap∣plyed, shal every one appeare in that stature, in which they departed this life? For this cause some have affirmed too rashly, that every one shal rise againe in that talnesse, in which Adam was created. Which opinion, both resisteth evidently this place, and also taketh away the truth of the resto∣red body, if ther shal not be that iust stature, in which they dyed. ¶ And the books were opened: The forme of iudging, by books opened, which are the consciences endued with the true light of Gods wil, & with a lively feeling of all their actions. These shal now openly manifest to all men, them in whom there is a syncere minde given of God, and in whom lay hid hitherto the seed of election. ¶ Then an other book: Of Gods decree and election: these things ar spo¦ken after the manner of men, considering that it is our manner for the helpe of our memory, to recorde in books things done, and in iudgmēts to give sentence according to the truth of them. Therfore election is no new thing, neither dooth it depend on our pleasure, but is founded on the eternal decree of God. ¶ And the dead wer iudged &c. After or according to those things which wer writtē in the books, as once in the return frō Babylōs captivity, they wer removed frō their place & office, whose genealogie was not found. Nehem. 7, 61.64.65.
The Gospel is in truth savoury to no man, neither doth any man give his name to it from his heart, but he who is written in the book of life; and in the booke of his heart, hath a writing answering the same word for word. 13 And the Sea gave up her dead: The way wherby they that are to be iudged, are presented before the iudgement seate: to weet, the Iewes wer gathered from all the corners of the earth: as in the generall resurrection nothing shal hinder, by what kinde of death soever any hath perished, but that a body shalbe restored to him. Yet notwithstanding when as the Sea signifyeth corrupt and false doctrine, by this also is noted, that those Iewes which live in Christian countreyes, of which sort are very many in Spaine, France, Germany, Italy, as it were in the bosome and compasse of the Popish sea, of which we have spoken so many things before, shal o∣pen their eyes to acknowledg the truth, and shal fly togither at the light thereof. ¶ Death ulso and hell gave up: A Synecdoche of the general; as though he should say, and al that have dyed of any other death. It must needs be that the karkeise be drowned in the sea, or be covered with earth, or rot in the aire, or be consumed of the fire, or devoured of beasts, or some like thing. As touching the drowning, he said before, the sea; as touching the grave, now he saith hell: Death conteineth all the rest. But seeing death re∣storeth those Iewes, which live in the Christian landes, and are infected with the Romish superstition, death and hell shal restore them that shall live among Turkes and Heathen, who are banished further off from sal∣vation, and are conversant in the inner parts of hell it selfe. For so are al those nations of whom the name of Christ is either hated, or not heard. Neverthelesse it maketh no matter whither a man perish by sea, or land, either among Christians, or among the enemies of this name. 14 But hell and death: A special execution on death. Therfore as after the general resurrection no death shal raigne any more in the world, be∣sides that eternal, which shal alwayes feed up, and not consume the wic∣ked, so after the Church shalbe restored by that full calling of the Iewes, death and the grave shal raigne no more in her, as of old while as scourges they alwayes lay upon the shoulders of the offenders, but onely they shal serve to translate the elect into the Kingdome of heaven, whereupō they shall loose their former name. They are cast into a lake of fre, not because either death or hell susteyne any person, but because that which is pro∣per to men, is attributed to them, as though he should say, there shalbe no torment any more eyther of death or hel, but in the lake of fire, where
the reprobate dye for ever. But from hence observe, that seing hel is cast into the lake of fyre, that is into hell properly so caled, that it obtaineth an other proper signification, then that which commonly is given to it in our mothers tongue. It is takē of many for the place of the damned, but commonly it noteth not any thing but the grave, and the common state of the dead, as may be learned from this and other places of this booke. 15 And whosoever was not found: None shalbe gathered into this Church, but he that shalbe of the elect. How excellent is this preheminence of the Church, which shal not be defiled with any hypocrites and counterfait Christians as before time? How faire is this field, which shall abounde with most fruitful corne? without any tares and darnel? Whatsoever is found in this nette may be laied up in a safe vessel. Therfore it cannot be declared in words how amiable this most glorious spouse shalbe. It may come to passe that some may fall some time through humane infirmitie, but holy admonitions, and wholsome correction shal bring them againe to good thrift and repentance. But shal every one of the Iewes be such? Some shal not embrace the truth, as is manifest from Daniel, many arising to shame and perpetual contempt, chap. 12.2. And we shal learne from the chapter folowing that some doggs shalbe excluded without this city. But they which now shal refuse the truth, shal shew forth a manifest token of their reprobatiō, that the Church shal not be subiect to be deceived any more. Wherfore in this renewing the goodnesse and power of God shalbe most famous through the whole world. VVhich shal restore wretched men so wonderfully, and make so singular choise of them, whom he wil redeem. But see how the godly shal receive comfort from hence. For wheras eve∣ry most holy man might iustly tremble through conscience of their sinns, against this feare we have here a notable confirmation, that election by Christ setteth us free from guilt. CHAP. 21. AFTER I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven, and the first earth were passed away; and the sea was no more extant. 2 And J Iohn saw the holy city the new Ierusalem come down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride trimmed for her husband. 3 And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, behold the tabernacle of God is among men, and he wil dwel with them, and they shallbe his people, and God him∣selfe shalbe with them, their God. 4 And God shal wipe all teares from their eyes: and death shalbe no more, neither
neither sorow, neither crying, neither shal ther be any more paine, because the for∣mer things are past. 5 And he that sate upon the throne said, behold J make all things new. And he said unto me write: for these words are true and faithfull. 6 And he said unto mee, it is done▪ J am Alpha and Omega, the beginning & the ende: I wil give to him that is a thirst of the well of the waters of life freely. 7 He that overcometh shall inherite all things, and I will be his God, and he shalbe my sonne. 8 But the fearfull and unbeleeving, and abominable, and murtherers, & whore mongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all lyars, shall have their part in the lake, which burneth with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. 9 And ther came to mee one of the seven Angels, which had the seven vials, ful of the seven last plagues, and he spake unto mee, saying, come I will shewe thee the Lambes wife. 10 And he caried mee away in the Spirit, in a great and high mountaine, and shewed mee that great city, that holy Hierusalem descending out of heaven frō God: having the glory of God. 11 And her brightnes was like unto a stone most pretious, as a Iasper stone shi∣ning as Crystal. 12 It had beside a great wall and hie, having twelve gates, & at the gates twelve Angels, and names written, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the childrē of Israell 13 On the East part there were three gates: on the North side three gates: on the Southside three gates: & on the Westside three gates. 14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, in which were the names of the Lambes twelve Apostles. 15 And he that spake with mee, had a golden reed for to measure the citie with∣all, and the gates therof, and the wall therof. 16 And the city lay foure square, whose length is as large as the breadth of it: & the length, and the bredth, and the hight of it are equall 17 And he measured the wall therof, a hundreth fourty & foure cubits, by the mea¦sure of man, that is, of the Angel. And the building of it was of Iasper. 18 And the city was pure golde, like unto cleare glasse. And the foundations of the wal of the city were garnished with all manner of pretious stones. 19 The first foundation was of Iasper: the second of a Saphyr: the third a Chalce∣donie: the fourth an Emerande: the fift a Sardonix 20 The sixt a Sardius: the seventh a Chrysolite: the eight a Beryll: the ninth a Topaze: the tenth a Chrysopra¦sus: the eleventh a Jacynth: the twelft an Amethyst. 21 And the twelve gates were twelve Pearles, & every gate is of one Pearle, & the street of the city is pure
gold, as shining glasse. 22 Neither saw I any temple therin: for the Lord God al∣mighty, and the Lambe are the temple of it. 23 And this city hath no need of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to shine in it: for the glory of God doth light it, and the Lambe is the light of it. 24 And the Nations which are saved shall walke in the light of it: and the Kings of the earth shal bring their glory and honour unto it. 25 And the gates of it shall not be shut by day: for there shalbe no night there. 26 And the glory and honour of the Gentils shalbe brought unto it. 27 And ther shal enter into it no uncleane thing, neither whatsoever worketh abo¦mination or lyes: but they which are written in the lambes book of life. Analysis. HITHERTO hath bin the maner of gathering the Church; afterward is de¦clared what shalbe the condition of it being gathered. Which is shew∣ed to be most happy; first generally from the things seen; a new heavē & earth, ver. 1. & the holy city ver. 2. & also from things heard, partly in common, tou¦ching the presence of God with men ver. 3. Of the removing of calami∣ties ver. 4. & a new restoring of al things, ver. 5. partly in private concer∣ning the certainty of the Prophecy ver. 5. of the mystery now fulfilled, v. 6. and the rewarding both of the godly, ver. 6.7. and also of the ungod∣ly ver. 8. And such is the generall declaration. The particular relateth the revealing cause, an Angel ver. 9. & 10. And the thing revealed, universally, ver. 10.11. By parts, in respect of the wall and city, and essentiall parts, as the forme of the wall ver. 12.13.14. The forme of the city ver. 15.16.17 Afterward of the common matter ver 18. Speciall of the wall ver. 19.20.21 Speciall of the city ver. 21. The externe arguments by which the glory of this city is set forth, is first, God himself, who is both the temple ver. 22. and the light of the city ver. 23. Secondly, the Gentiles, which shal bring their glory to it ver. 24 both free from all feare and suspicion ver. 25. & also from any defiling by contagion ver. 27. Thirdly a mervailous aboundance of things necessary, & the continuance of this glory in the chap. following. Scholions. 1 After J saw a new heauen: The opinion of the resurrection from the ende of the former chapter, hath mooved very many to interpret al these things of the Church as it shalbe at length in heaven. But wee have shewed, that neither the last resurrection is intreated of there, neithe doth the Spirit describe here to us the Angelical blessednesse of the Saincts af∣ter this life, but of them yet conversing upon the earth, as the thinges which are mentioned doo manifest in their places.
Neither perhaps is it needfull that the heavenly inheritance should be a∣dorned with words, which all know wel ynough to surmount any praises whatsoever, even they also, in whose eyes the Church on earth is other∣weise despised: but concerning this, her estimation is lesse with mortall men then ought to be, because shee is a stranger: wherupon ther may hav bin a necessary reason to set forth more largely the glory and dignity of it. The descriptron wherof notwithstanding, maketh a way to compre∣hende in minde that celestial happinesse. For if the magnificence of the spouse be so great on earth, of what sort are those things, which God hath prepared for his with himselfe? But the mind is weakened at the thin∣king of this, let us therfore turne our eyes aside to this earthly pleasant∣nes, greater indeed then all words can set forth, yet more capable to our senses, and which within a few yeeres shalbe made clare to the world. The interpretation of the new heaven and earth may be taken out of that to the Hebrewes chap. 12.26. whose voice then shooke the earth; but now hath de¦clared saying, yet once more will I shake not onely the earth, but the heaven: where to shake heaven and earth, by the interpretation of the Apostle himselfe, is to abolish the old manner of worship and people. For heaven by trās¦lation is the temple, and whole legal worship, wherof that temple was the seate and place where it abode long, as Heb. 8.5. From whence to shake heaven, is to abolish that worship. The earth are men, and more properly the Israelites, a people to whom that legal worship did belong. Therfore to shake the earth, is to shake the Israelites, & to remove them out of their place. Neither hath the common use of speaking through this book digressed any whit from this signification of the words, where heaven is the more pure Church, the earth, the degenerate citizens, as we have seen in their places. Even as God therfore in the first comming of his sonne shooke the heaven and the earth in reiecting that old both wor¦ship and people, and ordaining and choosing a new, so againe when it shal please him to have mercy on the forsaken nation, and to bestow upō it salvation by Christ, he shal darken the former glory of heaven & earth, making the dignity and honour of his new people so famous, as if he had created all things a new. Vherunto belongeth that of Isaiah: For behold I will create a new heaven, and a new earth, as thoug he should say, I will ap∣point a most pure manner of worshiping mee, and wil take unto mee a new people, in whose assembly I wilbe honoured, chap. 65.17. Of which sort is that of the Apostle, If any be in Christ, he is a new creature, old things ar passed away, all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. ¶ For the first heaven and earth were passed away: Shal the Church then faile
utterly among the Gentiles? For heaven noteth out more pure godlinesse as we said even now. How this should be abolished, it may be doubtfull because of those things which wee have mentioned before. As concerning the earth, it is not so doubtfull, considering that the Spirit hath already taught sufficiētly that the Pope of Rome with his whole (falsely so called) Catholique flock, shalbe rooted out utterly before this day. As then tou∣ching the reformed Church, shal the receiving of the Iewes, cause the alie∣nation of the Gentils, as before time the casting away of them, was the re¦conciling of the world? Rom. 11.15. It may seem so in deed, especially considering that the Apostle affirmeth in the same place, that a certain ful¦nesse of the Gentils shalbe accomplished, as is like at the calling of the Iewes ver. 25. but yet notwithstanding in this very chapter, the Revelation teacheth otherweise, to weet, that the Gentils, which shalbe saved, shall walke in the light of it, and the Kings of the earth shal bring their glory and honour to the new Ierusalem, ver. 24. Yea Paul in the place before said, plainly avoucheth, that the Church shalbe very flourishing amōg the Gentils, when the Iewes are called: For, saith he, if the casting away of the Iewes, be the reconciling of the world, what shall the reconciling be, but life from the dead? This is as if he should say, what shall the receiving be, but as it were a general resurrection, wherby they that are dead in sinns among all nati∣ons, comming at length to the truth, shalbe made partakers of eternall life by faith in Christ? From which wee gather that the fulnesse of the Gē∣tils is not a certaine ende of beleeving, at the calling of the Iewes, so that faith among the Gentiles afterward should utterly perish, (evē as no more can be powred into a full vessell,) but a more aboundant accesse of all na∣tions of the earth toward what part soever their countreyes doo extend, obeying the Kingdome of Christ, according to that saying: the Lord shal∣be King over the whole earth: in that day shall ther be one Lord, and his name shal∣be one, Zach. 14.9. And the Lord will destroy in this mountaine the figure of this vaile that is spred upon all nations, and the cover wherwith all nations are covered. he will swallow up death it selfe into victory, and the Lord Iehovah shal wipe away the tears from all faces, and will take away the reproach of his people out of all the earth, Isaiah chap. 25.7.8. For then they that dwell in the wildernesse shall kneele be∣fore him, and his enemies shall licke the dust. The Kings of the Ocean sea and of the Ilands shall bring presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall bring gifts: Finally, all Kings shall worship him, and all nations shall serve him, Psal. 72.9.10.11. How then in this celebrating shall the new heaven passe away, that is, the more pure Church among the Gentils? Must we distinguish concerning the Gē¦tils, wherof some are yet strangers from Christ, othersome are named
Christians now by the space of many ages, as we of Europe first of all? Shal they come to the Chuch, as the Prophecies even now aladged de∣clare, and many others agreeing with them? Shal these depart and fall a∣way, as the vision seemeth to shew, which these words doo set forth? The fist heaven, saith he, passed away. What other heaven is then among , according to the sense of this Prophecy, then among us of Europe for the most part? Certainly the promise made to the Chuch of Philadelphia in∣creaseth the suspition, to weet that it should be a pillar in the temple of God, ne∣ver to be cast forth, chap. 3, 12. Why is this attributed as proper and pecu∣liar to it, if all the rest enioy the same benefit alike? It seemeth therfore, that as once the unfruitfull fig tree was cut up, and the ill husbanded vineyard be∣ing taken from the old farmers was let out to other, Luke 13.6. Mat. 21.41. So the Church now a long time evill entreated among them of Europe, doo purpose to trusse up bag and baggage, and to forsake them at length, who have long since forsaken the purity and love of it. What though now it be called heaven?, the heaven themselves are impure in the eyes of our God, Iob. 15, 15. And the more in deed at this time our heaven, which rather en∣ioyeth such nam in respect of the Popish infernal gulfe, thā for any heavē¦ly clearenesse of his own. But that seemeth to be repugnant to this calami¦ty of Europe, that after the first resurrection, there are a thousand yeeres of reigne with Christ, chap. 20.6. that is, ther shalbe among those nations, to whō this resurrection hath befallen, a continuance of the truth by the space of so many yeeres from the beginning of the restauration therof. But wee know that this was proper to our countreyes. But it may be answered, that perhaps this reigne shalbe such as was that of the thousand yeeres before that resurrection, when the Divell was bound, chap. 20.4. when the Kingdome was of a few elect, in whose hart was the love of the onely salvation-bringing truth, howsoever the Antichristian impiety savoured better to all the rest of the multitude. Certenly other scriptures seeme to leane more this way, threatning that al religion shalbe so defiled, with so many corruptions, that fearce any wholesome footstep of it shall remaine entire. And who is so ignorant of things, that hath not iust causes inough to feare much, especially when he seeth the word of God to be despised every where, new errours to spring up daily, old to be brought back again from hell, al godlinesse to be converted into gaine and ambition? Many indeed are the arguments that the glory of God wil depart from us short∣ly, as once from the temple at Ierusalem, Ezech. 9.3. Vnlesse peradven∣ture some comfort ariseth from hence, that this departure of the first heavē and earth may be understood not of the utter decay of the truth among
the Europeans, but of such a renewing among the Iewes, in comparison of the excellency wherof, whatsoever was excellent before, may be said to have passed and vanished away; when the light of the moone shalbe as the light of the sunne, and the light of the Sunne sevenfold, as the light of seven dayes, & the Sunne shall blush when the Lord shall reigne in Sion: as wee have heard out of I∣saiah; or finally unlesse it hath some weight, that the Spirit here speaketh so exquisitely, not saying the former heaven and former earth were passed away, but the first heaven and the first earth, as though these words respe∣cted not the Gentiles at all, but onely the legall worship, which rightly one may call the first heaven, ordained at the first of God himselfe. But the Christian people of the Gentils, was neither the first people of God, neither were the rites observed by them, the first ordinances delivered frō heaven. As though the words should give this sense at last, albeit this peo¦ple of the Iewes al the time of their reiection, thirsted after their old cere∣monies and worship, and boasted openly that they should have at length free leave to use their auncient custome, (which we know they vaunt of e∣ven in these dayes,) yet in this restoring, they shall conforme themselves wholly to the will of God in such sorte, that willingly renouncing their old ordinances, which then they shall acknowledge to have received an ende in Christ, they shal make manifest to all men, that the first heaven and earth, which they looked for in vaine were passed away for ever. This last see∣meth to be of no small force, to shewe that the reason of the order of the first heaven and earth should not be between the Gētils and Iewes, but one∣ly among the Legal and Christian Iewes. The care that I have hath made mee to search out all corners to my power; now let the iudgement be in the power of the Christian reader, which of these is the beast. ¶ And there shalbe no more sea: The sea is degenerat and corrupt doctrine, which shall have no place among this new people, whose glassie sea shal∣be like Chrystal, most pure, most cleare, void of al saltnesse, and muddy grossenesse, as is that in chapter 4.6. Which also is said in respect of the Iewes themselves, and those errours which in these daies they deffend so obstinately; there is not a comparison of the Gentils with the Iewes handled in this place. The Gentile sea, that I may so say, and thath grosser was consumed already, when the Popish nation was destroyed: the purer sea of the reformed Church is of glasse, chap. 15.2. and shall not be abolished. The Iewes even hitherto have their own sea, most grosse, most foul with many forged tales touching the Messias, the legal worship, the righteousnes of the law, and many other points of salvatiō: al which shal now be so dryed up, that not a drop of the former sea shal remaine.
2 And I John sawe the holy City; In such weise then was seen the new hea∣ven and earth: now the holy city is exhibited, which is so called for excellē∣cy sake. The Church also of the Gentils is that new, and heavenly Hieru∣salem, as in the Apostle; but ye are come to mount Sion, and to the City of the li∣ving God, the heavenly Hierusalem, and to the company of innumerable Angels, Heb. 12. and Gal. 4 But our Hierusalem being deformed with many er∣rours and contentions shal cause that this most pure shal appeare altogi∣ther new. Aretas, the Compl. & the Kings Bible doo omitt the name Iohn, & reed thus, and I saw the holy City, the new Hierusalem. ¶ Coming down from God: Thefore this Hierusalem shall have her seate on earth, the heavenly shal never come down, but shal remaine fixed in heaven, where Christ sitteth in glory at the right hand of the Father; I goe, saith he, to prepare a place for you, and when J shall have gone, and prepared a place for you, I will come againe, and take you unto my selfe, that where I shalbe, there you may be also, Iohn 14.3. And againe, Father J will that those which thou hast given mee, be with mee, where I am, Iohn 17.24. Wee shalbe caught up in the cloudes, to meete the Lord in the atre, and so shalbe with the Lord, 1 Thess. 4.17. And to what ende should Hierusalē come downe from heaven, which by and by after the general resurrection al the elect shalbe in the heavens? Peradventure, wilt thou say, it might come down, that Iohn might see it. If it had come downe for this cause, Iohn should rather have been caught up into heaven to behold it, then that shee should be let downe to the earth. He was commanded before to come up into heavē, where through the dore opened, he saw the forme of the militant Church, chap. 4. how much more now should he have gone up, that he might behold the same triumphing? Therfore these words doe manifestly distinguish the new Hie¦rusalem pilgrim, from the inlandish. Albeit that be called also heavenly, because in very truth it is such, both by birth, and also by the right of the inheritance; as Paul saith, For that Hierusalem which is from above, Gal. 4.26. It cometh downe therfore from God, because his singular power and mercy shall appear in building up this new city. The increase of the whole building shalbe so swift, and the glory and dignity so great, that all with one consent shall acknowledge the hand of God, and shall declare him to be the onely artificer. ¶ Trimmed as a bride: To be presented to her husband: not yet hither∣to given by a marriage accomplished. After the last resurrection the mar∣riage shalbe accomplished, it shal not be a preparing for time to come. This bride was adorned with pure fine linnen, and the Iustifications of the Saincts, chap. 19.7.8. But observe that the city seen ere while, is now cal∣led
the bride, and more plainly after ver. 9. Come, saith the Angel. I will shew thee the bride the Lambes wife. Therfore this city is the whole multitu∣de of the faithfull, the most sweet and straight communion of all which a∣mong themselves, the Spirit declareth very well by such a forme of city. The members of the body are used sometime to the same end, but the si∣militude of a city setreth before our eyes a certaine more lively image There is a greater variety of things in a city, and a further difference of du¦ties, which yet are ioyned togither and conteined with the same law, and respect one chiefe good of all: This therfore notably representeth how the faithfull most differing in function, office, and course of life, doo grow unto one Holy body. 3 And I heard a great voice from heaven saying &c. He commeth to that part of the glory which is declared by the things heard. The Tabernacle properly belonged to the Iewes, and old worship: from whence here it signifyeth the whole divine worship of that people, to which before the tabernacle was peculiar. Togither also it sheweth, that the manifestatiō of Gods glory, shal not yet be perfit, such as the Saincts shal enioy after the last iudgment. But howsoever it shalbe farre more aboundant, then never before, yet men shall see God as through a glasse, and riddle, not face to face: they shall know in part onely, not as they are known, 1 Cor. 13.12. A taberna∣cle is fit for the Church being in pilgrimage, not for that which hath got∣ten a firme seate in her owne countrey. ¶ And he shall dwell with them: and they shalbe his people: Then God him∣selfe shal take upon him the protection of the Saincts, according to the forme of the covenant, Gen. 17.1. then the Saincts shall submit them∣selves willingly to be governed of God. So Ieremy from whence these things are taken, expoundeth them; I will put my law in their minde, & write it in their harts, and I will be their God, and they shalbe my people, chap. 31.32. &c. 4 And God shall wipe: So is the presence of God: now foloweth that which concerneth the remooving of the calamities. The truth shal not be made to sorow againe, nor be oppressed with the tyranny, eyther of the Beast or Dragon, or any such like plague, but now being victour and con¦querour of all enemies; shall flourish. He borroweth these words out of Isay chap. 25.8. that we may know of what times the Spirit speaketh. I∣saiah in the same place speaketh of the felicity of the Christian Church of the Iewes on earth: as is evident from that vengeance, which God wil take in his time on the Moabites, ver. 10. For the hand of the Lord shall rest in this mount, and Moab shalbe threshed under him, even as straw is threshed for dunging.
He ioyneth togither both the singular goodnesse of God toward the Israe¦lites, and the final destruction of the Moabites. And the Spirit using that Prophecy in this place shewe, that it is not accōplished of old, but that at lenght it shalbe fulfilled when this restoring of the Iewes shal come. So Iohn & Isaiah give light one to another. ¶ And death shalbe no more: The greevousnesse of punishments shal cease; in which sense Isaiah saith: he will swallow up death into victory: chap. 25.8. and Hoseah, I will redeeme them from the power of the grave, I will deliver them from death: O death I wilbe thy death, O grave, I wilbe thy destruction, repentāce is hidden from myne eyes, chap. 13.14. Which place Paul applyeth to the last resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.55. as also the Spirit hath shewed by the same this renewing, chap. 20.12. And so indeed shalbe the ful overthrowing of death, when the bodies shal rise againe. But in the meane time in the felicity of the new people, ther shal be seen a patern of the great weake∣ning of the sam. Not because the separatiō of the soules & bodies shal thē cease, wherby the saints are translated into the Kingdome of heaven; but because the sting of death being quite taken away, it shal not serve to the scourging of the Church any more. ¶ Neither sorow, neyther crying, neither labour: These things declare how farre death shalbe taken away, to weet, in regard of punishment, not of de¦parting unto eternal life So also the ministers and sumners of it shalbe ta¦ken away. For what right have the servants, where their maister hath no authority? Most happy bride, which shal then be freed from such distur∣bers. A visible image of the blessed reigne in heaven, shalbe now with men on earth, ¶ For the first things are past: Peradventure having respect to the first cō∣dition of the Iewes troubleous times and ful of misery: because of Gods wrath provoked by their own often rebelliōs: as though he should say, ther shalbe no more place afterward for this stubburnesse: & therfore neither shall God be so angry as in former times. 5 And he that sate upon the throne said: The certenty of this renewing & happinesse is confirmed by an other testimony of great authority: It is of him that sitteth on the throne, that is, the most high and eternal God him∣selfe, who openly testifyeth, that he will make all things new, that is, that he wil so restore the doctrine, worship, people, and whole administration of things, that men may worthily counte them new. ¶ And he said unto mee, write: Iohn commeth now to those thinges which were spoken to him particularly. In that he is commaunded to write, it is as if it had bin said, this is determined and resolved with God,
and as it were registred in statute books, so as it cannot be altered: or doo thou put it into common writtings, that the faithful may have to shew, how they may call upon mee for right, see the chapter 19, at the 9. verse. The writing which is commanded is, that these words are true and faithfull, to be performed at length in their time, though the world mindes nothing lesse. 6 And he said to mee it is done: The second thing which was said to Iohn in private, concerning the Mystery accomplished, which shall have an end in the restoring of the Iewes. Which consummation is part of the seventh vial, the proper of which is, to finish the Mystery of God, as in the 16. chap. and 17. verse. For this it is done, is the same that is there. If this were af∣ter, it could not rightly have bin said there, it is done, to which some thing even then should be left, which had not yet obtained his ende. Wherfore seing that there some things are said to be done after the mystery finished which belong to this earthly life, it followeth that neither that former it is done is after the last iudgement, as hath bin observed in the 16. chapter 21. ver. neither this second is to be referred to any other thing but to this present life. Aretas and Montanus doo reade otherweise, And he said unto mee, J am made Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ende. The Com∣plutent edition and the Kings Bible doo reade thus, And he said unto mee' it is done, J am alpha and Omega. But Aretas and Montanus doo wrongful∣ly omit it is done, seing this belongeth to the explication of the seventh vi∣al, the chiefe point wherof concern the finishing of the mystery, which is not accomplished in destroying the enemies, of whom onely mention was made in the 16. chapter, and 17. verse &c. but in that last choise ac∣complished: to which it is done is attributed for this cause, namely by rea∣son that it is the last ende of all Prophecies. ¶ I am Alpha and Omega: I am the same, who both in the beginning hav decreed al these things to be done, & also now at length have put an ende to the same. ¶ J wil give to him that is a thirst: This is the reward of the godly, who are said to be thirsty, that is fervently desiring those things, as are all they who have a tast of heavenly good things. Blessed, saith Christ are they, which hunger & thirst after righteousnes, for they shalbe satisfied, Mat. 5.6. But then especially shal the Iewes thirst, who shal satisfy themselves with no desire, wherby they may perceive a more ful sweetnesse of Christ. Yet neverthe∣lesse even to these which shal burne with an exceeding great desire shallbe given of the well of water of life freely, that is, not for any merit of their desire (though amōg al the gifts givē to men it excelleth,) but of the free grace of God.
A notable place against the blasphemous doctrine of the Papists touching merit. The Iesuite laboureth to shift it off, making the same sense of it, as of that of the Rom, 8.18. The sufferings of this time are not worthy of the glory to come, which shalbe revealed in us: by which words, saith he, our good de∣serts ar not compared with the future blessednesse, but the sufferings, that is, the labours which we suffer for Gods sake: as though he should say, our sorowes cannot be compared with the joyes of the blessed: although the endurings of griefes, in as much as they come from grace, are worthy doubtlesse of eternal life. Consider the fraude of the Iesuite, who having nothing to answer to this place, flyeth to an other, from whence some shew of an answer might be taken. But that I may not now examine that of the Romanes, why telleth he us of sorowes and af lictions not to be compared with the ioyes of the blessed, of which nothing at al is spo∣ken in this place? Here teares, death, sorow, crying, all labour is banished away, before in ver. 4. so as nothing is more unmeet as to dreame of such a comparison. For in these words it is shewed that not onely the sorowes of this life are inferiour to the ioyes of the blessed, but also that the thirst, hunger, and most fervent desire of godlinesse, than which nothing can be of greater esteeme in a man, doo not obtaine life by their merit, but by the meere grace & mercy of God. Neither is that of the fained Ambrose lesse frivolous, and also of Thomas, and Rupert, who wil have the word freely therfore to be said, because although eternall life be due to the merits of the righteous condignly, yet the merits themselves could not have bin merits without grace, which was given freely. For if they would rather have spoken with the Holy Ghost, then from their owne perverse braines, they would never have said, that any grace is given to men, by whose helpe they might doo workes worthy of eternal life, when here it is said expressely, that the re∣ward of the most excellent workes is alto gither freely bestowed, and not condignly. 7 He that overcometh shall inherit all things: For none shal attaine to this happinesse, but he which shall behave himselfe valiantly in that battell, with the Dragon, of which in the former chapter. Yee therfore ô Iewes, shew your selves men; It shalbe a terrible warre, if ever at any other time, Dan. 12.1. Yet notwithstanding feare not, neither fainte in your mindes. The victory is sure, and after the victory eternall ioy. 8 But to the fearfull and unbeleeving; The reward of the wicked; which first are called fearfull, fearing them which kill the body; and denying Christ before mē, Mat. 10.28.33. desiring to save their life, but in very truth loosing it, Mat. 16.25. Of which sort peradventure there shalbe some, in respect of the great∣nesse
of the danger, when the Turk the Dragon shal threaten most cruell destruction to them that professe Christ. Vnbeleevers are they, which shall refuse the truth openly. For every one shal not be converted; but it see∣meth that some by the iust iudgement of God shal remaine in their for∣mer stubburnesse, as we have observed before out of Daniel. Abominable, are men of desperate naughtinesse, and impudently wicked, whom al mē every where detest. Aretas and Montanus doo reade before abominable, the word sinners, as also the Cōplutent edition and the Kings Bible. But these sinners are alone with abominable; men notably wicked and desperate. But why is ther mention of Idolaters, when al the Iewes generally doo hate Idols. It may be that some have turned away to the Romish impiety, although this be a rare thing: ioint also that Rome before this time shall be destroyed. Therfore these things may be understood of the Gentiles, as also al other kinds of sinnes which have bin reckoned hitherto, who cleaving to their Idols shal have no part in this holy city; of wich in the meane time al the godly shalbe freedenizens, whersoever they shal live. Lyars also are excluded, that is, such as reioyce in lying, as hypocrites, dis∣semblers, and they who make some shew of religion, having no tast ther∣of n their hart. Observe how with those horrible sinnes he mixeth some lesser, in the common opinion: that no man should deceive himselfe, by supposing that if he refraine himselfe from those greater, he may followe the smaller without danger of punishment. But the thing is nothing so, he that continueth in the least without repentance, must know that a pla∣ce is prepared for him in the lake of fire: hither shalbe thrust al this com∣pany, and they who are of the same condition. Not because al the wic∣ked shal descend presently at that time into hel: but because they shalbe convinced and condemned by the sentence of the holy Church, which is as if God should pronounce it from heaven, and should strait way drawe the condemned unto torment. 9 Then came to mee one of the seaven Angels: Hitherto the generall declara∣tion; the particular followeth. And first by whose helpe this thing is to be manifested: this is one of the seven Angels, of which wee heard in the chap. 15. and as it seemeth the last, who was to poure out his vial into the aire. Frō which it is evident that this new Hierusalem is within that time, wherin the vials are powred out: for which cause there is so exact a repeating of his office, that he is one of those seven Angels, which have those seven vials, full of the seven last plagues, least any in wandring rashly should passe over the boundes that are set. ¶ Come I will shew thee the bride: Did not Iohn see it before, ver. 2. But
there through a windowe and somewhat confusedly, but now more di∣stinctly and clearly. The first shew of the newe descending Hierusalē shall seeme faire; but after that it shal have abode on earth somewhile, then it shalbe seene farre more noble. For we gather from the former thinges, that these words doo shew the event; as also that, which the Angel invi∣teth for to behold: whence we learne, from the analogie of those things, which hav bin said before, that some holy man by published writing shal manifest to al the faithful rhe most divine maiesty & celestial glory of this Church. But we see these things yet a farr off and darkly, the day at lēgth shal make this thing most cleare. 10 And he tooke mee up by the Spirit into a great and hie mountaine: He entreh into the description of the city, more fully then before: yet notwithstan∣sting shorter in these two verses. Therfore that Iohn might throughly knowe the bride, he is taken up into a hie and lofty mountaine. The first condemnation of the whore was seen in the wildernesse, chap. 17.3. but the glory of the bride shalbe revealed in a hie mountaine, in the eyes and light of the whole world. This mountaine seemeth to be that which Isa∣iah speaketh of; In the last times the mountaine of the house of the Lord shalbe set in the top of other mountaines, and exalted above the hilles, that all nations may flow unto it, chap. 2.2. VVorthily is this mountaine called great and hie, which is set in the highest toppe and height of other mountaines. Therfore what¦soever excelleth in dignity on earth, the excellency of this Church shall passe it. In this mountaine shalbe seen the beauty of this city; as if her ci∣tyzens dwelling within the walles should pereeive most plainly her reve∣rend and divine worthines, which cannot be so manifest to them that dw∣el farther off in remote countreyes. And many Iohns, that is, godly and holy men, leaving their places of abode shal flee unto this mountaine, not that being superstitious they may visit holy places, but that face to face they may behold the glory of the Lord; and enioy being present the glad∣nesse of the saints. For can any thing be more longed for, then to be con∣versant with them, which shal worship Christ most purely and most holi∣ly according to his ordinance alone and with most fervent affections? It shalbe certenly an excellent patterne of our felowship with the holy An∣gels. But it is sufficient to touch these things in a word, least I may seeme to some men to delight my selfe with a sweet dreame. But let us observe, that if these things should be spoken of the saints countrey after the last iudgement, no Olypus would be high ynough to shewe it manifestly. 11 And he shewed mee that great city: This city is great and most ful of ci∣tizens: hitherto it hath bin alwayes contained within a smal number of
men; now first of al called great, her boundes being inlarged, and increa∣sed with a ful multitude. It shalbe farre more glorious in this respect, se∣ing that the more common good surmounteth it selfe. But beside these shee is holy, and commeth downe out of heaven from God. Of which things we have seen before, This is a new thing, that shee is adorned with the glory of God, that is, that shee hath the presence of God manifested in her by a cer¦taine glorious beauty, as it is declared in those things that follow. To this ende the temple before was filled with smoke, after the old manner of ap∣pearing in the tabernacle and temple, but now there shalbe an other way. God shal give a more cleare shew of his maiesty, then ever before this ti∣me, either with the Iewes, or Christian Gentils. Moreover also it hath a light which is like to a stone most pretious &c. What is this light? Not any brightnesse with which the city shineth by her owne purity, (although of it selfe it shalbe most beautiful,) but a light which is conveyed into it from an other. For so Phoster signifieth, to weet, such a thing as sendeth forth light from it selfe, as the Sunne. Moone, Starres, candle, torch & the like. Therfore the Grecians translate these wrds of Gen. 1, 16. tous duo Phosteras tous megalous, those two great lights: And also Paul, Phainesthe hos Phosteres, shine yee as starres, Phil. 2.15. Therfore the Phoster of the ci∣ty is that which giveth light to the city, the which light shee draweth frō an other, and hath it not naturally. From whence then is it ministred? From the very glory of God, for these thinges depend on the next before going, as though he should say; I sawe the City having the glory of God, which glory of God being the light of it, was like a stone most pretious, &c. which interpretation is affoarded by the 23 verse after, where the of∣fice of lighting the city is given to the glory of GOD. But why is this light like to a stone most pretious, and not rather like to the Sunne, or Starres? Because perhaps the light of the Sunne doth burne, and blindeth the eyes, rather more agreable with an overthwart looking upon it, then a direct. The shinning of the stone is altogither harmelesse, very much grateful and pleasant; yee the more that one loo∣keth upon it, the more agreable it is; in which respect it representeth most excellently the pleasantnesse of the divine knowledge. For the nature of this, is to recreate and cherish the fainting soule, e∣ven with the onely sight of her beauty; but yet much more, if any with a serious contemplation, doth fixe the eyes of his minde upon her. The light and glorious brightnesse of al other thing, as of the Moone and of the Starres, is overwhelmed by the bright-shining beames of a greater light.
The brightnesse of a stone compareth with the sunne, neither is dimini∣shed, but increased by the beame therof; even as there is not any glory so great that can darken the glorious maiesty of God. The things which are lightsome with us, as torches, lampes, candles, alwayes stand in need of some matter, wherwith fire is kept burning, otherweise they would be turned by and by into darkenesse: the sparkling brightnesse of a stone is naturaly ingendred in it, which hath no need of any outward helpe, but shineth alway by his owne flame, so as it representeth before our eyes the eternal light of the most High God, in this respect also. But the Kind of stone is also expressed. For it is like a Iasper stone cleare as Chrystall. The Iasper is a most noble Iewel, both for antiquity and for variety. The like∣nesse to cleare shining Chrystal, describeth a certain kind of it, which shi∣neth through most purely, darkened with no colour. Therfore the Iasper like Chrystal, is that kind of Iasper which is commonly called Aerizula, resembling the most cleare ayre. Here it noteth the most excellent glory of God shining in this city, which no spot of earthly filthinesse doo make darke, as it is wont to come to passe, where any humane invention is pat∣ched to Gods ordinances. 12 Jt had beside a wall: Now he expoundeth the matter particularly, & first the things which belong to the forme of the wall, which is great and hie; that is, long, broad, and hie, firme on every part. The description wherof had bin superfluous, if it should belong to the heavenly city to be expected after the last iudgemēt: which al know wel inough to be set free from al danger. But the celestial Hierusalem on earth which we have seen tossed with very many stormes, from her first beginning even unto this day, hath had need of this defence and fortification of walles; least any should feare the same thing touching this city, which he knoweth to hav happened to the same in former times. But this forme hitherto belōgeth to the whole wall. The parts are the gates and foundations. The gates ar notable for their number: the watch, the names written upon them in this verse; then for their most cōmodious situation in the thirteenth verse, which al ar so described, that they may declare a most ready way into this city, which no impediment shal hinder. Hereunto first of al the twelve gates have respect, that an entrance be prepared for every tribe apart, to to the ende that it may be more free and ready. For the same purpose are the twelve Angels being the watch, who doo waite at the gates to open them, and to let in the commers in without delay. What other thing al∣so meane the names written, then to teach, how every one should go on directly, and not loose any time about seeking an entrance.
13 On the East part there were three gates. The situation of the gates is most commodious; not all for one quarter, but equal for every one; that a way might be opened on every side: & every one might go in directly without being hindred by any crooked turning about. Ezechiel hādling the same matter noteth every gate by name: but he beginneth at the North, on which side he setteth the gates of Reuben, Iuda, and Levi. On the East side of Ioseph, Beniamin & Dan. On the South of Simeon, Jssachar, Zebulon. On the West of Gad, Asher, Naphthaly, chap. 48.30. & c, The Iewes in the East and North part shal first stirre up themselves, and make hast to goe into this holy city, as hath bin shewed before chap. 16.12 by Euphrates dryed, that the way of the Kings of the East might be prepared. And as Daniel teacheth, speaking of the iourney undertaken into this city. But rumours saith he, shal trouble him from the East and from the North. That is, when the Easterne & Northerne Iewes are raised up, the Turke shalbe greatly trou∣bled, after he hath received newes of that thing. Therfore because the first iourney shall be undertaken from these countreyes, the gates of them are put first; and those without difference, Iohn attributing the first place to them in the East part, Ezechiel to them in the North, because both shal prepare themselves equally to this expedition. The Southerne Iewes shall follow these, our in the West shalbe last. 14 And the wall of the city had twelve foundations: Thus farre the gates: the foundations are described both by the number & also by the names. In number they are twelve, which are laid under the wall: the wall I say, not the city, for they are the foundations of ministery, not of salvation. There is one onely foundation hereof, Iesus Christ-alone: Other foundation cā no man lay beside that which is laid, which is Iesus Christ, 1 Cor. 3.11. The A∣postles may be called the foundations of ministery, yet not the principall, but instrumental, of which they are not the authours, but the first stones. For the foundation is not laid of it selfe, but of the maister builder. Christ laied these first in the bottome of the wall, in which respect they are called foundations. So Ezra is called the foundation of the comming up out of Babylō, because he was the Prince of that second company, which came up togi, ther with him, Ezra 7.9. But how are ther twelve foundations of one wal-wherof ther is wont to be but one? To weet, because any one stone is not layed through the whole length and bredth, but there are twelve layed e∣qually, one by an other long wayes and broad, the same order bein still re¦newed, until the building be brought to his ful perfection. No one Apo∣stle is here for a foundation; but al in equal place and office doo lie in the bottome. That unhappy and wicked boasting shalbe farre from hence:
Thou art Peter, and upon this rocke, that is, (as they wil have it who never saw this wall, neither have they any safegarde from thence,) upon this the Peter I will build my Church: this madnesse of building up the wall upō such one foundation onely, hath greatly troubled the Church of the Gentils, and at length wil make her wholly destitute of al wall. ¶ In which were the names of tht Lambes twelve Apostles: So as neverthe∣lesse that by these names ar understood not onely those twelve, which wer conversant with Christ on earth, but al the faithful Pastors, which shal ex∣ecute the like office in the Church. They were so called before, chap. 18.20. For there is a most straight communion of the faithfull, by reason wherof the proper names of some are applyed to others; but especially to them who beside the common bond, have also an other fellowship of office. But if the Apostles be the foundations, this is not that eternall city in the heavens. For Christ then shal deliver up the Kingdome to his Father, and God shalbe all in all, 1 Cor. 15.24. Neither shal the Saints have any ministery of teaching there, 1 Cor. 15.8. Therfore this wall belongeth to the Church being a stranger on earth, not unto that reigning in heavē. 15 Moreover he that spake with mee: Hitherto the forme of the wall, frō the continued quantity: there followeth of the city; the forme wherof he delivereth, both the continued, and the severed, togither; and first univer¦sally as touching the minister, and instrument, and the things to be mea∣sured, in this verse. The Minister is the same which spake with Iohn, the seventh Angel of those to whom were given the vials, ver. 9. Whose la∣bour biddeth us to seeke this city, before the last iudgement. And some excellent man seemeth to be noted by this Angel; who as a second Zoro∣babel, Ezra, or Nehemiah: shall appoint, from God, this most excellent policie, and shal describe most exactly every part of the holy city. The mea∣sure is a golden reede, shewing that the description of the whole frame shall∣be farre most pretious. The thing to be measured is the city, gates, wall, that is, the whole building. No part shalbe neglected, but every one, both most diligently assigned, and most wisely builded. In the Hierusalē of the Gentils, when the Beast began to appeare, the temple onely was measured, the description of the city was forbidden, and also of the out∣ward court; but this Angel wil measure both the city and gates and walls, and shal recal the whole government of the Church unto the exact rule of Gods will. 16 And the city lay foure squarre: Now he sheweth the forme of the ci∣ty, such as the continued kind of it giveth. It is foure squarre, & so great in length as in breadth. This city therfore shalbe most stable, so prepared
against al alteration, that her foundation be alwayes stable. There is an o¦ther consideration of this, then was of our Ierusalem, which lay hid amōg us Gentils for a thousand two hundred threescore yeeres: which had also a fouresquare figure, but of unequal sides, as we have shewed at the seven chapter, having in length twelve times a thousand, but in breadth onely twelve thousand. Of both which consisted that whole number of an hun∣dreth and foure and fourty thousand of them that were sealed. For there was some multitude of the godly at that time in lenght of continuance: but the Church did flourish in no breadth and present aboundance in any age, by al that intervalle. But in this city it shal come to passe otherweise It shal∣be made famous no lesse for the great multitude of the faithful, through every present age, as for a most happy propagation of a long time. ¶ And he measured the city with a reede twelve thousand furlongs: Such then is the forme of the continued quantity: now followeth of that which is se¦vered: and first of the city, whose dimension is about twelve thousand fur∣longs: which, it is doubtful, whither they belong to the whole plat of ground, or onely to the compas. There is nothing, that can be determi∣ned certenly and distinctly touching this thing. If we say the first, it is a huge city, every side of which shalbe an hundred and nine furlongs, and more, lacking a very little of the old Babylō, which conteined a hundred and twenty furlongs in every side, as Herodotus in Clio sheweth. But if the compas alone receiveth this measure, there was never any city to be compared with this in greatnesse, every side wherof shalbe three thousād furlongs in lenght, and the whole plat of ground nine times tenne hun∣dred thousand. The Complutent edition, whom Montanus and Plantins Bible follow, reade these things otherweise, thus, about twelve furlongs of twelve thousand, that is as I suppose, about twelve times twelve thousand furlongs, as if the whole largenesse were so many furlongs, as many as wer sealed of every tribe, ch. 7. to weet, an hūdred fourty & foure thousād furlongs. Which agreemēt causeth to doubt that this reading is the truer, both be∣cause it declareth the great similitude of this & the old Church of the Gētils, & also because it retaineth the proportion of the wal, in ver. follow∣ing. By this meane the city is made of the mutual increase of the cityzens & ministers, as the wal of the nūber of the ministers multiplyed in it selfe: for 12 tims 12 thousād, of which that multiplying signifieth the ministers, this to be multiplyed, the citizēs, do mak this nūber; whose side shal be of 379 furlōgs & above. But here it may be asked, why Iohn maketh this city much larger thē Ezech. seing it is the same in both. For he rehearseth the measure of ech side 4500 cubits, ch. 48.30, that is 12 furlongs onely and some what more:
Iohn which reading soever we folow, whether we esteeme the measure of the circuit, or the plat of ground, assigned a farre greater magnitude. Ezechiel was a minister of the Law, Iohn of the Gospel: from whence ari∣seth a difference of amplenesse according to the allowed portion of light, which alwayes was greater, the nigher men approached to the times of Christ. Wherfore the Temple of Salomon was built with lager dimensi∣ons, then the Tabernacle: and the Temple of Ezechiel, with farre greater than that of Salomon: but this ciry of Iohn with a great deale larger than of Ezechiel. For after Christs comming there came a very great light, ac∣cording to which increase of knowledge, ther is used an answerable ma∣gnificence of the building. ¶ And the length, and bredth, and height of it are equall: Even now we said, that the length is continuance of time: the bredth the present face of eve∣ry time, which shalbe no lesse faire and beautiful, then that glory of con∣tinuation. Now first mention is made of height: which serveth to betokē and excellent glory of this city, to be extolled by the speach and praises of al men. Things are set on high by commendations; wherby, as it is much used in common speach, they are lifted up to heaven. Therfore this ci∣ty shalbe no lesse famous among al, then durable in time, & alwayes flou∣rishing in a great multitude of citizens. For this city is solid, not superfi∣ciary, proportionable, & foure squarre on every part, which consisteth of al her measures, and al of them equal. It is perfect every way, to which nothing can be added. The former wanted solidity, whose bredth more∣over was so narrow, that it could scarce be seen. What marveile therfore, if they were shaken with every tempest? This more firme shal stande with so great strength on every side, that it cannot feare any stormes 17 And he measured the wall of it: Such then is the forme of the city. The quantity of the wall a part is of an hundred fourty foure cubits. Frō whēce is this number? From the nūber of the Apostles, multiplied in it selfe: for twelve times twelve doo make this number. VVherfore the Apostles, and the Ministere of the word who are propagated from them, shal compasse the holy city round about, and shal keepe it safe from al invasion of the enemy, and from al the fraud and deceit of Heretiques. But this measu∣ring is onely the height; that of the length may be known well ynough be¦ing shewed by the measure of the city: which the wal compassing the same doth exceed, because of the territories. ¶ The measure of a man, which is of the Angell: As though he should say Though the Ministers shal make this description with their cubite, yet they shal doo nothing at their owne pleasure, but as the Angels of God,
shal respect Gods wil in al things, and shal follow the same most happilye having the Spirit for their guide; but what should the measure of a man doo in heaven? observe therfore what city he describeth unto us. 18 And the building of the wall was: Thus farre of the forme: now he speaketh of the matter; and first iointly of the matter of the wall, & togi∣ther of the city. The frame of the wall is of Iasper. This stone both lyeth in the foundation, and is used chiefly in the rest of the building: perhaps because endomesis in greeke, is the stuffing of the wall, filling up the space between the fronts; that it may signify, the frame to be no lesse pretious within then without: the stopping which the word noteth, seemeth to si∣gnify some such thing: or rather seing procumation is also a pile or dam laid for to repell and breake the waves, the building is chiefly made of Iasper, because those teachers, which are signifyed by this gemme, shal endure the chiefe violence, and first assault of the adversaries, being in stead of a fortresse to the rest. ¶ But the city it selfe was pure gold: The matter in summe of the city, is pure golde, which the fire consumeth not, but maketh it more bright; neither weareth away with use, neither is defiled by the rust, neither is overcome, either by the juices of salt or vineger, which doo overcome other things. Plinie giveth those praises to gold. Why should not this city be perpetu∣al, which is made of matter so invincible, and is free from all corruption? But beside it is like to cleare glasse, that is, not loathsome to looke on by the deformity of any filth, even in the most secret corner. So wholly clear it shineth through, that in it and through it, every one may beholde the most favourable face of God. For hereunto tendeth this shining cleare∣nesse, that God himselfe may be considered and seen through it, whom as strangers on earth, we behold through a glasse, and riddle, 1 Cor. 13.12. Therfore this city is not, (as at this day Rome the whore,) gilded with golde wholly without, and within full of filthinesse, and al manner of cor¦ruption: but it hath exceeding great purity and holinesse ioyned with ve∣ry great dignity, and maiesty. Which marchandise, the more rare it is, the more glorious it shal at length be. 19 20 And the foundation of the wall of the city: He commeth to declare the foundations of the wall one after an other: in describing wherof he re¦steth not in the very lowest ground sellings; but teacheth that the matter of the whole frame is farre most pretious: as altogether consisting of most noble pearles, neither is it any thing inferiour to that most divine forme, of which wee heard before. I am not ignorant how greatly the Interpre∣ters labour in applying every one of these to the auncient Apostles; which
difficulty this so exquisite order increaseth, considering that there is not any certain order of the Apostles kept, eyther in the Ghospels, or in the Actes; but sometime one Apostle, sometime another, is reckened first; frō whence it becometh altogither uncertaine, what stone may be answera∣ble to which. But it seemeth that the Holy Ghost intendeth another thing in this place; not purposing to describe unto us the first twelve Apostles, but the future teachers of the Iewes Church: who carry the names of the Apostles, whom they shall succeed both in office and fellowship of re∣wards, as before in the 14. verse, and in chap, 18.20. All faithful teachers are the Apostles ofspring, as also the former verse taught, which made the greatnes of the wall, of the number of twelve multiplyed in it selfe. It is certain that the excellency of gifts, by which the teachers doo excell abov the rest, are signified here by most pretious earthly things; by which more over it is taught, both in what reckening they are with God, and also in what estimation they ought to be with men. And it is no lesse certen that every one of these excellent vertues shined forth in the old Apostles long time past; but I thinke that the order belongeth properly to the future Teachers, which if we shal apply to those auncient ones, perhaps we shall erre greatly by attributing to every each one, that which is unfit. Where∣fore resting as much as in us lay, in the proper drift of this place, beside that excellency, which is common to all the pearles, we think that so ex∣act a reckening doth perteine to the order, in which at length these new preachers of the Ghospell shall arise; that even as the situation of the ga∣tes shewed the order of the countreyes, in which the Iewes shalbe conver∣ted to the truth: so this manner of stones so set in order, may signify the rising of the teachers in what order they shal rise up from every place. Al∣though there is this difference between the people and the teachers, that the people assemble by troupes in every side of the city, and therfore shall have three gates opened to them on every side; the Teachers being fewer, shall not gather togither by multitudes, but shalbe numbred man by mā according to the state of the places where God shal rise them up. Yet we may not think that these shalbe but twelve, but that there shalbe perhaps so many chiefe, to whom the other multitude shalbe wholly like. Let us see therfore where these Gemmes growe, and of what sort they are, that in some measure wee may coniecture of the originall and disposition of those excellent men, whom the divine bounteousnes wil give within these few yeeres. The first foundation is a Iasper, a divine stone, often representing, (as we have seen) the Image of God himselfe; worthily occupying the first
place, because he that shal beginne the first restoring of the Iewes, as an o∣ther Moses shal come most neere to God himselfe, by a singular excellen∣cy of gifts. The beginnings are most hard, and require men very greatly furnished. It is a Scythian and Persian Gemme, of a celestial brightnes, in which respect a certen kind of it is called Borea & Aerizusa, the beautie whereof can more easily be admired than declared: it hath a pleasantnesse¦ful of variety, which the most sharpe eyed can not distinguish. It may ther¦fore represent a mixt riches of gifts, wherein a manifold excellency is seen, yet it cannot be diserned, which most of all excelleth, in which respect it fi∣gureth the Godhead as in chap. 9.3. in that so mixt fairenesse should si∣gnify in some measure that incomprehensible depth. The Saphyre gliste∣reth with golden points, in great account among the Medes, which shew∣eth a certen & distinct kind of delectablenesse, such as shal be in the next teachers after the first, whom the excellency of some singular gift shall make famous. A Chalcedonie, is of a simple colour, like to a Carbuncle, shining with a fiery brightnesse: it is a Northern Iewell; found about the narrow sea of Chalcedon beaond Chrysopolis, night to the rockes called Symplegades, from whence it hath the name; this betokeneth zeale & fer∣vency. The most noble Emeraude groweth in Scythia, it is of a most plea∣sant green, neither doth any thing more delight the eyes. But seeing here inward graces are more regarded, then outward, this greennesse is a most divine knowledge of things, upon which the minde desireth to fasten the eyes before all things: It is set after the Chalcedone, that knowledge may accompany zeale. The fift foundation is a Sardonix, which is an Indian Iewel, shining like the naile of a man set upon flesh: it sheweth a certen kinde of humanitie, having whitenesse mixed with rednesse. The Sardius is found in Sardes, it is wholly redde with bloody colour: it may betoken a certen severity, profitably ioyned with the Sardonix, least perhaps gentlenesse should be despised without this companiō. And these sixt first stones are belonging to the East and North: which doo shew a happy encrease of Teachers from these regions: which wee see how it agreeth with the former thinges, when the first people shall be revived out of these same countreyes. The seaventh foundation is a Chrysolite, which shineth through with a golden colour: It is a Iewell ful of dignity and maiesty. AETHIOPIA bringeth forth the same. PLINIVS affirmeth that the Beryll is found in INDIA: DIONYSIVS in his book intituled Perieg, saith that it groweth also in the land of BABYLON, of a skie and water colour,
as the same describeth, the skie coloured stone of the wet Beryll, which groweth in the field of Babylon. The watery colour belongeth to lenity and humili∣ty; as is the water it selfe, which easily giveth place to every thing; a most fit companion of the maiesty of the Chrysolite, that it may containe it within measure. The ninth foundation is a Topaze; which with Plinie is a green Iewel, it is found among the Troglodites, which dwel by the redde sea. Dionysius saith that it is found in india, or the stone of the bright Topaze shining with a skie colour, writing of India. But it is not of a simple and pure greennes, but yellowish and glistering like gold. From whence Eustachius attributeth unto it a golden colour, chrusoeides, yellow, saith he, sendeth forth a golden colour, which he borrowed out of Strabo, in whō are many things touching this stone, in his 16. book. Some from hence coniecture, that it tooke the name from the Hebrew word Pazaz, as though at the first it had bin to Paz, or in greek to Pazion, and at length by the ignorance of the printers to have grown togither, and made one word topazion. The Chry∣soprsus also, as the name sheweth, doth resemble a certaine kind of Gold, but as it were be smeared with the iuice of leekes. The eleventh & twelfth foundation is the Iacynth & Amethyst, both of a purple colour, but the first shining more brightly, the second of a a more wanne and weake co∣lour, as Dionysius sheweth, and the sweet Amethyst shining as asaied purple: In∣dia and Aethiopia doo afford these two. Therfore these last sixe belong to the East and South. Our West part, as it seemeth, shal minister citizēs, even as other countreys, but shal give few, or no Iewels, for the building up of the wall. It may be that God wil so set forth his power the more, in raising up teachers from those places, which are most repugnant to his truth. The foure last gemmes are like gold and purple, which colours are of a very great price and dignity: which the Spirit seemeth to have put in the last places for a certain purpose, and that by a course twice doubled: as though he would teach by the same thing, that those teachers shal ne∣ver be loathed, but shal alwayes flourish in very great authority. At the first the truth is wont to be acceptable, and the ministers of it are iudged worthy of al honour; but in time the good wil of men waxeth cold, & thē the authority of the teachers decayeth, after that men beginne to be full. But here no such thing shal come to passe. The end shalbe answerable to the beginning. The dispensers of the word shalbe no lesse honourable, af∣ter the truth through many ages hath waxed olde, then when at the first it began. And for this cause, I thick, was so great a plenty of golden and purple colour put to the last place. I know that other doo seek out an a∣greement of other properties in these stones; but seeing authours varie
greatly about this, what is the proper force of every one, neither is the thing as yet sufficiently cleared: I had rather follow things that are plain and of a known signification; and also the congruency of the Prophecy, then loose my labour in doubtful things. So therfore that which Daniell hath comprehendeth briefly in one word, they that instruct shall shine as the brightnesse of the firmament, and they that iustify many shallbe as the starres for e∣ver and ever, chap. 12.3. the same we have here declared peculiarly and more at large by sundry kindes of Iewels. 21 And the twelve gates are: Hitherto hath bin the matter of the walls: The gates are made of pearles, which signify Christ, who is the way & doore to life: if any shall enter in by him, he shallbe saved, and he shall goe in and out, and finde pasture, Iohn 10.9. But how notably doo the pearles represente the Sonne of God conceived in the wombe of the virgin? which are not bred of any earthly copulation, but ingēdred of a celestial dew, as of a husbād. For they report that the shell fishes at a certain time of the yeere, with a certain gaping, after that they have drunke up a dewing from heaven, doo conceive, and become great with yong, and the more that they have bin tossed with great tempests, after the dew received, the more noble fruit doo they bring forth: so the Holy Ghost came upō Mary, and the power of the most high overshadowed her; and Christ scarce brought forth into the light, was sought for to be put to death, and by an horrible storme was driven into Aegypt. After the same manner the first entrance into this city shalbe very laborious, but of so much the more aboundant praise & account, after they have entred. There are twelve gates, but every one of one pearle, because there is but one Christ, and but one onely name given under heaven, by which we must be saved, Act. 4.12. ¶ And the street of the city was pure golde: In the last place he addeth the matter of the city: which before, he said was golde: but there he made mē¦tion of the whole city in general; here in special of the streets. These are the publik wayes, wherin the citizens doo meete, if one have ought to doo with an other. Even as therfore the wayes of man are the actions, in which man is occupied: so the streetes of the city, are those publike offices of life and buyings and sellings, in which the citizens doo take paines. The Spi∣rit saith that al these things shalbe holy, pure, cleane, pretious. For the place of assembling, where these businesses are handled, is pure gold, and shining through, as before ver. 18. How holy and unblameable shal this city be, where the common life, then which nothing is wont to be more foule and polluted, shalbe free from al filth of wickednes? Righteousnes now, as a river shall run through the streetes, and godlinesse shal shine in
all affaires. 22 Neither saw I any Temple in her: Hitherto we have seen the inward & essential glory of the city, as farre as is given us, who doo not behold frō a hie mountaine, but a farre off from a low and pressed down valley: wher hilles and trees doo much hinder our eyes, that we cānot yet see the thing cleerly. Yet it delighteth mee, as once Daniell to opē his window twards Hierusalem, so to looke from farr off into this holy city, whose cloudie, and blackish toppes to behold a farr off, it much recreateth my soule. Now the Spirit teacheth how great dignity shall come from things out∣ward. First God the Father and the Lambe his Sonne in stead of a Temple, that is, then shal the worship be most simple and most pure, darkened with no legal ceremonies, which once God ordained, until the time of refor∣mation, much lesse with any humane inventions, but such as shal exhibit Gods presence most simply and familiarly. How then doth this agree with Ezechiel, who in eight whole chapters from the fourtieth to the end of the Prophecy, speaking of this very time, describeth so exactly the tem∣ple, the city, and whole legal worship? Very wel: for that whole descri∣ption tendeth to that ende, not to teach that the old ceremonies are to be restored, but that at lenght they being wholly abolished, Christ shalbe worshipped most purely and exactly according to his owne ordinances alone. For what other thing mean the new measurings of the walles, gates porches, and the whole building, the new distribution of the holy land, and the new portions given to the tribes, Priests, Levites, Prince, then an abrogation of Moses and al the legal ceremonies? But that time was not otherweise capable of any spiritual worship, then under those shadowes. Iohn speaketh playnly to Christians, al coverings being removed, as on whom the noone Sunne of truth shineth, and all things are naked and o∣pen. And indeed he openeth most significantly in one word that long & obscure description in Ezechiel, saying that that temple so magnifically & glo∣riously prepared, is in truth none at all: not as though the Prophet had utte∣red so many words vainly, but to shewe that we must not stick in the bark of the lettre, but that the kernell of the Spirit is to be found out. Let the Iewes heare, neither let them expect a renewed temple, as hitherto they doo, amisse and obstinately, but let them with minds and harts aspire in that right way, which shal need no temple. Let them look for the omni∣potent God and the Lamb to dwel among them, in comparison of which glory, whatsoever can be built of men shalbe vile. 23 Neither hath this city any need of the Sunne or Moone; For in very deed the Moone shallbe ashamed, and the very Sunne shall blush, when the Lord of hosts
shall reigne in mount Sion, and Hierusalem, and shall be glorious before his aunci∣ents, Isaiah 24.23. And why may it not be ashamed of her former darke∣nesse, when the light of the Moone shalbe as the light of the Sunne, and the light of the Sunne seven folde as the light of seven daies, Isay 30.23. Which thinges are not spoken to that ende, as though there should be no use then of the Scriptures; but because all shall so understand Gods will, as if they had no need to learne wisdome from books. Full, saith the Prophet, shall this land be of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters covering the chanell of the Sea, Isay 11.9. Neither shall they anie more teach everie man his friend, and everie man his brother, saying, know yee the Lord, for they shall all know mee, from the least of them even to the greatest of them, saith the Lord: that J doo forgive their in∣quity, and remember their sinne no more, Ier. 31.34. From hence let us observ that that Church is most glorious, in which the sunne of righteousnesse shineth with most open face, covered with no cloudes of ceremonies; ther¦fore let them see in how great errour they are, whom bring in a pompous shew of ceremonies, to procure authority to religion with the people. Furthermore let us note to what times Iohn applyeth the sentences of the Prophets, that we may know the things are yet to come, which we inter∣pret commonly to be past, and not onely in the heavenly countrey, whose happinesse needeth the words of no man, but here in earth in that resto∣ring wherof we have spoken. ¶ And the Lambe is the light therof: Therfore this light, the most bright of all godly times, shal not yet be perfit, as it shalbe after this life, but a candle onely in respect of that; least peradventure wee should rest in our iourney, as if we had come to the last ende. 24 And the Gentiles that shalbe saved. The second outward argument is glory from the Gentils. Before time the Iewes have alwayes found the Gē¦tiles most hatefull, who left no meanes unattempted to doo them hurt; now contrariweise ther shalbe no cause to feare that they will doo them a¦ny harme; yea rather why should they not expect all good at their hands, who shal apply al their forces to the advancing of them. But these Gen∣tiles are not al generally, but are limited with a certain kinde, which, saith he, shalbe saved: which word is inserted for an exposition. The place is ta∣ken out of Isaiah, 60.3. where it is thus, and the Gentiles shall walke to thy light, which Iohn draweth to the elect, by putting in of one word, least a∣ny should think it was spoken of every one generally. And see how Iohn trāslate that sētēce they shal walke to thy light, thus, they shal walke in the light of it, the sentēce being well expressed. For to walke at the light, is not to come only to the light, which one may doe & depart again by & by, being at on¦ce both seen & despised; but to walke after or according to the light, as to walke at the feete, is alone with, to follow & serve one, 1 Sam. 25.42.
Neither-hath this, place in the heavens, that the people should walke at the light of the Church, when Prophecyings shalbe abolished, and tongues shall cease, and God shalbe all in all, 1 Cor. 13.8. and 15.28. But it may be doubtful how it can have place on earth. For shal this difference remaine, of some peo∣ple which are saved, and of other that are lost, in this most happy govern∣ment of the Church? It seemeth indeed that there shalbe many, which yet still shal contemne the truth obstinately: for the day of the Lord shall come cas a share upon all that dwell on the face of the earth, Luke 21, 35. But the children of the Church are not in darkenesse, that that day should take them as a thief in the night, 1 Thess. 5.4. Moreover it was said before that the haile of a ta∣let weight of the last vial, shall drive men to blasphemy, chap. 16.21. Neverthe¦lesse those despisers shalbe of so feeble strength, that wil they, nil the, they shalbe compelled to yeeld their necks. The Complut. edition and the Kings bible doo omit these words which are saved: and so doth Aretas and the vulgar Latine: neither doo they reade, in the light of it, but by the light. ¶ And the Kings of the earth shal bring their glory unto it: Then the Kings bor∣derers on the Ocean, and of the Yles shall bring a present; the Kings of Sheba and Se∣ba shall bring a gift; finally all Kings shall worship him, and all nations shall serve him, Psal. 72.10.11. And Isay, The labour of Aegypt, and marchandize of Aethiopia, and of the Sabean Princes shall come unto thee, and they shall be thine, and shall follow thee, they shall come in chaines, and shall fall down before thee, and shall make supplications unto thee, saying; onely the strong God is in thee, there is none besides, no where else is God, chap. 45.14. Againe, Kings shalbe thy nur∣cing fathers, and their Queenes shalbe thy nurces, they shall worship thee with their faces toward the earth, and shall lick the dust of thy feet, chap. 49.23. For then shalbe given unto Christ a dominion, and glory, and Kingdome, that all people, nati∣ons and tongues should serve him, whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, which passeth not away, & his Kingdō a Kingdō which shall not be destroyed. Dan. 7.14. It shal not also be from the purpose to add here in what words the Sybille hath described this same thing, that at least, wee may help tthe Iesuite, if he will, who in expounding the same, is cleane out of the way: thus ther∣fore shee Prophecyed in the 3. book of the oracles of Sibyll. And then the world by womans hands shall rul'd be and obey: But when the widow over all the world shall beare the sway: And cast into the sea the gold and silver with disdayn, And cast the brasse of brittle men and yrn' into the Mayn; Then shall the wordly elements all desolate remayn.
Sibyll prophecieth that after the death of Antichrist, which we have had set forth in the former chapters, the soveraigntie of things through the whole world, shalbe in the power of a woman. But what manner of one? Is it such a one as wee properly so call? Nothing lesse. This woman is the Church, the spouse of Christ: which shee calleth a widow, not because she is a widow by the death of her husband, as this word is wont to signif u∣sually, but because shee is on earth, farr from him. For shee is also a wi∣dow, which after marriage dwelleth not togither with her husband, for what cause soever it be. Or shee may be called a widow, because before her restoring shee sat a widow so long, as in Hosea: Sit still for my sake ma∣ny daies, neither be married to any other. For the children of Isael shall remaine many dayes without a King, and without a Prince, & without an offering, & witht∣out an Image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim, afterward they shall returne &c. ch. 3.3.4.5. So Isayas, So that he shall say in his heart, who hath got∣ten mee these, seeing I have bin baren and a desolate captive, and a wanderer too & fro &c. chap 49.21. This then is that widow, which after shee hath go∣verned for a time, at length shal deliver all her subiects to be translated in to heaven, whither at length they shall goe, when this whole world is de∣stroyed with fire. Seeing therfore that these things are so, those are not to be understood of the future state after the resurrection. For what Kinges shal then bring their glory thither? Vnlesse peradventure, as the Iesuite writeth ridiculously, by building and inriching temples, by sending pre∣dicatours into sundry countreys, and by restreining the nations that are enemies to the faith. Did the man dreame waking when he wrote these things, that he would hav any such thing to be desired in the future state? But I wil not vexe the man, being as it seemeth, sick of an ague. 25 And the gates of it shal not be shut: All danger shalbe so farre away, that no feare therof shal trouble them. Ther shalbe no enemy that shal invade, but the gates shallbe open alwayes to receive new strangers, who in great companies shal flow thither continually, Isay 60.11. Blessed is that city, which shal enioy so happie, so glorious, and secure peace. ¶ For then shalbe no night there: These words are somewhat otherweise then in Isaiah, who speaketh thus, and they shal open thy gates continually, ney∣ther day nor night shal they be shut &c. that is, they shalbe opē alwayes. Ther is the same sense of this place, but the mention of the night being omit∣ted, as unprosperous and wholly unmeete for the happines of this city; as though he should say, the gates shal never be shut, for they are not wont to be shut in the day time, neither shal it be needful to add, nor in the night, because ther shalbe no night there.
26 And glory shalbe brought: We spake of this matter at the 24. verse, but the repetition is not in vaine, which teacheth that the Gentiles shall have this continual desire to enrich and store this city. Not because they shall give themselves to the gathering of riches, or to ambition; but be∣cause their good will shalbe most gratefull, who shal alwayes wish very wel unto it. Or as the words doo sound, and they shal bring the glory and ho∣nour of the Gentils unto it, that is, the Iewes themselves, as though now he would shew how much they should doo by their owne strength, when he hath shewed sufficiently what should come to them by the benefit of o∣thers. Wherby not onely they shalbe advanced, but also shalbe augmen∣ted with great glory by their owne riches. 27 There shall not enter into it any thing that defileth: This glory shal remain no lesse pure and undefiled, than secure and without feare of enemies. For the most part it commeth to passe that the rivers flowing beiond the ban∣kes, doo carry with them very much durty filth, wherby the whole water becometh foule: so for iust cause it might peradventure be feared, that in this very populous assembly of the Gentils, many wicked men shall assem¦ble togither, by whose contagion the most cleare purity at length should be defiled. But the Spirit biddeth them to be secure as touching this po∣int: God wil provide, that no filthy and impure thing shal enter in wher∣by the flower of so great dignity, may be distained never so little. ¶ But they which are written in the book: ei me, unlesse they which are written. But the elect are not among the uncleane, who through Christ have no spot, wrinkle, or any such thing, Ephes. 5.27. Therfore ei me is not to be transla∣ted as an exceptive by nisi unlesse, but as a discretive by sed but, as Theodore Beza hath noted. Vnlesse perhaps ther be a respect to the former time, as Paul concerning the elect, and such were yee every one: but ye are washed, but yee are sanctified, 1 Cor. 6.11. as though he should say, no uncleane per∣son shall enter into the city, unlesse they which are written in the book of life, who before their caling were uncleane, but being sanctified by faith in Christ, cease to be so. CHAP. 22. AFTER he shewed mee a pure river of water of life, cleare as Chrystal pro∣ceeding out of the throne of God and the Lambe. 2 In the middes of the street therof, and an the one and other side of the river was the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruit, and gave fruit every moneth, and her leaves are for the health of the nations.
3 And ther shalbe no more curse against any man: but the throne of God and of the Lambe shalbe in it, and his servants shall serve him. 4 And they shall see his face, and his name shalbe in their foreheads. 5 And there shallbe no night there, neither have they any need of the light of a candle, nor of the light of the Sunne: for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shal raigne for evermore. 6 Then he said unto mee, these words are faithfull and true: and the Lord God of the Holy Prophets sent his Angel, to shew to his servants the things which must shortly be fulfilled. 7 Behold I come quickly. Blessed is he that keepeth the words of the prophecy of this booke. 8 And J John am hee, which have heard and seen these things. And when I had heard and seen, I fell down to worship before the feete of the Angel, which shew¦ed mee these things. 9 But he said unto mee, see thou doo it not, for J am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the Prophets, and of them which keepe the wordes of this book. Wor∣ship God. 10 After he said unto mee seale not the words of the prophecy of this book: for the time is at hand. 11 He that hurteth, let him hurt still: and he that is filthy, let him be filthy stil: and he that is iust, let him be iustifyed stil: and he that is holy, let him be holy still. 12 And behold I come quickly: and my reward is with mee, to render to every one as his worke shalbe. 13 J am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, the first and the last. 14 Blessed are they that doo his commaundements: that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter by the gates into the city. 15 But without shalbe dogges, and enchanters, and whoremongers, and mur∣therers, and Idolaters, and whosoever loveth and maketh lies. 16 J Iesus sent my Angel to testify these things unto you in the Churches. J am the roote and that generation of David, that bright and morning starre. 17 And the Spirit and the bride say come: and he that heareth, saith come, and let him that thirsteth come: and let him that will, receive of the water of life freely. 18 For I testify there withall unto every one that heareth the words of the pro∣phecy of this book if any man shall add unto these things, God shall adde unto him the plagues, that are written in this book. 19 And if any man shall take away of the words of the book of this prophecy, God shal take away his part out of the book of life, and out of the holy city, and from those things which are written in this book. 20 He which testifyeth these things, saith, ye I come quickly. Amen. Even so
come Lord Iesus. 21 The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, be with you al. Amen. The Analysis. THVS farr the two first outward arguments, wherby the glory of this ci∣ty is set forth, the two last follow, the aboundance of things necessary, & continuance. The first handleth two things, which comprehende all other plenty; the most pure water proceeding out of the throne ver. 1. and the tree of life, ver. 2. whose fruite is described, and how many foulde it is, part¦ly in the kinde, for thete are twelve fruits; partly in the time, bearing every moneth: and how profitable, which appeareth from thence, that also the leaves are for the health of the Gentils, ver. 2. and thus much of the aboū¦dance: the continuance is declared by remooving of the corrupting causes, ver. 3. and by setting downe of the preserving causes, ver. 3.4, 5. And hi∣therto hath bin a prophetical narration, both of special things, and also of common things to the whole Church. There foloweth the conclusion of all the Revelation and of the Epistle: partly consisting in a confirmation; partly in a salutation. The confirmation first takes in hand a recounting and collecting of things before spokē, that being put as in a patterne ūder one view, they might have greater force for credit. And this recounting is cō¦tinued even to the eighteen verse; relating the authour of the Revelation, ver. 6. the happines of the keppers ver. 7. the ministers ver. 8.9. a publishing commanded, wherby ther should be a free examination ver. 10. with an an¦swer of a secret obiection ver. 11. the upright nature of the revealer. ver. 12. eternall ver. 13. the thing revealed ver. 14.15. the plaine testimony of Iesus ver. 16. and lastly the desire of the Spirit and bride ver. 17. Every one of which apart is of great weight to establish the authority of this Prophecy, but al togither are very much greater. Next Iohn of his owne part addeth some new thing, when he uttereth certain destruction to them which shall corrupt this prophecy never so little ver. 18.19. then testifying his most earnest desire of a speedie finishing ver. 20. The salutation lastly concludeth the whole Epistle with a praier ver. 21. Scholions. 1 Afterward he shewed mee: That wholesome fruite dooth more declare the excellent glory of this city, which not onely the citizens, but also for∣reiners doo receive. Wherunto also apperteine this river and tree, of the
which both, they drinke, and also are fedde unto life, both which the An¦gel sheweth to Iohn. For he saith, he shewed mee. But who is he that shew∣ed? That sevēth Angel, which manifested the city to him in the former chap¦ter, ver. 9.10. and therfore neither as yet are we come to the heavenly blessednes of the saincts after the last resurrection, when we shal not use Angels, or any other masters. But as touching the water, it is not some li∣tle fountaine, but a river: neither corrupted and troubled as Nilus, but flowing with most pure waters as Kidron & Gallirrhoe making glad the ci∣tie of God, Psal 46.5. Furthermore it is a river of water of life, not onely because of the continuance, for it runneth alwayes with new waters, as is the water of a fountaine or spring, which also in the Scriptures is called li∣ving, but because it bringeth life to the drinkers Iohn 4.14. The river is shi∣ning as Chrystall, farre exceeding the clearnes of the fountaines. Lastly it proceedeth out of the throne of God and of the Lambe, which it hath for chiefe fountaines, and to which againe as a companion it doth leade, or rather being a forerunner, goeth before, as a streeme to the sea. In Ezechiel the same flood issueth out of the temple & altar, chap. 47.1. But in this new Ierusalem there is no temple, as hath bin spoken in chap. 21.22. & ther∣fore the throne of God is set in the place thereof. Whether it runneth; here is no mention, but the Prophets plentifully teach it, namely towards the East, from the South side of the altar, first towards Galily, and into the plaine: then the waters come to the Sea, and by emptying themselves into the same sea, the waters therof are healed, Ezech. 47.1.8. So in Ioel there shal issue forth a foun∣taine from the house of the Lord and shall water the valley of Shittim, chap. 3.18. That is, the plaine of Moab; where the Israelites committed whordome with the Moabitish wemen, Numb. 25.1. Zacharie also, There shalbe, saith he, in that daie waters of life going forth out of Ierusalem, part of them to the East sea, and parte of them to the uttermost sea, which shalbe both in somer and winter, chap. 14.8. This river is the most fruitfull doctrine of Christ, which shall flowe forth towards the East, because the people watered with the moi∣sture hereof shall grow, and at last true life shall budde forth. For every living creature that creepeth, whersoever these rivers come, shall live, and there shal be a very great multitude of fishes, for by the comming of these waters thither, they are cured and live, whersoever this river commeth, Ezech. 47.9. For this Pro∣phet and Iohn speake of the same things and times, of the state and con∣dition of the Church in earth, as those things which in so many places we have observed, can plentifully proove. 2 In the middes of the market of it: tes plateias autes, in the middes of the streets of it, where the whole multitude of citizens is conversant. For this foun∣taine
is not shut up, but the free power therof is open to every one that possesseth the city. In this place springeth up and flourisheth the tree of life. Ezechiel mentioneth many trees, Behold, saith he, on the river side I saw many trees, on this side and on that side: the Greeks doo translate the Hebrewe words gnets rab, thus, dendra polla many trees. Tremelius turneth it great trees. But not so much the multitude, as the number, is respected, as by the 12 verse is manifest; where, that ere while in the seaventh verse he calles gnets rab, here he saith, col gnets, pan xulon brosimon all trees of fruit for meate, as if first he respected the variety more then the multitude. Iohn seemes to speake collectively of one for many, as appeares by the words entuthen ka entuthen, on this side, and on that side, that is, of both sides of the river; which fittes not to one tree, unlesse on this side and on that side be turned with tou potamou, of the river, and not with xulon Zoes, as followeth; In the middest of the market therof, and of the flowing streeme, on this side and on that side, was the tree of life; as if the tree were in the middes, which the river being devided into two parts, compassed on both sides. And so it is one tree, wherof there is a more manifest allusion to the tree of life, Gen. 3.1. and of which he hath made mention before, in chap. 2.7. to him that over commeth I will give to eat of that tree of life, which is in the middest of the paradise of God. Iohn saw this tree to be one, because there is one common foode of life for all the elect, 1 Cor. 10.3.4. But Ezechiel saw more, to signify the most fruitfull plenty of this one tree. This tree is Christ, who is to his as wel meat, as drinke, a most costlie meat of al things, which are necessa∣rie to salvation. ¶ Bearing twelve fruits; Not one fruit twelve times, but twelve diverse fruits; that this one tree maye be in stede of all those, which Ezechiel men¦tioneth. Christ doth impart himselfe with so great variety to his elect, that they are never glutted. Whereto also seeme to appertaine those so diverse kindes of offerings, which once were offered with the sacrifices: some of which were raw, some sodden, some drie, some with liquor, certaine ba∣ked, certaine fried, certaine also rosted, Lev. 2. so doth Christ provide a∣gainst our lothsomenes, who in fruit being the same meat, doth in tast yeilde himselfe so sondrie & manifoulde. Every moneth bringing forth fruit; word for word in the greek is by every one moneth. This meat never faile, but growes daylie new. There needs not here, that in harvest it be laide up for an other yeare, but there shalbe a continual spring & harvest, alwayes with some ripe fruites, and some other budding: as the orenge tree; which forthwith as the first apples by reason of their ripenes fall off, afterwards it bud des with new apples. But wer the trees so created in the beginning,
as that if sinne had never entred, which hath brought thornes, thistles, sweat of the browes, and painfulnes of living, they should cōtinually flo∣rish and be loaden with fruites? This allusion seemes to point out such a thing. And it may be Christ would not have cursed the figge tree, be∣cause it wanted fruite, when the time of figges was not, unlesse by his first nature it ought to have them at all times, Mar. 11.13. but I dare not med¦dle any whit at all to determine of this matter; neither would I willingly busie my selfe with this sort of questions, except perhaps that I might bring light to a darke place. ¶ And his leaves for the health of the nations; Not because they shalbe fedde with the leaves, but because they shalbe covered with the wholesome sha∣dow therof; or because their woundes shalbe cured, through a certaine power of medicine, wherwith the leaves shalbe endued. For from hence droppes that baulme, wherby all woundes are healed, the which no other vertue of surgerie can heale. The which things may not be applyed to the last estate of the blessed, where ther shalbe no difference of nations, and of other people, neither shall ther be any place for curing of woundes, when every one shalbe as an Angel of God. 3 Neither any curse shalbe against any: The fourth reason is of the continu∣ance, which hence he proveth, because there shalbe nothing, wherby this happines might be corrupted or defiled. We know that the ungodly and wicked bring the iudgement of God, on those cities, in which they so∣journe: there shalbe none of such vilenes, against whome the sword of the curse shalbe drawne out, and as rotten members shalbe cut off from the rest of the bodie: not because then discipline shal altogither cease (the which shal greatly flourish, as we have seen in the former chapter,) or as though no citizen shal ever fall, but because there shalbe so great watch∣fulnes of the Pastours in recalling the wandering sheepe, that God shall not need to manifest his wrath from heaven, even as he is wont, where di¦scipline is contemned, and not regarded; Montanus readeth corruptely catathema, seing that the Prophet Zacharie from whence this place is takē hath hherem lo jehi gnod, the curse shalbe no more, chap. 14.11. ¶ But the seat of God, and of the Lamhe: It apperteines to continuance, that God from thence wil not translate his throne some other where. Therfore at length we have founde, wher stedfastly he wil abide for al the time that shal remaine. In time past he forsooke the auncient Ierusalem: & Rome shal in vaine boast that shee shall never be a widow, as chapter 18.7. but he hath chosen this mountaine Zion, in which he will dwel for ever. But that we may not thinke that this is to be attributed to any holines of the,
place, he adioineth, and his servants shal serve him, as if he should say: men shal not through lothsomenes loth the truth, as at first, but they shal with exceeding fervency cleave unto it, they shal forever be the holy and faith full servants of God. This godlines of men causeth, that God abides in some place, and not any necessity of a certain place: which often we see was changed, as men themselves were changed. 4 And they shall see his face: They shal enioy a clearer sight thē ever here∣tofore: yet farre from that which at length being blessed, they shall en∣joy in the heavens: but so great shalbe the simplicity & purity of the wor∣shippe, that God shall seeme to be most familiarly conversant with them, as it were face to face. He also openly shall chalenge them to himselfe, mar¦king then ith his owne name; yea not men alone, but also it shalbe writtē on the horses belles, Holines to Jehova, as are the pottes of the house of Iehovah, as the bolles before the altar, Zachar. 14.20. he wil undertake their patrona∣ge, and defense of all their things, even of the least. 5 And ther shalbe no night: They shall not be afflicted as in the former ages, neither shal they need light cōforts, of the light and the lik things, which before they were wont to use, but they shall receive of God him∣selfe exceeding joye: neither shall they care for or seeke other meanes to ease their griefes, Isay 60.19.20. But how saieth he, they shall not neede the light, when above he said, the Lambe shalbe their light? chap. 21.2. here he denieth not altogither that they shall not neede the light, but onely no other but the Lambe. ¶ Because the Lord God giveth them light, & they shall reigne for ever & ever. Ther shall appeare greater kindnes of God, than can be attributed to any meanes. For so great shalbe the increase of knowledge, that men shall seeme to be made wise, not so much by hearing of the word, as by divine inspiration. The like shalbe of all other giftes, whose excellency shal farre exceed all meanes, which they might use in getting them. In the ende of the verse there is set downe in plaine words, what is the summe of these 3. verses: to weet, that this kingdome of Saints shalbe eternal; which shall∣be begunne in the earth, neither shal it ever be interruptep, but shallbe finally translated into heaven. 6 Then he said to mee: Hitherto hath bin the propheticall narration: now ther foloweth a conclusion of the Epistle, the shutting up of the whole Re¦velation, which in few wordes mentioneth certaine chiefe heades, where∣by every one maye confirme and strengthen himselfe of the credit and au∣thority of this Prophecy. It is a most profitable conclusion, and full of heavenly maiesty. The Spirit knew how this Revelation should not be re∣garded
of men, and certaine should call into question the credit thereof, beyond his wonted manner, he labourth in a few more words, to take away all this doubt. But who is this Angel which now talkes with Iohn? An other as it seemeth, than he who in the beginning of the chapter shew∣ed the river of the water of life, or that manifested the city. For thi is the seaventh Angell, that is, of those to whom the busines was committed of administring the seven last plagues, chap. 21.9. whose charge was certaine and conteined in the limites of a certaine parte, not endued with power of the whole Revelation. But this confirmation is common to the whole booke, and therfore seemeth to be of that Angell which was sent in the beginning, that manifested these things to Iohn. Next also it is likely, that here are not againe words uttered by the voice of the sam ngell, but they are related of Iohn under the person of the Angel, of whom first he had received them. Certainly the coniunction of things without any co∣pulatives, or any necessary coherence between themselves, seemeth to ap∣prove of such an account. Which meaning if we follow, the words ar not to be translated, then he said to mee, which declare the time of a new speach begunne after the sight of the city, but and he said to mee, as though he should say; seeing that now I have fully delivered to you al things, which are revealed to mee, that shal be, now ther remaineth nothing, but that with sure faith ye embrace the same: which that you may the more easilie doo, bethinke ye how holily and religiouslly the Angel hath confirmed the same to mee, those words are faithfull and true. Wherfore this confirma∣tion of the Angel apperteineth not onely to those things which went next before, of the new Ierusalem, although the demonstrative proouune be so used often, but likewise to the whole booke: as also that threatening, which followeth ver. 18.19. universally challengeth credit to the whole Prophecy, and not for the authority of some certaine part of it. These things are repeated out of the 19 chap. ver. 9. & by the words of Iohn speaking, which the Angel had before spoken, they are applyed to appro∣ve the whole Revelation. ¶ And the Lord God of the holy Prophets sent his Angell. Neither did the Angel of his owne accord utter, these words are faithful & true, but by the cōmaundement and authority of God the sander. The same God which inspired the auncient Prophets, that they might most certenly forespeake of things to come, he sent this Angell, which might reveale those thinges to Iohn for the use of the Church. These things are repeated out of the 1. chap. 1 ver. which Revelation he signified, when he sent by his Angell to his ser∣vant Iohn. But thou maiest observe that this latter member of the verse is
so inferred, that it may clearly shew that these now are not the words of the Angell speaking, but of Iohn repeating the arguments of this Prophe¦cy delivered from heaven. 7 Behold I come quickly; The testimony of Iesus concerning the speedy execution of these things, fetched out of the 11. chapter, which must short∣ly be done: and againe, the time is neare ver. 3. The event of things next past, should give credit to things that follow: and therfore he maketh mentiō of a speedy execution: as if he should say, take every one of you, for every of your ages a pledge, and as it were a fuerty of things to come, by the pre¦sent things, which thou shalt see to come to passe. These things assure you that the things to come are no lesse certain. But we who now for a thou∣sand and five hundred yeares, to weet, from Iohn, have seen the consent of the event and Prophecy, may not any more doubt of these few other things which as yet remaine. See how these things are heaped up togither, as but now we saied, without any bandes of speach, as for the most part it is done in numbring of things. ¶ Blessed is he that keepeth: A confirmatiō of the happines of them which keepe this Prophecy, which nothing can bestow on man, but the truth in spired from heaven, as before in chap. 1.3. from whence these are fetched. 8 And J Iohn: A confirmation from the Ministers. It is a most sure pro¦phecy, whose Minister the Angel was, and of so great maiesty, that Iohn the Apostle thought to worshippe him, and of that holines that he for∣bad the worshippe offered. Iohn telleth what first befell chap. 19.10. he falleth not downe againe into the worshippe forbidden him. ¶ But he said to mee: in the greek it is, and he saieth to mee, for he said to mee, or hath saide, as well the interpreters do translate it: he relateth not a new, but a thing past But we must marke that which he spake before, and of thy brethren which have the testimony of Jesus: chap. 19.10. here it is uttered in other words, and of thy brethren the Prophets. & of them which keepe the words of this book. Therfore to keepe the words of this book is to have the testi∣mony of Iesus. ¶ Seale not: The publishing of a commaundement, wherby ther should be free power to every one to examine, and, by the successe to iudge of the Prophecy. Iohn might not have it for himselfe alone, but should offer it to the trial of a publique examination, as forthwith from the beginning he was bidden: That which thou seest write in a booke, and send it to the seven Churches, chap. 1.11. And againe, write these things which thou hast seen, & which are, and which shalbe: that is, hide it not from others, but publish it. But if the publicke publishing of it be onely respected, how was Daniell
commaunded to shut up his words, and to seale the booke, who also brought in∣to open view his Prophecy? Therfore this prohibition of not sealing, in∣cludeth some other thing; namely, that things to come are in such sorte set downe, that men by the events present and neere at hande, might be ledde as by the hand, fully to understād the same Prophecie: which chaū∣ced otherweise to Daniell, who was not manifest to every age, for he light¦ly touching things interlaced, is chiefly imployed in things that should lastly come to paste, and therfore should expect the appointed time, be∣fore which it was not to be unfolded: which partly is to be understood of those more difficult visions; partly of the people of the Iewes, whom that Prophecy doth chiefly respect. That which followeth confirmeth this in∣terpretation, for the time is at hand: as if he should say, shutte not up this Prophecy, because the time neare at hand shall reveale it: but Daniels was sealed up, for the event farre to comme, caused, that for a great time it should lie hidden. Therfore these words have the same force, as the for¦mer, Behold I come quickly. 11 He that hurteth let him hurt still: A preventing of a secret doubt, wher¦by the mindes of the weake might be weakened; for they see that the un∣godly goe forward in their ungodlines, and their punishment for many ages is differred. Therfore they might demaunde, how he would come quickly, who so long forbeareth the wicked? He then meetes with it, and warneth that no man take this in ill part, but minde that the ungodly will continue in their wickednes, and the righteous will follow after righteous¦nes: but that there are certen boundes set them, beiond which they can¦not goe: neither must they wonder that a certaine increase of wickednes is permitted for a determined time, for the greater condemnation of the ungodly: but they are to leave those men and to turne their eies to the e∣lect, whose constant study of godlines ought to strenghten our wavering mindes against all stiffenes of the reprobate. Therfore these are not the words of one exhorting, but of one conforting, and admonishing, that by those scādales our expectatiō be not diminished, seeing that ther shall∣be such a state of things, even to the last end. ¶ And he that is iust shalbe iustified still: Let him be imployed in those workes wherby he may prove both to himselfe, and others that he is iust: but he doth not so much exhort, as shew the perseverance of the saincts, which being planted in Gods house, bring forth more planteous fruites in their old age. 12 And behold I come quickly: But it was repeated before in the seventh verse: but againe it is now pressed, as an excellent remedy against the of∣fense
of the extreeme hardnes of the reprobate, as if he should say; as of∣ten as the wickednes of men doth stirre up the minde, be thinke yee that shortly shalbe the coming of the Lord. He hath promised it, that cannot deceive: nor measure you not the delay by your owne sense, but beleeve stedfastly that that which he hath promised, shall not be so long differed. Yee consider that the Lord is present in those same things, which are day∣ly done: see that he now forthwith hasteneth his promises, that ye may not complaine of his overmuch delay, or may thinke that those things whih have bin foretold shall not come to passe. Therfore these things doo ve∣ry well accord with the former, nor by any meanes are they to be referred to an other place: albe it if this coupling togithe were not, wee ought not to be much troubled about the consequence. The rehearsall made, which we have spoken off, may containe in one full sentence divers things & sun∣dry persons, without any light of bandes and transitions. ¶ And my reward is with mee: These words belong to the same comfort, and set before our eyes Christ the rewarder, against the offense both of the felicity of the wicked, & also those troubles, which in the meane time the saincts doe finde. God is iust, neither can it be, but that it shal goe well at length with the good, & ill with the wicked, as hath bin declared in this same book in expresse words, chap. 13.10. and 14.13. 13 I am Alpha & Omega; They ar the words of Christ, but not speaking in this place in his owne person, but rehearsed by Iohn. They confirm the Prophecy frō the eternity of Christ, or rather frō his power, as before wee have interpreted: How should we not credit him so wel in pronouncing of things to come as past▪ who is eternal, or who hath given beginning to al things, and at his pleasure cā reduce them to nothing? chap 1.8. 14 Blessed are they &c. These things belong to the authority of Christ testifying, to whō whosoever obey, is blessed. He hath power over the tree of life, the liberty wherof he giveth to them that obey him, ch. 2.7. & of this, ver. 2. Moreover he giveth a right to enter into the city by the gates, by which alone the way is open, seing the wall is so hie, that there is not any hope ever to climbe over, chap. 21.17. 15 But without shalbe doggs: Men of doggish impudēcy & virulency, who alwayes barke at every good things; it shalbe a grea felicity to be delivered from their society. Concerning the troupe of the excluded, see ch. 21.8. 16 I Iesus &c. A confirmatiō frō a manifest testimony of Iesus himselfe, not spoken here by his owne voice, but by Iohns, repeated frō ch. 1.1. Christ speaketh never in this book in his own person, without some signifi¦catiō of his most great maiesty, wherby he may testify his presence.
¶ That bright &c. The morning starre is most clear, & sheweth the day following at her backe: so Christ in this life shineth most brightly to the faithful being also a pledg to thē of a greater light shortly to coē. But mor¦over he shineth to them by the first fruits of the truth, of which he wil giv them shortly a ful abūndāce. This praise is takē frō ch. 2.28. see mor there. 17 But the Spirit &c. A confirmation from the desire of the sanctified, to whom nothing is so deare as to see these things accomplished, wherof hope is given in this book. For as the soules under the altar cryed with a loude voice desiring deliverance ch. 6.10. so the faithful through hope of the future marriage leap for joy, & greatly desire that day to be shortned, ch. 19.7. For the word Spirit signifyeth here every faithfull, in whom the Spirit dwelleth: the word bride, the whole Church & cōpany of the faith∣ful. The godly al of thē, both severally & ioyntly desire the same by prayers. ¶ And he that heareth saith come: As though he should say, this is not on∣ly the desire of the Church present, but also of it proceeding from day to day even unto the last ende. Every of the elect, at the first knowledge of these things, shalbe inflamed with the same desire with their ancetours. ¶ And let him that thirsteth come: Neither doo these things serve onely to inflame, but also to satisfy the mindes: which is the peculiar property of Gods word. And that nothing may be wanting to certenty, thou must understand that this Prophecy doth give hope of salvation to men, not by expectation of a due reward, but by the grace and mercy of God alone. It publisheth a free salvation onely, as all the rest of the sacred scriptures, not due to our desertes. A notable rule of the heavenly truth. 18 19 For I testify togither: Hitherto the rehearsing of the former testi∣monies and arguments, which were used here and there in this precedent book. Now Iohn addeth a certaine newe one, but of the same divine au∣thority with the former; to wit, that this Prophecy is most true and unvio¦lable, which it is not lawfull to violate eyther by adding or taking away e∣ven the least thing without extreame punishment. Which being proper onely to the word which cometh down from heaven, this Revelatiō must needs be put into the same degree, Deut. 4.10. and 12 32. 20 He that &c. Christ himselfe, who is called that witnesse, both in res∣pect of the Gospel, which he hath brought into the world & also of this Prophecy which is grounded on his authority onely. In conclusion the whole matter is sealed up both by his testimony repeated, & Iohns pryer. 21 The grace &c. The usual forme of concluding Epistles, such as is this whole Prophecy sent to the 7 Churches by the commandement of Christ himselfe, chap. 1.11. Come L. Iesus. Glory & praise be to God for ever, Amē.
I give thee thankes Almighty and everlasting God, because thou hast lead mee, blind and unskilful man of no reputation, of no iudgement, of no wit, by thy onely mercy, for Christs sake, through this unbeaten wil¦dernes, hast made mee to view many secret corners, and hast given mee a safe iourney by the dennes of the Dragon and wilde beasts. Even so ô Fa∣ther, for such is thy good pleasure. Thou chusest the unnoble & base men of the world, & hast foūded strēgth from the mouth of babes & sucklings, that no flesh should reioyce. How incōprehensible is thy wisedome? how admirable thy truth? How iust & holy at al thy wayes? Who shal not fear thee? I would gladly tell thy prayses, but my tongue doth lacke wordes, & the words a minde. Whither soever my mind shal turne it selfe, it is swal¦lowed up of thy infinitnesse. If it shal ascend into heaven thou art hyer: if it shal cōsider thy workes, thou art greater: if it doth meditate on thy ho¦linesse, thou art purer then the very Sunne. O wonderful deepnes & un∣measurable bottomlesse pit, how dost thou compasse us about on everie side, & art comprehended no where? What mortal sight cannot be over∣whelmed with this so infinite brightnesse? Therfore my sight turneth frō the light that no man can come unto, that it may consider thee through the cloud of the creatures. Chiefly it delighteth much to behold thy most pleasant face in thy Sonne. But as in this glasse thou art most visible, so art thou most admirable, so farre surpassing our understanding, as thou dost abasse thy self neer to our sense. Thou art great ô Lord abov al that can be either said, or thought; grāt that we may reverēce thy exceeding great∣nes, which the world cōteineth not; that we may feare thy presence, which the eyes see not; that we may adore thy maiesty, in cōparison of which the universal creature beneath is nothing: that we may embrace thy goodnes wherwith thou followest us most unworthy men. Accomplish at length thy great mystery, & let the world acknowledge thy long delay to hav bin for thy onely mercy, not of forgetfulnesse or neglect of thy promise. De∣stroy the Romish Beast, and the Constantinopolitan Dragon, build up thy new Hierusalem, wherin Christ shal raigne, and the saints shal beare rule togi∣ther with him, to enioy for a time a blessed raigne on earth; and most hap¦py and eternal with thee in heavens. Heare ô Father to whom no thought of the mind is unknown. Be thou present, who art no where absent: but heare the prayers, before whom thou hast gone before, by thy decree. Then will wee bring forth our harpes, & sing praises to thee, celebrating thee the one three God, the Father, the Sonne, & Holy Ghost, to whom be all honour, praise, and glory for ever and ever, Amen. FINIS.
