4083 99842758 7443
AN ENGLISH EXPOSITOR: TEACHING THE INTER∣pretation of the hardest words vsed in our Language. WITH SVNDRY EXPLICATI∣ons, Descriptions, and Discourses. By I. B. Doctor of Physicke. . HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA ALMA MATER CANTA¦BRIGIA seal of the University of Cambridge LONDON, Printed by IOHN LEGATT. 1616.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND VER∣TVOVS, HIS SINGVLRA GOOD LADIE, THE LADIE IANE Vicountesse Mountague, all honour and happinesse. BEing perswaded (Right Noble Ladie) by some friends, for publike bene∣fit to make this Collecti∣on of words common, which at first was inten∣ded onely for priuate vse, (as written in my youth, at the request of a worthy Gentleman, one whose loue preuailed much with me) I could not finde in heart to send it forth, no better furnished than with a bare Title; lest like an vnknowne Infant, it should be exposed to ouer hard vsage, or per∣aduenture scornefully reiected, aduenturing abroad without countenance
of any friend or commaunder. Vpon sure knowledge there∣fore of your most honourable disposition, and former experience of your Ladyships fa∣uour toward me, I am emboldned to present this little Pamphlet vnto your Honour, with hope that by your Patronage it shall not one∣ly bee protected from iniuries, but also finde fauourable entertainment, and perhaps grace∣fully admitted among greatest Ladies and studious Gentlewomen, to whose reading (I am made beleeue) it will not prooue altoge∣ther vngratefull. And although I may well be taxed of folly or presumption, that for cre∣dit of a slender trifle, craue the assistance of so eminent a Person, yet such (I confesse) is my care thereof (since I must not deny it for my owne) and my duty and deuotion so affected to your Honour, and all yours; that I haue, (hoping of your Ladishps pardon) wilfullie repelled al reasons which might disswade me, choosing herein not so much what may seem most seemly, as what I suppose most behooue∣full for me. Accept therefore I beseech your Honour, and receiue vnder your noble tuition this lit∣tle vocabulary Treatise, which hauing beene many yeares restrained of libertie, is now glad of enlargement, especially
recommended vn∣to so worthy a Patronesse. The glorious Sun loseth not the least point of his heighth by li∣liberall lending downe his light, and quicke∣ning with his influence the lowest creatures; neither is any eminency disgraced, that easily condescendeth to others desired good: which is also confirmed by the Poet, who saieth; Conspicitur nunquam meliore potentia causa, Quàm quoties vanas non sinit esse preces. Not thinking needfull therefore to trouble your Honour with many words of entreatie (vpon assured confidence of your wel known Charitie and goodnesse) I conclude, sincerely wishing to your Ladiship, the best that may be wished, and resting my selfe euer, Your Honours to be commaunded, IO. BVLLOKAR.
To the Courteous Reader. HEre haue you (Gentle Reader) that which at first was not made for you, though now willingly (for your be∣nefite if you embrace it) offered to your kind acceptance. Commend it my selfe I will not, lest I should giue occasion to some quick heads, to come vpon me with the verse, Autor o∣pus land at &c. Yet this I will say (and say truely) that in my yonger yeares it hath cost mee some obseruation, reading, study, and charge; which you may easily beleeue, considering the great store of strange words, our speech doth borrow, not only from the Latine, and Greeke, (and som from the ancient Hebrew) but also from forraine vulgar Languages round about vs: beside sundry olde words now growne out of vse, and diuers termes of art, proper to the lear∣ned in Logicke, Philosphy, Law, Physicke. Astronomie, &c. yea, and Diuinitie it selfe, best knowen to the seuerall profes∣sors thereof. And herein I hope such learned will deeme no wrong offered to themselues or dishonour to Learning, in that I open the signification of such words, to the capacitie of the ignorant, whereby they may conceiue and vse them as well as those which haue bestowed lon study in the languages, for considering it is familiar among best writers to vsurpe strange words, (and sometime necessary by reason our speech is not sufficiently
furnished with apt termes to expresse all meanings) I suppose withall their desire is that they should also be vnderstood; which I (knowing that bonum quò communius eo melius) haue endeauoured by this Booke, though not exquisitely, yet (I trust) in some reasonable measure to performe. It is easier (all know) to find faults, then to mende them, and easier to mend faults in anothers worke already written, then to write any new worke free from all fault. If therefore any fault finder, or ouer curious Cri∣ticke (for from the best learned I expect best vsage) shall to shew his skill grow captious, and quarrell at my interpretati∣ons, I will desire him to forbeare bitternesse, and temper a while his choler, till hauing laide this worke aside, hee trauell himselfe in the same or some other new argument; and then I doubt not but he will either become more indifferent, or giue others occasion to bid him English the olde Prouerbe, Medice cura teipsum. But as for you (iudiciall or courteous Reader) whose fauour I desire, and whose counsell or friendly correcti∣on I will not refuse, if to you (I say) any thing herein shall occurre, which seemeth by me omitted, mistaken, or not fully satisfactory to your expectation, (for indeed there are almost slipt away seuen yeeres since I had any leasure as much as to looke on it) I promise that vpon warning hereof giuen to me or the Printer, at a second Impression it shall be amended or supplyed. Meanewhile vse this as you finde it, and I perswade my selfe your honesty will say it is worth the money you paide for it. So committing my selfe and Booke to your fauo∣rable good liking, I commit you to God. From my house at Chicester in Sussex, this 17. day of October. 1616. Your hearty well willer, Io: Bullokar.
An Instruction to the Reader. HAue care to search euery word ac∣cording to the true Orthography thereof, as for Phoenix in the Letter P. not in F. for Hypostaticall in Hy: not in Hi. Remember also that euery word mar∣ked with this marke * is an olde word, onely vsed of some ancient writers, and now growne out of vse. Lastly, if a word bee of different significations, the one easie, the other more difficult, I onely speake of interpretati∣on of the hardest; as in the words Tenne, Girle, Garter, may appeare.
ABandon. To for∣sake: to cast off, Abate. To make lesse: In our common Law it signifieth, to enter into any inheritance, be∣fore the right heire take possession, with intent to keepe the said heire out of it. Abatement. The action or enterprise of him which abateth in the common Lawe. Abba. An Hebrewe word signifying Father. Abbett. To helpe or assist one in euill. Abbettour. Hee that counselleth or comforteth another to doe any euill. Abbot A spirituall Lord ouer a religious house of Monkes. Abbreuiate. To make short: to abridge. Abbreuiation. A making short, an abridgement. Abdicate. To refuse or forsake, to renounce. Abeston. A stone found in Arabia, of the colour of iron, which being once set on fire, can hardly bee quenched. Abiect. Vile, base, of no estimation. Abiure. To sweare or forsweare: a terme some∣time vsed in Lawe, when one hauing committed a capitall offence flyeth to a Church, or Churchyard, and chooseth rather per∣petuall banishment: viz. to abiure the Realme, then stand to tryall of Lawe. This Law was instituted by S. Edward the Confes∣sour in fauour of life, but now is not in vse. Abiuration. A renoun∣cing by oath: see Abiure. Ablepsie. Want of sight, blindnesse, vnaduisednesse. Ablution. A washing. Abolition. A taking a∣way, destroying or aboli∣shing.
Abortion. The birth of a child before due time; or the destroying in the mo∣thers wombe. Abortiue. That which is vntimely borne. Abrahams Baume. A little tree of the kind of Withies growing in Italy, and o∣ther hot countreyes, bea∣ring round fruit like Pep∣per cornes. It is very hot and drie; and hath a sin∣gular propertie to procure chastitie, for which cause Phisitians haue named it Agnus castus. Abridge. To shorten, to cut off, to gather onely the principall points. Abrogate. To abolish: to disanull, by publike au∣thoritie to alter and make a Law, which was in force, to be of no effect. Abrupt. Broken off. Abruptly. By peece∣meale: out of order, with∣out obseruing of due cir∣cumstance. Absolue. To pardon, ac∣quite, or discharge. Absolute. Perfect: ac∣complished. Absolution. Pardon, ac∣quitall, forgiuenesse. Abstinence. A forbea∣ring from gluttony, or vn∣lawfull taking other mens goods. Abstinent. Sober, tem∣perate, content with his owne. Abstract. A little booke, or gathering taken out of a greater. Abstraction. A taking a∣way: or a short draught taken out of a greater thing. Abstruse. Hidden: se∣cret, not easie to vnder∣stand. Absurde. Foolish, with∣out any wit or grace. Absurditie. Foolishnesse. Abusiue. That which of∣fereth abuse. Abisse. A bottomelesse pit, any deepnesse so great that it cannot be sounded. Acatia. A little thorne growing in Egypt, out of the leaues and fruit wher∣of they draw a iuyce or blacke liquour, which be∣ing dryed, is called Acatia, and is very astrictiue or binding. Our Apotheca∣ries haue not the right A∣catia, but insteed
thereof, they vse the iuice of Sloes, being of the same vertue that Acatia is. Academie. A Vniuersitie or great publike schoole: the name hereof first came of a place in Athens, cal∣led Academia, where Plato taught. Academicall. Belonging to an Vniuersitie, or Aca∣demie. Academicke. A Philoso∣pher of the sect of Plato. They acknowledged one God, and beleeued the immortality of soules; Pla∣to hauing learned many things of the Hebrewes, then the peculiar people of God. Accelerate. To hasten. Acceleration. A haste∣ning. Accesse. Liberty or pow∣er to come to a place. Accessible. Which may be gone too Accessory. He that coun∣selleth or commandeth another to commit any offence: or comforteth, or hideth him, knowing that he hath committed an of∣fence. Accident. That which happeneth by chaunce: sometime it signifieth that which belongeth to a thing, and yet is no part of the substance, as the quan∣tine, qualitie and such like. Accidentall. Happening by chance: or belonging to an Accident. Acclamation. A crying out to one. Accomodate. To make fit: to apply. Accoutrement. Attire, or dressing. Accoste. To draw neere to one. Accrew. To grow, arise, or increase. Accumulate. To heape vp. Accumulation. A heaping together. Acerbity. Sowrenesse. Acheeue. To performe▪ or bring to passe. Acolite. A Minister ser∣uing to bring water, wine and light to the altar. Aconitum. A venemous herbe, hauing a root much like to a Scorpion, and shi∣ning within like alabaster. Poets
faine that Cerberus the three headed dogge of hell, being dregged vp in a chaine of Adamant by Hercules, did cast some of his fome vpon this herbe, whereby it became so ve∣nemous. Acquire. To get, or pro∣cure. Acquisition. A getting or purchasing. Acquite. To discharge, or free one. Acquitall. A freeing of one from being guiltie of an offence wherewith hee was charged. Action. A deed done: or the doing of any thing. In our common Lawe it signifieth a suite commen∣ced against any man, and is commonly diuided into three differing kindes. viz. 1. Action personall. which is for debt, goods, cattell. 2. Action popular: which any man may sue, as vpon the breach of a penall sta∣tute, where some aduan∣tage is allowed to him that will sue for it. 3. Action reall: when one claimeth title to any lands tenements, rents, or com∣mon, in fee simple; fee taile, or for terme of life. Actiue. Liuely, strong, nimble. Actiuitie. Strong nim∣blenesse. Actor. A doer, some∣time a Player. Actuall. That which is done or committed. Acute. Sharpe, wittie. Adage. A prouerbe. Adamant. A precious stone commonly called a Diamond, brought out of Arabia and Cyprus. It is the hardest of all stones, in∣somuch that it cutteth glasse, and yieldeth neither to stroke of hammer nor fire, for which cause the Greekes name it Adamas, which in their tongue sig∣nifieth Inuincible: Not∣withstanding it is softened with goats blood, being steeped therein new and warme. It is of contrary nature to the loadstone, in so much that being laide neere it, the loadstone can∣not draw yron, hauing the vertue
thereof ouermaste∣red by the Adamant. Addict. To apply, or giue ones selfe much to a∣ny thing. Additament. Any thing added. Addition. An adding or putting to. In our commō law it signifieth any title giuen to a man beside his name which title sheweth his estate, trade, course of life, and also dwelling place. Adhere. To cleaue to. Adherence. A cleauing to, or belonging to any thing. Adherent. That which cleaueth or ioyneth close to a thing. Adiacent. That which lyeth neere to another thing. Adiourne. To deferre or put off till another time. Adiournement. A terme in law when any Court is dissolued, and appointed to be kept vpon some o∣ther time, or at any other place. Adiunct. A qualitie ioyned to a thing, as heate to fire, coldenesse to Snow. Adiure. To binde by oath: to make one to sweare. Adiuration. A swearing, or binding by oath. Administer. To do ser∣uice: sometime to take charge and dispose of a dead mans goods, by ap∣pointment of the Ordina∣rie. Administration. The do∣ing or handling of a busi∣nesse; or the disposing of a dead mans goods, that made no will. Administrator. Hee to whom the Ordinary com∣mitteth in charge the goodes of a man dying without will. Admire. To wonder, to honour or esteeme highly. Admiration. A wonde∣ring. Admission. A recei∣uing or giuing one leaue to enter. Admit. To let in, to al∣low of. Admixtion. A mingling of things together. Admonish. To warne▪
Admonishment. A war∣ning giuen one. Adopt. To choose one to be his sonne. Adoption. The choosing and making one to bee as his sonne to him. Adore. To worship, to giue diuine reuerence. Adoration. A worship∣ping. Adorne. To decke, to set out, to beautifie. Adornation. A decking, or trimming. Aduent. A comming: Certaine weekes before Christmas are so called, because then is made in the Church solemne pre∣paration for the comming of our Sauiour. Aduentaile. A coate of Armour. Aduerse. contrary. Aduert, To marke. Aduertise. To giue knowledge of a thing. Adulation. Flatterie. Adulatory. Which flat∣tereth. Adulterate. To cor∣rupt or counterfeit. Aduocate. He that plea∣deth for another. Aduouson. The right which a man & his heires haue to present a Clerke to the Ordinary, to be ad∣mitted to a spirituall be∣nefice when it becommeth voide. Adust. Burnt, scorched. Adustion. A burning. Aedile. An officer a∣mong the ancient Ro∣manes, who had charge to see that Temples, pri∣uate houses and highwaies, were kept in good repara∣tion. Aegipan. A Poeticall word, signifying a monster hauing the body of a man and legs like a Goat. Aerie. A nest of Haukes is so called. Aeriall. Ayrie, or of the aire. Affability. Courtesie in speech: gentlenesse, kind∣nesse. Affable. Courteous or kinde in speech. Affect. To loue: some∣time to moue affection. Affectation. Too much curiosity: an
extreme la∣bouring without discreti∣on to imitate another, or doe any thing well. Affiance. Trust: confi∣dence. Affianced. Betrothed. Affinitie. Kindred by marriage: sometime like∣nesse or agreement Affirmatiue. Which affir∣meth. Affluence. Plenty: a∣boundance. Affront. To come bold∣ly before one: to looke boldly in ones face. Africa. One of three parts of the world, lying toward the South; herein is Barbary and all Ethiope contained. The people of these countries liued in times past very vnciuilly, feeding much vpon ser∣pents flesh: It is called A∣frica of the Greeke worke Phrice, which signifieth Colde: and the particle A. which in that language, being placed before a word, changeth the sense thereof: so that Africa signifieth a country hotte or without cold. Agarick: A kind of mush∣rome or tadstoole of great account in Physicke. It groweth vpon the Larch tree in Italy, and is white, light, brittle, and sponge∣ous. It expelleth cold fleame and grosse raw hu∣mours out of the body, o∣pening obstructions of the Liuer, and by this meanes amendeth an euill colour. Agast. Amazed with feare: dismaide. Agent. A dooer or med∣ler in a matter. Aggrauate. To make a∣ny thing in words more grieuous, heauier or worse then it is. Agilitie. Nimblenesse. Agitation. A shaking, iog∣ging or mouing. Agnition. Knowledge: acknowledgement. Agnize. To acknowledge Agnus castus. See Abra∣hams baume before. Agony. A torment of bo∣dy and mind: great feare and trembling. Agriculture. Tillage of land: husbandry. Alabaster. A kinde of marble white and very cleare, which by reason of the naturall coldnes ther∣of doth
preserue things long from corruption; and therefore they vsed to make boxes of it to keepe sweete ointments, and toombes to bury Princes and great Personages in. Alacritie. Cheereful∣nesse: courage, quicke∣nesse. Alchymie. The art of melting or dissoluing the nature of mettals, by sepa∣rating the pure from the impure parts thereof. Alchymist. Hee that is skilfull in Alchymie. Alcion. A small bird that maketh her nest in the sea, and then it is a signe of faire weather: some call it a kings fisher. Alcoran. A booke wher∣in Mahomets law and reli∣gion is written. * Alderan. A starre in the necke of the signe Leo. Algate. Notwithstan∣ding: if so be, seeing that. Alien. A stranger borne, an outlandish man. Alienate. To estrange and withdraw the minde, sometime to sell. Alienation. An estran∣ging, a selling away. Aliment. Nourishment. Alkakengi. Otherwise called winter cherries: An herb which beareth round berries and red, that are good against the stoppings of the Liuer, the stone and grauell, and diuers diseases of the kidneyes and blad∣der. Allay. To qualifie or a∣bate the strength or vio∣lence of any thing. It is also a terme of hunting, when they set hounds in a readinesse where they thinke a Deere will passe, and cast them off when the rest of the Kennell comes in. Allegation. A telling of some proofe or reason of a matter. Allegiance. Obedience of a subject to his Prince. Allegorie. A sentence consisting of diuers tropes which must be vnderstood otherwise then the litterall interpretation sheweth; as when Saint Iohn Baptist speaking of our Sauiour, Matth. 3 said: Whose fanne is in his hand, and he
shall make cleane his floore, and ga∣ther the wheat into his barne but the chaffe he shall burne with vnquenchable fire: The meaning whereof is, that Christ being su∣preme Iudge of all, shall separate the good from the euill, rewarding the one in heauen, and puni∣shing the other in hell fire. Allegoricall. Of, or be∣longing to an allegorie: spoken by an allegorie. Alleluia. An Hebrew word or rather two Hebrewe words ioyned in one, vsed as a signe of exultation, and is interpreted, Prayse ye our Lord. Paulus Diaco∣nus writeth, that when the Britaines were inuaded by the Saxons and Picts, and on a time ready to fight a battell against them, they were admonished by Ger∣manus a French Bishop, (who was sent hither with Saint Lupus to confute the Pelagian heresie) that they should doe as he did; and forthwith he cryed aloude Alleluia: which when the whole armie of Britaines had done, the sound there∣of strooke such a terrour into the enemies, that they presently fledde a∣way, whereby the Bri∣taines had the victory. De gestis Rom. lib. 15. Allie. Of kinne to one by marriage. Alliance. Kindred and affinitie, league or friend∣ship. Allot. To appoint, or giue by lotte. Allude. To speake any thing which hath resem∣blance, or priuilie is di∣rected to touch another matter. Allusion. A likening or priuy resembling of one matter to another. See Allude. * Alnath. A starre in the hornes of the signe A∣ries. Aloes, or Lignum Aloes. A precious wood vsed in Phisicke, which comfor∣teth the heart, and openeth obstructions. It is knotty, browne of colour, and bit∣ter in taste. Being burned it fometh, and yieldeth a sweete perfume. Some af∣firme it to grow
vppon mountaines in the East, neere the rising of the fa∣mous Riuer Nilus, from which mountaines falling downe, it is carried by the streame into India, where being taken vp in nets, it is cleansed, and made apt for physicke. Aloesuccotrina. The iuyce of an herbe brought hither dry out of India; the best whereof is cleere, cleane and red, like to the colour of a lyuer. It is very bitter, but an excellent medicine to purge cholericke hu∣mours out of the stomack; yet not good to bee taken inwardly of such as are troubled with the Hemor∣rhoides. Alpha. The first letter of the Greekes: wherefore it is sometime taken for the first or cheef in any thing. Alphabet. The crosserow of letters, the A, B, C. Alphabeticall. Belonging to the Alphabet. Alps. High mountaines between France and Lom∣bardie: the rockes where∣of Hannibal (the great Captaine of the Carthagi∣nians) softened in diuers places with fire and vine∣ger, to cut out a way for his army to passe into Italy. Altercation. An angrie reasoning or wrangling in words. Alternall. Done by turne or course, one after ano∣ther. Altitude. Highth. Amate. To dismay: to make afraid. Amazon. A woman of the Country Amazonica. Amazones were warlike women of Scythia, which kept a Countrey to them∣selues without men, yet to haue children companied with the bordering people. Their Sonnes they eyther destroyed or sent home to the father, but their daugh∣ters they kept, bringing them vp in hunting, ry∣ding, shooting and feates of armes. They burned the right breast of their children, lest it should hin∣der their archerie, where∣fore they had the name Amazons, which (in Greeke) signifieth women wanting a breast.
Ambage. A long circum∣stance of words. Amber. A kinde of hard yellow gumme, wherewith they make beades. Mesue saith, the tree whereon it groweth is called Ibex Ro∣mana; but what this tree is, I cannot yet learne. Dio∣scorides saith, that it falleth in manner of a liquor from Poplar trees into the riuer Po in Italy, where it con∣gealeth and becommeth hard, in that forme as wee see it. Ambergrise.Mesue saith it is the spawne of the Whale fish: Auicen affir∣meth it to grow in the sea. Others write onely, that it is cast vp on the shore, and found cleauing to stones there: the fume thereof is good against the falling sicknesse, and com∣fortable to the braine. Ambia. A clammy li∣quor of the colour of ho∣ny, brought out of India. It is said to haue great ver∣tue in healing old aches or griefes, proceeding from cold diseases. Ambidexter. He that can vse both hands alike: a crafty follow, that can play on both parts. Ambiguitie. Doubtful∣nesse. Ambiguous. Doubtfull: vncertaine. Ambition. Vnlawfull, or immoderate desire of so∣ueraignty. Ambrosie. A sweet shrub or little tree, wherewith some people were wont to make Garlands. In poetry it vsually signifieth the meat of the heathen gods. It is sometime taken for immortalitie. Ambulatorie. A place to walke in. Ambuscado. A company of Souldiours, hid in some wood or other couert, to entrap their enemies vn∣wares. Amenitie. Pleasantnesse, delectablenesse. Amerce. To punish one by enioyning him to pay a certaine small summe of money, at the discretion of him that lawfully com∣mandeth it. Amercement. A punish∣ment by the purse: See A∣merce.
Amethist. A precious stone of a purple colour, fit to graue any thing in, be∣cause it is not ouerhard. It withstandeth drunkennes, as the name in Greeke sig∣nifieth. Amiable. Louely. Amitie. Friendshippe, loue. Ammoniacke. A kinde of gum almost like to Fran∣kincense, so called because it groweth in Lybia, neere the place where the Tem∣ple of Ammon was. There is also a kind of salt so cal∣led, which is found in A∣frica vnder sand, and is like vnto allume. Amorous Louing, or gi∣uen to loue. Amphibolie. A speech ha∣uing a doubtfull sence, or which may bee taken di∣uers manner of waies. Amphibologie. The same that Amphibolie is. Amphiscians. Such peo∣ple as dwell vnder the bur∣ning Zone, neere the E∣quinoctiall line, so called because their shadowes at noone are sometimes to∣wards the North, some∣times toward the South. Amphitheater. A place hauing seates and scaffolds in it, vsed among the olde Romanes to shew specta∣cles and strange sights in. Offenders condemned to dye, and Prisoners taken in warre, were often brought to this place to fight and be deuoured by wilde beastes, the people sitting in safe places a∣boue, & inhumanely spor∣ting themselues thereat: Also the Gladiators or Sword-players did fight here. Ample. Large, great. Amplifie. To enlarge. Amplification. An enlar∣ging. Amplitude. Largenesse, greatnesse. Amulet. Any thing han∣ged about the neck, to pre∣serue one from inchant∣ment. Anagramme. An inuen∣tion that by altering the places of the letters of ones name, changeth the word, and turneth it to some other sence, as if for Iohn, one would write,
Ho∣ni: there beeing iust the same letters in them both. Analogie. Proportion, a∣greement, or likenesse of one thing to another. Analysis. A resolution or explicating of an intricate matter. Anarchie. Lacke of go∣uernment: all the time when the people is with∣out a Prince or Gouer∣nour. Anathema. Any thing hanged vp in a Church, as an offering to God: some∣time it signifieth excom∣munication; or a man ex∣communicated and deli∣uered to the power of the diuell. Anathematize. To hang vp a thing as consecrated to God: somtime to curse, sweare, or betake to the di∣uell. Anatomie An incision or cutting. The art of know∣ing the situation, office, and nature of all the parts of mans body. Anatomize. To cut and search euery part. Anchouie. A Spanish fish lesse then our Sprat, pre∣serued in pickle, and vsed by Gallants to draw down drinke. Anchoresse. A religious woman that liueth solitarie in some close place by her selfe. Anchorite. A religious man liuing solitary alone in some close place. Angelicall. Like an An∣gell. Angle. A corner. Anguish. Griefe of mind: vexation. Angust. Streight, nar∣row. Animaduersion. A mar∣king. Animate. To encourage: to harten on. Anime. A white gumme or rosin brought out of the West Indies: It is verie pleasant in smel, and being cast into the fire consu∣meth very quickly. Animositie. Courage. Annalls. Chronicles of things done from yeare to yeare. Annats. First fruits paid of a spirituall liuing. Annex. To knit or ioin to.
Annihilate. To make voide, or bring to nothing. Anniuersarie. A solem∣nitie kept euery yeare at a set time. Annotation. A note, mark, or exposition made vpon any writing. Annuall. Yearely. Annuitie. A yearely pay∣ment of money to one, not in way of rent, but vpon some other occasion. Annull. To make voide. Annunciate. To tell or declare. Antagonist. An enemie: an aduersarie. Antartike Pole. The south pole of the world. Antecedent. That which goeth before. Antheme. See Antiphone. Antichrist. An aduersary to Christ: It is compoun∣ded of the Greeke prepo∣sition Anti, and Christus, which signifieth contrary or against Christ. Anticipate. To preuent: to take before another. Anticipation. A preuen∣ting; or taking before. Antidate. The dating of a letter or other writing on some day already past. Antidote. A medicine a∣gainst poyson, or which serueth to amend any di∣stemperature of the body. Antike worke. A worke in painting or caruing, of di∣uers shapes of beasts, birds, flowers, &c. vnperfectlie mixt and made one out of another. Antimonie. A white stone found in siluer mines. Antipathie. A countrariety or great disagreement of qualities. Antiperistasis. A terme v∣sed in Philosophy, when heat being kept in by cold, waxeth the stronger in it selfe, or cold kept in by heate, groweth more ve∣hement. Antiphone. Any verse or litle sentēce, which church∣men do by course sing one after another. Antipodes. People vnder vs that goe with their feete toward ours. Antique. Old, auncient. Antiquaric. One studious in matters of antiquity, or well acquainted in old Hi∣stories.
Antiquate. To make old, or of no account. Antithesis. A contrarietie of things placed against o∣ther; as the spokes be in a wheele. Antlier. The lower branch of a Harts horne. Anxietie. Carefulnesse, sadnesse. Anxious. Carefull: sad. Aphorisme A short sen∣tence, briefely expressing the properties of a thing: or which serueth as a max∣ime or principle to guide a man to any knowledge, specially in Philosophy and Phisicke. Apocalypse A diuine book written by Saint Iohn E∣uangelist, while he was ba∣nished in the Ile Pathmos: so called because it contei∣neth many profound my∣steries there reuealed vnto him. In English it signifi∣eth a Reuelation. Apocrypha. That which is hidden and not knowne. Doubtfull. Apocynon. A little bone in the left side of a Frog, of great vertue as some thinke. Apogeon. A terme in A∣stronomy, signifying the farthest distance of a Pla∣net from the earth. Apologie. A defence: a speech or written answere made in iustification of a∣ny person. Apologicall. That which is spoken an defence. Apophthegme. A short quick sentence worthy the noting. Apoplexie. A very dange∣rous disease, wherin a man lyeth without sense or mo∣tion, as if hee were dead, with his eyes close, and great difficulty in fetching his breath. It commeth for the most part of colde and grosse flegmaticke hu∣mors, oppressing the brain in such sort that the ani∣mall spirits, cannot passe from thence into the sin∣newes, as they were wont. Apostasie. A reuolting or falling away from true religion. Apostata. He that reuol∣teth or falleth from true religion: Iulianus one of the olde Emperours was most infamous for this crime.
Apostaticall. Of or be∣longing to an Apostata. Apostle. One sent in mes∣sage: an Embassadour. Apostolicall. Of or be∣longing to an Apostle. Apozeme. A drinke made with water and diuers spi∣ces and herbs, vsed insteed of sirupes. Appall. To make afraid: Apparant. Cleare, mani∣fest, certaine. Appariter. A sumner▪ he that attacheth or summo∣neth one to appeare at a Court. Apparition. An appea∣ring: or vision. Appeach. To accuse: dis∣close, or bewray. Appeale. A terme in law, when a malefactour accu∣seth or discloseth those that were his confederates in the same offence or any other. Also when the de∣fendant refuseth a Iudge, and desireth to haue his cause tryed by a superiour power, he is said then to appeale: as Saint Paul ap∣pealed from Feslus to Caesar the Emperour. Appellant. He which ap∣pealeth. Appellation. A naming or calling. Appendix. That which dependeth or hangeth vp∣on another thing. Appertenances. That which appertaineth or belongeth to an other thing. Applaude. To shew loue or liking to a thing, by clapping the hands, or o∣ther signe of reioycing. Applause. A reioycing or clapping the hands for ioy. Application. An applying of one thing to another. Apposition. A putting of one thing to another. Approbate. To like, to al∣lowe. Approbation. An allow∣ance, or liking. Appropriate. To chal∣lenge to ones selfe: to keepe to himselfe alone. Appropriation. A terme v∣sed when any body corpo∣rate, or priuate man, hath the right vnto a parsonage in themselues, and may receiue the profite thereof, by maintaining a Vicar to serue in the place.
Arbiter. A iudge in a controuersie, chosen indif∣ferent for both parties. Arbiterment. An agree∣ment made betweene par∣ties, by an indifferent man to them both. Arbitrary. Belonging to arbiterment. Arbitrate. To iudge, to make an agreement Arbitratour. See Arbiter. * Arblaster. A Crosse-bow. Architect. A chiefe work∣man. Architecture. The art or Science of building and comely cōtriuing a house. It is written that this Sci∣ence did beginne in Caine, because hee was the first that euer built a city, which hee called by his sonnes name Enoch, as appeareth, Gen. 4. Ardent. Burning hot: vehement. Ardour. Heat: earnestnes. Argent. Siluer or siluer colour: sometime white. Argonautes. The Wor∣thies that went into Col∣chos to fetch the golden Fleece; so called of the shippe Argo in which they sailed. The chiefe of them were Iason, Typhis, Castor, Pollux, Hercules and The∣scus. Ariditie. Drinesse. Ariopagite. A Lawyer or chiefe Iudge in Capitall matters in the Citie of A∣thens: so called of a cer∣taine street in that citie de∣dicated to Mars, in which those Iudges were wont to sit. They were so seuere in their iudgements, that they satte to heare and de∣termine matters in the night time, to the end they would not behold the par∣ties which were to be iud∣ged, but onely heare what could be obiected and an∣swered. Saint Dionisius conuerted to the Christi∣an faith by Saint Paul, was one of those iudges. Aristocratie. A kinde of gouernment, where the noble men, or cheefe per∣sons beare all the sway. Aristocraticall. Of or belonging to Aristocra∣tie. Arithmetike. The art of numbring: It is
written that Abraham first taught this art to the Egyptians, and that afterward Pytha∣goras did much increase it. Arke. In holy scripture it signifieth two things: 1. The Arke made by Noe at the commandement of God, which was 300. cu∣bits long: 50. cubits broad, and 30. high: Gen. 6. Se∣condly it signifieth a most precious and consecrated cofer or chest, called the Arke of testament, made of the wood Sethim, and pla∣ted within and without all ouer with gold: It had fowre corners, and in each corner a golden ring, tho∣rough which were putte barres of the same wood Sethim, couered likewise with gold, which serued for the carriage thereof. This Arke was two cubits and a halfe long, one cubit and a halfe broad, and one cubit & a half deepe. Exod. 25. In it was kept part of the Manna in a pot of gold, also the two Tables of the Law, and Aarons rod that had budded: Heb. 9. Armadilio. A beast in India of the bignesse of a young pigge, couered ouer with small shels like vnto armour; for which cause he is called Armadilio, to wit, an armed beast. This beast liueth in the ground like a mole, and the bone of his taile hath vertue to cure diseases and noise in the head. Armipotent. Mightie, strong. Aromaticall. Sweete of sauour: smelling like spice. Arrerages. Mony or rent behind, not yet paid. Arrian. An heretike of the sect of Arrius bishop of Alexandria, who deuised a blasphemous doctrine a∣gainst the diuinitie of our Sauiour. Arride. To please well, to content with delight. Arrogancie. Pride, loftines Arrogant. Proud, boa∣sting. Arrogate. To chalenge, proudly more honour or praise than is due. Arterie. A veine with two coates, or a hollow si∣new in which the spirits of life doe passe through the body.
These kind of veines proceed all from the heart, where the vitall spirits are made, and are those which pant or beate, called com∣monly the pulses. Articulate. To set downe articles or conditions of a∣greement. Artificiall. Cunning, wel contriued, skilfull. Articke pole. The North pole of the world. Artillerie. Great ordnance for the wars. Artisan. A handy crafts man. Artist. He that is skilfull many art. Asa foetidae. A dried gum or liquor, brought out of Media and Syria, of a strong lothsome sauour; and is sometime applyed outwardly to the body. Ascance. Sidewaies, or looking on one side. Ascribe. To impute, ap∣ply, or account. Asia. One of the three parts of the world boun∣ding toward the East, in which is Pontus, Bithynia, Phrygia, Paphlagonia, Cappadocia, Armenia, Cyprus, Syria, Palestine, or the holy land, Arabia, Mesopotamia, (so called because it is in the midst betweene the two great ri∣uers, Tigris and Euphra∣tes) Assyria, Media, Per∣sia, and diuers other coun∣tries. Aspe. A venemous Ser∣pent of a blacke earthie colour and sometime yel∣low. The superstitious E∣gyptians did honour them, and their Kings vsed to weare the figure of an Aspe in their Diadems. They go alwaies two and two toge∣ther, and if it happen that one of them be killed, the other will presently pursue him that slue his fellow, in such sort that he shal hard∣ly escape, vnlesse he make great hast or passe ouer a riuer. If one be bitten by this Serpent, the best re∣medy is presently to cut off the member so bitten, if it be possible; otherwise he shall fall into a deadly sleep, & within few houres goe away, as it were in a trance. Cleopatra Queene of
Egypt, after the death of Marcus Antonius (whom she loued as her Husband) flue her selfe wilfully, by applying one of these aspes to her body; because shee would not bee carryed in triumph to Rome, by Au∣gustus Caesar; who had van∣quished her and Antonie. Aspect. Sight or the be∣holding of any thing. In Astronomy it signifieth the distance betweene the planets & heauenly signes: And there are foure such Aspects. The first called a Trine aspect (because it diuideth the heauens into three euen partes) is the distance of foure signes from each other; as Aries beholdeth Leo and Sagit∣tarius with a Trine aspect, because these are distant foure signes, the one be∣fore, the other after Aries. The second called a Quar∣till, is the distance of three signes, as Aries beholdeth Cancer and Capricorne, with a Quartill aspect, because they are distant three signes from him. The third called a Sextill as∣pect, is the distance of two signes, as Aries beholdeth Gemini and Aquarius with this Sextill aspect, beeing but two signes distant from them. The fourth called an Opposite aspect, is the farthest distance that can be, namely a distance of sixe signes asunder; as Aries beholdeth Librae with this opposite aspect, and Libra beholdeth Aries with the same. The like is of all the other signes, or Planets placed in them. For example; Taurus be∣holdeth Cancer and Pisces with a Sextill, Leo and A∣quarius with a Quartill, Virgo and Capricorne with a Trine, and Scorpio with an opposite aspect. The di∣stance of one or fiue signes is not called an Aspect. Asperitie. Sharpnesse. Aspersion. A sprinkling. Aspire. To hope to come to a thing: to seek aduance∣ment. Aspiration. A breathing, or pronouncing the letter H. before a vowell. Assasinate. A robbing, spoiling, or murthering in the high way.
Assecure. To make one sure or certain, to giue one assurance. Assentation Flatterie. Assertion. An affirming or auouching of any thing. Assets. A terme in the Commmon Law, when wee would signifie that a man hath goods enough come to his hands, to dis∣charge a dead mans debts or legacies giuen by him. Asseueration. An earnest affirming. Assiduitie. Continuance, or continuall attendance. Assigne. To appoint: al∣so one that is appointed in anothers behalfe. Assignation. An appoint∣ment. Assignement. An appoin∣ting or passing of a thing ouer to another. Assistant. A helper. Associate. To accompa∣nie. Association. A ioyning together in fellowship. Assoile. To acquite, cleere, or pardon. Assume. To take to him∣selfe. Assumpsit. When one for some consideration giuen him, vndertaketh any thing. Assumption. A lifting or taking vp. Astipulation. An affir∣ming; an agreement. Astriction. A binding. Astrictiue. Which hath power to binde. Astringent. The same that Astrictiue is. Astrolabe. An instru∣ment of Astronomie to gather the motion of the Starres by. Astrologie. See Diuina∣tion. Astrologer. One skilfull in Astrologie. Astronomie. An art that teacheth the knowledge of the course of the planets & Stars. This art seemeth to be very auncient, for Iose∣phus: lib. prim. Antiq. wri∣teth, that the Sons of Seth, Nephewes to Adam (for Seth was Adams sonne) did first find it out: who hea∣ring their Grandfather A∣dam foretel of the vniuersal flood which should shortly drown the world, they ther∣upon erected two great pil∣lars, engrauing in them the
principles of Astronomie; which pillars were the one of bricke, the other of stone; because if the water should haply wash away the bricke, yet the stone might preserue the knowledge hereof for posterity. Astronomicall. Belonging to Astronomy. Atcheuement. A terme of Heraldry, signifying the armes of any Gentleman set out fully with al that be∣longeth to it. Also the per∣formance of any great matter. Atheisme. The damnable opinion of the Atheist. Atheist. He that wickedly beleeueth there is no God, or no rule of Religion. Atomie. A mote flying in the sunne. Any thing so small, that it cannot bee made lesse. Atrocitie. Cruelty: out∣ragiousnesse. Attache. To take: to lay hands on. Attainder. A conuiction or prouing one guilty of a capitall offence. Attaynt. Conuicted or prooued guilty of some great crime. Attentiue. Diligentlie harkening. Attestation. A witnessing. Attired. A terme vsed a∣mong Heralds, when they haue occasion to speake of the hornes of a Bucke or Stag. Attract. To draw or pull to. Attraction. A drawing or pulling too. Attractiue. Drawing or which hath vertue to draw. Attrectation. A handling or feeling. Attribute. To giue to, or impute. It signifieth some∣time a fit title or terme ap∣plyed to any thing. Attrition. Sorrow, repen∣tance. Atturnie. He that by mu∣tual consent taketh charge of any other mans busi∣nesse. Attumment. The paying of any small peece of mo∣ny by a Tenant, in token that he acknowledgeth the party to whom hee payeth it, to bee now his Land∣lord. Auarice. Couetousnesse.
Aucupation. Hunting af∣ter a thing. Audacious. Bold, hardy. Audacitie. Boldnesse. Audible. That which is so spoken that it may bee heard. Auditor. An Officer of accounts: It is often taken for a hearer. Audience. A hearing or hearkening: sometime it signifieth an assembly of people harkening to some thing spoken. Auerre. To iustifie, a∣uouch or maintain a thing Auerment. A terme in Law when one offereth to prooue that his plea is good. Auersion. A turning a∣way, a disliking. Auert. To turne away. Augment. To increase. Augmentation. An increa∣sing. Augur. See Diuinati∣on. Auiditie. Greedinesse. Auowable. That which one may iustifie and main∣taine. Auow. To iustifie or maintaine. Auowrie. A Law terme, when a Bayliffe or other Officer, auoweth or iusti∣fieth the lawfull taking of a distresse from any man. Auricular. Spoken in ones eare. Auripigmentum. See Orp∣ment. Aurora. The morning. Auspicious. Lucky: for∣tunate. Austere. Sharpe, seuere, cruell. Austeritie. Sharpnesse, hard vsage. Authenticall. That which is vndeniable, and appro∣ued of all men. Authentike. The same as Authentica. Autumne. Haruest time: one of the foure quarters of the yeare; the other three are winter, spring∣tide, and sommer. Autumnal. Of, or be∣longing to Autumne. Axiome. A proposition or short sentence generally allowed to be true; as in saying, the whole is greater than a part. It signifieth also in Logicke, any per∣fect
sentence, that affir∣meth or denyeth a thing, as in saying, Caesar is mer∣cifull, or Caesar is not mer∣cifull. * Aye. For euer Azymes. A solemnity of seuen dayes among the Iewes, in which it was not lawfull to eate leauened bread: the Pasche or Ester of the Iewes. Azure. A fine blew co∣lour. B BAboone. A beast much like an Ape, but grea∣ter. Bacchanals. The feasts of Bacchus. Badger. He that buyeth corne or victuall in one place, to carry into ano∣ther. It is also a beast of the bignesse of a young Hog, liuing in the woods, commonly called a Brock. * Bale. Sorrow: great miserie. Balase. Grauell or any thing of weight laid in the bottome of ships to make them goe vpright. Balefull. Sorrowfull. Balke. A little peece of ground in earable land, which by mischance the Plough slippeth ouer, so that it is not ploughed at all. Ballon. The round Globe or top of a pillar. Balme. A precious iuice or liquor, otherwise called Balsamum, or Opobalsa∣mum. It droppeth by cut∣ting out of a little lowe plant (about a yard high) hauing leaues like Rue, but whiter, which plant grow∣eth in Egypt, and some places of the holy Land. This iuice is somewhat like to oyle, but more clammie, and inclining to a certaine rednesse. It hath a strong smell, and is not pleasant in taste: Being put into a vessell of water, it will sinke downe to the bottome like a round pearle, without breaking, and may bee taken vp a∣gaine with the point of a knife. It is an excellent medicine to take any scar out of the body, and for diuers other purposes, but very costly and rarely
got∣ten. Saladinus writes that there was but one vine∣yard of these in the whole world, and that belonged to the great Turke. Balneo. A bath. Balsamum. See Balme. Baptisme. It commonly signifieth a dipping or washing. Baptist. A washer. S. Iohn the sonne of Zacharias was so called, for that hee first began to Baptize or wash men in the riuer of Iordan to the remission of sinnes. Barbarisme. Rudenesse in speech, or behauiour, out∣ragious crueltie. * Bardes. Poets. * Bargaret. A kind of dance. Barrester. He that is al∣lowed to pleade causes at the barre. Barretter. A common quarreller: one that is e∣uer suing and molesting o∣thers without cause. Barricado. A warlike de∣fence, of emptie Barrels, and such like vessels, laide at the breach of a wall to keepe out the ene∣mies. Barriers. A warlike ex∣ercise of men fighting together with short swords, and within some appoin∣ted compasse. Barter. To bargaine or exchange commodities for commodities. Base. In Architecture it signifieth the foote of a pillar, or the foundati∣on that supporteth any thing. Basiliske. Otherwise cal∣led a Cockatrise: the most venemous serpent that is. It breaketh stones and blasteth all plants with the breath thereof, burning e∣uery thing that it goeth o∣uer; neither can any herbe growe neere the place where it lyeth. It is poy∣son to poyson, and driueth away all other serpents, with only hissing. If a man touch it but with a sticke, it will kill him, and if it see a man a farre off, it de∣stroyeth him with his lookes. This serpent is not aboue a foot long, of color betweene black & yellow, hauing red
eyes, a very sharpe head, and a white spot thereon like a crowne wherefore he is called by some in Latine Regulus, viz. a little king. It goeth not winding like other ser∣pents, but vpright vnto the middle, holding vp the brest thereof. It breedeth onely in the hot burning sands of Africa: Of this Basiliske the Poet Lucane writeth thus. lib. 9. Sibilaque effundens cunctas terrentia pestes. Ante venena nocens, late sibi submouet omne Vulgus, & in vacua regnat Basiliscus arena. With deadly hisse the Basiliske, all other plagues doth fright. And speedier kils then poisons can, with his infectious sight. Hee'le haue no neighbour dwell neere him, he loues to liue alone. And tyrantlike reignes by himselfe, in caue of sandy stone. Bassae. A noble man, or great Commander vnder the great Turke. Bastinado. A staffe: a cudgell. Baston. A staffe, or cud∣gell: sometime it signifi∣eth an officer of the Fleet, attending in the kings Court, with a red staffe, to conuey such to ward, as are there committed. Battry. A beating or stri∣king. Baubee. A small coine: a farthing. * Baine. A Bathe. Bdellium. A Gumme brought out of Arabia, and the Holy land, of a sweete smell and bitter taste. It hath vertue to mollifie and ripen hard swellings, and is good against the stiffe∣nesse of sinewes or other parts, and against the bi∣ting of venemous beastes. Beades of Saint Elline. Cer∣taine round roots brought out of Florida, which being drie are very hard, on the outside blacke, and inwardly white: of a sweet smel and good taste. They
are of great vertue against griefs of the stomack, as al so of the kidnies or reines. Beame. The maine horne of a Hart or Stagge. Beatitude. Blessednesse. Beauer. In armour it sig∣nifieth that part of the hel∣met which may bee lifted vp, to take breth the more freely: It is also a beast of very hotte nature, liuing much in the water. His two forefeet are like the feete of the beast called Gattus, (as Ioannes de San∣cto Amando writeth:) but what this Gattus is, I doe not well vnderstand, only I suppose it to be at Otter. Vpon these feet hee hath very sharpe clawes, where∣with hee taketh his prey, and hangeth vpon water bankes. His hinder feet are made like to the foot of a Goose, wherewith hee swimmeth. Hee hath very sharpe teeth, and doeth much harme to trees, with knawing the rootes and ryndes of them. It is writ∣ten that if a Beauer come into a strange place, where he hath not beene bred, the other Beauers will make him their slaue, to prouide them meate, and pull off all the haire from his backe that he may bee knowen. The stones of this beast are sold in Apo∣thecaries shoppes, by the name of Castoreum: they are much vsed in Phisicke, being very good against palsies and cold diseases of the sinewes: But the skin is of more valew then the stones. Beeglue. That which Bees doe make at the en∣try of their Hiue, to keepe out cold. Beestings. The first milke that commeth from the Teate, after the birth of a∣ny thing. Belial. An Hebrew word signifying a wicked naugh∣ty person. An Apostata; one without yoke, and is many times taken for the diuell. * Beliue. By and by, a∣non. Bellona. Warre, or the goddesse of Warre among the Heathen. Belt. A girdle.
Belzebub. An Hebrew word compounded of Bel, which in that language signifieth an Idoll, and Zebub, a Fly; so that Bel∣zebub signifieth the Idoll of Flies: notwithstanding commonly it is taken for the diuell. Benediction A blessing. Benefactor. A friend, one that doth good. Beneficence. A dooing good. Beneficent. Liberall, lo∣uing. Beneuolence. Good will. Beneuolent. Louing, friēd∣ly, well wishing. Benigne. Friendly, gentle, fauourable. Benignitie. Friendlinesse: liberty, courtesie. * Benison. A blessing. Benzwine A sweet smel∣ling gumme, good against hoarsenesse and the cough, being dissolued in water and dronken. It hath ma∣ny other excellent proper∣ties to be vsed in Physicke. The tree vpon which it groweth is not with vs cer∣tainely knowne. Berill. A precious stone brought out of India, cut most commonly with sixe corners, because otherwise it would not shew so faire, if the sticking out of the corners did not make the brightnesse more mani∣fest. It is of a greenish colour, like the water of the sea. Bestiall. Beastly: disho∣nest. Bestialitie. Beastlinesse. Beuie. A heard of row Buckes: most commonlie with vs it signifieth, a great number of Quails in com∣pany together. Beuie greace. The fat of a Row Deere. Bezar stone. A stone of excellent vertue against poyson, very costly and of great account in Physick. It is commonly of the bignesse of an Acorne or Chestnut, being compoun∣ded of certaine thin scales, one vpon another, like the scales of an Onion. It is easie to bee scraped or cut, and if it continue long in water, it
melteth. The middle part is some∣thing hollow, and full of powder of the same sub∣stance that the stone is of. And this is a marke to know whether the stone bee fine and true: for the Indians doe counterfeite them sometimes and de∣ceiue many. This stone is taken out of the bow∣els of a beast in India, much like a Hart, sauing that his hornes are like a goates. The occasion of the growing of the stones (as some write) is thus. These Harts or wilde Goates (for they resem∣ble both) going to the dennes of Serpents in those countries, doe with their breathing compell them to come forth, and then eate them: after they goe whereas water is, and plunge themselues therein vntil they perceiue the furie of the venome bee past, and till then they will not drinke a droppe: beeing come foorth of the water, they goe into the fieldes, where feeding vpon many healthfull hearbes (knowne to them by naturall instinct to bee of vertue against poyson) they are perfectlie freed from all danger; and by the mixture of these herbs with the Serpents eaten before, these Bezar stones are verie strangely (as is sayd) ingendered within them: growing by little and little, as appeareth by the scales thereof one folded vpon an o∣ther. Bezill. The broad part of a ring, in which the stone or signet is set. Bice. A fine blew colour vsed by painters. Bigamie. The marriage of two wiues; not both to∣gether, but seuerally after the death of the first. Bigamus. Twice marri∣ed, he that hath had two wiues. Such an one the Romish Church admit∣teth not to the Ministe∣rie. Bipartite. Diuided in two parts. Birgandes. A kinde of wilde goose. Bissextile. Leape yeare, so
called, because the sixt Calendes of March are in that yeare twice reckoned: viz. on the 24. and 25. of Februarie, so that leape yeare hath one day more than other yeares haue. This leape yeare is obser∣ued euery fourth yeare, and was first deuised by Iulius Caesar, to accommodate or make the yeare agree with the course of the sunne. Bitumen. A kind of clay, naturally clāmy like pitch; growing in some coun∣tries of Asia. It was of old vsed in phisicke: The best is heauy, bright, and cleere, of purple colour, and ha∣uing a strong smell. The black is accounted naught. This Bitumen was vsed in stead of morter, at the building of the tower of Babel, as appeareth in Gen. cap. 11. There is also a kind of Bitumen, like vnto a liquour, flowing out of some fountaines in the Isl∣land Sicilie, which is vsed in stead of oyle to burne in lampes. Blankemanger. A custard. Blemishes. Markes made by hunters, to shew where a deere hath gone in. Blend. to mixe or min∣gle together. Blewmantle. The name of an office of one of the Pur∣seuants at armes. * Blith. Merry, frolicke, ioyfull. Blomarie. The first forge, through which the iron passeth, after it is once mel∣ted out of the myne. Bloudstone. A stone growing in Ethiopia and Arabia; of nature astri∣ctiue, stopping any issue of bloud, and eating proud flesh out of woundes. It is of a darke colour, like vnto congealed bloud. Bole armoniacke. A red∣dish stone like to ruddle, of a very binding nature, and of great vertue against the plague. Bonayre. Gentle, milde, curteous. Bone breaker. A kinde of Eagle, hauing so strong a beake that therewith shee breaketh bones. Bolus. A medicine which must be eaten: a mouthfull. Bonnet. A hat or cap. Boone. A request, a suite, a
demand; some time it sig∣nifieth good: as a boone companion, a good com∣panion. Boras. A white substance like vnto saltpeter; where∣with goldsmiths vse to sol∣der gold and siluer: some write it is the gumme of a tree; which is very vnlike∣ly: others affirme it to bee made of old lees of oyle, by art and drying in the sunne brought to be white; notwithstanding I suppose it rather to be a minerall. Boreas. the northeast winde. Braces. In building it signifieth the peeces of timber, which bend for∣ward on both sides, and beare vp the rafters. Brachmans. A sect of philosophers in Iudia, that liued onely by hearbes, rootes, and fruite. Brachygraphie. A short kinde of writing, as a letter for a word. Braket. A drinke made of water and hony. Brandish. To shake, pro∣perlie a sword or such like weapon. Braynsicke. Mad, foolish, furious. * Bretfull. Top full. Breuitie. Shortnesse. Brigandine. A coate of defence. Brigantine. A kinde of small light ship. Brime. A tearme vsed a∣mong hunters when the wilde Boare goeth to the femall. Brocage. Meanes vsed by a spokesman. Broches. The first head or hornes of a Hart or Stagge. Brocke. See Badger. Brocket. A red Deere two yeere old. Brothell. A house of di∣shonesty. Brothelrie. Dishonestie, bauderie. Bruite. A report spread abroad. Brumall. Of or belon∣ging to winter. Brute. Beastly, barba∣rous. Brutish. The same. Brutishnesse. Beastlinesse, barbarous behauiour. Budge. A futre of a kind of Kid in other countries. Buffe. A Beast like a Bull, with a
very long mane; This beast bree∣deth in the woods of Ger∣many. Bugle. The same that buffe is: sometime a blacke horne. Bullion: Siluer vnrefined, not yet made in money. Burdon. A deepe base. Burganet. A Helmet, a Head-peece. Burglarie. The breaking and entring into a house by night, with intent to steale or kill. Burnet. A hood or attire for the head. Burnish. To make a thing to glister or looke faire by rubbing it. It is al∣so a terme among hunters, when Harts spread their hornes, after they be fraied or new rubbed. * Burled. It sometimes signifieth Armed. Burlie. grosse, fat, great. Burre. The round rolle of horne, next the head of a Hart. Bursholder. A Headbo∣rough, or officer in a bo∣rough. Buttresses. Staies for to beare vp any building, or make it strong. Buxome. Pliant, amiable, obedient. Buxomnes. Lowlinesse, humblenesse. C CAbal. The tradition of the Iewes doctrine of religion. Cabalist. One skilfull in the doctrine of the Iewes religion. Cachos. An hearbe of red colour, growing in In∣dia, which is of vertue a∣gainst the stone, and to prouoke vrine. Cadence. The falling of the voice. Calaber. A little gray beast of the bignesse of a Squirrell, whose skinne is vsed for furre. Calamarie. A fish which hath his head betweene his hinder part and his belly, with two bones, one like a knife, the other like a quill, whereof he is called by some a Cutle fish. Calcinate. To burne. Calcine. To burne.
Calcination. A burning, a turning into ashes. Calculate. To cast ac∣count, to reckon. Calculation. An account a reckoning. Calends. It signifieth pro∣perly, the first day of euery moneth, being spoken a∣lone by it selfe. If Pridie be placed before it, then it signifieth the last day of the moneth going before, as Pridie Calend. Ianuarij. is the last day of Decem∣ber. If any number bee placed with it, it signifieth that day in the former moneth, which commeth so much before the mo∣neth named; as the tenth Calends of March is the twentieth day of February, because if one beginne at March, and reckon backe∣wards, that twentieth day is the tenth day before March. In March, May, Iuly, and October, the Calends beginne at the sixeteenth day, in other moneths at the fourteenth which Calends must euer beare the name of the moneth following, and be numbred backeward from the first day of the saide following moneths. Calfe. The Fawne or young one of a Redde Deere. Califie. To make warme. Calefaction. A making warme. Callette. A lewd woman. Callidditie. Subtiltiy, craf∣tines. Calthrope. An instru∣ment vsed sometime in Warre. It is a little thing made with foure prickes of yron; of such a fashi∣on, that which way soeuer it be throwen, one point will alwayes sticke vp like a naile, to spoile the ene∣mies horsefeete. Caligraphie. Faire wri∣ting. Calumniate. To slaun∣der: to belie one shame∣fully. Calumniation. Slaunde∣rous lying. * Camoyse. Crooked vp∣ward, as commonly, the noses of blacke Moores bee. Camphire. A kinde of Gumme, as
Auicen wri∣teth. But Platearius affir∣meth it to be the iuice of an herbe. It is white of colour, and cold and dry in operation. Cancel. To deface, cut or blot out. * Canceline. Chamlet. Canicular. See dogge∣dayes. Canker. A hard swelling in the veines, being ouer∣charged with hot melan∣choly humors. It is cal∣led a Canker, because the veines so swollen are like vnto the clawes of a Crab. This disease may happen in any part of the body, but most commonly in womens breasts; by reason of their spongie hollow∣nesse, and great number of veines there meeting. If it continue long it is very hard to cure, because gen∣tle medicines will doe no good, and strong doe in∣crease the raging malice of it. Canniball. A barbarous sauage person: one that eateth mans flesh. Canon. A Greeke word, properly signifying a rule or line, to make any thing straight, or to trie the straightnesse of it. Here∣of Lawes or decrees for Church gouernement are called Canons. And cer∣taine times of prayer vsed by Churchmen, were cal∣led Canonicall houres of prayer. Canonicall. Approoued by common or exact rule. Canonier. He that shoo∣teth in great Ordinance. Canonize. To declare and pronounce one for a Saint. Canonization. The so∣lemnitie of Canonizing or pronouncing one to be a Saint. Cantharides. Certaine Flies shining like golde, breeding in the toppes of Ashe and Oliue trees be∣yond Sea. They are some∣time vsed by Physitiōs, to raise blisters in the body; but their heades, wings, and feete must bee cast a∣way. The iuice of them is poisonous. Cape. A corner of land shooting out into the Sea.
Capabilitie. An aptnesse to containe, or receiue. Capable. Which can con∣taine or hold a thing. Capacitie. Aptnesse to re∣ceiue and hold. Capers. A prickly plant, almost like to brambles, growing in Spaine, Italy, and other hot countries. The roote hereof is much vsed in Phisicke, against obstructions of the spleen or milte. The flowers and leaues are brought hither from Spaine, preserued in brine, and are commonly eaten with Mutton. They stirre vp the appetite, warme the stomacke, and open the stoppings of the liuer and milt. Capitall. Chiefe, princi∣pall; sometime deadly, ab∣hominable. Capite. A tenure, when a man holdeth lands, im∣mediately of the king, as of his crowne. Capitole. An ancient pa∣lace in Rome, so called. Capitulate. To draw or bring into Chapters. Capriole. Leaping of a horse aboue ground, cal∣led by horsemen, the Goates leape. Capstand. An instru∣ment to wind vp things of great weight: some call it a Crane. Captious. Short, quicke, quarrelsome in demaunds. Captiuate. To take pri∣soner. Captiuitie. Bondage, im∣prisonment. Caranna. A Gumme brought out of the West Indies, of great vertue a∣gainst aches proceeding of cold causes. Carbonado. A rasher vp∣on the coales. Carbuncle. It hath two significations, namely a precious stone, and a dan∣gerous sore. 1. Carbun∣cle stone, is bright, of the colour of fire. It hath ma∣ny vertues, but chiefely preuaileth against the dan∣ger of infectious aire. The best of these stones will shine in darkenesse, like a burning coale, as Albertus writeth, himselfe hath seene. Others shine but a little, and are lesse estee∣med; but such as
shine not at all, are scarce of any rec∣koning: these stones are found in some countreyes of Africa 2. Carbuncle disease, is a botch or vlcer, (otherwise called by a Greeke name Anthrax) caused of grosse hot blood, which raiseth blisters, and burneth the skinne. This vlcer is euer accompanied with a Feuer. Cardones. An herbe in India, of vertue to heale sores. Carlo Sancto. A roote growing in the West In∣dies, of a pleasant smell and bitter taste, the rynde whereof beeing chewed draweth downe fleame and humours from the head, and being drunken in powder is good against diuers inward diseases. Carcanet. A small chaine. Cardinall. Chiefe, prin∣cipall. Carnall. Fleshly. Carnalitie. Fleshlinesse. Carol. A song: some∣time a dance. Carpe. To checke, taunt or rebuke. Carreere. A short swift race with a horse, as at Iusts, Tournaments. Carrike. A great shippe of burden. Casana. India bread. Casia. It is commonly taken for Cinnamome. Poets vnderstand often by it, some sweete smelling herbe: as Virg. Eclog. 2. Tum Casia atque alijs intexens suauibus herbis. Also Ouid. Quo simul ac Casias & nardi lenis aristas. Quassaque cum fulua substr auit Cinnama myrrha, Lactantius also: De Phoenice. Cinnama dehine, auramque procul spirantis amomi; Congerit & mixto balsama cum folio. Non Casiae mitis, nec olentis vimen acanthi, Nec thuris Lachrymae, guttaque pinguis abest. Where wee see that Casia and Cinnamome, signifie two things. Some thinke
it to be Lauender for mine owne part, I know not certainely what English name or interpre∣tation to giue it. Cassia fistula. A fruite growing in Arabia and Syria, which is round, blacke, and long, almost as ones arme, of the big∣nesse of a Thumbe. The outside hereof is hard: within it, is contained the seede, and a blacke sub∣stance soft and sweete, which is much vsed in Physicke, as a gentle purger of the inwarde partes. Cassia lignea. A sweete wood much like Cinna∣mome, and of the nature of Cinnamome. Castigate. To chastise, to correct. Castigation. A chasticing, a correction. Castleward. A payment made by some dwelling within a certaine compasse of a Castle, for the main∣tenance of those that do watch and ward the Ca∣stle; Also the circuite of land, which oweth this seruice. Castoreum. See Beuer. Casuall. That which happeneth by chaunce, doubtfull, vncertaine. Casualtie. Chance: for∣tune, hap-hazard. Catadupa. A place in E∣thiopia so called, where the great riuer Nilus, fal∣leth from high Mounta∣nous rockes with such vi∣olence, that the continu∣all noise thereof, maketh the people there dwelling to become deafe. Catalogue. A roll, a bill, a register of names or other things. Cataplasma. It signifi∣eth properly a medicine, which is made of diuers herbes, either bruised or boyled in water, and so applied outwardly to the body. If there be oyle ad∣ded, it is not then called a Cataplasme, but an Em∣plaister. Cataract. A destillation of humours out of the eyes. Catarrhe. A destillati∣on of waterish humors out of the head, into the mouth and throate, caused by a
cold and sometime hotte distemperature of the braine. Catastrophe. The con∣clusion or end of Come∣die: a sudden alteration. Catechumen. A nouice, or one newly instructed in matters of faith, by word of mouth. Categorie. In the Greeke tongue it properly signifi∣eth an accusation. It is al∣so a terme vsed in Logike, which shall after be expli∣cated in the word Predica∣ment. Categoricall axiome. A simple axiome or proposi∣tion, not compounded of any coniunction, as, Pe∣ter is a man. Cathedrall. Of or belon∣ging to a Bishops Chaire. Catholike. A Greeke word, signifying vniuersall or generall. Catoblepa. A strange beast that killth a man onely with the sight of it: some thinke it to bee the Basiliske, or Cockatrise. Cauearce. A strange meate like blacke sope, made, (as is said) of the Roe of a Sturgeon. Caueat. A warning, an admonition to take heede. Cauerne. A hole or Caue in the earth. Cauille. To mocke or flout in words, to reason ouerthwartly. Cauitie. Hollownesse. Causticke. A medicine that burneth; and is vsed when a disease cannot o∣therwise be mastered. Cautele. A taking heed. Cautelous. Warie, cir∣cumspect. Cauterize. To burne: to seare. Caution. A warning or watchword giuen to take heed: sometime a great heedfulnesse, or warie ca∣riage in a thing. Cedar. A tall great tree, which groweth in Africa, and Syria, straight vpright like the Firre tree. The leaues are smal and thicke, of a sweete smell: This Tree hath fruit on it, all times of the yeere, which fruite is like that of the Pine and Firre Tree, but greater and har∣der.
Celebrate. To speake or write very honourablie in praise of any thing: also to rehearse often: and sometime to keepe a festi∣ual day, or other time with great solemnity. Celebration. The solem∣nization of a feast. Celebritie. Great resort to a place: famousnesse. Celeritie. Swiftnes, speed. Celestiall. Heauenly. Celsitude. Highnesse. Cement. Morter: Lime. Censer. A vessell to burne Frankincense in Censor. A graue Officer hauing authority to con∣trolle and correct maners. Censorean. Belonging to a Censor. Censure. A iudgement: an opinion. Centaures. People of Thessalie, which because they first rid on horses, were supposed to be halfe men and half horses. Poets feine they were begotten by Ixion vpon a cloud, made in the likenes of Iu∣no. They warred on the La∣pithes, and were ouercome by Hercules. Center. The point in the midst of a round circle, or the inward middle part of a globe. VVherefore the earth is called the Center of the world, because it is in the midst thereof. Centurion. A Captaine o∣uer a hundred footmen. Certes. Surely; certaine∣lie. Certificate. A writing which testifieth the cer∣tainty of a thing. Cerusse. VVhite Lead, oftentimes vsed by Surge∣ons in oyntments & play∣sters Some women make painting therewith. Ceterach. Otherwise cal∣led Fingerferne: An herbe which hath neither stalke, flower, nor seed. It is much vsed in Phisick against the blacke Iaundise, quartaine agues, and stopping of the spleene. Chalons. Blankets, Coue∣rings. Chameleon. A little beast like a Lizard, hauing a rough scaly skin, straight legs, sharpe clawes, a slow
pace like a Torteyes, and a long wreathed taile: Hee changeth himselfe quickly into any colour that he sit∣teth vpon, except white & red: wherefore men that are inconstant and fickle, are sometime called Cha∣meleons. This beast (as is saide) is nourished onely with aire. Chamfering. A smal gut∣ter or furrow made by art vpon some pillars of stone or timber. Champertie. See Cham∣pertours. Champertours. Those that stirre others to go to law, & beare the charges there∣of themselues, to the end they may haue part of the land, or other thing in va∣riance. Chancellour. A chiefe of∣ficer in a spirituall Court: Also the Lord or cheefe Iudge in the Chancerie. Chancerie. The Court of equity & good conscience. Chantor. A singer. Chaos. A great confused and disorderly heape, out of which Poets imagined all thing to be made. Chaplet. An attire for the head, made of Gold, Pearle, or other costly, or curious stuffe, vsed to bee fastned behinde; in man∣ner of a foulded rolle or garland. Character. The forme of a letter. A marke, signe, or stamp made in any thing. Characterie. A writing by Characters or by strange markes. Charles Wayne. Certaine Starres winding about the North pole of the world, in fashion like foure wheeles and horses draw∣ing it. Poets feine that Ca∣listo, King Lycaons daugh∣ter, hauing had a childe by Iupiter, was by Iuno in de∣spight turned into a Beare, and that Iupiter changing Calisto afterward, into this figure of Starres, for that cause, in Greeke it is called Arctos, which signifieth a Beare. Charnell house. A place to lay sculles, and bones of dead men in. Chart. A writing, a writ∣ten deed. Charter. A writing wher∣by the King
makes a grant to any person or persons of any liberty, priuiledge, par∣don, or other thing: Also writings betweene priuate men, are somtime so called. Chattell. A Law tearme, wherof there be two kinds, namely Chattels reall, and Chattels personall. Chat∣tels reall, are beasts, or wards. Chattels personall are all moueable goods, as money, plate, cattell, &c. Chaunter. A singer. Cheate. To cousin, to de∣ceiue. Cheating. Cousenage. Cherubin. One of the highest Order of Angels: See Hierarchie. Cheeftaine. A Captaine. Cheeke varnish. Painting vsed by some women. Cheuisance. Merchandise, bargaining. China. A hard knotty roote brought out of the East Indies, of a reddish colour: It is very comfor∣table to nature, and vsed often in restoratiues and dyet drinkes. Chiromancie. See Diui∣nation. Chiualrie. Knighthood: the knowledge of a Knight or Nobleman in feats of armes. Chiuancie. Chiualrie: ri∣ding. Chrisme. A Greeke word, signifying an Oynt∣ment: Sometime it is ta∣ken for a white linnen cloth, wrapped about an infant after it is newlie christened. Chrismatorie. A vessell to cary oyle in. Christ. The surname of our Sauiour, signifying an∣nointed. Chronologer. One skilfull in Chronicles. Chronologie. The know∣ledge of old Stories. Chrysocoll. A kinde of minerall found like Sand in the veines of some met∣talles. Chrysolite. A stone of the colour of Gold, which shineth brightest in the morning, and receiueth harm if it be held too nere the fire. Chymera. A strange mon∣ster, hauing the head and breast like a Lyon, the bel∣ly like a Goate, the tayle like a Dragon.
Chymicall. Of, or belon∣ging to a Chymist. Chymist. A Physition following the method of Paracelsus. Cimball. An old musicall instrument, made in some places of two or mo plates of brasse, which with bea∣ting together made a ring∣ing noyse. Cimisse. A noysome little worme, flat and red, which raiseth wheals where it bi∣teth: If it bee broken, it yieldeth a stinking smell. Cinoper. A soft red stone, found in mines, otherwise cald Vermilion. The Pay∣nims did vse to paint their Idols therwith, and them∣selues in publike feasts and solemnitiss, as wee reade that Camillus when he try∣umphed in Rome was painted with this Vermili∣on: So Virgill speaking in his tenth Eclog, of the shep∣heards God Pan, saith that he was seene, Sanguineis ebuli baccis minioque rubentem. With bloody Walwort berries staynd, and with Vermilion red. Coique Ports. Fiue hauen townes in our Countrey, which haue many liber∣ties. They are Hasting, Romnie, Hethe, Douer, and Sandwich. Circular. That which is round in compasse. Circumcise. To cut off the foreskin of a mans pri∣uy parts: which was a re∣ligious ceremony among all the Hebrewes after A∣braham, to whom God first commanded it. Circumcision. A cutting off of the foreskinne. See Circumcise. Circumference. The outer part of any round circle: The ring or round com∣passe of a wheele. Circumlocution. A long circumstance; a speaking of many words, where few may suffice. Circumscribe. To cōpasse round, to draw a line about Circumscriptible. That which may bee limited or contained within bounds. Circumspect. Wise, warie, heedfull.
Circumuent. To compasse in; to deceiue one craftily. Cite. To warne one to appeare. Citation. A warning one to appeare. Citrine. Yellow. Cittadell. A castle with a small garrison to keepe a towne in awe. Ciuet. A sweet substance like muske. It is said to be the dung of the beast Hye∣na. Ciuilize. To make ciuill. Clamour. A great cry or noise. Clamorous. Crying out or exclaiming. Clandestine. Priuy, close, secret. Clarentius. One of the Kings of armes, whose of∣fice is to dispose the fune∣rals of Knights & Esquires of the southside of Trent. Clarifie. To make cleere. Claritie. Noblenesse, cleerenesse. Clause. A short sentence. * Cleepe. An olde word, signifying to name, or to call. Clemencie. Mercy, gen∣tlenesse. Clement. Mercifull, pitti∣full. Client. One that asketh counsell of a Lawyer. Clime. See Climate. Climactericall. A Greeke word signifying an account or reckoning, made by cer∣taine degrees or steppes. Some haue heereby diui∣ded the age of mans life after this manner. The seuenth yeare they reckon for dangerous; and by this account the 14.21.28.35. &c. are climactericall yeares. Likewise the ninth yeare is esteemed equallie as dangerous, and by this account, the 18.27.36. &c. are called Climacteri∣call yeares. But the most noted and famous Clima∣ctericall yeare, is at the age of 63. because both ac∣counts doe meete in this number; namely 7. times 9. and 9. times 7. And this is held the most dangerous yeare of all other. Climate. A terme vsed in Cosmographie. It sig∣nifieth a portion of the world, betweene North &
South, conteining some notable difference in the sunne rising. Cloke. To couer or hide. Closhe. An vnlawfull game, called by some nine pinnes, cules, or kit∣tles. * Clum. A note of si∣lence. Coaction. Constraint. Coactiue. Constraining. Coadiutor. A fellow hel∣per. Coagulate. To turne to curde. Coca. An hearbe in In∣dia, the leaues whereof be∣ing bruised and mixt with the powder of Cockles or Oysters in their shelles burnt, the Indians vse in little balles to carry in their mouthes, to preserue them from famine or great dryth. Cockatrice. See Basi∣liske. Coequall. Equal in degree with another. Coessentiall. Of the same essence or substance. Coeternall. Equall in eter∣nity with another. Cogitation. A thinking. Cognition. Knowledge. Cohere. To cleaue, stick, or hang together. Coherence. An agreement or hanging together. Collaterall. Sidewaies, or ioyning to the side. Eue∣rie degree of kindred is ei∣ther lineall or collaterall: The lineall is that which cometh from the Grand∣father to the Father, from the Father to the Son, and so still right downeward: Collaterall is that which co∣meth sidewaies, as first be∣tweene brothers & sisters, then betweene their chil∣dren, &c. Also Vnckles, Aunts, and all Cousins are conteined vnder this tearme of Collaterall kin∣dred. Collation. A short ban∣quet. Colleague. A companion, or one ioyned in office with another. Collect. To gather toge∣ther. Collection. A gathering. Collocation. A placing together. Colloquie. A talking or conferring together.
Collusion. Deceite, couse∣nage. It is also a terme vsed in law, when an action is brought against one, by his owne agreement. Collyrie. A physicall terme signifying any medicine for the eyes. Colon. A marke of a sentence not fully ended; which is made with two prickes, thus(:) Colonie. Among the Ro∣mans, when their cittie was too ful of inhabitants, they vsed to withdraw a certaine number, to dwell in some other place, which number so withdrawne, as also the place to which they were sent, was called by the name of Colonie. Coloquintida. A kinde of wilde Gourd, which the Persians name Gall of the earth, because it de∣stroyeth all hearbes, neere which it groweth. It is round hauing a thinne yellow rinde (when it is ripe) and the inner part open, and spongie full of gray seede. If there grow but one vpon a plant, it must bee throwne away, because it will bee too violent in operation. This fruite is often vsed in phy∣sicke to purge slimie grosle humours from the sin∣newes and ioynts; but must be well prepared, for that otherwise it is verie dangerous. Colosse An image or sta∣tue of exceeding great∣nesse, made sometime by the olde Emperours of Rome. There was one such image in the Ile of Rhodes, dedicated to the sunne, of one hundred and fiue foot long, the thumbe of which image few men could fathome. Columbine. Douelike. Columne. A pillar. Coluri. Two imagined circles in the heauens, drawne both through the Poles; whereof one pas∣seth through Aries and Libra, the other through Cancer and Capricorne: So that they deuide the Zodiacke, and the whole heauens into foure euen parts. Combat. A fight between two, allowed by
the law for triall of some contro∣uersie. Combatant. He that figh∣teth or is to fight a Com∣bat. Combine. To couple or ioyne together. Combination. A coupling or ioyning together. Combust. Burnt or scor∣ched: a planet is said to be combust, when he is vnder the sunne beames, or with∣in certaine degrees of them. Combustible. That which wil soone be set on fire and consumed. Combustion. A burning. Comedie. A play or interlude, the beginning whereof is euer full of troubles, and the end ioy∣full. Among the Greekes Eupolis, Aristophanes and Cratinus, were the chiefe comicall Poets, among the Latines Plautus and Te∣rence. Comedian. A Player or writer of Comedies. Comet. A blazing starre. It is properly a great quan∣tity of hot and drye exha∣lations drawne vp from the earth, by the attractiue vertue of starres into the highest region of the ayre, where beeing neere the Element of fire, it is infla∣med, and there mooued round, according to the motion of the starre, vnder which it is growen, or the motion of the ayre, in those high parts. Comicall. That which pertaineth to Comedies: also pleasant or merry. Comma. A marke often vsed in writing and prin∣ting, which is made thus (,) Commemorate. To re∣hearse or make mention. Commemoration. A re∣hearsall, a remembrance. Commence. To begin, to enter an action against one. Commendatorie. which recommendeth one. Comment. Notes of in∣struction set in some bookes, to expound such things as cannot easily bee vnderstood. Sometime it is taken for a lie or fayned tale. Commentarie. See Com∣ment.
Commendatorie. That which hath commendati∣ons onely written in it. Commerce. Conuersation, entercourse of merchan∣dise. Commination. A threat∣ning. Commiserate. To take pittie or compassion vpon any. Commiseration. Pittie or compassion. Commissarie. One that hath spirituall iurisdiction in some out places of a diocesse, so farre distant from the chiefe citty, that it were too great trouble to summon people to it. Commission. A writing testifying that one or ma∣ny haue some authoritie in a matter of trust, commit∣ted to their charge. Commissioner. He that is in authoritie by vertue of a commission. Committee. He to whom a matter is committed to be decided or ordered. Commixe. to mingle to∣gether. Commixtion. A mingling together. Commodious. Fit, profita∣ble. Commotion. A great stir, a hurly burly. Communicable. That which may be imparted vnto an other. Communion. A partaking together. Communitie. Fellowship in partaking together. Commutation. A chan∣ging. Compact. Hard knit, close ioyned together, sometime a bargaine, agreement. Compassionate. Pittifull, which grieueth at others harmes. Compendious. Briefe, short, sauing. Compendium. A short way, a sauing course. Competencie. Sufficiency, fitnesse. Competent. Conuenient, fit, necessary. Competitor. He that sueth for the same thing with an other. Compile. To make, frame, or set together. Complement. Fulnesse, perfection, fine behauiour. Compleate. Full, perfect.
Complexion. The tempe∣rature of the humors in mans body, which causeth the colour: sometime it signifieth painting vsed by women. Complices. Fellowes or confederates, in leawde matters. Compose. To frame; or set together. Composition. A ioyning or putting together. Compositor. He that com∣poseth or setteth a thing in order. Comprehend. To con∣taine, or conceiue in the minde. Comprehensible. Which may be contained or con∣ceiued. Comprehension. A taking, a conceiuing, or vnderstan∣ding. Comprission. A pressing together. Compremise. An agree∣ment made by indifferent parties chosen on both sides. Comprise. To containe. Compulse. Constraint, enforcement. Compulsion. Constraint. Compunction. Griefe, re∣morse. Computate. To account, cast, or reckon. Computation. An account, or reckoning. Comrade. A compani∣on, a good fellow. Concaue. Hollow. Concauitie. Hollownes. Concinnitie. Apt, fitnes, a feate contriuing, or han∣some setting a thing toge∣ther. Concise. Briefe, short. Conclaue. A priuate roome, a closet. Concoct. To digest, to boile. Concoction. Digestion of meate in the body. Concourse. A great assem∣bly. Concupiscence. Lust, flesh∣lye desire. Concurre. To meete to∣gether. Condescend. To agree, to ioyne together. Condigne. Worthy, due, deserued. Condole. To lament with an other, to bemone. Conduce. To helpe, or be profitable.
Conduct. To guide one in the way. Confection. A mingling to∣gether: or that which is mingled. Confederate. One ioyned in friendship, or linked with another in any prac∣tise. Conferre. To compare to∣gether: sometime to talke or reason with another. Conference. A reasoning together, or a comparing of one thing with another. Confidence. Trust, credite. Confident. Very bold, as∣sured; nothing doubtfull. Confine. To appoint bounds, to limit. Confines. The bounds or borders of a Country. Confiscate. Forfeited: sei∣sed to the Kings vse. Confiscation Forfeiture of ones goods, or seising them to the Kings vse. Conflict. A fight, a skir∣mish, a bickering. Confluence. A flowing to∣gether: a great multitude: great store. Conforme. To apply or frame ones selfe to any thing which is required of him. Conformitie. Likenesse or agreement with another thing. Confront. To come or stand boldly before ones face: to face one. Confuse. Mixt together: mingled, out of order. Confusion. A disorderlie mingling. Confute. To disproue, to ouerthrow by argument. Congeale. To freeze, to grow stiffe, or cling toge∣ther with cold. Conglutinate. To glew together: to ioyne. Conglutination. A glew∣ing together. Congratulate. To reioyce in anothers behalfe with him: or to signifie that we so reioyce. Congratulation. A reioy∣cing together. Congregate. To gather together. Congruent. Agreeable, meet, fit. Congruity. Good agreemēt. Coniecturall. Vncertaine, which may, & may not be. Conioyne. To ioyne toge∣ther. Coniugall. Belonging to wedlocke.
Coniunction. A ioyning or coupling together. Coniure. To sweare or conspire together: to bind by oath, or vnder a great penalty. Connex. To knit or tye together. Connexion. A knitting to∣gether. Conniuence. A suffering, or winking at a matter. Consanguinitie. Kindred by blood. Consecrate. To hallow or make holy. Consecration. A making holy. Consequence. That which followeth another thing going before. Consequent. Following or necessarily comming after another thing. Conserue. To preserue or keepe. Conserues. The iuyce or substance of any thing boi∣led with Sugar and so kept. Considerate. Discreet, wise. Consistorie. An assembly of Magistrates, a iudgement place. Consolatorie. Comforting, which comforteth. Consolation. Comfort. Consolidate. To make firme or strong. Consonant. Agreeable. Al∣so euery letter not being a vowell, is so called, as B, C, D. Consort. A company: or a company of Musitions together. Conspicuous. Bright, cleere. Conspurcation. A defiling or making foule. Constellation. A company of starres together: or the influēce which they work. Consternation. Amazemēt: a great feare. Constitute. To ordaine, to appoint. Constitution. A decree, an ordinance. Construction. A ioyning of words and sentences toge∣ther. Consubstantiall. Of the same substance. Consubstantialitie. Agree∣ment in substance: the be∣ing of the same substance that another is of. Consull. A cheefe officer among the Romans: there were two chosen yearly to gouerne the Citty: These
Magistrates first began af∣ter the Kings were expel∣led, and were caled Consuls, of the latin word Consulere, because they were by their office to prouide and take care for the good of the common wealth. Consult. To take aduice together. Consultation. An aduice or deliberation taken to∣gether. Consummate. To finish, to make an end. Consummation. An end, a finishing of a matter. Consumption. A consu∣ming: Also a disease, wher∣in the lungs being exulce∣rated, there followeth a leannesse of all the body. Contagion. An infection. Contagious. Infectious. Contammate. To defile. Contamination. A defiling Contemne. To despise. Contemplate. To behold in the mind: to muse vpon. Contemplatiō. A beholding in mind; a thinking vpon. Contemptible. Base, vile, of no account. Contemptuous. Despiteful. Continencie. Chastitie, temperatenesse. Continent. Chaste, sober, temperate. Continent land. That which is no Iland, maine land. Contingent. Casual, doubt∣full, vncertain: which may and may not be. Continuate. To ioyn close together. Contract. A bargaine, an agreement made. Contraction. A shrinking together. Contradict. To gainsay or speake against. Contradiction. A speaking against; a withstanding in words. Contribute. To giue with others; to allow as others do. Contributarie. Which al∣loweth or giueth as others do. Contribution. A giuing with others, when many giue together. Contristate. To make sad or sorrowfull. Contritn. Broken: very sor∣rowfull: hartily repentant. Contrition. Great inward sorrow for sin committed. Controuert. To contend, striue, or be
at variance a∣bout a matter. Contumacie. Stubbornnes, disobedience: selfe will. Contumelie. Reproach; spite, disgrace. Contumelious Reprochful: spitefull, disgracefull. Contund. To pound or beate in a morter. Contusion. A beating, brui∣sing or pounding. Conuent. To bring one before a Iudge. Conuenticle. A litle assem∣bly; most commonly for an ill purpose. Conuention. An appearing before a Iudge. Conuerse. To vse ones company, to liue with. Conuersant. Vsing much in ones company. Conuersion. A turning from euill to good. Conuict. Proued guilty of the crime whereof hee is accused. Conuiction. A condemna∣tion or proofe of beeing guiltie. Conuince. To ouercome, or confute: To proue one guiltie. Conuocate. To call toge∣ther. Conuocation. An assem∣bling or calling together: sometime the company as∣sembled. Conuulsion. A shrinking, or pulling together of the sinewes; a cramp, a pang. Cooperate. To worke to∣gether; to helpe. Cooperation. A working with another, a helping. Cope. A Church vestmēt much like a large cloke. Copall. A white Rosin of much brightnesse brought from the West Indies: the people there were wont to make perfumes thereof in their sacrifices. It is hot in the second degree, and moyst in the first, and is vsed heere to bee burnt a∣gainst cold diseases of the braine. Copie. Great plentie. Copious. Plentifull, aboun∣dant. Copulation. A coupling or ioyning together. Corall. There are two sorts hereof, the one white, the other red; but the red is best. It groweth like a tree in
the bottome of the sea, from whence being taken, it is by the ayre hardened into the forme of a stone, as we see it. It is cold and dry in operation, good to be hanged about childrens neckes, as well to rub their gums, as to preserue them from the falling sick∣nesse. Corbell. A shouldering peece cut out in stone, as we may see in wals, to bear vp a poste, summer, or o∣ther weight. Corbets. Places in walles where Images stand. Corbona. A chest or cofer in the Temple of Hieru∣salem, where the treasure that serued for the Priests vse was kept. Cordiall. Hearty; that which comforteth the heart. Cordwayner. A Shooema∣ker. Corodie. An ancient term, vsed when the founders of Abbies or other religious houses, reserued a right in themselues and heires, to appoint some person to haue allowance of meate and drinke, or other main∣tenance out of the house; and this allowance wa called a Corodie. Coronell. A Captain oner many bands. Coronation. The crow∣ning of a King or Queen. Corporall. Of, or belong∣ing to the bodie. Corporation. A body po∣litick, hauing by the kings graunt a common seale, a cheefe Officer, and in∣feriour persons belonging to it. Corpulencie. Grossenesse, fatnesse. Corpulent. Fat & grosse. Correlatiue. A tearme of Logicke applyed to such words as cannot bee spoken, but there must be supposed some other word, which is necessarily a de∣pendant vpon it: as a Fa∣ther and a Sonne; a Mai∣ster and a Seruant; a Cap∣taine and a Souldiour; a Husband and a Wife. Correspondence. An a∣greeablenesse, or proporti∣on answering to some o∣ther thing. Correspondent. Agreeable, or answerable to another thing.
Corrigible. That which may be corrected or amen∣ded. Corriuall. He that is sui∣ter with another, to a wo∣man for marriage. Corroborate. To streng∣then, to confirme. Corrode. To gnaw asun∣der. Corrosiue. A fretting plai∣ster: any thing which laid to the body, raiseth blisters and maketh it sore. Cosignificatiue. Of the same signification with an∣other thing. Cosmographie. An art tou∣ching the description of the whole world. This art by the distance of the cir∣cles in heauen, diuideth the earth vnder them into her Zones and climats, and by the eleuation of the Pole, considereth the length of the day and night, with the perfect demonstration of the Sunnes rising and go∣ing downe. Couent. The whole num∣ber of religious men toge∣ther dwelling in one house. Couerture. A couering. In the Common Law it signifieth all the time, that a man and wife are coupled in marriage. Couchant. Couching or lying on the ground. Couert. Hidden, secret. Couertbaron. A marryed wife: a woman subiect to a husband. Couerture. In our Com∣mon Law it is sometime taken for marriage. Couine. Deceit, cousenage. Countermand. To giue cō∣mandement contrarie to that which was comman∣ded before. Countermine. To mine or dig in the earth against another. Countermure. A wall made in defence of another wall. Counterpane. The fellow coppy of a deed indented. Counterpoise. Any thing laid in waight against ano∣ther thing. Counteruaile. To bee of equall value to another thing. Coupee. Cut off. Cramp fish. A fish whose nature
is to make the hands of such as touch it, to be benummed or asto∣nied, though they touch it with a long pole. Crannie. A little hole or chinke. Crauen. A coward. Crazie. Sickly, weake, of vnperfect health. Credence. Beleefe, trust. Credible. That which may be beleeued. Creditor. He that lendeth or trusteth another with mony, or wares. Credulitie. Easines of be∣leefe. Credulous. He which ea∣sily beleeueth a thing. Cressant. In Heraldrie it signifieth the newe Moone. Crime. An offence, or fault committed. Criminall. Faultie: or that which belongeth to a fault or accusation. Crisis. A Greeke word, which is interpreted iudg∣ment. In Phisicke it signi∣fieth the conflict betweene nature and sickenesse: that is, the time, when either the patient suddenly be∣commeth well, or sudden∣ly dyeth, or waxeth better or worse, according to the strength of his bodie, and violence of the disease. Crispe. Curled. Cristall. A substance like cleere glasse. There are two kindes hereof. One which groweth vpon ex∣treame cold mountaines, being there congealed like yee, by the minerall vertue of the place, as Albertus writeth. Another kinde groweth in the earth in some places of Germa∣nie. Cristalline. Made of Cri∣stall, or shining like Cri∣stall. Criticall. In Phisicke the fourth and seuenth dayes are called Critical, because in them Phisitians vse to iudge of the danger of a disease: But the seuenth is accounted the chiefe Criticall day, & the fourth a token or signe what the seuenth day will be, if the Patient liue so long. This account must bee made according to the number of weekes thus. In the first weeke the fourth day is the token or
Critical of the seuenth day. In the second weeke the eleuenth is the Critical of the fourteenth. In the third the seuenteeth is the Criticall of the twentieth: for Hippocrates reckoneth the twentieth day for the last of the third weeke: In the fourth week 24. is the Criticall of the 27. In the fift, the 31. the Criticall of the 34. In the sixt weeke the 37. the Criticall of the 40. And so foorth to a hun∣dred. Criticke. The same that Criticall is. Also it signi∣fieth sometime, one that hath authoritie, or taketh vpon him to censure other mens acts or works writtē. Crocodile. A harmefull beast liuing most about the Riuer Nilus in Egypt. It is hatched of an egge, and groweth vnto a won∣derfull greatnesse, some∣time to twentie or thirtie foot long. This beast hath no tougue, and in feeding moueth onely the vpper iawe: He hath eyes like a Hogge, and cruell sharpe teeth: Hee hath no haire, but is made much after the fashion of an Euet, with a long taile, a long belly, and backe couered all ouer with scales close ioyned & of great strength. Vpon his feete hee hath strong sharpe clawes. In the day time hee can see farre, and liueth on land, in the night he is almost blind, and keepeth in the water. He is very bold vp∣on those he seeth afraid of him, and feareful if he bee assaulted. It is written that he will weepe ouer a mans head, when he hath deuou∣red the body, and then wil eate vp the head two. Wherefore in Latine there is a prouerbe, Crocodili La∣chrymae, Crocodiles tears, to signifie such teares as are fained, and spent onely with intent to deceiue, or doe harme. I saw once one of these beasts in London brought thither dead, but in perfect forme, of about three yards long. Croches. The little buds or branches, at the top of a Harts horne. Crossclet. A melting pot.
Crotayes. Dung of a Hare. Crownet. A little crowne, also a part of a horse hoofe is so called. Crude. Rawe, not well digested. Cruditie. Rawnesse: ill digestion. Cubebs. A certaine fruite sold by Apothecaries like vnto Pepper. It commeth out of India, and is hotte and drie in operation. It comforteth the braine much, and quickeneth the spirits, being held & chew∣ed in the mouth. It is also very good to open the stoppings of the Liuer. Cubite. Halfe a yarde: the measure from a mans elbow to the toppe of his middlefinger. Cullion. The stone of a∣ny liuing thing. Culpable. Faultie. Culture. Tillage, dressing of land. Culuertaile. A strong kind of building, by fastening boards or tymber, with ar∣tificiall ioynts, so firmely togither, that they cannot fall asunder. Cummune. An herbe, the seed whereof is much vsed in Phisicke. It is hot and dry, good to breake or dis∣solue windinesse in any part of the body. Cumulation. A heaping vp, or increasing. Cunctation. Slackenesse, delay, lingering. Capglasse. A hollow round Glasse, with a hole in the bottome, vsed by Physiti∣ans sometimes, to drawe blood or wind out of the body, for it sucketh with great strength, by reason of a little flame of fire made in it. Cupiditie. Desire, coue∣tousnesse. Curfew. A bell which ringing about bedtime, gi∣ueth folkes warning, to go to rest and couer their fire. Cursorilie. Swiftly: as when one readeth a booke ouer with speed. Curtezane. A harlot. Curtilage. Any peece of ground, as a yarde, backeside, or garden plotte, adioyning to a house. Custodie. Safe kee∣ping.
Cutchoneale. A little flie (as some thinke) brought from beyond the Sea, dri∣ed, wherewith diers die Stammell and colours in Graine: but indeed it is a fruit. Cynicall, Doggish, See Cynike. Cynike. Doggish or cur∣rish: There was in Greece an old sect of Philoso∣phers so called, because they did ouersharply barke at mens vices, and were not so respectiue in their behauiour as ciuilitie re∣quired. The chiefe of this sect were Antisthenes and Diogenes. Cypher. A circle in Arith∣metike like the letter O; which of it selfe is of no value, but increaseth the value of other figures af∣ter which it is ioyned: wherefore we sometime say of one, that in compa∣ny of others doth nothing himselfe, that he standeth for a Cypher. Cypresse. A tree which groweth on drie moun∣taines, very tall and slen∣der: the tymber thereof is yellowish and of a pleasant smell, especially set neere the fire. I carieth no leafe, but greene small twigs. D * DAffe. A dastard. * Dagges. Lat∣chets cut of Lether. Daine. To vouchsafe. Dandruffe. Small scales that sticke to the skinne of the head, and often hang about the haires. They are caused by salt fleame, or some other corrupted hu∣mours, piercing insensibly the pores, and then slight∣ly congealed by the aire, and may be taken away by washing the head with salte water or vineger warme. Darnell. A naughty graine almost like wheate, but much lesse, and groweth among wheate often. It may be vsed in Phisicke, against some outward dis∣eases, but taken, inwardly it is harmefull, as beeing too hot, and making the head giddy. Darreigne. To attempt, or challenge.
Deaurate. Guilded, gliste∣ring like gold. Debilitate. To weaken. Debilitie. Weakenesse. Debitor. A debtor. Debonaire. Gentle, milde, curteous. Decad. The number of tenne. Decalog. The ten com∣mandements. Decent. Comely, han∣some. Decencie. Comelinesse. Decide. To determine, or end a Controuersie or doubt. Decipher. To write after a strange fashion, that none shall reade it, also to find out the meaning of a thing so written. Decision. A determination, or end made of a contro∣uersie Declayme. To speake e∣uill: to reproach. Declamation. An oration or speech made of purpose in reproach of any person or thing. Declaymer. He that ma∣keth a declamation. Decline. To bend downe∣ward. Declination. A bending downeward. Decliuitie. A steepe ben∣ding downward, as on the side of a hill. Decoct. To seethe, to boyle. Decoction. A boyling or seething. In Phisicke it signifieth commonly any liquor in which medicina∣ble rootes, herbes, seedes, flowers, or any other thing hath beene boyled. Decollation. A beheading. Decorum. Comely, or comelinesse. Decrepit. Weake, or very feeble with age. Decressant. The Moone in the last quarter. Decretals. Ordinances, decrees. Dedicate. To offer, giue, or appoint for some speci∣all purpose. Dedication. An offering, a giuing vp. Deduce. To take away, to abate. Deduct. To take away. Deduction. A taking a∣way. Defamation. A defaming, a speaking ill of one.
Defamatorie. Slanderous: which defameth. Defatigation. Wearinesse. Defeasance. An ouer∣throwing, or vndoing that which was formerly done. A writing testifying that some other writing shall be of no force. Defeate. To deceiue, or beguile: to take craftilie from one. Defect. A failing or want in any thing. Defection. A falling away a reuolting. Defectiue. Faultie, which wanteth something. Defendant. He which an∣swereth to an accusation or challenge. Defensiue. That which defendeth, or is spoken or done in defence. Deferre. To put off, to prolong. Define. To declare, shew or describe a thing plaine∣lie. Definition. A sentence which expresly declareth what a thing is. Definitiue. Which de∣fineth or concludeth a matter. Defloration. A deflou∣ring. Defloure. To corrupt, spoile or marre. Deforme. To disfigure, to spoyle the forme of any thing. Deformation. A difigu∣ring. Deformitie. Ill fauourd∣nesse: vncomelinesse. Defraude. To deceiue, to beguile. Deft. Little and pretty, feat and handsome. Defunct. Dead. Degenerate. To turne out of kind. Degrade. To take away the priuiledge of holy or∣ders from one. Degradation. A taking a∣way of Ecclesiasticall au∣thoritie, from a Clerke conuinced of some noto∣rious crime. Degree. A terme often v∣sed in Astronomie and phisicke. In Astronomie it signifieth the thirtieth part of a signe: viz. of Aries, Taurus, Gemini, &c. For in∣to so many parts or de∣grees are all the signes di∣uided. In phisicke it
sig∣nifieth a proportion of heat, cold, moisture or dri∣nesse, in the nature of simples; and there are foure such proportions or degrees: The first degree is so smal, that it can scarce be perceiued. The second, that which may be mani∣festly perceiued without hurting the sense. The third, that which some∣what offendeth the sense. The fourth, which so much offendeth, that it may destroy the body. For exrmple: Sweet Almonds Rice, Buglosse, ripe Grapes are hot in the first degree: Parsley, Saffron, Hony, in the second degree; Cum∣mine, Galingall, Pepper in the third degree: and Garlike, Spourge, Euphor∣bium, in the fourth degree. So Barly is cold in the first degree, cucumbers in the second, Sengreene in the third, and Hemlocke in the fourth degree. Where note that in heat, cold, and drinesse, there may bee foure degrees, and in moi∣sture but two. Dehort. To disswade: to aduise one to the con∣trary. Dehortation. A perswasi∣on or admonition to re∣fraine from doing some thing. Deiect. To throw down, to debase. Deiection. A throwing downe, a debasement. Deitie. Godhead, or a God. Delineate. To draw the first proportion of a thing. Delinquent. An offender. Delude. To mocke, to scorne, to deceiue. Deluge. An vniuersall o∣uerflowing of waters, Noes floud. Delusion. A mocking. Demaynes. The Lords Mannor house, and the landes which he and his auncestors haue alwayes vsed. Demeane. To behaue or carry ones selfe. Demeanour. Behauiour. Demerit. A desert. Demise. To giue or graunt. Democratie. A kind of go∣uernment
wherin the peo∣ple bere rule without other superiours sauing such as they appoint. Democraticall. Of or be∣longing to the estate of Democratie. Demolish. To pull downe. Demolition. A pulling downe. Demoniacke. Possessed with a diuell. Demonstrable. Which may be shewed or made manifest. Demonstrate. To shew. Demonstration. A shewing plaine of any thing. Demurre. A pause or stay, a standing still. Demy. Halfe, sometime little. Deneere. A penny, a small peece of mony. Denizen. A straunger borne, that obtaineth the Kings letters patents, and becommeth his Maiesties subiect, enioying thereby al priuiledges, as if he were an Englishman. Denominate. To name one. Denomination. A naming. Denotate To note or marke, to signifie. Denotation. A noting or marking. Denounce. To giue war∣ning, to declare, to threa∣ten. * Denwere. Double. Deodand. When a man is casually killed by a Cart, Horse, or Mill, &c. that which mooued and was thereby cause of his death, being forfeit to the King, appertaineth to his Maie∣sties Almoner to bestow in deedes of charity, and is therefore called a Deodand, as being to be giuen away for Gods sake. Depend. To hang vpon an other thing. Dependant. That which hangeth vpon an other thing. Deplore. To lament; to bewaile. Deploration. A lamenting. Depopulate. To waste or spoile a countrey. Depopulation. A spoiling or wasting of a countrey. Depose. To take away ones authority, to thrust out of his kingdome, some∣time to sweare. Depositum. A pledge, any thing layd
vp with one to keepe. Deposition. A deposing or putting from great au∣thority, also a laying down, sometime an oath or testi∣mony giuen by oath. Depraue. To corrupt or marre, sometime to speake euill of one. Depresse. To crouch downe, to keepe vnder. Depriue. To take away. Depriuation. A losse of any thing. Depute. To appoint. Deride. To mocke, or floute. Derision. A mocking. Deriue. To take or draw from another thing. Deriuatiue. That which is deriued from an other thing or word. Deriuation. A deriuing, or drawing from some thing. Derogate. To empaire, diminish, or take away. Derogation. A taking a∣way from ones honour or estimation. Derogatorie. That which empaireth or hindereth the credit of any one. Descend. To go down∣ward. Describe. To expresse plainly the outward forme of a thing. Description. A plaine expressing of the outward forme of a thing, or the manner how a thing was done. Designe. To appoint. Designement. An enter∣prise or purpose which a man hath. Desist. To leaue off. Deteine. To keep from one. Detect. To discouer, to disclose. Detection. A discouerie, a disclosing. Detract. To speake euill of one. Detraction. Slanderous speaking. Detriment. Losse, harme, hinderance. Deuastation. A wasting of a country. Deuest. To vncloath. Deuiant. Farre out of the way. Deuoire. Endeauour. Deuolue. To rolle down. Deuolution. A rolling along.
Dewlap. The hollow part of the throate, hanging downe in some beasts. Dexter. Belonging to the right hand. Dexteritie. Nimblenes, quicknesse, skilfulnesse. Diabolicall. Diuellish. Diacatholicon. An electu∣ary much vsed in physicke, so called because it serueth as a gentle purge for al hu∣mours. Diacinnamon. A physicall mixture of cinnamom and diuerse spices in powder together, which helpeth digestion and is good a∣gainst colde moist diseases of the stomacke. Diacodion. A cold sirupe made of the tops of pop∣pies, vsed in phisicke some∣time against hote diseases, and to stay the falling downe of humours out of the head. Diacurcuma. A confe∣ction made of Saffron and diuers other simples, vsed against the dropsie and old diseases of the stomacke, spleene and liuer. Diadem. A Kings crowne, or an attire for Princes to weare on their heads, made of purple silke, and pearle. Diagalanga. A confecti∣on made of Galingale and hotte spices, good against the winde colicke and cold distemperature of the in∣ward parts. Diagridium. There is a plant called Scammonie growing in farre hot coun∣tries, the iuice of the roote whereof being dryed, is a very strong and violent purgatiue medicine, called also Scammonie: which be∣fore it can be vsed in phy∣sicke, must bee boyled in Quinces, to abate the ma∣lice of it: now the Scammo∣ny boyled and prepared in this sort, is called by Apo∣thecaries Diagridium. Dialacca. A confection made of the gumme Lacca, and diuerse hotte simples, good against cold diseases of the stomack, stoppings, of the liuer, and all causes that may draw one to the dropsie. Dialect. A difference of some words, or pronunci∣ation in any language: as in England the Dialect or manner
of speech in the North, is different from that in the South, and the Western Dialect differing from them both. The Grecians had fiue especi∣all Dialects: as 1. The property of speech in A∣thens: 2. In Ionia: 3 In Doris: 4. In Eolia: and 5. that manner of speech which was generally vsed of them all. So euery countrey hath common∣ly in diners parts thereof some difference of lan∣guage, which is called the Dialect of that place. Dialecticall. Of or be∣longing to the art of Lo∣gicke. Dialog. A talke, reaso∣ning, or disputation be∣tweene two parties or moe, or a discourse written where such a conference is set downe. Diamber. A comforta∣ble confection made of di∣uers hot spices, good to be giuen in wine or other li∣quor, to strengthen the stomacke, reuiue the spi∣rits, and warme the inward parts. Diameter. A streight line which passing throught the middle of any figure, di∣uideth it in two equall parts. Diapason. A concord in musicke of all. Diaphoenicon. An Ele∣ctuary vsed often by Phi∣sitions to purge fleame and choler. Diaper. A fine kind of linnen not wouen after the ordinarie fashion but in certaine workes, Di∣amonds, knots, or other deuices. Diapred. Diuersified: of diuers colours, or garni∣shings. Diaprunum. An Electu∣ary made of Damaske Prunes, and diuers other simples, good to coole the body in hot burning Fe∣uers. After it is made, phisitians vse often to adde Diagridium to it, and then it becommeth very Purgatory, and is called Diaprunum soluti∣uum; soluble, or laxatiue Diaprunum. Diarhodon. A comfor∣table confection
good to refresh and strengthen all the inward parts, after long hot diseases. Diasena. A purging E∣lectuary▪ good against quartane Agues, and all other diseases proceeding from melancholy. Diatragacanthum. A con∣fection made of the Gum Tragacanth, and other sim∣ples, good against hot dis∣cases of the breast, the cough, pleurisie & inflam∣mation of the lungs. Diatrionpiperion. A con∣fection so called, because it is principally compoun∣ded of the three kindes of Pepper, to wit, long, white and blacke Pepper. It is good to helpe digestion when the stomacke wan∣teth heat to concoct that which it hath receiued. Diatrionsantalon. A cold confection made of the wood Sanders, good a∣gainst burning Agues, and to refresh the inward parts inflamed with too much heate. Diaturbith An Electu∣arie which principally purgeth flegmaticke grosse humours. Dicacitie. Much talke: or prating. Dichotomie. A diuiding into two parts, or a diuisi∣on made by two and two. Dicker. Tenne hides of Lether. Dictate. To endite; also that which one writeth frō anothers mouth while he speaketh. Dictator. A chiefe Offi∣cer among the Romanes; neuer chosen but vpon great necessity in dange∣rous troubles of the com∣mon wealth. This Dictator could continue in office but onely sixe moneths, and then vnder paine of treason was to giue vp his authority: He could bee named by none but the Consull, and that in the night time, with great si∣lence and attention. After he was once chosen all o∣ther Magistrates were out of office, except onely the Tribune of the people; so that the Dictator, during his time, had (as it were) a kingly authority aboue al. Diffcult. Hard: vnea∣sie.
Difficulty. Hardnesse, vn∣easinesse. Diffidence. Distrust. Diffident. Mistrustfull. Diffuse. To spread a∣broad. Digamma. The letter F. so called, because he bea∣reth a forme, like the Greeke Letter Gamma, made double. Digest. To dispose or set in order. Dight. Made ready: ap∣parrelled, dressed. Digresse. To turne aside, to leaue the matter that is in hand and speak of another thing. Digression. A turning to speake of another thing. Dilaniation. A tearing in pieces. Dilate. To spread abroad to enlarge, to drawe in length. Dilatation. A drawing in length, speaking of a thing at large. Dilemma. A kind of ar∣gument, which conuinceth ones aduersary both waies: as in saying: If hee bee a good man, why doe you speake euill of him? If he be naught, why doe you keepe him company? Dimension. The true mea∣sure of a thing. Diminution. A dimini∣shing. Diminutiue. Little, small, or a word which betoke∣neth a little thing, as, lambekinne, a little lambe. Dinumeration A num∣bring, a reckoning. Dire. Fierce, cruell, terri∣ble. Directorie. That which directeth one. Direption. A violent cat∣ching away. Disanull. To disalowe. Disappeare. To vanish out of sight. To be seene no more. Disastrous. Vnluckie: vn∣fortunate. Disauow. To deny or refuse by vowe. Disciple. A Scholler, one that learneth. Discipline. Instructi∣on. Disclayme. To de∣nie. Disconsolate. Vncom∣fortable.
Discordant. Disagree∣ing. Discrepant. Much diffe∣ring. Discusse. To examine, debate, or trie a matter. Discussion An examining, a sifting or tryall of a mat∣ter. Disfranchise. To take a∣way freedome. Disfranchisement. A ta∣king away of ones free∣dome. Disgust. Dislike. Dislocation. A putting out of the right place. Dismall. Vnluckie: grie∣uous, Dismantle. To vnclothe: to vnfurnish, to leaue vn∣prouided. Dismisse. To discharge, to put away. Disparage. To disgrace: to ioyne with vnequall match. Disparagement. Disho∣nour: disgrace, It proper∣ly signifieth a shame or disgrace done by a Guar∣dian to his word, in mary∣ing him vnder yeeres, to a woman vnfitte for his calling, or to one past childe-bearing, or which hath some great defor∣mitie, lamenesse, or some horrible disease. Disparates. A terme of Logicke, applyed to such wordes as are onely diffe∣ring one from another, but not contrary: as heate and cold are contraries, but heate and moisture are Disparates: viz. two contrarie qualities. Disparitie. Vnlikenesse: vnequalitie. Disperpelled. A terme in Herauldrie, when any thing of soft substance, doth by falling from high shoot it selfe out into di∣uers corners or endes. Disperse. To scatter a∣broad. Dispersion. A scattering abroad. Displayed. Wide spread, opened. Disputable. Any thing that a man may dispute on. Disrobe. To vnclothe: properly of rich, or gar∣ments of estate. Dissent. To disagree. Dissheuelled. Bare hay∣red,
without any attyre on the head, the haire han∣ging at length. Dissimilitude. Vnlike∣nesse. Dissipate. To scatter, or spread abroad. Dissipation, A scatte∣ring, a wasting. Dissolue. To vndoe, weaken, or destroy: to plucke downe. Dissolute. Loose, wanton, giuen much to vaine plea∣sures. Dissolution. A breaking, weakening, or pulling a∣sunder of any thing. Dissonant. Of a contra∣ry sound, not agreeing. Disswade. To perswade one from a thing. Disswasion. A perswa∣ding of one from some thing. Distich. Two verses; or a sentence conteined in two verses. Distinguish. To put a difference between things. Distinction. A difference put betweene things. Distract, To drawe a∣way: to trouble ones minde. Distraction. A pulling asunder, or drawing away of the mind. Distresse. Any goods taken and detained for. not paiment of rent, or to enforce one to answere to a suite. Sometime it signifieth great affliction, or misery. Distribution. A diuding among many. Disturbe. To trouble, to vexe. Disunion. A disioyning, a seuering. Disunite. To part, to diuide, to seuer. Diuert. To turne a∣side. Diuident. That which diuideth. Diuine. Heauenly be∣longing to God. Some∣time to gesse or foretell a thing to come. Diuination. A fore∣telling of a thing before it happeneth: which may (as I take it) bee diui∣ded into three different kindes; namely, super∣naturall, naturall, and su∣perstitious Diuination.
Supernaturall Diuination (onely reuealed to man by God,) is not properly called Diuination, but prophecie, with which all the holy Prophets haue in former times beene inspi∣red. Naturall Diuination may be diuided into two branches; whereof the first is, that which hath in former times been prac∣tise by wicked spirits in o∣racles and answeres giuen by them in Idoles, and is at this day sometime seene in possessed persons, who by suggestion of the diuell may foretell often things to come: and this is but a naturall Diuination: For although to vs it seeme miraculous, because of our ignorance in the causes and course of things, yet in those spirits, it is but natu∣rall, who by their long ex∣perience and great obser∣uation, beside the know∣ledge of secrets in nature, and their quicke intelli∣gence from all places, are able to foresee much more then wee by nature can. The second branch of na∣turall Diuination, is that which a wise man may foretell by probable con∣iecture, being no way of∣fensiue, so long as it is on∣ly guided by reason; and ouerruled by submitting it selfe to the almightie power of GOD. And to this second kinde of Diuination, may also A∣strologie bee referred (which by the motion and influence of Starres and Planets doeth pro∣mise to foretell many things) so long as it kee∣peth it selfe in due limits, and arrogateth not too much to the certainetie thereof: into which ex∣cesse of vanitie if it should breake foorth, it can then be no longer called na∣turall Diuination, but superstitious and wicked: for the Starres may in∣cline but not impose a necessitie in particular things. The third and last manner of Diuinati∣on, is that which wee cal∣led superstitious, where∣of there hath among the Gentiles beene diuers dif∣ferent kinds, namely Au∣guration,
Aruspicie, Necro∣mancie, Geomancie, Hydro∣mancie, Pyromancie, Cosci∣nomancie, Palmistrie or Chi∣romancie. Auguration, was a diui∣nation made of things to come, by the flying, fee∣ding, & chirping of birds: the professors whereof cal∣led Augurs, were of great account among the heathē Romans, in so much that there was a Colledge of them in the citty; neyther would the Romans vnder∣take any publike matter of importance, without asking their assent. But the vanity hereof was well derided by a wise Iew, named Mosso∣lamus; as Iosephus writes. For an Augur in the wars once requiring, that the army which was then mar∣ching, might stand still a while, till he tooke obser∣uation of a bird there by, to foreknow the successe of that expedition, this Iew whilst the Augur was bu∣sie in his art, shot at the Bird with an arrow, and by chance killed her: whereat the Augur and others being highly offen∣ded: Are you so foolish (quoth the Iew) to ima∣gine, this poore Bird can tell what will happen to vs, that could not foresee her owne death so neere at hand? Aruspicie, is a diuination, which by ope∣ning and viewing the bo∣wels of beasts, did vnder∣take to foretell things to come: the professors whereof were called A∣ruspices. Necromancie, the worst of all others, is that diuination, which is practised by coniuration, and calling vp Diuels or dead mens Ghosts. Which manner of diuination we reade practised by King Saul (1. Reg. cap. 28.) when he required a Sor∣ceresse to call vp the spirit of Samuell to him. Geo∣mancie, is a kinde of diui∣nation practised by making prickes and lines in the earth; as the name in Greeke signifieth. So Hy∣dromancie, is a diuination made by some apparition in water, as
Varro writeth, that a Boy saw in water, one bearing the forme of Mercurie, who foretold in one hundred and fiftie verses, the euent of the warre which the Ro∣mans had with King Mithridates. Pyromancie is a diuination made by the fire, or spirits ap∣pearing in the fire. Cos∣cinomancie is a ridiculous kinde of diuination made with a sieue; which at this day is vsed by some sim∣ple women, and appea∣reth to bee of antiquitie, for in the third Idylle of Theocritus there is men∣tion made hereof. Palmi∣strie or Chiromancie, is a diuination practised, by looking vpon the lines of the fingers and hands, an art still in vse, among fortune tellers, Egypti∣ans, and iuglers. Besides these there were also o∣ther diuinations, as name∣ly Acromancie, that which is gathered by apparitions in the aire. Capnomancie, by the flying of smoake. Catoptromancie by visions shewne in a glasse. All which beeing euen by the Pagans themselues ac∣counted deceitfull and vaine, it remaineth that of Christians they be vtterly reiected and abhorred. Diuorce. A separation of man and wife, which was (as our Sauiour witnes∣seth) first permitted by Moses vnto the Israelites, for the hardnesse of their hearts, that men might rather put their wiues a∣way, whome they grew wearie of, than vse them with too great extremitie, to shorten their liues, as many did. The woman so diuorced was to haue of her husband, a writing (as Iosephus witnesseth) to this effect. I promise, that here∣after, I will lay no claime to thee: And this writing was called a bil of diuorce. But with Christians this custome is abrogated, sa∣uing onely in case of a∣dulterie. The auncient Romanes also had a cu∣stome of diuorce, and a∣mongst them, it was as lawfull for the wiues to put away their
husbands, as for the husband to dis∣misse his wife: but amongst the Israelites, this preroga∣tiue was onely permitted to the husband. Diureticall. That which is of vertue, to cause one to make water. Diumall. Of or belong∣ing to a day: Also a booke, wherein daily actions or accounts are set downe. Diuturmitie. Long con∣tinuance. Diuulge. To publish, or tell abroad. Diuulgation. A telling, or reporting abroad. Docibilitie. See docilitie. Docible. See docill. Docill. Easie to bee taught, one that wil soone learne. Docilitie. Aptnesse, quick∣nesse of vnderstanding. Document. A lesson, an instruction. Dogdayes. Certain dayes in Iuly and August, so cal∣led of the Starre Canis, the Dogge: which then ri∣sing with the Sun, doeth greatly increase the heate thereof. Dogmaticall. Which is held or maintained in som mens opinion. Dole. Sorrow, heaui∣nesse, griefe: sometimes almes giuen to many poore folkes. Dolefull. Heauie, sorrow∣full. Dolorous. Greeuous, painefull. Dolphine. A fish friend∣lie to man, and especial∣ly to children; the Fe∣males of this fish, haue breasts like to women, which are well stored with milke. They are ve∣ry faithfull to one ano∣ther, and bring foorth yong ones like whelpes, after tenne moneths, and in Sommer time. They sometime breake foorth of the Sea, but presently die as soone as they touch land. Doome. A sentence pro∣nounced: a iudgement. Doomesman. A Iudge. Domesticall. One of the house: or any thing belonging to the house. Domesticke. See Dome∣sticall. Domineere. To beare rule, or great sway.
Dominicall. Belonging to sunday or our Lordes day. Dominion. Lordship, rule. Donarie. A gift; proper∣ly that which is hanged vp in a Church. Donation. A giuing. Donee. Hee to whom a thing is giuen or granted. Donour. A giuer. Dormant. Sleeping. Dormitorie. A place to sleepe in: or that which hath vertue to make one sleepe. Dorter. A cell or cham∣ber vsed onely for religi∣ous men to sleepe in. Dowager. A Widdow Princesse, hauing dowrie in the countrey which was in subiection to her decea∣sed husband. Doulcets. The stones of a Hart or Stag. Drachme. See dram. Dramme. A smal weight, the eight part of an ounce: It conteineth in it three scruples, euery scruple beeing of the weight of twentie Wheate cornes: so that a dramme is the iust weight of 60. cornes of wheate. Drerie. Sorrowfull: la∣mentable. Dromedarie. A kinde of camel, hauing two bunches on the backe, which is very swift, and can trauell two or three daies without drinke. Drone. An idle Bee that will not labour. Druides. Ancient Pa∣gane Priests in France, which liued naked in woods, giuing themselues to the study of Philosophy, and auoyding all company so much as they might. They were of such estima∣tion among the people, that all controuersies were referred to their determi∣nation, and a great penal∣tie laid on such as disobei∣ed their sentence. They be∣leeued the immortalitie of soules, but supposed (with Pythagoras) that they still passed by death from one body to another. Dryades. Nymphs of the woods, so called of the Greek word Drys: which signifieth an Oake. Duall. Of, or belonging to two.
Dubious. Doubtfull. Dubitable. Doubtfull. Dulia. Seruire: a wor∣ship done to Angels and Saints. Duplication. A doubling. Duplicitie. Doublenesse. Durabilitie. Long conti∣nuance. Dwale. An hearb of cold operation, hauing power to make one sleepe: some call it Nightshade. E EAglet. A yong Eagle. Ebene. A tree which groweth in Ethiopia, bea∣ring neither leaues nor fruit. It is blacke and hath no graine like other wood, and is sharp byting in tast: Being burned it yeildeth a pleasant smell, neither is the smoake thereof offen∣siue: but the greene wood is so full of sap, that it will flame like a candle. It is good against many disea∣ses of the eyes. That which groweth in India, is spot∣ted with white and yellow, being not in such estima∣tion as the Ethiopian E∣bene is. Ebionits. Certaine olde Heretikes, which affirmed that Christ was not before his mother, the B. Virgin. Against these Heretickes, Saint Iohn writ his Gos∣pel, after he returned from his banishment in the Ile Pathmos. Ebonie. See Ebene. Ebrictie. Drunkennesse. Eccho. A rebounding or sounding backe of any noyse or voyce, in a wood, valley or hollow place. Po∣ets feine that this Eccho was a Nymphc so called, which beeing reiected of one, whom she loued, py∣ned away for sorrow in the woods, where her voyce still remaineth answering the outcryes of all com∣plaints. Ecclesiasticall. Of, or be∣longing to the Church. Ecclesiasticus. Of, or be∣longing to a Preacher. The name of a Booke in the olde Testament is so called. Eclipse. A fayling or want of any
thing: Com∣monly it signifieth a want of light; and there be two such Eclipses, namely of the Moone and of the Sunne. Eclipse of the Moone; neuer happeneth but at the full Moone, nei∣ther then alwaies, but whē she is in such a point, that the shadow of the earth de∣priueth her of the Sunne beames, from whence she taketh her light. Eclipse of the Sunne is not so vsuall, and happeneth only at the change of the Moone, namely when the Moone being betweene the Sunne and vs, doth with her dark body, hide part of her light from vs: which was the cause that Dionysius Areo∣pagita, seeing the Sunne so admirably eclipsed at our Sauiours passion, con∣trarie to all reason, when the Moone was not in a∣ny neerenesse to hinder his light, cryed out in amaze∣ment: Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut machina mun∣di dissoluetur. Either the God of nature suffereth, or else the frame of the world will be destroyed. Ecliptike line. An ima∣gined line, running tho∣rough the midst of the twelue signes, in which the sunne alwaies keepeth his course. Eclog. It is commonly taken for a poeme contei∣ning a communication of slepherds, but the word in Greeke signifieth a collection or choice ga∣thering of things toge∣ther. Eden. An Hebrew word signifying delectation, or a place of pleasure and de∣light. Paradise. Edible. Which may bee eaten. Edict. An ordinance made by any in authori∣thority: A proclamation or decree. Edifie. To build, to frame, sometime to in∣struct. Edifice. A building, a frame. Edification. A build∣ding: but most common∣lie it is taken for an in∣struction, so plainely de∣liuered that the hearer profiteth by it.
Edition. A setting forth or publishing. Educate. To bring vp, to nourish. Education. A bringing-vp. Effectuate. To performe Effeminate. Womanish, nice. Efficacie. Strength, ver∣tue, force. Efficiencie. A bringing to passe. Efficient. Which bringeth to passe or performeth. Effusion. A powring out, a large spending. Eftsoones. Againe, of∣ten. Egregious. Notable, ex∣cellent. Egresse. A going forth from any place. Egritude. Griefe of mind, or paine of bodie. Eiect. To cast out. Eiection. A casting out. Eiulation. A howling, a pittifull crying out. Elaborate. Curious, done with great paines. Elate. Lifted vp, aduan∣ced, proud, loftie. Elation. A lifting vp, pride, loftinesse. Elaterium. The iuyce of wilde cucumbers dried: Being taken inwardly, it purgeth waterish humours, and is good against the dropsie. But it must bee mixed with somewhat to restraine the malice of it, for otherwise it will bee painfull in operation. * Eld. Old age. Elect. To choose, or one that is chosen. Election. Choice. Electuarie. Any medi∣cine taken inwardly, made of diuers powders mix∣ed together, and by tem∣pering with some syrupes or hony, brought to a soft liquid forme. Elegancie. Finenes, neat∣nesse. Elegant. Fine, neate, pic∣ked, trim. Elegie. A mournefull song vsed in funerals, or other passions of sor∣row. Elegiacke Mournefull. Element. The first mat∣ter of visible substance, from whence all things take their beginning: wher∣of
there be foure, namely, fire, ayre, water, and earth. Sometime it signifieth a letter, as A.B.C. sometime the first foundation, prin∣ciple, or instruction of any thing. Elementarie. Which con∣sisteth of Elements. Eleemosynarie. Giuen in almes, or which giueth almes. Elench. A subtill argu∣ment. Eleuate. To lift vp, to aduance. Eleuation. A lifting vp. Elixir. An Arabian word of the same signification that Quintessence is in la∣tine: see Quintessence. Elke. A kinde Yew to make bowes with. Elocution. Vtterance, e∣loquence. Eloine. To put, giue, or sell away. Elong. To put, or set farre off. Elude. To mocke or de∣ceiue. Elusion. A mocking, a deceite. Elysian. Of or belon∣ging to Elysium. Elysium. A supposed place of pleasure below, where Poets imagined the soules of good men did rest. Embalme. To annoint with baulme. Embassie. An embassage, a message from one Prince to another. Embellish. To make beautifull. Embezill. To steale, to conuey away. Embleme. It properly sig∣nifieth any fine worke, cunningly set in wood or other substance, as we see in chesse boards and ta∣bles; notwithstanding it is commonly taken for a picture or other deuice, shaddowing some matter to be learned by it. Embost. A tearme vsed by hunters, when a Deere is so weary that he fometh at the moth. Embracer. A law terme of him, that when a matter is in triall, commeth for reward to the barre, being no lawyer, nor witnes, and speaketh in fauour of one of the parties: or which laboureth the
Iury, or v∣seth any vnlawful practise to make them giue their verdit, as hee would haue them. Embrion. A childe vn∣perfect in the mothers wombe. Emendation. An amen∣ding. Emeralde. A precious stone, the greenest of all o∣ther, for which cause it is very comfortable to the sight. The best of these stones are brought out of Scythia. And some affirme them to bee taken out of the Griffons neastes, who doe keepe this stone with great crueltie. It is found by experience (as Albertus writeth) that if the Emerald be good, it inclineth the bearer thereof to chastitie, and cannot endure the a∣ction of lust. There is also a disease sounding neere this word, for which see Hemorrhode. Eminence. Highnes, dig∣nitie, honour. Eminent. High, lofty, ho∣nourable. Emmanuel. An Hebrew word expressing the digni∣ty of our Sauiour, and is in∣terpreted God with vs. Emolument. Profit, gaine, aduantage. Empannel. To make vp a iurie of twelue, or more men. Emphasis. An expresse or most plaine significati∣on of ones mind. Emphaticall. That which is vttered with most ex∣presse signification, in such sort, that it setteth forth to the full, the intent of the speaker. Empiricke. A physition that getteth skill by his owne practise. Emplaster. A plaister or salue made of herbes, pow∣ders and oyle boyled toge∣ther. Empleade. To sue one. Emprimed. A terme vsed by hunters when a Hart first forsaketh the heard. Empyriall heauen. The highest heauen aboue the firmament; so called (by a Greeke name) because of the bright shining of it. Emulate. To enuie, to striue to doe as another doth.
Emulation. Enuie: an earnest desire to doe as an other doth. Enarration. A telling or declaring. Enchiridion. It is com∣monly taken for a little booke, which one may stil carrie in his hand. Encomium. A praise. Encroche. To creepe or presse vpon a man vnlaw∣fully, to get more then his due. Encrochment. A law terme when one man vnlawful∣ly presseth too farre vpon another, as in setting his pale oo farre vpon ano∣thers land, the more to enlarge his owne, or in ta∣king more rent then is due. Endorse. To write on the outside of a Letter. Endorsed. A terme of Herauldrie, when two beastes are painted with their backs turned to each other. Energeticall. Very forci∣ble, and strong. Energie. Force, vertue, strength. * Enewed. Made new. Enfranchise. To make free, to admit or receiue one into any corporation. Enfranchisement. A ma∣king free. Enhance. To aduance, or make greater. Enigma. A riddle, a darke speech. Enigmaticall. Obscure: darke, hard to vnderstand, spoken in a riddle. * Enmoised. Comforted. Enormitie. A going out of rule: a great disorder. Enormous. Wicked: ve∣ry bad. Enquest A Iury of twelue or moe men. Ensigne. A banner borne in warres: a flagge, or any ornament seruing for a marke of some dignitie. Entalented. Ingrafted. Enthymeme. A terme of Logick. It signifieth an im∣perfect syllogisme, which wanteth either the Maior or Minor: as for example. Euery sinne deserueth correction. Euery theft is a sinne. Therefore euery theft deserueth correction.
Now if wee will leaue the first part (called the Maior) and say thus: Euery theft is a sinne: Therefore Euery theft deserueth cor∣rection. Or omit the second part (named the Minor) and say: Euery sinne deser∣ueth correction, therefore euery theft deserueth cor∣rection, Then it is called an Enthymeme, to wit, a keeping in the minde (for so the word properly sig∣nifieth) because one of these parts is vnderstood in the minde: where note that if the two endes of the Enthymeme are like in speech, then the Minor is wanting, if the two beginnings be like, the Maior is omitted, as may easily appeare by the fore∣going example. Enueloped. Wrapped. Enuiron. To cōpasse about. Enumerate. To reckon vp: to declare. Enumeration. A recko∣ning: a rehearsall. Enunciatiue. Any thing pronounced or spoken. A proposition or speech, which simply affirmeth or denyeth any thing; as Cicero is vertuous: Cicero is not vertuous. Epact. A number which is in vse euery yeare, to find the age of the Moone by: This Epact changeth year∣ly, and is made by the ad∣dition of eleuen to the for∣mer Epact; both which numbers are the Epact for the following yeare, but al∣waies so, that both those numbers exceede not the number of 30. For if they amount to aboue 30. then must you cast away the 30. and the remaining number shall be the Epact. As for example, in this yeare 1616. the Epact is 22. to which if you adde eleuen for the next yeares Epact, it maketh 33. from which if you take away 30. there will remaine three; which is the Epact for the next yeare 1617. Note also: when in any yeare the E∣pact is 29. you must ad 12. to find out the next yeares true Epact, that casting a∣way thirty, the Epact may come to be eleuen. In al
o∣ther nūbers the Epast is stil made (as before) by adding eleuen. And these Epacts are euer changed on the first day of March. Ephemerides. A booke wherein day acts are regi∣stred. Commonly it is ta∣ken for a Booke of Astro∣nomy (in vse among such as erect figures to cast mens natiuities) by which booke is shewen how all the Planets are placed, e∣uerie day and houre of the yeare. Ephi. An Hebrew mea∣sure conteining about fiue peckes of ours. Ephod. A holy garment worne by the high Priest of the Hebrewes, when he executed his function. It couered the backe, & was curiouslie wrought with gold and twisted silke of Purple, Scarlet, and Vio∣let colour. On the shoul∣ders there were set two great precious Onix stones, and in them grauen the names of the twelue sonnes of Iacob, called the twelue Patriarches, in the right shoulder the sixe el∣dest, and in the left the sixe youngest, that the High Priest entering into the Sanctum Sanctorum (which was the holiest place of the Temple) might beare with him the names of the peo∣ple, for whom hee was to pray vnto God. Epicycle. A terme vsed in Astronomy. It signifieth a lesser circle, whose cen∣ter or middle part is in the circumference of a greater circle. In the vpper part of this Epicycle, the fiue Pla∣nets Saturne, Iupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercurie, doe goe forward according to the course of the signes; as Aries to Taurus, &c. in the lower part they are re∣trograde, that is, goe back∣ward, as from Gemini to Taurus, from Taurus to Aries againe. Betweene these two motions, are said to bee two stations; namely when a Planet ceaseth going forward, and beginneth to be retro∣grade, or comming to the farthest point of his retro∣gradation, goeth forward againe: so that in the
Epi∣cycle, these Planets wheele about somtime according, sometime contrary to the order of the signes. Epicure. It is common∣ly taken with vs, for a man giuen ouer much to plea∣sure, especially in gluttony. In ancient times it signi∣fied one that followed the sect of a Philosopher na∣med Epicurus, who taught that the greatest happines was, to be without paine, and enioy pleasure of body and minde. Epigramme. It pro∣perly signifieth a super∣sciption or writing set vp∣on any thing; now it is commonly takē for a short wittie poeme, which vnder a fained name, doth co∣uertly praise or tax some particular person or thing. Epilepsie. The falling sicknesse, whereto most commonly children and yong folk are subiect. This disease is caused by some humor or vapor, suddenly stopping the passage of spi∣rits in the braine, which the brain striuing to expel, causeth the patient to fall downe, and commonly some at the mouth. Epilog. The conclusion or end of a matter. A speech made, after an enterlude or play is ended. Epiphanie. An appearing or manifestation. The feast of Twelfe day at Christ∣mas is so called, because thē the appearing of a new star did manifest the birth of our Sauiour. Episcopall. Of, or belon∣ging to a Bishop. Epitaph. An inscription or writing set vpon a toombe; most commonly in lamentation or praise of the party there buried. Epithete. Any word or short sentence, added to a Noune substantiue, to ex∣presse some qualitie of it: as in saying, Barbarous cru∣eltie, vnbridled lust: anger the short madnes of the mind: where barbarous, vnbridled, and the short madnesse of the mind, are Epithetes expres∣sing the qualitie of cruel∣tie, lust and anger. Epitome. An abridgemēt or short gathering of any matter in writing. Epitomize. To make an abridgement or short ga∣thering.
Equanimitie. Vprightnes of hart, quietnesse of mind. Equinoctiall. An imagined line, passing iust in the midst betweene the two poles of heauen, to which line, the sun coming twice a yeare (namely about the xj. of March and the xj. of September) maketh the daies and nights of equall length in all the world; for which cause it is called E∣quinoctiall: The signes A∣ries and Libra doe both be∣gin at this line. Equipage. Furniture or prouision for horseman∣ship; especially in triumphs or turnaments. Equiualence. The equall value of one thing with another. Equiualent. Of equal va∣lue to another thing. Equiuocate. To speak or answere with a secret mea∣ning reserued in ones own mind; which peraduenture the hearers do not vnder∣stand. Equiuocation. A speech or answere made, with a se∣cret meaning reserued in ones mind. Equiuoke. When one word signifieth two things. Erased. A terme of He∣raldrie, when any mem∣ber of a beast seemeth torn from the body. Erebus. Hell, or a riuer in hell. Erect. To lift vp. Erection. A lifting vp. Eremite. See Hermite. Ereption. A taking away. Ermines. A little beast lesse than a Squirrell, the furre whereof is very cost∣ly, worne onely by Prin∣ces or great Potentates. It hath a taile of a thumbe length, and is browne. Er∣mine in Heraldry somtime signifieth white powdred with blacke, and Ermines, blacke powdred white. Errant. Wandring: ha∣uing no certaine abode. Erroneous. Full of error: deceiued. Erst. Heretofore. Erudition. Learning, in∣struction. Eruption. A violent brea∣king out. Escheate. To bee forfei∣ted to the King, or cheefe Lord.
Escheater. An Officer that obserueth and certifi∣eth into the Exchequer, such things as doe escheate vnto the King. Escript. A writing. Escuage. A tenure of lands, whereby the tenant is bound at his own charge to follow his Lord into the warres: either in Scot∣land or VVales: somtime in this tenure, the Tenant, only payeth a yearely rent. Escuerconera. An hearbe in the VVest Indies, so na∣med because it is of great vertue against the deadly stingings or bitings of cer∣taine venemous beastes, which in that country they call Escuercos. Esperance. Hope. Essayes. Tryals. Essence. The being or naturall substance of any thing. Essenes. Certaine religi∣ous men among the Iewes, which liued a very strict life, abstaining from wine, flesh, and women. Essentiall. That which belongeth to the essence of a thing. Essoine. A tearme in the common Law, when a man cannot well appeare at a day appointed in court, and is therfore allowed by the Court to bee absent without penaltie. Estreate. A copy which is taken of any writing. Estouers. Plots of wood, growing in heathes, com∣mons, and other places, where it is lawfull for te∣nants to take fewell, and timber to repayre their te∣nements. Eternall. VVhich hath no beginning nor end. Eternity. Euerlastingnes. Etheriall. Heauenly, or belonging to the celestiall spheres. Ethikes. Bookes of mo∣rall Philosophy, treating of ciuil behauiour and ma∣ners. Ethnike. A gentill: a Heathen: one that is no Christian. Etymologie. The true ex∣position or reason giuen of any word. Euacuate. To emptie. Euacuation. An emp∣tying.
Euade. To escape: to get away. Euangelicall. Of or be∣longing to the Gospell: commaunded in the Gos∣pell. Euangelist. A bringer of good tydings: wherefore Saint Mathew, Saint Mark, S. Luke, and S. Iohn, are called Euangelists, because they first in writing publi∣shed the ioyfull History of our Redemption by the Sonne of God. Euaporate. To consume away in vapour. Euaporation. A vapor or smoake passing from any thing. Euasion. An escape: a starting hole to get out. Eucharist. It properly sig∣nifieth a giuing of thanks. In Ecclesiasticall writings it is often taken for the B. Sacrament of the body & blood of Christ. Euecke. A kind of wilde beast like a Goate. Euent. The end or suc∣cesse of a matter. Euert. To ouerthrow. Euersion. An ouerthrow∣ing. Euiction. An ouerthrow in Law. Euitable. Which may be auoided. Eunuche. A gelded man. Euphorbium. A gum or te are of a strange plant, growing on the mount Atlas in Lybia. It is yello∣wish, cleere, and brittle. It may be vsed in oyntments against palsies, cramps, and shrinking of sinewes: but to be taken inwardly is very dangerous, vnlesse the malice thereof be wel cor∣rected; for it scaldeth and is exceeding hot, neere the fourth degree. Europe. One of the three parts of the world lying toward the West. In it are contained England, Spain, France, Germany, Italie, all Greece, Crete, or Candy, beside many other kingdoms, great countries and Ilands. Some affirme it to be caled Europe of Eu∣ropa, King Agenors daugh∣ter, whom Iupiter (as Po∣ets seine) in likenesse of a Bull, carried ouer sea, into the Iland Candy.
Exact. To demaund with great earnestnesse, or with constraint: also it sig∣nifieth perfect and accom∣plished. Exaction. A pilling or ta∣king vp of mony by con∣straint. Exaggerate. To increase or amplifie a matter: pro∣perly, with words to make a thing more than it is. Exaggeration. An increa∣sing or amplyfying by words. Exanimate. To amaze. Exanimation. An amaze∣ment. Exasperate. To anger, or prouoke one greatly to an∣ger. Exasperation. A prouo∣king or stirring one to an∣ger. Excesse. Which excee∣deth or is too much. Excite. To stirre vp. Exclamation. A crying out. Exclude. To shut out. Exclusion. A shutting out. Excogitate. To deuise. Excommunicate. To cast out of the communion of the Church. Excommunication. A ca∣sting out of the Church. Excrement. Any thing which naturally growing or being in the body, may bee taken away without harme to the body. Excression. A growing out: a swelling or bunch. Excruciate. To torment. Excursion. A running out, a light skirmish. Excerable. Wicked, wor∣thy to be detested. Execration. A cursing. Exemplarie. Of, or be∣longing to an example. Exemplifie. To declare a matter at large, to alledge examples. Exempt. Free or priuiled∣ged from any payment or seruice. Exemption. A freedome or a priuiledge from any businesse. Exequies. Funeral solem∣nities in honour of the dead. Exhale. To cast or send forth a breath or fume. Exhalation. A fumie smoake, hot and dry, drawne out of the earth by the heate of the Sunne, which being inflamed,
is the materiall cause of di∣uers fierie impressions in the ayre. Exhaust. To consume, spend, or waste. Exhibite. To present, of∣fer, or giue. Exhilarate. To make merry, to comfort. Exhortatorie. Which ex∣horteth or perswadeth to doe a thing. Exiccate. To dry, to make dry. Exigent. A straight, a hard pinch. Exile. Banishment. Exinanite. To make emptie, to spoile, weaken, or make of no force. Exodus. A going forth. The second Booke of Moyses, is so called, because it teacheth of the manner how the children of Isra∣el went out of Egypt. Exonerate. To vnburden, to acquite or discharge. Exorable. Which may be intreated. Exorbitant. That which goeth out of due propor∣tion, or the right way. Exorcize. To adiure, to binde by oath: to charge one vpon conscience or greeuous penaltie, to speak truly, or doe any thing re∣quired. Exorcisme. An adiuring or binding by oath. Exordium. The first en∣trance of a sermon, orati∣on, or such like speech. Expect. To looke for be∣fore it come. Expectation. A looking for, a longing. Expedite. Quick, readie. Expeditate. To cut off the balles or (as some say) cer∣taine clawes of great dogs feete, which are kept neere a forest, that they may not harme the Kings Deere. The dogs so cut, are said to be expeditated. Expedition. Quicke dis∣patch, speede, sometime a setting forth vnto warre; a voiage. Expell. To thrust out, to driue away. Experiment. An experi∣ence, proofe or triall. Expert. Cunning, skil∣full. Expiable. Which may be purged or satisfied for.
Expiate. To pacifie, to appease, to recompence. Expiation. Pacifying, appeasing by sacrifice. Expire. To dye, end pe∣rish, or decay. Expiration. A dying, a breathing out, an end. Explane. To make plain, to declare plainely. Explanation. A making plaine, a declaring. Explicate. To vnfolde, open, or to declare at large. Explication. An vnfolding or opening. Explode. To driue out with clapping the hands. Explosion. A driuing a∣way. Expose. To set forth: to set to view; to put abroad in hazard. Exposition. An interpre∣tation or expounding. Expositour. An expoun∣der or interpreter. Expostulate. To reason angerly with one; to chide or complaine, as finding himselfe grieued. Expostulation. An an∣gry reasoning or com∣plaint. Expression. A wringing or squeasing out. Exprobrate. To vpbraid, to cast in ones teeth. Exprobration. An vpbrai∣ding. Expugne. To conquer: to win by assault. Expugnation. A conquest: a winning by fight. Expulse. To thrust out. Expulsion. A thrusting out, a driuing away. Exquisite. Excellent, cu∣rious. Extant. That which stan∣deth abroad or in sight; which may be found. Extempore. Out of hand; presently, without studie. Extend. To stretch forth, to shew at length. Extension. A stretching out. Extenuate. To diminish: to make by words, a thing seeme lesse than it is. Extenuation. A dimini∣shing. Exterior. Outward. Exterminate. To banish: to driue away. Extermination. A destroy∣ing, or rooting out. Externe. Forren: outlan∣dish, strange, outward.
Externall. Outward, strange. Extinguish. To quench, to put out. Extinct. Quenched, dead, put out. Extirpe. To destroy, To roote out. Extirpate. To root vp: to destroy. Extirpation. A rooting vp. Extort. To wrest away, to take by force. Extortion. Wrong done by any officer, in taking greater fees or rewards, for executing his office, than the lawes will allow him. Extortioner. He that committeth extortion. Extract. To draw forth. Extraction. A drawing out. Extrauagant. Wande∣ring, disordered, when there are many neede∣lesse matters or wordes brought in beside the pur∣pose. Extrinsecall. Outward, or on the outside. Exulcerate. To raise blisters or sores. Exulceration. A rising of blisters or sores in the odie. Exulte. To reioyce greatly, to triumph ouer one. Exultation. A greate reioycing. F Fabricate. To frame, to build. Fabrike. A frame a buil∣ding. Fabulous. False as a fable. Facile. Easie. Facilitie. Easines. Faction. A sect or diui∣sion into sundry opinions. Factious. Contentious, troublesome, vnquiet. Factor. He that buieth and selleth for a merchant, or that looketh to his bui∣sinesse. Faculty. Power, ability, a trade or course of life, a priuiledge or power granted, that a man may doe something, which without such priuiledge he could not doe. Facundite. Eloquencie. Fage. A fable. Falding. A kind of course cloth.
Fallacie. Deceit in words. Falsitie. To counterfeit, or make false. Falsification. A counter∣feiting, or making false. Falsitie. Falsehood, de∣ceit. Fanaticall. Distracted, mad, franticke, out of his wits. Farcines. A disease in beasts: it is a creeping vl∣cer growing in knots, and following alongst some veine. Farced. Stuffed, full. Fascinate. To bewitch. Fastidious. Disdainfull, loathing, proud. Fate. Destinie, that which must of necessitie come to passe, by Gods secret appointment. Fatall. That which hap∣peneth or commeth to passe by fate. Faunus. Poeticall gods of the woodes. Fauorite. One in great fauour. Fealtie. A ceremonie done by some tenants to the Lord of whome they hold lands: which is in laying their right hand vpon a booke, and promi∣sing fidelitie to him by oath. Feature. Hansomnesse, comelinesse, beautie. Fecunditie. Fruitfulnes. Fleere. A companion, a husband or wife. Felicitie. Happinesse. Fell. A skinne, sometime it signifieth fierce, terrible, or frowning. Feminine. Of or belon∣ging to the female. Fencemonth. A month, so called, because then it is not lawfull to hunt in any forrest, for that the does then do fawn. This month beginneth about the ninth of Iune, and con∣tinueth till the ninth of Iuly. Fengreeke. A plant or herbe, the seede whereof is much vsed in phisike. It is yellow, being hot in the second degree and drie in the first, and hath pow∣er to mollifie and dis∣solue. Feodarie. An officer who is to bee
present with the Escheater, at the fin∣ding of any office, and to suruey wards lands, and to rate them. Feofment. A deede wit∣nessing the sale or gift of lands in fee simple, with liuerie of seisine, and possession thereof. He that maketh the Feofment is called the Feofer, and the partie to whome it is made, the Feofee. Ferie. Any day of the weeke not kept holy. Fers. The Queene in chesse play. Fertile. Fruitfull, yeelding much. Fertilitie. Fruitfulnesse. Feruent. Hot. Feruour. Heate. Ferula. A rod, sticke, or thinne paulmer, where∣with children are cor∣rected in schooles vpon the hand. Fessepoint. The middle part of a scucheon, whose bredth is deuided into three euen parts. Festiuall. Merry, ioyfull, belonging to a feast. Festiuitie. Mirth re∣ioycing, pleasantnes, mer∣rinesse. Feud. Hatred, enmitie, strife. Fewmets, or Fewmi∣shing. The dung of a Deere. Fiants. The dung of a Fox or Badger. Fiction. A feined deuice, a lye. Fidelitie. Faithfulnesse. Figment. A vaine deuice, a lye, a counterfeit tale. Figuratiue. That which figureth or serueth but as a representation of another thing. Filiall. Of or belonging to a sonne. Filme. A fine thinne skinne within the bodie, deuiding the flesh or any neere member one from another. Fine. An end: some∣time money payed when one first taketh land for yeares. Finall. Of or belon∣ging to an end, the last. * Finance. An end. Finite. which hath an end. Fire-drake. A fire some∣time seene,
flying in the night like a Dragon. Common people thinke it a spirit, that keepeth some treasure hid: but Philosophers affirme it to bee a great vnequall a∣lation; inflamed betweene two Cloudes, the one hot, the other colde (which is the reason that it also smo∣keth:) the middle part whereof, according to the proportion of the hote Cloud, being greater than the rest, maketh it seeme like a bellie, and both ends like vnto a head and taile. Firme. Strong, stable, stedfast. Firmament. Astronomers vnderstand by this word, the eighth spheare, next aboue the spheres of the seauen Planets, in which all the fixt Starres are pla∣ced. Firmitie. Strength, sted∣fastnesse. Fistike nuts. Outlandish nuts, brought out of Syria and other hot Countries, not much vnlike a small Hasell nut. They are very good against the stoppings of the liuer, being steeped all night in some sweete wine, and so eaten in the morning. They are good also to vnstop the lungs, and for such as are trou∣bled with shortnesse of breath, and are comforta∣ble for the stomacke; yet they nourish but little, be∣ing taken as meate. Fistula. A dangerous vlcer or sore still running. It goeth vp into the body, with a long narrow hole, like a pipe, and is com∣monlie hard in the out∣side, Fitch. The furre of the Polecat. Fixe. To fasten. Fixed. Fastened. Flagitious. Wicked, verie lewd. Flamine. A great Priest amongst the Gentiles. There were three such at Rome. One called Fla∣men Dialis: The Priest of Iupiter: who ware rich vest∣ments, and had a chaire of Estate. If his Wife chanced to dye, he there∣upon went presentlie out of
his office: It was not lawfull for him to a∣bide one night out of the Citty, nor yet to affirme any thing by oath; for his word was held of sufficient credit. The other two Fla∣mins, were the Flamine of Mars, and the Flamine of Romulus, called Quirinus. Flankards. Hunters call so two knots or nuts, in the flanke of a Deere. Flebotomie. See Phlebo∣tomie. Flegmaticke. Full of fleagme, or inclining to fleagme. Flexibilitie. Aptnes to bend. Flexible. Pliant, easie to bend. * Flo. An arrow. Floreine. A coyne, wherof there be two sorts: one a∣bout the valew of thre shil∣lings foure pence, the o∣ther about two shillings ten pence-farthing. Fluent. which floweth or aboundeth. Flux. A flowing or issue of bloud. Fluxibilitie. Aptnes to flow or spread abroad. Fluxible. Which is apt to flow or run abroad. Foyling. The print of a Deers foote in grasse, when it cannot well be seene. Foemen. Enemies. Fes. A kinde of furre brought for the most part out of France: the top of this furre is blacke, and the ground whitish: the beast that beareth it, is about the bignesse of a Cat. Foison. Great plenty, store. oerers. Vagabonds. Folio. A sheete or large leafe of paper. Fomentation. In physick it properlie signifieth, pow∣ders or drie things in bags, or any liquour in a sponge or bladder, applied warme to the bodie, to mitigate paine, or for some other purpose. Footstall. The lower part of a pillar, whereon it stan∣deth. Foppe. A Foole. Foppery. Foolishnesse, a vaine matter. Forage. Prouision for horses and cattell in the wars. Forcer. A cofer, or little chest.
Forester. He that hath charge to looke to a for∣rest, or some part of it. Foreloyne. A tearme in hunting, when a hound meeteth a chace, and goeth away with it before the rest. Forlorne. Vtterly vndone, in a desperate estate. Formalitie. An obseruing of good forme or order. Formall. That which keepeth due forme. Formositie. Beautie, faire∣nesse. Forestall. To buy victu∣all or other merchandise by the way before it come to the faire or market; to sell it againe at a dearer price. Forestaller. He that doth forestall, and buy things in such sort. Fortifie. To make strong. Fortification. A hold, any place made strong. Fortitude. Courage, strength, valour. Forewelked. Dried vp. Foster. To cherish, to bring vp, to keepe. Fother. A waincloade of 2000. weight. Fracture. A breaking. Fragility. Weakenesse, britlenesse. Fragment. A broken peece, a cantle. Fragrant. Sweete smel∣ling. * Frape. A companie, a rabble. Fraternitie. A brother∣hood. Fraud. Deceit, couse∣nage. Fraudulent. Deceitfull. Fray. Harts or stags are said to fray their heads, when they rubbe them, to make the pilles of their new hornes come of. * Fremd. Strange. Frequent. Often, com∣mon, also to haunt or re∣sort much to a place. Frequentation. A haun∣ting or resorting to a place. Frication. A rubbing. Friction. A rubbing. Friuolous. Vaine, foolish, of no account. Froise. A pancake, a tan∣sie. Front. A forehead, the first part of a battell, an en∣trance or beginning.
Frontire. The boundes or limits of a countrey. Frontlet. Any thing worne on the forehead. * Frownce. A wrinckle. Fructifie. To beare fruite. Frugall. Thriftie, spa∣ring. Frugalitie. Thriftinesse, good husbandry. Frustrate. To make void, to deceiue, to disappoint. Fugitiue. One likely to runne away, a vagrant per∣son, a run-away Fumigation. A perfume, any thing which being cast on hot coales, maketh a sweet smell. Function. An office, a charge which one hath, a course of life. Fundamentall. Of or be∣longing to the foundation, or to the maine, chiefe, and principall point. Funerall. A solemne bu∣riall of some great person. Furies. Three imagina∣rie hags or spirits in hell, hauing snakes growing on them in stead of haires. Poets feyned them to bee daughters of Acheron (a ri∣uer in hell) and of the night, and to haue the of∣fice of tormēting the soules of wicked men. Their names were Alecto, Megae∣ra, and Tisiphone. Fusible. That may be molten. Future. That which shall be hereafter. G * Gab. To prate or lye. Gabbing. Lying. Gabions. Baskets of earth to keepe off great shot. Gable. The fore-front or end of a house com∣ming downe right. Gaynest. Most profitable or neerest. * Gadling. Stragling. Galangale. An herbe so called, the roote whereof is hot and drye in the third degree, and much vsed in physicke. Galbanum. A gumme or liquor drawne forth of a plant in Syria called Meto∣pion. It is of a strange sa∣uor, and very pure, close and firme, neither too moist, nor
too dry. It is good against an olde cough, and for such as cannot easily fetch breath: and the perfume thereof dryueth Serpents from the place where it is bur∣ned. * Galiard. Lustie: frolike. * Galoch. A kinde of shooe. * Galpe. To belch. Grangrene. A dangerous disease when any fleshie part of the body, after som great inflāmation or other griefe, losing the naturall colour, beginneth to grow insensible, and by degrees to waxe dead. Garbe. A tearme in He∣raldrie. It signifieth sheafe of Wheate, or any other graine. Garbell. To purifie or cleanse spice or other things, from the drosse or dust which is mingled with it. Gargarize. To wash or scowre the mouth with a∣ny Physicall liquor. Gargarisme. A liquor to wash the mouth. Gargill. The same that Gargarize. * Gargoning. Strange speaking. Garrulitie. Pratling, vaine babling Garter. It sometime sig∣nifieth the principal of our English Heralds, called the King at armes. Gatherbag. The bag or skinne, inclosing a young red Deere in the Hyndes belly. Gauelkinde. Customes annexed vnto certain lands in Kent, called Gauelkinde lands: whereof one is, that if the Father be han∣ged for fellony, the Sonne shall inioy all his landes and tenements holden in Gauelkinde. Other cu∣stomes there are of Ga∣uelkind, too long to be re∣hearsed in this place. Gawgour. An officer ha∣uing authority, to giue a marke of allowance, to all Tuns, Hogsheads, Pipes, Barrells, &c. of Wine, Oyle, Hony, and Butter, before they ought to be sold. * Gawre. To stare. Gehenna. It properly signifieth a
place in a valley, in the Tribe of Beniamin, where the Israe∣lites erected abhominable altars, there sacrificing their children in fire to the Idoll Moloch: notwith∣standing it is vsually taken for hell. Gemme. A iewell. Genealogie. A pedegree; a declaration of ones li∣nage, stocke, or race. Generable. Which may be begotten. Generate. To beget. Generositie. Noblenesse of minde, Gentlemanlike courage. Generous. Noble, vali∣ant, vertuous. Genesis. A generation. The first Booke of Moyses is so called in Greeke and Latine, because it decla∣reth the creation and ge∣neration of all things. Genet. A goodly horse of Spaine. Genets. A beast almost of the bignesse of a Cat breeding in Spaine. There are two colours of them, blacke and gray; but the furre of the blacke is most esteemed. Genius. The spirit or soule: A good Angell, or a familiar euill spirit. Gentill. Among the Iewes, all were Gentiles, that were not of one of the twelue Tribes: now we commonly call them Gentiles, that professe not the faith of Christ. Gentilisme. The opinion or beleefe of the Gen∣tiles. Gentilitie. The same that Gentilisme is. Geographie. A descripti∣on of the earth, as we see in Maps. Geomancie. See Diuina∣tion. Geometrie. An art of due proportion consisting in lineaments, formes, distances, and greatnesse. There are foure principles hereof: to wit, 1. A prick or point: 2. A line. 3. a superficies or outside: 4. a bodie. This art was of great estimation among the auncient Grecians. Geometrician. One skil∣full in Geometrie. Georgikes. Books trea∣ting of husbandrie and til∣lage of land.
* Gerifull. Changeable: sometime cruell. * Gesseran. A breastplate. Gesticulation. A moo∣uing of the fingers, hands or other parts, eyther in idle wantonnesse, or to expresse some matter by signes, in dauncing, sing∣ing, or other such like ex∣ercise. Gestes. Deeds, noble acts. Geules. A tearme among Heralds: It signifieth a vermilion colour. * Gippon. A doublet▪ a light cote. * Gipsere. A bagge or pouch. Girle. A Roe Bucke of two yeares. * Gisarme. A certaine weapon. * Gite. A gowne. Giue. A fetter or chaine. Glaiue. A weapon like an Halberd. * Glede. Fire: embers; flame, ashes: sometime a bird called a Puttoke. * Glee. Mirth or ioyful∣nesse. * Gleire. White. * Glinne. A little vil∣lage, or part of a Village. Glister. A liquour made sometime with sodden flesh, sometime with deco∣ction of hearbes or other thinges, which by a pipe, is conueyed into the lo∣wer parts of the body. It is written that the vse hereof was first learned from a Bird in Egypt, cal∣led Ibis, much like vnto a Storke, which Bird doth often with her bill, open her hinder parts, when nature of her selfe dooth not expell what is neede∣full. Globe. A great round Bowle: or a description of the world made in such a forme. Glosse. A short expositi∣on of any darke speech. Glow. To be hot and red, to shine, to burne. * Gnarre. A hard knot in wood: sometime a short thicke fellowe, a chub. Gnathonicall. Flattering; deceitfull in words: soo∣thing ones humour, to get by him. * Gnoffe. A Foole, a Churle.
Goldfoile. A thin leafe of gold. Golden number. A num∣ber which changeth euery yeare, by adding one to the golden number of the yeare going before, vntill it grow as high as nine∣teene, and then the gol∣den number returneth to one againe. For example, this yeare 1616. the gol∣den number is two: the next yeare therefore it will be three, &c. This golden number was deuised to finde out the feast of Ea∣ster. Golgotha. A Syrian word, signifying, a place of dead mens sculles. It was a place at Hierusalem on the North side of Mount Sion, so called be∣cause there lay the sculles of offenders put to death. * Golierdise. Hee that hath a fowle great mouth. Gomor. The name of an Hebrew measure, contey∣ning more than a Gallon. The Israelites when they were fed from Heauen with Manna in the desert, receiued euery one, this measure full for a daies al∣lowance. * Gonfennon. A little flag. Gordian knot. A knot which cannot be loosed. Gorgon. A terrible figh∣ting Woman. Poets seine, there were foure such, Daughters to King Phor∣cus: their names were Scylla, Medusa, Stenio, and Euryale. Gossomor. Things that flye like Copwebs in the ayre. Gourmand. A glutton. Gourmandize. Gluttony: sometime to eate like a Glutton. Graces. A poeticall fic∣tion of three Sisters, sup∣posed the Daughters of Iupiter and Venus. They were called Aglaia, Thalia, and Euphrosyne. The mo∣ralitie of this inuention was, to expresse the mutual loue and cheerefull con∣uersation which ought to be amongst friends: For they were painted naked, to signifie that friendship ought to be plain without
dissimulation; smiling and merry, to shew that men should do good willingly; yong & maidēlike, to teach that friendship should con∣sist in honest things; and holding hands together in a round ring, to shew that a benefit bestowed, dooth againe returne to the gi∣uer. Gradation. A going by steps, or a speaking by cer∣taine degrees. Gradual. That which was said or sung, betweene the Epistle and the Gos∣pell. Graduate. He that hath taken degree of learning in a publike Vniuersity. Graines of Paradise. A li∣tle seede, brought out of Armenia, of a strong sweet smell, and somewhat sharp in taste. It is hot and dry, of a subtill substance, and often vsed in Physicke. For it warmeth the inward parts, and is good against the falling sicknesse, the Sciatica, the Strangurie, bytings of venemous beasts, and diuers other diseases. * Grame. Sorrow, mis∣hap: anger. Gramaticall. Of, or be∣longing to Grammer. Granadillia. A fruit like a Pomegranat growing in India. Grand. Great. Grandour. Greatnesse. * Graythed. Deuised. * Gratch. Apparell. Gratefull. Thankfull. Gratifie. To pleasure one, to offer one a kindnesse. To do a good turne. Gratification. A pleasu∣ring of one, a good turne. Gratis. Freely, without cost. Gratitude. Thankfulnes. Gratuitie. A benefit or gift giuen onely for good will: sometime thankful∣nesse, or a reward. Gratulate. To signifie that we reioyce at the pros∣perity of another. Gratulation. A reioycing for anothers good. A thanksgiuing. Grauitie. Heauinesse: al∣so sagenes, great discretion. Graund Sergeantie. An old tenure in the Com∣mon Law, when a man holdes lands or tenements of the king, to go with him
into the warres, or to beare his banner, leade his host, or doe some such like ser∣uice. Graunge. A village, or lone house in the countrey. * Gree. Good part. Griffine. A strange Bird in India, with foure feete armed with cruell clawes, being from the breast vp∣ward fashioned like an Ea∣gle, but of purple colour, with red fierie eies, and whitish wings, and in the hinder part blacke, made much like a Lyon. This bird neasteth in the high mountaines, and is excee∣ding hard to be taken, ex∣cept very yong; for he wil aduenture on any man, & is so fierce, that hee often killeth Elephants and Dra∣gons. He is most enemy to horses: for which cause Virgill in his eight Eclog, bringeth in the sheppheard Damon, who wondered at a strange marriage, speaking thus: Iunguntur iam gry∣phes equis: &c. The Grif∣fins fierce are ioynd with horses now. * Grith. Agreement. Gruell. Potage. Guacatane. An herbe growing in the west Indies of great vertue against the piles, or griefes proceeding from colde or windinesse. Guaiacum. A wood cal∣led by some Lignum vitae. It is much vsed in physicke against the French disease. Guaiauas. A fruit grow∣ing in India much like vn∣to apples. Guerdon. A reward. Guerdonles. Vnrewarded. * Guerring. Brawling. Gumme Arabicke A kind of gumme, growing on a thorne tree, called Acacia in Egypt. Guzes. The ball of the eye. A terme in heraldrie. Gymnosophists. Certaine Philosophers in India, that went alwaies naked, and li∣ued solitarie in woods; the first beginner of which sect, was (as S. Hierome wri∣teth cont. Iouinian.) na∣med Buddas. * Gyre. A trance. H. HAberdepoise. A pound weight which contei∣neth sixteene ounces.
Habit. The outward at∣tire of the bodie, whereby one person may be distin∣guished from another; as the habit of a Gentleman, is different from the habit of a merchant, and the ha∣bit of a Handi-crafts man differing from them both. Sometime it signifieth a qualitie in the bodie or minde, not naturall, but gotten by long custome, or infused by God: as an O∣rator still exercised in ma∣king orations, hath gotten a habit of eloquent spea∣king; and the holy Apo∣stles had a habit to vnder∣stand and speake languages without studie. Habitable. which may be dwelled in. Habitation. A dwelling place. Habituall. Grwne to a habit by long custome. * Hailse. Charge. * Haine. Hatred. * Haketon. A sleeuelesse iacket. Halituous. Vaporous, thin, moist, which may be voided out by the pores. * Halse. A necke. * Halke. A corner, a val∣ley. * Hameled. Cut off, aba∣ted. Hamkin A pudding made vpon the bones of a shoul∣der of mutton, all the flesh being first taken off. Hamlet. A village in the countrey. Hague. A hand-gunne of about three quarters of a yard long. Haguebut. A gunne or harquebuse. Harbinger. One that ta∣keth vp lodging for others. Hariant. A tearme in herauldry when a fish is painted standing vpright. Harmonie. Delightfull musicke of many notes. Harmonious. Sweete, plea∣sant, delightful to the eare. Harpyes. A poeticall word. It signifieth certaine monstrous birds, with mai∣den faces, & crooked sharp talons, so called because of their rapine which they vsed. They liued in Stym∣phalis a lake of Arcadia, and were sent by
the Gods (if wee beleeue Poets) to snatch away and defile the meate of Phineus, king of that countrey, because he at the perswasion of his second wife, had destroyed the children which he had by his first; they were at last driuen away by Zetus, and Calais the sonnes of of Boreas. These Harpyes were named, Aello, Ocypete, Celeno, and Thyella. Harquebuze. A hande Gunne. Harquebuzier. He that shooteth in a hand Gunne. * Harrow. An old word signifying, away, fie. Haubergion. A coate of male. Hauoire. Possession. * Hauselins. Breeches. * Hawbacke. To returne. Hawberke. A Gorget. Hearse. A buriall coffin couered with blacke. Hecatombe. A great sa∣crifice wherein were offe∣red a hundred beastes. Hecticke. A Feuer infla∣ming the Heart, and soun∣dest parts of the body. Heisugge. A bird which hatcheth the Cuckooes egges. Hemisphere. Halfe the compasse of the heauens: that part of the heauens which is still visible to vs. Hemistich. Halfe a verse. Hemorrhodes. A swelling of veines in the funda∣ment like werts; whereof some doe vse to bleede of∣ten, and some bleede not at all. They are caused by superfluitie of grosse me∣lancholy blood, sent to these parts from the li∣uer, beeing many times healthfull to the patient, by preuenting other disea∣ses; and therefore ought not hastily to be stopt, vn∣lesse through continuance, the body bee too much weakened by them. Henchman. A page of honour, neere attendant to a Prince, or other great personage. * Hend. Gentle. * Hent. To catch or lay hold of. Herbage. Pasture, or the feeding of cattel in pasture Herball. A booke of the nature of herbes. Herbinger. See harbinger. Hereticall. Obstinate in a false beleefe, belonging to an Hereticke.
Heretike. He that maketh his owne choice, what points of religion he will beleeue, and what he will not beleeue. Hereditarie. That which commeth to one by inhe∣ritance. Heriot. The best liuing beast which a Tenant hath at his death, which in some Mannors is due to the lord of whom the land is holden. Hermaphrodite. Of both natures: which is both man and woman. Hermite. One dwelling solitarie in the wildernesse attending onely to deuo∣tion. Hermitage. A lone house where an hermite dwelleth Hermodactiles Little roots white, and round, solde by Apothecaries. They are hot and dry in the second degree, and are much vsed against all gouts, purging slimie fleame from farthest parts of the body: but they must be taken with Gin∣ger, Anniseed or Cum∣min, and a little Masticke, or else by stirring windi∣nesse, they will ouerturne the stomacke. Heroes. Great Noble men. Heroycall. Noble, hono∣rable, couragious. Heroike. The same, as Heroicall. Hests. Commandements or decrees. Heteroscians. Any people dwelling vnder a tempe∣rate Zone: so called be∣cause their shadowes at noone bend still but one way. Hew. Colour. Hewte. A little copse or groue. Heyward. A bailiefe, or officer hauing charge to looke to the fieldes. Hiacinth. See Hyacinth. Hide of land. Some affirme it to be a hundred acres. Hidage. A taxe or pai∣ment for euery hide of lād. Hidebound. A disease in cattell when the skin clea∣ueth to their sides. Hideous. Terrible, vgly. Hiena. See Hyena. Hiera picra. A bitter con∣fectiō made
of Aloe succo∣trina, & other simples, oftē vsed in Phisicke to purge Choler out of the sto∣macke. Hierarchie. The holy or∣der of Angels, which con∣teining nine degrees (as some affirme) is a mystical resemblance of the B. Tri∣nitie, there being in nine, thrice three, and in euery three thrice one. So that there are three supe∣riour, three inferiour, and three middle degrees The superior are Sera∣phines, Cherubines, and Thrones; the middle, Do∣minations, principalities, Powers: The inferior, ver∣tues, Archangels, and An∣gels. Hieroglyphikes. A darke mysticall kind of writing, vsed chiefely in times past among the Pagane priests and learned men of Egypt to hide their knowledge from the vulgar sort. This writing was by making the formes of beastes and di∣uers other figures, and could hardly bee vnder∣stood without exposition, or great knowledge in the nature of things. For ex∣ample: Eternity or euerla∣stingnesse, they expressed by a round circle, which hath no end: A king, by a scepter with an eye in the toppe thereof: A mat∣of haste, by a Dolphin, the swiftest of all fishes. And a matter of deliberation or aduice, by an Anchor, which stayeth a ship in the waues. With a thousand such deuices, not subiect to common capacities to find out. Hight. Was named. Hillocke. A little hill. Hin. An Hebrew mea∣sure of moist things, con∣taining (by Agricolas ac∣count) foure pottles and a quart of ours. Santes Pagni∣nus affirmeth it to con∣tain, threescore and twelue egges. Hip. The red berry on the bryer. Hipocrite. See Hypocrite. Historian. A writer or teller of a History. Historicall. Of or belong∣ing to a History. Historiographer. A wri∣ter of Histories. Historiologie. The know∣ledge
and telling of old Histories. Hoane. A fine kind of whetstone. Hogsteere. A wilde bore of three yeeres old. Holocaust. A sacrifice wherein the whole beast is offered, and no part re∣serued. Holt. A groue. Homage. In Court Ba∣rons, the Iury that are sworne to enquire of mat∣ters, are so called. It signifi∣eth also a seruil ceremony, of duty by some Tenants to their Lords, after this manner. The Tenant that holdeth Landes by ho∣mage, kneeling on both knees before the Lord (who sitteth and holdeth the Tenants hands be∣tweene his) saith as follow∣eth. I become your man, from this day forward, of life and member, and of earthly honour, and to you shall bee faithfull and true, and shall beare to you faith for the Lands I claime to hold of you, sauing the faith that I owe to our Lord the King. And then the Lord sitting must kisse the Tenant. Homager. One that doth or oweth homage. Homicide. A manslayer: sometime manslaughter. Homilie. A talking toge∣ther: a speech, or a Ser∣mon. Homonymie. A terme in Logicke, when one word signifieth diuers things: as Hart: signifying a beast, and a principall member of the body. Honour point. In Heraul∣dry the vpper part of a Scutcheon is so called, when the bredth thereof, is diuided into three euen parts. * Hopesteres. Pilots to guide a shippe. Horizon. An imagina∣ry line compassing the lowest part of the heauens that we can see; so called because it limiteth our sight, diuiding the heauens vnderneath vs, from that which is aboue. The Sun rysing and going downe is euer in this line. Horologe. A Clocke, or Dyall.
Horoscope. The ascendent of ones natiuitie, to wit, that part of the firmament which ascendeth from the East, when a childe is borne. Astrologers call it, the first house. Horride. Terrible: feare∣full to looke on. Horrour. Great feare or trembling. * Horrow. Beastlie; base slaunderous. Hosanna. An Hebrew word, which signifieth, Saue I beseech thee. Hospitalitie. Entertaine∣ment of strangers, good house keeping. Hostage. A pledge left in warres for performance of couenants. Hostile. Of or belong∣ing to an enemie: malici∣ous, harmefull. Hostilitie. Enmitie: ha∣tred, open warre. Hotchpot. A terme in our common Law, when a daughter which hath had giuen vnto her any lands in Frankemarriage, clay∣ming to be coheire after her fathers death, to other lands with some sisters, is constrained to suffer that part of land, giuen her before her fathers death, to bee put in Hotchpot, that is, to be mingled to∣gether with the landes whereof her Father dyed seised, so that an equall di∣uision may bee made of the whole. * Howgates. How. Howsell. To minister Sacraments to a sicke man in danger of death. Howten. To hol∣low. Hulke. To open a hare or cony, to take out the garbage. * Hulstred. Hidden. Huke. A Dutch attire couering the head, face, and all the body. Humane. That which belongeth or may happen to man. Humanitie. Gentle∣nesse, courtesie, ciuill be∣hauiour: also manhood or the nature of man∣kind. Humide. Moiste. Humiditie. Moisture. Humiliate. To make humble.
Humiliation. A ma∣king lowe or humble. Humorous. Full of hu∣mors. * Hurtelen. To thrust, to prouoke. Hyacinth. The red, blew, or yellow lilly: also a pur∣ple flowre called crow-toes. Hydra. A monstrous serpent in the Lake Lerna, which hauing one head cut off, had forthwith two other heads growing vp in the place. Hercules fought with this serpent and slew him. Hydromancie. See Diui∣nation. Hydromell. A physicall sweete drinke, made of wa∣ter and hony. Hyemall. Belonging to winter, winterly. Hyena. A beast like a Wolfe, hauing a mane and long haires ouer all the bodie. It is the subtillest (as some say) of all beasts, and will counterfeit the voice of a man, to draw sheep∣heards out of their hou∣ses in the night, to the end hee may kill them. It is written that hee chan∣geth sex often, being some∣time male, and sometime femall. Hymen. A poeticall word, it is taken for the God of marriage, sonne vnto Bac∣chus and Venus; and some∣time for a song at a mari∣age feast. Hymne. A song to praise God. Hyperbole. A figure when one speaketh a great deale more than is precise∣ly true. Hyperbolicall. Any thing spoken aboue all be∣leefe, as in saying, high∣er than heauen, swifter than lightening, &c. is called an Hyperbolicall speech. Hypocrite. It properly signifieth one that doth counterfeite the gesture of an other man: but it is commonly taken for a dissembler, that with feined holines would seeme better than hee is indeede. Hypoquistidos. In di∣uers hote
countries there groweth a plant called Ci∣stus, hauing about the root thereof, a certaine Mush∣roome, which being brui∣sed yieldeth a liquor, cal∣led by Apothecaries Hypo∣quistidos. This liquour (brought hither dry) is cold of operation, and of vertue to stoppe all blee∣dings, laskes, and fluxes of the belly. Hypostaticall. Belonging to substance; or that which consisteth in the substance of a thing. Hypotheticall, In Logike, those propositions, which haue a coniunction in them, and so consist of two parts, are called Hypo∣theticall propositions, as in saying. If the Sunne be in our Hemisphere, it is day. Hysteron proteron. A Greeke terme, sometime vsed in derision of that which is spoken or done preposterously or quite contrary. We call it in En∣glish, The cart before the horse. I IAcent. Lying along. Iacynth. A precious stone found in Ethiopia, where∣of there are two kindes; the one of a pale yellow colour, and the other of a cleere bright yellow, which is accounted the better. It is cold of nature, comfort∣able to the body, and pro∣uoketh sleepe. Iacobs staffe. An instru∣ment in Geometry. Iaculatory. That which is suddenly cast from one, like a dart. Iambes. Postes sustei∣ning both sides of the dore. Iambeux. Armour for the legs. Iasmine. A limmer weake plant, full of ioynts or knots, which groweth in manner of a hedge or quickset, and must be stay∣ed vp, as roses and vines are. Iasper. A precious stone of diuers colours; but the best is greene, transparent with red veines, and shew∣eth fairest being set in sil∣uer: it is good to stoppe a∣ny issue of blood. Iasponyx. A precious stone, white
of colour, and hauing red strakes. Iazul. A precious stone of a blew azure colour. Ibis. A tall strong bird in Egypt, with a long bill, which doth much good there in destroying ser∣pents. Icleeped. named, called. * Icond. Learned. Idea. The forme or fi∣gure of any thing concei∣ued in the minde. Identitie. The selfe same thing. Idiome. The forme of speech, or propertie of any language. Idiote. It is commonly taken for a foole naturall: notwithstanding it some∣time signifieth a man vn∣learned. Ides. Eight daies in eue∣ry month, so called, because they deuide the month al∣most in the middle. In March, May, Iuly, and October, these eight daies beginne at the eighth day of the month, and conti∣nue to the fifteenth: in o∣ther months they begin at the sixt day, and continue to the thirteenth. Where note that the last day onely is called Ides, and the first of these dayes, the eighth Ides, the second the seuenth Ides: that is, the eighth or seuenth day before the Ides, and so of the rest. Idolaster. An Idolater. Iehouah. The ineffable name of God, signifying his diuine essence. The he∣brewes did not vse to reade this word, when they came to it in any writing, so much reuerence did they beare vnto it; but in stead thereof they pronounced Adonai, which signifieth Lord. Iesus. A Sauiour. * Iewise. Reward by re∣uenge, also a gibbet. * Ifere. Together. * Ifretten. Deuoured. Ignoble. Base, that is not noble. Ignominie. Shame, re∣proch, infamie. Ignominious. Shamefull, vile, reprochfull. * Jkend. Knowne. Iliads. A booke written in greeke by Homer, of the destruction of Troy. * Ilke. The same.
Illation. A bringing in of a matter. Illaudable. not worthy of praise. Illegitimate. Vnlawfull, not lawfully begotten. Illiberall. Not liberall, miserable, base. Jlliberalitie. Niggard∣nesse: properly in a greate man, that ouer slightly re∣wardeth a seruice or curte∣sie done to him by his in∣feriour. Illiterate. Vnlearned, one that is not acquainted with letters. Illude. To mocke, to deceiue. Jllusion. A mockerie, a cunning slight to deceiue one. Illuminate. To enligh∣ten. Illumination. A shining or giuing of light. Jllustrate. To make fa∣mous, or noble. Illustration. A making famous or noble. Illustrious. Famous, no∣ble, very honourable. Imagerie. Painted or carued workes of images. Jmaginarie. That which is conceited in the minde. Imbecillitie. Weakenesse. * Imeint. Mingled. Imitate. To follow. Imitation. A following. Imitator. A follower of another. Jmmaculate. Vndefiled, pure, vnspotted. Jmmanitie. Crueltie, out∣ragious, fiercenesse. Jmmarcessible. Vncor∣ruptible. Immature. Vnripe. Immaturitie. Vnripenesse. Immediate. That which commeth directly from one thing to another, with∣out any thing betweene. Immedicable. Which can∣not be healed. Immemorable. Not wor∣thy to be remembred. Immense. Vnmeasurable, which cannot be measu∣red. Immensitie. Exceeding greatnesse, vnmeasurable∣nesse. Jmmoderate. Vnreasona∣ble, contrarie to modesty. Immodest. Not sober, vn∣mannerly, saucy. Immolate. To offer in sa∣crifice.
Immolation. An offering of sacrifice. Immortall. Not subiect to death: euerlasting. Immortality. Euerlasting∣nesse. Jmmunitie. Freedome, or discharge from any publike businesse. Jmmure. To shut vp, or inclose in a wall. Immutable. Vnchange∣able. Immutation A change. Impacted. Thrust hard together: couched in∣to. Imparitie. Vnequalnesse, vnlikenesse. Imparlance. When a man sued in the common law, for debt, trespasse, or such like, craueth and obtai∣neth of the Court, some respite of time, before hee make his answere, this stay of making his an∣swere, is called an Impar∣lance. Impassibilitie. A Free∣dome from any abilitie of feeling paine. Impassible. Which can∣not feele any paine, or pas∣sion. Impeach. To harme, to hinder. Impeachment. A hinde∣rance. Impeachment of waste. A restraint from making waste in landes, or Tene∣ments. Impediment. A hinde∣rance. Impell. To thrust on, to constraine. Impenetrable. So hard that it cannot bee pier∣ced. Imperious. That com∣mandeth with authoritie: Lordlike, stately. Impertinent. Not belon∣ging to the matter. Impetrable. Which may be obtained. Impetrate. To obtaine. Impetuous. Violent: or hasty. Impietie. Wickednesse. Impious: Wicked. Implacable. Hard to bee pacified, or that cannot be appeased. Implicite. Wrapped vp, hidden. Implore. To beseech, to entreat with teares.
Importance. The weight or valew of a thing. Important. Of great weight and valew. Importune. To vrge ear∣nestly. Importunate. Very ear∣nest: which will not bee answered. Importunitie. Vnreasona∣blenesse: too much ear∣nestnesse in asking. Impose. To lay on. Imposition. A laying on. Impost. Custome or tal∣lage paid at Hauen townes or elsewhere. Impostume. A quantitie of euill humours, gathered into one part of the body. There are two kinds here∣of. One when inflamed blood, beeing turned to corrupted matter, filleth some place: the other when without any inflam∣mation, nature thrusteth those humours into some part apt to receiue them. Imposture. Deceit, cou∣senage: properly in sel∣ling counterfet wares for currant, or in craftie illu∣sions done by Sorcerers, Egyptians and Iuglers. The party so deceiuing is called an Impostor. Impotency. Weakenesse. Impotent. Weake, Fee∣ble. Imprecate. To curse and wish euill. Imprecation. A cursing, a wishing euill. Impregnable. That which cannot be taken or ouer∣come. Impresa. A deuice pain∣ted vpon a shield. Impresse. To import the forme of a thing. Imprimis. First of all. Improbabilitie. Vnlikeli∣hood. Improbable. Vnlikely to be true; that which can∣not be proued true. Improbitie. Naughtinesse, lewdnesse, dishonesty. Impropriation. A parso∣nage, or Ecclesiasticall li∣uing comming to one by inheritance. Improoue. To raise rents higher. Improuidence. Want of foresight. Improuident. Which fore∣casteth not, or taketh no care what shall come af∣ter.
Imprudence. Foolishnesse, want of wit. Imprudent. Vnwise, not discreet. Impudence. Shameles∣nesse. Impudens. Shamelesse, past shame. Impugne. To assault, or fight against. Impulse. To con∣straine. Impulsion. A con∣straint. Impunitie. Lacke of pu∣nishment. Impuritie. Vnclean∣nesse. Impute. To lay to ones charge: to ascribe. Imputation. An impu∣ting or laying by coniec∣ture to ones charge. Imputatiue. Which is im∣puted to one. Inaccessible. Which can∣not bee come vnto, vn∣approchable. Inanitie. Emptinesse. Inaugurate. To dedi∣cate, or consecrate. Inauspicious. Vnluckie, vnfortunate. Incantation. A charme. Incapable. Which can∣not conceiue or con∣teine. Incendiary. He that bur∣neth or setteth any thing on fire. Incense. To inflame, to stirre vp to anger: being a nowne it signifyeth the best frankincense. Incest. Carnall know∣ledge betweene neere kin∣dred. Incestuous. Wicked, which committeth In∣cest. Inchepinne. The lower gut of a Deere. Incident. That which happeneth or belongeth to a thing. Incision. A cutting: A terme vsed in Chirurgerie, whē they launce a wound, the better to come to the bottome; or any impo∣stume, or such like to let out euill humours. Incite. To stirre vp. Incitation. A stirring vp. Inclemencie. Vngentle∣nesse; cruelty. Include. To containe, to shut in. Inclusiue. Which con∣taineth
or is contained. Incoact. Vnconstrained. Incompact. Slight, not close ioyned. Incompatible. Disagree∣ing: vnreconcileable: al∣so mischieuous: not suf∣ferable. Incomprehensible. Which cannot be comprehended or conteined. Inconcinnitie. Vnaptnes: ill agreeing, disproportion. Incongruitie. Disagree∣ment: false speaking, dis∣proportion. Incongruous. Disagreea∣ble: absurd; against rule of Grammar. Inconsiderate. Foolish, vndiscreete, Inconsideration. Foolish∣nesse: vnaduisednesse. Inconsolable. Comfort∣lesse. Incontinent. Vnchaste: also forthwith, by and by. Incorporate. To mixe two or moe substances toge∣ther. Incorrigible. That which cannot be corrected or a∣mended. Increate. Which is not created or made. Incredibilitie. Impossibi∣lity of beliefe. Incredible. Which can∣not be beleeued. Incredulity. Want of be∣leefe. Incredulous. One that will not beleeue. Increment. An increase. Incressant. A terme of Herauldry, signifying the Moone past the prime, and not yet come to the full. Incroch. See Encroch. Incubus. The night mare, when a man in his sleepe supposeth he hath a great weight lying on him, and feeleth himselfe almost strangled; in such sort that he cannot turne him∣selfe nor sit vp, nor call for helpe. The vulgar thinke it some spirit, but the Phi∣sitions affirme it to bee a naturall disease, caused by humours vndigested in the stomacke, which fu∣ming vp to the braine, doe there trouble the animall spirits, stopping their pas∣sage into the sinewes, so that the body cannot mooue.
Inculcate. To repeat a thing often, thereby to make one remember it. Jnculcation. An often re∣peating, a beating into the braines. Inculpable. Blamelesse, without fault. Incumbent. Hee that is in possession of a benefice, or spirituall liuing. Incursion. A running in. Jndecorum. Vncomely. Indifinite. Not precisely exprest: vndefined. Indemnity. Escaping with∣out dammage or hurt. Index. A Table in a booke. Jndico. A stone brought out of Turkie, wherewith dyers vse to die blew. Indiction. The space of fifteene yeeres, by which account Charters & pub∣like writings are dated at Rome: euery yeere still increasing one, till it come to fifteene, and then re∣turning to one againe. Indigence. Want: pouer∣tie. Jndigestion. Want of di∣gestion: or euill diges∣tion. Indignitie. Disgrace, dis∣honour. Indiuiduum. That which cannot bee diuided: A terme in Logicke, when we directly expresse, and seeme to point to that thing which we speake of: as in saying, This horse, That man: For although the words Horse, or Man, may bee applyed to any horse or man, yet being so expresly pointed at, they cannot then be drawen to signifie other then those two. Indocible. Which can∣not be taught, hard to learne. Induce. To bring in. Jnducement. That which bringeth or draweth one in. Induction. A drawing in: or a forme of argument proceeding from particu∣lars to vniuersals. Indulgence. Gentle∣nesse, too much cocke∣ring. Jndulgences. Pardons. Induration. A harde∣ning. Jndustrie. Diligence &
painefull endeauours. Industrious. Diligent: painefull. Ineffable. That which cā∣not be spoken, vnutterable. Ineuitable. That which cannot be auoyded. Inexorable. Which can∣not be intreated. Inexperience. Want of ex∣perience. Inexpiable. So grieuous that one cannot make sa∣tisfaction for it: vnmerci∣full, deadly. Inexplicable. Which cannot bee vnfolded, ope∣ned or declared. Inextricable. So confu∣sed or difficult, that a man cannot winde himselfe out of it. Infallible. Certaine: sure wherein one cannot bee deceiued, Infamous. Lewd: ill spo∣ken of, base, vile. Infatigable. Vnwearyed. Infatuate. To make foo∣lish. Infecundity. Vnfruitfulnes. Infelicitie. Vnhappinesse. Inferior. Lower, more base. Infernall. Hellish, or be∣longing to hell. Inferre. To bring in by way of argument, to con∣clude. Inference. A bringing in, or concluding vpon some∣what going before. Infestation. A troubling, a molesting. Infinity. Endlesnesse: vn∣measurablenesse. Infirme. Weake, feeble. Infixe. To fasten, or sticke in. Inflammation. An infla∣ming: a hot angry swel∣ling. Inflate. To puffe vp: to make proude. Inflation. A puffing vp: a swelling. Inflexible. Very hard, which will not bend. Inflict. To lay punish∣ment, or some penaltie vp∣on one. Influence. A flowing in: most commonly it is ta∣ken for the power which Planets and Stars haue in mouing of inferior things. Information. An instructi∣on, or giuing one to vnder∣stand. Infringe. To breake: to transgresse.
Infuse. To poure in. Infusion. A powring in. Also a liquor wherein any medicinable thing is layed warme to steepe, that the vertue thereof may passe into it: Physitions vse these infusions often, when they haue to deale with de∣licate persons, that wil not endure strong medicines. Ingenerable. Which can∣not be bred or begotten. Ingenious. Witty: quicke conceited. Ingenuous. Gentleman-like. Ingot. A small masse or little wedge of fined gold. Ingrate. Vnthankfull. Ingratitude. Vnthankful∣nesse. Ingredience. A going in: or that which goeth into the making of a thing. Ingresse. A going in. Ingrosse. To buy vp all for himselfe: sometime to write a thing fayre in a booke. Ingrosser. One that buy∣eth corn growing, or dead victuall, to sell againe: ex∣cept it be by retaile, as vic∣tuallers vse, or buying bar∣ly for Malt; Oates for Oatmeale, oiles or spices. Ingulfe. To drawne, to swallow vp. Ingurgitation. A swilling or swallowing in. Inhabitable. Which canot be dwelled in. Inherent. Cleauing too, or abiding in a thing. Inhibit. To forbid. Inhibition. A forbidding. Inhospitable. Harbourles: not fit to entertaine one. Inhumane. Cruel, vnman∣like, vnciuill. Inhume. To bury. Inhumanitie. Cruelty, vn∣manlike behauiour. Iniection. A liquor which Surgeons doe squirt into a deepe wound. Inimitable. Which can∣not be followed. Iniunction. An inioyning or commanding one to do a thing. Innate. Naturall. Innauigable. That which cannot be sayled vpon. Innouate. To make new. Innouation. A making new: an alteration. Inobseruable. Which can∣not be obserued or marked
Inoculate. To graffe a bud, by cutting a round hole in the barke of ano∣ther tree, and setting it on with clay. Inquisition. A searching. Inquisitiue. Very desirous to know: searching or en∣quiring after a matter. Insatiable. Which can∣not bee satisfied or fil∣led. Inscription. A title or note written vpon any thing. Inscrutable. Vnsearcha∣ble: which cannot be per∣fectly found out. Insculpe. To cut or carue in. Insensible. Which cannot bee perceiued: or one so foolish that he perceiueth nothing. Insert. To put in; to adde. Insertion. A putting in. Jnsinuate. To put any thing into ones mind cun∣ningly and closely: also by little and little to creepe into ones fauour. Insinuation. A cunning speech to creepe into ones fauour. Jnsist. To continue or a∣bide. Insition. Graffing. Insociable. Not apt to keepe company. Insolencie. Pride. Insolent. Proud, pre∣sumptuous: also strange and vnwonted. Insoluble. That which cannot be loosed: vnanswe∣rable. Inspection. A looking in. Inspersion. A sprinkling. Inspire. To breathe into; to put in ones minde. Inspiration. An inward in∣struction or motion com∣ming from God. Instance. An example or similitude brought of a thing. Instant. Very earnest: al∣so quicknesse, speedinesse, present time. Instaure. To repayre or builde anew. Instigate. To stirre vp: to prouoke. Instigation. A stirring vp: a prouoking. Instinct. A naturall incli∣nation. Institute. To ordaine, to appoint: somtime to teach and instruct.
Institution. An appoint∣ment, an ordinance: som∣time a teaching or instruc∣tion. Insult. To vaunt proudly ouer one. Insultation. A proud crowing ouer one. Insuperable. Which can∣not be ouercome. Insurrection. A rising of many together in armes or disturbance of the peace. Integritie. Soundnesse; vpright dealing: honestie. Intellectuall. Of, or belon∣ging to the vnderstanding. Intelligence. Knowledge, vnderstanding: sometime an Angell or heauenly spi∣rit. Intelligent. One that vn∣derstandeth. Intelligible. Which may be vnderstood. Intentiue. Which liste∣neth well, and is earnestly bent to a thing. Intercede. To step be∣tween, to intreate for one. Intercept. To take by the way before it come to him to whom it was sent. Interception. A taking of a thing by the way, to the let or hinderance ther∣of. Intercesse. See Interceed. Intercession. An intreating in ones behalfe. Intercessor. He that intrea∣teth for another. Intercourse. Passing or sending one to another. Interdict. To forbid: to barre or keepe away. Interdiction. A forbidding. Interest. Right, or title: sometime profite made by vsurie. Interfeere. To knock the legs together in going. Interim. In the meane while. Interior. Inward. Interlace. To ioyne with∣all, to mixe together. Interline. To write be∣tweene two written lines. Interlocution. A speaking betweene. Interlude. A Play, a Co∣medie. Intermission. A leauing off for a time. Intermit. To leaue off for a time, to discontinue. Intermixe. To mingle with other things.
Internall. Inward: ve∣ry deerely esteemed, or fa∣miliar with one. Interpellation. An inter∣rupting or troubling one while he speaketh. Interpose. To put between, to step in betweene two: to busie himselfe where hee needeth not. Interposition. A putting betweene. Interre. To bury. Interreigne. The space of time between the old king and the new. Interrogation. An asking a question. Interrogatiue. Which as∣keth a question. Interrogatorie. Asking of a question: a demaund. Interrupt. To breake be∣tweene, to trouble one as he is speaking. Interruption. A breaking off: a troubling. Interuall. A distance of time or place. Intestate. That dyeth without making any testa∣ment or will. Intestine. Bred in the bo∣wels: Intestine warre: Ci∣uill warre. Intimate. To signifie, or touch a matter closely. Intimation. A cunning or close signifying of a matter Intire. Whole, sound, perfect. Intolerable. Which can∣not be endured. Intoxicate. To bewitch, to amaze, or extreamely dull ones spirit. Intractable. Stubborne, which cannot bee ordered or handled. * Intresse. Lyning. Intricate. Wrapped, entan∣gled, hard to bee vnder∣stood. Intrinsecall. Inward. Introduct. To leade or guide in. Introduction. That which leadeth or directeth one. Intrude. To thrust boldly in. Intrusion. A thrusting in, properly into a void tene∣ment, whereto one hath no right. Inuade. To set vpon: to assault. Inualiditie. Weakenesse, want of strength. Inuasion. A setting vpon: an assault. Jnuectiue. A sharp speech
made in ones disgrace. Inueigh. To speak bitterly against one. Jnueigle. To allure, to entice. Inueloped. Wrapped, co∣uered. Inuentorie. A writing of the quality and value of a mans goods. Inuersion. A turning in, or a turning vpside downe. Jnuert. To turne contra∣rie to right forme. Inuest. To clothe. Inueterate. Old, aunci∣ent. Inuincible. Which cannot be conquered. Inuiolate. Safe, whole, not wronged or broken. Inuisible. Which cannot be seene. Inuite. To request, to bid to a feast. Inundation. An ouerflo∣wing of water. Inuocate. To call vpon. Inuocation. A calling vp∣on. Inuolue. To roule vp in a thing: to couer. Inuulnerable. Which can∣not be wounded. Iocund. Merrie, plea∣sant. Ioynture. Lands or Te∣nements which a man as∣sureth vnto his Wife, for terme of her life, or other∣wise, in respect of his mar∣rying her. * Ioleyning. Ioyfull. * Ionglerie. Iugling. Iouiall. Noble, excellent; also liuely, pleasant, and merrie. Ioyeux. Ioyfull. Irascible. Which hath power to be angry. Iris. The Rainebow. Ironie. A speaking by contraries, as in calling blacke, white. Ironicall. That which is spoken in iest or moc∣kingly; contrarie to his meaning that speaketh it. Irradiation. A shining vpon. Irrationall. Vnmeasura∣ble. Irrefragable. Vndenia∣ble. Irregular. Contrarie to rule: somtime it signifieth one not capable of holie orders.
Irregularitie. A going out of right rule. In the olde Canon Law it is taken for any impediment, which hindereth a man from ta∣king holy Orders. As if he be base borne, or noto∣riouslie defamed of any notable crime, or be may∣med or much deformed, or haue consented to procure anothers death, with di∣uers other impediments too long to be rehearsed in this place. Irremediable. Which can∣not be remedied. Irreparable. Which can∣not be repaired. Irreprehensible. Which cā∣not be reproued. Irresolute. Not fully re∣solued: vncertaine. Irreuocable. Which can∣not bee called backe a∣gaine. Irrision. A mocking. Irritate. To prouoke: to moue to anger. Irritation. A prouoking. Irruption. A breaking into. Isthmos. A narrow part of a Country between two seas. Iterate. To repeate or do againe. Iteration. A doing again, a doing twice. * Iub. A bottle. Iubilation. A great shout for ioy, a great reioycing. Iubilie. A publike reioy∣cing or a great shout for ioy. Among the Hebrewes euery fiftith yeare, was cal∣led the yeare of Iubilie; for then were bond-men of their owne Country made free, possessions returned againe to the first owners, neither was it lawfull to plant or sow any thing that yeare. Among Chri∣stians this solemnitie of keeping a yeare of Iubilie, was first instituted by Bo∣nifacius the eight, in the yeare of our Lord 1300. who ordained that it should bee obserued euery hundreth yeare. After this Clement the sixt, instituted it to be kept euerie fiftith yeare. And lastly, Sixtus the fourth brought it to be celebrated euery fiue and twentieth yeare, be∣ginning it first in the yeare of our Lord God, 1475.
Iucunditie. Pleasantnes, mirth. Iudaisme. The religion or beleefe of the Iewes. Iudiciall. Belonging to iudgement: also wise, graue, of great iudgement. Iudicious. See Iudiciall. Iuiubes. Certaine plumbs of Italy, solde here by A∣pothecaries. This fruite is in colour white or red, in fashion round or like an oliue, in tast sweete, hauing a hard long stone like an oliue stone, but much lesse. If these plumbes bee kept long, they waxe drie, and full of wrinckles. They are temperate in heate and colde, and are good a∣gainst the cough, roughnes of the throate, and against all exulcerations and in∣flammations of the kid∣neis and bladder: but be∣ing eaten for meate, they are of hard digestion. Iulep. A physicall cleere drinke made of distilled waters, and sugar, vsed to coole the bodie, or quench thirst in hot diseases: some∣time the Iuleps haue sirupes or other mixtures put to them. Iuncture. A ioynt, a ioy∣ning together. Iuorie. The Elephants tooth; it is of a binding nature, and the scraping thereof is good against sores, growing vnder the rootes of the nayles. Iuridicall. Of or apper∣taining to iudgement. Iurisdiction. Lawfull au∣thoritie in any place. Iustification. A iustify∣ing or making iust. * Iwympled. Muffled, K Kalends. See Calends. Keele. The bottome of a ship. Keene. Sharpe edged. Kell. The caule about the paunch of a Hart or Stagge. * Kernelling. A brewers vessell. * Kepe. It is sometimes taken for care or regard. * Keynard. A micher, a hedge-creeper. * Kitchell. A kinde of cake.
Kintall. A certaine weight of about an hun∣dred. Kirat. An Arabian word signifying the weight of three graines. Kith. Acquaintance. Kithaies. The fruite of the ashen tree: they are little narrow huskes han∣ging together in clusters, wherein is contained the seede of the ashe which is bitter. This prouoketh v∣rine, and is sought by some for other purpose. * Knarrie. Stubbie. Knight-seruice. An aun∣cient tenure of lands, by which a man was bound to beare armes in warre, for the defence of the Realme. L LAas. A nette or gynne. Laborious. Painefull, full of labour. Labyrinth. An intricate building or place made with so many turnings and windings, that whosoeuer went into it,, could neuer get out without a perfect guide, or a thred to direct him, the end of which threed must be tyed at the doore where he entreth. Some heathen Princes bestowed infinite charge, to build such deuices in a stately forme. There wer fowre principall labyrinth in the world. The first in Egypt, made for a sepul∣cher of one of their Kings, or (as some write) in ho∣nour of the sunne. The se∣cond in the Iland of Can∣die, built at the comman∣dement of King Minos, by the ingenious workeman Dadalus, who tooke his patterne, from that which he had seene in Egypt, the third in the Ile Lemnos, the fourth in Italy built by King Porsenna, of great square stones, for his owne sepulcher. Lacca. A kinde of red gumme, brought out of Arabia, and solde heere by Apothecaries, good a∣gainst diseases of the breast, and comfortable to the lyuer. Laudanum. A yellowish gumme, as
some write; notwithstanding others af∣firm it to be made of a dew, which falleth vpon a cer∣taine herbe in Grecce. A∣uicen sayth, it is taken han∣ging on the haire of Goats beards, that haue fed vpon that plant. It is hot and drie, and sweete of smeil, if it be pure. It is often vsed in pomanders, and being annointed vpon the head with oyle of myrtles, it doth strengthen the skin, and keepeth haire from falling off. Laike. A lay man. Laitie. The estate or de∣gree of a lay man, lay men. Lake. A faire red colour vsed by painters. Laire. The place where any Deere harboureth by day. Languishment. A feeble∣nesse, a fainting. Languor. Feeblenesse, sicknesse, infirmitie. Lapidarie. One that sel∣leth or polisheth precious stones: a Ieweller. Lappise. A terme vsed among hunters, when hounds opē their mouthes in the string, or a grey∣hound in his course. Larch Turpentine. A kind of Turpentine or rosen growing vpon the Larch tree in Italie, vsed often in oyntments and emplai∣sters, to cleanse or heale wounds. It may be also ta∣ken inwardly with honie, and then it cleanseth the breast, looseth the belly, and expelleth the stone and grauell. * Larfon. Robberie. Largesse. Liberality. Lasciuious. Wanton, di∣shonest. Lasciuiousnesse. Wanton∣nesse. Lassitude. Wearinesse. Lastage. Any heauy weight or balasse, layd in the bottome of ships to make them goe vpright: It is also a terme in the com∣mon law, which signifieth to be quite of a certaine payment in faires and mar∣kets, for carrying of things where a man will. Latitude. The breadth of any thing: in Astrono∣my it signifieth the dis∣tance, north, or southward, from the
Equinoctiall line, or the distance of the Pole from the Horizon. Latria. Diuine honour. Laude. Praise. Laudable. Worthy of praise. Laureate. Crowned with Laurell. Laurell. The Bay tree, or a garland of Bayes. * Laye. A song. * Layuers. Thongs of lether. Lazer. A Leaper, a poore man full of sores and scabs. Lazule stone. A blewish greene stone of the kinde of marble, vsed sometime in physicke. It is in operati∣on hot and drie, and being rightly prepared (accor∣ding to an art knowne to Apothecaries) is good a∣gainst melancholy diseases, and by cleansing the bloud to preserue one from the leaprosic. League. Truce, friend∣ship, peace: sometimes it signifieth a space of three mile or thereabout. Leasing. Lying. Lector. A reader. * Lectorise. A Deske. Lecture. A reading, a les∣son. * Leede. An olde name of the moneth of March. Leete. A court or law-day holden commonly euerie halfe yeare. Legacie. Any thing gi∣uen by ones will or testa∣ment. Legall. Of or belonging to the law. Legate. An Embassadour. Legend. A story of olde matters. Legible. Which may be read. Legion. An armie of men▪ The Romane Legion con∣sisted of ten bands, wherof the first band conteyned 1105. footemen, and 123. horsemen; in which band the Standard was alwayes carried. The other nine bands had euery one 555. footemen, and 66. horse∣men; so that a Legion. made vp the number of 6100. footemen, and 726. horse∣men. * Legisters Lawyers. Legitimate. Lawfull, law∣fully begotten.
Legitimation. A making of one legetimate. Lenitie. Gentlenes, mild∣nesse, mercie. Lentils. A kind of small pulse growing in hot coun∣tries, round and flat, of co∣lour sometimes blacke, sometimes white, & some∣times browne. Being boy∣led but once, they loose the belly, but at the second boyling in another water, they are of a binding na∣ture, being then good to stop the bloody flixe or a∣ny loosenesse of the bo∣die. Lentiske. A tree growing in diuers hot Countries, which beareth the notable Gumme called Masticke: The leaues and barke of this tree stop al loosenesse, and issues of blood what∣soeuer. Lessee. He that taketh a lease. Lesses. Dongue of a raue∣nous beast, as of a Beare, Bore, &c. Lessour. He that letteth lands or tenements to an∣other. Lethargie. A disease con∣trarie to phrensie: for as phrensie is caused by hot humours inflaming the braine, so is a Lethargie by cold Phlegmaticke hu∣mours, oppressing the braine in such sort, that the Patient can doe no∣thing but sleepe, whereby he becommeth forgetfull, with losse (in a manner) of reason and all the senses of his body. Lethe. A Poeticall word, signifying a feyned Riuer in hell, the water whereof being drunken, causeth forgetfulnesse of all that is past. Leucoma. A fruite in In∣dia so called, much like vn∣to a Chestnut. Leueret. A yong Hare. * Leuesell. A bush. Leuitie. Lightnesse. Lexicon. A Greek Dicti∣onarie for words. Liable. Subiect to, belon∣ging to. * Liard. Nimble, wilde. Libard. A spotted wilde beast, the male of a Pan∣ther: See Panther. Libell. A little Booke: somtime a
defamatorie scroll, or slanderous wri∣ting or inuectiue written a∣gainst one, without any knowne name of the Au∣thor. Libertine. One of loose life, or carelesse of Religi∣on. Libidinous. Lustfull, lea∣cherous. Licenciate. One that hath studied the Ciuill Law fiue yeares. Licentious. Loose, wan∣ton. Licentiousnesse. Too much libertie, loosenesse, wan∣tonnesse. Lieu. In stead or place of another thing. Lignum Aloes. See A∣loes. Lignum vitae. See Guaia∣cum. Limit. A bound or end. Also to set bounds. Limitation. An appoin∣ting of bounds. Lineall. Downeright like a line. Lineament. The forme, draught, or proportion of the body. Linguist. One skilfull in languages. Lipothymie. A fainting or swounding, when the vitall spirits being suddenly op∣prest, a man sinketh down, as if he were dead. Liquid. Thin and moist. Liquefaction. A mel∣ting. Liquefie. To melt. Liquid Amber. A sweete Rosin brought from the West Indies, comfortable to the braine, or any griefe proceeding from cold cau∣ses. Lizard. A little beast much like our Euet, but without poyson, breeding in Italy & other hot coun∣tries. The dung of this beast is good to take away spots in the eye, & cleereth the sight. And the head thereof being bruised and laid to, draweth out thorns, or any thing sticking with∣in the flesh. Litanies. Prayers or sup∣plications, so called of the Greeke verbe Litaneuo, which signifieth to beseech or entreat. Litargie. The fome that riseth from lead, when it is tried. It is cold of opera∣tion, and often vsed by
Surgeons in Oyntments and Plaisters, being of a gentle drying, cleansing, and binding nature. See Lethargie. Literature. Learning: knowledge in bookes. Litherlie. Slothfull. Litigious. Contentious, full of strife. Liturgie. Publike seruice of the Church. Locall. Of, or belonging to place. Locust. A great Flye or Grashopper with long legges, breeding in India, and other hot Countries. There are two kindes of them: One with winges, not good to be eaten, and the other without winges, which the inhabitants vse for food. * Lodemanage. Skill of nauigation. Lodestar. A Starre that guideth one. Lodestone. A stone of the colour of rusty iron, which hath an admirable vertue, not onelie to draw iron to it selfe, but also to make any iron, vpon which it is rubbed, to draw Iron also. It is written notwithstan∣ding, that beeing rubbed with the iuyce of Gar∣licke, it cannot then draw Iron, as likewise if a Dia∣mond bee laid close vnto it. This stone is found in the Indian Sea, and also in the Countrey of Tra∣chonitis: It is of greatest vse in Nauigation, for by it Saylers finde out the certaine course of their voyage; the needle (in their compasse) tempered herewith, still standing di∣rectlie toward the North and South. Logician. One skilfull in Logicke. Logicke. The art of rea∣son. Lohoc. A physicall word; It is a thicke sirupe or o∣ther soft substance, which must not bee swallowed, but suffered to melt of it selfe in the mouth, that so it may gently slide downe, and thereby haue the more vertue against diseases of the breast, lungs and throate. Lone. Lending: somtime single or solitarie.
Longanimitie. Long suf∣ferance or forbearance. Longitude. The length of any thing: In Astrono∣my it signifieth the di∣stance of any Star or Pla∣net from the first degree of the signe Aries. Loquacitie. Much talke, or babling. * Lore. Learning, know∣ledge. Lorimer. One that ma∣keth bits for bridles, and such like instruments. * Lorrell. A deuourer. * Losell. A lout, some∣time a craftie fellow. Losenger. A flatterer, a Lyar. Lotion. A washing. * Louke. A fellow recei∣uer. Lubricitie. Slippernesse. Lucerns. A beast almost as big as a Wolfe breeding in Muscouia, and Ruscia, of colour betweene red and browne, mingled with blacke spots. Lucre. Gaine, profit. Lunacie. A disease wher∣in one is distracted in his wits, at certaine times of the Moone. Lunaticke. Sicke of a Lu∣nacie. Lupines. A little flat Pulse almost like a small beane, but much lesse and bitter in taste. They be not very good meate, but are sometime vsed in Physicke against worms in children, and the decoction of them taketh away spots and frec∣kles of the face. * Lushbrough. A base coine in the time of king Edward the third. Luster. A shining or great brightnesse. Lutum. Clay. Luxurie. Riotousnesse, leacherie. Luxurious. Riotous, wan∣ton, leacherous. Lyncuris. A bright shining stone, and sometimes of a dark yelow colour like Saf∣fron. This stone groweth of the vrine of the beast Lynx, being congealed, which vrine the Lynx hi∣deth (as Plinie writeth) be∣cause men should not find it. Some say it is good a∣gainst the paine of the sto∣macke, yellow Iaundise, & loosenesse of the belly.
Lynx. A spotted beast like vnto a Wolfe, and hauing a very perfect sight. This beast breedeth cheefely in countries of the East, & is often found in the woods of Almaine & Sclauonia. Lyrike. A Poet which ma∣keth verses to be sung vnto the harp. The best of these Poets among the Grecians was Pindarus, and among the Latines, Horace. M MAcerate. To steepe or soake in water; som∣time to afflict or vexe. To make leane. Machil. An Hebrew word; It signifieth the rich Robe of the Ephod, worn by the high Priest of the old law, hauing about the skirts therof 72. Pomegarnats of blew silke, purple & scarlet, and as many belles of gold between thē round about. Machination. A deuising or subtil contriuing of a mat∣ter. Machiuilian. A politicke states man: a cunning Po∣lititian, such as Machiuell was. Macrologie. Long and te∣dious talke. Maculate. To blemish or blot. Madrigals. A kind of Son∣nets. Magician. A cunning man: a Sorcerer, a great learned Clark, a Coniurer. Magike. At first this word signified great learning or knowledge in the nature of things; now it is most commonly taken for in∣chantment and sorcerie. Magistracie. The bearing of office: authoritie, rule, gouernment. Magnanimitie. Great cou∣rage. Magnanimous. Noble minded: one of great cou∣rage. Magnificence. Sumptuous∣nesse: great port and state∣linesse. Magnificent. Sumptuous: honorable, stately. Magnifico. Ah honorable personage. Magnitude. Greatnesse. Mainpernours. Those that are sureties for a man, and vndertake that he shall ap∣peare at a certine day, be∣fore Iudges in a Court.
Maineprise. The bayling of a man out of prison, vpon securitie giuen, that hee shall be forth com∣ming. Maior. The greater or more auncient. Maladie. A disease. Malecontent. Not conten∣ted: ill pleased. Malediction. A cursing. Malfactor. An euill doer. Maleuolent. Ill minded: spitefull, enuious. Malignant. Enuious, spite∣full, mischeeuous. Maligne. Spitefull: or to spite and hate. Malignitie. Spitefulnesse: enuy, malice. Mammon. An Assyrian word of the singular num∣ber, and Masculine Gen∣der, as Saint Hierome affir∣meth: It is interpreted ri∣ches. Manage. To rule, order or handle a thing well. Mandate. A commande∣ment. Mandragoras. See Man∣drake following. Mandrake. A strange hearbe, bearing yellowe round Apples. The roote of this hearbe is great and white like a Radish roote, and is diuided into two or moe parts, growing often almost like to the legges of a man. This roote, espe∣ciallie the barke thereof, is extreamely cold and drie, euen to the fourth degree: It is therefore ve∣ry dangerous to receiue inwardly, for that the least quantitie too much, will quicklie kill one. Surge∣ons vse to steepe this root in VVine, and giue it to bee drunken of such as they must cut, sawe, or burne in any part, for the cold operation thereof causeth sleepe, and maketh the body insensible for a time. Manna. In holy Scrip∣ture it signifieth a delicate food, which God sent from heauen to the Israe∣lites, in manner of a dew, white and somewhat like Coriander seede: with which the Israelites liued fortie yeares in the Wil∣dernesse, till
they came to the borders of the land of Canaan. At the first sending hereof, the peo∣ple were in such admira∣tion, that they said to each other, Manhu? viz. What is this? Which seemeth to be the cause, why it was after called Manna. In Physicke it is taken for a kinde of dew, which fal∣ling in hot countreyes vp∣on trees, doth there con∣geale, almost like to crummes of whitebread, and is gathered & choice∣ly kept, as a gentle purger of choler. Mansion. A tarying or a∣biding: also a dwelling house. Mansuetude. Gentlenes: mildenesse. Manuall. Handy: or that which may be caryed in the hand. Manumission. A making one free from bondage. Manumitte. To make a slaue or bondman free, which was in olde time thus. The lord of the slaue holding him by the head, arme, or other part, saide before witnesse, I will that this man goe free, and in so saying, shoued him forward out of his hand. Manure. To till, to dresse land. Manuscript. A handwri∣ting: a written booke. Marchasite. A stone par∣ticipating with the nature of some mettall, yet in so small quantity, that the mettall cannot be melted from it, but will vapour a∣way in smoake, the stone turning to ashes. These Marchasites are common∣ly in colour like to the mettall mixed with them; whether it bee golde, sil∣uer, brasse, or any other. Some affirme a Marcha∣site to be any stone out of which, fire may be stric∣ken. Marches. The boundes, or limits lying betweene two countreyes, common∣ly betweene Wales and England, or betweene En∣gland and Scotland. Marchionesse. A great Lady: a Wife to a Mar∣quesse. Marcionists. Olde con∣demned Heretikes, so cal∣led of their first master Marcion, a stoicke
Philoso∣pher, who held a detesta∣ble opinion that Christ was not the Sonne of God. Margarites. Litle pearles found in the shell fish, es∣pecially in Oisters, where∣of some haue holes in them, and some haue none. The best are brought out of India, yet they are also found in our English Seas, as also in the Fle∣mish and Almaine, and the fairest Margarits grow in yong shels. Some write that in Thunder, the Oi∣sters doe cast them vp, as it were in way of aborti∣on, which is the cause that they are often found in the sandes. They are some∣times vsed by Physitiōs in cordiall confections, for they comfort the spirits, and are therefore good a∣gainst swoundings, hauing vertue also in them to stoppe issues of blood, or any loosenesse of the bo∣dy. Margent. A brimme, or border. Marginall. Written in the Margent. Marine. Belonging to the Sea. Maritall. Husbandlike. Maritime. Bordring neere the Sea. Marte. A great faire or Market. Martiall. Warlike. Martyr. A witnesse: one that dyeth for the testimo∣ny of a good conscience. Martyrdome. A suffering of death or grieuous tor∣ment for constant perse∣uerance in true religi∣on. Martyrologie. A historie of the death of Martyres. A booke of the memorie of Martyres. Massacre. A great slaugh∣ter or murder of many people together. Masculine. Of the male kinde. Masticke. A white and cleere Gumme, of a sweet sauour. This Gum grow∣eth on the Lentiske tree, especially in the Iland Chios. It is temperate in heat, and of a dry binding nature; wherfore it streng∣theneth the stomacke, stayeth vomiting, and
stoppeth any issue of blood. Some doe vse to rub their teeth herewith, as well to whiten them, as to fasten such as bee loose. Mastuerco. An herbe in India, of great vertue to heale wounds. Materiall. Which hath matter or substance in it. Maternall. Motherly. Mathematician. One skilfull in the Mathema∣tickes: sometime it is ta∣ken in a worse sense, for one that superstitiously ca∣steth mens natiuities, or vndertaketh to find things lost, or foretell what is to come. Mathematickes. A terme applyed to such arts, as treate onely of quantities imaginarily abstracted frō bodies. The arts common∣ly so called, are Arithme∣ticke, musicke, Geometry, Geography, Astronomie, Cosmography, and Astro∣logy. Matrimoniall. Belon∣ging to Matrimony or Wedlocke. Matrixe. The wombe or place of conception. Matrone. A graue mo∣therly woman. Mature. Ripe. Maturitie. Ripenesse. Matutine. Of or belon∣ging to the morning. Maugre. In despite of ones heart: whether one will or no. Maxime. A principall matter, a maine point, a ge∣nerall rule. Maze. An astonish∣ment: sometime a deuice like a labyrinth made in some gardens in manner of a knot, out of which a man cānot get easily, if he once enter in. Mazar. A broad flat stan∣ding cuppe to drinke in: There is also a kinde of small Cherries so cal∣led. Mecoenas. It was the pro∣per name of a noble Ro∣mane, who being in great fauour with Augustus the Emperour, was a speciall friend to the Poets Virgill and Horace, and
generally a supporter of all learned men: wherefore sometime a great friend or patron is called a Mecoenas. Mechanicall. Of or be∣longing to handicrafts. Mechoacan. A whitish roote brought out of In∣dia, called by some Indian or white Rubarbe. It is hot in the first, and dry in the second degree, and purgeth all humours of what kinde soeuer with much ease. It cleanseth and comforteth the liuer and all the inward parts. Mediate. To deale be∣tweene two, to make meanes of agreement, as an indifferēt party to both. Mediation. A meanes of agreement by a friend to both parties. Mediator. He that ma∣keth meanes or speaketh for another. Medicable, Which may be healed. Medicament. A medicine. Mediocritie. A meane, a measure. Mediterrannean Sea. A sea which diuideth Europe from Africa. Megasine. A storehouse for warre. Melancholy. One of the fowre humours in the bo∣dy, the grossest of al other, which if it abound too much, causeth heauinesse and sadnesse of minde. Melioritie. A bettering. Mellifluous. Sweet as ho∣ny. Membrane. The vpmost thin skin in any part of the body. Memorable. That which is worthy of remem∣brance. Memorandum. A terme often vsed, when we write of a thing which we would remember. Memorial. that which put∣teth one in remembrance. Mendicitie. Beggerie. Meninges. Thinne skins in which the braine is contained. There are two such skinnes: one called by Phisitians, Dura mater, which is the stronger of the two, and next vnto the scull. The other named Pia mater, is within this first, being more tender and fine, and close wrapping the braine it selfe. If any of these
skinnes bee wounded, it causeth spee∣dy death. Menstruous. Which hath vpon her the monthly courses, or which belon∣geth to them. Mensuration. A measu∣ring. Mentall. That which is only thought in the mind. Mercenarie. A hireling: one that worketh for hire. Mercurian. Eloquent as Mercury was. Meridian. Of or belon∣ging to noone day, or the South part of the world. Merit. Desert, or to de∣serue. Meritorious. Which doth much deserue. Messias. The same in Hebrew, that Christ is in Greeke: to wit, Annoin∣ted. Our Lord and Saui∣our is often so called. Metamorphise. To change the outward shape. Metamorphosis. A change from one shape to another. Metaphore. The chan∣ging of a word, from the naturall sense, into ano∣ther sense like to it: as in saying, Couetousnesse is the roote of all euill: Where the word Root, is called a Metaphore, because it sig∣nifieth, the cause and be∣ginning of all euill, euen as a root is the cause, from whence a Plante sprin∣geth. Metaphoricall. Spoken by a Metaphore. Metaphysikes. Arts which lifting themselues aboue the changeable nature of things, doe consider of such as doe subsist in their owne essence, not subiect to any alteration; so that the Metaphysickes dealeth onely with incorporall, and euerlasting things; and in this sense schoole Diuinitie is the highest part of the Metaphysickes, being chiefly occupied in contemplatory knowledge of God, angels, and soules of men. Meteore. Any imper∣fect mixt substance ingen∣dred in the aire; as raine, snow, haile, thunder, lightening, blazing starres, cloudes, and winde: all which are made of
va∣pours or exhalations drawen vp from the earth and Sea, by attractiue ver∣tue of the Sunne. Meter. Measure, or a verse made by measure. Method. A direct way, to teach or doe any thing. Metonymie. A figure in speaking, when the cause is put for the effect, the sub∣iect for the adiunct, or con∣trarily. Metropolitan. The chiefe or mother city: An Arch∣bishop. Microcosmus. It proper∣ly signifieth a little world. This terme is sometime applyed to man, who is therefore called a Micro∣cosmus or little world, be∣cause his body being com∣pared to the baser part of the world, and his soule to the blessed Angels, see∣meth to signifie, that man is as it were a little world, and that the whole world doeth resemble a great man. Midriffe. A sinewie skin passing ouerthwarte in mans body, which diui∣deth the heart and lungs, from the stomacke, guttes, and liuer, lest the vitall parts should be offended with any ill vapour com∣ming from them. Migraine. A disease com∣ming by fits, either in the right or left side of the head; caused by distempe∣rate humours or vapours, brought thither from the veines or arteries at cer∣taine times. Militant. Warring or which is in warfare. Militarie. Warlike: or belonging to Warre. Mimicall. That which belongeth to scoffing be∣hauiour, or wanton ge∣sture. Mimicke. A wanton ie∣ster, a counterfet foole. Minatorie. Threatening. Minerall. Mettall or any thing digged out of the earth. Miniature. A small proportion: a little figure. Miniuer. A fine white Furre made of the bel∣lies of Squirrils: some say it is the skinne of a little white Vermine, breeding in Muscouia.
Minor. The lesser, the yonger. Minoritie. A mans time before he be of full age in the law, to dispose of his goodes and lands. Minotaure. A poeticall monster, halfe like a man, halfe like a Bull. This monster was kept in the Labyrinth of Candie, and fedde with mans flesh, where at last he was slaine by Theseus, as Poets report. Miscreant. An infidell, a false beleeuer. Misprision. An offence inclinable to fellonie or treason, but not so capitall, as fellonie or treason is; in which the offendour shall be punished by fine, losse of goods, forfeite of lands, during his life, or perpetuall imprisonment, according to the quality of his offence. Mission. A sending. Missiue. That which wit∣nesseth ones being sent. Mistleden. A plant which hath slender branches, and greene thicke leaues, grow∣ing neuer vpon the ground but vpon other trees. The best is that which groweth vpon an oake, and the leaues and fruit hereof are good to soften and ripen any colde hard swellings. Misy. A kind of yellow copperas, shining like gold, brought out of Egypt and the Ile of Cyprus: It is of a fretting burning nature, as the common coppe∣ras is. Mithridate. A great con∣fection like treacle, inuen∣ted by King Mithridates, from whome it taketh the name. It is of singular ver∣tue against poison, and hath so many and strong simples in it, that it ought not to be taken inwardly before it be aboue sixe moneths olde. Mitigate. To asswage or pacifie. Mitigation. A pacifying, an asswaging. Mittimus. A warrant made to conuey an offen∣der to prison. Mixture. A mingling. Mobilitie. Aptnes to moue. Moderate. Measurable, temperate,
also to gouerne or temper with discretion. Moderation. A due pro∣portion, temperance, good discretion. Moderator. A discreet go∣uernour, he that keepeth both parties from beeing too extreame. Moderne. Liuing now in our age. Modicum. A little, a poore pittance. Modulation. A pleasant tuning or sweete singing. Modwall. A bird which destroyeth bees. Moitie. Halfe. Moleboute. A great fish which maketh a grunting noyse when he is taken. Molestation. A troubling. Mollifie. To make soft. Mollification. A making soft. Moloch. The name of an Idoll, in the vally of Ennon, in the tribe of Beniamin, to which the Israelites did abhominably offer their children, in sacrifice of fire. This Idoll was made in the likenesse of a Calfe. Moment. A minute, a very little time, sometime the valew or weight of a thing. Momentanie. Of short continuance, which lasteth a very little while. Monarch. A King or Prince that ruleth alone, without any equall. Monarchie. The rule of one Prince alone, or a countrey so gouerned. Monasterie. A religious house of Monkes. Monasticall. Solitarie, be∣longing to a Monasterie. Monition. A warning. Monologie. A speaking still of one thing, a long tale of one matter. Monomachie. A single fight betweene two, hand to hand. Monopolie. When a man doth ingrosse or get com∣modities into his hands, in such fashion that none can sell them, or gaine by them but himselfe. Moote. To argue or rea∣son a case in law. Morall. Of or belonging to good manners: some time one of good behaui∣our: sometimes the mea∣ning of a fable. Moralitie. Goodnesse of
manners, ciuilitie. Morgage. To lay house or land to pawne, in such sort that they are forfeit, if the money be not repayed at a certaine time. Morositie. Frowardnesse, waywardnesse. Morpheus. Sleepe, or the God of sleepe. Mortifie. To kill: some∣time to tame, to breake the courage, or take away ones delight. Mortification. A killing, a pulling away, of ones pleasure. Mortmaine. A terme in the Law, when lands were giuen to a house of religi∣on, or to a company cor∣porate by the Kings grant; for then such land is said to come into Mortmaine, that is, a dead hand, and by a statue, the King or Lord of whom it is holden may enter into it. Mortuarie. A payment due in some places for the buriall of the dead: which is foure shillings and foure pence, where the goods of the deceased party are a∣boue the valew of twentie nobles, and vnder thirtie poundes: sixe shillings and eight pence, where the goods exceede thirtie poundes; and ten shillings where the goods amount aboue the valew of three∣score poundes. Mosaicall. A cunning kinde of painting, which seemeth to bee embossed and grauen in some places. Mother. A disease in wo∣men, when the wombe ri∣seth with paine vpward. In this disease the smelling to all sweet sauours is harme∣full, as contrarily the smel∣ling to al strong loathsome sauours, profitable. Motion. A moouing from place to place, or the moo∣uing of a matter to haue it considered of. Motiue. A cause moouing one to any thing. Motte. A word, or short sentence. Mountibancke. A base deceitfull merchant (espe∣cially of Apothecaries drugs) that with impudent lying doth for the most part sell counterfeite stuffe to the common people.
Mugwet. See Gather∣bag. Mulct. A fine or penal∣ty layd on one. Mullet. A kinde of deyn∣ty fish: it is also a tearme in heraldrie, which signifieth a spot descending from high, and deuided into fiue corners or ends out of one drop. Mummia. A thing like pitch, solde by Apotheca∣ries. Some affirme it is ta∣ken out of olde Toombes, being a corrupted humour that droppeth there from embalmed bodies: others say it is made of mans flesh boyled in pitch. It is hot in the second degree, and good against all bruisings, spetting of bloud, and di∣uerse other diseases. Mundane. Worldly. Mundifie. To make cleane. Mundification. A making cleane. Municipall. Of or be∣longing to the state of a Free-man or Burgesse of a Citty. Munificence, Liberality. Munificent. Liberal, boun∣tifull. Munition. Great Ordi∣nance for the warre, great shot. Muscle. In physicke it signifieth a knitting toge∣ther of flesh with veines, arteries and sinnewes, ser∣uing specially for the moti∣on of some part of the bo∣dy, by reason of sinnewes in it. Muses. The feyned god∣desses of poetry, and mu∣sicke, which were nine in number and daughters vn∣to Iupiter and Mnemosyne: Their names were Cleio, Melpomene, Thaleia, Euterpe, Terpsichore, Erato, Calliope, Vrania and Polymneia. Muske. It is brought out of India and other hote countries, taken there from a beast like a Roe, sauing that it hath two crooked teeth bending inward like two hornes; within which beast the muske groweth, conteyned in a little bag or bladder. It is comfortable to the heart and braine, by reason of the sweete smell thereof; beeing hote and
dry in operation: and it conueyeth the vertues of diuerse medicines, to those the two priccipall parts. Mutation. A change. Mute. Dumbe. Mutable. Changea∣ble. Mutabilitie. Changeable∣nesse. Mutinie. An vprore: a troublesome assembly of people together. Mutinous. Apt to breed quarrels, or discord a∣mong the people. Mutuall. That which passeth one from ano∣ther. Mutulate. To maime, cut off, or make lame. Muzrole. A ring or band of yron, to come ouer a horses nose. Myrobalanes. A fruite growing in Egypt and Sy∣ria, like Plummes, or Damsens. There are fiue kindes hereof, distingui∣shed by these names, Citrinae, Jndae, Cepulae, Emblicae, and Belliricae. They are colde in ope∣ration, and comfortable to nature; The first of these purgeth choler, the second melancho∣lie, and the three last fleame. Myrrhe. A Gumme brought out of Arabia, and Assyria, of colour betweene white and red, It is hotte and drie in the second degree, or as some write in the third, and is often vsed in Phy∣sicke, being of an ope∣ning, cleansing, and dis∣soluing nature. Poets feine that Myrrhe, first came by reason of a kings daughter, named Myrrha. who for a grieuous crime committed, was by the Gods turned into a lit∣tle Tree, out of the bran∣ches wherof this Gumme still droppeth in man∣ner of teares, as a token of her repentant sor∣rowe. Myrtle. A little lowe Tree growing in some hotte countreyes, hauing small darke leaues, and bearing berries, which are of a binding nature, good to stop any issue of blood. This
myrtle is a tender plant, not able to endure cold, and was wont to bee worne of the Ro∣mane captaines garland-wise in triumph, when they had obtained any victory, without slaugh∣ter of men: Poets con∣secrated this Tree to Ve∣nus. Myster. Vnknowen: strange. Mysticall. Darke, which hath a mystery in it. Mysterious. Darke spo∣ken in a mystery, hard to vnderstand. N NAdir. That point in the heauens which is direct vnder our feet. Naiades. The water Nimphes. Naperie. Linnen for the Table. Narcoticall. That which hath power to prouoke sleepe, or to make the bo∣dy insensible. * Narre. Neerer. Narration. A declaration of the matter whereof one purposeth to speake. A report, a discourse. Natiue. Naturall: The place where one was borne. Naturalize. To make naturall. Naue. The middle part of a wheele. Nauigable. Any water where ships may saile. Nauigation. A sailing by Sea. Nauigator. A Sayler: a Marriner. Nazarite. In Hebrew it signifieth a man separa∣ted or diuided. The Iewes so called those that had vowed themselues for some time to God: And these Nazarites, while their vow lasted, were to abstaine from wine and Grapes, either greene or dry, and generally from all whatsoeuer came from the vine tree, or might make a man drunke. They also cut not their haire, but suffe∣red it still to grow, and ob∣serued diuers other cere∣monies. The date of their vowe being expired,
they presented themselues to the Priest, who offered a sacrifice for them; and then was the Nazarites haire cutte, and burnt with the sacrifice. After which time it was lawfull, for the Nazarites to drinke wine as before. Necromancy. See Diui∣nation. Nectar. Poets faine it to be a delicate pleasant li∣quor, which the gods vsed to drinke. Nefarious. Very wic∣ked. Negation. A denying. Negatiue. A denyall, or that which denyeth. Negotiate. To trafike in merchandise: to follow much businesse. Negotiation. A buying and selling: a trafike of merchandise. Neophyte. Any thing lately planted or set: wherefore it is often taken for one, who is newly con∣uerted to the faith: a nouice, or young lear∣ner. Nerue. A sinnew. Neuter. Neither on the one side, nor the other. An indifferent partie. Neutralitie. A retch∣lesse beeing on neither side. Nicotiane. The herbe Tobacco, so called of a French mans name who first brought the know∣ledge of this Herbe into Fraunce. Niefe. In our common Law, it signifieth a bond woman. Niter. A substance like Salt, but sometime of a light red colour. It is hot and dry, of a strong fret∣ting nature: some take it to be salt Peter. Nobilitate. To make No∣ble. Nocent. Hurtfull. Nocturne. Psalmes and Prayers vsed at certaine houres of the night. Nocturnall. Belonging to the night. Noli me tangere. A dis∣ease by some so called. It is a peece of flesh growing in the nostrill, in such sort that it often stoppeth the winde. Nombrill. In Heraldry it signifieth
the lower part of a scuchion which is di∣uided by the breadth, into three euen parts. Nominate. To name, to appoint. Nomination. A naming. Nonage. A childes age, vnder 21. yeares old. Nonresidencie. Vnlawfull absence from the place of ones charge. Nonresident. Absent from his charge, or where hee ought to dwell. Nones. In March, May, Iulie, and October, they are the sixe dayes, next following the first day: In other moneths, they are the foure dayes next after the first; but the last of these dayes is properly cal∣led Nones, and the other reckoned backeward ac∣cording to the number distant from the Nones; as the third, fourth, or fift Nones. They are called Nones, because they are iust nine dayes before the Ides. Nonplus. No more, a terme sometime vsed, when a man can speake no fur∣ther, or make no answer to an obiection. Nonsuite. The letting of a suite fall. Norroy. One of the He∣rauldes, hauing the same authoritie beyond Trent northward, that Clarentius hath from Trent south∣ward. Notice. Knowledge. Notifie. To make knowne. Noueltie. Newes, a new matter. Nouice. A young lear∣ner, one that hath no expe∣rience. Nouitie. Newnesse. Nullifidian. Of no hone∣stie, of no religion. Nullitie. Nothing. Numeration. A number∣ing. Nuncupation. A na∣ming. Nuptiall. Of or belon∣ging to marriage. Nutriment. Nourish∣ment. Nutritiue. Which nouri∣sheth. Nymphe. A Virgine, a faire young Maide.
O OBdurate. To harden, also hard, or vnrelen∣ting. Obduration. A harde∣ning. Obeliske. A great square stone, broad beneath, and rising of an admirable hight, maller and smal∣ler, toward the toppe. There were diuers of these Obeliskes in Egypt, con∣secrated in honour of the Sunne: whereof foure were principall erected by King Sochis, of two hundred and fortie yards high: In time of the Ro∣mane Emperours, many Obeliskes were likewise set at Rome. Obiect. That which is placed before ones eyes, or the thing that one la∣boureth to attaine. Obiection. A laying to ones charge. Obiurgate. To chide, to reprooue sharpely. Obiurgation. A chi∣ding. Oblation. A sacrifice, an offering. Oblige. To binde. Oblique. Crooked: o∣uerthwart. Obliquitie. Crooked∣nesse. Obliterate. To blotout. Obliuion. Forgetfulnesse. Obliuious. Forgetfull. Obloquie. Slander: euill report. Obnoxious. Subiect to danger. Obscene. Filthy, abhomi∣nable, dishonest. Obscenity. Filthy talke. Obscure. Darke. Obscuritie. Darkenesse. Obsecrate. To intreate: to beseech. Obsecration. A besee∣ching. Obsequie. A Funerall: a solemne buryall. Obsequious. Dutifull: diligent, seruiceable. Obseruance. Diligent heede, or attendance. Obseruant. Dutifully watching, diligent. Obsesse. To beseege: or compasse about: A man is said to be obsest, when an euill spirit
followeth him, troubling him diuers times and seeking oportu∣nitie to enter into him. Obsolete. Olde, stale, growne out of vse. Obstacle. A hinderance or lette. Obstruction. A stopping, commonly in the bo∣die. Obtestation. A beseech∣ing. Obtrectation. A slande∣ring behind ones backe. Obtrude. To thrust forth, to cast vpon one. Obtuse. Dull; blunt. Occidentall. Of or belon∣ging to the West. Occurre. To come in the way: to meete with one. Occurrent. That which happeneth or commeth in the way. Ocean. The vniuersall maine Sea, compassing the greater part of the earth. Octanes. Eight dayes next after some principall feasts of the yeare. Ode. A song. Odious. Hatefull. Odour. A sweet smell. Odoriferous. Sweet smel∣ling. Oeconomie. The know∣ledge of well ordering matters belonging to houshould. Oeconomicall. Of or be∣longing to houshold. Oecumenicall. Vniuersall: generall. Oedeme. A waterish swel∣ling, in the body without paine, caused by some fleg∣maticke or vaporous hu∣mour, and leauing a hol∣low dent or pit therein, if one presse it downe with the finger. Offensiue. Which offen∣deth. Officious. Seruiceable: willing to please. Officiall. An Officer. Olibanum. The right frankincense, which is a Gumme, growing in Ara∣bia; whereof there are two kindes: the femall or smaller frankincense, and the male, the greater, whiter, and stronger: of which Virgill speaketh: Eclog. 8. Burne Verueine fatte, and strong male frankincense. It is hotte and dry,
good for per∣fumes to correct infecti∣ous ayre, and to be put in plaisters for green wounds. The weight of two or three Wheate cornes swal∣lowed downe, doth helpe digestion, and maketh the breath sweete. Where note that the right Olibanum or Frankincense will burne like a candle, and that which is counterfeit con∣sume away in smoake. Oligarchie. A common wealth where a few princi∣pall persons gouerne al the rest. Olympicke games. So∣lemne games of running, riding, wrastling, and o∣ther feates of actiuitie, kept euery fift yeare on a high hill in Greece, called Olympus. The reward to those that ouercame in these trials, was nothing but a Garland of Oliue branches, least couetous∣nesse, rather than vertue should make men striue for victorie: which was the cause that Tigranes Sonne of Artabanus, seruing in the huge army of King Xerxes, who then inuaded Greece, said to Mardonius, who had perswaded the King to that enterprize; against what a people haue you brought vs to fight, that more esteeme honour than money? Thinking it impossible to ouercome such Nations as were so affected. Omen. A hausening. Ominous. Hausening: that which signifieth som good or bad lucke to ensue. Omission. A letting slip: a leauing vndone. Omit. To forbeare: to leaue vndone. Omnipotencie. Almigh∣tinesse. Omnipotent. Almightie. Omniregencie. The ha∣uing all authoritie in ones owne hands. Onerate. To burden or ouercharge. Onyx. A precious stone found in the Mountaines of Arabia, of the colour of a mans naile. Some write, that it is congealed of a iuyce dropping from a tree called Onycha, which is the cause that it smelleth sweet being cast into the fire, as also that
it is often found with diuers pictures in it, being easily therein fashi∣oned, before the stone bee throughly hardened. Opall. A precious stone of diuers colours, wherein appeareth the fierie shi∣ning of the Carbuncle, the purple colour of the Ame∣thyst, and the greene shew of the Emerald, very strangely mixed together. Operate. To worke. Operatiue. Which work∣eth, or hath power to worke. Ophthalmie. An inflam∣mation of the outer skinne of the eye, caused by hot fretting humours flowing thither. Opinionate. Bent to his own opinion: selfewilled. Opium. The iuice of black Poppie, sold dry by Apo∣thecaries. It is sometime vsed in Physicke to make one sleepe, or to asswage excessiue paine; but then it must be mixed with o∣ther things, and giuen with great discretion; for taken alone it will cast one into a deadlie sleepe; beeing cold and dry in the fourth degree. Opobalsamum. See Balme. Opopanax. A sappe or li∣quor flowing in some hot Countries out of a Plant called Panax. It is brought hither dry, being of a yel∣low colour on the outside, and white within, if it bee not ouerstale. It is good a∣gainst cold shiuerings of agues, & to be drunke with meade, of such as are squat or bruised therein. Oportunelie. Fitly, in due time. Oppilation. A stopping. Opponent. He which ap∣poseth, or asketh questi∣ons. Oppose. To obiect; to set one thing against another. Opposite. Contrarie, or placed ouer against. Opposition. A putting, set∣ting, or standing against. Opprobrious. Reprochfull, naughtie, wicked. Oppugne. To resist, to fight against. Optike. Belonging to the sight. Option. A wish. Opulencie. Great wealth, riches.
Or. Gold, or golden co∣lour. Oracle. An answere or counsel giuen by God. A∣mong the Gentiles, these Oracles were but illusions of the diuel, who answered for the most part doubt∣fully in Idols, to questions or demaunds made vnto him. There were two such principall places of Oracles: One of Ammon or Iupiter, in Lybia, which was founded vpon this oc∣casion. When Bacchus after his conquests in India, came into the hot burning country of Lybia, and wanted there water to re∣leeue his Army, it is said that he praied to his father Iupiter to helpe him in that distresse: whereupon there appeared a Ramme vnto him, which stamping vpon the ground with his foote, caused a fountaine forth∣with to spring in the place. Bacchus obtaining by this meanes his desire, built a temple there of excee∣ding huge greatnesse, in the middle whereof, hee erected an Idoll to Iupiter, in the likenesse of a Ram; which Idol afterward gaue Oracles, and was called the Oracle of Ammon; be∣cause it was situated in a dry sandie place; for Am∣mos in Greeke signifieth Sand. The other Oracle was at Delphi, a Cittie of Beotia in Greece, where Apollo was said to giue an∣sweres. Oratorie. A place to pray in. Oratour. One that plea∣deth causes: an eloquent speaker. Orbe. Any perfect round circle hollow in the midst. Orbicular. Round like an Orbe. Orchall. A stone like Al∣lume, vsed somtime by Di∣ers to raise a red colour. Ordinarie. A Iudge that hath Ordinary iurisdiction in Ecclesiasticall causes. Ordure. Dung, filth. Orgall. The lees of Wine dried, vsed by Diers to make their cloth to drinke in the colour throughly. Organical. That which cō∣sisteth of diuers substantial parts and members.
Organist. A player vpon Organs. Organ Ling. A kinde of Ling brought out of the North Countries. Orgies. Rude ceremonies instituted by the Poet Or∣pheus, to bee kept euerie third yeare in the honour of Bacchus. Orient. The East. Orient Pearles. Glistring Pearles of great price. Orientall. Of, or belon∣ging to the East. Orifice. The mouth of a∣ny thing, or the outward hole of a wound. Originall. The first be∣ginning. The first of any thing. Oringos. Certaine rootes growing in some places, neere the Sea side. The Plant is called Sea hollie, bearing prickly broad leaues, and round sharpe prickly heads, set about with small sky coloured floures. These rootes are very long and deepe into the ground, of an ashie co∣lour in the outside and full of ioynts. They vse, scra∣ping of the outer rinde of these roots, and pulling out the pith, to preserue them by boyling them with Su∣gar or Hony, & a litle Ci∣namon and Ginger; which preserue is very good for a∣ged people, and such as are consumed in their bodie, to nourish them againe. Orisons. Prayers. Ornament. A garnishing. Ornature. A garnishing, a setting forth. Ornifie. To garnish. Orphan. He that wanteth Father & Mother: friend∣lesse. Orpment. A soft yellow kind of Arsenik, like vnto Brimstone: It is common∣ly taken for Rats-bane. Orthodoxall. That which belongeth to a true and right faith, or Religion. Orthographie. The art of writing words truely; as Sonne of man, with an O: Sunne that shineth, with the vowell V. Orthographist. Hee that professeth or is skilfull in Orthographie. Osanna. See Hosanna. Osprey. A kinde of raue∣nous Fowle,
which houe∣reth ouer pooles to take Fish. Ostentation. Boasting; vaine craking or vaunting. A proud setting forth to shew. Ostiarie. An officer ha∣uing authority to keep vn∣worthy persons out of the Church. Ostracisme. A banish∣ment among the Atheni∣ans for ten yeares, so called because they vsed to write the names of the party so condemned, in Oyster shelles. This punishment was cheefely vsed, to abate the ouergreat power of no∣ble men. Ouall. A long round cir∣cle made like an egge. such as pictures are sometimes drawne in. Ouerture. An ouerturning, a sudden change. Oxgang. Thirteene acres of land. Oxymell. A sirupe made of Hony, Vineger and wa∣ter, good to cut and clense grosse flegmatick humors: sometime there are boy∣led certain roots and seeds with it; and then is it cal∣led Oxymel compositum: sometime it is made with Hony, Vineger, and the Sea Onion, and then it is named Oxymel Scylliticum: which also is of two sorts, to wit, simple and com∣pound. P PAcal. A tree in India so called. Pacification. An appea∣sing or pacifying. Pacificatorie. Which ap∣peaseth or pacifieth. Pact. A bargaine. Page. A written side of a leafe of paper. Pagan. A Heathen: an infidell. Paganisme. The beleefe of the Pagans. Paico. An hearbe in In∣dia, good against the griefe of the stone in the Kid∣nies, which commeth of windinesse or cold cau∣ses. Palate. The vpper hollow part of the mouth, where∣in lieth the sense of tasting, as in the tongue.
Palestricall. Of, or be∣longing to wrastling. Also that which is done decent∣lie with comely gesture of the body. Palinode. A recantation or denying of an opinion formerly maintained. * Palliard. A Whoore∣monger. * Palliardise. Whoore∣dome. Palliate. To cloke, to co∣uer. Pallizado. Great postes set vp in the entry to a Camp, for a defence a∣gainst great shot. Palme. The tree which beareth Dates, growing plentifully in the holy land. There are of these trees found also in some parts of Egypt, but they beare no fruit, or if they beare any it is vnpleasant. The branches of this tree, were wont to be carried as a token of victory, because they are of that nature, that they will stil shoot vpward, though oppressed with ne∣uer so great weight, & the leaues thereof neuer fall. Of this tree there is male and female: the male bea∣reth only blossomes & no fruit, but the female beares both. In old times, some people vsed to write with Paper, made of leaues of the Palme tree. Palmer. A poore Pil∣grime, that visiteth all ho∣ly places. Palmister. He that tel∣leth ones fortune by loo∣king in his hand. Palmistrie. See Diuination. Palpable. That which may bee felt with the fin∣gers: manifest, notorious. Pamphlet. A little booke. Pandar. A base fellow that keepeth or attendeth vpon Harlots. Pandect. A booke trea∣ting of all matters: also the Volume of the Ciuill Law called Digests, is so called. Panegyricall. That which is spoken flatteringly in praise of some great per∣son: Also it signifieth, stately, honorable, magni∣ficent, or a speech made of many great matters toge∣ther.
Panther. A fierce wilde beast, hauing a sweet smel, and a faire spotted skinne, wherewith shee allureth o∣ther beasts to looke on her; hiding her head lest it should make them afraid, and by this meanes, getteth her prey more easily. The male of this beast is the li∣bard. The panthers (as is written) haue on their shoulder a spot, which groweth and waineth like the moone. This beast is so feareful of the Hyena, that in his presence shee dareth not doe any thing; in so much that if one haue but a peece of the skinne of a Hyena, the panther will not touch him, and it is said, that if both their skinnes bee hanged toge∣ther, the haire of the Pan∣thers skin will fall of. Panyme. A heathen, a gentile. Parable. A similitude or resemblance made of a thing. Paracelsian. A physition that followeth the me∣thod of Paracelsus, and his manner of curing, which was by exceeding strong oyles and waters extracted out of the nature of things. Paraclete. A comforter. Paradise. A garden or pleasant place. Paradox. An opinion maintained contrary to the common allowed opinion, as if one affirme that the earth doth mooue round, and the heauens stand still. Paragon A beautifull peece, a louely creature. Paragraph. It properly signifieth any marke set in a margent, to note the dif∣ferent discourses in a booke, or long chap∣ter, wherefore such di∣uisions in writing, are commonly called Para∣graphs. Paralipomenon. Omitted, or not spoken of: There are two bookes in the old testament so called, because many worthy histories o∣mitted in the bookes of Kings, are there related. Parallels. Lines running of an equall distance from each other, which can ne∣uer meete, though they bee drawne
infinitely in length, thus, —. In astronomie there are fiue such imagined lines, running circlewise about the round com∣passe of the heauens. The first is the Equinoctiall line iust in the middle of the world betweene the two Poles. The second northward from the Equi∣noctiall, is the Tropike of Cancer, to which line the sunne commeth about the the twelfth day of Iune. The third (yet more northward) is the northern circle, within 23. degrees and 50. minutes. of the North-pole. The fourth line is the Tropike of Ca∣pricorne, declining south∣ward from the Equinocti∣all, as much as the Tro∣pike of Cancer doth north∣ward, and to this line the sunne commeth about the twelfth of December. The fift and last line is the sou∣therne circle, beeing as neere the South pole, as the northerne circle (be∣fore spoken of) is to the North pole. Paralogisme. A deceitfull syllogisme, a maner of ar∣guing which seemeth true, when it is not: as in saying, He that affirmeth William to be a liuing creature, sayth true. He that affirmeth William to be a Horse, affirmeth him to be a liuing creature. Therefore he that affirmeth William to be a Horse saith true. Paramounte. The chieft Lord of the fee. Paramour. A Sweete∣heart, one dearely beloued. Paraphrase. A free man∣ner of translation or inter∣pretation, wherein a man doth not tye himselfe to expresse euery word as it lieth in the coppie, but to explicate and adorne the matter more at large, and to abridge some things, yet still keeping the sense of the Author, any such tran∣slation is called a Paraphra∣sticall translation. Parasite. A Flatterer, a trencher friend. One that is still hanging on some rich man, and flatteringlie feedeth his humor because he would bee partaker of his good cheere.
Parcitie. Sparingnesse, niggardlinesse. Parenthesis. Any word or sentence, thrust into an other sentence, in such sort that it may be left out in speaking, and yet the sense of the matter still remaine whole. Such word or sen∣tence is commonly mar∣ked with two halfe circles (thus.) Paricide. One that hath killed his owne Father or Mother. Among the aun∣cient Romans if any com∣mitted so horrible a crime, he was sowed aliue in a leather bag, with a Cocke, an Ape, and an Adder put to him (and as some write, a Dog) & so were throwne together into the riuer Tyber, where the misera∣ble Caytife must needes die a lingering death, being depriued of the vse of all e∣lements, saue onely a little aire, to draw his wretched life in torment the longer. Paritie. Equality, like∣nesse. Parley. A talking toge∣ther. Paroxysme. The sharpe assaulte or fit of an ague. Parsimonie. Thriftines, good husbandrie. Parsimonious. Thriftie, sparing. Particularise. To draw or deuide things in spea∣king, into certaine particu∣lars or small parcels. Partisan. A weapon like a Halberd. Paschall. Of or belon∣ging to the feast of Easter. Pasche. The feast of Easter. Passant. Walking, passing along. Passible. Which may suf∣fer, or feele paine. Passion. A suffering. Pastor. A shepheard. Pastorall. Of or belon∣ging to a shepheard. Paternall. Fatherly. Patheticall. Passionate, or that which mooueth passi∣ons in a man. Patriarch. A great aunce∣stour, a great Bishop or father. Patrimonie. Goods or lands left one by his fa∣ther, or some other aunce∣stour.
Patrone. A defender, a great friend that suppor∣teth one. Patronage. Defence. Patronize. To defend. Paucitie. Fewnesse. Pauice. A great large shield that couereth the whole bodie. Pauilion. A tent for war. Paunage. The feeding of swine in any forrest, wood, or other place with mast. Peccaui. I haue offended. Pectorall. Belonging to the breast, or which han∣geth before the breast. Pecuniarie. Of or belon∣ging to money. Pellican. A bird that wan∣ting food, feedeth her yong ones (as is said) with her owne blood. Pellmell. Confusedly, running disorderly toge∣ther. Penall. Of or belonging to paine or punishment. Pendant. Hanging, down∣ward. Penetrable. Which may be pearsed through. Penetrate. To pearse tho∣rough. Penitentiall. Belonging to penance or repentance. Penitent. He that is hear∣tily sorrie and repenteth. Penon. An ensigne or banner borne in warre. Pension. A yearely fee or wages for some seruice done. Pensiue. Sad, heauy. Pentateuch. The fiue bookes of Moses, to wit, Genesis, Exodus, Leuiticus, Numeri, and Deuteronomie. Pentecost. The feast of Whitsontide, so called be∣cause it is fiftie daies after Easter. For Pentecost in Greeke signifieth the fif∣tieth. Penurie. Want, pouertie. Penurious. Poore, in want. Perambulation. A wal∣king. Perceptible. Which may be perceiued. Perch. A kinde of fish, It signifieth also a rod or long pole vsed in measu∣ring of land, being of 16. foote & a halfe in length, and in some places more. Percullis. The name of an office of one of the Pursiuants at armes. Percussion. A striking.
Perdition. Destruction. Perdurable. Lasting, of long continuance. Peregrination. A trauel∣ling into a strange land. Peremptorie. Resolute, short, quicke. Perennitie. Long conti∣nuance. Perfidious. Treacherous, not to be trusted. Perfidiousnesse. Treache∣rie, disloyaltie. Perfunctorie. Carelesly don. Perigeon. The neerest di∣stance of the Planets from the earth. Period. The perfect end of a sentēce, marked commō∣ly with a full point thus (.) Peripatetickes. Philoso∣phers of the sect of Aristo∣tle: so called because they walked in their readings and disputations: for Peri∣pateo, in Greeke, signifi∣eth to walke. Periphrasis. A long spea∣king, a speaking of one word by many. Periscians. People dwel∣ling so neere either of the two Poles, that their sha∣dowes goe round about them like a wheele. Periurie. A forswearing. Permission. Sufferance; leaue. Permutation. A changing. Pernicious. Deadly, dan∣gerous. Peroration. The conclu∣sion of a long speech or Oration. Perpendicular. Directlie downe right. Perpetrate. To commit any vnlawfull thing. Perpetuitie. Euerlasting∣nesse. Perplexitie. Great doubt∣fulnesse, intanglednesse. Perquisits. Profits com∣ming to Lords of mannors by casualtie, or vncertaine∣ly, as escheats, heriots, re∣leefes, strayes, forfeitures. Persist. To continue to the end. Personate. To represent the person of another. Perspicuitie. Cleerenesse, plainnesse Perspicuous. Cleere, plain, manifest. Perswasiue. Which doth or may perswade. Pertinacie. Stubbornnes, wilfulnesse. Perturbe. To trouble.
Perturbation. A trouble, a great disquietnesse. Peruerse. Froward, con∣trarie. Peruert. To corrupt or marre: to turne one from good to bad. Pestiferous. Mortal, dead∣ly, poysonous. Petition. A suite, a de∣maund, a request. Petroll. A substance strai∣ned out of the naturall Bitumen spoken of before. It is for the most part white, and somtime black, and being once set on fire, can hardly be quenched. Pettie. Being placed be∣fore other words, it signi∣fieth little. Pettie Sergeantie. A tenure of lands, holden of the King, by yeilding to him, a Buckler, Arrow, Bow, or such like seruice. Petulancie. Wanton sau∣cinesse, malepart bold∣nesse. Phantasme. A vision or imagined appearance. Pharisee. A sect of Iewes, professing more holinesse than the common sort did. They wore on their fore∣heads little scrols, wherein were written the ten com∣maundements; and were called Pharises, of the He∣brew word Phares, which signifieth to diuide or se∣parate, because by their fei∣ned deuotion they seemed to separate themselues from the other people. Pheere. See Feere. Phenix. The rarest Bird in the world. It is written, that there was neuer any but one of this kind liuing at one time, and that only in Arabia; of the bignesse of an Eagle, of a purple colour, hauing a bright co∣lour of golde about his necke, a goodly faire taile, and a tuft of feathers vpon his head. He liueth aboue 600. years. and being old, buildeth him a nest of Cinnamom and the twigs of Frankincense, which he filleth with spices, & then with the labouring of his wings in the Sun, setting it on fire, is there consumed in it; out of whose Ashes there groweth a VVorme, and of the worme another Phenix. Pheon. A terme in Heral∣drie:
It signifieth the head of a Dart. Philosopher. A louer of wisedome. It is commonly vsed for a learned man, of great knowledge in the na∣ture of things. Philosophie. The study of wisedome: a deepe know∣ledge in the nature of things. There are three different kindes hereof. 1. Rationall Philosophy, in∣cluding, Grammer, Logick, and Rhetorick. 2. Naturall Philosophy teaching the nature of all things, and conteining besides Arith∣metick, Musick, Geometry and Astronomy. 3. Morall Philosophy, which consi∣steth in the knowledge and practise of ciuilitie & good behauiour. Philtre. An amorous po∣tion: a drinke to procure loue. Phlebotomie. Letting of blood. Phisitions (as is written) learned this prac∣tise first of a beast called Hyppopotamus, liuing in the riuer Nilus; which being of a rauenous nature, and therefore often ouerchar∣ged with much eating, is wont to seeke in the banks, for some sharpe stub of a Reede; vpon which prick∣ing his leg, he thereby ea∣seth his full body, stopping the bleeding afterward with mud. Phlegmon A hot swelling of inflamed blood. Phrase. A manner of speaking. Phylacterie. A scroll of parchment which the Pha∣rises wore on their fore∣heads, hauing the ten com∣mandements written in it. Physiognomie. An art to iudge of ones nature or conditions by his visage and forme of his bodie. Phytonisse. A woman pos∣sessed with a spirit, & there∣by foretelling things to come. Pia mater. The inmost skin which incloseth the braine round about. Pickage. Money paide at Faires for breaking the ground to set vp boothes. Pietie. Godlinesse. Pigment. A painting. Pight. Set or placed.
Pine tree. A tall strong tree not subiect to wormes or rottennesse, and there∣fore much vsed, where it groweth to make ships. The leaues of this tree are hard pointed, sharpe and narrow, continuing greene all the yeare, and the shad∣dow thereof will not suffer any plant to grow vnder it. Pinipinichi. A milkie iuice drawne out of cer∣taine trees in India▪ It is somewhat thick and clam∣my, and with great vehe∣mency purgeth cholerike humours. Pinnas. A fruite grow∣ing in India, good for the stomacke and heart. Pioner. A labourer in an armie, vsed to cast trenches or vndermine fortes. Pious. Godly, vertuous. Pipe. A measure of halfe a Tunne; that is, 126. Gal∣lons. Piepowders. A court held in faires for redresse of disorders there com∣mitted. Pirate. A robber by sea. Pistacke. See Fistik∣nuts. Placable. Gentle, milde, that will soone be pacifi∣ed. Placabilitie. Gentlenes, mildenesse. Placard. A licence to maintaine vnlawful games. Plaintife. He that com∣plaineth. Plane tree. A tree wide spreading, with broade leaues, in times past great∣ly esteemed in Italy onely for the shadow thereof, in so much that they often bedewed it with wine to make it grow. The Ro∣mans were wont to ban∣quet much vnder these trees. Planet. A wandering Starre mooued onely in a spheare by himself: there are seauen such Stars, to wit, the Sunne, Venus, Mer∣curie, the Moone, Saturne, Iupiter, and Mars. They are called Planets of a greeke word signifying to wander or goe astray, because these Starres passe through the twelue signes, and are sometimes wide di∣stant, sometimes neere to each other.
Plaudite. A signe of re∣ioycing: a clapping of the hands. Plausible. That which greatly pleaseth or reioy∣ceth. Plebeian. One of the common people. Pleget. A linnen cloath dipped in any water to wash, or lay to a sore place. Plenarie. Full, whole, in∣tire. Plenitude. Fulnesse. Pleuresie. A disease when the inward skin of the ribs in mans body, is inflamed with too much blood, flow∣ing vnnaturally to it. In this disease there is a hard∣nesse to fetch breath, a cough, a continuall ague, and a pricking paine about the ribs. Plonkets. A kind of wol∣len cloth. Plume. A Feather. Plurall. More than one. Pluralitie. The being or hauing more than one. Poeme. Any short matter, wittingly contriued in verse. Poesie. The writing of a Poet; a Poets worke. Poet. One that writeth well in verse. Poetaster. A counterfeit Poet: a bad Poet. Poeticall. Like a Poet: belonging to a Poet. Poetize. To write like a Poet. Poetrie. The same that Poesie is. Poise. Weight, heauines. Pole. The end of the axle-tree whereon the heauens do moue; that part or point of the heauens, which ne∣uer moueth. There are two such Poles of the world; one called the North pole, visible to vs in the North, farre aboue the earth: the other caled the south pole, farre out of our sight, being as much vnder the earth in the South, as the North Pole is aboue it. Polish. To make fayre or bright. Polite. Bright, trim, fine. Pollute. To defile. Pollution. A defiling, an vncleannesse. Polygamie. The hauing of moe Wiues than one: often marriage. Polype. A fish hauing many
feete, and changing co∣lour often: wherefore in∣constant persons are some∣times said to be Polypes. Polypodium. Okeferne: a kind of hearbe like Ferne, growing much about the roots of oakes: The roote of this hearbe is vsed in Phisicke to purge melan∣cholike, grosse, and phleg∣maticke humors. Pompe. A great shew, a solemne traine. Pompous. Stately, verie solemne. Ponderous. Heauie, of great weight. Pontage. Mony paid to∣ward the maintenance and repayring of bridges. Pontificacie. Popedome. Pontificall. Stately, ho∣norable, Bishoplike. Popular. In great fauour with the common peo∣ple. Populous. Full of peo∣ple. Pores. Little holes in the skin, out of which sweate droppeth, or vapors breath out of the body. Porphyrie. A kinde of red marble. Port. A hauen, or hauen towne, sometime a statelie traine or behauiour. Portable. Which may ea∣sily be caried. Portage. Carriage, trans∣porting. Portend. To foreshew, or signifie before hand. Portent. A monstrous thing which foresheweth some great matter. Portcullise. A falling gate to keepe out enemies from a Cittie, or keepe them in. Portgreue. A chiefe officer in certaine Port townes. Portrature. An image, a picture. Portsale. A selling at the hauen. Pose. A rheume or humor which falleth into the nose, stopping the no∣strills and hindering the voyce. Position. A setting or pla∣cing: sometimes a sentence propounded. Positiue. Expresly set downe and decreed. Postscript. That which is written in the end after an∣other thing.
Posterior. The later, the hinder part. Postilion: A speedy poste or messenger. Postulation. A demaund, a request. Potent. Mighty, strong, a∣ble. Potentate. A prince, a great ruler. Potion. A Physicall drinke. Pourcontrell. The same that Polype is. Poundage. A Subsidie graunted to the kings Ma∣iesty, of tweluepence in the pound, for all mer∣chandise, brought hither, or caryed away by euery merchāt denizen, or alien. Practicall. Of or belon∣ging to practise. Practique. The same that practicall is. Prauity. Leudnes, naugh∣tinesse. Preamble. A speech, spo∣ken before we enter into a discourse, a flourish or en∣trance into a matter. Prebend. A portion of maintenance, which euery member or Canon of a Cathedrall Church recei∣ueth in the right of his place. Prebendarie. Hee which hath a Prebend, or yeerely maintenance, out of the lands of a Cathedrall Church, and is member of the same Church. Precede. To goe before. Precedent. Going before. Precept. A commande∣ment. Precinct. The compasse, or circuit of a place. Precipitate. To throwe downe headlong. It is also the name of a corosiue pouder, commonly called, red Mercury, vsed by Chi∣rurgians, to eate corrup∣ted flsh. Precontract. A former bargaine, or contract. Precursor. A forerunner, a foregoer. Predestinate. To appoint before hand, what shal fol∣low after. Predestination. An ap∣pointmēt beforehand what shall follow. Predecessor. Hee that was in place or office before another.
Predicable. That which may be reported or spoken of. In Logicke it signifi∣eth certaine generall wordes, or vniuersalities; whereof there are fiue, to wit, Genus, Species, Differen∣ria, Proprium, and Acci∣dens. Predicament. A terme of Logicke: It signifieth a different order in the na∣ture of things, or certaine generall heads, to which they may he referred; and there are commōly recko∣ned ten such predicaments The first called Substance, includeth all substances whatsoeuer, as the foure Elements, and all other creatures. The second na∣med Quantity, containeth all quantities, as ten, twen∣ty, a yard, a furlong, a mile. The third called Quality, hath vnder it all qualities, as wisedome, art, fortitude, diligēce, sloth. The fourth named Relatiō, is properly of such words, as depend mutually one vpon ano∣ther, as a husband and wife, a master and seruant, a father and child. The o∣ther sixe are, 5. Action or doing: 6. Passion or suffe∣ring: 7. Where: 8. When: 9. Situation or placing: 10. the Habit or outward co∣uering of a thing. Predicate. To tell abroad, to report. In Logicke, it signifieth the later part of a proposition, as in saying, Paul is an Apostle: The word Apostle is called pre∣dicate, because it is spoken or affirmed of the subiect Paul. Prediction. A foretelling. Predominant. That ruleth or beareth sway. Preface. That which is spoken or written before. Prefect. A chiefe Magi∣strate, a Gouernour. Prefigure. See prefigurate. Prefigurate. To foreshew any thing by a figure. Prefiguration. A foreshew∣ing by a figure. Prefixe. To fasten before, or to appoint a time afore∣hand. Pregnant. Quickewitted, that will soone conceiue. Pregnancy. Quickewit∣tednesse. Preiudicate. To iudge rashly, without due tryall.
Preiudication. A iudging before hand. Preiudice. A iudgement giuen before due tryall, or a iudgement formerly gi∣uen of the same matter: sometime it signifieth harme, or hinderance. Preiudiciall. Which iud∣geth before due time, sometime hurtfull, or euill. Prelate. A Bishop, a great Clergie man. Premeditate. To thinke before hand. Premeditation. A thin∣king, or musing vpon a thing aforehand. Premise. To send before, to speake before. Promonish. To warne be∣fore. Premunire. A punishment wherein the offender lo∣seth all his goods for euer, and libertie during life. Preordaine. To ordaine before hand. Preordinate. Ordained be∣fore Preposterous. Disorderly, vntoward, contrary to due course. Prepose. To preferre, to set before. Prepuce. The foreskinne of a mans yard, which the Hebrewes vsed to cut off in circumcision. Prerogatiue. Priuiledge or authority aboue o∣ther. Presage. A foretelling, or coniecture made of a thing beforehand. Presbytery. Priesthood, eldershippe. Prescience. A knowing be∣forehand. Prescript. A commande∣ment or appointment by writing. Prescription. Possession and vse of a thing, time out of minde. Preseruatiue. Which pre∣serueth or defendeth from sickenesse. President. A chiefe Iudge or ruler. Pressure. An oppressi∣on. Prestigious. Deceitfull: blinding the sight. Pretermisson. A let∣ting passe, a leauing out. Pretermit. To ouer∣passe.
Pretext. A colourable ex∣cuse, or pretence. Pretor. A chiefe Iudge, a great officer. Preuarication. Deceit, false dealing: when he that seemeth to helpe a mans cause, doth craftily seeke to hinder it. Pricker. A Huntsman on horsebacke. Pricket. A Fallow Deere two yeeres old. Pricking. The print of a Hares foot on the ground. Prigge. to filch, to steale. Prigging. Stealing. Prime. The morning: sometime the spring, some∣time the chiefe. Primacie. Chiefe autho∣rity, or iurisdiction. Primate. An Archbishop. Primitiue. The first, the most ancient. Prioritie. The more ex∣cellent state or dignity. Pristine. Old, ancient. Priuation. A depriuing, or taking away. Probable. Which may be prooued. Probation. A proofe, a tryall. Probatum. Proued, tryed. Probitie. Honesty, good∣nesse. Probleme. A darke sen∣tence, with a question ioy∣ned vnto it. Procliue. Inclining, or bent to a thing. Procliuity. An inclinati∣on, a bending to. Proconsull. A deputy vn∣to a Consull, or one en∣dewed with a Consuls au∣thoritie. Procrastination. A de∣laying, a prolonging. Procreate. To breede, to bring forth. Procreation. A breeding, a bringing foorth. Procurator. A steward, he that taketh charge to o∣uersee anothers businesse. Prodigie. A rare thing seldome seene, which sig∣nifieth that some strange matter shall after follow. Prodigious. Strange, won∣derfull. Prodition. A betraying. Produce. To bring forth, to draw at length. Profane. To put holy things to a common vse. Profanation. A putting of holy things to common vses.
Proficient. One that hath well profited. Profligate. To ouerthrow, to driue away. Profunditie. The depth of a thing. Profuse. Waste full, lauish in spending. Progenie A generation, an of-spring, a stocke, or kindred. Progenitor. An Ancester, a forefather. Prognosticate. To knowe or coniecture before hand. Progresse. A going for∣ward. Progression. A going for∣ward. Proheme. A beginning of a matter: a preface be∣fore a booke. Prohibit. To forbid. Prohibition. A forbid∣ding. Proiect. A plot, or the contriuing of any thing. Prolix. Long, or large: te∣dious. Prolixitie. Length, or largenesse, tediousnesse. Prolocutour. The first speaker. Prologue. A preface, a forespeech. Promoscuous. Confused, mingled one with ano∣ther. Promontorie. A hill lying out, like an elbow into the Sea. Promote. To aduance, to lift vp. Promoter. He which ac∣cuseth another, for the breach of some law, and hath thereby part of the penaltie for his paine. Prompe. Ready, or quick: sometime to tell one pri∣uily, to teach what hee should say. Promptitude. Readinesse, Promulgate. To publish, to speake abroad. Promulgation. A publi∣shing of a Lawe or De∣cree. Prone. Stooping downe∣ward: also bending or in∣clined to a thing. Propagate. To spreade abroad, inlarge, or multi∣ply. Propagation. An increa∣sing, or breeding. Propense. Ready, apt, or giuen to a thing. Propheticall. Of or be∣longing to a Prophet.
Propinquitie. Neerenesse, sometime kindred. Propitiation. An obtai∣ning of pardon, or a sacri∣fice to appease Gods dis∣pleasure. Propitiatorie. A table set on the Arke of the Olde Testament; on either side whereof was a Cherubin of golde, with the wings spread ouer the Propiti∣atorie, and their faces looking one toward ano∣ther. Propitious. Gentle, fauou∣rable, mercifull. Propose. To set foorth, to offer, to appoint. Proposition. A short sen∣tence containing the summe of what wee will speake. Proprietarie. Hee that hath the fruites of a Be∣nefice, to him and his heires or successors. Propulse. To beate off, to put away by force. Prorogue. To prolong: to delay, to continue. Prorogation. A prolong∣ing. Proscription. Banish∣ment, or open sale made of goodes beeing for∣fet. Prosecute. To follow: to pursue. Proselyte. A stranger conuerted to our religi∣on. Prosodie. True pronoun∣cing of wordes. Prospect. A large sight, or a place where one may see farre. Prostitute, To set to o∣pen sale: to offer to euery man for money. Prostrate. To fall downe, at ones feet. Protest. To affirme ear∣nestly. Protestation. A declara∣tion of ones minde. Protomartyr. The first Martyr. Prototypon. The first copie or patterne of a thing. Protract. To drawe in length, to prolong. Prouiso. A prouision or condition made in any writing. Proule. To goe about in the night: to pilfer or steale small things. Prowe. The forepart of a ship.
Prowesse. Strength, man∣hood, courage. Proximitie. Neere∣nesse. Prudent. Discreete, wise. Prunellas. A fruite like small Figges, good for restoratiue, and to comfort the heart. Psalmist. A maker or singer of Psalmes. Psalmodie. A singing of Psalmes. Psalterie. A sweet instru∣ment like a Harpe. Pseudo. Note, that words which beginne with Pseudo, signifie counterfet or false, as Pseudo-martyr, a false Martyr, or witnesse: Pseudopro∣phet, a false prophet. Psisane. A Physicall drinke of Barley, and cold herbes sod together. Publicane. Hee that hyreth the reuenewes or common profites of the CITIE at a certaine Rent. This was an odi∣ous name among the Iewes, because they were commonly men of ill con∣science, which exercised that office. Publike. Common, open abroad. Pulcritude. Beauty, faire∣nesse. Pulpe. The fleshie part of any thing. Pulse. A beating veine: also pease, beanes, lupines, and such other Graine are so called. Puluerisated. Beaten to powder. Punctuall. Not missing a haires breadth: which is short, and direct to the purpose. Pupill. A Ward, a yong Scholler, one vnder age. Purgatiue. Which hath vertue to purge. Purgatorie. A place of purging. Purlue. A place neere mining to a Forrest, where it is lawfull for the owner of the ground to hunt, if hee can dispend fortie shillings by the yeere of freeland. Purporte. A purpose, or meaning. Pusillanimitie. Little∣nes
of courage, faintheart∣ednesse. Pustule. A wheale, or bladder risen in the body. Putrifaction. A rotten∣nesse or corruption. Putrifie. To be rotten or corrupted. Pygmies. Little people in India, not aboue a foote and a halfe long: their wo∣men bring forth children at fiue yeares and at eight are accounted old. They haue continuall warre with Cranes, who do often put them to the worst. Pyramides. A steeple or pillar, broad and square be∣neath, and sharpe aboue. Pyromancie. See Diuina∣tion. Python A spirit which possesseth one; or a man possessed with a spirit. Q Quadrangle. A figure made with foure corners. Quadrant. foure square, or the fourth part of a thing. Quadripartite. Diuided into foure parts. Quadruplication. A foure∣folde doubling. Quaint. Fine and strange. Quarentine. A terme in the common law, when a woman after the death of her husband remaineth fortie dayes in the chiefe Mannor place, within which time her dower shall be assigned. Quarrie. A place or pit where stones are digged. Among hunters it signifi∣eth a reward giuen to Houndes after they haue hunted, or the Venison which is taken by hunting. Quauiuer. A sea Dra∣gon. Quaternion. Foure, or any thing diuided by the number of foure. Queach. A thicke bushie plot. Querimonious. Full of complayning. Querulous. Complay∣ning. Quest. A search or in∣quirie. Quidditie. A short darke speech, an intricate que∣stion.
Quiddanet. A sweete mixture thicker than a si∣rupe, and not so thicke nor stiffe as marmalet. Quid pro quo. A terme amongst all Apothecaries, when in stead of one thing they vse another of the same nature. Quintessence. The fist substance. That which re∣maineth in any thing after the corruptible Elements are taken from it. Quippe. A quicke checke, a pretty taunt. Quotidian. Daily. R Rabbine. A Master, a Lord, a great Doctour, a teacher. Racha. An Hebrew word of reproch, neuer spoken but in extreame anger. Radiant. Bright shining, glistering with beames. Radiation. A glistering, a casting of beames. Radicall. Of or belon∣ging to the roote, naturall. Radicall moisture. The naturall moisture spread like a dew in all parts of the body; wherewith such parts are nourished; which moisture beeing once wa∣sted can neuer be restored. Raindeere. A beast like a Hart, but hauing his head fuller of Antliers. Rampant. A terme of He∣rauldry, when a beast is painted ramping vpright with the forefeete. Rancor. Hatred, malice. Rape. A violent rauishing of a woman against her will. There is also a roote like a Turnep so called. Sometime it signifieth a diuision made in some shires; as the county of Sussex is deuided into sixe Rapes, to wit, the Rape of Chichester, of Arundell, of Bramber, of Lewis, of Pe∣uensie, and of Hastings. Rapacitie. A rauening, a violent catching. Rapiditie. A snatching, a catching. Rapine. Robberie, cat∣ching, extortion. Rapsodi. A ioyning of diuerse verses together. Rarifaction. A making of that thin, which is thicke or close ioyned together.
Rarifie. To make thin, to pull a thing abroad. Raritie. Fewnesse, thin∣nesse. Rasure. A shauing away. Ratifie. To confirme, to allowe. Rationall. Reasonable. It signifieth also an orna∣ment, which the high Priest of the Iewes ware on his breast, when he exe∣cuted his function, being foure square, of the length of a span, made curiously of gold and twisted silke of diuers colours, wherein were set twelue precious stones in foure rankes of gold, and in euery stone grauen one of the names of the twelue sonnes of Ia∣cob. Reall. Which is in very deede. Reassume. To take a∣gaine. Recant. To deny an o∣pinion formerly by him∣selfe maintained. Recapitulate. To rehearse briefelie that which was spoken before. Recapitulation. A briefe rehearsall of that which hath beene formerly spo∣ken at large. Receptacle. A place of receit, or any vessell to re∣ceiue a thing in. Recesse. A bye-place, a going backe or aside. Recidiuation. A backe∣sliding, or falling backe a∣gaine. Reciprocall. That which returneth backe, or hath respect to some thing go∣ing before. Reclaime. To winne, to make gentle. Recluse. Shut vp. Recognisance. An ac∣knowledgment. A band wherein a man before a lawfull Iudge, acknowled∣geth himselfe to owe a cer∣taine summe of money to the King, if he faile in per∣formance of a condition thereto ioyned. Recoile. To flie backe. Recollect. To gather a∣gaine, to call his wits toge∣ther. Rectifie. To direct, to make streight. Recreant. He that deni∣eth his owne challenge, hee that goeth from what hee hath sayd, or eateth his word.
Rector. A Ruler, a Go∣uernour. Recurre. To run backe. Recursion. A running backe. Recusant. He that refu∣seth to doe any thing. Redolent. Sweete in smell. Redoubted. Greatly re∣uerenced, most noble. Redound. To abound, or ouerflow. Redobbour. He that wit∣tingly buieth stollen cloth, and turneth it into some other fashion. Reduce. To bring back, to restore. Reduction. A bringing backe. Reedifie. To build again, to repaire. Reenter. To enter a∣gaine. Reentrie. An entrance a∣gaine. Reeue. An old name of an officer in Lordshippes, much like to those that we call Bayliffes now. Refection. A refresh∣ing. Refectorie. A place to refresh ones self, or to take ones diet in. Refell. To disproue, to proue false. Reflect. To turne or cast backe againe. Reflection. A rebounding backe: or turning back a∣gaine. Reforme. To amend, to correct. Refractorie. Stubborne, which will not bend. Refuge. A place of suc∣cour. Refute. To disprooue, to coufound by sence and reason. Refutation. A disprouing, a confuting. Regall. Kingly; belong∣ing to a King. Regalitie. The estate or authority of a King. Regardant. A tearme in Heraldrie, when a beaste is painted, looking backe∣wards at one. Regenerate. To beare a∣gaine in birth, to renew. Regeneration. A new birth Regent. A Prince, Ruler or Gouernour.
Regiment. A gouernment, or the place where one hath authoritie. Register. Writings of re∣cord kept for memory. Al∣so hee that keepeth such writings in a spirituall Court. Regratour. He that in a faire or market, buyeth a∣ny dead victuall whatsoe∣uer, and selleth the same a∣gaine in any faire or mar∣ket kept there, or within foure miles thereof. Regresse. A going backe againe. Regression. The same. Regular. Vnder rule, or liuing according to a set rule. Reiect. To cast off, to de∣spise. Reioynder. A second an∣swere made by the defen∣dant, after his first an∣swere hath beene replyed vnto. Reiterate. To do againe, to do a thing often. Relapse. A backe sly∣ding. Relate. To tell, to de∣clare. Relation. A rehearsall or telling of a matter. Relaxation. A releasing, a refreshing or setting at li∣bertie. Relay. A tearme of hun∣ting, when they set hounds in readinesse, where they thinke a Deere will passe, and cast them off after the other hounds are past by. Releefe. A payment which some Heires make (after the death of their Aunce∣stour) to the Lord of whom their lands are hol∣den. Relent. To waxe soft, to yeilde. Relinquish. To leaue off, to forsake. Reliques. Things left or remaining. Most common∣ly it is taken for the bo∣dies, or some part of the bodies, or somwhat which hath toucht the bodies of Saints now in heauen. Remainder. A possibility in any, to enioy lands, te∣nements, or rents, after an∣others estate is ended. Remisse. Slack, negligent or carelesse. Remit. To send backe:
sometime to release or for∣giue. Remora. A little Fish which cleauing to the bot∣tome of a shippe, doth verie strangelie stay the shippe that shee cannot mooue. Remorse. Doubtfulnesse in conscience, to doe a thing: a staggering in minde: sometime pittiful∣nesse or repentance of a bad done. Remote. Farre distant. Remunerate. To reward. Remuneration. A reward, a requitall. Renouate. To renew. Renouation. A renewing. Repast. Food. Repeale. To call backe a∣gaine, to disallow. Repell. To thrust backe. Repercussiue. That which striketh backe againe, or reboundeth backe. Repetition. A new rehear∣sall. Repleuine. A Warrant sent from the Sheriffe or his Bayliffe, that a man shall haue his cattell or a distresse taken from him, restored to him againe; vp∣on suretie found to answer the partie grieued, in the Law. Replication. The answer made to the defendant af∣ter the defendant hath an∣swered. Repose. To lay vpon: sometime to take rest. Repositorie. A storehouse, a place to lay vp things in. Repossede. To possesse a∣gaine. Reprehend. To reprooue. Reprehension. A reproo∣uing. Represse. To stay backe, to keepe downe by force. Reprises. All payments and charges that issue yearelie out of a man∣nor. Reprobate. One past grace: a wicked person, a cast away. Republike. A Common∣wealth. Repudiate. To refuse a properly to put away ones Wife. Repugne. To resist. Repugnancie. Disagree∣ment, contrarietie.
Repugnant. Contrarie or resisting. Repute. To esteeme, to account. Reputation. Estimation or account. Requiem. Rest: ceasing from labour. Rereward. The hinde∣most part of a battell. Rescouse. A forcible de∣liuerie or setting at libertie of one that hath beene ar∣rested. Reserue. To keepe by it selfe, to keepe for some purpose. Reseruation. A keeping of some thing apart. Reside. To alight, sinke downe, or to abide in a place. Resident. Abiding in a place. Resigne. To giue or yeild vp. Resignation. A yeelding vp of a thing to another. Resolue. To open, to weaken, to make loose: sometime to expound and declare. Resolute. Determinately bent to doe any thing. Respectiue. Awfull, which beareth great respect to one. Respiration. A fetching of breath. Resplendent. Bright, cleere, shining. Respondent. He that an∣swereth. Response. An answere. Restauration. A repay∣ring, a making againe. Restie. Dull, heauie. Restitution. A restoring backe. Restriction. A restray∣ning, or holding backe. Result. To rebound, to leape backe. Resume. To take a∣gaine. Resurrection. A rising a∣gaine. Resuscitation. A stirring vp againe. Retaile. To sell in small parcels: that which was formerly bought. Retention. A keeping. Retentiue. Hauing po∣wer to binde, retaine, or keepe. Retire. To returne back∣ward. Retort. To throw, or shoote backe againe.
Retract. To call backe againe, to reuoke. Retractation. A calling backe, a recanting, a de∣nying of a thing before af∣firmed. Retreate. A calling back of Souldiers from fight: a returning or going backe. Retribution. A reward, a recompence. Retriue. A seeking a∣gaine. Retrograde. That which goeth backward. A planet is said to be retrograde, when he goeth backward contrarie to the course of the signes, as from Taurus to Aries &c. Retrogradation. A going backward. Reuels. Players and dan∣cings, with other pleasant deuices, vsed sometimes in the Kings Court, and else∣where in great houses. Reuenew. Yearely rent receiued for lands or tene∣ments. Reuerberation. A beating backe againe. Reuersed. A tearme in Heraldrie when a mans armes is giuen him, turned the lower part vpward. Reuert. To reurne. Reuise. To peruse, to look ouer againe. Reunite. To ioyne toge∣ther againe. Reuocable. Which may be called backe againe. Reuocation. A calling back againe. Reuoke. To call backe. Reuolt. To forsake ones captaine or company, and goe to another. Reuolue To tosse vp and downe in ones minde: to muse or thinke much of a matter. Reuolution. A turning or winding about: especiallie in the course of time. Rhetoricke. The art of e∣loquent speaking. Rheubarb. See Rubarb. Ridiculous. Worthy to be laughed at: foolish; with∣out wit. Rigid. Stiffe, hard, stub∣borne. Rigor. Hardnesse, stiffe∣nesse, extreame dealing. Rigorous. Hard, cruell, vnmercifull. Rime. A mist or foggie dew.
Ringwalke. A round walk made by Hunters. Rinocere. A great beast, hauing a horne in his nose, bending vpward, which he whetteth often against rockes, to fight therewith against the Elephant. Riot. In the law it signifi∣eth when three or moe persons, beeing assembled to commit forcibly an vn∣lawfull act, do accordingly execute the same. Rite. A ceremony, a cu∣stome. Riuall. One that sueth for the same thing with another. Robustious. Strong. Roode. In land it signifi∣eth a quarter of an acre. It is sometime taken for the picture of our Sauiour vp∣on the Crosse. Rotunditie. Roundnesse. Rougecrosse. The name of an office of one of the Pur∣seuants at armes. Rougedragon. The name of an office of one of the Purseuants at armes. Route. A disorderly as∣sembly of three or moe persons moouing forward to commit by force an vn∣lawfull act. It signifieth al∣so a heard or great compa∣ny of wolues together. Rubarbe. A costly roote much vsed in Phisicke to purge choler, & is brought hither out of Barbarie. Be∣ing toasted and dried it is then good against the bloodie flixe, and all man∣ner of laskes; if it bee so drunke with some binding liquor, as the iuice of Plan∣taine, red Wine, and such like. Rubrike. An order or rule written. Rubricated. Marked with red; or written in red let∣ters. Rudiments. The first grounds or principles of an art or any knowledge. Ruine. Vtter ouerthrow, destruction. Ruminate. To chew ouer againe as beasts doe, that chew the cud: wherfore it is often taken for to studie and thinke much of a mat∣ter. Running of the reines. A disease
when by reason of weakenesse, seede passeth often from one against his will. Ruption. A breaking. Rupture. A breaking. Rurall. Of or belonging to the countrey. Rusticall. Countrey-like, homely, rude. Rusticitie. Rudenesse: clownish behauiour. S SAbaoth. Hostes or ar∣mies of men. Sable. In armorie it sig∣nifieth blacke. It is also a rich Furre of a beast so called, which beast is made like a polecat, of colour be∣tweene black, and browne, and breedeth in Russia, but most in Tartaria. Sabboth. A day of rest. Saciety. Fulnesse. Sacrament. A mystical ce∣remony instituted by our Sauiour. Sacred. Holy. Sacriledge. The robbing of a Church: the stealing of holy things, or abusing of Sacraments or holy mysteries. Sacrilegious. Very wicked and abhominable. Saduce. An Heretical sect among the Iewes, which denyed the resurrection: they called themselues Sa∣duces of the Hebrew word Tsedek.: Which signifieth Iustice, because they tooke themselues to liue more vprightly, and iuster then other men. Safeconduite. A securitie and protection giuen by a Prince or any other per∣son in authoritie, for a mans safe comming or going to or from a place. Sagacitie. Quickenesse of vnderstanding; wittinesse. Sage. Graue, wise, dis∣creete. Sagapenum. The sappe or Gum of a plant grow∣ing in Media, of a yellow∣ish colour without, and white within. It is hot and dry, of a strong smell like garlicke, and is vsed in Physicke against diuers cold diseases. Saint Antonies fire. A dis∣ease rising of hot chole∣ricke blood, which begin∣ning first with a blister, groweth after to a sore, or scab like a tetter.
Salamander. A little beast like a lisard, with foure feet and a short taile, ha∣uing diuers spottes in the body thereof. It is of a byting venemous nature, and (as some affirme) will abide in the fire without harme, and at last put it cleare out. Salarie. Wages, or hyre. Salgemma. A cleere kind of salt like Chrystall, vsed sometime in Physicke, and is found plentifully in Hungaria. Saliant. A terme in He∣rauldry, when a beast see∣meth rampand, but lifteth not the fore pawes so high, as the rampande doth. Salubritie. Healthful∣nesse. Sanctifie. To make ho∣lie. Sanctification. A making holy. Sanctimonie. Holinesse. Sanctitie. Holinesse. Sanctuary. A place whi∣ther offenders, or indebted persons may flie for suc∣cour, from being punished or arested. Sanctum Sanctorum. The holiest place of the Iewes temple, where the Arke was kept, and whither none entred but the high Priest euery yeere. Sandall. An ancient kind of shooe. Sanders. A precious wood brought out of India, whereof there are three kindes, to wit, red, yellow, and white Sanders. They are all of a cooling nature, especially the red, which is often vsed in Physicke a∣gainst hot diseases. Sanglier. A wilde Bore, fiue yeeres old. Sanguine. In Herauldry it signifieth a murrey co∣lour: but commonly it signifieth a complexion most inclining towarde blood. Sanguinolent. Bloody. Sanity. Health. Saphire. A precious stone brought out of East India: of a cleare skie colour, and the best sort of them hath as it were cloudes therein, inclining to a certaine red∣nesse. This stone is said to be of a cold nature.
Sapience. Wisdome, know∣ledge. Sarcaparillia. A plant of India, the root whereof is often vsed in dyet drinkes, against the French, and o∣ther diseases. Sarcocolla. A Gumme brought out of Persia, which is red, and bitter in taste. It is of a healing na∣ture, and therefore often vsed to close vp woundes, and fill corrupted vlcers with new flesh. For which cause it is named in Greek Sarcocolla, which signifieth a glewer or healer vp of the flesh. Sassafras. A tree of great vertue, which groweth in the Florida of the West In∣dies: the rinde hereof hath a sweet smell like Cinna∣mome. It comforteth the lyuer, and stomack, and o∣peneth obstructions of the inward parts, being hotte and dry in the second de∣gree. The best of the Tree is the roote, next the boughes, then the body, but the principall good∣nesse of all resteth in the ryndes. Satan. An enemie. Satiate. To fill. Satiety. Fulnesse. Saturitie. Fulnesse. Satyr. A strange mon∣ster in India, hauing the body of a man all hairy, with legs and feet like a Goat: which monsters the ancient Poets were wont to call gods of the woods. It signifieth also a sharpe byting kind of verse, wher∣in mens vices were laid o∣pen. Satyricall. Sharpe or bi∣ting, as Satyrs were com∣monly written. Sauine. A little low tree, bearing leaues almost like Tamariske, and of a hotte scowring nature. Saults. Iumpes, leapes. Saunce. Without. Sawe. An olde say∣ing. Saxifrage. An herbe bea∣ring seed like Parsley seed, but more hot and byting, which seede or the roote being boiled in wine and drunken, breaketh the stone of the kidneyes and bladder.
Scalpe. The haire skinne of the head. Scammonie. The iuyce of the roote of an herbe, brought hither drie out of Asia, and Mysia. It is a violent purger of choler, and dangerous to take in∣ward, vnlesse it bee well prepared. See Diagridi∣um. Scandall. An offence, or that which causeth one to fall, stumble, or take offence. Scandalize. To offend by euill example, or giue one occasion to bee offen∣ded. Scarifie. To scrape, cut, launce, or open a sore. Scarification. A scraping, or cutting. Scedule. A little rowle, or written bill. Scene. A play, a Comody, a Tragedy, or the diuision of a play into certaine parts. In old time it signi∣fied a place couered with boughes, or the roome where the players made them ready. Scheme. A figure in spea∣king. Shisme. Diuision or strife in matters of religion. Schismaticall. Diuided in fellowship from the other part: erroneous. Schismaticke. One diui∣ded from the vnitie of the Church. Scholasticall. Learned, belonging to Schollers. Sciatica. A gout in the hippe, caused by grosse and flegmaticke humours, gathered in the hollownes of the ioynt thereof. Science. Knowledge. Scolopendra. A fish that feeling himselfe taken with a hooke, casteth out his bowels, vntill hee hath vnloosed the hooke, and then swalloweth them vp againe. Scope. The end or marke that one aimeth at. Scorpion. A venemous worme with seuen feet, bearing his sting in his taile; with which hee stri∣keth mischieuously. They are of diuers colours, and the femall is the greater, hauing withall a sharper sting then the male. They way be killed with
fasting spittle of a sound man. There are also great Scor¦pions with wings, which are caryed in some hotte countreyes with the winde from one place to ano∣ther. Scoute. One sent out to espie and bring tydings of the enemies purpose, or of any danger likely to happen. Scribe. A writer, a Clerke a publike notarie. Scruple. Doubt, difficul∣tie: In Physicke it signifi∣eth a small weight of twenty wheat cornes; the third part or a dramme. Scrupulositie. Doubtful∣nesse▪ difficultie. Scrupulous. Doubtfull, fearefull one that casteth many doubts. Scrutinie. Search: enqui∣rie. Scull. A great company of fish swimming toge∣ther. Sculpture. A caruing, a grauing. Scurrill. Scoffing, beastly, dishonest, filthy. Scurrilitie. Saucy scoffing, ribauldry. Scurrillous. The same that Scurrill is. Scut. The taile of a Hare or cony. Seacalfe. Great fishes that bellow like oxen, and haue their bodies couered with haire. They breed like beastes on the land, and sleep there often in the night. Sealamprie. A fish called by some Remora, which stayeth a shippe vnder a saile. Sebestens. Little plums brought out of Italy, of a blewish colour and sweete in taste. They are cold and moist in operation, and are often vsed by Physiti∣ans in hotte agues and inward inflammations of the body. Seclude. To shut apart, to shut out. Seclusion. A shutting a∣part. Sect. A particular opini∣on of some few. Sectarie. One that fol∣loweth priuate opinions in religion. Section. A diuision or cutting off.
Secular. Worldly, or be∣longing to the world. Secundine. The after birth, the skinne, wherein a childe is wrapped in his mothers wombe. Secure. Carelesse, voyde of feare. Securitie. Assurance from feare or danger. Sediment. The dregs of any liquor which sinketh to the bottome. Seduce. To deceiue, to misleade. Sedulity. Diligence, care∣fulnesse. Segregate. To diuide, to seuer. Seiant. A terme in Herauldrie, when a beast is painted sitting vp∣right. Select. To choose, to picke out. Semblable. Like. Semblance. A shew, a co∣lour. Semblant. Like. Semicircle. Halfe a cir∣cle. Seminarie. A seede plot. Semitarie. A crooked sword: a faucheon. Sempiternall. Euerla∣sting. Sena. A little plant grow∣ing in Italy and other hot countreyes, but the best is brought from Alexandria. It is hot and dry, and the leaues thereof are often boyled in Physicke, to purge the body of melan∣cholicke grosse humours, and to cleanse the blood: but there must be Annis∣seede, Cinnamom or Gin∣ger added to it, for that o∣therwise it will prouoke windinesse, and gripings in the belly. Senat. The Counsell house, where the Magi∣strates of a citie assemble themselues. Senator. An Alderman, or graue Magistrate of a citie. Senior. The Elder. Sensible. That may bee felt or perceiued: some∣time witty or of good con∣ceite. Sensuall. That pleaseth the senses, wanton, giuen to please the flesh. Sensualitie. Bodily plea∣sure: wanton delight.
Sentinell. A man standing in some conuenient place to discry what company cometh neere an army or towne of warre. Sententious. Full of sen∣tences, or wise speeches. Septentrionall. Of, or be∣longing to the North. Septuagints. Seuenty lear∣ned men which translated the Old Testament out of Hebrew into Greeke. Sepulture. Buriall. Sequell. That which fol∣loweth the matter follo∣wing. Sequester. To diuide, to withdraw. To put by it selfe. Sequestration. A putting apart: a placing in seuerall by it selfe. Seraine. A foggy mist or dampish vapour falling in Italie about sunne set, at which time it is vnwhole∣some to be abroad especi∣ally bareheaded. Seraphicall. Inflamed with diuine loue like a Se∣raphin. Seraphin. The highest or∣der of Angels: See Hie∣rarchie. Serenitie. Faire and cleere weather. Sergreant. A tearme ap∣plyed in Heraldry onely to the Griffine which is so called. Serious. Earnest, weigh∣ty, of great importance. Serpentine. Of the nature of a Serpent. Seruile. Base, slauish, be∣longing to a bondman or seruant. Seruilitie. Bondage; base estate. Seruitude. Bondage. Sessions. A sitting of Iud∣ges. Sethim. A kinde of tree like a white Thorne, the timber whereof neuer rot∣teth. Of this tree was made the holy Arke of the Old Testament. Seuere. Iust, graue, hard. Seueritie. Grauity, great constancy in ministring iu∣stice. Sewell. A Paper, clout, or any thing hanged vp to keep a Deere from entring into a place. Sewer. He that goeth be∣fore the meate
of a Prince or great personage, to place it on the table: also one hat hath authoritie to ouerlooke water courses. Shamoise. A wilde Goate keeping the mountaines. Shankes. The skinne of the shanke of a kinde of Kidde. Shingles. A disease about the breast, belly, or backe, wherein the place affected looketh red, increasing cir∣cle wise more and more. It is chiefely cured with Cats bloud; or if it goe round the bodie, it killeth. Shrew A kinde of field Mouse, which if he goe o∣uer a beasts backe, will make him lame in the chine; and if he bite, the beast swelleth to the heart, and dieth. Shrine. A Toombe or place where the body of some Saint is buried or re∣maineth. Siatica. See Sciatica be∣fore. Sibbe. One of kinne. Sibyll. A woman inspi∣red with a spirit of prophe∣sie; so called of the greeke wordes Sios, which signifi∣eth God, and Boyle, which signifieth counsell, because such women had know∣ledge (as was said) of the counsell of God. There were ten Sibylls famous a∣boue the rest. The first was Sibylla of Persia, the se∣cond of Lybia, the third of the citty Delphos in Greece, the fourth of Cuma, a citty in Aeolis, the fift of Erythrae, a citty of Asia, the sixt of the Ile, Sa∣mos, the seuenth of Cu∣mae, a citty of Campania in Italy. This Sibylla of Cumae, (as is written) came on a time to Tarquine King of Rome, in the habit of a strange olde woman, offering to sell him nine bookes, full (as she sayd) of diuine oracles; for which she demanded three hun∣dred crownes of gold: the King not much regarding, and beside thinking them too deere at that price, she burned three of them be∣fore his face, and then as∣ked if he would haue the other sixe, for which she demanded no lesse, than she had done at
first for the nine. Hereat the King de∣riding her and thinking her halfe made, she burned three more of them, and tolde him that he should giue her the same price for those three that were left. The King much wonde∣ring at the womans con∣stant earnestnesse, and therefore thinking the bookes contained no com∣mon matter, commanded three hundred crownes to be giuen her for them, which she receiuing, pre∣sently vanished out of sight. These bookes were after kept by the Romans very carefully, who in great matters of doubte, alwayes had recourse to them, as to an assured oracle. The eighth Sibyll, was called Sibylla of Helespontus in Greece; the ninth was of Phrygia; the tenth and last of Tybur, a citty neere Rome in Italy. All these Sibylls prophecied of the incarnation of our Sauiour Christ. Sicle. In coyne it signi∣fieth foure sterling groates of eight to an ounce: in weight it is halfe an ounce. Sidelayes. Dogs layd in the way to be let slip at a Deere, as he passeth by. Signet. A seale. Significatiue. Which ex∣presseth a matter plainely. Signiorie. A Lordship. Silence. Holding ones peace. Similitude. A likenesse. Simonie The selling of spirituall things for mony. This name first was deri∣ued from one Simon a sor∣cerer of Samaria, who offe∣red mony to the Apostles that he might haue power to giue the holy Ghost vn∣to any that he should lay his hands on; for which cause he was sharpely re∣prooued by Saint Peter. Simulachre. A picture or image. Simulation. Dissembling. Sincere. Vpright, plaine, without dissimulation. Sindon. Fine linnen cloth. Single. The taile of a Sagge or other Deere. Singularitie. Priuate o∣pinion, a desire to be odde from other men.
Sinister. Vnhappy, naugh∣ty, lewde, harmefull. Sinoper. A kinde of red stone which some call rudle. Syren. A Mer-mayde: Poets feine there were three Mer-mayds or Sy∣rens, in the vpper part like maidens, and in the lower part fishes: which dwel∣ling in the sea of Sicilie, would allure Saylers to them, and afterward de∣stroy them; beeing first brought asleepe with har∣kening to their sweete sin∣ging. Their names were Parthenope, Lygia, and Leu∣casia; wherefore sometime alluring women are sayd to be Syrens. Site. The setting or standing of a place. Situation. The same that Site is. Slot. The view or print of a Stags foote in the ground. Slowth. A heard or com∣pany of wild Boares toge∣ther. Sluse. A frame or deuice to keepe water in any ground, or let it out. Smaragde. A precious stone called an Emerald: See Emerald. Socage. An ancient te∣nure of land, by doing some inferiour seruice of husbandry to the Lord of the fee. Sociable. Kinde, louing, one that will keepe com∣pany, or is curteous in company. Societie. Fellowship. Sole. Alone, onely. Solecisme. A false man∣ner of speaking, contrary to rules of Grammar. Solegroue. An old name of the moneth of Februa∣ry. Solicite. To vrge, to mooue, to prouoke. Solicitude. Carefulnesse. Solid. Whole, firme, not hollow. Soliditie. Wholenesse, massiuenesse, soundnesse. Solitarie. Alone, without company. Solitude. A desert place, a wildernesse. Solstice. The stay of the Sunne when he cannot go higher and lower, which is (with vs) in sommer about
mid Iune, and in Winter a∣bout the middle of De∣cember. Soluble. Loose, not bound Solue. To vntie, to open, to expound. Solution. A paiment or an expounding. Sophister. A subtill cauil∣ler in wordes, a craftie dis∣puter, which will make a false matter seeme true. Sophisme. A false argu∣ment. Sophisticall. Deceitfull: captious. Sophisticate. To counter∣fet, to deceiue. Sophistrie. A false kinde of argument seeming true when it is not. Sore. To flye vp aloft: also it signifieth a Fallow Deere foure yeeres olde. Sorell. A Fallow Deere three yeeres old. Source. A waue of the sea. Sownder. A company of wilde Bores together. Spaide. A Red Deere three yeeres old. Spatious. Large and wide. Species. The differing kind of euery thing. Spectator. A beholder. Speculation. The inward knowledge, or beholding of a thing. Speculatiue. That which belongeth to Speculation, Sperme. Seed. Spermaceti. The seed of the Whale fish: It is vsed in Physicke against squats and bruisings of the bo∣die. Spermaticall. Of or be∣longing to seed: or the veines which conteine the seede. Sphere. A round circle; It is commonly taken for the circled round compasse of the heauens. Sphericall Round like a sphere. Spikenard A kinde of sweet herbe like Lauender. Splene. The milte of man or beaste: which is like a long narrow tongue, lying vnder the shorte ribbes on the left side, and hath this office of na∣ture, to purge the liuer of superfluous melancholicke blood: sometime it signi∣fieth anger or choler. Splendour. Brightnesse.
Splendent. Bright shining. Spongeous. Hollow, like a Sponge. Spousals. A marriage. Spraints. Dung of an Otter. * Sprent. To sprinkle. Spume. Fome or froth. Squadron. Asquare forme in a battell. Squinanth. A kinde of round rush, which is sweet, and hath flowers very me∣dicinable. Squincy. A swelling dis∣ease in the throat. Stabilitie. Stedfastnesse: constancie. Stacte. A sweet oyle or liquor which is drawen out of new myrrhe, by bruising and strayning it according to art. Staggerd. A red male Deere, foure yeeres old. Stanchhound. An old hound well experienced. Stannaries. Mines of Tinne. Staple. Any towne or ci∣tie appointed for mer∣chants of England to ca∣ry their Wooll, Cloth, Lead, Tinne, or such like commodities vnto, for the better sale of them to o∣ther merchants by the great. State. It is sometime ta∣ken for vrine of mans bo∣die. Station. A standing or resting place. Statue. A carued, or cast image, made in proportion like a man. Stauesaker. An herbe bea∣ring a three cornered seed of a hot burning nature, which beeing beaten to powder, and mingled with oyle, destroyeth lice, and cureth all itchy mangines. Stechados. A beautifull herbe, bearing faire knops or eares, which being boy∣led and drunken, doe open the stoppings of all in∣ward parts, and are very good against the paine of the head, and diseases of the brest. Sterill. Barren. Sterilitie. Barrennesse: vn∣fruitfulnesse. Stigmaticall. See Stig∣maticke. Stigmaticke. A notorious leude fellow,
which hath been burnt with a hot y∣ron, or beareth other markes about him, as a to∣ken of his punishment. Stile. A manner or forme of writing, or spea∣king. Stillyard. A place in Lon∣don where the Easterling merchants of Hawnse and Almane, were wont to a∣bide. Stipend. Wages, or hire giuen one. Stipendarie. Hee that re∣ceiueth yeerely wages, or is hyred to doe a thing for a certaine price. Stipulation. A solemne couenant or bargaine. Stoicall. Of or belong∣ing to the Stoikes. Stoike. A seuer▪ secte of Philosophers at Athens which followed the do∣ctrine of Zeno, who taught that a wise man ought to bee free from all passions. and neuer to bee mooued either with ioy or griefe. They were called Stoikes, of the Greeke word Stoa, (which signifieth a porch) because Zeno taught his followers in a common porch of the citie. Storax. A kinde of sweet Gumme, good a∣gainst hoarsnesse, and the cough. Storke. A bird famous for naturall loue toward his parents, whom he fee∣deth being olde and impo∣tent, as they fedde him, being young. The Egypti∣ans so esteemed this birde, that there was a great pe∣naltie laid vpon any that should kill him. Strangurion. A disease when one cannot make water, but by drops, and that with great paine. Stratageme. A policie or subtill deuice in warre, whereby the enemie is of∣ten vanquished. Strict. Hard, streight, seuere. Structure. A buil∣ding. Student. One that stu∣dieth. Studious. Giuen to studie. Stupid. Blockish, with∣out wit: dull. Stupiditie. Blockishnesse, dulnesse: astonishment. Stupifaction. A making dull or senslesse.
Stygian. Belonging to the riuer Styx. Styx. A feined Riuer in hell, by which the heathen gods did vse to sweare: And if they swore falsely, they were depriued of their godhead, for one hundred yeares after. Suauitie. Sweetnesse. Subalterne. Placed vnder another: or that which succeedeth another by course. Subalternation. A succee∣ding by course. Subiect. That which doth support qualities belong∣ing vnto it: as the body is the subiect in which is health, or sickenesse, and the minde the subiect that receiueth into it vertues or vices. Sublime. High, lofty, ho∣nourable. Sublimatum. A strong corosiue powder called white Mercury, vsed by Chirurgians to eate and consume corrupted flesh. Sublimitie. Highnesse, loftinesse. Submisse. Lowly, hum∣ble. Subordinate. Placed in office vnder another Subordination. An ap∣pointing or placing of one thing vnder another. Suborne. To bring one in for a false witnesse: to instruct one priuily how to deceiue another. Subpoena. A Writ where∣by one is summoned to appeare in the Chancery at a certaine time, vpon a great penaltie, if the faile in appearance. Subscribe. To write vn∣der. Subscription. A writing vnder. Subsist. To abide or con∣tinue in his owne bee∣ing. Subsistence. The abiding or continuance of a thing in it owne estate. Substitute. To appoint an inferior officer: also he that is in authoritie vnder another, or which ruleth in steed of another. Subterfuge. A refuge, a sauegard; a place to hide or saue one in. Subuersion. An ouer∣throw.
Subuert. To ouerthrow, to destroy. Succinct. Briefe, short. Suffocate. To strangle: choke. Suffocation. A choking: a strangling. Suffrage. Fauourable, voyces in our behalfe, as at the choosing of officers or Magistrates. Suggest. To put closely into ones minde. Suggestion. A prompting or putting of a thing into ones minde. Sulphur. Brimstone. Summarie. A briefe ga∣thering together; an a∣bridgment containing the whole effect of a matter in few words. Summarilie. Briefly: touching onely the chiefe points. Summitie. The height or top of a thing. Superabound. To abound very much; to be in great plentie. Supereminence. Authori∣tie, or dignitie aboue o∣thers. Supererogation. Laying out of more then one hath receiued; or the doing of more then a man is of ne∣cessitie bound to doe. Superficiall. Going no farther then the outside; slight, bearing shew onely in the outside, without any goodnesse within. Superficies. The outside of euery thing, which is al∣wayes in sight. Superfluitie. More then needes to bee, ouermuch. Superfluous. That which is too much: also vaine or vnprofitable. Superlatiue. The highest. Superiour. Higher, aboue another. Supernall. That which commeth from aboue. Superscription. A writing set vpon any thing, as on the outside of a letter. Supersedeas. In our com∣mon Law it signifieth a commandement sent by writing, forbidding an of∣ficer from the doing of that, which otherwise hee might and ought to doe. Superstition. An excesse of ceremonious worship, false worship, or honour giuen to God.
Supplant. To trip one, or to ouerthrowe him craf∣tily. Supplement. That which supplyeth or maketh vp what is wanting. Supply. To fill vp or adde too. Suppliant. He that maketh a supplication, or humbly intreateth another. Supplicate. To beseech humbly. Suppository. Any thing put vp into the Funda∣ment, to make the body soluble. It is commonly made of hony boyled till it grow thick, and so made into an apt forme for that purpose; whereto some∣time is added the yolke of an egge, or salt, when wee will haue it to worke the effect more speedily. Suppresse. To keepe downe; to beate vnder: sometime to conceale or keepe close. Supputation. An account or reckoning. Supreme. Chiefe, highest, most excellent. Surcease. To giue ouer, leaue off or cease. * Surcote. A gowne with a hood of the same. Surplusage. Ouerplus, more then needes. Surprise. To come vn∣wares: to take vpon a so∣daine. Surprisall. A taking vn∣awares. * Surquidrie. Presump∣tion. Surrender. To yielde vp lands or tenements to a∣nother. Surreption. A priuie ta∣king away. Surround. To compasse round about. Suruey. To ouerlooke, or ouersee. Surueyer. He that hath the ouersight, of the kings or some great personages lands or workes. Suruiue. To ouerliue, or liue after another. Suruiuer. He that liueth after another. Suspend. To stay one by authoritie for a time, from executing his office: to delay, to deferre. Suspence. Doubtfulnesse, vncertainty.
Suspiration. A breathing or sighing. Swallowes tayle. In buil∣ding it signifieth, a faste∣ning of two peeces of tim∣ber so strongly together, that they cannot fall asun∣der. Swaine. A Seruant. Swaynemote. A Court kept thrice a yeare, tou∣ching matters belonging to a forrest. * Sweuen. A dreame. * Swynker. A labourer. Sycomore. A tree like a fig tree, hauing great bran∣ches, and large leaues like a Mulberrie. It beares fruit three or foure times in a yeare, much like a wilde Fig, but without any seeds within. The fruit groweth vpon the verie bodie of the tree, and the great maine boughes, and will neuer be ripe except it bee scraped with an iron toole. It is found plentifully in Caria, Egypt, and the Ile of Rhodes; especially in such places, where Wheate will not grow. Sycophant. A Talebearer, a slandererer, a false accu∣ser. Syllogisme. An Argu∣ment consisting of three parts, whereby something is necessarily prooued, as thus: Euery vertue is honorable: Patience is a vertue. Thererefore Patience is honourable. The first part of a syllo∣gisme is called the Propo∣sition or Maior; the se∣cond the Assumption or Minor; and the third, the Conclusion. Syluane. Of, or belong∣ing to the woods. Symbole. A short ga∣thering of principal points together. Symmetrie. Due pro∣portion of one part with another. Symmetrian. Hee that considereth the due pro∣portion of a thing; & how well the parts agree with the whole. Sympathie. A likenesse in quantitie; or a like dispo∣sition or affection of one thing to another. Symphonie. Harmony or consent in Musick.
Symptome. Any passion or griefe following a dis∣ease, or sensibly ioyned with it: as headach with an Ague, a pricking in the side with a Pleurisie, and such like. Synagogue. A Congre∣gation or assembly: com∣monly it signifies a church of the Iewes. Synteresie. The inward conscience. or a naturall qualitie ingrafted in the soule, which inwardly in∣formeth a man, whether he do well or ill. Synod. A generall coun∣cell, a generall or vniuersal assembly. Synoper. Sec Cinoper. Synopsie. A sight or full view of a thing. T * TAas. An heape. Tabernacle. A shel∣ter or a roome made a∣broad, with boords and boughes of trees. There was of old among the Is∣raelites, a feast commaun∣ded by God, called the feast of Tabernacles; which beganne on the fif∣teenth day of the seuenth moneth, and continued seauen dayes, during which time the Israelites liued abroad in Tabernacles, in remembrance, that their Fathers a long time so li∣ued, after God had deli∣uered them out of the land of Egypt. Tacamahaza. A Rosin brought out of the VVest Indies, of great vertue a∣gainst any cold humours, rising of the Mother, Toothach, and diuers o∣ther griefes. Talent. A certaine value of money. Among the Greekes there were two kindes of talents, the grea∣ter and the lesse: The greater conteined about two hundred thirty three pounds sterling: the lesse about an hundred seuenty fiue pounds. Among the Hebrewes the greater Ta∣lent of the Sanctuary con∣teined 400. pounds, the lesser Talent halfe so much. Tallage. Custome: fraight.
Tamarinds. A fruite brought hither out of In∣dia, like vnto green Dam∣sens. They are cold in o∣peration, and therefore good against burning Fea∣uers and all inward disea∣ses, proceeding of heate and choler. Tamariske. A little tree bearing leaues not much vnlike to heath; the de∣coction whereof in Wine and a little Vineger bee∣ing drunken, is of great vertue against the hardnes or stopping of the spleene or Milt. This tree doth by nature so wast the Milt, that Swine which haue beene daily fedde out of a vessell made thereof, haue beene found to haue no Milt at all. * Tapinage. Secrecie, sli∣linesse. Tarantula. A little beast like a Lizard, hauing spots in his necke like starres. Tardie. Slow. Tartar. Leeze of wine. Tautologie. A repeating of one speech or matter often. Taxe. To appoint what one shal pay to the Prince: sometime to reprooue. Tearce. A measure of moyst things beeing the sixt part of a tun, and the third part of a pipe. * Teene. Sorrow. Temerarious. Rash, hasty. Temeritie. Rashnesse. Templaries. Certaine Christian souldiours dwel∣ling about the Temple at Hierusalem, whose office was to entertain Christian strangers that came thither for deuotion, and to guard them in safetie when they went to visite the places of the holy Land: They wore by their Order a white Cloake or vpper Garment, with a redde Crosse. Temporall. That which endureth but a time. Temporarie. The same that Temporal is. Temporize. To follow the time: To seeke to please the time. Tenacitie. A holding fast, a niggardnesse. Tenderlings. The soft tops of a Deeres hornes when they are in blood.
Tendrells. Little sprigs of Vines or other Plants, wherewith they take hold to grow or stay themselues vp. Tenne. A terme vsed among Heralds, signifying an O∣renge or tawny colour. Tenon. That part of a post which is put into a mortise hole, to make it stand vp∣right, or to beare it vp. Tenuitie. Littlenesse, slen∣dernesse. Tergiuersation. Wrangling, ouerthwart dealing. A see∣ming to run away and yet fight still. Termination. An ending or last part of a word. Terrene. Earthly. Terrestriall. Earthly. Terrifie. To make afraid. Territorie. Land lying within the bounds of a Cittie. Terrour. Feare, dread. Tertian. The third, or re∣turning euery third day. Testament. A written will. Testator. He that worketh a will. Testifie. To beare wit∣nesse. Testification. A witnes∣sing. Tetragrammaton. Ha∣uing foure Letters. The Hebrewes so called the great name of God Ieho∣uah, because in their lan∣guage it was written with foure letters. Tetrarch. A Prince that ruleth the fourth part of a kingdome. Theater. A place made halfe round where people sate to behold solemne playes and games. Theatricall. Of, or belon∣ging to the Theater. Theme. A sentence or ar∣gument whereupon one speaketh. Theologie. Diuinitie: the knowledge of Diuine things. Theologicall vertues. Faith, Hope and Charity are so called, because they haue their obiect & end in God. Theoretical. That which belongeth to contemplati∣on or inward knowledge of a thing. Theorick. The inward knowledge or contempla∣tion of a thing.
* Thilke. The same. * Thirle. To pearce. Thorpe. A village. Thrasonicall. Vainglorious, full of boasting as Thraso was. Threnes. Lamentations: mournings. * Threpe. To affirme. Thummim. An Hebrew word signifying perfection. See Vrim. Tiara. A rich cap or hat of silke vsed by Kings and Priests of Persia: It coue∣red not the whole head before, but was fastened with ribbins behind, so that it could not easily fall off. Tiger. A fierce wild beast in India & Hyrcania. This beast is the swiftest of all other, wherefore they are taken very young in the dams absence, and carried away by men on horse∣back; who hearing the cry of the old Tiger following swiftly after them, doe of purpose let fall one of the young whelpes, that while she beareth that back, they in the meane time may e∣scape safe with the other to the ship. Timerous. Fearefull. Timiditie. Fearefulnesse. Tincture. A dipping, co∣louring, or stayning of a thing. Titular. Which beareth onely a Title. Toft. A place where a house hath stood. Tolerate. To indure or suffer. Toleration. An induring; a sufferance. Tome. A part or diuision. Tone. A tune, note, or ac∣cent of the voice. Tonnage. A payment due for merchandise carried in tuns or such like vessels, af∣ter a certaine rate in euery tunne. Tonsure. A clipping or cutting of the haire. Topase. A precious stone wherof ther are two kinds: One of the colour of gold, and the other of a Saffron colour, not so good as the first. It is written that this stone being put into see∣thing water, doth so coole it, that one may presentlie take it out with his hand. Topikes. Places to finde arguments. Topographie. A description of a place.
Torrent. A little streame, a brooke that runneth swiftly. Torride. Burning, excee∣ding hot. Torteauxes. Cakes of bread: a terme vsed in He∣raldrie. Totall. The whole. Trace. To follow by the steps. Traces. The print of feet in beasts of rauine, as wilde Boares, Beares, and such like. Tract. A discourse, a draw∣ing in length. Tractable. Easie to be ru∣led and handled: gentle, easie to be perswaded. Tradition. A deliuerie: that which is deliuered vs from others. Traduce. To speake euill of one, to defame, to re∣proach. Tragacanth. A kind of Gum, the best whereof is cleere, and somewhat sweet in taste: It is often vsed a∣gainst coughes, and rough hoarsenesse of the throate. Tragedie. A play or Hi∣storie ending with great sorrow and bloodshed. Tragedian. A Player or Writer of Tragedies. Tragicall. Mournefull, la∣mentable, deadly, which endeth like a Tragedy. Tranquillitie. Quietnesse of mind, calmenesse. Transcendent. That which clymeth ouer, and sur∣mounteth another thing: In Logicke it signifieth a word of such nature that it cannot be included in a∣ny of the tenne predica∣ments. Transcript. A writing or a coppying out. Transfer. To carry or con∣uey from one place to an∣other. Transfiguration. An alte∣ring of the form or figure. Transformation. A chan∣ging into another forme. Transition. A passing o∣uer from one thing to ano∣ther. Transitorie. Soone passing, of short continuance. Translucent. Cleere, bright, which may be seen through. Transmigration. A remo∣uing to dwell, from one place to another.
Transmitte. To send ouer or away. Transmutation. A chang∣ing. Transparent. Cleere, that may be seene through. Transport. To send ouer by shippe. Transpose. To change or alter the order of a thing. Transubstantiation. A changing of one substance into another. Trasonings. The crossings or doublings of a Row bucke before the hounds. Traue. A treuise to shooe a wild horse in. Trauerse. To march vp and downe or to moue the feete with proportion, as in dancing. In our common Law it signifieth to make contradiction, or to deny the cheefe point of the matter wherewith one is charged. Treble. Threefold, or to make a thing thrice so great as it is: sometime it signifieth the highest note in musicke. Tremour. A trembling. Trepandiron. An instru∣ment vsed by surgeons to cut out a small bone with∣all. Tresses. Haire. Triangled. Three corne∣red. Tribe. A kindered; or companie that dwelleth to∣gether in one ward. Tribune. The name of two cheefe officers in Rome. The first was Tri∣bune of the people, who was to defend their liber∣ties, and had therefore the gates of his house standing alwayes open day and night. The other was cal∣led Tribune of the soul∣diours, who had charge to see them well armed, and ordered, being as the Knight marshall is with vs. Tribunall. A iudgement seate. Tributarie. which paieth tribute. Trine. The number of three. Trinitie. Three ioyned in one, or three together. Tripartite. Diuided into three parts. Tripp. A heard or flocke of goates. Triplicicie. Threefolde being.
Triuiall. Base, vile, of no estimation, common euery where. Triumuirate. The office of three together. Trociskes. Little flatte cakes sold by Apotheca∣ries, made of diuerse simple medicines mingled toge∣ther. Trope. The changing of a word; or a figuratiue mā∣ner of speaking. Trophie. Any thing set vp in token of victorie. This custome first began among the Greekes who vsed in that place, where the enemies were van∣quished, to cut downe the boughes of great trees, and in the stockes or bodies of them to hang vp armour, or other spoiles taken from the enemies. Tropicall. That which is spoken by a trope or fi∣gure. Tropikes. Two imagined circles in the spheare, of e∣quall distance on either side from the Equinoctiall line. The one is called the Tropike of Cancer, the o∣ther the Tropike of Capri∣corne. To the first the Sun cometh in Iune, to the o∣ther in December. They are called Tropikes of the Greeke word Trepo, which signifieth to tourne, be∣cause when the Sun comes to either of them, he turnes his course another way. Troy weight. A pound weight of twelue ounces, by which gold, siluer, pre∣cious stones, iewels and bread are weighed. Trucheman. An interpre∣ter. Truculent. Fierce, cruell and terrible. Trunk. The body of a tree. Tuition. Defence, pro∣tection. Tumor. A swelling. Tumult. A sedition or trouble, some gathering together of the people. Tumultuous. Seditious, full of buisinesse, or trou∣ble. Tunne. A measure of 252. gallons. In weight it signi∣fieth twenty hundred. Turbith. A roote much vsed in
Phisicke, to purge slimie fleame out of the body. The best is white and hollow, and is com∣monly taken with a little ginger, for then it will worke the effect with more ease. Turbith minerall. A cer∣taine red powder (made according to the Paracel∣sian practise) which is vsed against the French disease. Turbulent. Troublesome, vnquiet. Turkise. A precious stone of a silke blew co∣lour. Turpentine A faire, cleere, and moist kind of rosin, which issueth out of the Larx and Turpentine tree. It is good to be put into oyntments and em∣plaisters, for it gleweth, cleanseth and healeth wounds. It may be also licked in with hony, and then it cleanseth the brest, and gently looseth the belly, prouoking vrine and driuing out the stone and grauell. Turpitude. Filthines, dis∣honesty. Turtle doue. A bird lesse than a pigeon, famous for continencie in widowes e∣state. If the male or femall of this bird dy, the other euer remaineth single, as it were in continuall sorrow. In the Spring time they are scarce seene, because they then loose their fethers: when they drinke, they lift not vp their heads backe∣ward as other birds vse. They liue commonly eight yeares, and doe breede twyce a yeare, not aboue three egs at a tyme. Tutmouthed. He that hath the chin and nether iaw sticking out farther than the vpper. Tutour. A defender, he that hath charge to bring vp a childe. Twibill. An instrument v∣sed by Carpenters to make mortise holes. Tympanie. A disease wherein the body waxing leane, the bellie swelleth vp, hauing great store of wind and windy humours gathered together be∣tweene the inner skinne thereof and the guts. Type. A figure, forme or likenesse of any thing.
Typicall. mysticall, or that which serueth as a shadow and figure of an other thing. Tyrant. A cruell Prince, One that ruleth vniustly. Tyrannize. To play the tyrant, to gouerne with crueltie. V VAcant. Voyde, empty; without buisines Vacation. A ceasing from labour. Vacuitie. Emptines. Vacuum. Emptines. Vaile bonet. To putte off the hatt, to strike saile, to giue signe of submission. Valentinians. Certaine he∣retikes so called by the name of their first maister Valentinianus; who held o∣pinion that our Sauiour receiued not his flesh of the blessed virgin Mary. Validitie. Force, or strength. Variable. Changeable, which altereth often. Variation. An altering, or changing. Vaste. Huge and great. Vastation. A wasting or spoyling of a country. Vastitie. Exceeding great∣nes: also waste or spoile done to a country. Vauessour. A Lord. Vauntcourers. Forerun∣ners. Vauntlay. A terme of hunting, when they sette hounds in readynes, where they thinke a chace will passe, and cast them off be∣fore the rest of the kennell come in. Vaward. The foremost part of a battell. Vbiquitie. The presence of a person in all places at once. * Vechons. Hedgehogs. Vegetiue. That which lyueth and groweth as plants doc. Vehemencie. Earnestnes. Veile. To hide or couer: also any thing which hi∣deth or couereth. Velitations. Skirmishes, fightings. Velocitie. Swiftnes. Velume. Fine parchment of calues skynnes. Vendible. Saleable, which will quickly be sold.
Venerable. Reuerent, graue, worshipfull. Veneration. A worship∣ping. Venery. Hunting: some∣time fleshly wantonnesse. Veneriall. See veneri∣ous. Venerious. Fleshly: giuen to lechery. Venie. A touch in the body at playing with wea∣pons. Veniall. Which may ea∣sily be pardoned. Ventoy. A fanne for a wo∣man. Ventosity. Windinesse. Ventricle. The stomacke of any liuing thing. Ventroloquie. A hollow inward speaking of a spirit in a possessed body. Ver. The spring time. Verbal. Of or belonging to words. Verbatim. Word by word, that which is precisely spoken, according as some∣thing was spoken before. Verbositie. Much talke, many words. Verdegrease. A greene substance, made of the rust of brasse or copper, which hath beene hanged cer∣taine dayes ouer strong vineger; It is of a fretting nature, and therefore to be vsed with great discreti∣on. Verdour. The name of a chiefe officer in a For∣rest: sometime it signifieth greenenesse. Verge. A rod or wanne. Verger. He that carryeth a white wande before a great officer. Verifie. To prooue, to make true. Veritie. Truth. Vermilion. See Cinoper. Vernall. Of or belong∣ing to the spring. Versifie. To make ver∣ses. Verte. A terme in He∣rauldry: it signifieth a greene colour. Vesper. The Euening. Vestals. Certaine virgins among the ancient Ro∣manes, consecrated to the Goddesse Vesta. They were alwayes chosen be∣tweene sixe and tenne yeeres of age, and conti∣nued
thirtie yeeres in their office; whereof the first tenne yeares they be∣stowed in learning the ce∣remonies of their order, the second they employed in execution thereof, and the last tenne in teaching others, after it was law∣full for them to marry if they would. Their chiefe office was to keepe fire continually burning in a round temple at Rome in honour of Ve∣sta, and if it chanced to goe out, they were to renew it againe with no vsuall fire, but such as they could get by art from the Sunne beames. They were greatly honoured in the Cittie, and had diuerse priuiledges: for they were carried in Cha∣riots, and the chiefest Magistrates would doe reuerence to them. They had officers going before them, as the Consuls had, and if they met any who was ledde to be put to death, they had authori∣tie to deliuer him, taking an oath that they came not that way of purpose but by chance. They might also make a will, and dispose of their goods as they plea∣sed. But if any of them were found to liue vnchast, she was openly carried with sad silence to the gate called Collina, where being put into into a deepe pit, she was presently buried a∣liue. These Vestals were first instituted by Numa Pompi∣lius, or as some write, by Romulus. Vestment. A garment or clothing. * Viands. Victuals. Viaticum. Money or any necessarie prouision for a traueller. Viciate. To corrupt, to defile. Vicegerent. A deputie, one that supplieth the place of an other man. Vicinitie. Neighbour∣hood. Vicissitude. An inter∣changeable course of things, now one way, now an other. Victime. A sacrifice, a beast offered in sacrifice. Victimate. To offer in sacrifice, to kill and sacri∣fice.
Victor. A conquerer. Victorious. That hath gotten the victorie. Videlicet. To wit, that is to say. View. The print of the foote of a fallow Deere in the ground. Vigilancie. Watchfulnes. Vigilant. Watchfull. Vigill. The eeue or day next before a great festi∣uall day. It signifieth also a portion of the night deui∣ded into foure equall parts, the first Vigill beganne at sixe of the clocke in the euening, and continued till nine. The second Vigill began at nine, and continu∣ed till twelue. The third was from twelue till three. And the fourth was from three, till sixe of the clocke in the morning. Vigour. Strength, liueli∣nesse, force. Vigorous. Liuely, strong, lusty. Vilifie. To make base. Vilitie. Basenesse. Vindictiue. Reuengefull, or apt to reuenge. Vintage. The time of yeare when wine is made. Violate. To offer vio∣lence, to corrupt or defile, to transgresse or breake a law. Violation. An offering of violence, a breaking. Viper. A venemous ser∣pent in some hot countries lying much in the earth, hauing a short taile, which grateth and maketh a noise as he goeth. They are of a yellow colour, and some∣time red. The male hath but one tooth in euery side, but the female hath moe. It is written that when they ingender, the female biteth off the males head, which he putteth in∣to her mouth, and that the young ones doe gnaw the dams belly, and so kill her to get forth the sooner. Virago. A stout woman of manly courage. Virginall. Of or belon∣ging to a Virgin. Virilitie. Mans estate. Virulent. Poisonous, deadly, infectious. Visible. Which may be seene. Visibilitie. The abilitie or powre of seeing.
Vitall. Liuing, or ap∣pertaining to life. Vitiate. To corrupt or defile. Vitious. Full of vice, lewde, wicked. Vitriol. Copperas: It is of a middle nature betweene stone and mettall. Vituperate. To re∣proach, blame, or dis∣praise. Vituperation. A blaming, a rebuking. Viuacitie. Long life, liuelinesse. Viuification. A quicke∣ning, a reuiuing. Vlcer. A sore, or botch. Vlcerate. To make sores or blisters to arise. Vlcerous. Full of sores. Vmbilike. The Nauell, the middle part. Vmbrated. Shadowed. Vnaccessible. Vnapproch∣able, which cannot be come vnto. Vnanimitie. One con∣sent of minde, concord, a∣greement. Vncouth. Strange. Vnction. An annointing. * Vneth. Scarce, hardly, with difficulty. Vnguent. An oyntment. Vniforme. Of one forme and fashion. Vniformitie. One forme and fashion. Vnintelligible. Which cannot be vnderstood. Vnion. A ioyning to∣gether, concord, agree∣ment: also there is a preci∣ous pearle so called. Vnitie. Concord, a∣greement. Vniuersall. The whole, all in generall. Vniuersalitie. The whole state, all in generall. Vnsatiable. Which can∣not be filled or satisfied. Vocabularie. Of or be∣longing to words, which consisteth onely of words. Vocall. Of or belonging to the voice. Vocation. A calling, or course of life that one is called to. Volant. Flying. Volubilitie. The quicke turning of any thing: in∣constancie, changeablenes. Voluntarie. Willing. * Voluper. A Kercher. Voluptuous. Giuen to pleasure, wanton.
Voluptuousnesse. Pleasure of bodie, wantonnesse. Vomite. To cast, to rid the stomacke. Voracity. A deuouring. Votarie. Hee that maketh a vow, or bindeth himselfe by vow. Vowell. A letter which maketh a perfect sound of it selfe, as a, e, i, o, u. Vrbanitie. Courtesie in speech or behauiour, ciui∣litie, gentlnesse. Vrgent. Which vrgeth or compelleth a man to go a∣bout a matter. Vreters. The water pipes or conduits by which the vrine passeth from the kid∣nies to the bladder. Vrim. An Hebrew word, which the high Priest of the Iewes wore with the word Thummim, in the plaits of the Rationall vp∣on his brest: Saint Hierome interpreteth it, Learning. Vrine. Water of man or beast. Vrne. A box, or litle vessel. Vtas. The eighth day fol∣lowing any terme or feast. Vtenfils. Necessaries be∣longing to a house or ship. Vtility. Profit, commo∣dity. Vulgar. Common or much vsed of the common people. Vultur. A rauenous fel∣low, a cruell Cormorant. Vuula. A little peece of flesh in the inmost roofe of the mouth, which some∣time hangeth loose down∣ward, and hindereth from speaking and swallowing the meat. W VVAife. Goods that a Fellon flying, lea∣ueth for haste behind him, which commonly are for∣fet to the lord of the soile, if the right owner bee not knowne. Waiue. In our com∣mon law it signifieth a wo∣man that is outlawed. * Wanger. A male or bouget. * Warison. Reward. Wariangles. A kind of ra∣uenous birds. Warpe. The threed that goeth in the length of the cloth.
* Wastell bread. Fine Cim∣nell. * Waymeming. Lamen∣ting. Weasand. The throat or passage into the stomacke. * Weene. To thinke. * Welked. Withered. Welkine. The whole com∣passe of the heauens: the Firmament, the heauens. * Wend. To go. Whilke. Which. Whilome. Whilst. som∣time once, or in time past. Whirlebone. A round bone vpon the knee, which may be mooued vp and downe. Whorlebat. A weapon hauing plummets of Lead tyed to the end of it. Wile. Deceit, crafti∣nesse. Wilie Subtile, craftie. Wisard. A Wise man, a Witch, a cunning man. Withername. When hee that hath taken a distresse carrieth it to such a place, where the Sheriffe may not make deliuerance vpon a a Repleuine, then the par∣tie distrayned may haue a Writ to the Sheriffe, that he take as many beastes, or as much goods of the other in his keeping, till that he hath made deli∣uerance of the first di∣stresse, and this is called a Writ of Withername. * Wone. Store. * Wonne. To dwell, or a∣bide. * Woodshaw. Woodside or shadow. Woofe. That threed in weauing which goeth a crosse. Wooldriuer. He that buy∣eth wooll in the Country, and carrieth it away on horsebacke to sell it a∣gaine. Wrethe. The tayle of a wilde Boare. Wrecke. The losse of a-ship at Sea by drowning: also goods so lost and cast vp on the sea shore. * Wreme. To compasse about. Wright. A Carpenter. * Wimple. A Kercher. Wyuer. A serpent much like a Dragon. X XYloaloes. See Lignum Aloes.
Xylobalsamum sweet wood out of wh balme droppeth. See me. Y YAr. In some pla∣ce t is 20. Acres of land some, 24. and in som▪ 0. row. Fearefull, faint∣hted. Also there is an be so called, good to op any bleeding. Yate. A Gate. Ycleeped. Called, named. Yearne. To cry and barke as Beagles doe at their prey. * Yede. Went. Yexing. Sobbing. Yore. Long agoe, of olde. Yuca. An herbe in India, wherewith they vse to make bread. Z ZAnie. A foolish imi∣tator to a tumbler, or such like. Zenith. That part of the heauens which is direct o∣uer our head. Zephirus. The Weste winde. Zodiake. An imaginarie winding circle in the hea∣uens, vnder which the pla∣nets are still moued, and in which the twelue signes are placed. Zone. A girdle In Cos∣mographie, it signifieth a diuision made of the hea∣uens into fiue parts, wher∣of one is extreme hot, two extreme colde, and two temperate. The hot Zone, otherwise called the bur∣ning Zone, is all that part of the heauens, which is contained betweene the two Tropickes of Cancer and Capricorne, in which Zone, continually the Sun keepeth his course. The two cold Zones are vnder the two Poles of the world, or within 23. de∣grees neere them. The two temperate are the Zones betweene the far∣thest extreme cold and the middle burning Zone. And with these fiue Zones of the heauens, doeth the earth vnder, agree in heat, cold temperature. FINIS
