6227 S109220 99844870 9718
A FRVITFVLL COM∣mentarie vpon the twelue Small Prophets, BRIEFE, PLAINE, AND EASIE, GOING OVER THE SAME VERSE BY VERSE, AND SHEW∣ing euery where the Method, points of doctrine, and figures of Rhetoricke, to the no small profit of all godly and well di∣sposed Readers, with very necessarie fore-notes for the vnderstanding both of these, and also all other the Prophets. The text of these Prophets together with that of the quotations o∣mitted by the Author, faithfully supplied by the Translatour, and purged of faults in the Latine coppie almost innumerable, with a table of all the chiefe matters herein handled, and marginall notes very plentifull and profitable; so that it may in manner be counted a new Booke in regard of these additions. ƲƲritten in Latin by Lambertus Danaeus, and newly turned into English by Iohn Stockwood Mini∣ster and Preacher at Tunbridge. ye age of ye world in page 86. 2. Pet. 1. ver. 19. VVe haue also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye doe well that ye take heede. printer's or publisher's device PRINTED BY IOHN LEGATE, Printer to the Vniversitie of Cambridge. 1594. And are to be sold at the signe of the Sunne in Paules Church-yard in London.
The order of the XII. small Prophets, as they are placed in this booke. And here is added where, or in what page they are to be found. 1 Ionas pag. 82 2 Amos pag. 201 3 Oseas pag. 337 4 Micheas pag. 574 5 Nahum pag. 687 6 Ioel pag. 743 7 Sophonias pag. 814 8 Abdias pag. 857 9 Abacuc pag. 863 10 Aggeus pag. 898 11 Zacharias pag. 909 12 Malachias pag. 1116
To the no lesse vertuous then honourable Personages HENRIE Earle of Huntindon, &c. and the Lady KATHARINE his deare and welbeloued wife, Countesse of the same, &c. Iohn Stockwood, their humbly de∣uoted poore seruant wisheth all plentiful encrease of heauen∣ly and earthly graces of his holy Spirit, as may be most for God his glorie, and the good and welfare of his Church in this life present, and in the life hereafter, the onely and indeede true life perfect consummation of all heauenly ioyes and happines in Christ our Sauiour. IF the Heathen (Right Honourable) haue said very wisely and truly, That we are not borne for our selues alone, but that our pa∣rents, our friends, our cuntrie haue their pe∣culiar and seuerall right and interest in our natiuitie and birth, so farre forth as any way we may be able to profit and doe them good: then much more ought Christians duely to weigh & consider, that accordingly as God diuersly bestoweth vpon them the gifts and graces of his holy spirit, so are they especially to imploy and vse them vnto the benefit and instruction of the Church and people of God, and not hide and burie them in the ground, as did the idle and vn∣thankfull seruant his talent, as we reade in the Gospell. The cal∣ling to remembrance of which most waightie and neuer to be forgotten parable, hath stirred me vp from time to time, as leysure hath bin offered from the duties of my publike charge, to be still occupied about some thing, whereby both the Church, and also the Common-wealth might in some measure be benefited and edified. And for both their sakes and common good, I haue also nowe againe bestowed no small paines and labour for the publishing of this briefe, plaine, and easie Commentarie and ex∣position of the profoundly read, and deepely learned Danaeus vp∣on all the twelue small Prophets (as they are commonly called) to
the end that hereby the godly minded Christians may be the ra∣ther induced & moued to the reading of the same, being by this helpe now made so familiar and without any hardnes to be vn∣derstanded. Now what I haue more performed in this my simple translation, then is to be found in the Latin coppy of the Author himselfe, I haue rather thought meete in a word or twaine to signifie in a short speach vnto the curteous & Christian reader, then here to be tedious & trouble son▪ vnto your HH. in setting downe at large the same. This my labour such as it is, I haue presumed to recommend vnto the fauourable protection of both your excellent Honours, towardes whome these many yeares I haue bin a faithfull deuoted seruant, and poore welwiller, and unto whom I willingly confesse that euery way I owe farre grea∣ter duetie, then any way lieth in my small abilitie to yeilde and performe. This worke as it is new, and neuer hath had the like heretofore published in our English tongue, so I suppose that in easie briefnesse there is not any of like kinde that can bring vn∣to the well disposed Reader, more store of Christian knowledge and profitable instruction, in which respect I trust it shall come acceptable vnto your HH. & also vnto as many of God his faith∣full children as shall vouch safe the buying and heedfull reading of the same. And hereby I my selfe also shalbe further prouoked and encouraged to goe forwarde hereafter in the like, or perad∣uenture of more importance for the behoofe and commoditie of the well affected and disposed Christians. So crauing your Ho∣nourable and gentle pardoning of this my boldnes, I most hum∣bly & earnestly be seech the Almightie for your prosperous pre∣seruation, to this glorie your owne comfort, & the great ioy and reioycing of his chosen Israel. Tunbridge this 20. of Iune. 1594. Your Hh. most humble at commandement Iohn Stockwood Minister and Preacher at Tunbridge.
To the courteous and Chri∣stian Reader. RIght courteous and Christian Reader, I haue be¦gun, and through God his grace and assistance finished this briefe, but most learned and easie Commentarie vpon the small Prophets, not in profit, but in volume, for thy good and furthe∣rance, in the midst of many most grieuous and almost impor∣table troubles and incredile molestations, as they well knowe, who are best acquainted with my poore distressed estate, and vnderstand the true and vneuitable occasions of the same; as well to shew my selfe willing vpon all occasions according to my small measure to doe good vnto the congregation of the faithfull, and well disposed Christians, as to stay, or at leastwise to discredit the slaunderous reports of many viperous & poy∣sened tongues, who among many other vniust accusations and false charges bruited euery where against me, haue not ceased to giue out that I spend all my time in vaine and idle exercises, profitable vnto none, but greatly chargeable vnto my selfe, and much offensiue vnto others. For that I my selfe say nothing, nor seeke the true report and testimonie of others, who are well affected in religion, and most priuy vnto the cariage of my selfe in mine outward conuersation and behauiour; partly this worke now published, partly some others alreadie committed to the presse, and partly some other readie for the same both in Greeke and Latin, will easily cry shame vnto this so noto∣rious and open infamie, and cause the rest of like suite and substance, among all the godly to be esteemed and iudged of accordingly. And as after this manner exercising and occupy∣ing of my selfe at by-times and spare houres for the profit of the Church and Common-wealth, I haue not onely founde some release and quiet vnto my selfe in driuing many other combersome cares out of my pensiue and heauie heart, but also
haue had most comfortable experience of God his fatherly and prouident care, to raise vp for me some faithful friends vnloo∣ked for, the which mooued with Christian pitie and compas∣sion, haue profered me kindnesse and courtesie, so likewise my good hope and assured confidence is, that when in more gene∣ral maner my lamētable case shal come vnto the further know∣ledge of the greater number of the godly, not weighing nor beleeuing the sinister practises of the lewd & wicked, they will in the bowels of brotherly remorse and charitable sympathi and fellow-feeling of the pinching miseries in the poore mem∣bers of the same bodie, shew forth their willing and readie for∣wardnes to minister some reliefe and comfort in so harde and great extremities. But whither am I caried at vnwares with the violent streame of my afflicted estate, and the opprobrious cen∣sures of virulent and venemous tongues misdeeming, and tho∣rough misdeeming, mis-iudging, and most mis-reporting and mis-speaking of the same? It is high time that recalling my selfe, and humbly grauing thy courteous pardon (most gentle Rea∣der who soeuer thou art) I should surcease this wādring course not pertinent to the present matter, how soeuer very needefull in respect of my selfe, and speake some thing touching that which in the translation of this very profitable exposition, I haue presumed to adde and set downe of my self, aboue that which is to be found in the originall coppie of the godlie and learned Author. 1 Vnderstand therefore first of all thus much, that whereas the Latine treatise hath not so much as one marginall note, I haue filled the same with diuers, in one short and easie viewe laying open vnto thy consideration the summe and principall contents of that which is said vpon euery verse, as also pointing vnto euery especiall matter to be noted & marked in the same. 2 Secondly whereas Danaeus him selfe for shortnes sake, set∣teth downe no text in the expounding of all these Prophets verse by verse, but onely by quotation referreth thee vnto the same, I haue laid downe the english text according vnto such
translations extant among vs, as in the iudgem̄et of the learned are supposed to goe neerest vnto the same (sauing that in some few places I haue bin bold in some one word or twaine to put downe mine owne) for that I deemed that the bare quotation without the text it selfe, would seeme very raw and little profi∣table vnto the greater number, vnlesse it were vnto some fewe (if happily any such be to be found) that haue the whole text of every prophet verse by verse without booke, and by roote of heart, as commonly we vse to terme it. 3 Thirdly, where soeuer the author him self seemeth to stand vpon the interpretation of some hebrue word dissonant from the exposition of others, although he neuer in a maner doe vse to specifie or name the same word; I, notwithstanding doe vse in the margin to expresse the same in latin letters, as well for the vnderstanding of the most simple and ignorant, as also for that the Hebrew characters or letters are not very rise with euery Printer, nor their Compositors & workmen alwaies very skil∣full in the right and true compounding and ordering of the same, albeit notwithstanding they be orderly & truly set down in writing vnto their hand before. 4 Fourthly, all such places of scripture, the which Danaeus by quotation sendeth vs vnto (the which in this booke are almost infinite) not citing the text of the places themselues, the same so neerely as I could find them, and vpon due examination iudge to make fitly for the purpose, whereunto they were quoted, I haue truly set downe in the text it selfe, and so farre as my small skill and little learning would serue me, haue laboured and en∣deuoured to applie and frame them vnto that which I concei∣ued to be likeliest to be the sense and meaning of the Author. But howe great cumber and trouble the same oftentimes did bring vpon me, as for that not onely the verse, but sometimes the chapter, yea & otherwhiles also the whole booke was mis∣taken, I referre vnto all those that shall assay to make proofe and triall hereof in the Latine coppie it selfe of the Author. 5 Fiftly, whereas this writer beeing a great Schooleman and
cunning Artist, doth often lay forth the figures of Rhetoricke vsed by the Prophets in their seuerall writings and sermons, when soeuer occasion serueth that he doth name any such fi∣gure, I doe briefly in the margin make a short description of the same, and make it easie for the vnderstanding of the Reader euen of the meanast capacitie and conceit by some one or two familiar examples, and so often as after he maketh recitall of the same figure againe in any part of this worke, I doe by quotati∣on referre the Reader whither he shall repaire to vnderstande and know what the said figure is. 6 Last of al, the errours and faults which in the Latin coppy partly through the negligence of the workemen, and partly through ouersight of the Author himselfe, doe amount vnto many hundreths, are in this english translation all of them (espe∣cially if they be of any moment or weight) faithfully amended and corrected, so that all things are made most plaine and easie for the drawing on of the courteous Reader to be delighted with the reading of this booke, the which as by me it was ta∣ken in hand, and not without great painetaking as wel in rising earely, sitting long at it, and going late to bed, that thou migh∣test increase daily more and more in all Christian and heauenly knowledge, so if it shal be gently taken, and friendly receiued at thy courteous hands, I shall thinke my trauaile well bestowed, and daily pray vnto God for the increase of all needefull giftes and graces of his holy spirit for thee according to thy place and calling to his glory, and benefit of his Church and people for Christ his sake our onely Mediatour and redeemer. Thy poore brother in Christ, Iohn Stockwood.
TO HIS VERY SINGV∣lar good Friend the Right VVorshipfull, AND FOR MANY VERTVES MOST renowmed M. Antony Bacon, sonne of the most Noble and Honourable Syr Nicholas Bacon Chauncelour of England. THat saying of Tulli, if any other, (right worshipfull M. Bacon) is very notable and true,Tull. Offic. lib. 1. that nothing is more beautifull, faire, and amiable then vertue. The which, as in many others, so in you especially hath place and experiment. For whome doth not your religiousnes to God-ward, cause chiefely for to loue you? whom doth not your great towardnes of wit, whom doth not your courteousnes, the which receiuing from the right Honourable, and of most blessed memorie Syr Nicholas Bacon your father, sometimes the most wise Chauncelar of England, you especially haue increased, as a most excellent and singular part of inheritance of your fathers ver∣tues: whom doth not that your desire to learne the best things, to see the more famous countries, to please all good men, whom, I say, doe not these your vertues allure vnto you, and draw him in a manner whether he will or no? He must doubtlesse, be made of yron, and a blocke, and as hard as the Marpesian rocke, which is not delited, nor mooued with these so many your sweete odours, who doth not for the same vnfeined∣ly wish well vnto you, and which doth not fauour you with all his heart? For mo truly saith Origen, Like as vice euery where is of a most filthy smell: so the sauour of vertue is in all places most pleasant.Origen. For it smelleth like pretious oyntments, the which with a certaine mar∣uailous loue thereof draw all men vnto them Verily albeit that alwaies heretofore I haue made very great account of the name of the English Bacons, because of the singular praises of your whole house, and also haue hereof giuen publike testimonie in that booke, the which I dedica∣ted vnto your most worshipful brother M. Edward Bacon, the which is named Paratitla in Augustinum: yet after I had seene you,Paratitla in Augustinum. a branch and noble ympe of the same tree, together with your brother Edward, and had some tast and experience of you, there was added so great an augmentntion of my loue vnto your whole house, and so great was the increase of the reuerence and seruiceablenes the which I carie towards you all, that I my selfe did wonder at so great an addition, & think that
now there can be added no more thereunto. Therefore to the ende there might no lesse testimonie be extant of my good will towardes you, then your brother Edward, behold right worshipfull Syr, and in all respects most noble, I present vnto you a small gift, namely my Commentaries vpon the twelue small Prophets, as they call them, the which I was de∣sirous to publish and dedicate vnto your Name. For they containe such doctrine,The doctrine of the small Prophets ne∣cessarie for the Church of God at all times. the which as it hath bin alwaies necessarie for the Church of God, so is it especially at this time. For that age of the Church was most miserable and full of troubles, whereof in these small Prophets there is made mention: the enemies then more dangerous and noysome, then at any time else: the kings both of the Israelites, and also of the Iewes, were for the most part persecutors of the truth of God and do∣ctrine of the Prophets, or els mockers of the same: there was left in a manner no outward helpe and aide for the godly at the hands of men: nay of the Israelites themselues, and especially of the Iewes (who alone remained of those twelue tribes and seede of Israel, a people embracing the true knowledge of God) yet I say, of the Iewes themselues many did withstand the true religion, and preferred earthly goods before hea∣uenly: and had their eyes dazeled with the brightnes of the infidelian Monarchies, such as nowe is that of the Turks, and was then of the Assyrians and Babylonians: or beeing caried away with the sweetnes of this earthly peace, chose rather to serue the infidell Princes, then to follow the seruice of God. To conclude, in the ende it came to passe, that as the dogge can not be driuen from his fattie leather, no more would these Iewes afterward be drawne from their blasphemous and idola∣tricall, but yet for the time quiet and vnto them commodious cuntry of Babylon, albeit they were captiues there, nor could be drawne vnto that same promised land, the which was vnto them a token of the hea∣uenly inheritance. All which things, when haue they at any time hap∣pened more truly then at this time,The smal Pro∣phets do shew the iudge∣ments of God vpon the wic∣ked, and bles∣sings vpon the godly. vnto the true Church of God? And out of these bookes also may we notably learne, what iudgements of God did afterwards ensue, either vpon the enemies of the Church, or vpon the backe-sliders and forsakers of the worship of God, as well Israelites as Iewes, people, as Kings: and on the otherside, what blessings of God haue bin shewed towards such men as hath bin in deede godly, and fea∣ring God, which made lesse account of all that they had, and of them∣selues also, then of the glorie of God. What then can be more profitable then this doctrine for euery Christian, or more fit for this time? For albeit your countrey of England of all places of the world in a manner alone these many yeares,England. both through the singular goodnes of almigh∣tie
God, and also through the most wise counsails of Queene Elizabeth, haue remained quiet, and be to be tearmed truly happie: yet hath not it bin without her trubles also, or is without for the name of Christ. And looke what calamities you doe behold in your neighbour-brethren, the same also (of your loue towards your brethren) according vnto the pre∣cept of the Apostle, you doe esteeme and reckon as your owne. But to returne againe vnto our matter in hand, Ierome hath a very notable saying, That we Christians are borne for this end, that we should be made eternall, and therefore that despising the deceitfull promi∣ses of this world, and all the subtile baytes of the Deuill and the flesh, we should wholly consecrate and vow our selues vnto the true immor∣tall, and onely wise, blessed, rich, and almightie God, and his worshippe and will, which thing is especially taught in these books. Iudging ther∣fore this doctrine and these examples to concerne you chiefely, by rea∣son of the hope of the great good seruice to be done in the Common∣wealth, whereunto both God himselfe, by bestowing of innumerable gifts vpon you, doth seeme to cal you, and the which the dignitie of your house doth promise vnto you, I haue the more willingly dedicated these my Commentaries vnto you. For these shall instruct you both vnto true godlines, and also the gouernment of the Cōmonwealth, & shall frame & work you vnto al increase of vertue, the which at al times you are to labour for. And to be short, these shall draw you from euill counsails and examples vnto those that be good and godly. For you knowe that which Plato writeth, lib. 3. de Republ. That young men of good to∣wardnes and nature, are easily corrupted by euill men,Plato. and euill coun∣sails, when as they measuring others by their own disposition, doe thinke no harme or deceit to be in the counsails of others. And truly the more easily that you great and noble men doe liue, the more meete it is, that you should knowe the thinges that are godly and holy. Nowe that your house, that is, the house of the Bacons is most noble,The house of the Bacons. appeareth both by the English and French histories, in the which there is often made honourable mention of the same: and also by this, that euen yet nowe at this day there is remaining a most wealthie village in Normandie, as bigge as a great towne, called Baconvil, in French Bacceville, si∣tuated neere vnto Diepe a sea towne in France,Baconvil. the which keepeth still the memorie of your name together with the remnants of a most strong castle, and the which both the Frenchmen themselues, and all the in∣habitants, and the thing it selfe doth witnes and declare to be a mo∣nument of your most noble and honorable familie. As for this my poore and simple gift (right worshipfull) I doe most earnestly request, pray, and
beseech you with as willing and glad a minde to accept it, as with a lo∣uing and vnfained heart I doe giue it. And because that you doe loue me, as I haue alwaies vnderstoode by your selfe, see that you in like manner loue the holy doctrine herein conteined, both for it owne, and for my sake also. Fare you well. At Orthesium which is a towne in the cuntry of Bearne, vnder the mountains called Pyrenaei, neere vnto Spaine, where is an Vniersitie erected by the most courteous King of Navarre Henry the second. Calend of May, in the yeare of the last time 1585. Your W. most bounden Lamb. Danaeus, Professor of Diuinitie.
A TABLE OF THE CHIEFE FI∣gures of Rhetoricke mentioned in this Treatise. A Metaphor what it is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. Occupatio what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 12. Hypophora what it is, see Amos cap 5. ver. 3. Synecdoche what it is, see Amos cap. 5.21. Apostrophe what it is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 24. Hypotyposis what it is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12. Metonymia what it is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 1. Epiphonema what it is, see Ionas cap. 2. ver. 9. Mimesis what it is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18. Metalepsis, trassmutation, what it is, see Oseas cap. 6. v. 18. Katachresis what it is, see Oseas cap. 5. ver. 1. Prosopopaeia what it is, see Oseas cap. 6. v. 1. Auxesis or Increasing, see what it is, Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4. Parenthesis what it is, see Oseas cap. 8. ver. 2. Aposiopesis what it is, see Oseas cap. 8. ver. 10. Dialogismus what it is, see Micheas cap 6. ver. 6. Anthropopatheia what it is, see Micheas cap. 7. ver. 8. Periphrasis what it is, see Nahum cap. 2. ver. 7. Sarcasmos what it is, see Nahum cap. 3. ver. 14. Synathroismos what it is, see Sophon. cap. 1. ver. 15. Hyperbole what it is, see Habacuc cap. 2. ver. 11. Epimone what it is, see Zachar. cap. 1. ver. 4. Noema what it is, see Zachar. cap. 2. ver. 5. Allegoria what it is, see Zachar. 11. v. 2. Antonomasia what swit is, see Zach. 12. ver. 10.
FORE-NOTES BY the way of a preface, vpon the xii. small Prophets, for the better understanding of the same. CAP. I. Of the sundry names, by the which the Prophets have beene called. I Thinke I shall doe a thing worthy the travell, if (intending with the helpe of God to take in hand the exposition or laying open of the meaning of the twelve Prophets, which are called Small Prophets) of a notable argu∣ment or matter I shall make also a notable beginning: and shall first set downe as cer∣taine fore-notes, those things the which will bring light unto the whole discourse ensuing. And such they are as doe most especi∣ally appertaine unto the declaring of the office and order of the prophets, of the which albeit many have written many thinges most learnedly, chiefly Iohn Calvin in his fore-notes upon Isai,Calvin. Martyr. and Peter Martyr in his common places, the which are gathered together out of his workes: yet is there as I suppose, no law to the contrarie, but that I also may lay downe my shot as it were, for the common use and edifying of the Church, and now adde, if any thing of them be overpassed. For the which no man will blame me, especially when as I will now only deliver those things the which doe properly belong unto the manner of my purpose, Nay, to speake truly, are altogether requisite and necessarie ther∣unto. And of these things intonding a most briefe rather then large discourse, I will especially begin with this point,Prophets. Prophesie. Prophesying. Of the sun∣dry names or titles of Prophets. For these termes of Prophets, Pro∣phesie,
and Prophesying are founde not onely in Church-men or Church-writers: but also in prophane authours, both Greekes, as Plato his Phoedrus, Charmides, and other his workes: also in Aristotle his booke of the worlde: but also in Latine writers, as appeareth out of Festus Pompeius.Diviners. But M. Tullius calleth them every where Diviners: because of all men they come neerest un∣to the nature of God, and declare unto us his will and mind, be∣ing othervvise secret and hidden. But to the ende this whole discourse may be the more fitly and easily understood,Prophets have their name of Prophesie. first vvee must intreate of the worde Prophet it selfe, and afterwardes of the thing meant by the worde, and shewe what it is. Now the name or worde Prophesie is it whereof Prophetes are named, the which excell and are indued therewithall. The Hebrewes (to begin with them) call a Prophet Nabia,Nabia. Nebuah. and Prophecie Nebuah; because prophets are Messengers unto men of the answeres and decrees of God. For they receave the worde from God, the which after∣wardes they deliver unto others. Whereupon the word Nib sig∣nifying a speech,Nib. hath great affinitie with the worde Nabiah a prophet. Yet others had rather fetch it from the verb Boa, because that prophets doe foretell things that happen and come after∣wards to passe. Certes from whence soever the Hebrew word be derived or set, or with what worde soever it have affinitie or like∣nes, this with full consent and truly hath bin noted of the Hebrues, that the verb Naba, the which signifieth to prophesie, is wont to be formed in the passive voice Niphal, when as mention is made of the true prophets of God,The Hebrewes for the most part speaking of true and false prophets, use the verb signifying to prophesie, in sundry coniuga∣tions. because that word betokeneth that the same prophet was truly and indeed inspired by the spirite of God, and received from God and not from himselfe the prophe∣sie, the which he afterwards delivereth unto men. But when they speake of false prophets, they use the selfe same verb in the coniu∣gation Hithpael, because such prophets are not sent of God, but of themselves thrust forth themselves of their owne authority to prophesie. Furthermore, the signification of the word Prophet and Prophe∣sying,The large sig∣nification of the word prophet, & prophesying. is very large among the Hebricians. For it comprehendeth all those the which being moved with the spirit of God, either or∣dinarily or extraordinarily, either in prose or in verse doe set forth, tell, and declare the will of God, and the same either already knowen & written: or as yet hidden & unknown. So the Levites
that were Singers are called Prophets, as appeareth in the begin∣ning of the 1. Chron. 25. in these words:The finging Levites called prophets. So David and the captains of the armie separated for the ministery the sonnes of Asaph, & He∣man, & Ieduthun, who should prophesie with harpes, viols, & cymbals, &c. Yea moreover the false prophets, who although they lie,False prophets termed pro∣phets. yet professe that they will declare the will of God, are also tearmed Prophetes. Wherefore it commeth to passe, that Paul Titus 1.12.Epimenides. (speaking of Epimenides of Creta, a prophane man) calleth him a prophet, because he did lively set forth the disposition & maners of the men of Creta, and was a most ancient poet, as Cicero teach∣eth in his first booke of Divination. And thus because the signifi∣cation of a prophet and prophesying is most large; the wordes of Paul be these: One of themselves, even one of their owne prophets said, The Cretians are alwayes lyars, evill beastes, slow-bellies.The Sibyllae. To be short, both Lactantius and sundry others doe call the Sibyllae of the Heathen, Prophetisses.A prophet called a Seer. The same Hebrewes also doe call a pro∣phet Chozch, a Seer, because by the reuelation of God they doe foresee things to come, as in Samuel 1.9. vers. 19. Hee that is now called a Prophet, was in the old time called a Seer.An Angel, or Messenger. And vers. 19. And Samuel answered Saul and saide, I am the Seer. They call him also Maleah, that is to say, an Angell or Messenger, be∣cause he bringeth unto us the commandements of God. Haggai 1.13. Then spake Haggai the Lords Messenger in the Lords message unto the people, &c.The difference between an Angel and a prophet, accor∣ding unto some. Although notwithstanding some thinke that this is the difference betweene a Prophet and an Angell, that an Angell or Messenger bringeth unto us not onely the charge and commandement of another: but also often times the very words and speech of the commaunder: but the Prophets,The confutatiō of the former difference. as these men will have it, delivered in their owne wordes the comman∣dement, which they received from God. As if the selfe same spirite of God did not tell unto the Prophets the very wordes which they should use when as hee gave unto them the matter, the which they should declare, as Peter teacheth in his second Epistle chapt. 1. vers. 20, 21. So that ye first knowe this, that no Prophesie in the scripture is of any private motion. For the Pro∣phesie came not in the olde time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the holy ghost. And after this maner doe the Hebrewes call the prophets. Nowe the Greekes also doe terme them by sundry names.
For these words Prophêtes, Hupophêtes, Mantis, Mesîtes, do often signify all one thing, as Iul. Poll. l. 1. Onomast. doth teach. Although notwithstanding he seemeth to be Prophêtes who doeth foresee a thing to come:A difference between these words Prophê∣tes, and Hupo∣phêtes. but Hupophetes is he, who doth so far forth de∣clare a thing tolde him by God, as it is tolde unto him at severall seasons. Therefore he taketh the speech of another, the which he reporteth againe at the selfe same instant in which it is tolde him. Whereupon Homer Iliad. 16. calleth them Hupophetai, who onely doe openly recite the oracle, or answer, which they have received from an other. Mesites is a Messenger betweene partie and partie,Mesites. such a one as Moses was, as hee witnesseth of him∣selfe, Deut. 5. vers. 3. when he saith, At that time I stoode beweene the Lord and you, to declare unto you the word of the Lord: for ye were afraid at the sight of the fire, and went not up into the mount, &c. And in the Galatians chap. 3. ver. 19, 20. The law was ordeined by Angels in the hand of a Mediator. Now a Mediator is not a Me∣diator of one, &c. Hee is also called an Angel. Likewise the selfe same (to wit, Prophetes) are called Manteis, that is to say, Vates, and Chresmodoi,Other Greeke names whereby prophets are called. Chresmologoi, Chresmodotai, that is, Pronouncers and tellers of oracles, as Iulius Pollux writeth. But the Prophets of God are no where in the holy scripture called manteis & Chres∣mologoi, of which names I will speake hereafter. Moreover the Latine writers also doe call Prophets by sundry names.The Latines call prophets by sundry names also. Isidorus lib. 7. Etymolog. chap. of Prophets writeth thus: Whome the Gentiles call Vates, or Sooth sayers, these our men call Prophets, because a farre off they doe tell and foreshew the trueth of things to come. Therefore these wordes Prophetae and Ʋates are with the Latines all one.Festus Pomp. Festus Pompeius a most diligent author and observer of the Latine tongue writeth thus: Iulius in Adra∣sto calleth prophets, praelates of Churches, and Interpreters of oracles. The wordes of Iulius Caesar in Adrasto, as Iosephus Scaliger the light of our age hath restored them, are these, Whom, the Pro∣phets, which devoutly purifie the holy sacrifices, doe commaund to co∣ver their heads with greene laurell. Now this C. Iulius Caesar was before the time of Cicero, whereby appeareth that the worde Prophets was in use among the olde Latines and profane writers.Prophets called Vates. The same are called Vates, whereof commeth the verbe vaticina∣ri,Varros deriva∣tion of Vates, and aticinari. to Prophesie: although notwithstanding M. Varro doe derive the signification of the worde Vates from one thing, and Vati∣cinor from an other. Vates, saieth hee libr. 6. de Lingua Latina,
they called the old poets à versibus viandis; of binding of verses. For in them they did binde wordes unto certaine lawes and rules: where∣upon the verses and oration of Poets is saide to be bounde. But the verbe vaticinari (as hee writeth in the fifth of the same worke) is so tearmed, because they which prophesie, doe it with a di∣straughted minde. This is the opinion of Varro. For (as Tullie teacheth lib. 1. De Divinatione) the Prophets which were know∣en unto profane men did give foorth their oracles beeing stirred up with madnesse, or as it were, distraughtnesse. But I woulde say that these tearmes vates and vaticinari are derived of all one word, and that a greeke word, namely Mantis.Danaeus his de∣rivation of the former wordes. For it was an easie matter of the Greeke worde mantis to make vatis: and of the worde vatis to make the verbe vaticinor, to prophesie. Fur∣thermore they are called of the same profane authours, the Inter∣preters and Messengers of the goddes: and every where of M. Cicero Diviners, of whome afterwardes they make many sortes: as, Diviners by the entralles of beastes, Bird-prophets, Dreamers, oracle-tellers. But the Prophets of God are never called Diviners by the Latine Fathers and Ecclesiasticall or Church-writers,The prophets of God never cal∣led Diviners. be∣cause that name according unto the use and signification of the Latine tongue is proper unto profane and devilish divination. But these sundry sortes of divining are notably set foorth by Gas∣par Peucer the best learned of all the Germanes; if any man haue leysure and a minde to reade such things. And by so many names is one and the selfe same thing called. And now let us see what that is. CAP. II. What Prophesie generally is? WE must first shewe what Prophesie generally is, and afterwardes come unto that signification thereof, the which is proper unto the Pro∣phets of God,From whence these wordes prophesie, and prophet are derived. and is reteined and used of the godly in the expounding of holy matters on∣ly. When as Prophesie hath his name of the worde Prophet: and the same worde is derived and taken from the Greeke nowne Prophêtes: my when as this worde Prophêtes it selfe is derived from the Greeke verbe Pro∣phêmi
and prophanai, it may easily be gathered of the nature and signification of the worde, that Prophesie generally, is every kind of foretelling and foreshwing of things to come extraordina∣rily,What prophe∣sie generally is. from whence soever hee have it, which a farre off and before they come to passe doeth foretell that those things which are to come, shall come to passe. Therefore after what maner soever he doe foretell the same, whether he be well in his wit or out of his wit, as Lactantius speaketh in his first booke, that is, be taken with madnesse when hee pronounceth or uttereth them: or whether hee put them in writing and in bookes, or be content onely with the sound of wordes, that is, by mouth to speake them: or finally, whether a man foretell things to come onely either by some gesture, or beckening, or deed, or a∣ny externall meane, he is a Prophet, the worde being taken ge∣nerally. For by divers vvayes and by divers things did those of olde time, prophane men especially foretell things to come: as Pausanias in his sixth booke,Pausanias. which is the second of his Elia∣corum, and libr. 9. doeth shewe. Finally, whosoever doe utter any foretelling voice, as Pollux speaketh, they generally may be named Prophets. Plato in Charmide seemeth to make a difference betweene those that are indeede Fore-shevvers, whome hee calleth Prophets,Plato. and those which for ostentation or vaine glories sake doc fore-tell things to come, vvhome hee calleth Arrogants: yet in the same place hee generally defi∣neth foretelling to be a knovvledge of things to come: and a Foreteller to be one which knoweth all things to come: whom hee doth sever from him which knoweth things past and things present, who may be tearmed onely a VVise-man, or a man of a good memorie or remembrance, and not a Prophet and Foreteller. Of all vvhich ensueth the thing, that vve vvoulde have, that prophesie generally, is an extraordinarie knovvledge and foretelling of things to come, by whomsoever the same is done, and after vvhat manner soever it be declared and done. Novve I haue added this vvorde Extraordinarie,Extraordinarie foretelling. because that often times thinges to come may be fore-tolde by ordinarie and naturall causes, For as Augustine teacheth lib. 4. Trinitat. cap. 7.Phisitions. Phisitions doe also observe certaine Prognosticates or fore-tokens in diseases, the vvhich doe arise of accidentes, vvhereby they doe foretell what shall be the estate of the sicke partie, vvhome Cicero lib. 1. de Diviuat. calleth Wise∣men,
not Diviners, knovvers of naturall causes, not Prophets. So Marriners doe knovve certaine signes and tokens of the tempest to come in the sea, and doe likewise foresee the same:Marriners. to be shorte, Christ himselfe when as Matth. 16. he saith unto the Scribes and Pharisees, When it is evening,Christ. ye say fayre wea∣ther: for the skie is redde, &c. teacheth, that fayre weather or foule may be foretolde by the face of the skie or ayre. But be∣cause these things are knowen as effectes lying in their cau∣ses, and the same naturall, they doe not at all appertaine unto prophesie and foretellings. For to prophesie or foretell, is to knovve and foreshewe things to come without their naturall causes, nay without any their causes at all. For the things that are gathered of their causes, the same are not properly said to be divined or foretolde: But they are foreshewed by their cau∣ses, wherein in possibilitie they are included, as the partes of a body that shall be afterwardes, doe lie in the seed. CAP. III. How diverse and sundry sortes there are of prophesie generally taken. MOreover there are divers sortes of pro∣phesie, vvhen as it is thus generally ta∣ken. But yet that we wade not infinite∣ly without end, there may a threefolde course be taken, by meanes whereof we may briefly comprehend all those sorts the which in a manner are innumerable or without number.The many sorts of prophesies may be brought unto three kindes. For these prophets may be distinguished or marked out one from another either in regarde of the matter which they han∣die: or of the efficient cause, and that which inspireth these kindes of Prophetes: or of the evente or issue, which their predictions or fore-tellings doe shevve, and obteine. Diverse men haue made diverse and sundry kindes of divination, some more, and some fevver. Plato in Phoedro seemeth general∣lie or in all to have made but two sortes and kindes thereof:Sortes of pro∣phesie according unto Plato. namely, the one called Mantiken or soothsaying (which is, when as
any body foretelleth things to come by the inspiring of some di∣vine power, beeing as it were distraughted, and besides him∣selfe the other Oionistiken, or appertaining unto birdes, the which by the flying of birdes and other shewe-tokens thereunto belonging doeth search out thinges that afterwardes shall come to passe. Cicero in like manner lib. 1. De Divinitat. according unto the opinion of the Stoicke philosophers rehearseth two kindes of Prophesie, but diverse from them of Plato. I there∣foe (saith hee) doe holde with those which have made two kindes of divination: the one artificiall, the other voide of arte. For there is a certaine arte in those the which by coniecturing doe finde out nevve things, and have learned old things by observation. Of which sort is all kinde of foretelling of things by the observation and marking of the flying of birdes. But those are voide of arte the which foretell things to come not by observing and marking signes and tokens with reason and coniecture, but by a certaine concitation or trouble of the minde: or some wandering and free motion; the which falleth out also unto dreamers, and sometimes unto those the vvhich through mad∣nesse foretell things to come. Of which sorte those oracles are to be accounted, the which are uttered by a divine motion and inspira∣tion. And thus much Cicero. Others doe make three especiall kindes according unto the manner of revelation.Beda. Anselmus, or Beda (for those commen∣taries are Bedaes) make three sortes of them, according unto the thinges which are foretolde by these prophets, and accor∣ding unto the issue and event, or falling out of them. Isidorus reckoneth up seven sortes of them.Isidorus. The Schoole∣men. The Schoolemen make mention onely of five. To be shorte, it were an infinite or end∣lesse thing to recken up the opinions of everie severall writer in this behalfe. But let us proceede or goe forwarde with that threefolde division of Prophesie generally taken, the which wee have set downe before. Prophetes then doe differ one from another in regarde of the argument or matter which they handle.Difference of prophets accor∣ding unto the matter which they hande. Prophets of God. For some of them set before them, as the true scope and marke of their foretel∣lings, the Lawe of God, and the promises of the Messias, or the Christ the redeemer of the worlde, the which was to come into the worlde: and these are called Prophets of God, and true Prophets. Others doe onely foretell thinges belonging unto men, and frame them-selves unto the serving of their
will and curiositie, whilst they doe denounce or declare the events or issues of warres, publique or priuate calamities or miseries and troubles, of the which they are demaunded: these are called pro∣phets of the Gentiles and Diviners. Of the first sort were Isaias,Prophets of the Gentiles. Ieremias, Oseas, and the rest of the Prophets of God, both of the old and new Testament. Of the second sort were Epimenides of Creta, Bacchis, Boccatius, the Sibyllae, and those which gave out o∣racles in the woode Dodôna, at Delphis in the denne of Coricium, and in other prophesying places, the which were every where a∣mong the Heathen. And this is one diuision of prophecie and di∣vination taken generally; according vnto which, some are Pro∣phets of God, and other some may be called prophets of men. There is another division taken from the efficient cause of the said diuination or prophesie, the which is three fold; namely,Another di∣vision of prophesie. the efficient cause properly: the instrumentall cause: the manner of revelation and action. Nowe the efficient cause of divination or prophesie, ought properly to be said to be thus; that is to say, the efficient cause is either God, or satan, or the wicked spirit, and the devill. For those which were the Prophets of God, and are so cal∣led, these beeing truly mooved and taught by the spirit of God,The prophets of God led by the spirit of God. did speake and foretell things to come, as Peter the apostle shew∣eth in his latter epistle, chap. 1.21. saying, For prophesie came not in old time by the will of man, but holy men of God spake as they were mo∣ved by the holy Ghost. But those prophets which did foretell things belonging vnto men, and applied themselves vnto the curiositie and vanitie of men, or which nowe at this day frame themselves thereunto: these doe prophesie and foretell things to come,The prophets of men, inspired by the devill. being led with the inspiration of wicked spirits or devils, as appeareth out of the first booke of Kings, chap. 22.21, 22. where the wicked spirit saith, I will entise Achab. And the Lord said vnto him, Where∣with? And he said, I will goe forth, and be a false spirit in the mouth of all his prophets, &c. And thus are Prophets devided by the effi∣cient cause. now the instrumentall cause of prophesyings was manifold.The instrumen tall cause of prophesyings.And of divine prophesyings it was of three sorts; vision, speaking, dreaming, as in the booke of Num. chap. 12.6. where the Lorde saith, Heare my words, If there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be knowne vnto him by a vision, and wil speake vnto him by dreame, &c. But the instrumentall cause of divelish prophesies was infi∣nite, or in a manner without number. For there was almost no
kind of things the which the devill in times past did not abuse to deceive men withall, and to establish that his diuination, or pro∣phesying. For he used both birdes, and beastes, and the elements themselves,Devilish prophe¦sying. as heaven, the starres, the aire, the earth, water, fire, (from whence come these names, Iudiciarie astrologie, Aeromanci, foretelling by the aire:Astrologie. Aeromancie. Geomancie. Hydromancie. Pyromancie. Geomancie, foretelling by the earth, Hydro∣mancie, foretelling by water, Pyromancie, foretelling by fire) yea and the chippe-axe also (which is a base instrument or toole of Carpenters ordeined to smooth wood withall) and springs, and hearbes, and lottes, and the buckle bones, and the living, and the dead, & briefly, what not? The devil therfore used all these things, and set them abroad, as the thing it selfe, & matter from whence they shoulde fetch their Prophesying and fore-telling of things to come, when as not withstanding they were but only instruments. And therefore in this regard of prophesyings, the kinds thereof are in a maner infinite or without number, as M. Agrippa, and Gas∣parus Peucerus doe teach. Moreover according unto the manner of action or doing, and revelation there are also sundry fortes of prophesying, but chiefly two:Two sortes of prophesying ac∣cording unto the maner of doing, and reve∣lation. namely madnesse, or as it were a kinde of distraughtnesse, or a quiet and stayed mind of men that foretell things to come. For all the oracles or answeres of Apollo, and of Delphos were never given forth by the prophet of Apollo, but that he was first taken with a furie and madnesse of minde: the which Ʋirgil libr. 6. Aeead. teacheth to haue happened unto the Sibyllae. Therefore this kinde of prophesying was indeed altogether madding, and utterly devilish. But others, as for example, the prophets of God with a quiet heart and stayed minde did foretell things to come: because God did worke in them, and did mildly reveale his will unto them, whom he now will, and then also would have of all men to be heard with great attention or heedefulnesse and reve∣rence of minde, not as madde persons, but as his preachers, and most wise messengers and godly men. And that God thus de∣clared his will the which he would have with heedfulnesse and reverence to be heard of men, appeareth Zach. 1. ver. 6. where the Lorde thus speaketh:Testimonies shewing that the Lord him∣selfe declared his will by his prophets. Did not my wordses and my statutes, which I commaunded by my servants the Prophets take hold of your fathers? And in Hose a chap. 6. vers. 5. Therefore have I cut downe by the pro∣phets: I have slaine them by the wordes of my mouth: and thy iudge∣ments were as the light that goeth forth. Likewise Ierem.25.3. From
the thirteenth yeere of Iosiah the sonne of Amon king of Iuda, even un∣to this day (that is, the 23. yere) the word of the Lord hath come un∣to me, and I have spoken unto you rising earely, and speaking, but yee would not heare. & 2. King. 17.13. Notwithstanding the Lord testi∣fied unto Israel, and to Iudah by all the prophets, and all the Seers, say∣ing, &c. But how many sorts there are of true and godly prophe∣sie, according unto the manner of revelation, the which was made by God, shall be shewed afterwards in his due place. A third diffe∣rence of pro∣phesie. Finally the third difference of divination or prophesie general∣ly taken, is set from the event or falling out of things foretold. For some of them doe alwaies so come to passe, & in every respect so, as they have bin foretold, the which is to be termed a tru prophe∣sie. As for other prophesies, they are either not at all fulfilled, or least wise not in such sort, nor after such maner, as they haue bin foretolde, the which is called a false prophesie. Therefore of pro∣phets some are called true, some false: some casie & plaine, others darke and doubtfull, and deceivers, which do utter nothing plain∣ly, and understandably, such a one as was Apollo, that is to say,Apollo the devil of Delphos. the devill & Satan, the matter of profane prophets, the which for the darknesse of his answers, was of the heathen themselves accoun∣ted darke and doubtfull, some of whose answers full of deceit are these among the rest, King Craesus entring to the citie Halys,This might as well be mens of his owne riches as of theirs of Halys. shall overthrow great abundance of riches: as Cicero doth translate it. Againe, I say thee Pyrrhus the Romanes may overcome, which might be understood, that the Romanes were as likely to give Pyrrhus the overrhrow, as Pyrrhus them. Some also are called deceiving prophets, or lying prophets, of whom hereafter, for that, albeit they do many times tell the truth, yet they do often tell lies & are not sent of God. Therefore are they deceivers, such as under the gospell are the prophets of Antichrist, of whom Paul 2.Proofes of scri∣pture that An∣tichrist and his prophets shal be false prophets and deceivers. Thess. 2.9. saith, that his comming is by the working of Satan, with all power & signes, & lying wonders, & in all deceiveablenes of unrighte∣ousnes among them that perish, &c. And in the Revel. chap. 20. v. 10. it is said that the beast and the false prophets shall be tormented day & night for evermore in a lake of fire & brimstone. And Peter in his 2. epist. cap. 2. v. 1. affirmeth, that there were false prophets also among the people, even as there shall be (saith he) false teachers among you, which privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord, that hath bought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. In the old testament those which withstood the true prophets are
called false and lying prophets, of the which there are these nota∣ble examples. 1. King. cap. 22. of the false prophets that deceived king Achab, and Amos 7. of Amasias the priest of Bethel. Likewise Ierem. 28. of Hananiah the false prophet, that withstoode Ieremie. And thus much of prophesie generally. CHAP. 4. Of the signification of this word prophesie, as it is vsed in the holy Scriptures. OF all those things which have beene said be∣fore may easily nowe bee gathered, what is that signification of the wordes prophesie and Prophet, whereof there is vse in the holy scrip∣tures. And that is thus, namely that in the word of God he is properly called a Prophet,A description of a prophet out of the word of God. which is sent of God, both to declare his law, and especially also to rehearse and confirme vnto the Church, the promises of Christ or of the Messias the alone and onely Me∣diatour of the worlde, which was to come. He therefore for this cause, doth foretell vnto the Church things to come, and revealed or opened vnto him of God, both as well to terrifie or feare the same from sinne: and also to comfort it beeing afflicted or troub∣led, and to stay it vp with the hope of peace and reconciliation or favour with God, made and procured by the same Messias Ie∣sus Christ. This definition may seeme peradventure somewhat long, yet is it not withstanding most true. For it comprehended the whole nature of a true prophet, and of true prophesie. And first of all in this same definition,Two endes of true prophesie. 1. The prophets were to declare and expounde the law of God delivered by Moses. is declared the end of true prophesie, the which doubtles is two-fold. For the Prophets doe both bring the exposition of the law of God delivered by Moses, whereup∣on is this saying of the Prophet, Esa. chap. 8.20. To the law, and to the testimonie. And Malach. 4.4. Remember the lawe of Moses my servant, which I commanded vnto him in Horeb for all Israel with the statutes and iudgements:2. To expounde the promises of the Messias. and also they did call to remembrance of the Church of God, and did expound and confirme those pro∣mises of God concerning Christ, the which was then to be sent in the world. Whereupon Christ by Paul Rom. 10.4. is said to be the end of the law, and so consequently of the prophets, who as we have saide,Christ the foun∣dation of the Apostles and Prophets. were alwaies the interpreters and expounders of the lawe. And therefore is Christ him selfe called the foundation, or marke that the prophets ayme at, as also doe the Apostles, as Paul
witnesseth vnto the Eph. 2.20. where he saith, Ye are built vpon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Iesus Christ him selfe be∣ing the chiefe corner stone. And 1. Cor. 3.11. For other foundation can no man lay, then that which is laide, which is Jesus Christ. Like∣wise Augustine lib. 12. contra Faustum Manich, cap. 1. and the Prophets by Ambrose lib. 2. de poenitent, cap. 7. are saide to be the mouth of Christ. After what mā∣ner the prophets expound the law of God, and promises of Christ.Secondly, in that our definition is shewed the manner of ex∣pounding the law of God, and promises of Christ by the prophets; namely, in that they foretel vnto the said Church things to come. For they doe very plainly declare, what iudgements of God shall come both vpon the Church it selfe, and also vpon other nations and people of the world, because of their contempt or despising of the doctrine conteined in the same lawe of God, according vnto the revelation made vnto them by God. Hereof commeth it to passe, that the bookes of the Prophets are full of threatnings,The prophets full of threat∣nings. and of the feareful wrath of God prepared and readie against the world, as appeareth in Esa. chap. 13. ver. 17, 18. and in other pla∣ces. In Ierem. chap. 25. vers. 44, 47. and in other places. Amos 1. Zach. 6.7. and in other places: and so in the rest of the prophets also. And Paul Rom, 1. 8. saith, that the wrath of God was made ma∣nifest from heaven against all vngodlines. That which at all times by the Prophets of God especially hath beene done. Further, what thinges the promised Messias should both suffer for vs in this world, and with howe great glorie he should afterwardes be crowned, and howe great benefits he should bestow vpon vs, the selfe same Prophets of God have clearely foretold, because that they did plainly confirme the promises of the Messias which was to come. And hereunto doth Peter in his first epistle chap. 1.10, 11, 12. evidently beare record, writing after this manner, Of the which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched, which pro∣phesied of the grace that should come vnto you, searching when or what time the spirite which testified before of Christ which was in them, should declare the sufferings that should come vnto Christ, and the g∣rie that should followe. Ʋnto whome it was revealed, that not vnto themselves, but vnto vs they should minister the things that are nowe shewed vnto you by them which have preached vnto yon the Gospell by the holy Ghost sent downe from heaven,The bookes of the prophets ful of excellent cō∣forts. the which things the Angels desire to behold. Reade more of the sufferings and glorie of Christ, and of the benefites which hereby doe come vnto vs, Esa. 53.
Psal. 22. Hereof it commeth to passe, that the same books of the Prophets are stored and full of most excellent comforts,The bookes of the prophets full of excellent comforts. be∣cause they did shew that God was appeased with his Church, by and for the Messias even then the redeemer & mediatour of the same: nay moreover, according unto the revelation made unto them from God, they did foretell the benefites both earthly and spirituall, the which should befall unto the Church to come through the same good will and peace of God towards his in Christ. That which by the reading of the prophets themselves may easily appeare to every one. Here of is that saying of Paul Rom. 15.4. The things that are written, the same doe appertaine to our comfort, that is, unto the Church that should be after them. Now of these things is concluded, that the selfe same par∣ties, the which did both expound the law of God, and shew the Messias that was to come, for the confirmation of both this their doctrine, did foretell things to come by there ve∣lation of God, of the which foretelling, as the more won∣derful part of their office they are called prophets, that is, fore∣tellers of things to come:The office of the Levites and Priests ordina∣rie. & not only interpreters, expositours, ma∣sters, or teachers of the law. For that expounding of the law the which might and ought to be made without the foretelling of things to come, by the comparing or laying of things to∣gether which are like or dislike, by the proper signification of the words, or motion of God, belonged no doubt to the Levites & Priestes, the which every Sabbath did teach the same law of God in the Synagogues of the Iewes, as it is in Malach. 2.7. where he saith, that the priests lippes should preserve knowledge, and that they should seeke the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hostes. And of their ordinarie expounding of the law every sabbath, there is testimony Act. 15.21. where Iames witnesseth, that Moses of old time hath in every citie them that preach him, seeing he is read in the synagogues every Sabbath day. But this was an ordinary calling in the Church under the old testament like as now under the Gos∣pell the office of the pastors in teaching the same Church is perpetuall and ordinary. But the office of the prophets was extraordinarie.The office of the Prophets extra∣ordinarie. For no man without the extraordinary reve∣lation of God either then, or at any time was able to fore∣know and foreshew the things to come, which they foretold.
Therefore the Levites in the Synagogues did not foretell any such certen things peculiarly, to come to passe afterwardes. Wherfore the prophets were extraordinarily called of God, as contrary unto the usuall manner of the Levites, Scribes, and Priests, & beyond their capacity or understanding they did teach the people of God. And God did set them out with such notes and spirituall ornaments, that any man were he never so contentious or given to striving, might easily be sure of their calling, albeit extraordinarie, although many times they did neither raise up the dead, nor heale diseases, nor shew any other miracles, when as they used that their mini∣sterie, and came into the open face of the Church. For God did sufficientlie commend them both by the truth & maiesty of his doctrine, and also by the extraordinarie knowledge of his divine or heavenly will,Notes where∣with God com∣mended his prophets. by the which they were clearly known, even of the most way ward & peevish, to excell above the capacity or understanding of the rest of the godly, the which taught others also. These delivering the wil of God & heavenly doctrine sound & pure, peaking nothing to please men, were the servants of God and not of men. For albeit they gave reverence unto Magistrates and higher powers, & did not despise them (as the whole popish Clergie at this day doth, as Peter 2. Epist. cap. 2. v. 10. complaineth of some that walke after the flesh, in the lust of uncleannesse, and despise the go∣vernment, which are presumptuous, and stand in their owne conceit, & feare not to speake evill of them that are indigintie) yet did they not flatter them, or winke at the vices of Magistrates and spare them. Nay they did sharply and with great boldnesse, that is to say, liberty of minde reproove all Magistrates, as you may read, Isa. 1. Amos 7. and in Ieremie every where. Wher∣of grew this saying, That the prophets of God were to be beleeved, the which also is now true, as Augustine teacheth libr. 12. contra Faustum Manich. libr. 4. Trinitat. cap. 17. And in the Sentences gathered out of August. Sentent. 214. For as Am∣brose upon the epistle of Paul to Titus teacheth, and that verie well, they could not be deceived, as being such as did speake as they were led of the spirit of God. Now the Prophets which do foretell things to come not being called of God, or promise any thing unto the Church,Prophets not called of God by what names they are termed.
or doe teach in the same without any lawfull calling: also those which deliver false things, that is, maintaine and defend false do∣ctrine: these are called lying prophets, or false prophets and wicked prophets.How the Scrip∣ture speaketh of prophets not sent of God. Hosea 9.7. The Prophet is a foole, the spiritual man is madde for the multitude of thine iniquities. Ier. 23.25. I haue heard what the prophets said, that prophesie lyes in my name, saying, I haue drea∣med, I haue dreamed. Ezech. 13.3. Thus saith the Lord God, ƲƲo vnto the foolish Prophets, that follow their owne spirit, and haue seene nothing. Such are those which overthrow & corrupt the doctrine of Christ, either in part, or in whole, as the heretikes of whome Peterepist. 2. chap. 2.1. speaketh, saying: But there were false pro∣phets also among the people, euen in there shalbe false teachers among you: which priuily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that hath bought them, and bring vpon themselves swift damna∣tion. Their doctrine by Paul is called a doctrine of devils. 1. Tim. 4. Nowe the spirite speaketh evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall give heede vnto spirites of error, and doctrines of devils. Iames chap. 3.15. calleth it earthly wisedome, saying, This wisdome descendeth not from above, but is earthie, sen∣suall, and develish. CHAP. 5. Of the dubble signification of the word prophesie, as it is vsed in the holy Scriptures. 1. Prophesie ta∣ken for expoun∣ding of the scriptures.ACcording vnto the former definition of prophesie, wherof there is vse in the church▪ there hath begun to be a double significa∣tion of this worde, to wit, the one which betokeneth the onely expounding of the word of God comprehended in writing without any fore-shewing or fore-telling of things to come:2. For foretel∣ling of things to come. the other, which is re∣ferred vnto the fore-telling of things to come. Therefore both they which onely doe expound and teach the written worde o God truely and syncerely or soundly, and doe knowe nothing by extraordinarie revelation, nor declare any thing to come, are na∣med Prophets notwithstanding: and those likewise are called Pro∣phets, the which according vnto the peculiar and extraordinari
reuelation which they haue from God, doe foretell things decre∣ed by God,The office of the old Pro¦phets two-fold. because this was the double office of the olde Pro∣phets as we haue shewed, namely to expound diligently and truly the law of God written and deliuered by Moses; and to fore∣tell things to come by the inspiration of the holy Ghost. Both these significations of the word Prophesie, and the same differing the one from the other, is found as well in the old Testament,The word Pro∣phet in the olde testament taken for an expounder of the worde of God. as in the newe. And in the old Testament 1. Sam. ver. 20. we reade thus: And Saul sent messengers to take Dauid, and when they sawe a companie of Prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed ouer them, the spirit of God fell vpon the messengers of Saul, and they also prophesied. And 2. King. chap. 4. ver. 38. Afterward Elisha returned to Gilgal, and a famine was in the lande, and the children of the Prophets dwelt with him. Also Isai, chap. 8. ver. 18. Beholde, I and the children whome the Lord hath giuen me, an as signes and as wonders in Israel, by the Lord of hosts which dwelleth in mount Sion. In these and the like places the word Prophet, in my iudgement for him which expoundeth the law or God written, with a more ma∣jestie and exactnes, then others can and not for him also, the which doth foretell certaine things to come. For I can not thinke that all those,Why some in the scripture are called the sonnes and dis∣ciples of the Prophets. which in the olde Testament are called the sonnes and disciples of the Prophets, had also an extraordinarie reuelation from God of thinges to come: but I iudge them so to be called, because they applied themselues onely vnto the true vnderstan∣ding, and sound deliuering of the word of God written, and dili∣gently framed themselues thereunto Therefore they kept the pu∣ritie of the word of God, and the doctrine from God deliuered by Moses and the other Prophets, vncorrupt and sound. And among them there were some, which were as it were them masters of the others, because that in the iudgement of all▪ they did excell the rest, and did appeare to be more furnished with the gifts of God, that they might be masters vnto the rest, as I said before. Nowe these receiued from God the reuelation of things to come, the which accordingly as they were commāded by the spirit of God, they did either onely deliuer ouer as it were by hand vnto those their disciples to be preserued and kept, or else they did openly de∣clare and vtter them vnto all the people.Elizeus. So Elizeus among the Prophets of his time, was a master of the rest, and one, who him∣selfe did know thins to come, but the rest which were called the sonnes or children of the Prophets, vnder him as their master, did
wholly attend both vpon the exercise of true godlines, and also vnto the learning and retaining of sound doctrine. And this ap∣peareth both out of 2. King. chap. 4. and the 6. and also chap. 9. of the same booke, ver. 1. Where Elisha the Prophet called one of the children of the Prophets, and saide vnto him, Gird thy loynes, and take this boxe of oyle in thine hand, and get thee to Ramoh Gilead. For the same Prophet him selfe, which annointed Iehu king, did not knowe that it should come to passe, before it was told him by Elizeus. The word Pro∣phet in the old testament takē for him that foretelleth things to come.This word Prophet in the old Testament is taken for him al∣so, the which foretelleth things to come by the spirit of God tea∣ching him extraordinarily, and that so often, that I neede not stay any longer in citing testimonies for proofe of this matter, and sig∣nification of the worde. For so is the same worde taken, where I∣saias, Ieremias, Ezechiel, Moses, and these twelue small Prophets, are called Prophets. And this is the proofe of the double significa∣tion of this word Prophet out of the old testament. The same is in like manner confirmed out of the new testament. For Paul in the whole 14 chap. of the 1. Cor. and also Rom. 12. ver. 6. (Whether we haue prophesie,The word Pro∣phet in the new eament, for an expounder of the scripture. let vs prophesie,) doth take the word Prophet and prophesying for the onely expounding of the holy Scripture: but in the same 1. epistle to the Cor. cap. 12 ver. 10. he vseth the word prophesie for the foretelling of thinges to come, as it is also done of Luke Act. 11. ver. 27, 28.For one that foretelleth things to come. In those daies also came Prophets from Ie∣rusalem vnto Antiochia. And there stoode vp one of them named A∣gabus, and signified by the spirit, that there should be great famine tho∣rough out all the worlde, which also came to passe vnder Claudius Cae∣sar. And againe Act. 21. ver. 10.11. And as we tarred there many daies, there came a certaine Prophet from Iudea, named Agabus. And when he was come vnto vs, he tooke Pauls girdle and bound his owne hands and feete, and saide, Thus saith the holy Ghost: so shall the Iewes at Ierusalem binde the man that oweth this girdle, and shall deliuer him into the handes of the Gentiles. But why stande I any longer vpon a thing that euery diuine knoweth very well?
CAP. 6. Of Prophesie, which is the expounding of holy Scripture, and how it differeth from the gift of tongues. WHereas we haue set downe a double signifi∣cation of godly prophesie, we must first speake briefly of the former, and then afterwards of the latter. The first signification then of this word prophesie, betokeneth, as I haue said be∣fore, the declaring and expounding of the holy Scripture made in the mother tongue, and therefore comprehendeth what soeuer appertaineth vnto the publike office of teaching in the Church. For so doth Paul gene∣rally deuide all the callings in the Church into prophesie, and offie, that is to say, into the office of teaching and of instructing, Rom. 12. ver. 6, 7. saying: Whether we haue prophesie, let vs prophesie ac∣cording vnto the proportion of faith: or an office,Paul his defini∣tion of prophe∣sie, taken for expounding of the word. let vs watte on the of∣fice: vnder the name of prophesie comprehending all offices in the Church, which deliuer sound doctrine; and vnder the name of office, all other lawfull and ecclesiasticall or Church callings. Whereby without all doubt appeareth, that prophesie taken in is signification is one certen chiefe part of the whole ministerie of the Church, the which Paul 1. Cor. chap. 14. ver. 5. doth briefly thus define: He that prophesieth, speaketh vnto men to edifying, and to exhortation, and to comfort. This Prophesie therefore, is a sound speaking vnto men of the worde of God written, by one that is lawfully called vnto the office of teaching in the Church; or it is expounding of sound doctrine appertaining vnto the comfort, exhortation, and edifying of the Church. Whereby appeareth, that this prophesie in his force and signification doth comprehend what so euer the said Paul teacheth of the fruit of sound doctrine, and holy scripture expounded 2. Tim. 3. ver. 16. Which is giuen by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, &c. And Rom. 15. ver. 4. where he affirmeth, that whatsoeuer things are written afore time, are written for our learning that we, through patience, and comfort of the scrip∣tures, might haue hope: the which fruit consisteth in this, that the Church of God may be instructed, corrected, and finally receiue comfort.
Prophesie dif∣fereth farre frō the git of tongues. Now this prophesie differeth farre and wide from the gift of tongues, as Paul at large declareth 1. Cor. 14. and as out of him af∣terwardes both Ambrose and Chrysostome, and also Anselme haue taught. But of these two points may the difference of them both within themselues be easily perceiued.1 Prophesie onely seth the mo∣ther tongue. The one, for that this prophesie onely vseth the mother tongue. For when as it doth all thinges vnto the edifying of the whole congregation of the Church in euery citie, and Church, it onley vseth that language and tongue, the which is knowne vnto that whole Church, and common sort of those men. Therefore vnto the Frenchmen it speaketh onely French, vnto the Spaniards, spanish, & not French or Dutch or Latine, because that the same tongue, namely the French, Dutch, or Latine, is not the Spanish tongue. But he, which hath the gift of tongues, speaketh with diuers tongues euen in e∣uery Church. For albeit that the godly, and nun fearing God, who had receiued this gift from God, did turne it vnto the edi∣fying of the Church, and nor vnto their owne of oftentation or vaine glorie: yet if they had vsed but one tongue onely, such a gift of God should not haue beene knowne to be in them, and the selfe same persons should not haue beene, iudged to haue the gift of tongues. Whereof it came to passe, that for the shewing forth of the glorie of God vnto all men, and his goodnes vnto his Church, these kinde of men did vse diuerse tongues euen in the assembly of the Church, either in expounding the publike worde of God; or also in supplication and praier. Therefore they are said of Paul not so much to speake vnto men (of euery particular person wher∣of they could not be vnderstood) as to speake vnto God him selfe 1. Cor. 14 ver. 2. where he saith: For he that speaketh a strange tongue, speaketh not vnto men, but vnto God: for no man health him: howbeit, the spirit he speaketh secret thinges. Out of which there appeareth a great difference betweene prophesie and the gift of tongues. 2 Prophesie is of greater vse in the Church, thē the gifte of tongues. Another difference also ariseth of the former, namely, that pro∣phesie is of more vse and edifying in the Church, and rather to be sought after, and desired of God, then the gift of tongues, as the same Paul sheweth in the same first epistle vnto the Cor. chap. 14. ver. 5. saying: I would that ye all spake strange languages, but ra∣ther that ye prophesied: for greater is he that prophesieth, then he that speaketh diuers tongues, except he expounde it, that the Church may receiue edification. Furthermore prophesie needeth no other helpe
vnto the people and assembly of the Church, then it selfe, to teach and instruct the Church withall: but the gift of tongues needeth an interpreter besides, to performe the same, (who of Paul is cal∣led Diermeneotes) and interpretation, that the common people may vnderstand the things which he speaketh 1. Cor. 14 ver. 28. But if there be no interpreter, let him keepe silence in the Church, which speaketh languages, and let him speake to himself and to god. whereof it cometh to passe that this gift of Prophesi is more pro∣fitable for the Church, then the gift of tongues.Prophesie com∣prehendeth the gift of wisdome and the gift of vtterance. Moreover, prophesie doth also comprehend the gift of wisdome, and the gift of vtterance. 1. Cor. 12. ver. 8. and 10. albeit in the for∣mer places Paul doth make a difference betweene them both, and prophesie, which foretelleth things to come. For a man can not rightly and fitly expound the holy Scripture, except he be such a one as is singularly furnished with the science and knowledge of the same, the which is called wisedome: and doth excell in the grace and gift of speaking & expounding of himselfe, the which of Paul is called the gift of speech, or vtterance. Albeit among the Prophets themselues some oftentimes receiue and haue from God these gifts more excellently then other some And thus farre of Prophesie, as it is taken for the expounding of the worde of God written. CAP. 7. Of godly Prophesie, which is a foretelling of things to come, and how it differeth from the prophesies of the Gentiles, or Heathen. Prophesie, as it is taken for the foretelling of things to come.THere is yet another signification of the word prophesie, vsed by the holy Ghost, betokening the foretelling of things to come, the which by God are revealed vnto men extraordinari∣ly, and are commanded to be published or o∣penly vttered to his glorie and the edifying of his Church. And of these kinde of Prophets there were both in the old & new testament, yet more in the old testament, because that Christ the sonne of the liuing God (who is the ende and accomplishment of all prophe∣sie) was not yet come. But we must here consider how these Pro∣phets doe differ from the prophane prophets, least that prophane
persons should draw those things which hereafter shall be spoken of the true Prophets of God, vnto their diuiners sooth sayers, prophets, and such as by birds flying, feeding, singing, & such like doe fore∣tell thinges to come, and least that these and the true Prophets should be thought to be all one. Nowe that I gather not infinite things together, wherein the Prophets of God foretelling things to come, doe disagree and differ from the prophets and oracles of the Heathen, who also fore shew things to come, I onely set down three things, by the which this difference betweene them both may plainely be noted.A three folde difference be∣tween the Pro∣phts of God, & the prophets of the heathen. For they differ one from another in the matter, cause, and manner of reuelation, the which was made vn∣to them both, that is, vnto the Prophets of God, and those other wicked prophets. And in the matter they differ, for that the Pro∣phets of God did foretell of Christ to come especially, and that as the Mediatour of the world,1 Difference in th matter. as Augustine teacheth, lib. 12. contra Faulst. Manich. cap. 2. and against the aduersaries of the Law. c. 3. of whome these prophane prophets many times, nay for the most part speake not one whit: yea when as they haue foretolde some thing of him, they haue not vnderstoode the thing, which them∣selues did speake, much lesse that others did conceiue and vnder∣stande them. Therefore their whole prophesies tended to this ende, namely how they might satisfie or content the desires and questions of curious persons, seeking to knowe thinges to come. But the true Prophets of God did onely imploy themselues vnto God, and vnto the edifying of the Church: and not vnto the cu∣riositie and vanitie of men, as did the oracles and prophets of the Gentiles, as Lactantius teacheth lib. 1. Divinat. institut. cap. 4. whereupon lib. 7. cap. 13. he saith,Lactantius. The manner and diuination of the true Prophets consisteth onely in this, that they teach man to be created vnto the seruice and worship of God, and to receiue immortalitie from him. As for that which is obiected of the Sibyllae, the which are said to haue prophesied some thing of Christ,Obiection. Acroichis is a kinde of verses so made, that the first letters of euery verse running tho∣rouh them all, doth make some name or sen∣tence. Answer. and whose Acro∣stichis is extant, the capitall letters whereof doe describe this name IESVS CHRISTVS Dei Filius, Servator▪ Crux: Also of other oracles, the which the same Lactantius in sundrie places doth recite, especially lib. 4. divin. institut. where he hath many things concerning Christ: I answer, that both the Sibyllae themselues, and those other prophane prophets did either not at all vnderstand the things which they did vtter, or did not speake them to this ende, to establish true godlines, and the true worship
of God, the which thing notwithstanding the true Prophets of God had an especiall care of, and aymed thereunto:Why God suf∣fered the Hea∣then prophets to fore tell some things of Christ. but God would haue these things to be extant euen among these prophane and heathen men, to this ende they might be made vnexcusable, who beeing put in minde of Christ by their owne oracles, they yet despised and refused, when as afterwardes he was preached vnto them by the Apostles and their successors. Furthermore, those things the which Satan and the deuill reuealed and opened vnto these prophets concerning Christ, the same he gathered out of the writings of the true Prophets themselues, the which were extant, or abroade; but yet he did newe furbish them to serue his owne turne the better. Therefore the difference betweene the Prophets of God, and these prophets of the heathen is very lage: namely that these of the heathen either spake nothing of Christ, or else prophesied of him without fruite and vnderstanding.2 Difference in the mouing cause. A∣gaine, that these prophane prophets were mooued by the inspira∣tion of Satan, but the Prophets of God did speake by the moti∣on of God, and of the holy Ghost. Therefore al the things which the Prophets of God foretold, did in such sort come to passe as they did foreshew that they should: but the Heathen prophets li∣ed in many things, as being wholly led by the lying spirit. The third difference standeth in the manner, whereby they both receiued reuelation. And concerning the Prophets of God,3 Difference in the manner of reuelation. they were led by the meeke and milde inspiration of God, and were not like vnto the prophets of the Heathen, taken with a madde phrensie, when as they prophesied and did speake. And al∣beit that Iohn say Reuel. 1. ver. 10. that he was in the spirite, or ra∣uished when he prophesied: and Ezechiel confesse many times,The rauishmēts of God his pro∣phets was not like the madnes of the heathen prophets. as especially chap. 3. ver. 14. that the spirit of God rushed and fell vp∣on him: and Daniel chap. 8. ver. 27. and chap. 10. ver. 8. that after the visions and prophesie, he was taken with sicknes, and that his strength fayled him: yet had the holy rauishments and distraught∣ments of the holy Prophets of God nothing common and agree∣able with the madnes of the heathen prophets, wherewith they were taken, when as they gaue foorth their prophesies. It could not be, but that the Prophets of God beeing mortall men, must needes be very greatly mooued with the presence of the maiestie of God, as often as he offered himselfe vnto them in more great and royall manner, then that he could be contained within the straightnes of man his bodie. Wherefore they were for the time
as it were swallowed vp, and then it must be of necessitie that their minde after a sort was withdrawne from their body, as Paul writeth of him selfe 2. Cor. 12. ver. 3. where speaking of his being taken vp into the third heauen,Gestures of the Heathen pro∣phets. he saith: I know such a man (whe∣ther out of the bodie, or in the bodie, I can not tell: God knoweth. Yet euen in those cases, and at that time were they not madde, as were the Heathen prophets, neither did they some at the mouth, neither were they ougly in visage, neither ignorant, or not know∣ing what they saide or did: but both wise and well aduised, and with great reuerence of God, with great faith and full assurance of God speaking in them, did they heare and receiue the thinges which God did reueale and open vnto them; they did vnderstand the thinges receiued and reuealed vnto them, yeilded thereunto, and afterwards deliuered them, and for the same did all of them more and more glorifie God. Visions (as writeth Lactantius lib. 7 chap. 23.) were by the spirit of God offered vnto their eyes, and they sawe them in their sight, to be as it were done and ended. Whereof commeth to passe that they were much mooued with these visions offered vnto them. And how could it be otherwise? when as they were but meere and weake men. Yet for all this neither was their minde put out of his seate, that they vnderstood nothing: neither were they as blockes and stocks, or onely pas∣siue or suffering instruments and organes of God, the which did but onely vtter the thinges to come, and vnderstoode not what they ment: that which fell out vnto the prophane prophets. The Prophets then of God did vnderstand and beleeue the thinges which they vttered. For otherwise they could not be called the true Prophets of God.Augustine. For Augustine lib. 12. de Gen. ad literam, cap. 9. saith very well, They which in the spirite by some bodily things had signes shewed vnto them, vnlesse there had bin added thereunto the office of the minde, that they might also vnder∣stand them, were not yet prophets. But the Heathen Prophets, when as they vttered their prophesies, were without doubt be∣sides themselues,The heathen prophets out of their wits when they propheed. out of their witts, and taken with madnes, and vnderstood not what they said or did, but were onely the meete instruments of Satan speaking by their mouth,The strange & beastly itting of th prophe∣tesse of Apol∣lo, when shee prophesied. of which like kind of persons possessed with deuils we haue seene many also at this day. Therefore Chrysostome writeth, that the Prophetesse of A∣pollo at Dlphos, when shee was to prophesie, did sit vpon her but tocks, with her naked legges astride vpon a stoole, the which
was set ouer an hole and gaping gulfe of the earth or temple of Delphos, and that at those times the deuill was wont to enter in at her secret parts, who did rauish, vexe, prsse, & in a word frame her, that shee onely lent her mouth and teeth, and he himselfe the vncleane spirite did speake in her. From whence come these tearmes peculiar and proper vnto these kinde of prophets, as Iuli∣us Pollux speaketh; to be rauished, to be madde, to be franticke, and the thing it selfe, or the spirite whereby they were led, was called the inspiration of the deuill, a madde spirite. And to be short, both Virgil and Lucan doe notably describe and set forth the manner howe these prophets were wont to be handled and vsed by the same their deuill. Virgil for his part lib. 6. AEneid. in these verses:Englished by Phaer. But good Aeneas to Apollos Church, and temple towres, Went to seeke the secret caue Of Siblyes dreadfull bowres. A vaut of widenes vast where mightie Spirite and mightie minde Apollo her inspires that all Things knowes in secret kinde. And things that fatall bin he doth Full broad to her vnfold. And a little after,—As thus shee babling prates All suddenly with faces more Then one before the gates And colours more then one, disfigured Wilde shee stoode in traunce Her haire vpstarting stands, her trembling Breast doth panting praunse. Her heart outraging swells, When of the god shee felt the blast Approching neere. And afterward But wrastling wilde as yet, against The god in th'entrie large Dame Siblye mumbling made, and strugling Strong withstoode the charge. If haply so shee might the gods Enforcing, shake from brest. But he preuailing still, with more
And more her spirit opprest Her heart, her raging mouth he Taming staide, and fixed fast. And thus farre Virgil concerning this matter, out of the true hi∣storie of oracles. Lucan in like manner lib. 1. Pharsalidos, writeth hereof thus: For as the Thracian Edonis In Bedlam sort with Bacchus fraught Doth gadding runne on Pindus hill Besides her selfe through him distraught:One of Bacchus Bedlm women priestesses. So doth Oricia Romane Dame Th'amased citie ouer-range, Dislosing Phoebus haunting her, With such like words in manner straunge: Apollo whither am I drawne? &c. This sayd shee lay as in a trance, Through madnes which vpon her fell. Thus then the profane Poets them selues doe liken their Pro∣phets vnto very madde men, and drunken persons: yea their Si∣byllas,The Heathen liken their pro¦phets vnto mad men and drun∣kards. whome notwithstanding they doe reuerence with more deuotion and holines, then their other prophesiars. Yet doth Pla∣to in Phaedro, and M. Cicero lib. 1. diuinat. write that these Sibyl∣laes themselues were taken with this deuilish madnes, when as they gaue forth these prophesies: albeit Tulli afterwardes disa∣greeing from himselfe,Tulli dissenting from himselfe. and beeing deceiued, writeth thus in the same booke. For (saith he) the power or vertue of the earth did natu∣rally stirre vp Sibylla the prophetesse of Apollo at Delphos, as if the Sibyllae by a certaine naturall motion did foretell things to come, and were not stirred vp with that same madnes, and inspiration of the deuill, as I saide before. The which opinion it seemeth the same Tulli had of others also, namly that there were certaine pro∣phets by nature, or by naturall causes, yet that all of them were madde when they prophesied. Thus then he saith, And those whose mindes forsaking their bodies, doe flie out and goe foorth, beeing inflamed and stirred vp with a certaine heate, doe see for certentie, those things which prophesying they doe foretell: and such mindes are inflamed with many things, which abide not in their bodies, like vnto those which are stirred vp with a certaine sound of words, & Phrygian songs: many the woods and graues, many the riuers or seas doe mooue, whose madding wind doth long before see, the things which are to come.
But why this madnes and stirring vp by the deuill should be put into these prophets,Why the Hea∣then prophets are taken with madnes, s Pla∣to thinketh. the reason is giuen of Plato in love in these words, as Serranus my very good and learned friende hath translated them: VVherefore God, when he taketh from them their mindes, he vseth these ministers, tellers of oracles, and divining pro∣phets, that we which heare them, should vnderstand that it is not they which doe vtter these things of so great importance: not they, I say, which are taken with madnes: but that it is God which speaketh them, and speaketh vnto vs by the ministerie or seruice of those men. Thus much Plato. Of the which appeareth how absurd or foolish his madnes of these prophesiars, and rauished men did seeme vnto the Heathen them selues. And the Poet Claudianus faighning himfelse a prophet, saith:Claudinus. All humane sense bath madnes now Quite from my breast "retired, "or, exiled And wholly is mine heart and minde With Phoebus rage inspired. And here let these things now haue an ende. CHAP. 8. Of sundrie kindes of godly Prophets. LEt vs therefore returne vnto true Prophet, who also are called men of God. And here it is first of all demaunded, howe many sorts of godly prophesie there haue bin, and may be gathered out of the worde of God. For that there haue beene diuerse and sundrie manners of reuelation, and not one alone, by the which God did speak both vnto the Prophets themselues, and by the Prophets vnto others, appeareth vnto the Hebrewes c. 1. v. 1. in these words:God spake by his prophets af∣ter sandrie manners. At sundrie times and in diuerse manners God spake in the old time to our fathers by the Prophets. And Numb. 12. ver. 5. Heare nowe my wordes (saith God) if there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be knowne vnto him by a vision, and will speake vnto him by a dreame, &c. For although that in respect of the heauenly doctrine, they all had one scope or ende, to wit▪ the glorie of God, and the promises of the Messias to come: yet in re∣garde
of the sundrie manner of reuelation and extraordinarie shewing of him, the which was made vnto them from God, there may be obserued and noted sundrie kinds, or degrees (as other tearme them) of godly prophesie. For besides that God did open and shew himselfe vnto them more and lesse (whereupon some are said to be more excellent then othersome, and Moses a∣mong the rest is named to be most familiar with God, for Deut. 34. ver. 10. it is said of him, That there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like vnto Moses, whome the Lord knew face to face. And Num. 12. ver. 8. God saith, that he will speake vnto him mouth to mouth, and by vision, and not in darke words, but he shall see the similitude of the Lord.) There was also a diuerse manner and not one onely, whereby it pleased God to shewe and make knowne vnto them the things to come, that he might declare his manifold wisdome, euen in those extraordinarie manners, by the which he did work in his Prophets. Yet was none of these manners and waies mad∣nes and furie, after which onely manner not withstanding the de∣uill, as we haue shewed, stirred vp his prophets. Now how many were these diuers waies of God his reuelati∣on,Three sundrie manrs of God his reuelation of thinges to come. is set downe most plainly Num. 12. ver. 6. &c. as hath before bin declared, namely thee three, Oacle, or speaking: dreame, and vision. For whereas some adde vnto these exstacie, or beeing in a trance, as a fourth kinde of this propheticall and diuine reuelation (after which manner Iohn the Evangelist Reuelat. chap. 1. ver. 10. saying of him selfe, And J was rauished in the spirit on the Lords day, and heard behinde me a great voice, as it had beene of a trumpet. And Paul speaking of himselfe 2. Corinth. 12. that he can not tell whether he was in the bodie, or out of the bodie, when he was taken vp into Paradise, doe shewe that great secrets were by God ope∣ned vnto them; this skilleth not, nor maketh any difference at all. For this exstasie,Exstasie con∣tained vnder vision. or being in a trance, wherewith the true Prophets of God sometimes were taken, as Ezechiel very often, ought to be referred vnto vision. Therefore there was three manners of shewing of things to come by God extraordinarily vnto his Pro∣phets, the which I had rather set downe in the wordes of Peter Martyr out of his commentaries vpon the first of Samuel cap. 19. then in mine owe. ƲƲe may also (saith he) after a plaine manner thus distinguish o mke a difference betweene the degrees of prophe∣sies, that we may call one an oracle,An oracle. an other a dreame, and the third a vision. An oracle is, when as by the voice of God himselfe is decla∣red,
what is to be done. So Abraham was willed by a voice from hea∣uen, that he he should not kill his sonne. Gen. 22. As for the manner of dreames,2 Dreames. there needeth no examples. For they are to be found euery wherein the Scriptures, as Gen. 15 12. ver. 12. Mat 1.20. 2. ver. 13. Vision may be of three sorts,3 Vision, and the same threefold. either that thinges to come, and true, may be seene by the infusion or prwring in of light, end simple vnderstanding (that is, without any offered shape of things) or that besides that light there be described the images or shapes of things also and that either in mind, of which sort is this, that Zacharias seeth horns,  & candlesticks,  and Ieremie a potte, Zach. 1. and 4. Ierem. 1. ver. 13. or with the eyes, of which sort is this in Daniel, that a finger is seene on the wall,  and that Angels haue bin seene talking with men in the shape of men. These things saith Martyr, and the same most truly. For whereas the schoolemen, and some others prattle of the essentiall touch∣ing of propheticall wit, and of vniting of the same with the deitie,The pratile∣ments of school∣men. by the which the mindes of the Prophets should be englightned, this is not onely too nice and curious, but also most vntrue. For nothing can essentially touch the God heade, it beeing a thing without bodie. Neither can our mindes doe this, albeit that they also be without bodie, because that our humane nature is not ca∣pable of such touching, or light. For as Paul teacheth 1. Tim. 6. ver. 16. God dwelleth in the light, that none can attaine vnto, where∣fore the deitie can not be touched of any creatures, no not of the blessed Angels themselues, much lesse of the mindes of men. Yet there hath bin before this time,Of a peevish kinde of men that would be called Prophets and is also is this day a certaine kinde of men, who, on God his name, terme themselues Prophets, and would be so called and accounted. And these good fellowes doe vaunt themselues, that by expounding of the holy Scriptures they can foretell things to come, not onely generally, but also particularly vnto euery countrey, kingdome, King, peo∣ple, of whome they are demanded. For they promise & tell what shal come to passe at this or that time, in this or that state of things and counsell as if they had this their prediction or foretelling from the mouth of God, and worde written. Therefore whatsoeuer is read in the Scripture they referre vnto the alterations of times, chaunges of kingdomes, and troubles, and restoring of peoples & things. Such a one they will haue one Mthodius and Cyl∣lus the Moke to haue beene, and loachimus the Abbot, and al∣so Ierome Sauanarola, both Florentines, but a fewe yeeres a∣gone to haue beene. And in this our age one Broccard an Ita∣lian,Broccard
that liueth at Leyde, or Lugdunum in Hollander this day, whome I did see and speake with there, the foolishest person, and blasphemous that euery I saw, in this behalfe. I doe confesse that godly and wise men may foresee many thinges euen nowe adaies,After what sort wise and godly men even at this day may foresee certaine things to come. and that thinges to come may be gathered and foretolde out of the worde of God by a certaine wise coniecture and rea∣soning, but generally, not particularly: but by indefinite consi∣deration of time, not by any set and appointed day: but beeing such as not onely one or two godly persons may foresee, but all that are godly and wise: but to be briefe, beeing such thinges the which may and also ought to be gathered as effects from their causes, by comparing of the promises and threatnings of God, with the godly, or vngodly life of the men of whome that Scripture speaketh, and not such as he, who so sheweth or fore∣telleth the iudgements and promises of God, hath by the pecu∣liar gift of God, or by any extraordinarie spirite of prophesie. For example sake, thus it is written in Isai cap. 60. vers. 12. he nation and kingdome that serueth not God, shall perish, nay shall vt∣terly be rooted out. Out of this place what godly man may not ga∣ther, that the kingdome of the Turkes howe mightie and in∣vincible, or vnconquerable it may seeme nowe for to be, shall yet in the ende be destroied, and ouerthrowne? There is this threatning of God against idolatours, Isai chap 1. vers. 19. For they shall be con founded for the trees and groues, which they haue desired. That the Popedome therefore for the like idolatrie shall in the ende be confounded and chastened by God, what godly man by wise coniecture may not conclude? The things are infi∣nite or without number, that after this manner may be conclu∣ded,Against Broccard and his companions, such as are the paltrie and bal∣sphemous pro∣phesies of one Paul Grebner, of the which some of them published in english, were so greedily bought vp this last har∣est 590. and things to come foretold vnto the worlde, both for the despising of the true heauenly doctrine, and also of an holy life. But these thinges are foretold in generalitie, and are gathered of the life of men, the which is a witnesse of their faith, or of their infidelitie. But these Broccardical-mates, and Diviners doe foretell what shall fall out particularly vnto this or that kingdome, and of this or that deliberation, at such or such a time, that is to say, they professe or take vpon them that they can tell, as if it were iust so written of these thinges expressely in the worde of God. In the which the Scripture of God is plainely abused of
these paltrie fellowes, and they doe falsifie and corrupt it. For that thing the which the Holy Ghost hath peculiarly and especi∣ally foretold of some one certaine nation, the which God hath decreed that it shall come to passe at a certaine and set time, the selfe same I say, neither ought nor may particularly be applied vnto another nation, and vnto another time. For these thinges are bounded and limited by the worde of God, and not onely spoken generally. Neither doe these companions in those their predictions or foretellings out of the worde of God, take the worde of God written as for their argument, or doe bring their prophesies as conclusions by wise coniecture by them selues gathered: but in such sort as if the selfe same thing which they foretell, were expressely written in the worde of God, and that in a manner in so many wordes, as these superstitious persons doe set downe. This therefore these fellowes would haue to be obserued or marked, that the very names of cities, peoples,A rope sur∣se ad new deuise of these new prophets. and thinges, are not extant or to be found in the holy and sacred Scriptures in so many syllables, as they are at this day called: but they wil haue the things forsooth which they foretell to haue beene onely darkned, and hidden vnder a diuerse name. So Ty∣rus a towne of Syria in Ezechiel, is with Broccard Antwerpe, that is a citie of Brabant: so Babylon in Isai is Parise in France with the saide Broccarde: and thus forsooth may these men play the fooles. And nowe seeing I am fallen into this vaine, it shall not per∣aduenture be besides the purpose, in this place to set downe, what I thinke of the writings of this Broccard, of the which I my selfe haue had conference with him selfe the author of them. For from the Synod of Middleburge (which is the chiefe citie of the Iland of Valacria in Zeland) I,Broccard con∣ferred with all about his wri∣tings. and the worship∣full and learned Martinus Lydius a most faithfull minister of the worde of GOD in Austerodam in Hollande, in the yeere of our Lorde 1582, were appointed to conferre with this Broccarde about his writings propheticall. The which when he was nor able to maintaine and defende, at the last he excused him selfe, nay, he complained that they were not his owne, but were put forth and printed by the meanes and at the charges of certaine others, vnto whom he had communica∣ted
or imparted them: and thus this good fellow did at that time condemne and renounce the vnhappie birth of his wit, and that rightly and freely. Absurdities of e prophe∣ticall writings of Broccard  Absurditie. As for the thinges the which in these propheticall writings of Broccard (as he tearmeth them) I doe dislike, they are these for the most part, albeit out of a great many but a fewe. First, that according vnto the opinion and interpretation of this man, hee will haue and presupposeth, that the olde prophesies in the Scrip∣ture are not yet fulfilled. For all things, which by the old Prophets haue beene foretold concerning the ouerthrowe of Ierusalem, Egypt, Sidon, Tyrus, and other nations and cities, that they should come to passe after a certaine manner, and a certaine and set time, this Broccarde doth referre and take as thinges yet to come, and such as haue beene no more foretold of those cties and countries, then of France, Antwerpe, the Prince of Au∣range, Condie, and men and thinges of our time. Which if it be true, what fulfilling and accomplishment of the olde pro∣phesies, may there. I pray you, be thought to haue beene? Dout∣lesse none at all,The old prophe∣sies not yet ful∣filled in the iudgement of Broccard. by the opinion and interpretation of Broccard, for as much as those Cities or Countries (of the which notwith∣standing expresse mention hath beene made by the Prophets) are not meant, but those which are and doe remaine in this our age: and that (as he saith) neither that manner, nor that time, albeit neuer so much limited by them, is the manner, or the time past, or which hath beene alreadie, but is either present, or yet nowe for to come. Wherefore those prophesies can not be saide to be yet fulfilled. The which if it be supposed to be true, what will profane persons & mockers think of those things, which the selfe same same Prophets of God haue foretold should come to passe concerning Christ? Shall not they also be iudged as yet to be vnfulfilled? Shall not the whole written worde of God at the length goe to wracke) one part thereof beeing accused of false∣hoode, and once vndermined) and, as Augustine against Ie∣rome gathereth very well, be deemed false, and overthrowen? And this in die first place beeing altogether blasphemous, must needed followe, and be gathered out of the prophesies of occad. Secondly,2 Absurditie. that the same threatnings, which the Spirit of God doth denounce or declare vnto meere profane persons, and unto men that are inside, and reprobates, those doth Broccard every
where apply unto the Church of God, and the faithfull: yea unto Gods true elect or chosen. That which any man may observe & marke in his writings. Now to mingle and confound or huddle up together the things, the which shall come to passe unto the e∣lect, with those things that shall fall out unto the reprobates, is plainly to confound God his election with his reprobation, nay to take away both (that is, a chiefe part of the word of God) yea it is to make the sonnes of God, and the enemies of God all one: it is finally to confound and jumble one with another, tem∣porall paines with paines eternall, and to make our adoption, or being chosen into the sonnes of God, vaine and of none effect. The which is no lesse blasphemous then the former. Thirdly, Broccard maketh a way for every Origenist, especial∣ly of a sharp wit.3. Absurdity. Origenists, were certaine hee∣tikes named af∣ter Origin, that used to turne all the scriptures into allegories. 1. Absurdity. For now there shall be nothing certaine for vs in the holy scriptures, for to follow. Tyrus is not Tyrus: Babylon is not Babylon: but all things forsooth must be expounded by an allegorie. VVhich thing is flat and plaine heresie. Fourthly, Broccard openeth a window unto every Soothsay r, and Almanisticall prediction, or foretelling of things after the maner of Prognosticators and Almanack makers. For the same, like unto Broccard, setteth downe some thing, the which not∣withstanding it leaveth still vnten. For these fellowes do not as did the true prophets, set dovvne the maner it selfe, or any cer∣taine time of the things by them foretold to come: But Broc∣card affirming some things peculiarly of some matter and coun∣trey, doth altogether overpasse the other circumstances. That which is the propertie of a spirite of the devill, turning himselfe into an Angell of light to deceive withall: and when he hath deceived, so cunningly to handle the matter, that he cannot be accused of falshood, because he leaveth out the circumstances, thee which notwithstanding the prophets of God do diligently and exactly rehearse, that it may the better be knowen, when their prophesies had their accomplishment and fulfilling. Fiftly and lastly (that this my discourse be not without end) This Broccard in most of his prophesies hath already bene found to he vaine,2. Absurdity. false, and a lying marchant, by the issue and falling out of the matter, and the same also daily more and more appeareth. For I let passe that he bringeth no proofe of this his extraordina∣tie calling in the Church: nor yet can (because that beeing demaunded of vs for the same at that time, he was mumme,
and had nothing for to say) and is now also tongue-tied, when as he is urged, or earnestly requested thereunto. And these things doe sufficiently condemne the propheticall writings of Broc∣card. Nowe as oftentimes there have bene shewed unto the true Prophets the similitudes and formes of things to come:The true pro∣phets used di∣ves gns and geues in foe∣telling of tigs to come. so they also often when they did foretell things to come, did represent the same by diuers signes and gestures of their body: that they might the rather mooue the Church, and shewe that the thing should come to passe. So Isai walked bare-footed. Isai. cap. 20. So Ieremie weareth a vvoodden chaine. Ierem. 28. The which doings of the Prophets because of their signification, Augu∣stine calleth mysticall, lib. 22. contra Faustum Manich. cap. 8. CAP. 9. Of the true notes and markes of the godly and true Prophets. FVrther there are certaine notes and markes the which the worde of God it selfe hath set downe as most true and sure, to discerne and knowe the true Prophets from the false by. Deuter. cap. 13. vers. 1, 2, 3, &c also the 18. ver. 21, 22. And if thou think in thine heart, How shall we know the vvorde, which the Lorde hath not spoken? ƲƲhen a prophet speaketh in the name of the Lorde, if the thing follow not nor come to passe, that is the thing, vvhich the Lord hath not spoken, but the prophet hath spoken it presumptuously: thou, shalt not there∣fore be afraid of him. For when as God substituted or under-ordained his Prophets to teach the Church, as it were in his stead, and in as much as Satan doeth imitate or follow their wordes and deedes, to disceive withall, if hee could, even the godly themselves: it was altogether necessarie, that there shoulde be extant certain tokens, and the same not at all doubtfull, as being shewed by God himselfe by the which the true prophets might be severed and marked out from the false. For at all times both in the olde Testament, and in the new, the devill hath gone about to overthrow the found doctrine, by the
false prophets, as his Postes and Messengers. Therefore like as under the law there were false prophets among the Iewes, and old people of God: so have there also bene under the gospell, as Peter teacheth, epist. 2. chap. 2. vers. 1. But there vvere false pro∣phets also among the people, even as there shall be false teachers among you: vvhich privily shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord, which hath ought them, and bring upon themselves swift damnation. VVe must therefore see what these notes and markes are. VVhere this is to be noted,Who in this place is proprly to be termed a false prophet. that in this place he onely is cal∣led a false prophet, who in respect of the doctrine which he tea∣cheth, and the things which he foretelleth, ought to be tearmed, and is found to be a deceiver and a lyar. For those which are called false Prophets, because they haue no lawfull calling▪ albeit they teach▪ true doctrine, and foretell things to come, and that truely, of which sorte some doe arise out of the middest of the Church, these doe not appertaine unto this question, whereas we speake of the true markes of prophets: but unto that, where∣in it is demanded, what is the lawfull calling of prophets, or what is the godly and lawfull use of holy prophesie. False prophets in three respects 1 Jn regard of their calling. False prophets then are so called generally for three causes, namely, in regard of their calling, in regard of their use, and in regard of their doctrine. And in respect of their calling they are to be taken for false prophets, who albeit they foretell true things, yet are they not sent of God, but of Satan, to deceive: they are not alowed of God▪ but are the instruments of the devill, such as are those distraughted and madde prophets, of whome we haue spoken before: and such also as some are in the Church of God oftentimes by the iust iudgement of God, who do lead away men into idolatrie. In regard of their use, those are called false prophets, which have indeed a lawful calling to prophesie,2 In regard of their use. and the same by God plain∣ly confirmed by certaine waies and which do foretel true things, but yet not for such end & purpose, as they ought, not with such an intent as God appointed, namely for that they foretell those things to come for vain-glory, or for gaine sake; and not for the cause of setting forth Gods glory only, nor yet to doe good ser∣vice in his Church by seeking the profite of the same. These pro∣phets therfore although they do speak true things, yet do they not speak thē truly, that is, with a sincere mind, & such a mind as they ought. For they seeke thēselves, & theirs, & not God, or the things
that are Gods. Such a one was Balaim the Prophet in the time of Moses,Balaam. one that spake the truth indeed, and was brought forth by God unto that people, and was not madde: but covetous, an hirling, seeking for gaine by i office, as afterwardes in the Church did Simon Mgus.Simon Magus Of Balaam read Num. 22. in the whole course of that chapter. And in Peter 2. epist. 2. chapt. 15. vers. there is mention made of hi and such as he was, of whom he saith, that they did forsake the right way, and went astray, fol∣lowing the way of Baliam, which loued the traces of unrighteousness, &c. Of Simon Magus you have Act 8. v. 20. where Peter spea∣keth unto him offering to buy the gift of the holy ghost for mo∣ney, sayng, Thy money perish with thee, because thou thinkest that the gift of God may be obtained with money. Such were they of whome Paul complaineth. Philipp. 1. v. 16. Some (saith he) preach Christ een through envy and strife, and of contention, and not purely, supposing to adde more affliction to my bondes. Therefore (they preached not Christ purely, that is, with a pure minde, al∣beit they preached true Christ. So they which abuse true pro∣phesie, nay the gospell it selfe unto their gaine and vaine glory, in respect of this use are false prophets. Thirdly in respect of doctrine they are called false prophets,3 nregard of their doctrine. the which doe want either the one onely, or else both the true markes, the which both the true prophets hane, of whome I speake  this chapter.Two markes by th which true prophets are knowen from the false. For there are▪ as I haue said, two notes whereby the true prophets are distinguished and marked out from the false. The one, if they be found co have made a lye, in in the matters by them foretold, or to have spoken false. When a prophet shall speake in the name of the Lord,1 Lying o false speing. if the thing follow not, nor coe to passe, that is the thing, which the Lord hath not spoken, but the same prophet hath spoken it through pride, saith the Lorde. Det. 18.22. Therefore such a one is to be termed a false prophet. So Ieremie the true prophet of God appealeth unto the event or falling out of the matter foretold by Hnanias the false prophet. Ierem. 28. ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. Even the prophet Ieremy said, So be it. The Lord so doe, the Lord confirme thy wordes, which thou hast prophesi∣ed to restore the vessels of the Lords house, and all that is carried cap∣tive from Babel unto thi place. But heare thou now this word that I will speake in thine ares, and in the eares of all the people. The prophets that have bene before thee, and before me in times past, pro∣phesied gainst many cuntries and against great kingdomes, of warre,
and of plagues, and of pestilence. And the prophet which prophesieth of peace, when the word of the prophet shall come to passe, then shall the prophet be knowen that the Lord hath sent him. 2 Persuading to idolatrie, or false doctrine. The second marke of a true prophet must altogether and at all times goe with the former: but in the false prophets it is suffici∣ent, if ither one, or both of them be wanting. This second marke therefore is, if he that foretelleth things to come, a although they be true, goe about, assay, and briefly be desirous to drawe and perswade vs from the true God, and his doctrine revealed unto idols, or any false doctrine. When there shall arise (saith the Lord Deut. 13. ver. 1. &c.) a prophet in the middest of thee, or one that shall dreame a dreame, and shall give thee a signe, or a wonder, the which he shall speake unto thee, saying, Let vs goe after false goddes, whom thou hast not knowen, and let vs worship them: thou shalt not obey the wordes of that prophet. So Elias 1. King. 18. doth reprove and convince or overthrow Achab the king his false prophets. VVhereof commeth to passe, that because God would alwaies have his prophets found to be true, and in every part of their pre∣dictions or fore-tellings, he did so reveale things to come unto them, and they so foretel them, that they did evidently set down all circumstances of the matter. Therfore they did not only de∣clae something to come (the which often times the mad pro∣phets, and sometimes Astrologers doe) or to fall out unto such a people: but they did also (as I haue said before) expresse the ma∣ner, way, and all the circumstances of the thing to come, and therefore have they them in their writings set downe. For they doe declare and lay downe both the time and the place, and the manner, and the instruments, and the persons,Causes why the true prophets set downe every circumstance. whereby those things shall come to passe, which they foretell, and that not without cause. First, least they might seeme to speake darkely: so that if they have erred in any circumstance,  they might be cal∣led false prophets. Moreover, that by so many circumstances re∣hearsed,  and all which afterwardes come to passe, they may ap∣peare to be the more true, and indeed the prophets of God. But these madde fellowes tellers of Oracles, soothsayers, Astrologers, and the rest of that rabble of divinours, (as they tearme them∣selves) doe either generally and indefinitely onely take upon them to foretell some thing to ome, but doe not evidently and plainly expresse the thing it selfe: as for example, There shall be warre, but they adde not, civill and frreine: or if they doe set
downe something to come, yet doe they not expresse all the cir∣cumstances of the thing. For by these they should quickly be found out to be false prophets, or lyars. Now these circumstan∣ces are the cause, the end, the place, the time, the manner, the instruments, the matter: like as of these matters, which of them both are foretold to come to passe, may easily be discerned and knowen which of them are true or false prophets. For the true, set downe the circumstances of the thing to come, but the false overpsse them.The prophets of God bgan from the begin∣ning of the world. And whereas the true prophets doe at no time, nor by no meanes carrie vs from the true God, and from his ser∣vice, and doctrine unto idolatry, or unto the elements of this world, we gather that all Cabalists, and other such like prophets are false prophets. For were it granted that all these did alwaies foretell true things (the which they at no hand will yeeld vnto which have heard from them of things to come) yet in the end they draw vs hereunto, that in stead of God, we should wor∣ship the elements of the world. For they doe tye the power of God unto certaine words and syllables, as doe the Cabalists, and some Magians or Sorcerers: or else they doe not purely expound the worde of God it selfe, but doe carry and apply it from the knowledge of godlines unto the vanity and curiositie of men, the which no doubt the Broccardicall prophets use to doe. CAP. 10. When the godly and true Prophets of God tooke their beginning. And likewise when they ceased or ended in the Church. IT is a worthy question, At what time first the prophets of God began to be, and at what time they ceased, the which for this cause ought not here of vs to be omitted and over∣passed. And first to speake briefly of the first part of this question: The prophets of God began to be, ever from the beginning of the world, as being such, who both knew the will of God by his re∣velation, and themselves received from God, and delivered over againe as it were from hand to hand that same promise of the Messias to come, and to suffer for the saluation of mankinde. Here∣of it is that the Prophets, the which haue spoken of the Church to be redeemed by Christ, are saide by Zacharie (who himselfe
was a prophet) to have beene from the beginning of the world, that is from all age of the world, and from the first making and being of the world, as it is in Luke in his gosped, chap. 1. v. 70. As he spake by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which were since the world began. And Paul writeth that the promise of God the fa∣ther concerning his Sonne the Messias and propitiator or atone∣ment maker of the world to come, that it was knowen and fore∣told by the prophets before the times of the world, that is, before any ages of the worlde, or this courses of yeres, which doth arise of the going about of the sunne, were made, and therefore from the very beginning of this globe or round world, Titus 1.2. Vnder the hope of eternall life, which God that can not lye hath promised be∣fore the world began. That which also is confirmed out of the epi∣stle unto the Hebrewes cap. 1. vers. 1. in these wordes: At sun∣dry times, and in divers manners God spake in the olde time to the Fathers by the Prophets: In these last dayes he hath spoken vnto vs by his Sonne. For straight after the creation of the world by God,The promise of the Messias frō the beginning. and sinne committed by the first man Adam, the promise of the Messias was, I will put enimitie betweene thee (to wit, Satan) and betweene the seed of the woman, He shall breake thine head, and thou shalt bruise his heele. Gen. 3.15. the which promise at the first was made unto Adam in wordes, and delivered as a prophesie, and most excellent foretelling of things to come. Afterwards it was declared and expounded by the addition or bringing in of sacrifi∣ces. For as God commanded sacrifices to be made unto him by Adam and his successours or those that came after him (untill the comming of the Messias himselfe) so he did declare the meaning of them: And also moreover the same will of God concerning the Messias to come, was alwaies more clearely opened and shewed by other revelations made unto the godly. Whereupon from the very selfe lame time prophesies and prophets concerning Christ, the iudgement of God to ensue upon the wicked, and concer∣ning other matters also, and articles of the faith began to be in the worlde, and in the Church of God, that is to say, from the very beginning of the world the true prophets of God were, and be∣gan to be. And I make no doubt, but that Adam himselfe, who talked so often with God, who first received from him that same promise of the Messias, and diligently delivered it unto his po∣steritie,Adam the chiefe and first prophet. who had sacrifices, and the signification of them by God his revelation, (Hebrewes chapt. 11.) vvas a
chiefe prophet of God, and is to be reckoned first in the roule of the prophets: after him Abel, then the rest of the Patriarches of whome in the holy scripture there is godly and commenda∣ble mention, Gen. cap. 5. Hebr. cap. 1. For as without faith in Christ there was never any saluation, nor any peace and recon∣ciliation or friends making an atonement betweene God and men, Heb. 9. ver. 15. And for this cause is he the Mediatour of the new Testament, that through death which was for the redemption of the transgressions, which were in the fomer Testament, they which were called, might receive the promise of eternall inheritance. So was there no age of the worlde, in the which that same promise of Christ to come was not extant and preached, and in the which die same was not better confirmed, and by little and little more clearely expounded by the fuller revelation of the things (which Christ should suffer and doe for vs) the which revelation, as the time of the comming of Christ was more neere, so was it of God made more full and more plaine. VVhereof it commeth to passe, that there was no age, before the comming of Christ, in which there were not some Prophets, and therefore, that they began to be from the very instant of the saving of the Church, that is, from the beginning of the world made. That which Pe∣ter also teacheth. 1. epist. 1. chap. vers. 10, 11. namely that the sufferings and glorie in Christ to come, were declared of the prophets of God by the revelation of the holy ghost. The wordes be these: Of the which salvation the prophets have inquired and searched, which prophesyed of the grace that shoulde come unto you, searching when or what time the spirit which testified before of Christ, which vvas in them, should declare the sufferings, that should come unto Christ, and the glory that should follovv. But these revelations alwaies in the latter times untill the comming of Christ, were more easily and fully revealed: but in the first times more ob∣scurely or darkely vnderstood. And this is mine answere unto the first part of the former question, when the prophets of God tooke their beginning. When the pro∣phets of God eased in the Church. In the second place it is demanded, VVhen the prophets cea∣sed in the Church of God. Vnto the which question, that I may the more plainly make answer, I say, that of the prophets of God some were under the old testament, and some under the new. VVherefore if the question be of the Prophets of the old Te∣stament, I answer with the wordes of Christ himselfe, Mat. 11.
verse 13. That the law and the prophets continued untill Iohn the Bap∣tist: and from that time ceased and had their end. For after that Christ the promised Messias came into the world, and was made manifest or shewed, as he was by the finger, by Iohn the Baptist often pointed vnto, when as Iohn beholding Christ walking, said unto his disciples and unto the people: This is the Lambe of God which taketh away the sinne of the world. Ioh. 1. ver. 29. the olde Testament then ceased: and therfore the prophesies and the pro∣phets also ceased, which did foretell of Christ or the Messias that was to come in the flesh, because that nowe hee was alreadie come. For Moses and the Prophets which were under the law,The prophets of the old Te∣stament eased at the comming of Christ. or vnder the olde Testament, did onely foretell of Christ to come in the flesh. When as hee therefore was come and tooke vpon him our flesh, this kinde of Prophets ceased, and new came in their stead. Therefore Iohn the Baptist him-selfe which sawe with his eyes Christ incarnate, or in the flesh, is said to have beene more then a Prophet, Matth. 11. cap. ver. 9. And some doe gather out of the writings of the Rabbines, and Thal∣mudists, that Simeon of whome Luke maketh mention cap. 2. ver. 25. was the last of these godly prophets of the old Testa∣ment. For the Thalmudists will have and doe teach, that in this Simeon the spirite of Prophesie ceased among the Iewes. And they make Rabbi Ionathan who wrote the Chaldee translation and interpretation of the holy Bible, to be of the same time with him. Finally they wrote that this Simeon was the disciple of Hillel. Howsoever it be, the godly prophets of the old Testa∣ment were onely untill Iohn the Baptist. For from him began the kingdome of God and the gospell, that is, the new Testa∣ment, as Marke the Evangelist speaketh cap. 1. Therefore what prophets soever were among the Iewes after Christ his suffe∣ing, and rising againe from the dead,Notes of false prophets after Christs time. and his receiving into heaven, or after the overthrowing of the temple of Ierusalem, which either saide that they were the Messias, or did foretell that the Messias was then first to come in the flesh were false pro∣phs. 1. Ioh. cap. 2. ver. 22. ƲƲho is a lyar, but he that denieth that Iesus is Christ? The same is Antichrist that denyeth the Fa∣ther and the Sonne. And againe Ioh. 4. ver. 3. And every spirite which confesseth not that Iesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God: but this is the spirit of Antichrist, &c. Of which sorte a∣mong others was that notable robbet and varlet Barchobab,Barchobab. of
whome there is in Euseb. l. 4. Hist. Eccl. c. 6. and Nicephl. 3. cap. 24. Now when these former Prophets, that is the Prophets of the old Testament ceased, then began the Prophets of the newe Te∣stament,When the pro∣phts of the new Testament be∣gan. Christ a prophet of the new Te∣stamnt. of which sort there were many: especially Christ him∣selfe the Prophet of Prophets, but so far forth as he was man, and made manifest or shewed in the flesh. Afterward the Apostles, if not all, yet many of them (for the office of the Apostles and Pro∣phets was distinct or diuerse the one from the other, 1. Cor. 12. ver. 19. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all teacher?) & such a one was Paul, as appeareth Rom 11. ver. 25. in these words: For I would not brethren,Paula prophet. that ye should be ignorant of this secret (least ye should be arrogant in your selues) that partly obstinacie is come to Is∣rael, vntill the fulnes of the Gentiles be come in: which sheweth that he prophesieth of the conuersion of the Iewes. And 1. Tim. 4. ch. ver. 1. Nowe the spirit speaketh euidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall giue heede vnto spirits of error, and doctrines of deuils: where be prophesieth of a falling from the truth in the latter times. And Peter also was a Prophet as may ea∣sily be gathered out of his 2.Peter a pro∣phet. epist. cap. 2. ver. 1, 2. &c. where hee prophesieth of false teachers, and cap. 3. ver. 3. where he foretel∣leth of mockers and scorners. Likewise Iohn the Evangelist was a Prophet, as his first epist. cap. 4. and his Reuelation doth proue.Iohn the evan∣gelist a prophet. But after the Apostles there were others also, which were Pro∣phets of God, yet but for a time onely, and vntill Christ by the preaching of the Gospell wras plainely and throughly made ma∣nifest. For the holy Scripture maketh mention of Agabus the Prophet Act. 11. ver. 28.Agabus. who liued in the dayes of the Apostles: and of the daughters of Philip the Evangelist, which were pro∣phetisses, Act. 21. ver. 9.The daughters of Philip the e∣vangelist. And furthermore Iustinus against Try∣phon the Iewe doth testifie, that the gift of prophesie was in the Church vntill his times. The which thing also Eusebius lib. 4. Histor. Eccles. cap. 18. rehearseth out of him. But these Prophets which liued vnder the Gospel, were both in dignitie, and degree, and in time also inferiour vnto the Apostles, but aboue and higher then the Doctours and Pastours. Therefore the Prophets of the Gospell are rehearsed in the second place, that is, after the Apo∣stles, Eph. cap. 4. ver. 11. He therefore gaue some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastours and teachers. And 1. Corinth. cap. 12. ver. 29. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets? Are all teachers? Nowe there is a question, when
these Prophets of the newe Testament ceased, or had their en∣ding.When the pro∣phets of the nw Testament cea∣sed. Certes albeit I confesse, that God for the confirmation of his Gospell, would haue the gift of Miracles, and Tongues, and of Prophesie to flourish long in his Church, yet were those giftes first by little and little diminished, as it is most certaine, and after∣wards vtterly taken away, to wit, after that the doctrine of the Gospell was sufficiently and throughly confirmed and approo∣ued. Whereof it came to passe, that both the gift of Miracles, and of Tongues, and also of Prophesie, at the length ceased in the Church. But the gift of prophesie, which foretold thinges to come, did then especially take his ende,When the gift of prophesie ceased. after that Saint Iohn his Apocalypse was written of him by reuelation from God. For it containeth what so euer shall happen or fall out vnto the Church, euen vntill the ende of the worlde. VVhereof it commeth to passe, that it is forbidden that any thing should be added or put vnto it, Reuel. cap. 22. ver. 18. If any man shall adde vnto these things, God shall adde vnto him the plagues that are written in this booke. For what neede was there, that those thinges should be foretolde vnto vs, the which shall come to passe after that this worlde is ended? Therefore this Apocalypse or Reuelation was a sealing and closing vp of all prophesie, the which vnfoldeth the estate of the whole Church vnto the very last age of the worlde, and resurrection or ri∣sing againe of the deade.Jstinus Mar∣tyr. And albeit that Iustinus Martyr doe affirme that there were afterwardes some Prophets re∣maining in the Church (for the Reuelation was written about the last times of Domitianus the Emperour, and Iustinus Mar∣tyr liued vnder vnder the Emperours Antonini, to wit, about fourtie yeares after the writing of the Reuelation) yet those Prophetes flourished but a little time in the Church, neither foretold they any thing of any great importance: but onely such things as were to come to passe in regard of that time vn∣to the Church, the which God for this cause would haue them to foretell, to comfort the Church withall. And that selfe same gift also vanished away by little and little. Therefore after the re∣uelation, I doe not thinke that there were any prophets in the Church, the which foretold any falling out of things of any great importance, because that the same Reuelation doth abundantly conteine all thinges, as I haue said, the which shall come to passe euen vntill the worlds ende. And whereas I say, that there were Prophets both in the olde
and also in the new Testament, I doe also vnder them compre∣hend Prophetisses,Ʋnder prophets are also to be contained pro∣phetisss, that is, certaine godly women extraor∣dinarily indued by God, with the gift of pro∣phe. that is to say, godly women, whome the Lord raised vp sometime to prophesie. Of which sort there is in the holy Scripture mention made of these Marie, the sister of Moses and Aaron, Exod. 15.20. Debora, which in battell o∣vercame Sisara, Iudg. cap. 4. ver. 4. Olda in the time of Iosias King of Iuda, 2. King. cap. 22. vers. 14. The like I would say also of Anna the mother of Samuel, albeit that expressely she be not called a Prophetesse: yet out of her long the which is extant 1. Sam. chap. 2. ver. 10. It appeareth that she did prophe∣sie of the kingdome of Christ, where shee saith, The Lordes adversaries shall be destroyed, and out of heaven shall he thunder up∣on them: the Lorde shall iudge the endes of the vvorlde, and shall give power vnto his king, and exalt the home of his annointed. To conclude, that same Anna, of whome Luke maketh mention, and whome he himselfe calleth a prophetesse cap. 2. verse 36.Five prophetis∣ses of the old Teament. Mary, Debo∣ra, Olda. Anna the mother of Samuel, Anna in Luke. Therefore these five properly are the prophetisses of the old T∣stament. Vnto these may be added one Noadia. of whome mention is made Nehem. cap. 6. ver. 14. bu shee is said to have abused this gifte in the selfe same place, by this that Nehemiah there prayeth against her, when he saith, My God remember th Tobiah and Sanballat according unto these their wokes, and Noa∣diah the prophtisse also, and the rest of the prophets that woulde have put me in feare. Finally the Masoreth of the Hebrewes addeth unto this number of women prophetisses, the wise of Isai the prophet, because shee is called of him a prophetesse cap. 8. v. 3. But shee is not therefore so called by Isai, that shee should be vn∣derstood to have beene endued with this extraordinary gift of God: but that shee may be knowen to have bene his lawfull wife, and a most honest and chast matrone: and not an harlot as the wife or Oseas is said to be, whome being such a one Oseas had married, at the commandement of God Ose cap. 1. These then are the women Prophetisses of the old Testament. The new testament had also his prophetisses, and the same also very famous.Prophetisses in the new Testa∣ment. For Ioel had foretold that it should so come to passe long before, in the time of the gospell cap. 2. v. 28. saying in the person of God: And afterward I wil powre out my spirit upon all flesh: and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophesie: your old men shall dreame dreames, and your young men shall see visions. And that for this cause, least the authoritie and dignitie of the new testament
should be lesse then the old: or lest the gospell should be thought to be lesse garnished with the gifts of God, thē the law was before. Therefore vnder the Gospell there were also godly women Pro∣phetisses, as Peter in the second of the Acts by alledging the former place of Ioel, seemeth for to prooue, as is without all doubt to be seene. Act. 21. ver. 9. where fowre virgins the daughters of Philip the Evangelist,The daughters of Phili th Evangelist. Marie the mo∣ther of Christ. are said to haue prophesied. The like also would I say of Marie the virgin and mother of Christ, the which I saide before of Anna the mother of Samuel. For out of Luke 1. v. 15. and so forth, shee, as it appeareth, doth foreshew and foretel cer∣taine great thinges of the kingdome of Christ, and of the power of God. And these were women Prophetisses in the newe Testa∣ment. As for a certaine woman called Bigid, and one Merlin of England, of whome some write, (for they will haue them to haue prophesied) it is a tale most foolish and most false. That which the euent or falling out of things by them foretold doth prooue. CHAP. 11. Of the godly Prophets of the old Testament, and of their order and succession of following one another. THis likwise i a most profitable questiō, what godly Prophets haue beene in the old Testa∣ment, nay from the very beginning of the world, and who succeeded or followed each other vntill the birth of Christ, at which time the old prophesie is said of vs before, to haue ceased. For this thing bringeth light, and the same very great vnto the interpretation and exposition hereafter to insue, of the twelue Prophets (which are called the smal Prophets) and will shew howe and in what order they are to be place For this matter is not fully agreed vpon nei∣ther among the Hebrues, nor yet among the Christians.Writers agree not about the order and pla∣cing of the pro∣phets. Epiphanius. And to let passe the Hebrues or Rabbins, Epiphanius in his booke of the Life of the Prophets (as we shall afterwards shew) thinketh one way of the order and placing of them, to wit, these our twelue, and Isidorus another way. And Ierome dissenting from them both, followeth that order, after which these twelue are alreadie placed in the coppies of our Bibles.Isidrus. Let vs therefore now goe for∣ward with the question that we haue in hand, & generally shw, so farre as we may out of the worde of God, what Prophets haue
bin from the beginning of this world, vntil the comming of Christ our Lorde. And this shall easily be done, if wee deuide the whole time which hath now passed from the creation of the worlde vn∣to Iesus Christ the King and onely sonne of God, taking flesh vpon him for vs, unto certaine courses or ages of times. And these we will,The time from the creation of the world vntil Christ, deuided into seuen ages. for the better laying open of this matter, make and set downe to be onely seauen, in euery one or which we will shewe what Prophets haue liued. Where first of all I doe willingly con∣fesse, that the succession of the Prophets, vas not alwaies so con∣tinued, that it neuer was interrupted or broken off. For whereas this office was extraordinarie in the Church of God, no maruell, if it often ended, or for a time ceased for to be: in as much as the ordinarie callings them selues (of which sort was sacrificing vn∣der the Lawe) did not withstanding sometime cease, and were broken off, as in the whole time of their exile and captiuitie in Ba∣bylon, and oftentimes else. So therfore it came to passe, the sinnes of men deseruing the same, that the Church of God was often de∣stitute or voyd of true Prophets, as is gathered out of 1. Sam. 3.1. And the word of the Lord was precious in those daies: for there was no manifest vision. And Psal. 74 9. We see not our signes: there is not one Prophet more, nor any with vs that knoweth how long. Therfore there were then no Prophets, but their succession was for the time no doubt of, & the continuation of them broken off. That which no godly man which readeth the holy Scriptures with diligent heed∣fulnes, in my iudgement, will denie. But let vs returne vnto those seuen ages of the worlde, which haue passed since the beginning thereof vnto Christ borne of the blessed virgin Marie. The first of them containeth al that whole time, which was from the making of the world vntil the floud, which fell out in the sixe 100. yeere of the Patriarch Noah. And this age comprehendeth 1656. yeeres. This first age had these Prophets,The 1. age of the world from the creation un∣to the floode, 1656 yeres, had these prophets. Adam, Abel, Enoch, Noah. Adam, Abel, Enoch, & Noah. Of Adam we haue spoken before. Of Abel it seemeth that it may ea∣sily be gathered both out of Mat. 23.34, 35. & Heb. 11.4. namely that he was a Prophet, as also was Enoch, & other Prophets whō the Iewes wickedly flew. Of Enoch there is extant or remaining a most certen Testominie in the word of God to wit, in the epist. of Iude, v. 14. whose prophesy also is there rehearsed, in these words: And Enoch also the seuenth from Admprophesied of such, saying, Be∣hold, the Lord commeth with thousands of his Saints. Of Noah, it is a matter past al doubt, that he was a Prophet of God, & did foretel
of that ouerthrow of the whole world, & the dwellers therein, the which was to come, & was through waters made by God, almost 120 yeares before it came, and that by especiall reuelation from God. Gen. 6.13. And God said vnto Noah:God uealed vnto Noah the destruction of the world by water. An end of al flesh is come before me: for the earth is filled with crueltie through them: and behold I will destroy them with the earth. Read more hereof cap. 7. and 2. Pet. 2.5. Neither hath he spared the old world, But saued Noah the eight person, a preacher of righteousnes, and brought in the floude vpon the world of the vngodly. If there were any more Prophets be∣sides these, they are not rehearsed in the holy Scriptures.The sonnes of God seuered from the sous of men. The sonnes of God indeed are seuered from the sonnes of men in all that first age, and the one are called wicked, & despisers of God, and the other, to wit, the sonnes of God, are said to haue bin god∣ly, and fearing God, Gen. 4. ver. 26. And to the same Sheth also, there was borne a sonne, and he called his name Enosh. Then men be∣gan to call vpon the name of the Lord. And Gen. 6. ver. 2. The sonnes of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fayre, &c. But yet are they not called Prophets. To be short, If any of thē were such, their names are not expressed, vnlesse any man peraduēture wil say, that Lamech the father of Noah, & others borne of Seth, & the Patri∣archs & such as are named in the holy Scriptures, were prophets of God. And these prophets of God had that first age of the world. The second age is from the time of the floud vntil the first cal∣ling of Abraham out of Vr a citie of the Chaldeans,The 2. age con∣taining 422 yerees, had fewe or no prophets. which cal∣ling was made by God. For Abraham first departing with his fa∣ther Thara out of this citie Vr, went vnto Carras, following God calling him. This age had 422 yeeres Gen 12. and Prophets ei∣ther none, or very fewe, at least which are knowne vnto vs by the word of God, vnlesse any man peraduenture will reckon Sem the sonne of Noah, and Melchisedech among the Prophets of that age. For concerning Abraham himselfe before this age, it is ma∣nifest that he was anidolater, and therefore no Prophet of God at that time, Ios. 24.2. such a one not withstanding as afterwarde he was Gen. 20.7. For the first, that the was an idolatour oua saith, Your fathers dwelt beyond the floud in old time, euen Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and serued other gods. For the second, that he was afterwards a Prophet of God saith of him to Abimelech in the place before cited: Nowe deliuer the man his wife againe: for he is a Prophet, and he shall pray for thee. But whe∣ther and of those which Gen, chapter 10. and chapter 11. are rec∣koned
vp for the heads of families and nations of the posteritie of Noah, as Sem the sonne of Noah, and others were prophets, it cannot by any meanes by the word of God be determined. For in the epistle vnto the Hebrewes cap. 11. all this whole seconde age, as it which lacked his Prophets of God, nay that which more is, godly men, is cleane ouerpassed, and the holy Ghost by and by with a great leape and gulfe oftime and succession, skippeth from Noah vnto the calling of Abraham. Then were the Prophets of the world very few, besides Sem and Abraham. The 3. age from Abraham to the giuing of the law, 430 yeeres, had these prophets. Abraham, I∣saac, Iacob, Ioseph, Mo∣ses, Aaron. The third age of the worlde is from the first calling of Abra∣ham out of Vr of the Chaldeans vnto the setting forth & giuing of the law of God vnto the people of Israel by Moses in the de∣sert of Sinai. This age comprehendeth 430. yeares, as the holy Scripture it selfe doth declare Exod. 12. ver. 41. Galat. 3. ver. 17. This third age had these sixe Prophets well knowne, Abraham, I∣saac, Iacob (who also is called Israel) Ioseph, Moses, and Aaron, as appeareth in Genesis, the epistle vnto the Hebrews 11. cap. and infinite other places. For whither in the meane season, whilst the children of Israel liued vnder the Pharaos in Egypt, after the death of Ioseph, and before the birth or the wing of Moses, there were any other Prophets of God, of the Israelites abding in E∣gypt, the holy Scripture doth no where plainly make any menti∣on. And therefore neither wil I affirme the ame. Further, whereas some will haue certaine propheticall writings of Abham the Patriarch to be extant, they are childshly ceiued, foolishly set∣ting one of the Rabbines called Abraham, in steade of Abraham the Patriarch. The 4. age from the Lawe to the bulding of the temple by Salo∣mon, 480 yeres, had many pro∣phets, asThe fourth age of the worlde is to be reckoned of vs from the giuing of the Law in Mount Sinai vntill the building of the Tem∣ple of God at Ierusalem by Salomon (the which falleth into the fourth yeare of Salomon his reigne. This age conteineth 480. yeares, as appeareth 1. Thing. 6. cap ver. 1. And in the 480. yeare (after the children of Israel came out of the land of Egypt) and in the 4. yeare of the reigne of Salomon ouer Israel in the moneth Zif (which is the second moneth) he built the house of the Lord. This age had store of many godly Prophets,Josua, Obo∣ra, the Pro∣phet 1. Sam. 2. ver. 29. Samu¦el, Davi, Na¦than, Gad. as these by the word of God well knowne vnto vs, Iosua which succeeded Moses, De∣borah, and a long time after, that ame man of God set vnto Eli▪ 1. Sam. 2. ver. 27. Samuel, David, Nathan, Gad. But whether those also were Prophets, which wrote the books of the warres Num.
21. ver. 14. and the booke of Iasher Ios. cap. 10. ver. 13. Also the bookes of Chronicles of the kingdome of Iuda and Israel, whereof mention is often made in the bookes of the Kings, is not set downe in the holy Scripture. But that Dauid, and Nathan, and Gad were Prophets of God, appeareth 2. Sam. 12. 1. Chron. 29. ver. 29. and cap. 21. Besides these if there were any other Pro∣phets in that age, their names are not rehearsed. For that which is written of Othoniel the Iudge in the third of the Iudges, vers. 10. and of other Iudges also, that the Spirite of God fell vpon them, when as they were called of God extraordinarily vnto that office, this in my iudgement is not to be vnderstoode of the Spi∣rits of prophesie, as if then they became Prophets, that is, fore∣tellers of things to come, such as was Isaias, Ieremias, and others: but it is to be vnderstoode of the spirite of fortitude or strength, whereby they might be able boldly and without feare, to resist and withstand the enemies of the Church, were they neuer so much to be feared. Neither are there any prophesies extant of those Iudges, who after Iosua gouerned Israel as politique Ma∣gistrates in many ages: neither are there any of them reckoned at any time among the Prophets, but among the Magistrates of Israel. Therefore that which is Hebr. cap. 11. ver. 32. And what shall I more say? For the time would be too short for me to test of Ge∣deon, of Barac, of Sampson, of Iephthe, and Dauid, and Samuel, and the Prophets, doth not prooue those Iudges to be numbred among the Prophets: but onely among godly men, which by faith serued God. For Paul Act. 13. ver. 20. calleth them onely Kritas, that is, Iudges, whereas he calleth Samuel (who was him∣selfe a iudge in Israel) a prophet also. And albeit God, Deu. 18.15. promised the Israelites, that is, his Church, that it should come to passe, that out of it he would raise vp Prophets, euen after that Moses was deade yet was not this rancke and course of Prophets succeeding one an other continuall, but oftentimes broken off, as I haue said. And in deede all the whole time in a manner of the Iudges it seemeth that there were none,Few prophets in the time of the Judges. or else very few Pro∣phets of God in the Church. Therefore 1. Sam. 3. ver. 1. vision and prophesie is said to haue bin very rare, and fayling in Israel, that is, in the Church and people of God. But after Samuel it began to be both more common and also more knowne. Therefore in his time there were many Prophets, as appeareth 1. Sam. cap. 9. and 10. whose names notwithstanding the holy Scripture doth
not set downe. The 5. age frō the temple vnto the carrying a∣way of the ten tribes by Sal∣manazar 294 yeares among many other, had these prophets. Proofe for this former sppu∣tation of time.The fifth age of the world is from the Temple of God buil∣ded at Ierusalem by Salomon King of Iudah, vnto the leading and carrying away of the tenne tribes of the kingdome of Isra∣el, by Salmanazar King of the Assyrians, into Assyria and Meso∣potamia, that which fell into the eight yeare or there about, o die reigne of Ezechias king of Iudah, like as the besieging o Samaria by the same Salmanazar happened about the sixth yeare of the reigne of the said Ezechias 2. King. cap. 17. ver 6. In th ninth yeare of Hoshea, the king of Asshur tooke Samaria, and carru Israel away into Asshur. And cap. 18. ver. 9, 10. And in th fourth yeare of king Hezekiah (which was the seuenth yeare of Hshea sonne of Elah king of Israel) Shalmanesar king of Asshur cam vp against Samaria, and besieged it. And after three yeares they to it, euen in the sixth yeare of Hezekiah, that is, the ninth yeare of He∣sheaking of Israel, was Samaria taken. This age hath two hundred ninetie foure yeares, to wit, thirtie sixe of those fourtie yeares in which king Salomon reigned after he had built the Temple of God, and two hundred fiftie eight yeares after the setting vp o the kingdome in Israel by Ieroboam the sonne of Nabat, that is, among the tenne tribes, the which fell a way from the kingdome of Iudah by and by after the death or Salomon. For so man yeares, namely two hundred fiftie eight, continued the same king¦dome of Israel, rent from the kingdome of Iudah. Nowe th age had Prophets almost innumerable. For there was neuer a∣ny age vnder the whole olde Testament more full of them,  more garnished with the gifts of God, and prophesies, that a well the Iewes as the Israelites might be made inexcusable  without excuse for the despising of God, and his worde. Where∣fore both of them for this cause afterwarde were very sharpel and iustly punished by God, as appeareth 2. King. chap. 17. an Zach. chap. 1. Further, many of the writings of the Prophets, the which are extant or remaining euen vnto this day, were s forth and written at that time, and by the same Prophets, whic liued in that age.Prophets in this fifth age. Therefore let vs now speake in order of the Pro∣phets of that age as many as are extant, for we haue not all the names, nor writings at this day. The first then of these seemeth to haue beene Ahias the Silonite:Ahias the Silonite. for he liued in the daies of Salo∣mon euen vnto the beginning of Roboam king of Iudah, and Ie∣roboam king of Israel: nay which more is, he did foretell of the
renting in sunder into two parts of this bodie, consisting before of twelue members and tribes. 1. King. 11. cap. from the 29. verse vntil the 40. So that this Ahias was a very old man about the be∣ginning of the reigne of Ieroboam 1. King. 14. cap. ver. 4. where it is said of him, that he could not see: for his sight was decaled for his age. Therefore he is reckoned as if he succeeded the Prophet Nathan 2. Chron. cap. 9. ver. 29. where the Acts of Salomon are said to haue bin recorded by Nathan the Prophet, and in the pro∣phesie of Ahiah the Silonite, and in the visions of Iddo the Seer. And Nathan seemeth to haue come almost vnto the times of the midst of the reigne of Salomon. So then the Prophet Ahias the Silonite succeeded Nathan. Afterward liued Iadi, and was in the selfe same time with Ahias:Iadi. but he seemeth in age to haue beene younger then Ahias. Some thinke this Iadi to be the same which is called Addo, and Oded, the which I doe not suppose to be true. He was therefore Iadi. There was also at that time Semeias,Semeias. of whome we read 2. Chron. 12. ver. 15. The Acts also of Rehoboam first and last, are they not written in the booke of Semaiah the Prophet? &c. There was likewise in the same times, that same man of God and Prophet, his prophesie is extant or remaining concerning the ouerthrowe of the Altar at Beth-el 1. King. 13. From the first verse vnto the fourth, yet is not his name set downe; like as theirs is not also, which in the selfe same chapter are called the Prophets of God. There was moreouer at the same time Addo,Addo. 2. Chron. 12.15. but he was yonger then this Prophet, and Semeia, and Ia∣di, after whom also he is set, of whom I haue also spoken alreadie. Furthermore, there was at that time also Azarias the sonne of O∣bed,Azarias the sonne of Obed. younger then Addo, of which Azarias mention is made 2. Chron. 15.1. Then the spirit of God came vpon Azarias the sonne of Obed. For Azarias the sonne of Obed liued in the dayes of Asa king of Iuda, who succeeded his father Abias, & his grandfather Roboam. But Ahias, Iadi, and Semeias, and Addo, liued in the daies of the kings Roboam and Abias,Cōsider if there be not some er∣ror in this pla∣cing of these Prophets. wherefore this shal be the order, course, and succession of these Prophets, to wit, Abias, Ia∣di, Semeia, Obed, Addo, and Azarias, vnder Roboam, Abias, and Asa, kings of Iudah: and vnder Ieroboam and Nadab his sonne kings of Israel. Further, after the Prophet Azarias, who liued and prophesied about the middest of the reigne of Asa king of Iudah there were and flourished these Prophetes, Hanani, Iehu, Elias, Micheas, Elizeus, as appeareth by the holy
historie. And as for Hanani, it is plaine that hee liued in the dayes of Asa 2. Chron. cap. 16. ver. 7. At the same time (he speaketh of the comming of Baasha King of Israel,Hanani. against Asa) Hanani the Seer came to Asa king of Iudah, and saide vnto him, &c. Ieh the Prophet was yonger then Hanani,Iehu. as beeing his sonne, as it is saide 1. King. cap. 16. vers. 1. Then the word of the Lord came vnto Iehu the sonne of Hanani against Baasha, &c. He liued in the daies of Baasa king of Israel, vnto whome and his whole house hee threatned destruction from God. But he seemeth to haue foretold those things in the beginning of the reigne of Baasa. So that from that time it may appeare that Prophesie ceased for a time in the kingdome of Israel, and was broken off vntill the dayes and age or Elias the Thesbite. For Elias the Thesbite, o whome there is 1. King. cap. 17. succeeded this Iehu the Pro∣phet the sonne of Hanani, whereof it insueth, that Prophes seeme to haue ceased in that age among the tenne tribes ren from the kingdome of Iudah, by the space of thirtie who yeares at the least. Therefore after that the Prophets had kep silence so many yeares in the iust iudgement of God again the Israelites beeing idolatours (who worshipped the calues  Beth-el and Dan) and when as the true worship of God amon the Israelites seemed to be vtterly banished bv Achab king  Israel,Elias the Thes∣bite. his Lawe whole blotted out, this Elias the Thesbite appered, or arose vp, sent from God as it were from heauen, to resto both the worshippe of God, and also the true doctrine of t Lawe. Therefore like as C. Marius was called of the Romane the second builder of the citie of Rome: so was this Elias as it w an other,Elias compared with Moses. and a second Moses, who all things beeing past hope, a all religion banished, was extraordinarily raised vp of God: a confirmed, and commended vnto the people by the fast of fou daies, as Moses was: to be briefe, he spake familiarly with God▪ Moses did: nay, he beheld God, as did Moses, & deliuered & rered againe the law of God vnto the Israelites. Whereupon of  Prophets Elias alone was present with Christ with Moses, & gtestimony vnto him when he transfigured him selfe. For he was a new restorer of that same law, the which Moses at the first duered by the commandement of God. Mat. 17. In a word; when now by the space of many yeres there had bin no prophet a the Israelites, then stood vp Elias, of his cuntry Thesbe called  Thesbite, in whom was renued prophesie it selfe, & the autho
of the Prophets. For during the whole time of Baasa, Ela, Zam∣bri, Ambri, kings of Israel, and in the beginning of the reigne of Achab, the tenne tribes were destitute or voide of Prophets be∣cause of their idolatrie. In the which age idolatrie and all kinde of superstition was maruailously confirmed among them. And this did Elias partly represse and stay, and partly take cleane a∣way. For he brought againe into vse among some godly per∣sons the worship of God, the which before was cleane buried. This Elias succeeded that same Iehu, the sonne of Hanani of whome I haue spoken alreadie. In the time of Elias was that Mi∣cheas,Micheas the sonne of Imlah. of whome mention is made 1. King. cap. 22. ver. 8. who also was in the kingdome of Israel. After Elias succeeded Eli∣zeus,Elizeus. as is set downe 1. King. cap. 19. ver. 16. where God saith vnto Elias after this manner: And Iehu the sonne of Nimshi, shalt thou annoynt King oner Israel, and Elizeus the sonne of Sha∣phat of Abel Meholah shalt thou annoint to be Prophet in thy roome. And Elizeus liued a very long time, namely vnto the dayes of Ioas King of Israel,Elizeus prophe∣sied 54. yeeres. vnto the last age of Ioachas king of Iudah, that is to say, Elizeus prophesied almost whole fif∣tie fowre yeares, to wit, vnder the kings of Israel, Ochosias, Ioram, Iehu, and Ioachas, all which together gouerned the kingdome of the tenne tribes by so many yeares, namely fiftie foure, and vnder the kings of Iudah, Iosaphat the sonne of A∣sa, Ioram, Ochosias, and in the beginning of the reigne of Athalia a woman. But who succeeded next after Elizeus the Prophet, is a great question. Wherein I am no we to vnfold the order and course of those Prophets,A great questi∣on, which of the prophets succee∣ded Elizeus. whose writinges in part are extant at this day. For here once againe the successi∣on of the Prophets seemeth to haue beene broken off for cer∣taine yeares, because in the worde of God it is no where set downe, what Prophets were in Israel vnder the kings of Isra∣el Ioas and Ieroboam his sonne: or in the kingdome of Iudah also (except Zacharias the sonne of Ioiada) vnder the Queene Athalia, and Ioas king of Iudah the sonne of Ochosias. And yet this middle space oftime containeth almost fiftie seuen yeres, in the which Ioas and Iereboam his sonne reigned in Israel. But all thinges beeing cast. I finde it to be thus, namely, that vnder this Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas, and king of Israel, was Ionas the Prophet, that selfe same, whose prophesie (by the consent of all men) is extant,Jonas succee∣ded Elizeus. concerning the ouerthrowing
of the citie Ninive, if it did not repent. For hee liued and pro∣phesied vnder this Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas 2. King. cap. 14. ver. 25. For he (to wit, Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas) restored the coast of Israel, from the entring of Hanah, vnto the sea of the wilder∣nesse, according vnto the worde of the Lord God of Israel, which hee spake by his seruant Ionas, the sonne of Amitta, the Prophet, which was of Gath Hephar. Therefore, to graunt as little time as possib∣ly may be vnto this interrupted or broken off succession, at the least wise there are still aboue thirtie yeares betweene the death of Elizeus, and the Prophet Ionas, who next succeeded Elizeus, to wit, the whole reigne of Ioas king of Israel, the which conti∣nued sixteene yeares, and a great part of the raigne of Ierobo∣am the sonne of Ioas, who raigned fourtie-one yeares. Finally, to gather the matter into a briefe, Ionas the Gathire succeeded the Prophet Elizeus, albeit that then this continuall course and succession of Prophets were for a time broken off, and for cer∣taine yeares,A doubt who succeeded Io∣nas. and were as it were vnioynted. And here ariseth a greater doubt, who succeeded Ionas: I will touching this mat∣ter speake what I thinke, and will not that therefore any man should be abridged of his iudgement. I verily suppose that Amos succeeded next after Ionas.Amos succee∣ded Ionas. Neither doe I thinke, that any great reckoning is to be made, what others haue iudged of the order of the Prophets of the old Testament. First for that, as Ierome tea∣cheth in the preface of his Commentaries vpon Ioel, the Hebrues and the Greekes agree not within themselues concerning this matter and order. Secondly, because that also among the Ecclesi∣asticall or Church-writers them selues, looke how many men in a manner there are, so many are there opinions, whilst that they marke not the times, in the which euery Prophet flourished, the which notwithstanding is set downe by all the Prophets them∣selues in a manner. Therefore to rippe vp this whole matter the more deepely for their sakes that are desirous of this historie, it is manifest,The old Christi∣ans not so much carefull for the order of the Prophets, and why. that the first and auncient Christians, which read the the writings of the Prophets, were not much carefull for this order of he the Prophets, either for that by old tradition, it was then suffici∣ently knowne in the Church, who succeeded each other, that is, what Prophets were first, what were latter: either for that, when as they had receiued nothing from the Apostles concerning this matter, they did; thinke that they were not hereupon to contend. The twelue Prophets are in deede numbred among the Canoni∣call
bookes of the holy and sacred Scripture, as in the Canons of the Apostles (as they are called) Canon 85. which is the last of all: in the Councell also of Laodicea, cap. 58. and in first Councell of Carthage, Canon 24. and of Euseb. Caesa∣rien. lib. 4. Histor. cap. 26. and Epiphan. de Mensuris: but they are not reckoned vp in order, who succeeded others. Somewhere this onely is written, that there is one booke of the twelue Prophets; otherwhere, that there are twelue bookes of the twelue Prophets. But why should not the Greekes and La∣tines beeing straungers and Proselytes among the Hebrewes, be ignorant of these thinges, when as the Rabbines them∣selues,The Rabbines themselues see not downe the order of the prophets exactly and the olde Hebrewes (so carelesse were they of their owne historie) doe not set downe this thing? For Eccle∣siast. cap. 48. (where no doubt the opinion of the Rabbines of that age is rehearsed) Isaias is reckoned vp, as he that succee∣ded next after Elizeus. And cap. 49. of the same booke, ver. 12. there is onely saide to haue beene twelue Prophets: but who they are, or at what time they liued, is not rehearsed, such was the flouthfulnesse of this learned Hebrewes, yet otherwise most curious in searching out of trifles. In Iosephus the Histori∣cian,Josephus. and also a great Hebrewe, of this matter all is whist, when as this thing notwithstanding did especially appertaine vnto the vnfolding of the antiquitie of the Iewish nation. And albeit the olde and first Christians, as I haue saide, haue left vs nothing at all touching this orderly placing of these twelue small Prophets, as they are called: yet haue the latter writers afterwardes dili∣gently inquired of this matter. In the which notwithstanding, as I haue shewed, they doe not consent nor agree within them∣selues. For Epiphanius in his booke of the Life of the Prophets, doth so place the twelue Prophets, of the which we doe nowe speake, (for of the Prophets of whome I haue spoken alreadie, there can be no doubt at what time they were,) namely that O∣seas is the first of them twelue in order, then Amos, Micheas,How Epiphani∣us placeth the xij. small pro∣phets. Ioel, Abdias, Ionas, Nahum, Abakuk, Sophonias, Aggeus, Zacharias, Malachias, for that Epiphanius had receiued from the opinion of the seaventie Interpreters, that they were so to be placed, as Ierome sheweth in his preface vpon Ioel. But Augu∣stine, who was after Epiphanius, lib. 2. de doctr. Christ. cap. 8.Augustine. doth reckon them otherwise, namely thus, Oleas, Ioel, Amos, Ab∣dias, Ionas, Micheas, Nahum, Abakuk, Sophonias, Aggeus,
Zacharias, Malachias, and this out of the chiefe of the He∣brewes or Rabbines, as the selfe same Ierome writeth, who him selfe notwithstanding setteth not downe his owne opini∣on.Jsiodorus. Isidorus Episcop. Hispalens. lib. 7. Etymologic. cap. de Pro∣phetis, doth number them thus: Oseas, Ioel, Amos, Na∣hum, Abakuc, Micheas, Sophonias, Abdias, Ionas, Za∣charias, Aggeus, Malachias, disagreeing from them both, to wit, the Hebrewes and the Seventie. Out of all which appeareth howe diuerse the opinion of the Ecclesiasticall or Church-wri∣ters hath beene of the order and placing of the XII. Prophets, which are called the small Prophets. And I doubt not but that more also may be gathered of the studious and diligent, if a man would seeke after the opinion of euery one: but I for short∣nesse sake, will be content with these, by the which is vnder∣stoode, howe that a man is not carefull of this matter in vain, and that hee may without enuie set downe and shewe his opi∣nion or iudgement also of these thinges. Wherefore out of this by path to returne into the way at the length, I say that by the consideration of the times, it seemeth vnto me thus, that Amos is to be set in the second place, that is after Ionas, because in time he followed next vnto Ionas. Wherein this rule ge∣nerally is to be followed of vs,A rule for the finding of the antiquitie of one Prophet before another. That those Prophets which doe witnesse that they prophesied vnder the former, or elder Kings, the same may also be deemed to haue beene former, or more olde and auncient, then those which prophesied vn∣der the latter Kings, albeit that the same doe often concurie and meete with those other younger ones, and liuce at the same time, because that those former Prophets continued long in their office of prophesying. So Oseas and Isaias doe liue and prophesie at the same time, of the which notwith∣standing without all doubt Oseas liued first, or beganne to prophesie, and therefore it is to be iudged to be first. For Oseas maketh mention also of Ieroboam king of Israell, who was the sonne of Ioas, and witnesseth that he prophesied vn∣der him. Nowe this Ieroboam was more auncient then those kings vnder whome Isaias witnesseth that hee was, and also prophesied. Wherefore in as much as Amos was, and also prophesied vnder that same Ieroboam King of Israel, and sonne of Ioas, two yeare before the earthquake (which fell into the second yeare of Vzias King of Iudah) it appeareth
that Amos was in age before him, and therefore more anci∣ent then Oseas,Amos more ancient then Oseas and I∣saias. who notwithstanding prophesied under the same king. Now Oseas prophesied long after that same famous earthquake, and when as Vzias had bene and was now a good while confirmed in his kingdome: in the beginning of which Vzias his raigne, Amos notwithstanding began to foretel things to come by Gods commaundement. VVherefore this must be the order of the xii. Prophets, Ionas, Amos, after Amos I place Oseas: for Oseas began to prophesie about the last dayes of Iero∣boam sonne of Ioas king of Israel,Oseas. as appeareth by his owne testimonie cap. 1. v. 1. The word of the Lorde that came vnto Oseas the sonne of Beeri, in the dayes of Vzias, Iotham, Achas, and Heze∣kiah kinges of Iuda, and in the dayes of Ieroboam sonne of Ioas hing of Jsrael. And Oseas prophesied in the kingdome of Israel, at the which selfe same time (albeit he began after him, and were younger then he) prophesied also in the kingdome of Iuda that same Isaias, which was of the kings stocke. After Oseas follow∣eth in order Micheas, another of the twelve, who prophesied under Ioatham, Achaz, and Ezechias kings of Iuda,Micheas. before the carrying a way of the ten tribes by the Assyrians, Mich. 1. cap. v. 1. Then worde of the Lorde which came unto Micah the Morashite in the dyes of Iothan, Achaz and Hezekiah kings of Iudah, &c. And Ieremy also maketh mention of his prophesying under Heze∣kiah cap. 26. v. 18. in these wordes, Micah the Morashite prophe∣sied in the dayes of Hezekiah king of Iudah, &c. And these so many Prophets had this fift age, that is to say, these which follow, and which are, Nathan, Ahias the Silonite, Semeias, Iadi, Addo, O∣bed, Azarias, Anani, Iehu, Elias, Micheas the first, Elizaerus, Ionas, Amos, Oseas, Isaias, Micheas the second, or the Mora∣shite, besides those that are not named by their proper names in the holy scripture. The sixt age now followeth: and the same continueth from the carrying away of the ten Tribes (which were the kingdome of Israel) made by Salmanazar king of the Assyrians,The sixt age frō the carying a∣way of the ten Tribes untill the full captivi∣tie of Babylon 133. yeres had these prophets. untill the times of the full captivitie of Babylon, the which happened un∣to the kingdom of Iuda (to wit, after the overthrow of the king∣dome of Israel) namely when as the Iewes with their king Ze∣dekias were wholly carried unto Babylon and Media by Nabu∣chadnezzar Emperour of the Babylonians: and not onely be∣gunne to be carried away. For they beganne to be carried away
vnder Ioacim king of the Iewes, 18 yeres before their full and through captivity. This sixt age containeth 133 yeeres. For so much space of time passed betweene the ten tribes of the king∣dome of Israel carried away by the Assyrians, and that full cap∣tivitie of the Iewes made by the king of Babylon, as it appea∣reth by the continuall succession of the kings of Iudah 2. King. 17.18. cap. and so foorth. For the first captivitie or carrying a∣way of the Iewes by the Babylonians beganne, in the reigne of Ioacim sonne of Iosias, having reigned now 4 yeres, as I haue saide already and appeareth Matth. 1. cap. ver. 11. and in the first yeere of the Empire of Nabuchadnezzar Dan. 1. vers. 1. And the last or full captivitie fell out vnder Sedechias the king having reigned no we eleven yeres. In this age the Prophets so succeeded one another, that there seemeth to have beene no interruption or breaking off. For the prophets of God which lived in this ninth time, succeeded next vnto Micheas the Mora∣shite. And the first of them in my iudgement, and so farre as I can gather, all things beeing considered, was Nahum. For he see∣meth vnto me to haue beene,Nahum. and to have prophesied next after Micheas, and after the carrying away of the ten Tribes of Isra∣el by the Assyrians, to wit, vnder die king Ezechias, when as yet now the Empire of the Assyrians florished in all respects, and no man so much as once durst by dreame to thinke of the fall there∣of: yea finally when as hitherto it had felt no hurt from any peo∣ple, and as yet had not growen into contempt, the which not∣withstanding happened vnto his Empire aftervvard, to wit, vnder Sennacherib who succeeded Salmanazar. For under him first of all the Assyrians received that great overthrow, at the besieging of the city of Ierusalem, of the which mention is made by Isai∣as cap. 37. ver. 36. to wit, how the Angell of the Lord went out, and smote in the campe of Ashur an hundreth, foure score, and five thousand, &c. At which time the Emperour of the Assyrians first doubtlesse began to waxe vile and to be contemned or despi∣sed of his subiects. And of this his overthrow, and losse for to come prophesied Naum: also cap. 1. ver. 14. in these wordes. And the Lord hath gîven a commandement concerning thee, that n more of thy name be sowen: out of the house of thy goddes will I cut off the graven and molten image. I will make it thy grave for thee: for thou art vile. Therfore after this overthrow, the people that were subiect vnto the Assyrians, and especially the Babylonians or
Chaldeans began to lift up themselves into a kingdome of their owne, and to fall away from the Assyrians. A proofe whereof is this, for that under Salmanazar king of the Assyrians, the Ba∣bylonians are reckened vp as wholly subiect unto the Assyrians, and vvithout any king of their owne, 2. king. cap. 17. ver. 24. where we read thus: And the king of Ashur brought folke from Babel (by vvhich it may appeare that Babylon was then subiect unto the Assyrians) and from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamah, and from Sepharhaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria in stead of the children of Israel, &c. But after that same great over∣throw, the vvhich Sennacherib king of the Assyrians, and succes∣sour unto Salmanazar received in Iudea, the same Babylonians are rehearsed, as those who had novv a king of their ovvne, and did seeke and sue for the fellovvship and friendship of other peo∣ple, which were enemies unto the Assyrians, Isai. cap. 13. ver. 1. At the sametime Merodach Baladan, the sonne of Babadan king of Babel (novv Babylon hath a king of her ovvne) sent letters and a present unto Hezekiah, &c. Out of vvhich appeareth that vvhich wee haue saide, that the Assyrian Empire began first to fall to decay under king Sennacherib, and to grovve into contempt among men, so that novv all men might easily thinke upon the mine of the same. But that the same should come to passe, Nahum by revelation from God had foreshevved before this time. For what matter of great importance had it beene,Nahum prophe¦sied of the ruine of Assyria. or neede of any especiall prophesie to shevve unto the Assyrians their destruction then, that is to say, when as all men of by reason of that overthrow vvhich before they had received, might easily gesse, and by vvise coniecture gather that the same vvoulde by and by insue. VVherefore every one not given to contende, may novv easily understand, at vvhat time Nahum prophesied. Namely in that middle space of time, vvhich pas∣sed betvveene the carrying away of the ten Tribes by Salma∣nazar and the destruction or overthrovv of the host of Sennache∣rib. And this is the space of 8. yeres under the reigne of Ezechias. So then Nahum prophesied in the dayes of Ezechias king of Iudah, from the seventh yeere of his reigne unto the fourteenth yeere, as may be gathered by the 2. King cap. 18. vers 10, and 13. Next after Nahum prophesieth Ieremie, namely the thirteenth yeere of the same Ezechias, as hee him selfe doth clearely shevve, chap. the first, verse the second,Ieremie. vvhere he saieth
that the word of the Lord came unto him, in the dayes of Iosi∣ah the sonne of Amon King of Iuda in the thirteenth yeere of his reigne,He seemeth to have mistaken Hezechiah for Josiah. Ioel. who a very long time used this office in Iudeah, namely by the space of 40 yeres. After Ieremy I doe place Ioel: for Ioel doth foreshew that same famine the which Ieremie the Prophet did foretell also, and the which was under Iosias, after the 16 yeere of his reigne, as suppose. Of the which read Ieremy chap. 14. from the first unto the seventh verse. After Ioel fol∣loweth Olda the Prophetesse,Olda the pro∣phetesse. of whom the holy history maketh mention, 2. Chron. cap. 34. ver. 22. Then Hilkiah and they that the king had appointed, went to Olda the Prophetesse, &c. For she was of great authority in the dayes of Iosias, at that time especially, when as the booke of the law was found in the Temple of God, that which fell out in the 18 yere of the reigne of Iosias, as ap∣peareth in the 8. verse of the 2. Chron. cap. 34. And Ieremie the Prophet had now begun to prophesie sixe yeres before, namely in the 13. yeere of the reigne of the said Iosias. I also doe place the prophesie of Ioel before the finding out of the booke of the law, as I doe the famine in like manner, the which was foretold by Ioel,Sophonias. After Olda I doe next set the prophet Sophonias, who prophesied in the latter dayes of King Iosias, to witte, after the purging of the Temple of God by Iosias, and that same fa∣mous keeping of the passe over in Judea, wherof read 2. Chr. 35. 2. King. 23. when as the glory and state of the kingdom of Judah seemed to florish, and to be now throughly restored. I doe there∣fore place the prophesie of Sophonias after the twentieth yeere of the reigne of Iosias, at what time the overthrow of the king∣dom of Iudah (the which Sophonias foretelleth) was lest looked for of any man, because that the worship of God was now tho∣roughly restored by Iosias. After Sophonias succeedeth the prophet Abdias:Abdias. for Abdias seemeth to haue prophesied not onely after that Iosias was slaine in battell by Pharao Necao king of Egypt, when the kingdome of Iuda being novv very sore afflicted, the enemies thereof and the next borderers did rush in upon it on every side, but especially the Idumaeans: but also af∣rer that Ioakim king of Iuda was fore pressed of Nabucadneza king of the Chaldeans, Syrians, Moabites, Ammonites, and other people borderers, and was troubled and shut up in Ieru∣salem, when as also the first captivitie of the Iewes was neere at hand, as it is to be seene 2. King. 24. v. 2, 3. & 10. Among which
borderers the Idumeans no doubt were the most deadly ene∣mies, because they were the brethren of the Iewes. Therefore a∣boue all other neighbour nations they onely wished the destru∣ction of and overthrow of the whole nation of the Iewes, and did urge the same because of their old hatred against the Iewes, unto whom, after that Ierusalem was taken, and the Iewes all slaine, they were and remained notwithstanding deadly ene∣mies, as appeareth Psalm. 157. where the Iewes pray against him for their crueltie shewed at the siege of Ierusalem and say: Remember the children of Edom, O Lorde, in the day of Ierusalem, which said, Rase it, rase it, to the foundation thereof. But at the selfe same time when as the Idumeans thought themselves most hap∣py, because of the then first most dolefull state of the Iewes (their matters being then brought into so narrow a streict) un∣der Ioachim king of the Iewes, Abdias denounceth or sheweth destruction unto the Idumeans, as also doeth Ieremie cap. 49. from the 7. verse unto the 23. Abdias therefore must have lived and prophesied about the end of the reigne of Ioachim king of Iudah, whilest Ieremias also used his office, the kingdom of the Iewes being greatly diminished and decayed, and the Idume∣ans for this cause reioycing and triumphing within themselves. But these Idumeans did the Chaldeans afterward most cruelly bring in subiection unto themselves, to wit, when as they come againe the second time with their king Nebucadnezar, to be∣siege Ierusalem, in the reigne of Sedechias, as it was foretold by Abdias. After Abdias followeth Habakuk the prophet, but in Iudea.Habakuk▪ For after the carrying away of Ioachim king of Iudah by Nebucadnezar into Babylon, together with his mother and fa∣mily: nay after that the people of the Iewes being the people of God, were sore pressed of the Chaldeans an infidell nation, Habakuk prophesieth under Sedechias, that is, after the seventh yere of his reigne. Therefore he setteth downe a forme of prayer for the Iewes already caried captives into Babylon, and for them that were after to be carried. Habakuk therefore with his owne eyes saw the Chaldeans uniustly ruling now over Iudea, & most greevously oppressing the people of God in the time of his pro∣phesie, at the which time Ieremie lived, and yet also prophesied. Yet in order and also in age the prophet Ezechiel goeth before the Prophet Habakuk: but in Chaldea.Ezechiel. For Ezechiel together with Ioacim the king of Iuda (who in the kingdome succeeded
his brother Ioacim) was carried away by Nabuchadnezar Em∣perour of the Babylonians. But Ezechiel being in Babylon be∣gan strait for to prophesie, that is, in the fifth yere after the car∣rying away of Ioacim, and to comfort the godly, and to terrifie or affray the wicked Iewes. Ezech. cap. 1. vers. 2, 3. In the fifth day of the moneth Chebar (which was the fift yere of King Io∣achims captivitie) the worde of the Lorde came unto Ezechiel the Priest the sonne of Buzi, in the land of the Chaldeans, &c. At the which very time Sedechias the uncle of Ioacim reigned yet in Iudea, and Ieremie also prophesied of the same event or falling out of things Habakuk then is after Ezechiel, because that Haba∣kuk came neerer unto the times of the overthrow of the city Ie∣rusalem. VVherefore this sixt age had these prophets, namely Nahum, Ieremias, Ioel, Olda the prophetesse, Sophonias, Abdi∣as, Habakukin Iury, and Ezechiel in Chaldea. The 7. age from the captivitie unto Christ, 508 yeres, had these prophets. To conclude, the seventh and last age comprehendeth all that time, which passed from the full captivitie of the Iewish people under the Babylonians (which fell into the eleventh yere of Se∣dechias king of Iuda) untill the birth of Christ, and manifesta∣ting or shewing him in the flesh. And this age hath 508. yeeres, to wit, 51 which are to be taken out of the 70 yeres of the cap∣tivitie of Babylon. For of those 70 yeeres there were passed. 18. comming in, and falling betweene the first, or begun captivitie, which was in the fourth yeere of Ioacim king of Iudah, and their full carrying into Babylon, the which happened in the e∣leventh yere of Sedechias king of Iudah. Therefore of those 70 there remaine onely 51, if you take out of them 19 yeres. Now vnto these fiftie and one yeeres adde or put too the weekes of Daniel, which are Dan. cap. 9. and containe 457, and you shall make 508 yeres, which is the iust space of time which passed be∣tweene the captivitie of the Iewes under Sedeehias, and the birth of Christ. Now this seventh age had these prophets knowen unto vs out of the word of God: and first of all Daniel, who as appeareth by his booke prophesied in Chaldea almost that same whole time of the 70 yeeres, or carrying away into Babylon.Daniel. For he lived both under Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and all that time in the which was the Empire of the Chaldeans. Fi∣nally, became even unto Cyrus, who overthrew the Empire of the Babylonians, and did first set up the kingdome of the Per∣sians. Of this Daniel we read Ezech. cap. 28. vers. 3. Beholde
thou art vviser then Daniel (he speaketh so in mockge of Tyrus) there is no secret that they can hide from thee. After Daniel succee∣ded the Prophet Haggaeus,Aggeus. after the deliverance of the people of the Iewes out of the captivitie of Babylon, prophesying in u∣dea. After Haggeus succeeded Zacharias, and albeit that they prophesied at one time, yet Zacharias was the latter.Zacharias▪ And therefore Esdr. 5. Agg. 1. ver. 1. Zach. 1. ver. 1. he is reckened af∣ter Aggeus, as later then he in the execution of his office. After Zacharias follovveth Malachias,Malachias. after whom the ranke and suc∣cession of the prophets was interrupted or broken of. For those of whome mention is made Nehem. 6. ver. 14. are not alowed. Moreover, those which after the times of Malachias wrote cer∣taine Psalmes, are not known by name, albeit many of them were prophets of God. The last, and those which lived in the age and time of Christ, but being yet an infant, and unknowen, are these, Zacharias the father of Iohn the Baptist. Luc. 1.Zacharias the father of Iohn Baptist. Simeon. Anna the pro∣phetesse. And Simeon and Anna the prophetesse, of whom writeth the same Luke cap. 2. Wherefore this seventh and last age had these pro∣phets: Daniel, Aggeus, Zacharias, Malachias, Zacharias the se∣cond, Simeon, Anna. And thus much hitherto of the order and succession of the prophets of the old Testament. CAP. 12. How the writings of the godly Prophets have beene gathered together. AND this also is a worthy question, How the writings of the godly Prophets, which are now extant, haue bene gathered togither.The prophets of the heathen. For con∣cerning the Prophets of the heathen I haue nothing to say, this only excepted, that it ap∣peareth out of the 6. book of Virgil his Aenei∣dos, to witte, that the Sibyllae did afterwardes write in leaves, & on the barkes of trees by peece meale, the ver∣ses, which they uttered with their mouth, & that their answers lay thus cast abroad and scattered about their cave (in which being shut up they prophesied) untill such time as they were gathered togither either by themselues, or by some other body, & so were patched & packed up togither. But the maner of the godly pro∣phets was otherwise, the vvvhich did not make sleight accoūt of their prophesies, as namely being such the which they knew to
be the very worde of God, neither would they have them to lye scattered and carelesly, when as they knew that they did apper∣taine not onely unto the edifying of the Church that then was, but also of the Church that was to come. Therefore I thinke it necessarie to be shewed how they were gathered, and how they at that time became knowen unto men, and so consequently were delivered over unto us as it were from hand to hand.The iudgement of some, of the gathering of the writings of the Prophets. Some he have written being moved with that of Isai. 8.1. and Habac. 2.2. that this was the maner of the Prophets, after that they were commaunded by God to shewe and declare anything unto the people, that they did in few wordes comprehend the summe or effect of the things by them declared, and fasten it on the dores of the Temple. The which writings when as by the space of certaine daies they have stoode sufficiently open, were taken downe of the ministers of the Temple of Salomon, and laide up in the Treasurie, that there might be extant or remaining a perpetuall monument or remembrance thereof. And thereof they will have that it came to passe that the sermons of the pro∣phets be not alwaies set down in such order as the circumstance of the time, and of the things also by them foretold doth require The which last point of the order of their sermons, is I confesse most true. But whereas out of that which we read Esai 8. ver. l how God willeth the Prophet to take unto him a great rowle, an to write in it with a mans pen, &c. And Habakuk. 2. God com∣mandeth Habakuk to write the vision, and to make it plaine, upo tables, that hee may runne that readeth it: they would confir the former opinion of the maner of the gathering together of the sermons of the prophets, those two places doe onely shewe that the godly prophets were commanded by God to put the oracles or prophesies in writing, for that they did make for th comforting of Gods elect, and confirmation of the authoritied the heavenly truth, but doe not teach that the same prophets  fasten their writings on the dores of the Temple: and much lesse proove, that the said propheticall writings were afterwardes ga∣thered together and preserved or kept by the Priestes or Mini∣sters of the Temple.The confutatiō of the former opinion. For if this were the maner of publishing and lawfull setting abroad of the prophesies, what should ha become of those prophesies and prophets, who executed the office in the kingdome of Israel, as for example Amos did, whe there was neither any Temple of God, neither yet any godly
priests. Shall we say that at such times they sent their prophesies unto Ierusalem, and caused them there to be set up upon the dores of the Temple? And that so in the end they were gathered together and kept by the ministers of the Temple? No doubtlesse. For how can this be prooved to have bene done so by any place of the holy Scripture? Neither may any man thus thinke, that the prophets fastened their writings on the dores of idolatrous Tem∣ples (such as were in the cities of Bethel and Dan) when as they prophesied in the kingdome of Israel. For they themselves did not so much as once come unto those temples, much lesse would they seeme to give countenance unto them with so honoura∣ble testimony of their writings, the which places they them∣selves out of the word of God did pronounce to be most wicked and detestable, and that mostiustly. Finally what should at those times have befallen the godly prophets, when as both the priests themselves of the Temple of Salomon, and all the ministers thereof besides did iudge the doctrine of the prophets and their prophesies, as blasphemous, and noysome and hurtfull unto the people it selfe, the countrey and city of Ierusalem, nay did thinke them to be utterly abolished or done away, as it fell out under V∣zias and Achaz the kings, and also under Sedechias. Isa. 7. Iere. 36. would any man I pray you suppose that the such like priests and ministers of the Temple being so deadly enemies unto the prophets of their times, gathered togither notwithstanding and laide up in the Treasurie the writings of the Prophets, and were desirous to have them preserved, and not rather to be utterly done away and burned, as appeareth out of the selfe same 36. chapter of Ieremie? Danaeus his iudgement of the gathering together of the writings of the prophets. Therefore without preiudice or forestalling the iudgement of any man this is my opinion, and thus doe I teach, both that these twelve small prophets (whome for the smallnesse of the bookes by them see foorth they call the small prophets) and al∣so those, whome they tearme the great Prophets, because of the greater workes which they wrote, did in such sort deale concer∣ning the setting abroad of the word of God, the which they had received of God to declare and preach, as did before them both Moses, and Ioshuah, and Samuel, and Nathan, and Gad, and Semeias, who them selues also were Prophets of God, and before those whose propheticall writings, as they call them, wee have at this day, I thinke I say, that first of all they
did often openly, and in the hearing of all the people, according∣ly as they were mooued by the spirit of God, and accordingly  they were commanded by God to execute their office in Iud or in the kingdome of Israel, or elsewhere, they did, I say, openly diligently, and carefully declare and deliver that same word  God, the which by revelation they had received from God. A so by this meanes that very excellently and easily their doctri became knowne unto the whole people by that often repetiti and making sermons many times of one matter unto the peopl unto whome they were sent by God, so that it was manifest acerten unto every one, what those prophets had said, or shoul say.The prophets themselves did put the summe and effect of their prophesies in writing. Now after that their prophesies and doctrine, according a was by them delivered, was knowen unto the people, the prphets themselues did briefly comprehend in writing those the prophesies (the which they were expressely by God commaded to set foorth) to the end, that being by them thus writte they might publish and communicate or impart them unto  godly, to testifie the providence of God for mankinde unto  Church, or for the perpetuall comfort of the godly, and for  terrour or fearing of the wicked. Hereof commeth that say of Ambrose, It belongeth vnto the people to discerne the spirits the Prophets. For that if they had not first openly declared th doctrine, neither were they wont to be called prophets,  their writings to be read.Moses. So Moses himselfe is commanded God to write those things, which hee had foretold concerni the destruction of the Amalechites should come to passe, Ex 17.14. And the Lord said unto Moses, Write this for a remembra in the booke, and rehearse it to Ioshua: for I will utterly put out  remembrance of Amalek from under heaven. So he the same Mses after the rehearsing of the doctrine of the Lawe the seco time in the plaine of Moab, doth write it out, and delivereth t same booke unto the Levites to be read continually, to be wten out, and to be kept. Deut. 31. v. 24. unto v. 30. And 2. Chr. 3 14. &c. mention is made of the finding of this booke of the L written in the Temple.Samuel. But Moses doth not fasten or set up t booke upon the dores of the Tabernacle. So the bookes of Smuel were written by Samuel. So by Nathan, Semeias, Gadt  prophets, their prophesies being often, or once uttered by mou accordingly as God commanded, were afterwards by them p in writing. 2. Chron. 9.29. & cap. 12. ver. 15. So the things whi
should come to passe unto Ioram, Elias wrote out in an epistle,Elias. the which afterwardes was sent unto Ioram by the prophets, the disciples of Elias, by whom it was kept, and was not gathered to∣gether or kept by the priests or ministers of the Temple of Salo∣mon. Hereof read 2. Chr. 21. from the 12. unto the 16. ver. So I∣saias first taking faithfull witnesses doeth openly pronounce or speake those things,Esaias. the which by revelation from God he was commaunded to foretell to come to passe: and afterwards he wri∣teth them out himselfe, sealeth them, and delivereth them to be kept unto his disciples, that is, unto the godly. Isai. 8.1, 2. & 16. But to make an end at the last of this matter, it doeth no where better appeare that this was used to be done, then out of the book of the prophet Ieremie. For as it appeareth by the 26. chap. v. 7, 8, & 16.Ieremie. Read the whole 26. and 36. chapters. Ieremie doeth openly often times utter the doctrine told him from God, to wit, in the audience of all the people. And the priests of that time doe utterly condemne his words and prophe∣sies, and do think them to be abolished or done away, much lesse that they would lay them up in the treasury of the Temple. Nay morvover, Iehudi the purple or gallant Courtier of the king Sede∣chias doth burne those oracles or sayings of God, after that they were written by Ieremie him selfe. Iere. 36.23. but by the com∣mandement of God and Ieremie telling him what to write the second time, the selfe same things are written againe by Baruch his minister, as in the same chapter appeareth. The like may any man easily gather out of the same Ieremy cap. 29. Out of Ezec. cap. 12. & 14. Finally, thus the Apostles, as Paul, Peter, and the Evangelists, Matthew, Iohn, Marke, and Luke, have left unto us their writing, the which are another part of the word of God. For this their doctrine the which they afterward put in writing, they did first along time and often utter by mouth, and then wrote it, and imparted it unto nations unto the everlasting glory of God, and edifying of his Church. And this in my iudgement was the use, maner, and way of gathering together of the books and writings of the prophets. But if for this cause they are now thought to be of lesse cer∣tentie, and undoubted credite, then if they should be saide to have beene publikely kept by the priests in the Treasury of the Temple and so by this means to have come unto us:  I deny this, For those writings of the Prophets have beene by all the godly faithfully and uncorruptly kept, & delivered unto posteritie. Nei∣ther
is it recorded of any other book that he was kept in  Temple of God, besides the booke it selfe of the law, the whi Moses wrote with his owne and proper hand 2. Chr. 34.14.  Hilkiah the Priest found (to wit, in the Temple) the booke of  law of the Lord given by the hand of Moses. To be short, the wtings of the prophets, if they had bene kept in the hands of  priestes and onely in the Temple, of the which they were  chiefe rulers (they being too too often the open enemies of  heavenly truth) they might of these priests more easily h beene corrupted, then if we should earnestly hold and say th they were kept in the closets and hands of the godly. Where it commeth to passe, that nothing hereby either can, or ought seeme to be taken from the certenty of the writings of the pphets (the which God by his holy spirit speaketh into our he 1. Ioh. 2.27. But the anointing which he received of him, dwellet you: and yee need not that any man teach you, but as the same annting teacheth you of all things, and it is true, and is not lying, and it taught you, ye shall abide in him) if they haue in such sort bene gthered together, as we have shewed, even out of the word of G it selfe. There remaineth yet one thing, the which may be obiected laide against us, namely, how then falleth out this disorder chapters & time (which is seene in the writings of the Prophet if the prophets themselves gather togither their owne writing  But the answer is easie and at hand, to wit, The prophesies were put in writing, not as the prophet would, but as God cōmanded. that every severall pphesie was not alwaies in such sort written by the prophets, a was first foretold and foreshewed by them, but they were comanded by God to commit every one to writing. Therfore ma times that prophesie which was later in time was set forth a written former notwithstanding, God so commanding: aga that which was first uttered by mouth, was yet later written a recorded. For neither by the Prophets, nor yet by the Apos themselves is there alwaies observed or kept an exact or iust  koning of time, the spirit of God in such sort enditing unto th those writings, to the end that godly men might with more  and diligence be occupied in reading of them wholly: & mig rather mark the matter it selfe, which is comprised in these wtings (because it appertaineth unto faith in God) then the hist of the things written by the Prophets, wherin the onely pleas of the readers is many times sought for, & looked after.
CAP. 13. Of those things vvhich ought to be especially observed or mar∣ked in the expounding of the writings of these prophets of the old Testament. FVrthermore we haue also to consider, what is especially to be observed or marked in the expounding of the wri∣tings of the prophets of the old Testa∣ment, that their meaning and understan∣ding may be the more easie unto us: Af∣terwardes I will set downe what Epi∣phanius, Ierome, and Isidorus have writ∣ten concerning these xii. prophets, so that at length I may conclude and make an end of these fore∣notes. And for the setting foorth of an easie exposition of all the propheticall bookes of the old Testament,The historie & the method es∣pecially to be noted in the prophets. these two things espe∣cially are diligently to be observed and noted, namely their hi∣story, and their method or order in writing. The history, touching the things, persons, and times, where with the severall bookes of the prophets deale, and of the which they speake. VVherein not∣withstanding wee are litle or nothing holpen by the prophane Historicians, if you except those things, the which are set downe in the 11. chp. of Dan. for the easie understanding whereof, that maketh very much, the which Tit. Livius, Appianus, Plutarchus, and some other writers of credit of the Greeke and Latine history have left unto us. But as concerning the things which appertaine into the former age, they receive either none at all, or else very small light from the prophane Historiographers, I meane Hero∣dotus, Diodorus, Siculus, Xenophon, and such other like. For with them all that age was either confused, or disorderly min∣gled, or bewrapped with tables, or altogither unknown, where∣fore the whole historie of those former times is of us to be sought for out of the word of God written only: yet hath there none hi∣therto in my iudgement bene found, who hath wholly gathered it, as it ought, by the diligent and carefull comparing and laying togither of the holy scripture with it selfe, albeit many have writ∣ten many Histories, Chronicles, fardels of times &c. The new writers do here more further us unto the knowledge of these mat∣ters, as Iosephus Scalig. the very light of his age, in his books de Emend. Temporum, Matthaeus Beroaldus▪ a man whilest he lived,Ios. Scaliger. Beroaldus,
my very friend: Franciscus Iunius, in a maner my citizen, and most deare unto me,Iunius. a man of singular learning, in his late scho∣lies and notes most learned (in my iudgement) upon the Bible and finally Arias Montanus in Biblico suo apparatu (for I would not have any mans praise taken from him) yet for all this there is wanting unto us at this day such a writing the which out of the word of God might conteine the whole,Arias Mon∣tanus. that is, a iust and full hi∣storie of the former times of the universall worlde, the which  being holpen with the writings of other men am about, if God graunt me life and leisure (for I wrote this at Orthesium in the yeare of the Lord 1584 being now fiftie yeere olde) and that the peace of the Church will suffer it. In the meane season, le euery man note and gather for him selfe, as much as hee can out of the whole holy Scripture, whatsoever appertained un∣to the historie of the prophets. The methode also or order of the prophets is diligently to be noted of vs,The method or maner of wri∣ting of the pro∣phets. to the ende, that the exposition or know∣ledge of them may be cleare and easie unto us. For albeit,  Lactantius writeth libr. 5. Institut. Christian. cap. 1. the pro∣phets of God, as unto the people did speake in the commo and plaine language: yet as Augustine writeth Libr. 4. de Doct. Christian. cap. 7. the same were eloquent men, and they ofter used figures in writing, under which they covered many things the which by how much the more they seeme to be covered i borrowed speeches, by so much are they the more sweete, when as they are opened, especially if they be referred unto the newe Testament.Rules to be ob∣served in the Prophets. Let us therefore brieflie shewe what profitable rules especially are in their writings. As for the te they that are diligent may gather out of Augustine lib. 4. de Doctr. Christ. cap. 7. The first and the chiefest rule shall be, That those things the which the Prophets doe foretell to come to passe hereafter, they do so tell them,They foretell things to come, as if they were present, or al∣readie past. as if they were now present, or else already past, to the end the certenty of the thing to come and by them fore∣told may be understood to be the greater. Therefore the verbe which they use in the preterperfectense, or time past, are to be taken for the future tense, that is, in the signification of the future, or time to come, and that in all prophesies, and alwaies, like as wen they tell of a thing done, that those things which the prophets doe say to have bene, or to haue come to passe by
verbe of the preter tense, or time past, we doe expound that the same things shall come to passe, and by a verb of the future tense, or time to come, albeit by them they be as I said conceived and uttered by a verbe of the preter tense or time past. Examples whereof sith every one may meete withall, there is no neede to make any stay in the alledging of them. And especially this rule is to be followed, when as they prophesie of Messias the king to come in the flesh. For they deliver those things as alrea∣die done, the which notwithstanding were as yet to come. For they had their accomplishment in Christ, whereupon it is said that the old Testament beareth witnesse unto the new. 2. Rule. Things spoken figuratively, not to be taken sim∣plyThe second rule is, That we expound not, nor take not those things, which by them haue bene said or done tropically and fi∣guratively, as if they had bene only said or done naturally or sim∣ply, albeit I deny not that they were done according to the letter, or literally: for that the writings of the Prophets are full of tropes and figurative kindes of speaking, it is more knowen, then that any man can doubt thereof, the which hath read but one onely leafe in them. So Mich. 1. So Isa. 1.Many of the do∣ings of the pro∣phets mysticall, and signes of things to come. So every where that there are to be founde many actions and deedes of theirs, the which are also mysticall, and signes of things to come, and not onely to be read according to the letter, and as things by them barely done, Augustine hath long since very notably taught, wri∣ting against Faustus. Otherwise they might be thought to be madde and franticke persons, who notwithstanding were mooved by the holy Ghost unto the doing of them in such order, and therein did altogether obey God, and were most wise. So Isaias goeth bare footed, Isai. cap. 20. vers. 2.Isaias bare foo∣ted. So Iere∣mie weareth a vvoodden chaine about his necke.Ieremy wea∣reth a woodden chaine. Ierem. cap. 28. vers. 10. So Ezechiel carrying his stuffe vpon his shoulder in a darke night making an hole in the vvall goeth into another mans house. Ezech. cap. 12. vers. 7.Ezechiel cari∣eth his stuffe by night into ano∣ther mâs house. All these were the doinges of men well in their wits, nay of godly men, being so commanded by God, but to be expounded mystically, and not onely accor∣ding unto the bare deed done, but to be understood according unto the signification of them. 3. Rule. Often amplifi∣cations used by the prophets.The third rule is, That we diligently observe and note the of∣ten amplifications which the Prophets use. For there is no∣thing more common then them. for both in the describing or laying out of the sinnes of men: and in pronouncing or de∣claring
the iudgements of God against them: and in shewing the mercy and goodnes of the same God, they doe weigh in m∣ner all circumstances alwaies, they doe wisely and advised marke, recite, compare, or lay togither things going before, a things that follow after. VVhereof it commeth to passe that w do find often amplifications in their writings, the which are  either to be confounded and mingled one with another, or to  passed over with squint eyes, or looking as it were through o fingers, that is, sleightly: but we must also distinguish or mar out the reason of one amplification from another and diligently consider of every one of them. For otherwise it will come passe, that the oration or speech of the godly prophets which most eloquent, and ought to be said and praised of us to be mo briefe, shall be thought to be but a certaine vaine babbling, & tedious or troublesome repeating of one thing only, or as an ab∣surde or foolish and incredible hyperbole or excessive speaking beyond the truth. But doubtlesse they do speak & write nothing but that which is well framed: nothing but that which is fetch and gathered wisely and godlily from the nature it selfe of th things whereof they intreat: nothing finally but that which is a∣terward confirmed and approoved by the very issue or falling o of things. And they use these amplifications in the setting forth the faults of mē, & both in the iudgemēts & also in the benefits God, lively to lay out before our eyes the greatnes of the matter who by reason of our naturall dulnesse, are drowsie, & make sin regard of them otherwise. These amplificatiōs (which others ∣ther tearme exornations) they which in the writings of the Pro∣phets either do not mark, or wisely distinguish one frō another b their divers & sundry argumēt, matter, or reason, do corrupt th same most eloquent writing of the prophets, ful of great efficaci or cause that it should seeme to be fond & foolish,4. Rule. What figures are chiefly to be noted. Wherēin the unlearned must aske helpe of the learned, yet as occasion shall be offered I will endea∣uour to describe them as plainely as I can. the which hath ioyned with it great blasphemie toward God himselfe. The fourth rule is, that in the writings of the prophets of the old testament, these figures especially be observed or marked, first in their simple words, these, to wit, often metaphors, & enallages, or chāgings of tenses & persons. For in one & the same verse many times they do go frō the secōd persō to the first, or unto the third, & contrariwise by & by frō the second or third unto the first, and they change the tenses of verbs, that their speech may be of more force, & more pricking the hearers. In the things thēselves, or sen∣tences
of the prophets, these figures must be noted: Epiphonemata,These are words of art, & shalbe expounded in their proper places. Propodae, Apostrophae, Hypotyposes, Hypophorae, & such similitudes as are brought by the prophets. Exāples wherof, whē as they are eue∣ry where to be foūd in these our commentaries following, I haue thought good heare to alleadge thē. For I must studie to be brief.5. Rule, that those thinges which be spoke by way of threatning, be not taken as things absolute∣ly decreed by God, which can not but come to passe. Last of all, the fifth rule is this, the which is diligently to be mar∣ked in the same writings; that we take not those things, which they doe onely denounce or declare by the way of threatning as if they were the setled and determined iudgements of God simp∣ly and in such sort, as they can not be altered. For Anselmus doth teach very well, that there is one prophesie of the predesti∣nation of God, the which shall certenly come to passe; and ano∣ther of Commination, or by way of threatning, such as was that of Ionas, Yet fourtie dayes, and Ninive shall be destroyed:2. Sorts of pro∣phesie. likewise that of Isai, Thou shalt die, and not liue, Isai 38. and many other which are to be found in the other prophets.1. Of predefli∣natiō vnchage∣able. For they which make not a difference betweene these prophesies in the predictions or foretellings of the Prophets, do both trouble & misturne the mea∣ning of God,2. Of commi∣natiō alterable vpon the repen∣tance of the parties, & such like conditions. Peter Martyr. & doe draw them selues into most hard & comber∣some questions, as it were snares & labyrinths or mazes, out of the which being once in, they can very hardly afterwards get. Finally it misseth but a litle by the means of the fond opinion of these kind of interpreters, but that the truth & word of God is like to be dis∣credited. But because that P. Martyr hath at large & notably hand∣led all these points, the which afterwards in his Common places haue bin collected together by others, I will here make an end of these things. As for that which M. Tullius Cicerol. 2. de divin. al∣legeth against Divination of things to come, I haue not refuted the same, because that I suppose godly and prophetical foreshew∣ing of things to come to be sufficiently confirmed by God him∣selfe, who can not lye,Proofes that godly prophesie is warranted by God. whereof there is vndoubted testimonie Deut. 18.15. The Lord thy God will rayse vp vnto thee a Prophet like vnto me from among you, euen of thy brethren: vnto him ye shall hear∣ken. Act. 7.37. the very selfe same is confirmed. 2. Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. We haue also a most sure word of the Prophets, to the which ye doe well that ye take heede as vnto a light that shineth in a darke place, vn∣till the day dawne, and the day starre arise in your hearts. So that ye first know this, that no prophesie in the scripture is of any priuate motiō. For the prophesie came not in the old time by the will of man: but holy en of God spake as they were mooued by the holy Ghost. Those there∣fore which gaine-say him, and dispute against thi
neede of confutation, but of bumbasting. For as it is in Plato, It is  detestable and madde wisedome to curse and thinke euill of God. And this thus farre. Almightie God, the father of all mercie and true wisdome, for his onely sonnes sake Iesus Christ our Lord, graunt that wee may both expound his Prophets truely, as beeing guided by the same spirit, wherewith beeing mooued, they spake: and that we our selues reading these Prophets godly, holily, and reuerently, may with all our hearts acknowledge him in Christ, and serue and worship him for euer.
OVT OF EPIPHA∣nius his booke of the life of the PROPHETS. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Oseas. OSee the Prophet the sonne of Beeri, borne in Belemoth,Osee. of the stocke or tribe of Isachar, gaue a signe and a wonder, to wit, that the Lord should come from heauen into the earth: and that this should be the token of his comming: if that same oke in Seloin be of it selfe clouen into twelue parts, and doe become so many okes. And so it came to passe. He prophesi∣ed not a little of the fornication and whoredome of his nation. When hee had layde downe his life in peace, he was buried in his owne lande. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Amos. AMos the Prophet, borne in Theuca, of the land of Zabulon,Amos. was father vnto the Prophet Esaias. And beeing continually beaten of Amasias the Priest of Beth el, he was laid waite for, and rayled at. In the ende, the sonne of Amasias slewe him, striking him about the temples with a club, because that he had checked him about the snares of the two calues of gold But yet breath∣ing, he went into his owne countrey, and there dying, was buri∣ed with his Auncetours. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Micheas. MIcheas the Prophet the Marathite,Micheas. was borne of the tribe of Ephraim. When as he had shewed many things vnto Ahab king of Iuda, he dyed beeing cast downe headlong by Ioram the sonne of Achab; because he had reprooued him for the iniquities of himselfe, and of his Auncetours, the which they had commit∣ted. He beeing deliuered from the prison of his bodie, founde a tombe alone by himselfe at Maratha in his owne land neere vnto Polyandrum. And his tombe is most famous euen vntill this day.
The lyfe and death of the Prophet Iohel. IOhel the Prophet,Iohel. borne of the tribe of Reuben, in the lande of Bethor, prophesied many things ouer Ierusalem, and or the en∣ding of nations. He also ended his daies in peace, and was buried at Bethor in glorie and honour. The life and death of the Prophet Abdiu. ABdihu the Prophet born in Sichem,Abdihu. and in the land of Beth∣achamar. This is he who caried the halfe Centurion, or pee Captaine, and whome Elias the Thesbite spared. He went down to speake with the king, and after this, being a forsaker of the kings ordinance, he stucke vnto Elias the Prophet, and became his dis∣ciple, for whose sake sustaining many things, he was saued. And ending his life, he was buried with his father in the land of Beth∣achamar. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Ionas. IOnas the Prophet was of the lande Cariathamarim,Ionas. not farre from Azotus, a citie of the Greekes, neere vnto the Sea. At that time the Prophet Elias reprooued Achab the prince of Samaria. The same Elias when as he gat him selfe into the wildernes, by reason of a great famine the which he had called vpon the lande, where beeing nourished by ravens, he quenched his thirst with the water of the brooke, and when the brooke was dried vp, he was an hungred, and remooued vnto Saraptha a citie or towne Sidonia,It seemeth that in this, & some other things be∣fore and here∣after, that Epi∣phanius was deceiued, and therefore no futher to be credited, then he hath the word of God to warrant him. vnto a certaine poore woman a widowe, the mother o Ionas, and entred into her house. Nowe the woman left nothing vndone of that which he commanded her. And he did eate, and blessed her, as well in her grayne as in her oyle, and he remained with her, for he could haue no aboad with the vncircumcised▪ And when as Ionas the sonne of this widow was deceased, God raised him vp by Elias, and restored him aliue vnto his mother, be∣cause of the entertainment which she gaue him. When Ionas therefore came vnto full age, he was sent vnto Ninive to the Assy∣rians, and when as he went about to flie from God, he was swal∣lowed vp of a Whale in his iourney, minding to haue gone vnto Tharsus. And going forth againe out of the Whale, he preached in Ninive. Then the Ninivites repented before God, & made God to become fauourable vnto them: but Ionas ouertaken with hea∣uines, returned vnto his natiue countrey, and did not thinke good
to remaine at home, but taking vnto him his mother, was a soiour∣ner in Sur, in the land of the Heathen, for he said, least peraduen∣ture it be cast in my teeth, that my prophesie against the Nini∣vites was vaine or false. When as therefore he dwelled in the land of Saar, he died there, and was buried in the caue of Cenezeus the Iudge. And the same Prophet prophesied, that when they should see in Ierusalem innumerable strangers from the West, the same citie should be pulled vp by the roote, and vtterly be destroyed. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Nahum. NAhum the Prophet,Nahum. was borne at Elckesi beyond the riuer Iordan, towards Hegabar of the tribe of Simeon. This is that Prophet, who after Ionas gaue a signe and a wonder ouer Nini∣ve, that in time to come it should be destroied by sweete waters, and earthly fire. That which in the end came to passe, because that fire out of an earthquake compassing it round on euery side, water also comming by and by from the wildernes, drowned all the higher places of the citie. As for Nahum he gaue ouer his life in peace, and resteth in quiet death in Begabar in his owne home. The life and death of the Prophet Abacuk. ABacuk the Propher, borne in the countrey of Bexzochar,Abacuk. and tribe of Simeon. When as before the taking of it, he did foresee the captiuitie of Ierusalem, he did greatly lament both o∣ver the citie, and also ouer the people of the same. And when as Nabuchodonosor drewe neere Ierusalem to destroy it, he fled in∣to Ostracine, and remained a dweller there in the land of Ismael. But when as the Chaldees breaking vp from Ierusalem, returned into their owne countrey with the spoile and captiues, and the remnant of the citie Ierusalem went downe into Egypt, this Pro∣phet comming againe into his owne countrey, serued the reapers in his field. For he had sowen barly: but straight as he had pre∣pared meate for them, he prophesied vnto his, saying: I shall goe into a farre countrey, and returne quickly, but if I make any long stay, set you before our reapers what to eate. And beeing carried vpon the sudden into Babylon, he gaue Daniel his dinner, who was in the caue with the lyons. After comming forth, he stood with his rea∣pers as they were now at supper, & did not impart vnto any man
any thing of this matter, which had happened. Furthermore, within fewe dayes after Abacuk shewed afterwards out of Baby∣lon, that the people should returne to Ierusalem. He gaue them also a signe, which dwell in Indea, namely that they should see in the Temple a great light shining clearely, and so should behold the glorie of God. He foreshewed also of the ouerthrow of the Tem∣ple, that the overthrow thereof should be in Ierusalem by a peo∣ple from the west. Then said Carbasus, Dabir shall be deuided in∣o two parts: also the heads or chapters of the two pillars shall be taken from the midst, and no man shall know where they are, o whither they came, but they shall be carried out by Angels into the desart, where the tabernacle of Martyrdome was lately made and in them the Lord shall know in the end, that they shall ligh∣ten the persecuted by the serpent, as from the beginning. And the Lord shall keepe them from the shadow of death, and they shal be in the holy tabernacle. This Prophet prophesied not a few things of the comming of the Lord, and two yeares before the people returned from Babylon, death tooke him, and he was bu∣ried with great honour in his owne countrey. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Sophonias. SOphonias the Prophet was a Sarabathite,Sophonias. or of the mount Sa∣rabatha, and of the tribe or stocke of Simeon. He also prophe∣sied of the citie Ierusalem, namely that it should be farre better it were built in length and bredth. Also vpon the ouerthrowe o nations, and like wife the destruction of the wicked, and the com∣ming of the Lord. He died in the reuelation of the Lord, and was buried alone in his ground. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Aggeus. THe Prophet Aggeus when as he was but yet a very young man,Aggeus. came from Babylon vnto Ierusalem, and prophesie plainly of the returne of the people. And he sawe with his eye the building of the Temple at Ierusalem. He there first of all san Alleluia, which is to say, Let vs set forth with prayses the liuing God. Amen, which is expounded, So be it, So be it. He therefore died in the same place, and was buried in the ground neere vnto the Priests with honour and glorie. And therefore euen vnto thi
day we sing Alleluia, which is said to be the song of Aggeus and Zacharias. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Zacharias. ZAcharias the Prophet, the sonne of Barachias,Zacharias. came from the land of the Chaldees, and as he went, he prophesied ma∣ny things vnto the people, and for demonstration sake shewed many miracles. This is hee which told Iosedeck vnto his face, there shall a sonne be borne of thee, who entring into the mini∣sterie shall sacrifice vnto the Lord at Ierusalem. He also blessed Salathiel in his sonne, saying, He shall beget a sonne, and shall giue him to name Zorobabel. Zacharias also gaue a token of Cyrus the king of the Persians, and that vnto victorie. He likewise shewed a signe touching Croesus the king of the Lydians, and concerning Astyages the king of the Medes. And he prophesied furthermore of the publike seruice, the which king Cyrus should doe at Ierusalem, and he set him forth with praises, and did not smally blesse him. Further, touching his owne foretelling in Ieru∣salem (the which they call prophesie) and of the ouerthrowe of nations, and of the building of the Temple at Ierusalem, and fi∣nally he expounded some things with a certaine double iudge∣ment concerning the idlenes and slouth as well of the Prophets, as of the Priests. Hee died in extreame age in the lande of Iudea, and was buried next vnto the Prophet Aggeus. The lyfe and death of the Prophet Malachias. MAlachias the Prophet was of the tribe of Zabulon.Malachias. He is said to haue bin borne after the returne of the people from Babylon, in Sopha, to wit, in the land of Zabulon. He from the beginning of his age, and whilst he was a yong man, is reported to haue liued a blamelesse life. Certaine things are prophesied by him of the comming of the Lord, and of the iudgement of the deade, and that the ceremonies with the Lawe of Moses shall haue an ende, and be amended. And when as all the people did reuerence him, as a man indued with no lesse holinesse then mildenesse, they gaue him to name Malachias, the which (if a man require the interpretation) soundeth an Angel. For he was of a marueilous excellent beautie. And what so euer Malachias
said besides in his prophesie, he was thought that an Angel  daily instruct him, and declare vnto him, as it is said also to haue bin done in the time of the Anarchi, or when there was yet  gouernment, as is set downe in Spharpheti, that is, in the book of the Iudges. And this Prophet beeing as yet a young man, d before his time, and was laid by his Auncetours in his owne field OVT OF THE PREFACE of Ierome vpon Ioel. Diversitie in the order and placing and placing of the xij. Prophets.THere is not all one order or maner of placin of the XII. Prophets with the 70. Interp∣ters, as is retained or kept in the truth of  Hebrew. For the 70. make Amos the secon Micheas the third, Ioel the fourth, Abd the fift, Ionas the sixt, Naum the seuenth. H∣bacuk the eight, Sophonias the ninth, Agg∣us the tenth, Zacharias the eleuenth, Malac as the twelft.The order of the Prophets in the Hebrew. But the Hebrewes after Osee, the which with th both is the first, read Ioel the second, Amos the third, Abdias t fourth, Ionas the fift, Micheas the sixt, Naum the seuenth, Hab∣cuk the eight, Sophonias the ninth, Aggeus the tenth, Zacha the eleuenth, Malachias the twelfth, who also is the last. And be∣cause I haue once reckoned vp all the Prophets of one volume, seemeth vnto me profitable briefely to set downe the Etymologi or significations of their names, both in Greeke and Latin Osee, whome they interpret Sozon, we may call a Saviour,  Archomenos,The significati∣ons of their names. Beginner. Amos, Bastazon, which in latine is ca∣led Portans, a Bearer. Abdias, Doulos Kuriou, that is the serua of the Lord. Ionas, Peristera, that is, a Doue. Macheas, Hostio a name giuen of two parts of speach, the which with vs sounde Who as it were, or who will. Naham, Paraklêsis, that is comforting, Abakuk, Perilambanon, that is, imbracing,  wrastling. Sophonias, Kekrumenos kuriou, that is the hidde of the Lord. Aggeus, Heortaxon, whome we may call Feast vall, or solemne. Zacharias, Mneme kuriou, that is, The remem∣brance of the Lord. Malachias, Aggelos mou, that is, my Messen∣ger. All which in what sense they are to be taken, shall be shew∣ed in their bookes. Now the foure other Prophets, that we
make vp the number of sixteene, are Esaias, Ezechiel, Ieremias, Daniel: and they haue this vnderstanding. Esaias is called Sote∣ria kuriou, that is, the Saluation of the Lord. Ezechiel Kratos ku∣riou, the which we may terme, the Strength or commandement of the Lord. Hieremias Huthelos kuriou, that is, the high one of the Lord. Daniel Ekrine me kurios, that is, the Lord hath iudged me. Ex Isidori Etymologicôn lib. 7. cap. de Prophetis. OSee, Sauiour, or sauing.Osee. For when as he did prophesie the wrath of God against the people of Israel for the sinne of idola∣trie, he pronounced or declared health vnto the house of Iudah. For the which it is shewed, that Ezechias king of Iudah, taking away the idols, the which the for∣mer kings had halowed, did purge and clense the Temple of the Lord. IOel, the Lord God, or Beginning vnto God, or He was Gods.Joel. For this doth his name sound in an vncertaine signification. AMos, a people pulled away. For his prophesie was vnto the people of Israel, because it was now rent from the Lord,Amos. and rued the golden calues, or was pulled away from the kingdome of the stocke of Dauid. NAhum, a bud, or a Comforter.Nahum. For he doth rebuke the ci∣tie for bloud, and after the ouerthrow thereof he comfor∣eth Sion, saying: Behold vpon the mountaines the feete of him that ringeth glad tidings, and declareth peace. ABacuk, Embracing,Abacuk. because that either for this that he was beloued of the Lord, he is called embracing; or for that he ommeth into battell with God, he hath the name embracing, at is, wrastling. For none so boldly durst chalenge God vnto the
disputing of his righteousnes, namely, why in the affaires of men of men  of this world, there was in things so great iniquitie? MIcheas,Micheas. who is he, This one that is left? For he threatn Samaria for the cause of Idols after that manner: of  which another saith, Who is this that wrappeth vp sentences▪ SOphonias is expounded,Sophonias. the glasse or secret of the Lord. B agreeth vnto the Prophets. For they know the mysteries o crets of the Lord. Whereupon it is said vnto Ezechiel, I haue m thee a Watchman, or in Espiall ouer the house of Israel. And in other place, The Lord will not doe any thing, vnlesse he reueale ∣pen it vnto his seruants the Prophets. ABdias,Abdias. The seruant of the Lord. For as Moses was the ∣uant of the Lord, and the Apostle the truant of Christo Prophet being sent an Embassadour vnto the Gentiles, doth and preach, such things as are beseeming the ministerie & sent of a Prophet: and thereupon he is called the seruant or the Lo IOnas expounded a Doue,Ionas. or sorrowing A doue, for his owing when he was in the bellie of the Whale. Sorrow either for the sorrow which he had for the saluation of the N∣vites; or for the Iuie tree suddenly withering, with whose sha he was couered against the heate of the sunne. He also (as Iewes doe hold) is Amathi the sonne of the widowe of Sara∣whome Helias raised from death, his mother saying vnto him terward, Now I know that thou art a man of God, and the wo of the Lord in thy mouth is true, and for this cause the childe called Amathi For Amathi, out of Hebrew into english, signif truth, and of this that Helias spake the truth, he which was ra was called the sonne of truth. ZAcharias,Zacharias. The remembrance of the Lord. For the seuen yeare of the destruction of the Temple beeing ended, ∣charias preaching, the Lord remembred his people, and by▪ commandement of Darius, the people of God returned, the tie and the Temple is reedified or builded againe. AGgeus in english,Aggeus. signifieth ioyfull, and glad. For he prop∣fieth
that the Temple destroyed, must be built vp againe, and af∣ter the sorow of their captiuitie, preacheth the ioy of their return. MAlachias is interpreted, the Angel, (that is,Malachias. the Messenger) of the Lord. For whatsoeuer he spake, it was beleeued, as if had beene commaunded from the Lord, and therefore the Seuen∣tie haue thus translated his name, saying, The taking vp of the word of the Lord vpon Israel, by the hand of his Angel. Now not onely a good man, but also a wicked man may haue Prophesie. For we finde that Saul the king did prophesie. For he persecuted the holy one Dauid, and beeing filled with the ho∣ly Ghost, began to prophesie. The ende of the Fore-notes.
THE WORLD FROM THE CREATION vntill the comming of Christ▪ diuided into seuen ages, and what Prophets of name flourished in euery one of them, as more at large in the fore-notes appeareth. The first age of the worl from the cre∣ation vto the flood containing 1656. yeares, had these Prophets: Adam Abel Enoch Noach The second age from the floud vntil the first calling of Abraham out of Vr of the Chaldees con aining 422. yeares, had ei∣ther none at all, or els very fewe prophets knowne vnto vs out of the word of God, except these may be coūted in that nūber: Sem Melchisedech The third age from the first caling of Abraham vnit the giuing of the Lawe by Motes in the de¦sert of Sinai, con∣taining 430 yeares, had these Prophets: Abraham Isaach Iaacob Ioseph Aaron Miriam the prophetisse. The fourth age from the giuing of the Law vntill the building of the Temple by Salomon containing 480. yeares, bad thse Prophets: Ioshua Debora the Prophetisse. Samuel Dauid Nathan Gad The sift age from the Tēple vnto the captiuitie of the ten tribes containing 294. yeares, had Prophets almost in∣numerable, but of name, these Ahias Iadi Semeias Addo Azarias Hanani Iehu Elias Micheas 1. Elizeus Ionas Amos Oseas Esaias Micheas 2. The 6 age frō the captiuitie of the tē tribes till the times of the full captiuitie of Baby∣lon, is 133. yeares! in this age flourished these Pro∣phets, whose names are re∣corded in the Scriptures. Nahum Ieremie Ioel Olda the pro∣phetisse. Sophonias Abdias Habacuk Ezechiel The seuenth and last age from the captiuitie of Babylon vntill the birth of Christ containing 508. yeares, had these Prophets, whose names are written in the Bible. Daniel Aggeus Zacharias Zacharias father of Iohn Baptist. Simeon Malachias Anna the prophetisse.
A COMMENTA∣rie of Lambertus Danaeus vpon the Prophet Ioel. CHAP. I. THE drift and ende of this Prophet,Two ends of this Prophet. is two fold: the one proper and peculiar vnto this Prophet in a manner, 1 Proper and pe∣culiar. namely to teach with howe great aptnesse to learne, and with how readie obedience we ought to obey God when he cal∣leth, and how that vnto this matter we are not to take to counsell neither flesh nor bloud, as Paul speaketh Galat. 1. ver. 15, 16. saying of himselfe, But when it pleased God (which had separated me from my mothers wombe, and called me by his grace) to reueale his sonne in me that I should preach him among the Gentiles, immediatly I communed not with flesh and bloud: neither ought we to be troubled about the euent or issue of this our trauaile, and mi∣nisterie, or seruice to be done, Act. 26. ver. 19. Wherefore king A∣rippa, I was not disohedient vnto the heauenly vision. 1. Pet. cap. 5. er. 2. Feede ye the flocke of God, so much as in you lieth, saith the Spi∣rit of God. Of the which places, the first in like cases requireth our obedience, and the latter our vtmost endeuour and diligence. For there is a rewarde readie for vs, albeit we be refused of men, and that we profit not, that is, albeit the matter haue not such successe as we hoped for, and wished that it should. August. lib. 1. contra Cresconium, cap. 5.8. and 9. And this is the proper ende of this booke, and appertaineth vnto all which ordinarily or extraordi∣narily are called by God, either vnto offices in the common∣wealth, or in the Church. The second ende and drift of this booke,2 Common with other Prophets. is common vnto Io∣nas
with the other Prophets to wit, to set forth the iudgemen and mercie of God towards mankinde: in the which selfe same point notwithstanding Ionas hath this as peculiar vnto himselfe for that he is not here sent vnto the Church and people of God but onely vnto profane, vnbeleeuing, and vncircumcised person that we should vnderstand that God hath rule ouer all nations,  is the God as well of the Gentiles as of the Iewes, and that he waies hath bin Lord ouer them, God is Lord o∣uer all, but yet not father of all in Christ. but yet not father of them all  Christ notwithstanding. Psal. 105. ver. 7. He is the Lord our G his iudgements are through al the earth. Rom. 3.29. God, is he the  of the Iewes onely, and not of the Gentiles also? yes euen of the Gent also. But of the Prophet himselfe, many other before vs haue sp∣ken, & it may sufficiently be gathered who he was by the 2. K 14.25. where we read that Ieroboam the second restored the co of Israel, from the entring of Hamath, vnto the sea of the wilder according vnto the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spake his seruant Ionas the sonne of Amittat the Prophet, which was  Gath Hepher.Who & whēce Jonas was. And it seemeth that Ionas was the first of all  Prophets, whose writings are remaining in the bookes Cano call. For he liued before the battell of Ioas king of Israel with  Syrians about the ende of the life and prophesie of Elizeus  King. cap. 13. ver. 14. &c. and cap. 14. ver. 25. Reade that whic haue written in my fore-notes, and vpon the Prophet Amos.  then the Prophets were sent vnto the Syrians, and to them of  mascus, and to the Tyrians, and Gentiles, but yet extraordina∣ly, as appeareth by the sending of Elias to the widow of Sare 1. King. 17. ver. 9. &c. by the going of Elizeus vnto Damascus,  King. cap. 8. ver. 7. where in that which followeth, Benha king of Syria beeing sicke, sendeth to knowe, whether he sho recouer, or no. And 1. King. cap. 19. ver. 15. where Elias is  God willed to goe vnto Damascus, and to annoynt Haz∣king of Syria. Vers. 1. The word of the Lord came also vnto Ionah, the so of Amittai, saying: THIS verse containeth both the calling of the Prophet,Contents of this verse. as the ratifying of his office to come, 1. The calling of Ionas. and also the name a stocke of Ionas him selfe. 2. His name and stocke. 1. His calling. He was therefore called by God,  tooke not vpon him this counsaile and purpose of any priu
surmize and thought of his owne. Therefore when as Ionas followeth not his calling, he resisteth against God calling him, and is become guiltie of most shamefull rebellion. Therefore that wee may vnderstande the sinne of Ionas, and of all o∣thers that obey not God, when he calleth, their lawfull cal∣ling is first to be noted, the which here is expressely concer∣ning Ionas set downe, and else where in like manner of o∣thers, as 1. Sam. cap. 3. of the calling of Samuel, and of his obedience beeing called, and so also of Paul, as he before A∣grippa testifyeth of himselfe Act. cap. 26. from the 16. verse vn∣to the 21. 2. His name & stocke. And the name and stocke of the Prophet here ex∣pressed, doe shewe more certenly that he was euidently and peculiarly called of God vnto that office, the which afterward notwithstanding he did refuse. Vers. 2. Arise, and goe to Ninive that great citie, and cry a∣gainst it: for their wickdnes is come vp before me. A Plainer expressing of that in the first verse. For he shew∣eth what that worde of God was, A plaine lay∣ing out of all the circumstan∣ces of Ionas his calling, & why. the which in the for∣mer verse he said, came vnto him. And briefely, he stayeth vpon the laying downe of euery the circumstances of his calling, to the ende that we may knowe that his calling was certaine, and from God, and that he sinned not of ignorance, as one which had knowne nothing at all what he had commaun∣ded him, but of a setled and purposed obstinacie or stubborn∣nesse of minde. The first circumstance is here expressed,1. Circumstāce, the commande∣ment of God. namely the comman∣dement of God him selfe, willing him to arise and goe, that is, all delay laid apart, and all hanging backe or excuse making set aside, to remooue from the place and lande in which he was. He is commanded to arise, and goe him selfe, that he should vnder∣stande that he in his owne person must speake these thinges to the Ninivites in their presence, not by a substitute, or to get another to doe it for him. For those whome God calleth vnto the office of teaching his Church, ought to execute this office by them selues, and not by others for them. A pastour must attende vpon his charge, vnlesse the more speciall good and seruice of the Church require his absence. In this case he may substitute a man: so was the absence of Epaphras at Colosse,
and of Timothy at Ephesus supplied by Tychicus. Calv. Colo chap. 4 ver. 7. and 2. Tim. 4 9, 10. 2. Circumstance.2. Circumstāce. The place whi∣ther he was to goe. The Prophet himselfe sheweth the pla vnto the which God precisely sendeth him, and this is Ninive, th great and wealthy citie, of the which shalbe spoken hereafter,  whereof we reade Gen. cap. 10. ver 11. that it was builded by ¦shur: and this citie was in Assyria out of the promised lande,  borders of the elect or chosen people.  But why is Ionas sent  to it, and doth Nahum afterwardes prophesie of it? whenas t Prophets of God for the most part, were appointed and sent t to the Israelites, and not vnto the Gentiles?  I answeare, beca that God by this threatning and meanes would shewe, Why Ionas was sent vnto the Gentiles. that  onely among the Iewes and Israelites, but in all nations  people that he is a reuenger and punisher of wickednesse, an chalenger of his owne right, and therefore the God and Lorde all peoples, yet not the Redeemer of them all in Christ, but o∣ly of his Church. Eph. chap. 5. ver. 6. Let no man deceiue your vaine wordes:Proofes that God is a reuen∣ger & punisher of wickednes. for, for such thinges commeth the wrath of God¦on the children of disobedience. Coloss. chap. 3. ver. 6. Mo therefore your members which are on earth, fornication, vncl∣nesse, the inordinate affection, euill concupiscence, and coue¦nesse, which is idolatrie. For the which things sake, the wrath of  commeth on the children of disobedience. Rom. chap. 1. ver. 18. the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen against all vngodlines,  vnrighteousnes of men, which withhold the truth in vnrighteous and ver. 28. For as they regarded not to know God, euen so God del∣red them vp into a reprobate minde, to doe those things which are  conuenient. Rom. 3. ver. 29. God,That he is God and Lord of all. is he the God of the Iewes onely,  not of the Gentiles also? Yes, euen of the Gentiles also. Psal. 105. ve He is the Lord our God, his iudgements are through all the earth ¦ph. 5.23. For the husband is the wiues head, euen as Christ is the h of the Church,That Christ is the Redeemer of his Church. & the same is the sauiour of his body. Therfore o Prophets also, as Isaias and Ieremias, haue prophesied agai the Gentiles. Another cause of the sending of Ionas vnto Ni∣niue. But by this meanes moreouer, and sending of  Prophets vnto straungers, and such as were vncircumcised, G would reprooue the desperate stubbornnesse of the people  Israel, the which could not be mooued by so many his Prophe by so many threatnings, when as the infidels, or vnbeleeuers no∣withstanding, did by and by obey euen the voice of one Pro∣phet, yea and the same beeing Ninivites, that is, the might
lordes of things, and the most wealthy Monarkes or Emperours of the world, and consequently most proud persons. Mat. 12.41. The men of Ninive shall rise in iudgement with this generation, & condemne it: for they repented at the preaching of Ionas: and behold, a greater then Jonas is here. The like is Luc. 11.33. which shew∣eth both the speedy repentance of the Ninivites, and that the same shall turne unto the condemnation of all others, whome their example, or greater then they can not move to doe the like. In the third place is set downe the cause of this punishment and denuntiation or forewarning, 3. Circumstance The cause of this punishmēt. the which God would haue to be given unto the Ninivites. And this same was most iust, so that Ionas ought the more willingly to obey it, that he might be a defender of the power of God contemned by the Ninivites wallowing yet in their sinnes. Now this cause is not some light small offence of the Ninivites, but most grievous, olde, Sinnes are then said to crie up into heaven, when as they are notorious, and exceeding grievous, and in a maner past all hope of a∣mendment. & stub∣borne disobedience against God, so that their ungodlinesse and wicked life is said to have come up come up even unto heaven, as Genes. 18.20, 21, Then the Lord said, Because the crie of Sodom and Go∣morrah is great, and because their sinne is exceeding greevous, I will go downe now, and see whether they have done altogether according unto that crie, which is come unto me: and if not, that I may know. Vers. 3. But Ionas rose vp to flee unto Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord, and went downe to Japho: and he found a ship going to Tarshish: so he paid the fare thereof, and went downe into it, that he might goe with them unto Tarshish, from the presence of the Lord. Antithesis, or the contrary unto that which God before com∣manded.The rebellion of Jonas laid out and enlarged by all his cir∣cumstances. For the rebellion of Ionas, and the same advised and determined upon, is opposed or set against the commandement and appointment of God, the rebellion it selfe also the prophet layeth out, and enlargeth by all the circumstances thereof, that he may give full testimony or witnesse of his sinne. And here let us learne by his example to give the glory unto God, and to iusti∣fie him, and not our selves, in his iudgements against us, albeit the same be sharp. So doth David Psalm. 51. v. 4. when he saith, A∣gainst thee, against thee onely have I sinned, and done evill in thy sight, that thou mayest be iust when thou speakest, and pure when thou iudgest. And Psalm. 32. v. 5, 6. Then I acknowledged my sinne vnto thee, neither hid I mine iniquitie: for I thought, I will confesse against
my selfe my wickednesse unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the punish∣ment of my sinne. Selah. Therefore shall every one that is godly, make his prayer in a time when thou mayest be found: surely in the flood of great waters they shall not come neere him. 1. Circumstance His change of place.First then Ionas ariseth, that is, changeth the place in which he was before, and removeth from thence, as minding to with∣drawe himselfe from the sight and presence of God himselfe: such as is the foolish and carnall thought of men, yet God is e∣very where, Psal. 139.7. Whither shall I goe from thy spirite,  whither shall I flee from thy presence? &c. to the 13. verse. But the place being changed, where men haue seene God, or the wra of God, they thinke that so they haue escaped his handes also▪ as Cain did, Gen. 4.16. Then Kain went out from the presence of  Lord, and dwelt in the land of Nod toward the East side of Eden. 2. Circumstance He fleeth to Tharsus.2. circumstance. He fleeth to Tharsus, that is, as some inter∣prete it, into a farre countrey which is called Cilicia. But as I ex∣pound it, to wards the sea: and he came afterward unto Tarsis and to the Sea. For here he generally taketh this worde Tars for the sea, as it is also taken 2. Chron. cap. 9. vers. 21. For th Kings shippes vvent to Tharshish (or to the sea) vvith the ser∣vants of Huram, every three yeere once came the shippes of T∣shish and brought golde and silver, yvorie, and apes, and pecockes▪ For the Hebrewes call every sea Tarsis, of his skie-like or bleu∣ish colour: as the Greekes and the Latines call every Sea Pon∣tus. Ovid. All was Pontus, or a sea, and the sea vvanted shoare▪ He fleeth unto the sea, and minding to take shipping to loppe because at that time that way they used to travell unto that cu∣try, that the Iewes would rather go and travell thither by sea, th by land, by reason of the commoditie of sailing, and the king∣domes of uncircumcised nations lying betweene, if they should passe by land. 3. Circumstance His advised & setled, urpose to sle, and so to breake the com∣mandement of God.3. circumstance. Hee him selfe declareth with what advise purpose of minde, and stubbornnesse he despised the comman∣dement of God, and did refuse or flee his ppointment. He com∣meth unto Ioppe a sea city, of the which see Ios. cap. 19. ver. 46. Actes cap. 10. ver. 5, 6 there he hyreth a shippe, he payeth the master of the shippe also beforehand: he chooseth rather to ioyne himselfe with the marriners and other infidels, then not to flee at all. All which things doe argue or evidently shewe a stub∣borne mind, and an especiall purpose to flee.
Last of all Ionas doth this, to flee from the presence of God, and to refuse his expresse commandement, 4. Circumstance He fleeth from the presence of the Lord. and that wittingly and knowing of it. In which wordes the greatnesse of his fault is sufficiently enough painted foorth. Yet some will rather have these wordes, from the presence of the Lord, to be expounded, that he fled from his office or gave ouer his office of a prophet. Wherfore Ionas fleeth. But wherefore fleeth Ionas? Hee himselfe hereafter, namely, cap. 4. vers. 2. doth declare the cause. To wit, because he had seen very many threatnings of God foretold before that time by his prophets by the commandement of God, to become voide and of none effect, that is to say, not to haue beene put in executi∣on by God: therefore hee did thinke that the like also would become of him, and those his threatnings, whereupon he also should be taken for a false prophet, and should be laughed at, as other prophets were, especially of those infidels, and skorners of God. The which thing he also had experience of, and saw to come to passe in the middest even of the land of Israel, as ap∣peareth 1. King. cap. 22. ver. 18. of that which happened unto Micheas the sonne of Imli, at the hand of king Achab and his false prophets. Read the place. And 2. King. cap. 9. ver. 11. where they aske Iehu after this manner of one of the sonnes of the pro∣phets, which came to anoint him king: ƲƲherefore came this fellow (thus scornefully they speake of him) vnto thee? &c. And 2. King. cap. 2. vers. 23. where Elizeus is mocked by the little children of Bethel, who call him bald-pate, saying, Come up thou bald head, come up thou bald head. For about those dayes, or a little after, lived Ionas towards the ende of the age of Elizeus. Being therefore carefull of the reteining and keeping whole and sound of the authoritie and dignitie of his ministery and of him selfe, measuring and seeking to establish the same carnally, that is, according unto his owne minde, and the worldly wisdome of his owne wit, he supposeth that this whole commandement and charge of God will be but laughed at; and get unto himselfe ra∣ther discredit, then cōmendation unto God, and his office of pro∣phesying. He therfore fleeth, and refuseth to execute it. We must not iudge of the successe of God his matters ac∣cording unto the wisdome of the flesh. And these things do also fall out unto us so often as we doe make reckoning of the worke of God, & of the successe & profit therof according to the iudgement of carnall wisdome: and so long as we doe not commit unto him both the whole work, & also the issue & falling out of the same. And this we ought indeed to do: as the prophet
David teacheth us Psal. 37. ver. 5. when he saith. Commit thy we unto the Lord, and trust in him, and he shall bring it to passe. And here with all the godly comfort themselves, when as they can not d∣suade Paul from going up to Ierusalem Act. 21.14. saying, Th will of the Lord be done. And Paul Galat. 1.16. testifieth of him∣selfe that when he had once received from God commission  preach unto the Gentiles, he forthwith addressed himselfe there unto without taking any wordly advise, as it is there expressed, an was before alledged in the very entraunce into this proph pag. 107. Sect. 10. Moses in deed refuseth at the first, Moses. Ieremy. Exod. 3.  so doth Ieremy also: but yet afterwardes they obey. But Ion continueth in refusing, according unto the iudgement of carn and fleshly wisdome. Vers, 4. But the Lord sent out a great vvinde into the Sea, and the was a mightie tempest in the Sea, so that the ship was like u∣broken. The secōd part of this chapter of the iudge∣ments of God against Jonas for his disobedi∣ence. 1. The tempest. 2. He is cast into the sea. The tempest described 1. By an extra∣ordinary wind.THE second part of the chapter unto the 13. verse. in  which is shewed what iudgements of God did pursue Io fleeing from God, the very infidels being witnesses and ackno∣ledging the same. And first of all, a tempest, and the same mo cruell and raging, is sent by God upon the whole shippe and  only for Ionas his sake sailing with them. Secondly he himse (condemning himselfe by his owne sentence) is cast into these  the infidels beholding and perceiving the iudgement of God a∣gainst him. And the tempest it selfe is here described very feare full: first by a winde, and the same most vehement or strong, a sing or sent upon the sudden, and beyond the common obse∣tion or marking of the marriners: so that it might easily appeare that some thing was then done meerely by God, and extraord∣narily. This kind of winde Luc. 8.23. is called Latlaps, that is,  whirle winde. and Act. 27.14, Anemos Tuphonikos, a stormy wi called Euroolydon.2. By the trou∣bling of the aire 3. By that which followed tow∣ards the ship. Secondly by the troubling of the aire, where by the storme arose, and the same a very great one. Thirdly, b the consequent, or the effect that followed, the ship was in ve∣ry great hazard to be lost or to suffer shipwracke. Compare th place with the shipwracke of Paul. Act. 27.14. &c. Here a question is demanded, why others shoulde come daunger of loosing their life for Ionas his sake, who onely w
guiltie?  I answer, that God hath alwaies cause sufficient, why to destroy us both every one particularly, and all of us generally, and that for our owne sinnes, and not for the sinnes of others, al∣beit that God many times have occasion ministred from others, with whome we liue, to execute his iudgements against us. Vers. 5. Then the mariners were afraid, and cryed every man unto his god, and cast the wares that were in the ship, into the sea, to lighten it of them: but Ionas was gone downe into the sides of the ship, and he lay dovvne, and was fast a sleepe. AN amplification of the tempest, that is, of the danger and iudgement of God sent upon them for Ionas his sake, An amplificatiō of the temp st by three effects. 1. The feare of the mariners. by three most grievous effects or adjointes▪ the which are not wont to fall out, or be seene but in extreme shipwracks on the sea. First, the feare of the marriners, who otherwise are men well ac∣quainted with these matters, and therefore hardy, unfearfull, and carelesse. Secondly, the prayers o the passengers: For every one of them in this so present danger, calleth upon that God, 2. The prayers of the passeger s. whom he served. For whereas Psalm. 107 vers. 23. to 33. (the whole place is worth the reading) it is said that God is called upon of them that are like to suffer shipwracke, albeit that this properly e done of the faithfull and godly onely, in such sort as indeede t ought to be: yet by the sense and telling of nature, it is done also of the infidels or faithlesse, but without true faith. Example in this place, and in Aeneas suffering shipwrack, lib. 1. Aenead. and in Vlysses Odyss. lib. 5. whereof appeareth that which Paul wri∣th Rom. 1. & Act. 14.17. That men by the light of nature are ght sufficiently that there is a god, By the light of nature men are taught that there is a God. and that he is the gover∣our of this world, and that he is the authour & giver of life, and other good things unto us: but who he is they are ignorant, who have not learned it out of his word. True it is, that there are so ma∣ny blasphemies and superstitions, as men doe make unto them gods, and powers to be worshipped: & yet in dangers especially do men foolshly call upon, & worship for gods those powers or dols, that is, images which they themselves do take for gods, Psa. 115. & 1. Corinth. 8. which plainly proove, 3 Effect of the tempest, the a∣fring out of the mars of the ship. that those which the heathē take for gods, are not so indeed, but idols. Thirdly, mother effect of this dāger is, the losse of the wares, & all the furniture of he ship, that the ship being lightened or unloded the passengers
themselves might be saved. So it is also done, Act. 27.18, 19. T next day (saith Paul) when we were tossed with an exceeding temp they lighted the shp: & the third day we cast out with our owne hi the tackling of the ship. For the ship is then carried more safely,  cause it doth more easily yeeld and give place unto the waves,  the windes. From hence groweth this saying, A man will give things for his skinne. Iob. 2.4. Skin for skin (faith the devill) and that ever a man hath, he will give for his life. Damages stir men up to call upon God.Finally here we learne how dangers do stirre us to call on God, and to acknowledge him, yea and that earnestly, Psa 119.71. Jt is good for me (saith David in that place) that I h beene afflicted or troubled that I may learne thy statutes. Jonas his secu∣ritie, expressed by an antithesis, which is a fi∣gure, in the which cōtraries are laide downe togither, as in this place, the behaviour of Ionas contrarie unto the passen¦gers.There followeth by a figure called antithesis or the contra (expressing the contrary disposition of Ionas) the sluggish  damnable securitie, or carelesnesse of Ionas. For beeing p unto himselfe of his so great a fault, hee neverthelesse sleep sweetly and quietly: and in the ship he setleth himselfe not  the earnest thinking upon his offence, nor unto repentance,  to the calling upon God for the same: but unto pleasant  sweet sleepe, as if he were guiltie of no crime, or worthy of punishment: nay hee sleepeth even unto a dead sleepe. Fo snotteth and lyeth in the ship dead with sleepe, being notw∣standing in greatest daunger, and while others call every  opon his owne God.All feeling of sinne, yea even in the most god∣ly, clane gone often, for a sea∣son. Here it appeareth how blockish and  the conscience of men is many times in their sinnes, yea and  same very hainous, and how for the time all feeling of the iud∣ment of God may seeme to be abolished, as it fared with ∣vid vid also after his adultery, 2. Sam. cap. 11. & 12. Vers. 6. So the shipmaster came unto him, and said unto him;  meanest thou, O sleeper? Arise, call upon thy God, if so be  God will thinke upon us that we perish not. An other am∣plification of the carelesnesse of Ionas.An other amplification not of that tempest, but of the dam∣ble securitie or carelesnesse of Ionas, and of the feeling of  iudgement of God being extinct or quenched in him. For  a shame that he, both an Israelite and a Prophet should be pu mind of praying unto God by a man that was an infidell. H  therefore raised up from that his unseasonable, and altogi brutish dead slumber: and that with a grievous and sore reb
as if he had bene utterly godlesse, or blockish and foolish. For he slept, as one that did not feele the great danger wherein he was: or being plunged in the same, doth not for all this pray unto God with others for deliverance. He is awaked and raised up by the master of the ship, a man that was indeed an infidell, yet ing this principle of the light of nature, That God is the author and gi∣ver and preserver of our life, and that therefore in dangers he ought to be called upon. And whereas he saith, Call upon thy God, the prophet sheweth that this master of the shippe was a meere idolatour, The shipmaster an idolater. which did thinke that every God was to be called upon, as for a true God. It was not therefore true invocation & prayer, or faith wherwith he called upon his God, or counselled Ionas to pray unto the true God: but only a feeling of nature, a feare of danger, and such like generall light of the knowledge and understanding of God, Men by the light of naturall reason, do know that there is a God. whereof Paul speaketh. Act. 14. ver. 17. Neverthelesse, he (that is, God) left not himselfe without witnesse, in that he did good, and gave vs raine from heaven, and fruitfull seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladnesse. And Rom. cap. 1. v. 20, 21. For the invisible things of God, that is, his eternall power and godhead, are seene by the creati∣on of the world, being confidered in his workes, to the entent that they should be without excuse. Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankefull. Plato also lib. 10. de legibus, speaketh to this purpose. Vers. 7. And they saide very one to his fellow, Come, and let us east lottes, that we may know, for whose cause this evill is upon vs. So they cast lottes, and the lotte fell upon Ionas. THE third amplification both of the sluggishnesse of Ionas, and of the shipwrack, and of that same foule and cruell tem∣pest, described before, by the effect, The third am∣plification of the foule of Jo∣nas by an extra∣ordinary effect of casting lors. were unto men use both sel∣dome for to runne, and not except the wrath of God doe mani∣festly or plainly shew it selfe as it were from heaven, and extraor∣dinarily, where with notwithstanding Ionas is not yet in such sort mooved, as that he doth confesse his fault. This effect is casting of lottes, and as it were an extraordinary speaking, and asking by God himselfe, with whome among these all, he should be so offended, that the same parrie might be iudged to be the cause of so great trouble unto the rest. Now the prophet doth amplifie
or enlarge these things, both that his owne fault may appeare the greater, and also that the mercy of God towards him may be acknowledged to be the more singular: and finally that tho¦rough the feare of so great a iudgement and danger, the rest may bee e more fearefull and learne to obey God when he calleth For men very seldome grow to cast lots concerning the giving  themselves unto death, The casting of lots upon life & death, extraor∣dinarie, and in what coses used. and this, not except either God him selfe by some extraordinary signe or token, as we haue said before,  shew that he is angry with some one among many: or that some thing be extraordinarily to be asked of God, the which men by their owne and worldly wisdom, without the iust offence of some other, are not able to declare. Hereof are gathered two things, the one, that such was the tempest of the sea at that time, Two things to be noted. 1 so sudden, strange, and unusual that all men might easily perceive that it was sent from heav by God being angry with some one of them. Therfore that th might be knowen, by common consent they runne unto lots,  if it were to enquire at the mouth of God himself. For this is a thi knowen among men not utterly void of goodnes and godlines even by the very light of nature, Gods providēce doth appeare in the lawfull use of lots. that in the use of such things,  wit, in the casting of lots, God, and the providence of God do shine forth and appeare. For Salomon Prov. 16.33. saith: Th lot is cast into the lappe: but the whole disposition therof, is of the L Yet Ierome affirmeth that this was therefore done of these infe∣dels, because that alwayes among profane and heathen men the use of lottes hath bene common, even in matters of small impor∣tance.  point in what cases lottes both have, and also may be used. The other point is to be noted, to wit, that lots have, an may be used both among profane, and also among godly men  matters extraordinary, and immediatly depending upon the w of God, as Iosh. 7. for the finding out of Achan: 1. Sam. 14. fo the trying who had eaten meate, contrary unto the oth taken them by Saul: & Act. cap. 1. for the choosing of Matthias in the roome of Iudas. Hereupon lots that are lawfull, are called con∣sultory, and divisorie. But such as are divinatorie, whereby they tell of things by way of soothsaying, and lusorie, or such as a used in play, are to be condemned and disallowed, the which a not onely curious, but also prophane and heathenish. Further, doubt not, but that albeit these, as Ierom saith, ranne easily to c∣sting of lottes according unto the custome in those times used yet that they tooke this course and counsell with one consent
by the only instinct or secret motion of God: because that God himselfe was minded to lay open before all men the fault of his blockish prophet, and to bring to light the things which he did hide and keepe close. And for this cause did the lot fall upon Io∣nas. Vers. 8. Then said they vnto him, Tell us for whose cause this evill is come upon vs? What is thine ocupation? and whence commest thou? ƲƲhich is thy countrey? and of what people art thou? THE figure Commoratio, or staying in or upon a matter, as in this place upon the particulars of the tryings out of Io∣nas his fault. The figure commoratio. For here is severally set downe after what maner at the length, and by what degrees God both manifested, or o∣pened the fault of Ionas, and also punished him for the same. And first of all he openeth the sinne of Ionas by Ionas himselfe, who first did stoutly hide and smother up the same. 1. The sinne of Jonas uttered by himselfe. For he ma∣keth him the Cryar as it were, and the Teller of all things as they fell out, or were done. But first of all he is asked by the other pas∣sengers, woondring at this man beeing so hated of God. And they aske him diligently, to the ende they may finde out, from whence that his fault might arise, that they may admo∣nish him, and finde a remedie for that evill or mischiefe, if by any meanes it may be. Therefore it proceeded not of curiosi∣tie, but of charitie and love and carefulnesse and trouble for the avoyding of the daunger and offence of God, that they so diligently enquire of Ionas, what is his occupation? what is his countrey? who is his people? from vvhence hee commeth? For by these sundry circumstances they supposed might be un∣derstood and learned, in what thing especially Ionas had offended God: or else by all likelihoode that he followed some unhonest trade, as theeves and murtherers are wont to doe: or that he was descended and come of some nation alto∣gether prophane, as the Canaanites &c. Therefore they aske and enquire of the cause of the disease and sore, that they may, if they can bring a medecine: and not to understand of certaine new matters, and such as they never heard of before. Vers. 9. And hee ansvvered them, I am an Hebrevv, and I
feare the Lorde God of heaven, which hath made the sea, a the drie land. The answer of Jonas.THE answer of Ionas, and the same indeed very short, b in the which he sheweth unto them all things at large: b that which is here recied or rehearsed conteineth onely th summe and substance of the whole matter. And here two thing are to be observed, 1. Ionas his true confession. and marked. First Ionas him selfe freely at truly confesseth the matter it selfe as it was. Therefore this a∣swer of Ionas, and his free confession carrieth a token of h earnest repentance, and of a feeling of the iudgement of Go now by God himselfe stirred up, 1. What he nswereth. and wrought in him. Secon∣ly is to be noted what he answereth, namely, that hee is of s a nation as feareth the true God, that is, of the Hebrewes: a that he also feareth the true and almightie God, and which ha power ouer this selfe same troubled sea, as he who is the ∣ker of the sea and of the lande. And all these things doth Ion rehearse, not to commend unto them his owne godlinesse o shewe himselfe to be voide of blame, or to purge or cleare h selfe, or to lessen his fault: but to increase it, by taking a from himselfe all excuse of ignorance or shifting of the ma Futher in this place Ionas doth not now call himselfe a proph being privie vnto his fault, and lest by so doing he might br this so holy an office into contempt: and in this respect Paul nieth himselfe worthy to be called an Apostle, 1. Cor. 15.9. ¦ing, For I am the least of the Apostles, which am not meete to be¦led an Apostle, because I persecuted the Church of God. He addeth last of all, that unto the same God (whom he b worshipped, and from his cradle, as one being an Hebrew,  confessed to be Lorde of both heaven and earth) himselfe  notwithstanding disobedient, and a rebell, and that he was fled from his presence, as from the power as it were and rule of Lord, lest he should do his commandements, witnessing that ran away malitiously or of a set purpose, and treacherously. A such indeed & in truth ought our repentance for to be, What maner of repentance ours ought to be. the wh in any case must be true & earnest, that it may give righteous wholly unto God; & lay upon our selves wholly the whole fa and sinne. As David doth, Psal. 51.4. saying, Against thee, ag thee only have I sinned, and done evill in thy sight, that thou mayest
iust when thou speakest, and pure when thou iudgest. And Psal. 32.5 Then I acknowledged my sinne unto thee, neither hid I mine iniquitie: for J thought, J vvill confesse against my selfe my wickednesse unto the Lord, and thou forgavest the punishment of my sinne. Vers. 10. Then vvere the men exceedingly afraide, and said unto him, Why hast thou done this? (for the men knevve that hee fled from the presence of the Lord because he had told them), A iustifying of God, and con∣demning of Jo∣nas by the hea∣then.A iustifying of God is here adioyned, the which is made by the Heathen them-selues, whereunto also is ioyned the condemnation of Ionas with an earnest rebuking of him, made likewise by the same Heathen. And this was set down by the prophet, not onely that the course and proceeding in thinges might be understoode, as they fell out in order at that time: but also thereby to shewe his fault to be so much the greater and more shamefull, and to amplifie the same, which of the infidels themselves was iudged to be so grie∣vous, and clearely to proove that the iudgement of God a∣gainst him was iust. They all of them therefore are afraide when they heare these things, the which Ionas had saide of the true God, whome he had offended. And this feare was an acknowledging of his almightie power, and a confessing of the iust anger of God against Ionas, The passengers rebuke Jonas very sharply, but consider no∣thing of their owne sinnes and offences. and so consequently against themselves also, the which were conversant, or had their aboade, and were carried in that shippe. Therefore considering the power of that God (whome Ionas had of∣fended) and also the greatnesse of his offence they thinke that themselues now are not without daunger with him. 1 The feeling of the true God, otherwise tou∣cheth the consci¦ences of verie infidels, then doth the feare of their idols. They doe therefore grievously rebuke Ionas, because that so tre∣cherously hee had prooved so mightie a God both against himselfe, and also all his fellowes which were ioyned with him. But concerning themselves and their owne sinnes a∣gainst God, these good fellowes speake and thinke nothing. Hereof wee are to gather two things, the one, that the sence or feeling of the true God doth farre otherwise moove the con∣sciences of very infidels and unbeleeving persons, 2 Sinne condēned by the light of nature in some sort. and doth pricke the same, then the feare of their idols doth touch them. The o∣ther, that sinne namely, so far forth as it is a contempt or despising
of God, is condemned by the testimony or witnesse of consci∣ence, and the light of nature left in the same, of every man, whether faithfull or unfaithfull. For to the end that men should be left without excuse, God would have this feeling of his righ∣teousnesse to reigne and dwell in our consciences, whereby we doe hold this generall principle, That we can not offend God scorfree, and escape without punishment. For Paul Roman cap. 1. ver. 31. speaking of the heathen, saith that they did know the righteousnesse of God, and that they which commit such things, are worthy of death, that is, the very light of nature did leade them hereunto, that sinne deserveth punishment. And therfore Isaias cap. 5. v. 18. crieth, VVo unto them which drawe in∣quitie (that is, do nothing else but as it were with all their might maine purposedly commit sinne (with cordes of vanitie, and sinne as with cart ropes. Vers. 11. Then said they unto him, ƲƲhat shall we do unto thee, th the sea may be calme unto vs (for the sea wrought and was troublou A deliberation what to do with Jonas.A deliberation or advise taking what to doe, the which pro∣ceeded or came from the feare of God, which they had ∣ceived by the words of Ionas, & by experience it selfe. For on th one part they see God to be iustly wraught with Ionas, they a knowledge by the words of Ionas, that he is Lord of heaven a earth, the which can stirre up, arme, and trouble all the element unto the revenge of his name, nay that he hath stirred them ready. And on the other part they see Ionas also to be now hu∣bled and to become penitent for his sinne, to be a godly man, one that feareth that same God. They therefore take pity on hi VVherfore they dare not rashly attempt or enterprise any thin against him whom they acknowledge for the servant of them God, lest that God waxe angry with them also. The passengers conceive hope of the savour of God towardes Jonas.Furthermore, out of that common principle and natural knowledge grafted in the hearts of men, (to wit, that God is mer∣cifull and favourable unto them that repent) they do now con¦ceive good hope of the wrath of God appeased towardes Io¦nas, or happily hereafter to be appeased. Beeing therefore troubled and perplexed or combred with these thoughtes, whe as in the meane season the sourges and tempest of the sea ne∣ver a whi abated, they consult or take advise not onely with in them-selves, but calling Ionas him-selfe to counsail
what is needfull to be done, and what they should resolve or determine upon concerning him (whome God manifestly by himselfe called for, and had declared to be the cause of this dan∣ger) that the wrath of God might be pacified. In this deliberation appeareth first of all the singular curtesie and pitie of these marriners being otherwise barbarous and cru∣ell men, the which wee ought to imitate or follow, 1. The curteous pitifulnesse of these marriners of vs also to be followed. even then when we see any man iustly for his deserts to be punished either by God, or else by the Magistrate, as an heinous offender. For we may not be like unto those bloudy Emperours of the Romanes, Tiberius, Caligula, Claudius, who were delighted with the blood and punishment of men, and used to come earely in the morning into the market place to behold their executions. For this is senslesse hardhartednesse and brutishnesse. Secondly in these Marriners and passengers,2. These marri∣ners hold the death of the godly precious. there is to be no∣ted an image and shadow of true pietie or godlinesse, as being such, who doe account and hold as precious the death of the godly, and such as feare God, like as in his eyes it is so taken Psal. 116. vers. 15. where it is written, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saintes. Now the cause of this their delibe∣ration or counsell taking was: because that storme and raging of the sea abated not, nor ceased. Vers. 12. And he said unto them, Take me, and cast me into the sea: so shall the sea be calme unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you. The answer of Jonas.The answer of Ionas unto the former deliberation, the which in like maner conteineth two things. First the answer it selfe of Ionas: secondly the reason of the same.  Ionas answereth that he only is to be cast into the sea. The reason,  for that for his sake only, this tempest, by meanes whereof they all were in danger, hath arisen, and continueth, and so shall continue, untill hee as a sacrifice have received and suffered due punishment at the handes of God for this his rebellion. And as well in the answer as also in the reason of the same appeareth Ionas his true repen∣tance and amendment, who now doeth franckly acknowledge his offence and fault, and the punishment the which God taketh and executeth upon him, is ready to undergo without any grud∣ging, nay he doeth willingly offer himselfe thereunto, and with
his owne mouth pronounceth or declareth him-selfe worthy of the same. This therefore is a true description of true repentance, that is, of an earnest acknowledgement of sinne, and of a minde changed, Ionas maketh this answerwith a true propheti∣call spirit. and apprehending or laying hold of his God by faith, the which is opposed or set against that sluggishnesse or bloc∣kishnesse the which was in Ionas before. The same appeareth David Psal. 51. & in Peter, Mat. 27▪ It appeareth furthermore tha Ionas spake these things, and made this answer with a true pro∣pheticall spirit, not of any grudging of mind against God, not of any excessive feare, not through hatred or wearinesse of life, be∣cause that he was now knowen to be a rebell unto God: nor fi∣nally moved with light or humane and worldly coniectures: but because God by lottes did openly, and as it were with his owne voice rouze him up, and aske, and call for him unto punishment. Ionas therfore doth not rashly offer himselfe unto death, but wi undergoe that punishment (the which God evidently from hea∣ven did lay upon him) and that willingly, because God so wi have it. Vers. 13. Neverthelesse the men rowed to bring it to the lande, b they could not: for the sea wrought, & was troublous against then The thirde part of this 1. chap. & the contents of the same.THE third part of the chapter, in the which is contained the execution of Gods punishment laide upon Ionas for his re∣bellion And first of all there is before it set downe the purgati∣on or excuse of the Marriners and passengers themselues, le any man might thinke them to have done this of a certaine cru∣eltie of minde. And in the verse following is conteined their pra∣er and protestation before God. The excuse is, in that they ass alwaies before they come unto Ionas himselfe. The example of the marriners. They rowe wi all the might they can, the which here in Hebrew soundeth an signifieth as much as the latine word sulcare mare, to forowth sea. For the Marriners with their oares, doe make as it were, fu∣rowes and ditches in the sea, when they row. They proove wit all their might to bring the ship unto the land, and shore. The wrastle against the winde and the tempest. They suffer them∣selves also to be in that danger, untill that they indeed doe find that they assay all things in vaine, as namely having God him∣selfe striuing against them. Then come they unto that last re∣medie: wherein appeareth their singular humanitie or curtesie
and compassion. For to have compassion on the afflicted or such as are in miserie, and to mourne with them that mourne, is the law of humanitie it selfe, and not onely the commandement of Paul. This example ought iudges for to follow, An example for iudges. and such as haue authoritie by the appointment of the law for the punishment of malefactours or offenders: to wit, iudges of life and death, that they doe not rashly, nor of a certen thurst and delight to shed mans blood punish and condemne men that are even worthy of death. For this is to murther and cut the throats of men, and not to punish. Vers. 14. VVherefore they cried unto the Lord, and said, We beseech thee, O Lord, we beseech thee, let not us perish for this mans life, & laye not vpon vs innocent blood: for thou, O Lorde, hast done as it pleased thee. The prayer of the marriners conteining three points.THE prayer of the marriners and passengers, wherein they purge themsclues before God, as they did before clear them selves before men of all suspicion of cruelty, or conceived ha∣tred against his servant when as they executed upon him these iudgements of God. This prayer containeth three things. 1. That God will turne frō them the presens dan∣ger. First they pray, that God will turne away frō them that present danger the which hung over their heads for that one mans sake. Wherin they secretly in their mind consider the law of Distributive iustice, To wit, that punishment doeth follow the authours and causes of the same, & that no man is iustly punished for another mans of∣fence, as Abraham in his prayer unto God for the sparing of the good among them of Sodom & Gomorrah Gen. 18.25. seemeth to confirme, speaking unto God for them after this maner: Be it farre from thee from doing this thing, so slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be even as the wicked, be it farre from thee. Shall not the iudge of all the world do right.2. They pray a∣gainst the death of Ionas. The second, they pray against the death of Ionas, that it namely be not laide to their charge, and that they be not punished therfore, when as in this behalfe they are only the executioners and instruments of Gods iudgement and will. For God himself calleth for him unto death. They adde the third thing for the which they both excuse themselves, & also doe praise God for his righteousnesse & iustice. They excuse thēselves, because it lieth thē upō to execute those things the which God will have & doth declare. 3. They excuse themselves, and praise God. And they praise god, in cōfessing that whē as god decreeth these things cōcerning
Ionas, that he doth this iustly, and according unto his owne pro∣per right, and most iust rule and power over all things. For thou dost this (say they) according unto thy good or iust and righteous will. For the Hebrewe Cephet signifieth not only thelesin, a willing o will, but eudokian, that is, that same righteous and holy will of God, albeit in comprehensible, or not able of us to be conceived, whereby the decreeth all things. For in this sense is that worde taken and used Matt. 11. v. 26. The Greeke word in both places is Eudo chia. Jt is so, O father, because thy good pleasure vvas such. and Ephes. cap 1. vers. 5. Who hath predesti∣nate vs to be adopted through Jesus Christ unto himselfe, according unto the good pleasure of his will. Furthermore here is nothing spoken of the covenant of God of Abraham, of Isaac, of the Messias. Because that albeit they conceive & make this prayer, The prayer of the marriners void of true faith. yet the same proceedeth or com∣meth not from a true faith, but onely from that generall know∣ledge, the which is in every man, who is not altogither godlesse or foolish, or madde. To wit, that God is righteous and merciful towards men. And therefore that he may be prayed unto of mea for things that are iust and righteous, and that men are hear of him. Yet notwithstanding this prayer hath something th which we Christians may follow, Wherein Chri∣stians may fol∣low this prayer, and iudges in especiall. both in this that being in trou∣ble they have recourse unto the true God alone: and also for the they doe shew themselves to have singular testimonies of the ∣stice and mercy of God, engraven in their mindes, and that the doe aske no fond or foolish thing at the handes of God. This e∣ample also ought iudges to imitate or follow, to wit, that they  prayer first, when as they are to condemne offenders, and  pronounce and give sentence upon life and death. Vers. 15. So they tooke vp Ionas, and cast him into the sea, and these ceased from her raging. The conclusion of the whole for∣mer discourse of this 1. chap.THE conclusion or knitting up of the whole former na∣tion or discourse, wherein is shewed, what in the ende w the issue of this rebellion of Ionas against God, and of the tem∣pest arising in the sea for the same, as well in regard of Ionas hi selfe, Ionas adiudged unto a most la∣mentable death. as also of the marriners and passengers themselves. And in regard of Ionas, this was the end, how he was grievously pu∣nished by God, and adiudged unto a moste lamentable death according to the iudgement of man (for he is cast into the raging
and surging sea to be drowned) and that beeing first of all con∣demned of treacherie against God by the infidels them selues. And to make short, here is declared, how Ionas himselfe was the proclaimer of his owne ignominie or shame, and sinne, the which notwithstanding he would before ful-faine haue kept close, and for the couering whereof he fled into strange nations (as into an vnknowne place vnto God) where he might be reprooued of no man. The like punishment had Dauid, hiding at first his adulterie with Bersabe a. Hereout appeareth what ende tarieth those, who either doe not at al giue eare vnto God, when he calleth, or when they haue heard him, neuerthelesse doe not follow him nor obey him, resting vpon, and beeing deceiued with their owne carnall or fleshly cogitations and surmizes. The which doctrine no dout appertaineth both vnto the politike ministeries or officers in the common-wealth, and vnto the callings in the Church, the which men doe refuse or disdaine, when as God calleth them. Barac. So Barac hath a shewe of a draw-backe, when he refuseth to goe against Sisera, vnlesse Deborah went with him, and is reproched for the same, and told by Deborah that the glorie of the victorie shall be none of his, Iudg. 4. ver. 8, 9. And Barac said vnto her (to wit, De∣bora perswading him vnto this exploit, or piece of seruice) if thou wilt goe with me, I will goe, but if thou wilt not goe with me, I will not goe. Then shee answered, I will surely goe with thee, but this iourney that thou takest, shall not be for thine honour: for the Lord shall sell Sisera into the handes of a woman. And in the 5. cap. ver. 23. the peo∣ple of Meroz is cursed, because they came not beeing called. Curseye Meroz (said the Angel of the Lord) curse the inhabitants thereof,The people of Meroz cursed. because they came not to helpe the Lord against the migh∣tie. Neither is it here against, that both Moses, Moses. doth excuse his infancie and vnablenes, vnto God Exod. 3. ver. 11. saying, Who am I, that I should goe vnto Pharao, and that I shouldbring the chil∣dren of Israelout of Egypt:Ieremie. Nor Ieremie his in like manner cap. 1. ver. 6. when he saith: Oh, Lord God, Behold, I can not speake, for I amachilde.Ionas the true Arion, whome the Poets faine to haue bin a minstrel cast in∣to the sea by the mariners, and to be saued by a dolphin. For it is one thing to acknowledge and lay out his in sufficiencie, and vncapeablenes, and to thinke truly and modest∣ly of himselfe, and therefore to refuse the burden or charge, the which is lawfull for any godly man to doe: and another thing vtterly to refuse and disdaine it, as Ionas did. And he was indeede and in truth that same godly and Christian Arion, which is feig∣ned of the Poets, and of whome Herodotus writeth.
Vers. 16. Then the men feared the Lord exceedingly, and offered a sacrifice vnto the Lord, and made vowes. The issue of this historie in re∣gard of Marri∣ners and pas∣sengers.NOW also is shewed what was the issue of the former hi∣storie in regard of the Marriners and passengers, who were infidels, and the same is two-fold. First, that in wardly, and in their minde they did carnestly conceiue the power and maiestie of the true God, and the God of Israel, by the very effects of the same, which they sawe: albeit that at the first they did not knowe the same God, and wholly serued idols, and did not beleeue that there was any God besides. Therefore by this apprehension o conceit of the power and maiestie of the God of Israel, and the same the true God, The feare of the Marriners an experimen∣tall feare. they did greatly feare him. Wherefore thi their feare was not of faith in Christ, but an experimentall feare that is, growing of the terrour and feare the which they had con∣ceiued, when as they sawe the heauen and the sea in such so by him to be troubled, as the things ouer which he had most fe rule and power. They testifie their scare by sacrifices. The second effect is, that they did openly giuen stimonie & witnes of this their feare, and feeling of the true Go by sacrifices, when as they performe their vowes, the which the had vowed, being & remaining in that same danger. That which the very sense or feeling of conscience doth teach that it ought be done, albeit the godly, as it is Psal. 107.31, 32. doe this  onely of a generall knowledge of nature, but of a true faith, th is, of an assured trust of minde, whereby they doe knowe and fer that same true God to be their father in Christ. The words of th Psalm are these, speaking of the godly trauailers by sea, and the seeing the wonderfull works of God deliuering them from da∣ger of drowning and shipwracke: Let them therefore confesse fore the Lord his louing kindnes, and his wonderfull workes before  sonnes of men, And let them exalt him in the congregation of the p∣ple, and praise him in the assembly of the elders. Yet it is not said that these either came vnto Ierusalem to ∣crifice; or sent their vowes thither, where that same God one would be sacrificed vnto, They worship God together with their idols or finally that they cast away the wo shipping of their idols; but togither with their idols they take  to themselues this God, as the chiefest, and as to be feared, &  desirous to haue him fauourable and appeased with them, a doe acknowledge him before and aboue their idols, in truth: be the Lord of heauen and earth: and they doe testifie or wit
that them selues in this same daunger were saued and preserued by him, and not by their idols. So the Samaritans together with their sundrie idols, did mingle the worship of the true God also. For the people alleadging that they were destroied by lyons, be∣cause they serued not the true God, the king of Asshur comman∣deth, saying: Carrie thither one of the Priests, whome ye brought thence, and let him goe and dwell there, and teach them the manner of the God of the countrey. 2. King. 17. ver. 27. which beeing per∣formed accordingly, as it there followeth, yet the people wor∣ship their owne seuerall gods also. For so it is said, ver. 33. They feared the Lord, but serued their gods after the manner of the nations, whome they caried thence.The passengers and marriners not to be acco∣ted faithfull. Therefore are these passengers & Marri∣ners neither to be reckoned in the number of the faithfull, albeit they sacrifice neuer so much vnto the true God, neither are their sacrifices of them selues acceptable vnto God, as were the sacri∣fices of the faithfull, because that they were voide of true faith, which is the foundation of true acceptablenes vnto God: Aster what sort the sacrisi∣ces and other externall acti∣ons of the wic∣ked haue plea∣sed God. but so farforth did their sacrifices, albeit vicious and corrupt, please God, as in like sort the onely picture and shadow of true faith pleaseth God: and as he conuerteth or turneth vnto the edifying of his, and of the godly, those things which outwardly onely haue a taste and smell of his honour, although inwardly they be filthie and foule. So the repentance of Achab pleased God 1. King. 21. ver. 27. to the end of that chapter. These two lat∣ter examples are very dispu∣table and dout∣full in my simple opinion, and as many reasons to be made to the contrary, as for the proofe of them. Likewise the bold confidence and trust of Achaz, Esai 7. ver. 12. And the faith of the nine lea∣pers, who afterwards did forsake Christ, Luc. 17. read the whole storie beginning ver. 12. vnto ver. 20. All which things are to be noted, least any here vpon might suppose and conclude that any workes without true faith in Christ, are either in deede good, or else acceptable vnto God, the which some doe most peruersely or wickedly hold. Neither did these passengers and Marriners become Proselytes or conuerts vnto the lewes religion: neither were their sacrifices a conceit or sorrowefull heart and broken spirit: but carnall sacrifices offered according to their vsual man∣ner among their owne countri-men, yet vnto the true God not∣withstanding.
CAP. 2. Now the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow vp l∣nas: and Ionas was in the bellie of the fish three dayes and three nights. Here most con∣veniently is the beginning of the 2. chap.ALthough some referre this verse vnto the chap∣ter going before, yet in my Hebrew booke it i the beginning of the second chapter, and th in my iudgement, most fitly. For the ende a drift of this second chapter is, after the des bing of the iust iudgement of God against o∣nas for his contempt of the calling of Go made concerning him (the which hath bin declared in the chap∣ter before going) to shew how great notwithstanding the mer of the same true God was towards this same Ionas, The drift of this chapter. both that  his example, we should trust in God, euen in the very midst of  afflictions or troubles, be they neuer so great, as it is said Iob  13. ver. 15. Lo, though he slay me, yet will I trust in him, and  reprooue my waies in his sight: and also that we should vnderst this to be true in the elect and true faithfull, namely that the ∣cie of God doth triumph aboue iudgement, Iam. 2. ver. 13.  there shall be iudgement mercylesse to him that sheweth no mercie,  mercie reioyceth against iudgement. And Psal. 30. ver. 5. For ∣dureth but a while in his anger, but in his fauour is life: weeping  abide at euening, but ioy commeth in the morning. And Ionas  here briefely in this chapter set downe, an especiall effect of  mercie of God towards him, to wit, his deliuerance from  wracke, and his repentance. So then he was afterwards thro the great bounteousnes of God deliuered by the selfe same Go by whom he was adiudged before vnto death, and the same  lamentable and reprochfull. 1. Ionas his mi∣raculous deli∣uerance.This verse containeth three things, first a briefe setting for  of that wonderfull and miraculous deliuerance, and that al∣gether by God. Secondly, the meanes and maner of the sa God prepared at the selfe same instant or minute of time (in which according to his pleasure and will Ionas was cast into  sea) a fish, 2. The means of the same. and that a very great one, the which swallowed vp ∣nas beeing cast into the sea, but yet did not strangle him, or
him: but did keepe him for the space of three daies, beeing by God left as it were vnto his custodie, and in the ende when God calleth for him, deliuereth him againe. This preparation sheweth the great prouidence and care of God for those that are his, and so consequently the absolute and most mightie power and rule of God ouer all the works of this world, be they neuer so excel∣lent and great, who hath at his becke all liuing creatures and beasts, as he will, and vseth them according as best pleaseth him, for his glorie, and good of those that are his. This fish is not said to be a new created, but onely prepared, The fh that swallow d vp Ionas was of the kinde of Whales. and standing and set as it were, to receiue him, whom God would leaue with him to keepe. It is manifest that this fish was of the kinde of Whales, who are of so huge a greatnes, and so wide bellied, that they can swallow downe whole men. Some will haue this fish to be called a La∣mia, or Sea dog: others a fish called Brechinechis, others the fish called a whirle-poole, of the which the Psal. 104. ver, 26. spea∣keth and some do translate him Leviathan, as it is in the Hebrue. Plin. lib. 32. nat. hist. cap. 1. writeth of a Whale that was found the which was 600. foote long, and 360. foote broad. read him lib. 9. cap. 5. Thirdly, 3. The means of Ionas his deli∣uerance ampli∣fied by the cir∣cumstance of time. he doth amplifie the manner of his deliuerance by the circumstance of time. For he was in the belly of that fish, by the space of three daies and three nights, and yet all this not∣withstanding neither did the fish nor Ionas die. The which is an other plaine miracle. For who can be and remaine aliue so long, hauing his breath stopt? For the fish did not by and by cast forth Ionas againe, but after three daies. Christ our Lord Mat. 12. cap. ver. 40. compareth the time of his buriall, by the which his bodie ay in the sepulchre, with the time that Ionas was shut vp in the ellie of the whale, as it were in a sepulchre or graue. For as Ionas (saith he) was three daies and three nights in the whales bellie: so shall the sonne of man he three daies and three nights in the heart of the earth: whereof it commeth to passe, that I suppose in this place, part of a day to be taken for an whole day, as it was in the three daies of Christ, and not three whole naturall daies. But here Ierome mooueth a question, how Ionas liued there?  I answer, either by water, . the which came into the bellie of the fish; or else that he was there sustained by God without meate. Therefore let vs know that this in Ionas was a figure and signe of the buriall of Christ: so the Lord vseth euen the sinnes of his vn∣to his glorie, and the opening of his secrets. And this Ionas in deed
is that same Christian Arion. Vers. 2. Then Ionas prayed vnto the Lord his God out of the fi∣shes bellie. What Ionas did in the bellie of the fish. ORder. For here Ionas telleth in order, what followed after∣ward, that is to say, what he did lying in the fishes bellie by that whole three daies space. And he saith that he praied, and that vnto that same true God, whome before he called the Lorde of heauen and earth, as vnto him that peculiarly was his God also. He therefore teacheth three things. 1. He praieth. First that he praied both in minde, and also in voice it selfe. Wherein the excellent faith and patience of Ionas appeareth, who goeth euē vnto the same God, whome notwithstanding he did within him selfe feele to be an∣grie with him, to wit, by a wonderfull faith, and feeling of his mercie the which towards his can neuer be drawne drie, he prai∣eth vnto him. He doth not therefore as infidels, vtterly cast away all hope: he doth not as Atheists, or godlesse persons, murmur, or curse God: not as hypocrites fret and whet, or repine against God: but by faith praieth vnto him, euen at that time when as he is sorest vexed or troubled: the which things these wordes, out of the bowels or bellie of the fish, doe declare, that is to say, out of the midst of the graue, wherein he lay in a manner deade, as Iob confesseth of himselfe, That he will trust in God, though he slay him,2. He prayeth vnto God. 3. He calleth him his God. and reprooue his waies in his sight. Iob 13. ver. 15. Secondly, he praieth vnto God the Lord, and not vnto idols. Thirdly, he cal∣leth him his God: wherein he sheweth that he praieth of true faith, who doth not onely acknowledge God to be the true God and Lord ouer all: but doth finde and feele him to be peculiarly his God, that is, the God of euery true faithfull person. Hereby appeareth how that the repentance of Ionas was true repentance springing from a true faith, whereunto notwithstanding he was called backe of God, by a most hard and grieuous punishment. Vers. 3. And said, I haue cried in mine affliction vnto the Lord, and he heard me: out of the bellie of hell cried I, and thou hea∣rest my voice. APlaine declaring of the matter. For he sheweth what hee praied. For this is here a rehearfall of Ionas his prayer, as
he wrote it after his comming forth of the fish, but yet in such sort as he conceiued it before in the fishes bellie. A rehearsal of Ionas his praier as he wrote is after his deli∣uerāce, hauing so before cōcei∣ued is in the fi∣shes bellie. And first of all he doth briefely here set downe the summe or effect of the same. Afterwardes by the figure Commoration, or staying vpon the recitall of the particulars, he doth more at large declare the same by parts, that the infinite or endlesse mercie of God may of vs be better vnderstoode; and of vs be hoped for in our troubles. Fur∣ther, here is liuely painted out as it were in colours, the greatnes of the daunger, wherein Ionas was. The summe of Ionas his praier The summe of Ionas his prayer is this, Ionas prayed in that his most lamentable afflicti∣on or miserie, nay being in the midst of the sepulchre or graue of death, making request vnto God, and that with most earnest af∣fection, and was also heard of God: So God commandeth vs in our troubles for to doe, and promiseth that he will heare vs, Psal. 50. ver. 15. Call vpon me (saith God) in the day of trouble: so will I deliuer thee, and thou shalt glorifie me. And Dauid to encourage vs hereunto, sheweth in his owne example that he so did, and was deliuered, Psal 116. ver. 3, 4, 6. When the snares of death compassed me (saith he) and the griefes of the graue caught me: when I found trouble and sorow: Then I called vpon the name of the Lord, saying, I beseech thee, O Lord, deliuer my soule: I was in miserie, and he saued me: So then that most sharpe feeling of death, in the which Ionas was, letted not, but that he readily had recourse vnto God, that afflicted or troubled him: and with great and daily praier and af∣fection turned him selfe vnto him, and with indeauour. For this doth the wordes of calling and crying signifie: whereupon he saith, that he was heard. Such is the sense or feeling of the godly touching immutable or vnchangeable mercie of God towardes them through Christ, as Paul teacheth, when he saith: For I am perswaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shal be able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. Rom. 8. cap. ver. 38, 39. Com∣pare this prayer of Ionas with these Psalmes 142.136.69. and 40. Vers. 4. For thou hadst cast me into the bottome in the middes of the sea, and the flouds compassed me about: all thy surges, and all thy waues passed ouer me. THe figure Cōmoratio, or staying in recitall of particulars.The figure Cō∣moratio. For
Ionas doth shew by parts, what things came into his mind when he praied. 1. The danger wherein Ionas was. The first part therefore telleth the greatnes of the dan∣ger, wherein the Prophet was. The second, the benefite of God in his deliuerance ver. 7. in part, and ver. 8. The third, containeth his thanksgiuing ver. 9. and 10. The greatnes of the daunger was to be declared, that the goodnes of God, and also his power in de∣liuering of Ionas might more euidently or clearely appeare vnto vs. For the greatnes of a disease causeth the benefite of health and healing to appeare the greater. And the benefits of God are not lightly or sleightly to be set forth of vs, but earnestly and with the consideration of the circumstances, the which may lift vs or o∣thers vp vnto God, The greatnes of the danger described by three words cō∣taining so many amplifications of the same. and confirme or strengthen our faith. Here therefore the greatnes of the danger is described by the circum∣stance of the place, but after this manner, that the same beeing expressed by three wordes, hath so many amplifications of th daunger. Ionas was cast into the sea. But he sheweth that th part of the sea, whereinto he was throwne, was most deepe, an therefore most daungerous, so that according vnto the iudge∣ment of man, there was no hope left vnto him of his deliueranc For he calleth it the bottome of the sea that is to say, 1. The bottome of the sea. a whil poole couered with waters, and an huge gulfe in respect of othe parts of the sea. For there are some places in the sea not so v∣deepe, and therefore not so daungerous. Nowe that this part the sea whereinto Ionas was throwne, was such a one, that is  such a depth, appeareth euen by this, if there were nothing el that in it the same mightie whale, which tooke in, and swallo∣ed vp Ionas, could swimme. Secondly, he calleth it the heart of  of the waters,2. The heart of the waters. as if it were the midst of the sea, and the matrice an boyling vp of the waters themselues, where the flouds, that is,  waters are more plentifull then in the other parts of the same For in this place I doe take the word floud for waters (to wit,  speciall being put for the generall) or else because that out of th gulfe of the sea (which of Plato is called Tartarus, that is, he the waters doe flowe into the passages of the earth, as it is Eccle 1. ver. 7. All the riuers goe into the sea, yet the sea is not full: for  riuers goe into the place whence they returne, and goe. But those w∣ters of the sea, as it were by fining and straining doe becom sweete by running along the veines and passages of the eart Further, 3. All the sur∣ges and waues. thirdly he saith, all thy surges and waues of waters were  the same place of the sea, that we should vnderstand that Iona
was cast not onely into the deepest sea, but also into the whirle∣poolish and wrastling sea with it selfe, the waues in that place vi∣olently foming and beating one against an other, and therefore consequently it was most dangerous. After this manner Dauid also describeth his great troubles, Psal. 42. ver. 7. saying: One deepe calleth another deepe by the noise of thy water-spouts: all thy waues and thy flouds are gone ouer me. Ionas cast into the sea by the Marriners, saith that this was done by God, and in what sense.Moreouer it is to be noted, that albeit he were cast into the sea by the Marriners, yet he saith that he was cast in by God, be∣cause it was done God so commanding. Of which thing it selfe appeareth, in howe great anguish and trouble of minde Ionas then was, who did not onely sustaine those same terrours or feare of death in so filthie a place, and such as he could not tuggle out of laide before him: but did moreouer see and feele them as most assured testimonies or witnesses of the wrath of God against him. It appeareth also how great the faith and repentance or turning from sinne vnto God, of the same Ionas was, who al this notwith∣standing doth flee vnto God him selfe as his father. Vers. 5. Then I said, I am cast away out of thy sight: yet will I looke againe towards thine holy Temple. The second amplification of Ionas his dan∣ger.THe second amplification of the danger wherein Ionas was by the adiuncts, that is, by his thoughts and most hard wrast∣lings the which Ionas then felt in his minde. And these did let him, that he could not without great difficultie or hardnes assure him selfe to hope for helpe from God. Nowe this cogitation or thought was in a manner greater and more bitter then the daun∣ger it selfe: because that he did thinke with him selfe that he was banished from the presence of God, as if that now there were no way open for him vnto God, when as he was euidently punished by God him selfe, and the same most apparantly angrie with him for his most grieous offence committed against God him∣selfe. For so doth the flesh iudge of the will of God towards it by the feeling of externall or outward things. True faith in Ionas withstan∣deth his dange∣rous tentation. This feeling therefore did no doubt enstrange him from God. But yet faith, and the same a true faith, withstoode this most dangerous cogitation or thought. For faith wrastled and stroue against this cogitation, sustaining or vpholding it selfe vpon the couenant of God, the promises vnto the seede of Abraham, and the Sacraments and
signes of those promises, as the Tempie. For Ionas did hope that it would come to passe, that neuerthelesse at the handes of the same God before beeing angrie with him, he should nowe ob∣taine mercie, and be deliuered, nay that he should be brought a∣gaine vnto the holy Temple, in the which God was worship∣ped, and should yet againe be reckoned to be in the Church and in the number of the sonnes of God. Therefore I doe take the Hebre we particle (Ac) by the way of contrarietie vnto tha which he said in the former part of this verse, for (but) as name∣ly expressing a sentence contrarie vnto the former. Hereby ap∣peareth that same wrastling of faith with diffidencie, or distrust also the fight of Satan enstranging vs from God by the feeling  our sinnes, with the spirit of God calling vs backe againe vn God by the feeling of his vneuitable grace and fauour toward his, wherein faith in God his elect or chosen ouercommeth  the ende, as in Ionas it did ouercome. Such a like thing may  obserued in the Psalmes 73. and 116. ver. 4, 10, 11. The Temple taken for all o∣ther sacraments by the figure Sy∣necdoche, which is, when as the whole is put for the part, or con∣trariwise the part for the wholt.Moreouer, whereas by the figure Synecdoche, Ionas make mention of the Temple of Ierusalem aboue all other Sacramen of that time, vnto the which he hopeth that he shall yet goe a¦gaine, this appertaineth hereunto, that he may shew that he d earnestly, set before him selfe the Sacraments and signes of Go his couenant with Israel, and called them as it were to helpe him against that importunate or vnreasonable and strong assault distrust, so that by this place, if there were no more, they may b vnderstoode to be vngodly and wicked persons, the which d despise and reiect or refuse of contempt the Sacraments appoin¦ted by God for the confirmation or strengthening of our faith. Vers. 6. The waters compassed me about vnto the soule: the dep closed me round about, and the weedes were wrapt about ma heade. The third am∣plification of the danger.THe third amplification of the daunger, by the manner  plight that Ionas was in, whereby appeareth no hope of e∣scaping and deliuerance, that the power and goodnes of Go may be acknowledged to be the greater, who notwithstanding deliuered Ionas out of that daunger. 1. He is compas∣sed with waues on euery side. And here he briefely reheat∣seth three things, namely, that he was on euery side compasse round about with the waues, so that he could not swimme o
Secondly, that he was so ouerwhelmed in the deep, that he could not come vp againe. Thirdly, 2. He is in the depth. that his very head was compassed with the ooze and other weedes of the sea, the which doe hold and drowne the swimmers, be they neuer so strong otherwise. 3. The sea weeds compasse about his heade. Whereof it is manifest, that Ionas, when be was cast out of the shippe, and before that he was swallowed vp of the whale, did in such sort fall into the sea, that he was tumbled and drenched into the very bottome of the sea, and there did see him selfe on e∣uery side ouerwhelmed and couered with waters, and to be wrapped and carried away with most horrible and dangerous whirle-pooles. Vers. 7. I went downe to the bottome of the mountaines: the earth with her barres was about me for euer: yet hast thou brought vp my life from the pit, O Lord my God. The 4. amplifi∣cation by the description of the sea, and her shoares, in the which Ionas was.THe fourth amplification by the description of the sea it selfe, wherein Ionas was, and of the shoares thereof, by the which is shewed that this place could not be escaped out of by any mortll man. For Ionas was grabling in the very feete of the mountaines compassing in that sea, and in the vtmost parts and barres or bolts of the earth, the which in that part of the sea no man can breake, or ouercome by strength that from thence hee may swimme out of the waters vnto the shoare. He doth therefore liuely set foorth the situation of the sea of Ioppe, into the which Ionas was cast, and teacheth, that the same was compassed about on euery side with cliffes and high rockes, such as is the situation of the Syrian sea, The Poets fein that this An∣dom da for her pride was chained to a recke of the sea, neere vnto Iopa, to be de∣voured by a sea monstr, or whale, from whome she was deliuered by Perseus, who afterwards ma∣ried her. espe∣cially at the citie Ioppa. This may easily be gathered out of the prophane or Heethen writers, where they write of Perseus and Andromeda, Plinius lib. 5. Natur. Hist. cap. 13. Ioppe (saith he) a citie of the Phoenicians, was before the o∣uerflowing of the worlde with the floud, and is seated vpon an hill, hauing a great rocke before it. And cap. 31. he faith out of Mutianus, That the sea is there 50. cubits deepe. Strabo lib. 16. speaking of Ioppa, and of the situation of that place, writeth, That it is a very high place, so that they say that from thence may be seene Ierusalem the chiefe citie of the Iewes. Therefore I thus take these words, The roots of the sea, or the bottome of the sea, & the
barres or bolts of the earth, for the mountains themselues, the which doe shut in that shoare, and doe there beate backe the sea, which mountains Ionas calleth the barres of the earth, or the rayles se by God himself against the sea, that it passe no further, after which like sort God speaketh vnto Iob cap. 38. ver. 4. & 10. Where wast thou, when I laid the foundations of the earth? When I stablished m commandement vpon the sea, and set barres and doores, and said, Hi∣therto shalt thou come, but no farther, and here shall it stay thy proud waues. These so high and craggie rocks, at that place especially, no mortall man is able to clime vp, and by them to saue them selues from shipwrack, because both of the roughnes & also the height of those hills and rocks. And this much hath Ionas spoken of the greatnes of his daunger, wherein consisteth the first part of thi praier. 2. The benefit of God in de∣liuering Jonas, consisting of two points.The second part followeth, where Ionas his deliuerance mad by God, notwithstanding this daunger, is described: Yet (sait Ionas) hast thou made my life to come vp from the graue, &c. An hereby the glorie of God in helping those that are his, appeare to be the greater, that is, his bounteousnes and power, by how much the daunger is greater and certaine. This part of the vers containeth two things. 1. The summe of his deliuerance. For God by his wonderfull power to wi breaking and remoouing all the former lets which he hath reci∣ted, made him lying in the very bottome and depth of the sea,  it were in a graue, where he was now oppressed or kept vnder,  arise and come vp, and that aliue. It hath therefore an emphasis,  force, when he saith, Thou hast made me to come vp, that it may b set against the words of the 4. ver. Thou hadst cast me into the b∣tome, into the heart of the sea. There is also a notable antithesis,  contrarietie, betweene life and the pit, or corruption, and that n euery corruption, but an vtter corruption, the which is death. S thē God brought forth Ionas aliue out of the very iawes of death or out of the castle of hell. The which thing is a shape, figure, a confirmation of the resurrection or rising againe of the dead For albeit Ionas lying in that place and bellie of the fish, ha not yet giuen vp the ghost: yet it came to passe beyond the natu of things, that he came forth thence aliue and safe, & that he ha not there beene deade, and begunne to be putrified. This is o point to be noted. 2. The cause of Jonas his deli∣uerance. The other thing is, the cause of his deliu¦rance, the which he sheweth to haue beene the mere or one power and mercie of God: the power, Ionas noteth by this wo
Ichouah, that is, Eternall: the grace or mercie in these wordes, My God. For this so sweete a seach, My God, containeth the remembrance of the couenant of God with the seede of Abra∣ham, and the witnesse of the same couenant, the which Ionas felt by faith, concerning his peculiar adoption or chosing into the number of God his elect or chosen. Vers. 8. When my soule sainted within me, I remembred the Lorde: and my prayer came vnto thee into thine holy Tem∣ple. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefit by the circumstāce of time.AN amplification of the former benefite, by the circumstance of time. For then God did helpe, when as Ionas was nowe fainting, that is, God heard Ionas out of his holy Temple, at the very pinch, when he cried vnto him, and deliuered him, when as he was now vtterly void of strength, and fainted. He therefore witnesseth that this his life is a new gift of God. And whereas he saith, that he was heard of God out of his holy temple, hee hath respect vnto that promise of God, which is 1. King. cap. 1. ver. 38. where Salomon praieth that God out of heauen will heare and graunt all the petitions of those that in faith pray vn∣to him in and toward that Temple. And further, he nameth the Temple, because that place was a singular and especiall testimo∣nie or witnes of the presence and fauour of God towards the bles∣sed seede, or the seede of Abraham. And whereas Ionas saith, that he praied, & remēbred the Lord, it doth not proue that Ionas was deliuered by God for any worthines, force, and desert of the prai∣er, & of this his cogitation or thought: but that he did that, which God had commanded concerning praying vnto him in afflicti∣on and trouble, as it is Psal. 107. ver. 28. and Psal. 50. ver. 15. as hath bin recited before, the which thing all the godly, The figure ac∣clamation, is the allowing or disalowing of some matter, that we haue told before, by the adding of some pithie sen∣tence thereunto for either of those respects. that are indued with true faith doe performe, that is to say, in their mise∣ries they call vpon God, and haue recourse vnto him. Vers. 9. They that waite vpon lying vanities, forsake their owne mercie. THe figure epiphonema, or acclamation, with the which the third part of this praier beginneth, to wit, a thanksgiuing the which Ionas yeildeth vnto God. This place cōtaineth two things.
One, the singular praise of the true God (whome Ionas witnesseth that he called vpon, and by whome he was deliuered) by com∣paring him with idols, it containeth, I say, the praise of God as the fountaine of all mercie, of al good things, of all saluation, and that the onely fountaine, of the which they doe depriue or bereaue themselues, whosoeuer call vpon & worship other gods. There∣fore Ionas being now deliuered, & rauished as it were besides him selfe, doth triumph vpon the earnest consideration of so great a benefit, and as a conquerour ouer the idolatours, auoucheth the glorie of the true God, crieth out that al men may heare him, that this God alone is the father of all clemencie and mercie, that is, of all good thinges, the which benefits they through their owne fault forsake, which flee vnto idols. Wherefore in this place I take the word mercie, for the effects of mercie, the which God being mercifull, bestoweth vpon men. The second part of this verse hath a very excellent and most true description of idols, the which by the way of contrarieties is opposed or set against that most boun∣teous nature of the true God. A notable de∣scription of i∣dols by way of contrarieties set against God. For he is true: the idols are lyes: He is bounteous in deede: the idols are vaine, that is, without any ef∣fect. Those therfore which call vpon them, and in their necessities pray vnto them, and not vnto the true God, doe willingly depriue themselues of true and certaine helpe of all good things: of salua∣tion it selfe: because they forsake the true God the fountaine of all good things, as Ieremie, or rather God by Ieremie complaineth, Ierem. 2.13. My people (saith God) haue committed two euils: they haue forsaken me the fountaine of liuing waters, to digge them pittes, ouen broken pittes, that can hold no water. Vers. 19. But I will sacrifice vnto thee with the voyce of thanks∣giuing, and will pay that I haue vowed: saluation is of the Lorde. A thanksgiuing containing 1. praising of God by voice. 2. Offering of sacrifice.A Full thanksgiuing for the benefit receiued. This containeth three things. First, Ionas with voice praiseth the true God, with voyce confessing and acknowledging him to be the true and onely author of his deliuerance. Secondly, it containeth a sa∣crifice offered vnto God according vnto the worship at that time commaunded. For Ionas sacrificeth a sacrifice eucharisticall, or of thanksgiuing, in steade of which sacrifice we nowe haue almes towards the poore, and giuing of thanks, as we are taught, Hebr.
cap. 13. ver. 15, 16. Let vs therefore by him (that is, by Christ) offer the sacrifice of praise alwaies vnto God, that is, the fruit of the lippes, which confesse his name. To doe good and to distribute, forget not: for with such sacrifices God is pleased. And Ionas also doth more∣ouer make mention of his vowe, to teach that it was publikely and solemnly payde by him, witnessing there by that same sin∣gular goodnes and mercie of God towards him. So Paul is read to haue vowed and performed the same, Act. cap. 21. ver. 26. And Dauid, Psal. 116. ver. 28. saith, I will pay my vowes vnto the Lord, euen nowe in the presence of all his people. In like manner ought we openly and with a full mouth, to rehearse and set forth vnto others the benefits of God towards vs. Thirdly, 3. A reason of the two former. he rendreth a reason of them both, namely for that he doth acknowledge that same his deliuerance, and euery mans els, to come from that same true God alone, and not from idols. So Dauid Psal 36. re∣hearsing the manifold mercies of the Lord, among the rest con∣fesseth God to be the maintainer and preseruer both of man and beast, ver. 6. Thou Lord (saith he) doest saue man and beast. And thus doth Iames teach vs to acknowledge euery good gift, and so consequently our saluation, and all other our deliuerances to come from God, when he writeth cap. 1.17. Every good giuing, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the father of lights, with whome is no variablenes, neither shadowing by turning. And when Ionas saith, I will sacrifice, &c. this word (I) hath a maruailous vehemencie or force, as if he should haue said, If all the world besides should be vnmindfull of their dueties, I, euen I, that miserable wretch, rebell, and runagate from God, thus mercifully beyond all desert deliuered, &c. will sacrifice vn∣to God, and shew my selfe thankfull. And touching these sacrifi∣ces, I take them to haue beene such as the law of God in such cases requireth, Leuit. 7. the which Ionas, after that he came forth of the bellie of the fish, sacrificed at Ierusalem according vnto the word of God. This therefore was done afterward. For first he was cast vp by the fish. Vers. 10. And the Lord spake vnto the fish, and it cast out Ionas vpon the dry land. The effect of Ionas his prai∣er.THe effect of Ionas his praier. God beeing called vpon was present with Ionas, and sent him forth aliue out of the bellie of the fish, of whome he had beene swallowed vp. This agree∣eth with the rule Psal 34. v. 19. Great are the troubles of the righte∣ous:
but the Lord deliuereth him out of them all. And with the which hath before beene alleadged out of other Psal. as Psalm 50. ver. 19. Psal. 116. ver. 4. and Psal. 107. And he saith further that God commanded the fish to cast vp Ionas, that is, that the fish should deliuer backe againe the thing which God had lef with him for a time to keepe. The fish obeieth, and deliuereth him: that herby we also may learne to obey God, and to acknow∣ledge all thinges to be subiect vnto his power, and to reuerence and stand in awe of him, and to worship and feare him. And th is furthermore a notable example and witnes, to prooue then r∣surrection or rising againe of our bodies. An example of the rising again of our bodies. For the land and these shall deliuer vp againe, yea all other elements shall deliuer vp ∣gaine the bodies of men, which they haue receiued, when Go so commandeth them. Hereof read more at large Ezech. 37. CAP. 3. Vers. 1. And the worde of the Lord came vnto Ionas the seco time, saying, The second part of this booke.THe other or second part of this historie  booke, in which that same commandeme of God is rehearsed againe, the which w before inioyned and commaunded the Pro∣phet Ionas: the execution whereof is now with great fruite and profit put in practise b Ionas, that it may sufficiently appeare, th he did before amisse suppose that he was i vaine sent vnto the Ninivites, when as afterwardes he shall se with his owne eyes so great and wished for an effect of his prea∣ching. But yet for all this did not Ionas sufficiently esteeme of th neither, but still had cogitations or surmises that were carnall fleshly, concerning the contempt, scorning, and diminishing o his propheticall office by meanes of this his preaching, as appea∣reth by the 4. chapter. A rehearsing a∣gaine of the for∣mer comman∣dement touch∣ing the destru∣ction of the Ni∣niuites.Nowe this verse containeth the commandement of God, tou∣ching the shewing vnto the Ninivites their destruction, becaus of their wickednes, and the same rehearsed here againe in as ma∣ny words as it was declared before cap. 1. ver. 1. And therefore the Prophet saith, Againe, or The seconde time: where appea∣reth,
that albeit hee were unworthy, yet neverthelesse that he was not onely retained in the Church as a member of the same, but also was restored unto the office of a Prophet through the singular favour and mercy of God. So likewise Peter after his great fall and deniall of his master, was notwithstanding after∣terwards not only received into favour againe, but also by Christ put in commission a fresh to feed his sheepe. Iohn 21.17. where Christ saith unto him the third time: Simon the sonne of Iona, lovest thou me? Peter was sory because he said unto him the third time, lovest thou me: and said unto him, Lord, Thou knowest all thinges, thou knowest that I love thee. Then Iesus saide unto him, Feede my sheepe. Now if Ionas had not had this commission renewed, hee neither ought nor could have gone to Ninive, and followe that first commavndement, the which seemed through Ionas his of∣fence, by God himselfe to have bene revoked, or called back. Further, these things were done by Ionas, at the least under Ie∣roboam the sonne of Ioas king of Israel, under whome he lived, at what time the power of the Assyrians was now knowen unto the Israelites: but as yet not feared of them. For so it began to be under Manahem the king, 2. King. 15. Vers. 2. Arise, goe to Ninive that great citie, and preach unto it the preaching which I bid thee. An explanation of that which went before.AN explanation, or making more plaine of that which was said before. For Ionas declareth what God commaunded him, to wit, the same thing which he did before. So much doe these wordes sound: Preach the preaching which J bad thee. For God will have it wholly to be fulfilled: neither is the same chan∣geable, Psalm. 115.3. Our God is in heaven (say the faithfull) he doeth whatsoever he will. Therefore albeit here be nothing said of the sinnes of the Ninivites, yet is the same to be repeated out of the first chapter ver. 2. as is that which followeth vers. 4. and is said of the 40 daies, the which was then also commanded him to say unto them. Vers. 3. So Ionas arose, and vvent to Ninive according unto the word of the Lorde: novv Ninive was a great citie, and excellent, of three dayes iourney.
THE execution and faithfull performance of the comman∣dement of God, as may thus appeare. For God said unto him before, vers. 2. Arise, goe to Ninive: and here it is saide, He arose, and went to Ninive according unto the word of the Lord, that Ionas may shew himselfe now to haue bene ready to obey, and not to be resisting, disobedient, and running away, as he was before. So ought we to obey God both faithfully, and also readily. And for the truth of the history, and to testifie or witnesse his obedience, he describeth Ninive, to shew that he came into the selfe same city, and that he told the selfe same things, the which God had commaunded him: that is to say, hee came unto that same very great city Ninive, The greatnes of Ninive. the which as Herodotus and Diodorus Siculus lib. 3. cap. 1. doe affirme, was more then 30. French leagues, and was seated by the river Tygris. Strabo lib. 5. Geograph. saith, that there were certaine remnants thereof, the which are called a ci∣tie. Tacitus lib. 12. Annal. Marcellinus lib. 14. and 18. doe attri∣bute it unto Commagena. Now albeit he were sent both alone and also a stranger, and to tell them being infidels, hard and hea∣vie newes, yet is he not afraid, being both instructed in faith, and also now taught by experience of the might and power of God in preserving him. So Elizeus goeth to Damascus, 2. King. cap. 8. ver. 7. So must we in like manner despising all dangers fol∣low God when he calleth us Exod. cap. 3. and Ierem. cap. 1. The repentance therefore of Ionas was true. Further, why this citie Ninive was so great, the reason is, for that before the Empire of the Macedonians, those countreyes were inhabited onely by streetes: and there were very few cities in them, as saith Plinie libr. 6. Histor. Nat. cap. 26. It was situate or seated by the river Tygris as hath bene said. Vers. 4. And Ionas began to enter into the citie a dayes iourney, and hee cryed, and saide, yet fourtie dayes, and Ninive shall be destroyed. THE preaching of the commaundement of God concer∣ning the destroying of Ninive because of her sinnes, The preaching of the destructi∣on of Ninive. and that shortly, namely, after 40 dayes, except it did repent and a∣mend her former wickednes. Ionas therefore after that he is once entred into Ninive, beginneth by and by, and that openly, and as lowd as he can: he maketh no delayes, he speaketh not doubt∣fully
nor darkely, those things the which God would haue tolde unto them: he doth not first go and purchase the favour and good will of some towards him, but committeth unto God the falling out of things, and as much as in him lyeth goeth forward in the worke commanded. And whereas God would haue 40. God is long suf∣fering even to∣wards infidels. dayes graunted unto the Ninivites for repentance, and that they should not forthwith be destroyed, this declareth the infinite or endlesse patience and bearing of God even towards infidels, as Paul Roman. cap. 2. ver. 4. blameth those which abuse the long suffe∣rance of God as an incouragement to induce them the more boldly to sinne, when he saith, Despisest thou the riches of his boun∣tifulnesse and patience, & long sufferance, not knowing that the boun∣tifulnesse of God leadeth thee unto repentance? And moreover this 40. dayes respite sheweth that in these threatnings of God there was included a condition of repentance. The threatning of God towards the Ninivites, conditionall. Therefore this threat∣ning was conditionall not simple or pure as they say, and as some notwithstanding doe think, wherein they wearie them selues against the wordes of the prophet. Vers. 5. So the people of Ninive beleeved God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackloath, from the greatest of them even unto the least of them. The effect or fruit of Jonas preaching.THE fruite or effect of the former preaching of Ionas among the unbeleeuing Ninivites, being such as were accustomed unto sinne, namely their repentance. VVhereby appeareth that the ministerie of Ionas through the grace of God, was effectuall, or of force even among the Ninivites, as Christ himselfe also doth teach Mat. 12. The men of Ninive shall arise in iudgement with this generation, and condemne it: for they repented at the preaching of Io∣nas: and behold a greater then Jonas is here. Of this all they may cō∣ceive good hope of happy successe, who are called & sent of God unto any worke, or ministery to be executed either among the faithfull, or among the unfaithfull. But the repentance of the Ni∣nivites is briefly here described first by two signes or tokens: and afterwards the whole matter is more at large declared by way of explanation or laying out of the same more plainly. Two signes of the repentance of the Nini∣vites. And the two signes are, namely the faith of the Ninivites (for they are said to haue beleeved God) and the outwarde constitution or behaviour touching their body, to expresse the earnest feeling of the sorrowe for their sinnes committed, to wit, fa∣sting and sackecloath. Touching the faith of the Ninivites:
they are saide to have beleeved God, that is to say, the prophet Ionas in the name of God denouncing or shewing unto them these threatnings because of their wickednesse. 1 Faith, and how farre forth, or in what respect the Ninivites may be saide to have saith. Therefore they neither drave the prophet out of their citie, clearely declaring unto them the iudgements of God to ensue upon them except they did amend: neither yet stopped their eares, as the Scribes doe, Act. 7. neither for bad him, that he should not publish or tell forth these things: but received them as the most true and certen wordes of God: they perswaded them selves that he was assu∣redly sent unto them by God: and finally they beleeved that those things which he threatned would come to passe, as appea∣reth hereafter ver. 9. Thus farre foorth therefore was this assent or agreeing of the Ninivites unto the saying of Ionas faith, as they beleeved this worde of the prophet. For here is nothing spoken of the covenant of God towardes men, of the Messias, of the meanes and cause of the forgiveneffe of sinnes, or of the other partes of the word of God, unto all the which neither did the Ninivites give assent, neither yet did knowe them, albeit i these properly the true and iustifying faith doth consist. They wanted then this faith, but they had onely a particular faith, th which beleeveth or receiveth for true, but some one point  the word of God. In this sense many are said by the Evangeli to have beleeved Christ. And such as was the faith of the Nin∣vites, such was their penitencie or repentance: not feigned I con∣fesse, not hypocriticall, not counterfeit, that when as they w not inwardly touched with the feare of the iudgements of Go and of his punishment the which was then declared unto the yet neverthelesse they did feigne themselves to be moved: a when as they did not sincerely or truly acknowledge themsel to be such, that is to say, sinners, such as by Ionas they were ∣scribed for to be, yet notwithstanding after the maner of hyp∣crites they did counterfait themselves to be sinners: But t were inwardly and in their minde earnestly touched both w the feeling of their sinnes, The Ninivites had not true re∣pentance, which is the effect of a iustifying faith. and also with the feare of Gods iudg∣ments: yet notwithstanding had they not that same true pe∣tencie or repentance, the which is the effect of a true and iu∣fying faith, the which the godly only and the elect of God ha and whereof we have a description in those that repented at ∣ters sermon, and were baptized Act. 2.37. & 41. They felt ind an inward feare and trembling of mind, such as by nature th
men are wont to haue in themselves being convicted of their sinnes, & feared with the threatnings of God: but they had not that same lively and sweete taste of the mercy of God applyed unto thē by Christ, & the testimonie or witnes of the holy ghost, by the which the godly with all their hearts are angry even with themselves, albeit there were no hell or punishment to come. Whereupon they onely and none but they which are godly doe truly repent. Such an affection of mind doth Paul describe spea∣king of the repenting sorrow of the Corinthians concerning the matter of the incestuous person. 2. Cor. 7.11. saying, For behold, this thing that ye have bin godly sory, what great care it hath wrought in you: yea, what clearing of your selves: yea, what indignation: yea, what feare: yea, how great desire: yea, what a zeale: yea, what punish∣ment? in all things you have shewed your selues pure in this matter. This affection these Ninivites had not. Neither is that which Christ saith, Mat. 12.41. alledged before in the beginning of the former sectiō, any thing against this, where he saith, that the Ninivites repented: ergo, would some conclude, the repentance of the Ninivites was true repentance, and such as is the repentance of the godly.  I answer, that these names of Faith and Repentance carry many significations, and are often times at∣tributed unto those affections which haue but an imitation or resemblance of faith and repentance onely, as is the repentance of Achab 1. Kin. 21.29. And in the gospell of Matthew this word Faith is often so taken, as cap. 9. ver. 2. of those that brought unto Christ the man sicke of the palsie, of whom Christ saith, That he saw their faith, &c. & in the same chap. ver. 22. he saith the like of the faith of the woman that had the bloody issue, comming unto him to be cured of the same. & chap. 17. v. 20. where Christ tel∣leth his disciples, That if they had faith but as much as a graine of mustard seed, they should remove mountains, &c. So here after in this prophet cap. 4..2. the faultie prayer of Ionas, is notwithstanding called a prayer. And thus much of the faith, and inward repen∣tance of these Ninivites. 2. The outward signes of the repentance of the Ninivites, fasting, sack∣cloth, & ashes.The outward repentance of the Ninivites was in those signes, the which at that time were used of those that did truly repent, al∣beit hypocrires also did oftn make shew of the same: as may ap∣peare out of Ioel cap. 2. v. 14. where God saith, Rent your heartes and not your garments, and turne to the Lorde your God, &c. signify∣ing that true repentance must proceed from an heart humbled
by faith, and not consist in outward ceremonies, in the which of all others hypocrites as most forward. For so 1. King. 21.27. A∣chab, when by Elias he heard of Gods iudgements towardes him, Renteth his cloathes putteth sackcloth upon him, and fasteth, & lyeth in sackcloath, and goeth sofly: yet was he void of true re∣pentance, such as the godly have. These outward signes are fa∣sting, sackeloth, and ashes. After which maner the godly haue in former times humbled themselves before God. For so Iob. cap. 2. v. 8. sitteth downe among the ashes. And Psalm. 69 v. 10, 11. David saith of himselfe. I wept, and my soule fasted, but that was to my reproofe (he meaneth among the wicked) I put on a sacke als  and I became a proverb unto them. Vers. 6. For word came unto the king of Ninive, and he arose from his throne, and he laid his robe from him, and covered him with sacke∣cloth, and sate in ashes. EXplanation, or laying out more at large that which briefly was set downe before. For now he doth more fully declare that, Explanation. which he had briefly before spoken of the repentance of the Ninivites. He therfore pursueth every circumstance, both that the efficacie or force of the word of God outwardly preached even among the heathen themselves, may be understood, & also that we may know that the repentance of these men was true, and not hypocriticall, and that this may be an example for the godly being put in minde of the threatnings of God to follow. And to this purpose doth Christ alledge it Mat. 12. Publike & not private repen∣tance here de∣scribed. But in this place is described publike, not private, solemne and extraordinarie, and not ordinary repentance, like is as also Ioel cap. 2. VVhich two kindes of repentance are not to be confounded or hudled up to∣gither: neither are we to looke for that in ordinary, or private repentance, the which is proper and peculiar unto extraordinatie and publike repentance: as is for example, the decree of the magi∣strate, the putting on of sackcloth and ashes, &c. Furthermore we must note, that the signes which are here re∣hearsed, Fasting, sacke cloth, & ashes, and such like externall ge∣sture are rather signes of true outward repen∣tance of the godly, the which consisteth in the hears truly bū∣bled by faith, & shewing forth the fruits of the same, by the workes of mer∣cy, &c. did indeed in these Ninivites spring frō a sincere or purt minde: yet notwithstanding if they be considered in themselves they do rather paint out unto us the true nature and condition of the outward then the inwarde repentance of the godly, as may easily appeare Isai, 58. v. 5, 6, 7. Is it such a fast that I have choses
(saith the Lord) that a man should afflict his soule for a day, & to bow downe his head as a bulrush, and to lye downe in sackcloth & ashes? Wilt thou call this a fasting, or an acceptable day unto the Lord? Is not this the fasting that I have chosen, to loose the bandes of wickednesse, to take off the heavie burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye breake every yoke? Is it not to deale thy bread to the hungry, & that thou bring the poore that wander unto thine house? When thou seest the naked, that thou cover him, and hide not thy selfe from thine owne flesh. For inward repentance, such as is in godly men, is assured of the forgivenesse of sinnes by Christ, of the promises of God, of his fatherly good will towardes them, &c. Now these thinges were nor in the Ninivites. The first circum¦stance of the re∣pentance of the Ninivites, to wit, the persons repenting.Moreover the first circumstance of this publike repentance of the Ninivites, are the persons repenting: among the which the person of the king is first described as the which namely was the cause and example of the repentance of the rest: Afterwards the rest repented. For they all repented from the greatest unto the least, as was before ver. 5. and not onely one or two. Yea the king of Ninive himselfe, and not onely his subiectes. And this repen∣tance of the king, and that publike (laying aside all cogitation and pride of his kingly maiestie) is in this verse described by moste excellent contraries, He that sate before in his royall throne, lay in ashes: he that before was clothed with soft and gorgeous rai∣ment, tooke upon him most hard and sackcloath, and cloath of haire. Compare this outward shewe of repentance with these places and examples of the scripture, of Achab 1. King. 21.27. Ioel. 2. Isal. 58.5. Iob. 16.15. Mat. 11.8. VVhether Ionas came unto the king, or whether the king heard of his sermons by the report of others, hee was earnestly touched. Vers. 7. And he proclaimed and said through Ninive (by the counsell of the King and his nobles) saying: Let neither man nor beast, bul∣locke, nor sheepe taste any thing, neither feed, nor drinke water. An amplificatiō of the former circumstance of the persons.AN amplification of the same circumstance of the persons, whereunto are also adioyned two other circumstances: And the amplification of the persons repenting, consisteth in this, that the men of all ages, sexe, and kinde or condition, as the Peeres and States of the Realme, and also the common people fasted, and cloathed them-selues with sackecloath.
They did therefore openly repent. Concerning age, the very children and infants also fasted, concerning sexe, the females & the males, yea the bridegromes and brides fasted. And these are gathered by this word (Man) in this place taken generally. But Ioellcap. 2. ver. 16. all these former are expressely commanded for to fast in these wordes: Gather the people, sanctifie the congregati∣on: gather the elders: assemble the children, and those that sucke the brestes: let the bridegrome goe forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride chmber. Thus then all that same whole most great city was in sorow, and full of most bitter heavinesse, and there∣fore gaue forth testimony of her repentance. Such a generall so∣row doth the prophet Isai foreshew that the Moabites shoulde be in, because of the great evils, that were to come upon them. cap. 15. ver. 3. In their streetes (saith the Prophet) shall they b girded vvith sackecloath: on the toppes of their houses, and in their streetes every one shall howle and come downe with weeping. Read the whole chapter. To be short, not onely the men, but also the cattell, All the tame beasts of the Ni∣nivites doe fast. that is, all the brute beasts that were tame, and had their being with men, fasted, & put on sackcloath and cloath of haire, as the oxen, the sheepe, under which by the figure Synecdoth (which is, when the whole is put for the part, or the part for the whole) I doe comprehend the other kindes of tame beasts,  hennes, dogges, and the rest, which doe live of foode given unto them by men, and not of ravine. But this latter point was extra∣ordinarie in this publike repentance, neither is it rashly of us to be followed: but was used by them to shew the greatnesse of their sorrowe. And thus much of the first circumstance of this publike repentance of the Ninivites. 2. Circumstance of this repen∣tance.There followeth the second circumstance, namely, the meane whereby this repentance was proclaimed. It was proclaimed by the publike commandement of the king and his whole counsel the which by a sergeant was openly cried and declared through out the whole citie of Ninive. So those things which are pub∣like, ought to be done by the authoritie of the publike counsell. The third circumstance, is the forme and maner of this repen∣tance, 3. Circumstance and the same moste exquisite or perfect so farre footh as concerneth the outwarde signes, for all these are commaunder to fast from all kind of meate, not onely from delicate and dair∣tie meates: sackcloath, and cloth of haire are appointed for the∣to weare and to be clothed withall, so that both the men & also
the beasts themselves might be understood to be worthy of that anger of God, that is, of death. Finally a strong crie unto God is commaunded with mourning and teares, that by the earnest feeling of their miserie and guiltinesse before God, all of them might repent and mourne. For here is prescribed or appointed a religious fast, and not a naturall, or physicall fast. Vers. 8. But let man and beast put on sackcloath, and cry mightily unto God: yea, let every man turne from his evill way, & from the wickednesse that is in their handes. 4. Circumstance The end of this fast and repen∣tance.THE fourth circumstance, the end of this fast & repentance. For they were commanded not only to use these outward things, but also to cast away all their wicked living earnestly, and to refourme and amend the same sincerely: And this by the fi∣gure Synechdoc he (which is, when the whole is put for the part, or the parte for the whole) is comprehended under the name of wickednesse or violence: because that this is commonly the first publike fruite of the uniust life of men, namely, violence or hurt, the which is offered by vs unto our neighbours. And therefore Paul saith 1. Thess. 4.6. Let no man oppresse or defraud his brother in any matter: for the Lorde is avenger of all such things. This is then another part of repentance. Here is nothing spoken of the true worship of God, of the covenant, and embracing the Mes∣sias: no nor so much as of laying aside of their idolatrie doe these Ninivites take any care or thought, but only of such knowen vi∣ces, as doe turne to the hurt of men. Ver. 9. ƲƲho can tell if God will turne, and repent, and turne a∣way from his fierce wrath, that we perish not? THis is a rendring of a reason of the former commandement comprehended in the kings decree concerning their fasting, A reason of the former comman dement of God. and also their putting upon them of sackcloath and ashes, wher∣by both the people are encouraged unto repentance, to wit, up∣on hope to escape the wrath of God: and also by the same is shewen, what manner of feeling that same generall feeling is, the which all men have, which are not plaine Atheistes, of the mercie and kindnesse of God towardes mankinde. For all men by the remnants of the light of nature which is in them, doe generally knowe, that God is both iust, and also mer∣cifull: that which his government of the worlde, and expe∣perience it selfe doeth proove: but yet all this notwithstan∣ding
they neither know the foundation, nor yet the force both of this iustice, and also mercy of God, as namely being infidels, the which neverthelesse the faithfull doe understand, being taught both by the worde of God and also by the holy ghost. We haue therefore seene before both in the marriners, and also in the Ni∣nivites themselves, what manner of common knowledge there is in all men, yea, even in the infidels concerning the righteous∣nesse of God, to wit, that he is iust, and a punisher of wickednes: so also this is a common principle engraffed in the hearts of all men, that God likewise is mercifull and loving. But both these knowledges doe farre differ from that, which the godly and the faith full haue concerning both these properties and vertues of God, out of his word, and by the feeling and swetnesse of a true faith. For as high as the heaven is above the earth, so great is Gods mercy toward them that feare him. Psalm. 103. vers. 11. and Psalm. 34. v. 8. the prophet willeth the faithfull, who indeed only haue the true feeling hereof, To taste and see how gratious the Lord in and addeth, Blessed is the man that trusteth in him. Feare the Lord, ye his saintes: for nothing wanteth to them that feare him. The lyon doe lacke, and suffer hunger: but they which seeke the Lorde, shall want nothing that is good. This feeling without all doubt the Ninivites wanted, being onely troubled and carefull for their destruction, and thereof admonished or warned by Ionas. I The Ninivites hope well of God, though he threaten them.But here are two things to be marked. The first is, That they conceive a good hope of God even then neverthelesse, when he threatneth them, and doe beleeve that he may be appeased, but yet doubtingly: and not after that maner, after which he belee∣ved, that said: yea albeit he kill me, yet will I trust in him. Iob. 13. ver. 15. But for that all men, as I haue saide, beeing by nature taught concerning the mercy of God, are not utterly void of all hope, albeit I doe not denie that the Ninivites in this hoping of the mercy of God did greatly wrastle both against the threat∣nings of Ionas, and also against the testimony or witnesse of their owne conscience condemning them. This also we are to follow, and that so much the rather, because that we have moste assured promises of God to be mercifull unto us in Christ, as is plentifully to be seene in many places of that most comfortable Psalme 89. and also every where in the prophets, singing this note, Turne unto me. The other point here to be noted is, That they say God may repent, and call backe the sentence by him
given. But God is unchangeable and can not lie. Titus cap. 1. vers. 2. I answer, he voice and sentence of God is of two sorts: 2 They say that God may repēt, and in what sense this may be understood. The one Comminatorie or threatning onely: The other defini∣tive and absolute. This latter can never be revoked or called backe, the former may. For that is pronounced or given against us under a certen condition, the which if we do performe accor∣ding unto the will of God threatning us, it is all one as if it had never bene given against us. Such were these threatnings of God of the destruction of Ninive, except they repented, as appeareth by the number of fortie dayes being adioyned thereunto. Gods threat∣nings against the Ninivites, conditionall. They repented: therefore those threatnings ceased to haue place any longer. Of this kinde of sentence of God speake the Ninivites here, when as they say, Who knoweth, if God will repent, &c. Vers. 10. And God savv their workes, that they turned from their evill wayes: and God repented of the evill that he had sayde he would doe unto them, and he did it not. THE conclusion of the whole former narration or discourse.The conclusion of the former narration. And it sheweth that God being mooved with the repen∣tance or change of living made by the Ninivites, spared them, and not for their outward ceremonies onely, as their sackcloath, ashes, and fasting, for this was the meaning of God, that if they did after this manner repent, they should be saved from the threatned destruction. The end of God his reprooving of vs. This is the end of all Gods threatnings towards us, and chidings with us, to wit, that wee should ear∣nestly turne unto him. August. God doth not in such sort find fault with us, as to insult or triumph over us, but to bring us to con∣fusion and shame for our sinnes, that he may afterwardes heale us. So God teacheth us that the end of the sending of his pro∣phets to reproove his people, was, that they should amend & be blessed, as Ierem. cap. 35. vers. 15. I have (saith God) sent unto you all my servants the prophets, rising vp earely, and sending them, saying. Returne now every man from his evill way, and amend your workes, and goe not after other gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the lande, which I have giuen unto you and to your fathers. And David Psalm. 103. ver. 9. saith, That God will not alwaies chide, neither keepe his anger for ever, but that he hath mercy in store for them that feare him and turne from wickednesse. Read the whole Psalme, for it is full of most excellent comforts. Two things are to be observed or noted in this place: The one that it is attributed unto their workes, that God did save them. I
answer,1. The sparing of the Ninivites in what sense attributed unto their workes. So farre forth as those workes, namely their repentance were signes & testimonies or witnesses of the earnest trembling and feare of the Ninivites at the threatnings of God and they themselves were not hypocrites, but such as unfainedly were so∣ry, albeit not in such maner as the godly in such cases are. For God loveth the onely resemblances of Christian vertues, as o faith, hope, feare, &c. that we should understand by how much the more he loveth the true vertues themselves, and therefore that we should follow after them the more earnestly. So he al∣loweth the repentance of Achab 1. King. 21.29. And the faith of Simon Magus. Actes 8.13. and of Iudas Iscariot, who also wrought miracles with the other Apostles. The other thing to be noted is, 2. God did not as he threatned, and why? that God is saide not to have done, that is, not to have executed those his threatnings. Not that any thing ca let or hinder the will of God, besides God himselfe, but, as  have shewed, therefore he did it not, because he would not. For he had not simply decreed to destroy the Ninivites, but under this condition, unlesse they did repent from their wicked way, at least wise in the outward regard of their living. The which thing they performed. CAP. 4. Vers. 1. Therefore it displeased Ionas exceedingly, and he was angrie. THE consequence or what followed this their repentance. For the Prophet goeth on not onely in telling of the historie of things that followed, but also in the description of his owne sinne, when as he had not yet through∣ly repented being learned by the former pu∣nishments, that by his example all men may learne the true way of establishing the glory of God, and not to make estimation and determination of the fruite of the worke whereunto they are called of God, Wee may not e∣steeme of Gods doing after our owne mind, but what he willeth the same ought in every respect to like and con∣tent vs. by the iudgement and sense or feeling of mans wisedome, and of the flesh, but by the iudge∣ment, will, and wisedome of God himselfe: that looke what he will haue brought to passe, & after what maner he will haue it brought to passe, the same also may like us, and that wee allowe of the same, albeit that wee did suppose that some
other thing, or after some other maner, would haue ensued of it. In a worde, we are hereby taught not to consult with flesh and blood neither in the worke, nor about the worke of God. For flesh and blood can not inherite the kingdome of God. 1. Cor. 15.50. For Gods thoughts are not like unto our thoughts. Isai. 55.8, 9. Now this that followeth from this first verse unto the 5. ver. is here set downe by a figure called Hysteron proteron.Hysteron pro∣teron, is a fi∣gure, by the which that that was last is vpor∣ted first, & con∣trariwise that which was first, is placed last. 1. Ionas dissen∣teth from the will of God. 2. He is excee∣ding angry. For after his sermons made in Ninive, Ionas departed out of the city, and waiting there 40. dayes, he perceiveth that God had repented and spared the Ninivites. VVherefore this prayer was made after those fortie dayes expired or past. For after those 40. daies it came to passe that Ionas complained grievously with himselfe because that the Ninivites were spared, and was most exceeding angry. This verse then conteineth two things. First his dissenting or disagreeing from the will of God: secondly his anger upon this disagreeing, nay his burning and great boyling in minde, not a∣gainst God I confesse (for that had bene the part of a man utterly wicked, such a one as Ionas was not) but within himselfe taking it grievously, for that the matter and issue of his preaching, did not so fall out, as he hoped it would do, and as he thought it to be meet for the glory of God, & for the commending of the autho∣ritie of the ministerie propheticall, and his especially among the Gentiles, and men that were scorners of the God of Israel. This man therefore did fret within himselfe, & did chafe in his minde, (but not against God, accusing him of lying or falshood, or blas∣pheming his name) but preferring the iudgement of his owne mind concerning the establishing of the God of Israels power a∣mong the Heathen, & the certentie of his word among men that were infidels, before that counsell of the wisdome of God, and also before so notable a fruite of his ministery or office. VVhereby doubtles doth appeare evidently the power & feare of the migh∣ty God of Israel even among the Heathen themselves, whilst they in such sort give eare unto & receive his prophet, whom they had never seene before, & one that was not famous among them by any miracles there wrought, Two causes of Jonas his anger and as it were, saucinesse to chide with God. 1 & do beleeve him to be a most true prophet. There were therfore two causes of this trouble & mala∣pertnesse of Ionas: The one, for that he supposed that that way only the glory of the God of Israel might be established among the Heathen, the which otherwise was like to be contemned or despised, namely if those things the which hee as a prophet and
preacher had in the name of God told unto them for to come to passe might in every respect so fall out as he had foretolde them that they should. And that otherwise God himselfe should be accused of inconstancie, and his prophets of vanitie and open lying. 2. Jonas under∣standeth not the end of Gods threatnings. The other cause is, for that he neither thinketh that this is the scope or drift of Gods threatnings, that men should convert or turne, and repent (for God will not the death of a sinner: but that he should repent and live) neither doeth he esteeme so much of this effect of his ministerie, as he doth of the falling out of the matter according unto the bare word of his preaching. VVe must I confesse, be fervent or earnest unto God (as Paul Rom. 12. v. 11. biddeth us be fervent in spirit) in which two causes, Io∣nas was greatly deceived, and most men for the most part now a dayes doe offend (whilest they intermeddle and mingle the owne wisdome with the commaundement of God) being men otherwise grave and godly, and ready to obey God: but they consider not that which is 1. Corinth. cap. 1. vers. 20. Hath not G made the wisdome of this world foolishnesse? And Roman. 8.7. The wisdome of the flesh is enmitie against God. Vers. 2. And he prayed unto the Lorde and saide, J pray thee, O Lorde, was not this my saying, when I was yet in my countrey Therefore I prevented it to flee unto Tarshish. For I knevve that thou art a gracious God, and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and repentest thee of the evill. The first ampli∣fication of the sinne of Jonas.THE first amplification of the sinne of Ionas, the which Ionas himselfe maketh, not onely to shew, whether in the end those our carnall or fleshly cogitations or thoughts carry us and lead us quite out of the way: but also to teach that we can of∣ten times ley false gloses, and alledge faire titles, causes, and rea∣sons for our foolish prayers, vowes, and iudgements. So Christ Luc. 9.55. answereth his Apostles. Ye know not of what spirit ye are. VVhich glosing and faire excusing of matter is done not onely unprofitably in cases betweene God and us, but also disobedi∣ently and blasphemously, and turneth unto our condemnation. Therefore Ionas is not onely foolishly angry: but also will ap∣proove this his foolishnesse unto God himselfe, and confirme or strengthen it as a wise counsell or purpose. Jonas would have God to like of his folly. Wherfore he saith, that he spake unto God, & pleaded with him (the which in this place he calleth praying) for the avouching and iustifying of this his burning & boiling anger. For he did not blaspheme God, as some
wicked persons vse to do: but with greater reverence layeth open this his cause unto God. And finally in the end he desireth of God that he may die for the selfe same cause. This prayer of Ionas hath three parts: first, the entrance or be∣ginning, I pray thee, O Lord,Three parts of Ionas his praier. 1. The entrāce. 2. The defence of Jonas his cause. whereby he wisheth God to be fa∣vourable, & an upright iudge unto him, & sheweth that the de∣sire of his mind was most vehement or earnest. The second is, the defence and prooving of his cause and righteousnesse, to wit, that he did at the first iustly & upon good ground take this counsell to flee away: because that he did foresee that this whole comman∣dement of God unto the Ninivites would be vaine and of none effect, and hurtfull also unto the glory of God among them. For they would laugh God to scorne hereby as changeable, because he brought not to passe the things which he threatned, or as not able to do it in the iudgement of Ionas: & so consequently, that they would more and more contemne or despise the true God of Israel. This forsooth is the foolishnesse of worldly, that is to say, madde wisdome. As if God knew not what course to take for the maintenance of the glory of his name and maiestie of his power and godhead even among the very heathen themselves, & infi∣dels, after a farre other sort then we can imagine. The third part is the reason of his righteousnes or iust cause: 3. The reason of Ionas his righ∣teousnes or iust cause. the which reason doth utterly overthrow it selfe, which reason forsooth is this, be∣cause God is mercifull, therefore he shall be contemned or despi∣sed of men: nay rather the selfe same effects of the mercy of God do proove the power and efficacie or force of God in the ministe∣rie of Ionas, as he that converted those Ninivites being desperate persons. And God is praised for his mercy and long sufferance. Ro∣man. 2.4. & Psal. 136. throughout the whole Psalme. Vers. 3. Therefore now, O Lord, take I beseech thee, my life from me: for it is better for me to die then to live. The second am∣plification of Jonas his sinne.THE second amplification of the sinne of Ionas, taken from the immoderate heat of his anger, & the malapertnesse of his wit, who will not only have himselfe and his cause to be acquit∣ted & cleared before God, albeit the same were false: but is more∣over so carried away with the same force of his wrath, that ther∣fore he wisheth for death, because that God followeth not his iudgement & mind against the Ninivites. See whither in the ende the wisdome of the flesh doeth carrie even godly men, and how it is indeed enmitie against God, as Paul tearmeth it. Rom. 8.7.
Two parts of this verse. 1. The second part of Ionas his prayer.There are two partes of this verse, the first is, the second part of Ionas his prayer, the which sheweth the vehement & earnest desire of Ionas in the thing, which hee asketh, noted in these wordes, I beseech thee (saith he againe) and (Thou O Lorde) also (because it is better.) For by these wordes is declared and painted forth a greater malapertnesse in Ionas then before, and the same more damnable or to be blamed, who is so unappesably angry because of the falling out of the matter otherwise then hee thought meete in his wisdome. This doubtlesse hereby appea∣reth to be true, the which Iames saith, cap. 1. vers. 20. The wrath of man doth not accomplish the righteousnesse of God. 2. The thing asked.The second part, is the thing it selfe, the which he asketh. Io∣nas doth not therefore wish for any small hurt unto himselfe, but even for death it selfe. And albeit that it be lawfull for the godly sometimes to wish for death, Jn what cases death may be wished for. so farre forth as this life of ours is a shoppe of sinnes (as Paul calleth it the body of this death, and wi∣sheth to be delivered therefrom. Rom. 7. ver. 24.) or in respect that death it selfe is the last degree and entrance unto us to be∣hold Christ (and so Paul desireth to be loosed, and to be with Christ:) yet to wish for death by and through dispaire and impatiencie in troubles of minde, through wearinesse of this life, which is the gift of God: through pride of minde, or our wrastling and stri∣ving against the providence of God, is wicked and ungodly. So Elias wisheth to die through wearinesse of life and feare of Iea∣bel, and desireth God, saying, 1. King. 19 4 Jt is now enough, O Lorde, take my soule, for I am no better then my fathers.Jonas most im∣patient. These wordes therefore of Ionas, It is better for me to die then to live, are the wordes of a man most impatient, and do not conteine a comparison of one good thing with another good thing: but doe shewe a most bitter feeling of burning anger, and the as∣sault of a man now able to refrain himselfe no longer. It is better, that is to say, it is more to be wished for of me thus carried away with the trouble and unquietnesse of my mind. Vers. 4. Then said the Lord, Doest thou well to be angrie? The iudgement of God concer∣ning this fact of Jonas.NOwe followeth the sentence or iudgement of God concer∣ning the fact, praier, & anger of Ionas. Therefore this place with the whole place following, is a commoration or staying in laying out of things more particularly. For Ionas doth seuerally discourse, what was said & done, & followed after his praier. First
therfore we are to heare the voice of God concerning this anger of Ionas, to the end that no man should excuse it, as Ierom hath done, God condemneth it, what faire glosse so euer it may seeme to carie. And he doth afterwards shewe a reason of this his con∣demning of it, & confirmeth the same by a notable falling out of a like matter, & in the end God doth approue the same euen vnto Ionas himselfe, who at the length resteth satisfied and contented therewith all. Hereof appeareth, that how wise soeuer the carnall or fleshly reasons of men may seeme vnto vs to be, how fit, glori∣ous & agreeable vnto the matters taken in hand, that they al not∣withstanding do vanish away like smoke, or that they are to vaile the bonnet, & as it were to strike sayle vnto the wisdom of God a∣lone, that whatsoeuer God shal ordaine to the contrarie, or will to be done, that same be liked & alowed of vs, & that we wholly rest our selues vpon his prouidence, for the counsails of God are not onely diuers from our counsails (as the Lord saith Isa. 55.8. My thoughts are not your thoughts, nor my waies your waies:) but also God is infinite waies wiser then we, as Paul teacheth 1. Cor. 1.25. That the foolishnes of God is wiser then men, & the weaknes of God stronger then men. Yea in the ordering of all things in particular, & also in general, he alone is the best iudge and Moderator: whose counsa and works, albeit they be often hidden, and wonderfull vnto vs, yet are they alwaies most iust and well framed, and for this cause to be allowed. Vers. 5. So Ionas went out of the citie, and sat on the East side of the citie, and there made him a booth, and sat vnder it in the shadow, till he might see what should be done in the citie. Where Ionas became after his preaching vntill the 40. daies were en∣ded.SEcondly here is described, where Ionas became in the meane season whilst after his preaching had through the whol city of Ninive, he waiteth for the end of the matter, that is, of his threat∣nings. This verse then is a further making plaine of the matter the which ought to be read by a parenthesis. So long therefore vntill the 40. daies were out, after the diligent execution of his office in the citie. Ionas goeth aside out of the citie, & abideth notwithstā∣ding in the cuntrey neere adioyning, in his cottage, the which he had built vnto himselfe at the East side of the citie for a litle time. And here are two things to be noted to wit, the wisdome and pa∣tience of Ionas. His wisdome, in that he departeth from the citie, The wisdome of Ionas. beleeuing that it will come to passe, that the Niniuites should be destroied. Least therfore that he should be wrapped in the same
iudgement with them, he doth wisely remoue himselfe from thē, and that by the selfe same spectacle, he might the more confirme that his threatning would proue true, & so might make the Nini∣uites afraid. And so to assure his people that Babylon should be destroied, the Prophet Isai 48.20. saith vnto them, Goe ye out of Ba∣bel: flee from the Chaldeans, with a voice of ioy, &c. So the Angel, Apoc. 8.4. willeth the people to depart out of Babel for feare o∣therwise they should be punished with them: Goe ye out of her my people (saith the voice from heauen) that ye be not partakers in her sinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues. The patience of Ionas.The patience of Ionas herein appeareth, that he sitteth there, that is, patiently waiteth vntill the whole 40. daies doe passe a∣way. In the meane while he sitteth, not vnder the shadow of the gourd, the which was not yet growne (for it sprung vp afterward) but vnder the shadow of the cottage the which he himselfe had slightly builded and made. For Ionas did not liue or dwell there deliciously and in pleasure. Vers. 6. And the Lord God prepared a gourd, and made it to come vp ouer Ionas, that it might be a shadow ouer his head: and deliuer him from griefe. So Ionas was exceeding glad of the gourd. What ensued after Ionas his praier, & God his answer vn∣to the same.THirdly here is declared, what things followed after that same praier of Ionas, & God his answer vnto the same: both which (as I said before) after those whole 40. daies being fully ended. After those 40. daies then, and not before, Ionas praied so anger∣ly: and when as God had answered him, he alledgeth a reason of this his answer, and mercie towards the Niniuites, the which hee confirmeth by the confession of Ionas himselfe, and by the issue and likelihoode of a thing most apparant, to the end the counsel and purpose of God in pardoning them, may appeare vnto all men to be most wise and iust. This therefore fell out after those 40. daies, so that Ionas did yet once againe shewe the malapert∣nes and impatience of his minde, and the same vtterly vnexcusa∣ble and yet notwithstanding it did spring from the same fountain from the which the former did. Out of this selfe same doth God shew two things: Our affections in shew neuer so faire, are hatefull vnto God, vnlesse they he wholly subdued vnto his will. first, that our affections, albeit godly, lawfull, & tender in shewe (vnlesse they be wholly subiect vnto his will) are troublesome motions of our disobedient flesh vnto God, & fruits of our stubbornnes, & therefore vnto him worthily hateful, bitter, and filthie. The second thing is, God out of this second anger of Ionas, altogether immoderate or vnmeasurable and rash, taketh
an occasion and cause to condemne the former anger also. For so by degrees also God doth leade vs vnto earnest repentance, and teacheth vs by little and little, as it were by play, that the thinges the which in vs are vicious, the which notwithstāding we would not easily confesse so to be, he might proue & shew by the com∣parison and similitude of other thinges knowne and graunted of vs, to be vtterly to be condemned, foule and filthie. The order of the Prophet in describing his anger.Further, in the setting out of this whole matter, the Prophet v∣seth this order, that first he sheweth the cause of his second anger & wrath vnto the 8. ver. Secondly he declareth, that his anger and immoderate rage, ver. 8. and 9. Lastly, that thereupon God tooke occasion to condemne Ionas both in this, and also in that his for∣mer complaint, v. 10, 11. This sixt verse containeth two things, & both of them a preparation onely vnto the declaring of the anger of Ionas. First, what God prepared for Ionas, yet remaining in his booth, the which he had slightly made of boughes: & secondly, 1. What God prepared for Ionas. what ioy Ionas conceiued for the same. God ordeined & would haue a gourd to grow vp for him (for so the word kikaion is to be translated, 2. What was his ioy for the same. Kikaion, There is great sturre about the translation of this word, but I haue rather followed those which doe eng∣lish it, a gourd. whatsoeuer August. epist. 10. say against Ierome to the contrary) and that forthwith, & almost in one moment, for it grew vp in an artificial day, that is, within XII. equinoctial houres, v. 10. so high & so ful of leaues, that it shadowed Ionas his whol booth, & did defend him from the heat of the sunne, the which was then most parching & burning: and finally with the leaues thereof it made him a coole shadow. Therefore the growing and maner of this gourd was extraordinarie: and for this cause God is saide to haue prepared it, that is to say, this tree sprang vp not by any natu∣rall meane, but supernaturally, or extraordinarily, God so ordai∣ning for the keeping of Ionas from griefe, that is, from that scor∣ching heat, the which Ionas tooke most grieuously at that time, & in that place. Wherin not onely the fact of God, but also the ende of the same is briefly touched, to wit, that we should know that he is carefull for the least discommoditie and griefe of those that are his, that he may helpe them. And thus much did God. Ionas his ioy.But Ionas for his part on the otherside, is exceeding glad and ioyfull both for his coolth and that same suddaine shade giuen him by God against the burning of the sunne: and also especi∣ally for the tree or shrubbe it selfe that was sprung vp, for the height thereof, for the leaues, for the fairenesse, for the shade of it, because that all these thinges in this gourde were singular
aboue the maner of other gourds. So in euery kind of thing those points & parts do delice vs the which are singular and excelling a∣boue the vsual maner, because that in them there appeareth a cer∣taine singular & especiall fauour of God, & a work of his omnipo∣tencie, or almightie power. So this was in deede in Ionas a most ioyfull affection of his minde for the springing vp of the gourd, and the same most fauourable and louing towardes the gourd it selfe, a shrub of base account & of small continuance: yet without any cause, the which might grow of any especiall paines, la∣bour, or hope of his towards the gourd. Vers. 7. But God prepared a worme, when the morning rose the next day: and it smote the gourd, that it withered. The gourd vp∣on the suddaine destroied by God.THe consequent, or shewing what followed. For here is de∣clared how the gourd quickly springing vp, was quickly also destroied by God. The which also is a preparatiue vnto the decla∣ring of Ionas his anger. For these things in like maner doe proue & shew him to haue bin impatient, faultie, & beyond measure & reason delicate and tender: nay wanton, albeit that this his ange also seemed vnto Ionas himselfe lawful & iust. Further, it hereby appeareth, that this gourd died after an extraordinarie and a cer∣taine peculiar maner, for that there breedeth so soone a worme i him, & the same specially and suddenly by God set vnto the roo of him. This worme then gnawing and eating the roote of the gourde, and robbing it of moystnes, foorthwith killeth the plant whereupon the tree or shrub withereth & dieth. For plants haue also their diseases & woūds, as wormeating, blasting, & such like Plin. l. 17. c. 24. Nat. Hist. Yet some will haue that the gourd di not for all this fall from the booth of Ionas: but alwaies aforde him some small shade such as it was, because that the withere leaues of this gourd did yet remaine still hanging vpon the pole of his cottage, and made a shadow, but a small one, & the whic did not any longer keepe Ionas frō so great burning of the sunne▪ Vers. 8. And when the sunne did arise, God prepared also a ferue East winde: and the sunne beate vpon the head of Ionas, that  fainted, and wished in his heart to die, and said, It is better f me to die, then to liue. The cause of Ionas his anger.THe third part of this same preparation, the which declarer the cause and anger of Ionas: to wit, a parching heat, greate then was vsuall, the which God sent that same day & time. There∣fore this verse conteineth two things:  the one, a third cause so
the which Ionas is angrie, and praieth vnto God in that his cho∣ler and heat of minde. The second comprehendeth a description of this anger, and prayer. The third cause of Ionas his being angrie, was the parching & burning of the sunne, being greater then it was wōt, by the means whereof it did beate vpon the head of Ionas very grieuously. Of this heat there were two causes, Two causes of the heat men∣tioned in this verse. both the ordinarie season of the yeare, and the sunne, & also that same extraordinarie East winde, faint, and dissoluing or loosing the members, such like kinde of windes as are wont commonly to blow in the summer, the ayre beeing drie and void of cloudes, the which windes doe not re∣fresh vs, or coole the ayre: but rather increase the heate of the sunne, because that they also are hot and parching, and faint and calme. By which like meanes the Lord also can scorch and parch the fruits of the earth for the sinnes of his people, as he testifieth Agg. 2.18. where he saith: I smote you with blasting, and mildew, and with hayle, in all the labours of your hands, and yet ye turned not vnto me, saith the Lord. Of this I gather that these things were done in the summer. For Assyria (in the which Ninive is) is no Southerne cuntry, that it should haue any great heats, besides in the summer. Here then also, like as before v. 2. & 3. the anger of Ionas was ma∣lapert & saucie, and the assault of his mind very raging, the which groweth in this place in like sort, of the too wel liking of his owne counsell, and of the things which he approueth or alloweth. For what rashnes and great hastines is this, that he wisheth and desi∣reth out of hand to die? for that he should desire this by and by, and that of God, his hastie anger egged him on thereunto. And Ionas is here angrie through the feeling of the flesh, as before, and that more manifestly, albeit that in shewe he seemed to haue a colourable & reasonable cause, to wit, for that he was deli∣ted with the fairenes of the gourd that was sprung vp, and did so∣lace him selfe therewith, as with a most daintie worke of God, and a fauour of the same God towards him, beeing oppressed or grieued with the heate. This is in deede a faire pretense or shewe of the flesh. But the true originall or beginning of this kinde of anger is the waywardnes and pride of man his wit. Ionas hath a faire shew for his anger. For we doe preferre our counsails and will before the wisedome and will of God, so that we take it very hardly and grieuously that it should be and come to passe, the which albeit that it be done by the will of God, yet notwithstanding it falleth out often otherwise then
we would wish. As for Ionas he is not properly or especially an∣grie, because he nowe felt the sharpe heate of the sunne: neither yet doth he pray, that God would strengthen him to beare so great parching of the same, or that God would a bate the heat: but he is angrie, The proper cause of Ionas his anger. for that those things the which he had made recko∣ning with himselfe should haue continued, and the which for the time ought to haue bin fit and commodious for him, and to be a witnes of the fauour of God towards his selfe and his ministerie, the same were now chaunged and taken away, to wit, his braue gourd, a worke in deede of God and extraordinarily sprung vp in the fauour of Ionas was decaied, and extraordinarily also perish∣ed. Therefore through the selfe same carnall or fleshly wisdome he doth imagine the commendation of his ministerie to lie in the gourd, like as he did before suppose his contempt, to lie in the sa∣uing of the citie. Therefore Ionas is angrie for the dying of the gourd: and not properly for that he was scorched after that man∣ner with the burning of the sunne, as appeareth hereafter ver. 9. & 10. and he doth not now any more desire any other signe and te∣stimony of God his fauour towards him, but death through a trou∣bled and disquiet affection. For through vnstaiednes of minde he desireth to die. The which argueth or proueth the corruption, dis∣obedience, and furie of men in their carnall or fleshly affections, and whilst they doe not wholly submit them selues vnto the will of God alone. Vers. 9. And God said vnto Ionas, Dost thou well to be angry forth gourd? And he said, I doe well to be angrie vnto the death. An amplifi∣cation of the anger of Jonas.AN amplification of this second sinne or anger of Ionas. And it is amplified by the reprehension or admonition of God, and the disobedience and contestation or auouchment of Ionas. The reprehension is here made by God, like as before ver. 4. Two things are to be noted in this reprehension. 1. The maner of speaking. First, the manner o speaking, the which is an interrogation or asking of a question▪ For this doth more presse him, and more euidently lay before Io∣nas the fault of this his anger, & noteth out the same. For it doth containe the manifest anger and reproouing of God the iust e∣steemer and iudge of things, 2. The words here vsed. for the same. Secondly, the worde themselues are to be noted, Good, that is, well and rightly done according vnto the duetie of a godly man, who knoweth that God must be obeied. Furthermore (to be as it were redde angrie) that is, (although thou be angrie for a iust cause and matter) to be
mooued aboue measure, and altogether impatiently, through a raging heat of minde. Finally, for (a gourd) that is, a thing so light, and of so small an account. The disobedi∣ence of Jonas, & what we are to learne there∣by.The stubbornes and disobedience of Ionas followeth descri∣bed by his own selfe, that his earnest repentance may be vnder∣stood, & that by this his exsample he may teach that all mortal men how godly soeuer & the seruants of God, doe notwithstan∣ding easily raunge beyond the bounds of their dutie, and fall into most vndoubted disobedience, vnlesse they wholly submit them∣selues and all their affections, albeit naturall and colourable vnto the will of God. For we are caried quite away, when as we yeeld vnto them neuer so little. Ionas his diso∣bedience very great. For 1. He striueth against God. 2. He iustifieth his anger. 3. He doth not acknowledge his excessiue anger. And this contestation or auouchment & stubbornes of Ionas is grieuous and great. First in that answering he wrastleth against God so plainly speaking vnto him. Second∣ly for that in this place, like as before also, he doth contend or ear∣nestly maintaine the cause of this his anger to be iust, as if that he would reprooue God of vniust iudgement. Lastly, in that he doth not acknowledge this outragious excesse of his anger, by the which he was brought to wish for death. So are we in like maner blinded, when as we doe both rest vpon the iudgement of our owne wisedome, and let lose the bridle vnto the affections or de∣sires of our flesh, and are ruled by such beasts. Vers. 10. Then said the Lord, Thou hast had pitie on the gourd for the which thou hast not laboured, neither madest it growe, which came vp in a night, and perished in a night. The applicatiō of the former historie vnto Jonas.THe application of the whole historie of the former fact and falling out of the matter vnto Ionas, whereby also God doth confute or ouerthrow him, & sheweth that his anger wherein he did so greatly please himselfe, to haue bin most vniust. In this sen∣tence & condemnation of God, Ionas doth now rest, & is satisfi∣ed or contented. And thus in the end he doth testifie his true re∣pentance: but first many waies wrastling, & wrastling againe, such is the disobedient nature of man against God. This then is an ap∣plication. For God taking an argument from the lesser vnto the greater, God proueth his purpose in sauing the Ni∣niuites to be most iust by the acknowledge∣ment of Ionas himselfe. doth proue his counsell and purpose in sauing the Nini∣uites, euen after the preaching of Ionas to haue bin most iust, Ionas himselfe beeing now iudge, who is now taught so much by the similitude of the gourd, as it were by play. This then is a con∣futation both of the former, and also of the latter cause, the which Ionas did bring for the iustifying of his anger. For God sheweth
that it was conceiued and taken without any iust ground. And he refuseth the first cause, for that he spared the Niniuites. For he pro∣ueth that the consideration of the gourd, and of Niniuie was di∣uers, that is, that there was great oddes betwixt them. In like mā∣ner he confuteth the latter cause, for that Ionas was mooued i such sort about a matter of nothing, and the which belonged not vnto him. The first part of the compari∣son. But this verse doth onely lay open that part of the cō∣parison, the which is betweene the gourd and Niniue. By the which is taught, that the mercie of God in pardoning the Nin∣uites, euen after the threatnings of destruction denounced or told vnto them, was more iust then was the pitie and pleasure of Ionas fauouring the gourde, the which his pitifulnes Ionas did before maintain to be iust. So that in this place God doth retort, or tue backe againe vpon Ionas the things which he so obstinately al leadged and auouched for the iustifying of his own fact. So God doth kill vs with our owne sword, and vseth our owne vanitie to the commendation and setting forth of his glory. Thus this first part of the comparison doth containe the pitie of Ionas toward the gourd, but God, as I said, doth confute and reproue the same. Vers. 11. And should not I spare Ninive that great citie, wherein are sixe s thousand persons, that cannot discerne betweene their right hand and their  hand? and also much cattell. The second part of the com∣parison. The parts of this comparison liuely laid out by way of con∣trarietie.THis verse following hath the other part of the same compa∣rison, the which sheweth by the other parts of the antithes or contrarietie, that the cause of God was the iuster. The parts of the comparison are these: In respect of the person, Thou a man God. In respect of the Thing, Thou sparest a gourd: I, Ninive. I respect of the Cause, The gourd is a shrub: Ninive a citie: that is,  company of men. The gourd is a shrub, of smal reckoning & sho continuance: Ninive is a great multitude of men, and also of ca tell. Thou art angrie for a gourd, the which is none of thine, tha is, the which thou neither hast planted, nor brought vp, nor take any pains about: I haue planted Ninive, I haue taken pains abo it, it is my labour, it is mine owne thing, the which I take pitie o Thou hast pitie on it, namly the gourd: I on this city, & that which is mine owne. Thou vpon a thing the which is not to be pitied haue compassion vpon men, who by reason of their age, & iust  excusable ignorance, are in the iudgement of all men worthie o pardon, nay of pitie & compassiō, the greater part of them bein children and young infants. This is the force of this compariso and iustifying of God against Ionas.
A Commentarie of Lambert Danaeus vpon the Prophet Amos. CAP. 1. The end of this prophesie, as al∣so of the rest.THe end and drift of this prophesie, is all one with the rest of the other Prophets and their prophesies, namely, to leade vs by the feeling of our owne destruction and miserie, vnto God the fountaine and father of mercie through his Christ: and so consequently to teach vs to repent from our wicked liuing, and to serue the true God, and to worship him according vnto his law and commandement. Therefore he both layeth downe the threatnings of God, and also the promises. And first of all he doth in generall set foorth the threatnings against all sinners, yea, euen men that are infidels. Then afterwards particularly against those which call themselues the people of God, and do boast themselues of that name, such as in times past were both the Israelites, and also the Iewes properly so called, and now the Christians, whether Pa∣pists, or Gospellers: whereof it commeth to passe, that Amos be∣ginneth with those iudgements of God, the which God did threa∣ten generally against Idolaters. And afterwards he commeth vnto those which were peculiarly addressed vnto the Israelites, vnto whom by name he was from God appoynted a Prophet. Further∣more, hee rehearseth those also which were ordayned against the Iewes themselues, that is, against the kingdome of Iudah, be∣cause they also did vaunt themselues vpon the praise and title of the people and inheritance of God, and that vpon better reason, then the kingdome of Israel. And thus much concerning the threatnings. As for the promises, Amos hath the same which other Prophets
haue, to wit, first generall vnto all mankinde, then particular vnto the true Church of God, for and through the Messias promised vn∣to the Fathers, that is, our Lord Iesus Christ, the which this our Pro∣phet for the comfort of the godly, doth excellently set downe. But concerning the time wherein Amos prophesied, The time wherein Amos prophesied. thus I thinke, sa∣uing the iudgement of others, the which I would not by this mine opinion haue to be forestalled. Amos seemeth vnto me to haue been the second of all those Prophets, whose prophesies wee haue in the volume as well of the great, as also the small Prophets, the which are extant or to be found in the Canonical bookes of the ho∣ly Scriptures. And I thinke that he liued almost after fortie yeares at the least from the death of the Prophet Elizeus, & was by God raysed vp in the kingdome of Israel, for that the same part of the people especially wanted earnest admonitions, when as it had cast away the Word of God, and the true Sacrifices, and in the roome thereof set vp their owne. The reason why the Pro∣phet Amos is thought to haue prophe∣sied about this time. The reason of mine opinion is this, be∣cause that Elizeus dyed at least about the first beginning of the reigne of Ioas the sonne of Ioachaz king of Israel: for 2. King. cap. 13. ver. 14. mention is made that Ioas came to visite Elizeus lying in his death-bed in these words, When Elisha fell sicke of his sicknes whereof he dyed, Ioash the King of Israel came downe vnto him, and wept on his face, and sayd, O my father, O my father, &c. And that this was in the beginning of his reigne, the diligent considering of that which followeth in that chapter, and in the beginning of the next, will easilie declare. And from that time vntill the 27. yeare of King Ieroboam (who was the sonne of this Ioas, and in the first yeare in the which Vzzias began to reigne in Iudah, which was the time of the beginning of this prophesie) there doe come 41. yeares be∣tweene. So Amos then liued and prophesied in that age, as he him∣selfe teacheth. Ionai seemeth to haue been before Amos. But the Prophet Ionas seemeth in time to haue bin before him, which Ionas his booke of prophesie is in the Canon, or among the Canonicall bookes of the Bible, for as much as either in the reigne of Ioas the father of this Ieroboam (about the 27. yeare of whose reigne Amos might haue begun to prophesie) or at least wise about the beginning of the reigne of this Ieroboam, Io∣nas executed his office, as appeareth 2. King. cap. 14. ver. 23. and so to the end of the chapter, and as I haue shewed before in my notes before these Prophets. So that the beginning of the Prophet Ionas may seem to haue bin some certain yeres after the death of Elizeus, the succession of the Prophets for a time being discontinued, as
easily may be gathered, if 2. King. cap. 13. ver. 14 be compared with cap. 14. ver. 25. Wherefore among the Prophets, Ionas the first in time of all the Prophets canonicall. whose writings are in the Canonicall Scripture, Ionas is the first in respect of time. For that which is obiected of Micheas, whose booke of prophesies is extant, is against this nothing at all: because that Micheas is not the same Micheas, the which prophesied in the dayes of King A∣chab, and was before Ionas. And this our Amos is second, Amos the se∣cond, Oseas the third. Oseas third, who fell into the times of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas king of Israel, and Vzzias the sonne of Amasias king of Iudah: but because he is sayd to haue prophesied vnto the times of King Ezechias, it is likely that he began not at the selfe same beginning and instant of time, in the which those two Kings (each in his kingdome) began to reigne: but a little after. For by the space of 14. yeares they reigned together, Ieroboam in Israel, and Vzzias in Iudah. There∣fore if we do graunt that Oseas began to prophesie an yeare or two after that same earthquake, two yeare before the which Amos pro∣phesied: Oseas must then begin to execute his office in the 31. or 32. yeare of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas king of Israel, and in the 4. or 5. yeare of Vzzias king of Iudah. For I hold that the same earth∣quake happened in the second yeare of the reigne of Vzzias, and in the thirtith yeare of the reigne of this Ieroboam. And Oseas pro∣phesied vnto the beginning of Ezechias king of Iudah, beginning at the 32. yeare of the reigne of Ieroboam sonne of Ioas, (which fell into the fifth yeare of Vzzias the king of Iudah) that is, by the space of full 70 yeares, well neere. Oseas prophe∣sied almost full 70 yeares, and Amos but 14. But Amos seemeth to haue fi∣nished his office within the space of that time, wherein this Iero∣boam of Israel, and Vzzias of Iudah liued in one age together in their Kingdomes and Empires, to wit, by the space onely of 14. yeares. For Amos maketh mention of no other King, either of Israel, or of Iudah, but of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas, and of Vzzias. And thus much of Ionas, Amos, and Oseas. Esaias the 4. Prophet in or∣der and time.The fourth in order and time seemeth to haue been Isaias, and to haue begun his office after Oseas, but to haue continued it longer, namely, vntill the times of King Manasses, by whom about the be∣ginning of his reigne Isaias was put to death. For when as Isaias maketh no mention of this Ieroboam, who was the sonne of Ioas, but of Vzzias, Ioatham, &c. only, he seemeth indeed to haue begun to prophesie vnder Vzzias king of Iudah, but that same Ieroboam being now dead, vnder whom both Amos and Oseas had now exe∣cuted their office of Prophets. Therefore in as much as Ieroboam
the sonne of Ioas king of Israel dyed in the 14. yeare of Vzzias the king, Isaias cannot seeme to haue prophesied before this time, but afterwards about the 16. yeare of the reigne of Vzzias. From which time vnto Manasses, and the beginning of his reigne, there come betweene aboue 80. yeares, all which time Isaias must haue executed the office of a Prophet: for he himselfe cap. 7. maketh mention of three score yeares. Vers. 1. The words of Amos, who was among the heardmen at Te∣coa, which he saw vpon Israel, in the dayes of Vzziah King of Iu∣da, and in the dayes of Ieroboam sonne of Ioash King of Israel, two yeares before the earthquake. The proposition conteining fiue points.THe proposition or principall ground of this whole booke and prophesie, the which conteineth fiue poynts. First, the summed the matter, the which is comprehended in this booke, namely▪ Words,1. The preaching of Amos. that is to say, the preaching of Amos, the which he vttered openly with a lowd voyce. The second, what manner of words the same words were, that is to say, the words of God: wherein the cer∣taintie and authoritie of these words, 2. What maner of preaching it is, namely, such as was reueled by vision. or prophesie is auouched. For it is a vision, that is, a reuelation shewed by God himselfe, and com∣mitted vnto the Prophet. Thirdly, vnto whom it was shewed, to wit, vnto Amos, who by the addition of certaine circumstances, is described what manner of man he was, both for the laying out of his person more certainly, 3. Vnto whom this preaching is committed. that he might be knowne from others of the same name: and also for the better and greater confirmation of his calling, as which was altogether extraordinarie, and raised vp by God, for to beate downe the pride and outragious haughtinesse of the men of that age. For God made choyce of this man, whom he would send to terrifie or feare the kingdome of Israel, the which at that time was most florishing. And he choseth a man that is a Thecuite, that is, of the Iewes, not of the Israelites (such a one as E∣lias notwithstanding was) and one of the shepheards that kept cattell, as he confesseth of himselfe, chap. 7. vers. 14. saying: I was no Prophet, neither was I the sonne of a Prophet, (he meaneth of the ordinarie manner and calling of Prophets) but I was a heardman, and a gatherer of wild figges. God sendeth a Iew vnto the Israelites, to touch them the deeper by this meanes, as if they were such man∣ner of persons who now had none among them fit to teach them, but stood in need of forrainers and strangers, and especially Iewes,
whom notwithstanding they did deadly hate, as may appeare by the rent and breach, when the ten Tribes fell away from the other twaine, vpon that, that their request was not graunted by Reho∣boam, where they vpon that occasion speake thus, 1. King. cap 12. ver. 16. So when all Israel sawe that the King regarded them not, the people answered the King thus, saying, What portion haue we in Da∣uid? we haue none inheritance in the sonne of Ishai. To your tents, O Israel: now see to thine owne house, Dauid. So Israel departed vnto their tents. God sendeth a Neathead, that by this obscure and base person in the world, he may cast downe those high and loftie spi∣rits. For as it is 1. Cor. 1. ver. 27.28. God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise & God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the mightie things, And vile things of the world, and things which are despised hath God chosen, & things which are not, to bring to nought things that are. For as the same Apostle speaketh, 2. Cor. cap. 10. vers. 4, 5, 6. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mightie through God to cast downe holds, casting downe the imaginations, and euery high thing that is exalted agaynst the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie euery thought to the o∣bedience of Christ, and hauing readie the vengeance against all disobe∣dience when your obedience is fulfilled. Thecua, of the which Amos in this verse is said to be, was one of the cities in Iudah, built by king Rehoboam sonne of Salomon, as it is 2 Chron. cap. 11. vers 5.6. And Rehoboam dwelt in Ierusalem, and built strong cities in Iudah: he built also Beth-Iehem, & Etam, and Tekoa. Fourthly, 4. Vnto whom A∣mos is sent. here is taught vnto whom Amos is sent or against whom those things were com∣maunded by God to be spoken, that is to say, against the Israelites, namely, against that kingdome properly, the which was separated and deuided from Iudah: but yet (because God is the keeper of his whole Church) Amos doth also prophesie against the kingdome of Iudah, that it also may be saued by God. Lastly and fiftly, 5. At what time Amos proph∣sied. vnder Vz∣zias king of Iudah, and Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas king of Israel, full two yeares before that same great earthquake happened in all that same whole countrey, the which, as I sayd, seemeth to haue happened at the least about the second yeare of the reigne of Vz∣zias, and the thirtith yeare of the reigne of this Ieroboam.
Vers. 2. And he sayd, the Lord shall roare from Zion, and vtter e voyce from Ierusalem, and the dwelling places of the shephear shall perish, and the top of Carmel shall wither. The summe of the iudgements of God against the Israelites.THe summe of the iudgements of God the which should com to passe against the Israelites, to wit, the vtter desolation or wa∣sting of their whole countrey. For all the best and fattest things  this kingdome of the Israelites, shall in such sort bee strooke God in his iust iudgement, and for their disobedience, that bo the cottages of the shepheard themselues shall mourne, to wit,  being destroyed: and also Carmel that same most fruitfull mou∣taine shall wither, being touched with the heate of God his ange Therefore it is certaine that these things are denounced and tol against Israel, by the place Carmel, the which the Prophet rehe∣seth in as much as it is a famous mountaine in the land of Isra And here in this place the Prophet also by and by getteth autho∣tie vnto his prophesie, The Prophet winneth au∣thoritie and attention vnto his prophesie. that it be not contemned or despised: a attention or eare-giuing thereunto, wherby be they neuer so pro and loftie otherwise, he doth neuerthelesse terrifie or feare the▪ He getteth authoritie when as he teacheth that these things are ∣nounced both by God himselfe, and that they shall also be fulfill and that by the same God, the which is the God of Sion, a pla most knowne, and most holy, that is, that these things doe co from the true God, and not from Idols. And he getteth vnto him∣selfe attention, or eare-giuing vnto that he speaketh, by the figure which he vseth, as this proposition and sentence is garnished wi maiestie and loftinesse of words. For God is sayd now to roare gainst them with a great and terrible yelling, as it were a lyonst∣red vp and teased with anger. For this roaring doth expresse bo the anger of the lyon, and also the terriblenes or fearefulnes of  voyce: vnder which like phrase or manner of speaking the othe Prophets doe describe the fierce wrath and anger of God, as lo cap. 3. ver▪ 16. The Lord also (sayth he) shall roare out of Sion,  vtter his voyce from Ierusalem, and the heauens and the earth s shake, but the Lord will be the hope of his people, and the strength of t children of Israel. So the Prophet Ieremy cap. 25. vers. 30. is will for the terrifying of the wicked nations, to say vnto them: The L shall roare from aboue, and thrust forth his voyce from his holy ha∣tation: he shall roare vpon his habitation, and shall crye alou
as they that presse the grapes, agaynst all the inhabitants of the earth. Vers. 3. Thus sayth the Lord, For three transgressions of Damascus, and for foure, I will not turne to it, because they haue threshed Gi∣lead with threshing instruments of yron. The confirma∣tion of the for∣mer threat∣ning.THe confirmation of the former threatning against the Israelites both by the example of other nations, the which the Prophet here reciteth, (yea euen of Iudah) the which God doth punish for the same sinnes: and also by the iustice and righteousnesse of God, the which is neither rashly moued, neither yet ought to suffer these sinnes of the Israelites to escape vnpunished. God is not rashly mo∣ued to punish, but after that he hath a long season borne with men, yea and the same also obstinatly or stifly continuing in sundrie and most grieuous vices. Therefore he doth in the end chastice and cor∣rect, not for one or two sinnes of them onely, but for many. But God will not let the sinnes of the Israelites goe scotfree, who can not suffer the offences of the Iewes their brethren, nay of the Gen∣tiles being altogether infidels to be vnpunished, and therefore will he not beare with the sinnes of these, the which ought to be more holie. Why the Pro∣phet reckoneth vp onely those nations, the which were borderers vpon the Israelites.Further, he reckoneth vp onely those nations, the which were neighbours vnto them, to the end the Israelites should be the more moued, and should beleeue the things to be true, the which were threatned. For GOD hath also punished alwaies before this, other nations besides these for their sinnes, and doth yet at this day pu∣nish them. And he beginneth with the kingdome of Damascus, be∣cause that the power and glorie thereof at that time was greater then of other people neere vnto them, as being the head of al Syria: for so is it Isai. cap. 7. vers. 8. The head of Aram (that is of Syria) is Damascus, and the head of Damascus is Rezin, &c. And 1. King. cap. 19. vers. 15. Elias is commanded to returne by the wildernesse vn∣to Damascus, and there (as in the head citie of the land) to anoynt Hazael King ouer Aram, that is, Syria: Damascus the chiefe citie of Syria. for Damascus was then the Metropolitan or chiefe citie of Syria. 1. The wicked life of the Damas∣cens.Now this verse conteineth two things. The first, the wicked and stubborne life of them of Damascus. Their life is noted to bee wic∣ked by the word (Peshang) the which signifieth open rebellion and treacherie against God, and not only simple sinne. And that it was
fortresses:1. Decapolis. This prouince was called Decapolis. Secondly, by the countrey of Auen, or Aueria, the which was another prouince of the kingdome of Damascus neere vnto the Arabians, 2. Auen, or Aue∣ria. and in a ma∣ner a continuall valley by the riuer Euphrates. And last of all by the countrey of Eden, wherein also was a peculiar King of it owne, the which notwithstanding was subiect vnto the King of Damascus. 3. Eden. All these countries as they were partners and partakers with them of Damascus, in these sinnes and crueltie against the people of God: so shall they in like manner be all ouertaken with the same iudgement of God. And thus much concerning the kingdome it selfe, and the prouinces of the kingdome at that time most florish∣ing. 2. What shall be∣come of the men.In the second place he setteth downe what shall become of the men themselues. They shall goe into countries vnknowne vnto them, and farre off, as namely, being carried away by the King of the Assyrians into Media, and into the citie thereof, the which i called Cir, or Cirus, 2. King. cap. 16. vers. 9. Then the king of Asshur consented vnto him: (that is, to king Achaz king of Iuda, hiring him for money against Rezin king of Syria) and the king of Asshur went vp against Damascus, and when he had taken it, he carried the people away to Kir, (or Cir, or Cirus, as it is in the common translation, which for the most part in the proper names this author follow∣eth) and slew Rezin. And least that these things, because of the po∣wer and glorie of the kingdome of Damascus, might seeme ridicu∣lous, or to be laughed at as toyes, and vnpossible, the Prophet re∣hearseth againe, That these things are threatned by the true God himselfe, who cannot lye, and by the almightie Lord Iehouah, whom nothing can withstand. Vers. 6. Thus sayth the Lord, for three transgressions of Azzah, and for foure, I will not turne to it, because they carried away prisoners the whole captiuitie, to shut them vp in Edom. THe second example of the iudgements of God against the peo∣ple bordering vpon Israel, The second ex∣ample of God his iudgements against the Philistines. to wit, against the Philistines. The same things in a manner are here to be noted, the which were be∣fore in the example of them of Damascus. I will therefore onely touch such things as it hath proper and seuerall to it selfe. In this verse then this is singular or proper to it selfe, to wit, the cause, why these Palestines, or Philistines are punished by God, and that with
so great a punishment, which is this, for that they also, like as the Damascens, vsed great crueltie against the Israelites, that is, against the people of God: but yet in another kind of crueltie. The Da∣mascens slew the Israelites whom they tooke: but the Philistines sold them, taking away all hope of deliuerance, or returning again, and comming home any more. For when they had once taken thē, they did them away both vnto the Greekish merchants, that they might carrie them away into farre countries: and also vnto the I dumeans the most deadly enemies of the people of God, making with them this condition when they solde them, that they neuer should afterwards be redeemed of any▪ For so doe I expound these words (to shut them vp in Edom) as if the Philistines did not simplie carrie them into Idumea, when they had taken them, and sold them there: but on this condition and bargaine, that afterwards they should neuer let them depart againe. The extreme crueltie of the Philistines, the which like they vsed at other times also a∣gainst God hi people. Wherein appeareth their great crueltie, the which may also bee gathered by that which is written, 2. Chron. 21. ver. 16. in these words: So the Lord stirred vp against Iehoram the spirit of the Philistines, and the Arabians that were beside the Ethiopians. And they came vp into Iudah, and brake into it; and carried away all the substance that was found in the Kings house, and his sonnes also, and his wiues: so that there was not a sonne left him, saue Iehoahaz, the yongest of his sonnes. The Lord also by his prophet Ioel complaineth of this crueltie, as of other nations so also of the Philistins by name, for selling a way his people into farre countries vnto the Greekes, that there might be no hope of their returning, when he sayth: The children also of Iudah, and the chil∣dren of Ierusalem haue ye sold vnto the Grecians, that ye might send them farre from their border. God his church deare vnto him.By this example also appeareth, how deare the Church is vnto God, how small tokens soeuer it retaine of his couenant (as was the Church of the Israelites at that time) when as he is in such sort an∣grie against the enemies thereof, for handling it so cruelly. Vers. 7. Therefore will I send a fire vpon the walles of Azzah, and it shall deuoure the pallaces thereof. This verse is in a manner all one with the fourth before.THis verse hath nothing singular or peculiar to it selfe from the fourth verse before, except the name of Azzah, or Gaza onely. It therefore noteth, that for this their crueltie they shall vtterly be consumed and destroyed, and that in most fearfull manner, as are
those things which are wasted by fire, the which consumeth all, and leaueth nothing that it can reach or come vnto: for with it there is neither pitie nor mercie. Vers. 8. And I will cut off the inhabitant from Ashdod, and him that holdeth the scepter from Ashkelon, and turne mine hand to Ekron, and the remnant of the Philistims shall perish, sayth the Lord. The iudgemēts of God against the whole land of the Phili∣stines.NOw the iudgements of God are threatned to the whole coun∣trey of the Philistines, as before vers. 5. to the whole kingdome of Damascus. And in this place are reckoned vp foure chiefe Te∣trarchies or Quarternes of that countrey of Palestina, to wit, that of Gaza or Azzah, that of Ashdod or Azotus▪ that of Asculon, and that of Accaron. The sift Tetrarchie or Quarterne is ouerpassed, namely, that of Geth, from whence was Goliath. Of this Gethor Gith is mention, Ios. 13. ver. 3. where it is reckoned vp as one of the fiue Lordships of the Philistines. But this is singular or peculiar in this verse, for that God doth denounce and shew that no remnants of this nation shall be left aliue, and this he threatneth, who is Lord, and hath rule ouer all things. So sore a punishment was not threat∣ned vnto the Damascens, but the iudgements of the Lord are iust and righteous, albeit the crueltie of the Damascens may seeme greater then this of the Philistines. Yet these Philistines did conti∣nually and daily afflict or trouble the Church of God, when as they did sell the Israelites in such sort that they should neuer afterward be free againe. Vers. 9. Thus sayth the Lord, for three transgressions of Tyrus, and for foure, I will not turne to it because they shut the whole captiui∣tie in Edom, and haue not remembred the brotherly couenant. The third ex∣ample of God his iudgements against the Ty∣rians.THe third example of the iudgements of God vpon the nations neere vnto the Israelites, to wit, vpon the Tyrians, a florishing people at that time. The selfe same things are here againe rehear∣sed, the which haue been in the threatnings before, besides a very few things peculiar vnto Tyrians. For these also are noted and condemned for their extreme crueltie against the people of God, whom they did so scatter abroad, that they should neuer afterwards returne againe, but perish & dye in miserable captiuitie. And this
crueltie they procured against the Israelites by the Idumeans the brethrē of the Israelites: The Tyrians breake the law of consangui∣nitie, and of nature. wherein these Tyrians did violate or break the lawe of consanguinitie or of bloud and kindred, and of nature, who did set those vnreconcileably together by the eares within themselues, whom they ought to haue made friends one with ano∣ther. These Tyrians therefore doe make Executioners of their cru∣eltie against the Church of God, not euery one without regard and at all aduentures, but the very brethren of the Church, by how much the more detestable and vnmercifull, nay more hurtfull and more contrary vnto nature it selfe, and the common lawe of huma∣nitie was this crueltie of the Tyrians against the Israelites, and ther∣fore worthily punished by God more seuerely or sharply. For not onely those which commit euill are worthie of death, but those al∣so that consent vnto them that doe euill, and stretch out the cordes of iniquitie, and increase vngodlinesse and wickednesse among men. Finally, those which so farre as in them lyeth doe vtterly ex∣tinguish or quench the law of nature, as these Tyrians did: against such kind of sinners the Lord by his Prophet doth threaten a curse, saying: Woe vnto them that draw iniquitie with cords of vanitie, and sinne as with cart ropes. Esay. cap. 5. vers. 18. And Paul, Rom. cap. 1. vers. 31. maketh mention of such as being fearfully giuen ouer of God vnto their owne reprobate sense, that they sinne against the lawe of God, and of their owne conscience, and draw on others to sinne, when he writeth: Which men (namely, giuen ouer of GOD) though they knew the lawe of God, how that they which commit such things, are worthie of death, yet not onely doe the same, but also fauour them that doe them. Vers. 10. Therefore will I send a fire vpon the walles of Tyrus, and it shall deuoure the pallaces thereof. This verse is al one with some other before.Conferre this tenth verse with those other verses before, of the same contents and arguments. Vers. 11. Thus sayth the Lord, for three transgressions of Edom, and for foure, I will not turne to it, because he did pursue his brother with the sword, and did cast off all pitie, and his anger spoyled him euermore, and his wrath watched him alway. The fourth ex∣ample of God his iudgements against the I∣dumeans.THe fourth example of the iudgements of God against the na∣tions bordering vpon the Israelites, namely, vpon the Idumeans
themselues, who are called the brethren of the Israelites. Therefore the Israelites ought to be now the more moued with their punish∣ment, that they should not thinke that themselues should goe sco free, but should beleeue the comminations or threatnings of God vsed against them, Things com∣mon vnto the Idumeas with other nations. to be true. Now these things are common vnto the Idumeans with the other nations before named, to wit, that the Idumeans, like as the former nations, liued stub borne and disobe∣dient against God, and voyd of repentance: and wickedly heaping sinnes vpon sinnes. Secondly, that they also, like as the rest, were cruell against the Church of God. Special and pe∣culiar to them∣selues, by these circumstances. But the kind of their crueltie speciall, and proper to themselues, and also farre greater then the which hath been set out before. The which the Lord also doth de∣clare by these circumstances. First, in regard of the persons: for whilest the Idumeans doe persecute the Israelites, 1. Of the persons. they persecute and murther, not euery one of the meinie, but their owne brethren. For Esau was the brother of Iacob, yea his brother german, and his twin, or borne at one birth with him. Of Esau came the Idumeans of Iacob the Israelites. Their crueltie therefore was more shame∣full against the Israelites, then was that of the other nations. For they did manifestly or openly breake in sunder the affections of nature it selfe. Secondly, God proueth the crueltie of the Idumeans to be greater, 2. Of the outra∣giousnes of their anger. by the manner, or outragiousnes of their anger against the Israelites. For it was so ouerpassing and farre out of square, that it did vtterly abolish or doe away those inward feelings of nature, the which doe stirre vp pitie and compassion among men, as ap∣peared by the doings and sayings of the Idumeans against the Is∣raelites. An example whereof may be taken out of the Psalm. 137. vers. 7. where the Prophet prayeth vnto God against the same, say∣ing: Remember the children of Edom, O Lord, in the day of Ierusalem, which sayd, rase it, rase it to the foundation thereof. Hereupon, that is, by reason of the excessiuenes thereof, the crueltie of the Idumeans in this place is called, not only anger, but also wrath, or furie. Third∣ly, 3. By the effects. by the effects: for they both persecuted them with the sword, and also raunged against the Israelites with robbing and stealing. Therefore the Idumeans spared neither the life, nor the goods of the Israelites: but being not content to haue murthered them, they carried away, and spoyled all their goods, like theeues. Fourthly, by the time. 4. By the time. This anger of the Idumeans against the Iraelites was perpetuall, and continuall: not to be appeased, not abating, not ceasing: nay, the Idumeans spoyled and slew the Israelites both in
the time of warre: and also their wrath did watch the Israelites in the time of peace, that is to say: did lay continuall waite for them, procured hatred, and did hurt them. Vers. 12. Therefore will I send a fire vpon Teman, and it shall de∣noure the pallaces of Bozrah. The wisedome of Edom shall not helpe it in the day of visi∣tation.TEman, a nation, citie, or people of Idumea, of the which Ieremy speaketh, cap. 49. ver. 7. To Edom thus sayth the Lord of hostes: Is wisedome no more in Teman? Is counsell perished from their chil∣dren? Is their wisedome vanished? Bozrah the head citie of the Idu∣means. The rest of this verse is allone with the like going before, which hath been often repeated, and signifieth: that for this their crueltie they shall sharply be punished. Vers. 13. Thus sayth the Lord, for three transgressions of the chil∣dren of Ammon, and for foure, I will not turne vnto it, because they haue ript vp the women with child of Gilead, that they might en∣large their border. The fift exam∣ple of the Am∣monites.THe fift example of the Ammonites, who themselues also were cosines or of kinne vnto the Israelites, as namely, those which came of Lot the nephew of Abraham, to the end the Israelites might be the more moued with these domesticall or home exam∣ples. And this in these Ammonites is a peculiar kind of crueltie a∣gainst the Israelites, that is, the Church of God such as it was, for that they most barbarously at one blow as it were, The barbarous crueltie of the Ammonites. did cut in sun∣der the women of the Israelites, and the same great with childe, a∣gainst the lawe and feeling of nature cruelly murthering both the mother and her innocent or giltles child together. The which furie is more then barbarous and brutish. And this crueltie is increased by the circumstance of the cause, for that the Ammonites did these things so cruell, not to keepe away, or to be reuenged of these mo∣thers, as being in armes, or offering wrong vnto them: but onely to the end they might haue the larger borders of their kingdome, and the same voyd and emptie: these Ammonites forsooth made lesse esteeme of the image of God shining forth in these women and their children, then of one foote of dead earth the which they had a minde to vse and reteine. Therefore in these men there was ex∣treme crueltie ioyned with extreme couetousnes and ambition: &
so consequently it was also grieuously punished by God, and th worthily. God cannot a∣way with cru∣eltie shewed a∣gainst such as beare a shew of his church be it neuer so little.Further, in all these examples this is to bee obserued and note that God is described and set foorth to be especially angrie wi those nations, because of the crueltie which they executed agai the Church of God, euen such as it was (such as the Israelites th were) that those, which in these our dayes haue made those mo cruell slaughters and butcheries against the Church of God in the Realme of France, and elsewhere, may at the last vnderstand wha iudgement of God is prepared for them, and hangeth ouer th head. Vers. 14. Therefore will I kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah, and  shall deuoure the palaces thereof, with shouting in the day of be tell, and with a tempest in the day of the whirlewinde. A speciall and peculiar point in the punish∣ment of the Ammonites, a∣boue the other nations men∣tioned before.THis is speciall and peculiar in the punishment of the Ammo∣nites, that it shall be most speedie, and most full of terroure feare. It shall be most full of feare, for that with the burning of Rab∣bah the chiefe citie of the Ammonites shall be ioyned both bat∣tell, and such horrible feare, as in miscrable manner is wont in su cases to be heard, by reason of the slaughters and murthers there committed. For he telleth that this fire & burning of Rabbah sh be in the very day of battell, and in the very noyse and shoutings  the battell, where with those that are taken by the enemie shall Sword most swift and speedie. For it shall come creeping like a which wind (such as is wont to be when stormes doe arise) that this pu∣nishment of the Ammonites may fall out vnlooked for. Vers. 15. And their King shall goe into captiuitie, he and his print together, sayth the Lord. COnferre this verse with the fift of this chapter expounded be∣fore, with the which it hath some things agreeing. This no∣withstanding is here speciall and proper, that not onely the peop and common sort, as in the punishment of them of Damascus the specified: but also the King himselfe, and the Princes and Nobl or Peeres of the kingdome, shall be led away prisoners, and cap∣tiues vnto miserable seruitude, slauerie or bondage together so companie.
CAP. 2. Vers. 1. Thus sayth the Lord, For three transgressions of Moab, and for foure, I will not turne vnto it, because it burnt the bones of the King of Edom into lime. The sixt exam∣ple of the iudg∣ments of God against the Moabites.THe sixt example of the iudgements of God against the nations bordering vpō the Israclites, that they therby might be terrified feared with these threatnings of God, and so consequently repent. And it is of the Moabites the cosens and kinsmen of the Ammo∣nites, and also of the Israelites themselues. And here is expressed a singular or peculiar kind of crueltie in them aboue the other na∣tions before, not against the Church of God indeed, but yet not∣withstanding against men, to wit, the Idumeans, who also were co∣sens and of kinne vnto these Moabites themselues. All kind of crueltie dis∣pleaseth God. Whereof we gather, that all kind of crueltie committed against any men what∣soeuer, doth highly displease GOD: and much more that, which doth violate or breake and blot out the priuileges of bloud, and the affections of nature, such as was this barbarousnes of the Moabites against the Idumeans. For Edom or the Idumeans came of Abra∣ham, and the Moabites of Lot, the nephew of Abraham, whom A∣braham brought vp and aduanced. But as concerning that which is here reported of the King of the Idumeans burnt aliue by the Moabites, and cruelly vsed, and despitefully, as if he had been some oxe, so that nothing was left of him, no not so much as his bones, but that he was all consumed into ashes and lime, (the which is a thorow burned kind of ashes) some doe referre it vnto the 2. King. cap. 3. vers. 26.27. where the King of Moab being not able to break by force into the King of Edom, who came against him to helpe the Israelites, he tooke his eldest sonne, that should haue reigned after him, and offered him for a burnt offering vpon the wall, by which meanes the campe of the Israelites brake vp and departed: but others doe referre it vnto some other historie. Vers. 2. Therefore will I send a fire vpon Moab, and it shall deuoure the palaces of Kerioth, and Moab shall die with tumult, with shou∣ting, with the sound of a trumpet. The description of the punish∣ment of the Moabites.A Description of the punishment, the which conteineth the de∣struction of the nation of the Moabites, and the ouerthrow of
their whole state, and that like to ensue with their great feare, tu∣mult, and dismaying. Their dismaying is here layd forth by a sen∣tence as it were loose and not tied together with the bands of con∣iunctions copulatiue, to wit, in these words (with tumult, shouting, sound) of the Moabites, at the voyce of a trumpet: which thing sheweth a great turmoile of all things, and their disordered and tu∣multuous feare & trembling, such as is wont to be where nothing is done in order in a battell and skirmish: but the vanquished on euery side runne away without captaine, without counsell. Vers. 3. And I will out off the iudge out of the midst thereof, and will slay all the Princes thereof with him, sayth the Lord. The destructiō of the people and of the stateTHe destruction of the nation and state. For besides the burning of their cities, their Kings also, nay all their Iudges, the which do susteine or vphold and gather together the body it selfe of the peo∣ple, shall miserably be slaine, and that euery one in the midst of his Iurisdiction and of the citie, ouer which he is set to rule, that the Moabites may vnderstand themselues to bee vtterly forsaken, and to be voyd of all hope of winding out of so great miseries. The Church of God neuer vt∣terly destroyed. And this is a thing the which neuer falleth out vnto the Church of Gods. So sore a punishment doubtles doth this crueltie of men deserue. Vers. 4. Thus sayth the Lord, For three transgressions of Iudah, and for foure, I will not turne to it: because they haue cast away the law of the Lord, and haue not kept his commandements, and their lies caused them to erre, after the which their fathers haue walked. The seuenth example of God his iudge∣ments against the Iewes.THe seuenth example of the iudgements of God against the na∣tions bordering vpon the Israelites, because of their obstinat or stubborne wickednesse. And by this example all dulnes and drow∣sines ought to be shaken off from the Israelites. For God setteth before the Israelites euen the Iewes themselues as a mirror or loo∣calleth his owne people, to wit, because of their sinnes peculiarly by the Iewes themselues committed against his worship and ser∣uice, that all men may vnderstand, and so consequently the Israe∣lites, whether they offend against the first table of the lawe, or a∣gainst the latter, that they doe prouoke the Lord, and that they are most worthie of anger and punishment. And whereas in this place
the Iewes themselues also are sayd to be punished,Why punish∣ment is threat∣ned vnto the Iewes, as well as vnto other nations. it is done, not onely that the Prophet may put away all suspition of flatterie and currying of fauour with his owne people, (for Amos was of the tribe of Iuda) whom, as well as the rest he doth comprehend: but also that out of all these examples being gathered together, wee should acknowledge the same true God to bee the God and Iudge of the Gentiles, and also of the Iewes. For so Paul teacheth, Rom. 3. ver. 29. saying: God, is he the God of the Iewes only, and not of the Gen∣tiles also? yes, euen of the Gentiles also. Secondly, that wee should conclude by a reason taken from things compared together: If God spare not the Iewes themselues, that is, his owne beloued peo∣ple, how much lesse will he spare others? for if these things be done vnto the greene tree, what shall bee done vnto the drie? Luk. 23. ver. 31. Accordingly whereunto Peter Epist. 1. cap. 4. ver. 17.18. wri∣teth: The time is come, that iudgement must begin at the house of God. If it first begin at vs, what shall be the end of them which obey not the Gospell of God? And if the righteous scarcely be saued, where shall the vngodly and sinner appeare? Why the Iewes are punished.Further, the peculiar sinne of the Iewes, for the which they are punished of God, is sayd to bee the contempt or despising of the first table of the lawe, the which in this place is described by three effects that is, for that they despised the lawe of GOD it selfe, The contempt of the law de∣scribed by three effects. the which they had giuen vnto them by the singular benefite of God. And so Paul seemeth to ascribe vnto the Iewes, that they doe ac∣cept of the law, as of a speciall fauour of God towards them aboue all other nations, when he sayth Rom. 2. ver. 17. Behold thou art cal∣led a Iewe, and restest in the lawe, and gloriest in God, &c. And cap. 9. vers. 4. he sayth of the Iewes, That vnto them doe belong the coue∣nants, and giuing of the lawe, and seruice of God. Vnder the name of the law I doe comprehend that part of it, the which conteineth the morall precepts, that is, the Decalogue, or ten Commandements. The second effect is.  The neglecting or forslowing of the Ceremo∣nies appoynted by God, the which here are called statutes or com∣mandements. The third, is false doctrine,  the which they embraced in stead of the true doctrine, whereby the Iewes both worshipped Idols, and also would often excuse their sinnes before God, being so taught by the false Prophets, whom they did esteeme aboue the true: in so much that God was neglected, or not cared for of that people for a certaine long continuance and succession of ages. For
earth, that is, driue them vnto extreme beggerie, taking away from them all that euer they haue. Yea finally they doe in the ende cor∣rupt the way or life and good maners of these miserable creatures, and in such sort afflicted or troubled, doe make them to goe wrong. For they teach and frame them vnto lewdnes both by their example, and also through their crueltie, that those miserable and afflicted ones may deliuer themselues from them. 3. The incest of the Israelites.The third sinne of the Israelites, their wicked incest, through the which they doe defile the name of the true God (whose people because of circumcision the Israelites doe all themselues) among all the heathen, the which doe know, or heare of their life and wic∣kednesse. For such is their guise and custome, to speake euill of God, either for the wicked liues of those that are his people, or whē they see them any waies afflicted and in trouble, as God himselfe complaineth Esai. 52. ver. 5. Now therefore what haue I here, sayth the Lord, that my people is taken away for nought, and they that rule o∣uer them make them to howle, sayth the Lord? And my name all the day continually is blasphemed (he meaneth by the wicked which held them in subiection.) So then the Israelites of whom Amos here for their incest saith, that they caused the name of God to be disho∣noured, were nothing at all carefull of that commaundement of God, Be ye holie, for I am holie, Leuit. 11. ver. 44. Vers. 8. And they lye downe vpon clothes layd to pledge by euery al∣tar: and they drinke the wine of the condemned in the house of their God. The second amplification of the crueltie and couetous∣nes of the Is∣raelites.THe second amplification of the desperate life of the Israelites, as well the Iudges as also priuate persons, in the maintaining of that course of their crueltie and couetousnesse, as who doe openly glorie, and shamelesly triumph of them both, before their gods, (whom they suppose to be diuine powers.) Therefore the Israelites doe declare, that all feare of God is shaken off, or fallen from them. Whereof he bringeth two examples and testimonies or witnesses. First,  for that they lye vpon clothes taken to pledge of their brethrē, against the lawe of God, and cruelly, and doe stretch themselues wantonly, and tumble vpon them, as vpon most honest and holie beds, wallowing and resting vpon them fore the very altars of their gods. But this reteining and keeping of things or garments layd to pledge was vtterly forbidden Exod. 22. vers. 26.27. If (saith
Moses) thou take thy neighbors rayment to pledge, thou shalt restore it vnto him before the Sunne goe downe: for that is his couering onely, and this is his garment for his skinne: wherein shall he sleepe? There∣fore when he crieth vnto me, I will heare him: for I am mercifull. The second example is, for that they of the spoyles of men by them vniustly condemned and vexed, doe shamelesly offer giftes vnto their gods, and especially wine (the which was by them giuen in sacrifice for drinke offerings) that they might offer of those spoyles vnto their gods, and feast before them ioyfully and dainti∣ly, as if all were well, and that they had behaued themselues very honestly. To conclude, they make their gods partners with them, and guilty of that their vniust robbery, booty, & wickednes: where∣in appeareth a manifest or open contempt or despising of God his power and maiestie. Of such complaineth the Psalmist, who think that God either doth not see their cruelty or otherwise regardeth not the same. Psal. 94. ver 6, 7. They slay (saith he) the widdow and the stranger, and murther the fatherles: yet they say, The Lord shall not see: neither will the God of Iaacob regarde it. Ver. 9. Yet destroyed I the Amorite before thē, whose height was like the height of the Cedars, & he was strong as the oakes: notwith∣standing I destroied his fruit frō aboue, and his root from beneath. THe third amplification of the former sinnes against God, by the sundry and great benefites of God towards the Israelites. The third am∣plification of the former sins of the Israelites. One of these benefites is here rehearsed, and laid out by his circumstan∣ces, that is to say, the ouerthrowing of the Amorites, wrought by God for the Israelites sake, which Amorites were most deadly ene∣mies vnto the Israelites, and did keepe them from their promised habitations or dwellings. The first circumstance therfore is taken from the person of the Amorites. 1 The Person of the Amorites. They were both in stature most tal, and in strength most valiant, and in deed Giants, as appeareth Num. 13. vers. 28. and so to the end of the chapter: where is at large reported the height and strength of the people of the lande of Ca∣naan (whereof the Amorites were a part) in comparison of whom the men that were sent to search the land, seemed to bee but as Grashoppers, &c. Therfore they were not ouercome by the strēgth of man but by the pwer of GOD, when as they are ouerthrowen by the Israelites, after which maner the Egyptians are destroyed by God at the red sea, as it is Exod. 14. vers. 14. Where Moses sayth vn∣to
to the fearefull Israelites: The Lord shall fight for you: therefore holde you your peace. And Psal. 44. ver. 2, 3. the faythfull doe ascribe vnto God the whole glorie of this driuing out of the heathen, and plan∣ting their fathers in their steads: we haue heard say they, How thou hast driuen out the heathen with thine hand, and planted them (they meane their fathers) how thou hast destroyed the people, (to wit the heathen) and caused them to grow (that is, the Israelites) For they in∣herited not the land by their owne sworde, neither did their owne arme saue them: but thy right hand, and thine arme, & the light of thy coun∣tenance, because thou diddest fauour them. 2 The maner of their ouer∣throwe.The second circumstance is from the maner of the victory that God gaue against them. For the Amorites sustained or suffered not only some certaine light plague: but they were vanquished before the Israelites with cutting vp and with vtter destruction, so that the root it selfe of the nation, and the issue or al fruit is now vtterly cutte off. Finally the people it selfe in those battels was cleane destroyed by God. For this was the worke not of men, but altogether of God, and a miracle. Vers. 10. Also I brought you vp from the land of Egypt, and led you fortie yeares thorow the wildernesse, to possesse the land of the A∣morite. Another bene∣fit of God to∣wards the Is∣raelites.ANother benefite, whereby the goodnes of God towards the Is∣raelites and the miracle of his worke is manifestly increased: for God did not only ouercome the Amorites the enemies of the Israe∣lites, and tooke them away that they should not hurt them: but moreouer God gaue the countrey of the Amorites cut off, & ouer∣comen, vnto the Israelites for an inheritance, that is, to be possessed and enioyed of their posteritie by a perpetual and continual succes∣sion. It was much, that the Amorites, the enemies of the Israelites, were destroyed by God: but it is more, that God also most bounti∣fully and liberally gaue their dwellings, their fenced Cities, & their lands and all their goods to be possessed of the Israelites, that they should not thinke that this was to bee attributed vnto their owne strength, that they possesse this land, and haue it from their Elders, and ancestors. Here is also an amplification of this benefite taken from the person of the Israelites: for the Israelites were euen at that time a people most afflicted and miserable: namely, the bond slaues of the
Egyptians.A third benefit of God toward the Israelites. Wherein also God doth recite a third benefite of his to∣wards them, to wit, that he brought them from out of the land of E∣gypt, and from the Iron furnace, and by the space of forty years most patiently lead them about, and nourished them in the midst of the wildernes, and defended them. All which are singular testimonies or witnesses of the goodnesse of God towards the vngrateful or vn∣thankfull Israelites. Vers. 11. And I raysed vp of your Sonnes for Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites. Is it not euen thus O ye children of Is∣rael, saith the Lord? The fourth be∣nefite of God towards the Israelites.THe fourth benefite of God towards the Israelites, whereby God doth amplyfie his goodnes towards them. For he sheweth that he gaue vnto them not onely earthly benefites (as were victories, dwellings, riches, and such like before rehearsed) but also heauenly giftes, and such as made for the health of their soules, namely the true doctrine of his worship and of euerlasting saluation, and the vse thereof, and that most plentifully, whilest that among them, and out of themselues he rayseth vp Prophets and Nazarites. This is a singular benefite of GOD, and peculiarly reserued for the sonnes of GOD, and not giuen indifferently vnto them and the Infidels: the which notwithstanding the Israelites despised as they did the former, and as the verse following dooth declare. And by these two effects is noted not some cōmon declaring of the health∣full and heauenly doctrine: but a most excellent, and also extraor∣dinary, such as was done by the Prophets: nay moreouer the pra∣ctise, vse, and effect thereof was also shewed by God vnto them, such as was the vow of the Nazarites, taken vpon them by many of their children, so that God promiseth no singular and especiall thing vnto his: the worship and doctrine of God hath nothing pe∣culiar and proper, the which God hath not clearely bestowed vp∣on these Israelites. The which thing to be most true, the interroga∣tion or asking of a question following doth teach, Is not this true? and also these wordes (saith the Lord) which two things are added, that the consciences of these men, albeit neuer so stubborne and brutish in the acknowledging of God his benefites might be tou∣ched most sharply, and that the confession of the trueth to the iusti∣fying of GOD might bee wrested from them in spite of theyr teeth.
Ver. 12. But ye gaue the Nazarites Wine to drinke, and comm∣ded the Prophets, saying: Prophesie not. The cōtempt of all the former benefits of God.NOw followeth the contempt or despising of all the former be∣nefites, but especially of this fourth and last, that is, of the grea∣test, and the which they ought to haue made most account of. For both in the Prophets and Nazarites they shewed that they vtte despised euery excellent gift of God. The Nazarites they moue and entised, and in the end perswaded to breake their vowe: fro the Prophets they tooke away freedome to speak, and forbad the to prophesie. Then both which what could be committed mo shamefull of the Israelites? Vers. 13. Behold, I will presse you, as the sheaues are pressed vnde cart that is loaden. The punishmēt most grieuous for their for∣mer sinnes.AFter the sinnes of the Israelites the Prophet sheweth vnto then their punishment, and the same most grieuous, from the which nothing foreseene either by the wisdome of man, or sought out by riches, or giuen by nature shall deliuer them, to the ende that they should most certainly assure themselues, that they onely remedy to escape this miserie doth consist and rest onely in repentance and true turning of the minde vnto God. And this verse containeth two poynts, first, the person of him that speaketh and threatneth these iudgemēts. 1 The person of him that spea∣keth. This is that same God Iehouah, euerlasting, & almighty, least the Israelites might thinke themselues able to withstand his power, and so consequently escape these iudgements of God, as hypocrites and prophane persons do suppose it may come to passe. To this purpose pertayneth that which is ver. 16. in the ende of this chapter, the saying of the Lord, or saith the Lord. 2 The punishmētThe punishment it selfe is here declared, & the same most hard. For God shal in such sorte presse these obstinate or stubborn Israe∣lites, as a cart full loaden is wont to doe the sheaues in haruest, the which it beateth and treadeth in the flower, for this is a n="*" Metaphora, is a figure, wherby a word is changed frō hi natural & prper sinifi∣cation vnto a like: as to see, for to vnder∣stand: to heare for to obey: to thirst, for to desire, &c. Metaphor borrowed from those that tread out corne. For in olde time they did beat out their corne in the floore with Cartes, Waines, and Draies, the which we now do with lailes. Of this kinde and man∣ner of beating out of corne out of the sheaues & eares with Waines and Cartes, we may read Isai 28. ver. 27.28. where the Prophet hath
these wordes. For fitches shall not be threshed with a threshing instru∣ment, neither shall a Cart wheele be turned about vpon the Cummin: but the fitches are beaten out with a staffe, and Cummin with a rodde. Bread corne when it is threshed, he doth not alwaies thresh it, neither doth the wheel of his cart alwayes make a noise, neither wil he break it with the teeth therof. God then wil rise vp vnto the punishment of the Israelites, that is, the rebels against him, not with a light hand or faint strength: but with a great might, force, & power. Confer this kinde of punishment of the Israelites with that of the Moabites threatned Esay 25. ver. 10, 11. There wee reade thus: For in this mountaine shall the hand of the Lord rest, and Moab shall be threshed vnder him, euen as straw is threshed in Madmenah. And he shal stretch out his hand in the midst of them (as he that swimmeth stretcheth them out to swimme) and with the strength of his hands shall he bring downe their pride. Vers. 14. Therefore the flight shall perish from the swift, and the strong shall not strengthen his force, neither shall the mighty saue his life. Vers. 15. Nor he that handleth the bowe shall stand, and he that is swift of foote, shall not escape, neither shal he that rideth the horse saue his life. The prophet in these 2 verses answereth all their vain opi∣nions for the e∣scaping of their punishment to come.AN explanation or more plaine laying open of their punishment. For he setteth down the maner of this iudgement to come, and in the meane season he answereth all their vaine opinions concer∣ning the escaping of this punishment. Now the maner of this iudg∣ment is, that all the refuges or wayes to escape, the which euery one of them supposed that they had, God shall make voide and vnpro∣fitable, and to stand them in no stead, whether they bee naturall, as swiftnes of foote, and strength of body: or attained vnto by indu∣strie, diligence and witte, as power and authoritie among others, skill in warre and fight: or riches and trayned horses. And hereby also appeareth the answere vnto the vaine cogitations or furmises of euery one of them to deliuer themselues from this iudgment of God. For some of them did oppose or set their naturall strength a∣gainst these threatnings of God, and some their riches and authori∣ty. But nothing besides the mercy of God it self can deliuer vs from his iudgements, Only the mercy of God deliue∣reth from his iudgments. the which his mercy is to be obtained of vs only by true repentance of mind, through the promises of God in Christ.
Vers. 16. And he that is of mighty courage among the strong  shall flee away naked in that day, saith the Lord. COmmoration,Commoratio. or staying in the setting out of the iudgements  God against the mighty: for to the end that the rest may vnder∣stand and be assured that nothing can set them in security or safe against their sinnes, and the iudgements of GOD, he doth stay  terrifying or fearing of the strong ones by name, who thinke th they aboue the rest can escape, because they do excell in streng t These therefore themselues also, albeit neuer so valiant in body and strength, shall flee as being afraid at the sight of their enemies: ye and they shall flee away naked, to wit, casting away their weapon and armour, as those that are afrayd are wont to doe, and shall ac∣knowledge themselues not able to match their enemies, and to be affrighted. And it is not some one or two that shall doe this, but all Therefore they shal one with another by flockes and heaps shame∣fully run away, either not at all withstanding their enemies, or no escaping those iust iudgements of God by means of their wonde∣full strength, the which they boasted of before. CAP. 3. Vers. 1. Heare this word that the Lord pronounceth against you, O children of Israel, euen against the whole family which I brough vp from the land of Egypt, saying: Another ser∣mon, threat∣ning the iudge∣ments of God against the Is∣raelites.ANother Sermon, wherein Amos threatneth the iudgements of God against the said Israelites, and that repeating & expressing the commaundement of God, least that because these men were wonderfully hardened, the former threatning should by and by va∣nish away: or least it might seeme to haue been threatned but for fashion sake, as hypocrites with these toyes and iuglings are wont to shift of the threatnings of God, be they neuer so great and ear∣nest. But this verse containeth two chiefe poyntes. Two partes of this verse. 1 Attention. First, it hath a commendation or getting attention or marking of the things that are to be spoken: for the Prophet winneth authoritie vnto his mini∣sterie from the Maiestie of God himselfe, whome Amos doth wit∣nes to speake these things rather then himselfe being but a man. Therefore when as the Israelites doe heare these things, they must
giue eare vnto them, not as the voyce of a mortall man, but as if they should heare the sound of the euerlasting word of God. This is the first point of this verse. The second, 2 Vnto whome this Sermon belongeth. vnto whom this prophesie belongeth. And generallie it belongeth vnto all the tribes, the which God brought out of Egypt: but especiallie vnto the king∣dome of Israel, that is vnto the ten tribes, the which had separated themselues from the kingdome of Iudah And this rehearsall of the benefite which God did vnto them, hath a secret accusing of their ingratefulnes or vnthankfulnes, and a reason and repeating of their more streight bond to serue and worship God. Vers. 2. You only haue I known of all the families of the earth: there∣fore I will visit you for all your iniquities. The chiefe point of this sermon, a re∣hearsall of the great benefites of God towards the Israelites, and of their vnthankfulnes for the same.THe proposition or maine point of the whole sermon, and decla∣ring of the threatnings of God against the Israelites the con∣temners of God, and in deede more wicked then other nations, and of themselues vnexcusable. And therefore here is also briefelie shewed, how iust the iudgements of God were against them. This verse containeth two things, first, a short but yet a plaine and nota∣ble rehearsal of the singular & greatest benefits of God towards the Israelites, namely, for that the Israelites, through the singular good∣nes and bounty of God were preferred before other nations of the world, that they alone & only shuld be the people & inheritance of God For God himself only vouchsafed thē this special fouour, care, prouidence & knowledge of himself. This fauour of God towards them before and aboue other people, Dauid commendeth Psalm. 147. ver. 14. saying, For he hath exalted the horne of his people, which is a praise for all his Saints, euen for the children of Israel, a people that is neere vnto him. And Paul Rom. 3. ver. 1.2. Affirmeth that the pre∣ferment of the Iewes, is great in comparison of other nations, in these wordes: What is then the preferment of the Iewes? Or what is the profit of circumcision? Much euery maner of way: for chiefelie, be∣cause vnto them were committed the oracles of God. And yet more plainely, cap. 9. ver. 4.5. where he sheweth, That vnto them per∣taineth the adoption, and the glory, and the couenants, and the giuing of the law, and the seruice of God and the promises. Of whome are the fa∣thers, and of whome concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God ouer all, blessed for euer. Wherefore the more and the greater that the benefites of God were towards them, so much the more shamefull
was their ingratitude or vnthankfulnesse, and contempt of GOD and their sinne the greater and more heinous. The threat∣ning thē with punishment for their sinnesThe second poynt conreineth the threatning and declaring  to them of the punishments, and the same, as appeareth, most  least any either of them or vs might complaine, that they we punished of God vniustly, or more hardlie then was meet, & fal charge God for the same. For that same comparing by way of co∣traries of the benefites of God, and iniquities of this people tog∣ther, doth notably set foorth the iustice of God, and sheweth  same to be most equall and indifferent. Vers. 3. Can two walke together except they be agreed? Commoration, or standing vpō the full answe∣ring of the ob∣iections of the Israelites, wher¦by they would shift off the iudgements of God against their sinnesCOmmoration, or standing vpon the more particular layi out of the matter, in the which he rouseth vp the Israelites  moreouer the Prophet answereth their obiections pleasing the selues in their sinnes, and seeking to shake and shift off God b threatnings. He vseth diuers and sundrie similitudes, to confim these his answers vnto them, as being notorious hypocrites, and ∣uident contemners or despisers of the iudgements of GOD, a herein vsing false, but yet colourable pretences and excuses, and  shamefully deceiuing and beguiling themselues. Therefore  whole place is as it were a certaine fortifying before hand vnto  narration and declaration of the iudgements of God to come,  which beginneth vers. 9. that it may bee giuen eare vnto and to ∣ked. For the Israelites were stiffe necked and disobedient. Wh by appeareth how great the care of GOD is to call vs, being  stubborne, vnto soundnesse of minde, that when as wee perish,  may vnderstand, and in the end acknowledge, that we haue p∣rished through our owne default. This verse conteineth an answere vnto this obiection of the ∣raelites: Obiection of the Israelites. You forsooth do threaten vs with the iudgements of Go but he hath made and entred into a couenant with vs. Therefo by this couenant and bargaine of God with vs, we are safe enoug as being his people, and such as will deale with him by that cou∣nant. The Prophet answereth, The answer of the Prophet. The force and strength of this fo∣mer couenant and entring as it were into league is lost, becau you doe not now agree with God, nor yet keepe those conditio. Therefore you shall not at all be safe by meanes of that couenant whereby before you had a common priuiledge, bargaine, and fe∣lowship
with God. For there cannot so much as among men be or remaine any societie, traffick, fellowship, or friendship, except they agree together, keep the couenants one with another, and on both sides stand vnto their promises. And this he doth declare & proue by a certain similitude, The similitude of this verse ta∣ken from those that purpose to doe any thing together, be it neuer so small. the which is taken from one kind of societie of fellowship among mē, to wit, of those that purpose to go about and take in hand some thing together, be it neuer so small, as for example a iourney: for except these agree together, they cannot be ioyned together, and iourney and trauaile together. So also is there now no agreement betweene God and the Israelites, neither are they ioyned together because of the former couenant, because that the Israelites dissent from GOD, haue broken the league, and stand not to their bargaines. Reade Ierem. 5. chap. where God grie∣uously complaineth, as also chap. 25. of the vniuersall falling from God and the breach of his couenant both in the people, and also in the Princes and Rulers. Vers. 4. Will a lyon roare in the forrest when he hath no pray? or will a lyons whelpe crie out of his denne, if he haue taken nothing? HAuing refuted the vaine confidence or trust of the Israelites in the couenant of God, he doth secretly rehearse and confute an other vaine obiection of theirs, because of the daily and continuall threatnings of the Prophets, and this also by a most apt or fit simi∣litude. The obiection is thus: to wit, Another obie∣ction of the Is∣raelites We are not moued with these threatnings. For these are your ordinarie and daily manners of dea∣ling. For there is nothing more common then these your terrify∣ings or going about to make vs afrayd, albeit that there haue fallen out nothing among vs extraordinarily, or haue done no otherwise then wee are continually wont to doe. The Prophet answereth, The answer of the Prophet. These things are not threatned for fashion sake, as if God did not purpose to punish you: but as if they were spoken as words of course, or lightly, without any anger of God moued against you, and without any punishment prepared alreadie for you also. For this is euen at hand, the which is layd before you by the expresse and extraordinarie commandement of God. But God doth not a∣nie thing in vaine, or to no purpose, nor threaten any thing, but to some effect by his word, for as much as the very lions themselues doe not roare except they see some pray. And so doth God by his Prophet teach vs concerning the efficacie or force of his word,
which is neuer without his effect, Isai. 55. ver. 11. where hauing com∣pared it with the falling of the raine for the cherishing of the ear and the things therein, he concludeth: So shall my word be that go∣eth out of my mouth: it shall not returne vnto me voyd, but it shall ac∣complish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto  sent it. As therefore that roaring and yelling of the lions, albeit bruit beasts, is not in vaine, but an assured token of the pray: so i like manner neither is the word, and the threatnings of the most true God declared in vaine, or cast foorth to no purpose, but they are the prognostications or foreshewers of the wrath of God al∣readie prepared, and such testimonies of his iudgements to come as cannot lie, and are most true and certaine. Vers. 5. Can a bird fall in a snare vpon the earth, where no fouler is? or will he take vp the snare from the earth, and haue taken no∣thing at all? The third ob∣iection.THe third obiection of the Israelites, to wit, from the delay that should be of these threatnings: These things which thou threat∣nest, are not so readie and hastie. The Prophet answereth, yes most readie. The answer. For like as birds are neither caught without a fouler, and without his nets alreadie set and layd, and he attending vpon the businesse: neither doth the fouler carrie away, nor take vp his n before he hath gotten a pray: so neither doth God threaten these things, but that he hath the executioners of his iudgements readie neither will he withdraw his hand, but that he will punish you, ex∣cept ye repent. For God is not lesse wise, nor lesse constant in his counsell and purpose, then men that are foulers are wont to be, that you doe not herewithall deceiue your selues vpon a vaine hope of the delay of his iudgements. Vers. 6. Or shall a trumpet be blowne in the citie, and the people be not afrayd? or shall there be euill in a citie, and the Lord hath  done it? THe fourth similitude the which with that following conteineth as it were an ouerplus, that is to say, most earnest exhortations, and sheweth what is the most true fruite of the former admoni∣tion, and what is their dutie, vnto whom God threatneth any thing that is, that they giue diligent eare or heed vnto those threatnings
of God, and doe in the end themselues repent.The fourth si∣militude. For like as when a trumpet giueth a signe or token out of a watch tower, the people hearkeneth, and is troubled, and prepare themselues this way, or that way, accordingly as the trumpet gaue the token: so at the voyce of GOD, as a most shrill trumpet, wee ought to be atten∣tiue, or giue eare, and to bee moued with the sound thereof, and accordingly as he giueth warning, prepare our selues, and looke a∣bout vs. The great loue of God towards those whom he punisheth.And these words (Is there an euill in the citie, and the Lord hath not done it?) are a reason, whereby the great loue of God euen to∣wards those whom he punisheth, is described, as who doth first ex∣presly shewe them of these punishments, to wit, to this end, that they might auoyd them, and amend themselues. Which thing if they doe not, then God doth chastise and correct them, and that iustly, as obstinate or disobedient persons. God then according vn∣to his singular and endles mercie towards his Church, doth fore∣shewe his iudgements, wherewith he doth punish her, if she doe not repent. After which manner God is not alwaies wont to deale with other people: but towards his Church he is exceedingly and singularly mercifull. To this purpose, besides many other places, appertaineth almost the whole 65. chap. of the Prophet Isai, where God maketh a notable difference betweene his Church, and those that appertaine not vnto the same, but especially vers. 13.14.15. Therefore thus sayth the Lord God, Behold, my seruants shall eate,What is ment by the word (Euill) in this place. and ye shall be hungrie: behold, my seruants shall drinke, and ye shall be a thirst: behold, my seruants shall reioyce, and ye shall be ashamed. Be∣hold, my seruants shall sing for ioy of heart,Euill Of sinne, or of guiltines Of affliction, or punishment is From our selues. Frō God by meanes, or without meanes. and ye shall crye for sorrow of heart, and shall houle for vexation of mind. And ye shall leaue your name as a curse vnto my chosen: for the Lord God shal slay you, and call his seruants by another name. But here by the name of (Euill) we doe not vnderstand sinne, or the euill of guiltinesse, but affliction or trouble, or the euill of pu∣nishment. For God is not either the author, or the cause of our sinne, but we our selues. And so Iames cap. 1. vers. 13.14. teacheth, when he sayth: Let no man say when he is tempted, (that is, moued vnto e∣uill) I am tempted of God: for God cannot be tempted with euill, nei∣ther tempteth he any man (vnto euil) But euery man is tempted, when he is drawne away by his owne concupiscence, and is entised. And the Prophet Osee doth learne vs, that God is not the author of our de∣struction, but of our saluation, cap. 13. ver. 9. O Israel (sayth he) one
hath destroyed thee, but in me is thine helpe. Speaking thus in the per∣son of God. Vers. 7. Surely the Lord God will doe nothing, but he reueleth his secret vnto his seruants the Prophets. THe meaning of this verse is all one with the sentence going im∣mediatly or next before: onely by way of explanation, or ma∣king the matter more plaine, he declareth that which he had spo∣ken before (Hath not the Lord done it?). When God is sayd to do euill. For then, The Lord doth euill, or is sayd, To doe euill, when he doth either send iust punish∣ments vpon obstinate or stiffe necked sinners: or els when as he doth shewe and threaten them to come to passe, by his Prophets, vnto whom he doth reueale them, that they should be foretold vn∣to others. Vers. 8. The lyon hath roared: who will not be afrayd? The Lord God hath spoken, who can but prophesie? The figure Ai∣tiologia.THe figure Aitiologia, or rendring of a reason, by the which the Prophet both sheweth a cause, why he is vnto them so heauie a messenger: and also doth remoue and put away al enuie from him∣selfe: and sinister or wrong opinion, which they might conceiue of him, as crowing ouer another man his kingdome, where he had nothing to doe: or els, as if he told these things reioycing at their calamities or troubles. He answereth therefore, that he sheweth these things vnto thē both by the expresse cōmandement of God, not of any priuate pleasure of his owne mind, and also that he doth this of entire loue and compassion towards them, because that the mind of God towards them, is as of a lyon now roaring and readie and desirous to take and deuoure his pray. For as much then as God himselfe would haue thus much to be signified, and hath spo∣ken vnto Amos, by what meanes then can he forsake or refuse this burthen and charge, although it wee hard and heauie vnto the Is∣raelites. For God must in any case be obeyed, especially when as he commandeth a thing expresly and by name. God in any case must be obeyed. As may appeare by the example of Ionas so grieuously punished for his disobe∣dience. And 1. King. cap. 13. ver. 17. The Prophet that was sent to preach against Ieroboam his altar at Bethel, being afterwards re∣quested by Ieroboam to goe home and dine with him, answereth:
that he would not doe it, if the King would giue him his house full of gold, because he had a charge from God to the contrarie. And the like he sayth to the old Prophet in the place before specified, which bad him home vnto his house also, I may not (sayth he) re∣turne with thee, nor go in with thee, neither will I eate bread nor drink water with thee in this place. For it was charged me by the word of the Lord, saying, Thou shalt eate no bread, nor drinke water there, nor turne againe to goe by the way that thou wentest. This commande∣ment notwithstanding he brake, and was afterwards, for his diso∣bedience, slaine by a lyon. So Peter Act 4. vers. 19.20. when he with Iohn was forbidden to speake or teach in the name of Iesus, answereth: Whether it be right in the sight of God, to obey you rather then God, iudge ye. For we cannot but speake the things which we haue seene and heard. When God in his anger spea∣keth, who can but tremble, and be moued.Furthermore, when as God speaketh these things, and that be∣ing angrie, and now as it were addressed & setled to execute those his iudgements, who can but tremble and feare? And being mo∣ued with a certaine pitie and compassion, can choose but admo∣nish or warne those to repent, ouer whose heads snorting and rou∣ting in their sinnes, so heauie punishments doe hang? The which thing Amos did. Whereby both the authoritie of his ministerie or prophesie is auouched: and all opinion of euill will towards the Israelites is put away and wiped out. Vers. 9. Proclaime in the palaces at Ashdod, and in the palaces in the land of Egypt, and say, Assemble your selues vpon the moun∣taines of Samaria so behold the great tumults in the midst there∣of, and the oppressed in the midst thereof. A more plaine laying open of the iudgements of God against the Israelites.THe explanation or laying more plainly open of the iudgements of God against the Israelites, and the same very wonderfull, and such as they ought to bee amazed at, the which the Prophet now sheweth, or threatneth vnto them, to wit, after that he hath answe∣red vnto sundrie their obiections, and hath cleared himselfe and his ministerie from all suspition, and false charge of bearing euill will vnto them. But to the end the sentence of God against them, albeit neuer so hard, may yet seeme to be the more iust, he produ∣ceth or bringeth foorth beholders and witnesses of the desperate wickednesse, and all other kind of sinnes of the Israelites, Beholders and witnesses of the wickednesse of the Israelites. not one, or two men onely, but whole nations themselues, namely the Phi∣listines,
and the Egyptians, that is, such people as were neere, and such also as were farre off, because that he would haue the lewdnes of the Israelites very well knowne vnto euery nation. Finally, be bringeth for witnesse the Infidels themselues, that the Israelites may be the more ashamed both of their disobedience vnto God, and also of their owne blockishnes, and soothing or flattering of themselues. In this verse therefore is conteined a calling of the Philistines and Egyptians openly to beare witnesse against the Is∣raelites. Vnder the name of Ashdod the Philistines are comprehen∣ded by the figure Synecdoche,Synecdoche is a figure, whereby the whole is put for the part, or the part for the whole: as in this place Ash∣dod one citie of the Philistines is put for the whole nation of them. but the Egyptians are cited by name. And first of all God will haue the wickednesse of the Israelites, to wit, the same which he accuseth in them, to be published or open∣ly told and proclaimed, euen in the palaces of those that should be witnesses. Then secondly he wil haue those same witnesses to come to behold, being gathered together in companies, and not seueral∣lie one by one after another: and to see and view this wickednesse of the Israelites throughout the whole countrie of the Saman∣tanes, from the mountaines, that is, from the neere and plaine, and open places, that they may giue the more certaine and true testi∣monie or witnesse of it, as of a matter the which they themselues had seene, and whereof they had knowledge and experience. The Israelites chiefly accused of crueltie and couetousnesse.Moreouer, he doth summarily or chiefly accuse the Israelites of two sinnes, vnder the which the rest are comprehended, that is, of crueltie, whereby they doe vexe and trouble one another of them, so that they are neuer at quiet and peace within themselues, but continually at garboyle and deadly fewd. Secondly, of auarice or couetousnesse, whereby they oppresse one another, and robbe and spoyle each other, euen in the midst of their townes and cities, and in the bowels of their nation. Vers. 10. For they know not to doe right, sayth the Lord: they store vp violence and robberie in their palaces. The lewdnesse of the Israelites amplified, first generally, and then specially.AN amplification of the wickednesse and sinnes whereof God accuseth the Israelites before the Philistines and Egyptians, the which amplification is taken from two places. First, from the ge∣nerall, they are so wicked, that they are altogether lewd, and doe not now any good thing at all. For they haue accustomed them∣selues vnto all kind of sinnes, so that they know not any way how to liue well. For this word (they knowe not) doth not note out in
them any excusable ignorance, but such as is vtterly inexcusable, as who namely by a long custome of sinning haue in such sort gotten a practise and hardinesse of wickednesse, that whatsoeuer before they had learned out of the word of God and law of Moses con∣cerning good workes, they haue now through their owne default, shamefully forgotten the same, and wickedly blotted cleane cut of their mindes. The second place of this amplification, is from the speciall. For he doth amplifie both the sinnes of crueltie and coue∣tousnesse, by the manner of their exercising of the saine. And con∣cerning their couetousnesse, he sayth, that (they doe store, or hord vp) their violence, that is, they are not content with one or two booties from their brethren: but they heape them vp. Secondly, they there∣by doe gather together treasures in their palaces, the which they may keepe layd vp on heapes, and vnprofitable, and kept onely to feede the eyes of their couetousnesse. Their crueltie is hereby am∣plified, in this that they the selfe same are sayd euery where to bring in desolation and wastnes. Vers. 11. Therefore thus sayth the Lord God, An aduersarie shall come euen round about the countrie, and shall bring downe thy strength from thee, and thy palaces shall be spoyled. A description of the iudge∣ments of God against the Is∣raelites, and the same very sharpe and bit∣ter.A Declaration and description of the iudgements of God, sharpe and bitter indeede: (for it is in euery respect answerable vnto their sinnes) but yet most iust and righteous. God therefore doth shewe them that it shall come to passe, that like as the sinnes of the Israelites, are on euery side seene and beholden of all their borde∣rers: so shall they be compassed about on euery side by the ene∣mie, and like as the lewdnesse of them reigneth in euery place of their countrey: so the enemie shall euery where raunge against them in their owne countrey, so that as their wickednesse did not liue and florish in one place only, so should their punishment pre∣uaile, and their enemie be present not onely in one place, but in all places of their countrey. So much then doe these words sound (round about the countrey) that is to say, your enemies shall bee at hand among you, and shall presse and vexe you euery where, and on euery side. And both the equitie, and the grieuousnesse and greatnesse of the iudgements of God doth herein also appeare, that like as the Israelites haue vsed violence, and been couetous: so shall their strength also bee broken by their enemies: that either
they shall not be able to stand before them, or if they stand before them, they shall be slaine. Moreouer their palaces, the which were the receiuers of their robberies vniustly made by them, and were their caues and dennes, shall be robbed and spoyled by their selfe same enemies, so that their punishment may be in euery condition fitting and agreeing with their sinne. Vers. 12. Thus sayth the Lord, As the shepheard taketh out of the mouth of the lyon two legges, or a piece of an eare: so shall the chil∣dren of Israel be taken out, that dwell in Samaria in the corner of a bed, and in Damascus, as in a couch. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer punish∣ment.AN amplification of the punishment described before, taken from the lamentable euent or falling out of things: namely, for that very fewe and scarse none at all shall remaine out of that de∣struction, or be deliuered, that is, very fewe shall escape. And that which followeth, the Prophet doth set down vnder two similitudes taken from a shepheard, with great difficultie and daunger pulling some little piece or part of his sheepe or other cattell out of the iawes of the lyon. This therfore that here is added, hath in it a great force and stirring vp of affection, when he sheweth, that there shall not many of those which dwell and liue delicatly and deintily in Scimron or Samaria it selfe, that same braue and gorgeous citie, de∣liuer and withdraw themselues out of this so great miserie and de∣struction. A description of the riotous and deintie life of the Is∣raelites in Sa∣maria. And this their nice and deintie life is described by their beds and couches of their houses, vpon the which these daily lye & rest themselues by reason of their wantonnesse and delicacie, and excessiue pleasures and tendernes of liuing. These then of whom he here speaketh are the rich and mightie ones, who liue delicious∣lie, whose condition in such kinde of calamities and miseries will therefore bee the harder, and their estate the more bitter, for that they haue little been acquainted with such manner of vsage. The Prophet therefore by this kinde of speaking, doth, as I haue sayd, moue affection, that he may at last stirre and rouse them vpto thinke on the matter. Vers. 13. Heare and testifie in the house of Iaacob, sayth the Lord God, the God of hoasts. The seconde part of the iudgements of God against the Israelites.ANother part of the iudgements of God against the Israelites, and that declared and vttered in this place with great contesta∣tion
or calling of God to witnesse. For the former parte recited be∣fore shewed what should happen or fall out vnto the men them∣selues: this latter part declareth, what shall betide the countrey it selfe, and otherthings, which were in the countrey of the Israelites. And this verse containeth two things, and the same yet appertai∣ning and ayming to all one marke, namely, to moue the Israelites with the feare of this punishment, and to shew the certaine euent, or issue and falling out of these threatnings, except they repent. The first contestation therefore, or calling to witnesse of GOD, threatning these iudgements against the Israelites, 1. The Iewes are called as wit∣nesses of the threatnings of GOD against the Israelites, and to what end. is made before the Iewes a people neere vnto the Israelites, and their brethren by nature. For God will haue these his threatnings against the Israe∣lites to be declared vnto the lewes, and that the Iewes be taken for witnesses of them so threatned, that they may afterwards testifie and acknowledge the notorious and desperate hardnesse and stub∣bornnesse of the Israelites their brethren in contemning or despi∣sing the iudgements of God: and on the other side the great care and most louing minde of God, who so earnestly and timely did before hand giue warning of these things vnto the Israelites. And that therfore God be iustified in his iudgments, and men abide and remaine guilty, as Dauid in his owne cause witnesseth of GOD, Psal. 51. ver. 4. saying: Against thee, against thee onely haue I sinned, and done euill in thy sight, that thou maist be iust when thou speakest, and pure when thou iudgest. And so by this meanes the Israelites are made vnexcusable. Therefore they shall know that these threat∣nings are not cast forth in vaine, or that words are not vttered at all aduenture by the Prophet, when as the Iewes their neighbours are called as witnesses of the fulfilling of them, who themselues also by this meanes are by the way moued vnto repentance by the exam∣ple of the Israelites. 2 The titles of God heaped vp in this place to∣gether, and what we are therby to learn.Secondly, in this verse is to be noted the heap of words and titles, by the which appeareth that these things are threatned by almigh∣ty God, and not by Amos a mortall man and a Neat-heard onely, that they may be beleeued as most certainely to come to passe, vn∣lesse the Israelites doe change their life. For hereunto appertay∣neth this which the Prophet affirmeth, that this which he vttereth is (the saying of Iehouah, and the same the Lord, and God of hosts) all which things doe auouch the authority and rule of God, and do teach that there is in him power to performe and bring the same to passe.
Vers. 14. Surely in the day that I shall visit the transgressions of Isra∣el vpon him, I will also visit the Altars of Beth-el, and the hornes of the Altar shall be broken off, and fall to the ground. A descriptiō of the second part of Gods iudge∣mēts the which hath two parts.A Description of the second part of the iudgements of God, or pu∣nishment against the Israelites, the which consisteth of two parts. The first containeth the destruction of all their holy places, that is, of those places, in the which because of their religions and Idolatries, 1 The ouer∣throw of their holy places. they did put considence or trust. And these places are signified vnder the name of Beth-el; because they had placed the chiefe exercises of their Idolatry in the townes or cities of Dan and Beth-el. God therefore in this place doth pull downe and take from them those things which they held, as religious and holy, and inuio∣lable or such as could not be broken, and should remaine for euer because of their religiousnes, and the which they did oppose or set against the threatnings of God, as a most safe and sure buckler or shield, whereunder they might hide themselues. For all their holy places shall be ouerthrowne, their altars shall be clouen in sunder, and the hornes of their altars (the which are thought to be holier then the other partes) shall be broken. For nothing is able to stand against the threatnings of God, Nothing but repentance can stand against the threat∣nings of God. but the repentance of men: and as for these places, they were but monuments and instruments of meere and blasphemous Idolatry. Nowe the things the which Amos here threatneth, fell out or came to passe when as Iosias did purge and cleanse all that whole countrey from Idolatry, 2. King. cap. 23. ver 15. for thus is it there written concerning this matter: Furthermore the altar that was at Beth-el, and the hie place made by Ieroboam, the Sonne of Nebat, which made Israel to sinne, both this altar, and also the high place brake he downe, and burnt the hie place, and stampt it to powder, and burnt the groue. Vers. 15. And I will smite the winter housewith the summer house, and the house of yuorie shall perish, and the great houses shall bee consumed, saith the Lord. The secōd part of this punish∣ment against the Israelites.THe second part of this punishment against the Israelites. And it containeth the destruction and ouerthrow of all the best and chiefest houses Therefore not onely those holy places shall perish, and be destroyed, but also the prophane, yea the most sumptuous
palaces (the which those Israelites haue so laboriously builded) that euery where in that countrey there may be a sharpe and heauy token, footing, and print of God his iudgements, and of their ob∣stinate or wilfull wickednes. And not onely their sumptuous pala∣ces shal be broken downe: but also their other houses, so that there shal be throughout that whole countrey a great wastnes, the which in these wordes no doubt is described. Further there is mention made of The Summer and Winter house, because that in those weal∣thie kingdomes, not only the Kings, but also the other nobles, yea and priuate persons in like maner, had their Summer houses seuered from their Winter houses, and especially in hote countreyes. So Iudg 3. ver. 24. there is mention made of the summer Parlour of Eglon King of the Moabites slaine by hud, whom when his ser∣uants missed, and saw the doores of the Parlour shut, They say one to another, surely he doth his easement in his summer Parlour. So the Kings of the Persians had Susa and Ecbatana. The Greeks had their vnder roumes, and vpper roumes, but yet all in one house: as also the Latines had their sundry supping and dining places. CAP. 4. Vers. 1. Heare this word, ye kine of Bashan, which are in the moun∣taine of Samaria, which oppresse the poore, and destroy the needy: and they say to their masters, bring, and let vs drinke. AFter the Prophet Amos in the chapter before going hath indif∣ferently dealt with all the Israelites, Two chiefe parts of this verse. now he doth seuerally and particularly set vpon the Princes and Rulers of the kingdome of Is∣rael, because of certaine special and particular and notorious sinnes of theirs. Wherfore there are two parts of this verse. 1. To whome the prophet spea∣keth. The first shew∣eth vnto whome the Prophet speaketh: The second, wherefore he speaketh vnto them. He speaketh vnto them not in his own person, but in the person of God, whose messenger he is, 2 Wherefore he speaketh vnto them. that the more au∣thority and assured credit may be gotten hereby vnto that which he vttereth. And he speaketh vnto the Kine of Bashan, the which doe dwell in the mountaine of Simron, that is, in the chiefe Citie of Sa∣maria (the which was both called Samaria, or Simron, and also was seated vpon a mountain) For thus it doth appeare, 1. King cap. 16. ver. 24. where we finde that Omri King of Israel bought the moun∣tayne
Samaria of one Shemer for two talents of siluer,Samaria, wher¦of so called, & whereupon it was built. and built in the mountaine, and called the name of the citie which he built, after the name of Shemer, Lord of the moutaine, Samaria. By these name and descriptions, the which are taken partly from the place, are partly from the qualities of the persons, the Prophet doth  and point out the princes themselues of the Kingdome, both for their fiercenes and curstnes towards all men: and also because or their ouermuch and blockish securitie or carelesnes, by reason o their too much wealth and riches. For Bashan was a mountaine beyond Iordan, neere vnto Galaad, in the possession of the half tribe of Manasses. Ios. cap. 13. ver. 4, 5. fit for pasturing, where most notable kine and fat cattell were fed, as we may see Deut. 32 cap. ver. 14. where among other benefites of God great and excel∣lent, done for his people, Moses sheweth how hee planted them, where they were fed with Butter of kine, and milke of sheepe, with f of the Lambs and Rammes, fed in Bashan, &c. Whereupon men that are fierce and cruel, and proude and haughty through ouer good succes in things falling out happily vnto them, are in the Scripture, compared vnto these kine, and bulles of Bashan. As where it is sayd in the Psal. 22. ver. 14. Many young bulles haue compassed m mightie bulles of Bashan haue closed me about. Amos therefore cal∣leth these so by the commandement of God, not to speake euill of Princes or Magistrates, but to shake off from them sluggishnes of minde. The Princes of the Israelites threatned especially for their couetousnes & cruelty.Further he speaketh vnto them, that is, threatneth them for ma∣ny causes, of the which in this place there are expressed especially two, that is, Couetousnes and Crueltie. Couetousnes, because they doe rob and oppresse the poore: they do sucke the needy drie, ye euen breaking their bones, that they may eate out their marrow, and take it cleane a way. Cruelty also is ioyned herewithall: that which the words of (oppressing, and breaking) do declare. And i these Princes both these vices is insatiable, or such as can neuer be filled, and barbarous, because they aske daylie, and craue that some thing may be brought them: and also doe moreouer wittingly and willingly feast themselues most dayntily with those spoyles of the poore, the which is altogether a cruell and vnmercifull parte, voyd of all naturall affection, that men should in such sorte deuour one another, and after the manner of wilde beastes bee fierce and cruel against liuing creatures of their owne kinde. Of the which kinde
of cruell and mercilesse men, Dauid Psal. 14. ver. 4 doth complaine, saying: Doe not all the workers of iniquity know that they eate vp my people, as they eate bread? Vers. 2. The Lord God hath sworne by his holines, that loe, the daies shall come vpon you, that he will take you away with thornes, and your posterity with fish hookes. HE hath noted and pointed out the persons whome hee threat∣neth: now he doth declare and vtter the threatnings of God themselues. Wherein two things are also to bee noted: first, Two things to be noted in this verse. the forme and maner of the declaring of them, the which is not onely done inthe name of God: but also with the vsing of an oath, that it may be the more assured and certaine vnto them, 1 The maner of speaking. and that he may take away & shake off from them their cruelty, and al other starting holes, whrewith the great ones are wont to shift off the threatnings of God. And thus doth the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrues teach vs, cap. 6. ver. 17, 18. that God vseth to confirme his promi∣ses vnto vs by an oath, to the ende wee should the more certainely beleeue the same: So God (saith he) willing more abundantly to shew vnto the heires of promise the stablenesse of his ciunsell, bound himselfe by an oath, That by two immutable things, wherein it is vnpossible that God should lie, we might haue strong consolation, which haue our refuge to hold fast the hope that is set before vs.In what sense God is said to sweare by his holines or tem∣ple. And God in this place swea∣reth by his Holynes, Sanctuary, or Temple, so farre forth as it was vn∣to them a manifest and visible token both of his holines and true worship: and also of his maiestie, to the end they should not thinke that any vaine Idol did here speake vnto them, and not the true God, whose temple they saw with their eyes, at leastwise it was ex∣tant among them to be seene. And so doth Christ teach Math. 5. ver. 35. That Ierusalem is the Citie of the great King, that is an out∣ward signe of God his glory, and the seate and house that hee had chosen for his kingdome and empire: and therefore that they which should sweare by it, did euen sweare by God, of whose honour and glory it was a president: like as Mat. 23. ver. 21. hee doth expresly shew that he which sweareth by the Temple, doth sweare by it, and him that dwelleth in it, that is, by God, of whose presence the Tem∣ple was an outward Sacrament, testimony or witnesse. The second thing to be marked in this verse,2 The punishmēt to fall vpon the Israelites ex∣cpt they repēt. is the punishment which is here described, and the euent or issue which should imme∣diately
insue of the same, if they did not repent. This punishment is most sore and grieuous, and yet vnto God most easie, howsoeuer they were the Peeres of the realme; and therefore seemed to be vn∣moueable, the which could not be shakē, nor stirred frō their place, nor cast from their degree. 1. The punishmēt of the Israelites most grieuous. And this punishment is most grieuous because that it is both the neck breake of themselues, and toucheth also their posteritie: and doth not onely plague them in their own countrey, but shall further thrust them out from their owne home. For thus much signifieth this speech (I will take you away) that is, I will cause you to remooue (and your posteritie) out of this you most pleasant land and countrey. 2. Most easie vn∣to God to exe∣cute. It shall also bee most easie, euen as easilie as a fisher taketh fishes with his hooke and angle, as if it were in sport and playing. Vers. 3. And ye shall goe out at the breaches euery Kowe forward: and ye shall cast your selues out of the palace, saith the Lord. The amplifiyng of the punish∣ment by their feare and trem¦bling.THe amplifiyng of the punishment threatned vnto them, taken from their feare and trembling. For both themselues shall flee away with speede, wheresoeuer they can finde a waye, as men void of counsel and not knowing what to doe, nor yet able by strength to resist: and also they shall with their owne handes cast out those things and goods, the which they haue kept so long and so careful∣ly in their palaces, that euery one may take and possesse them as things by them left and forsaken, like as it is wont to fall out in a shipwrack or in firing and burning of houses. The which is a most miserable condition or estate of rich men, who seemed vnto them∣selues to be safe and without danger in their own seats and houses But yet for all this these things shall fall out and come to passe vnto the Israelites continuing obstinatly or stifly in their sinnes. Vers. 4. Come to Beth-el, and transgresse: to Gilgal, and multiplie transgression: and bring your sacrifices in the morning, and your tithes after three yeares. A secōd reason why the Israe∣lites are puni∣shed.THis is another rendring of a reason why the Israelites are so grie∣uously punished by God (for there hath been one expounded in the first verse of this chapter) namely their horrible Idolatrie, wher∣in they were most superstitious, 1. The Israelites most supersti∣tious. and most obstinate or stifnecked. Superstitious they were in this, that in their Idolatrie they did falsi∣fie
and corrupt all the parts and points of the true worship of God, and like vnto Apes did imitate or counterfeit the same, the which thing is taught in this verse, and in the verse following. And they were most obstinate or stifnecked in their Idolatrie, 2 Obstinate and stifnecked. because that they could not by any punishmēts be withdrawen therefrom, and be brought to acknowledge and worship the true God. And this so outragious Idolatrie of the Israelites is set forth by the great indig∣nation and wrath of God, God speaketh vnto them as desperate per∣sons, in the way of mockge. yet vnder a isting and mocking maner of speaking, as if God dealt with desperate persons, or such as were past all hope, and so consequently as if God gaue them leaue, that according vnto the wish and desire of their desperate hearts they should wholly drowne and plundge themselues ouer head and eares in this sinne, and in the same play the wantons their belly full, continue, transgresse and offend God. Thus Ierem. 7. ver. 21. God in mockage biddeth the Israelites continue their wonted maner of sacrificing with opinion, that how wickedly soeuer they liued, yet for the outward worke sake he must needes be pleased with them, saying: Put your burnt offerings vnto your sacrifice and eate the flesh. Likewise in Ezechiel cap. 21. ver. 39. As for you, O house of Israel, Thus sayth the Lord God, goe you, and serue euery one his Idol, seeing that ye wil not obey me, and pollute mine holy name no more with your gifts, and with your Idols. So Malach. 1. ver. 4. GOD in mockage granteth vnto the Edomites, as it were in spight of him, to build vp againe the places, the which hee had layd waste, but sheweth that they shall haue but ill successe with the same. For sayth hee there: Though Edome say, we are impouerished, but we will returne and build the desolate places, yet sayth the Lord of hostes, They shall build, but I will destroy it, and they shall call them, The border of wickednesse, and the people with whome the Lord is angry for euer. God then in these and the like kinde of speeches, doth not incourage men vnto sinne, nor is delighted with those that sinne (For God is not a God that lo∣ueth wickednes, neither shall euil dwell with him. Psal. 5. ver. 4.) but he dealeth after this manner with desperate persons (that he which is filthy may be more filthy Apoc. 22. ver. 11.) and that they may be made altogether vnexcusable. In this verse there are three things to be considered.3. Things to be noted. First the place it selfe, where they did so grieuously sinne, namely, Beth-el and Gilgal. Osee 4. ver. 15. Though thou, Israel, play the harlot,1 The place, yet let not Iudah sinne. Come ye not vnto Gilgal neither goe ye vp to Beth∣auen, nor sweare the Lord liueth. These places Ieroboam had cho∣sen
out for Idolatrie in the south partes of Iewry:2 The ordinary sacrifices of that place. Secondly, the or∣dinary sacrifices, the which were done there, the which are he called (Transgression) that is, a notorious and heynous sinne: a therefore the more sacrifices that were made by them, so much the more did these Israelites sinne, and heape vp their iniquities vpon their owne heads. The reason is, because that this seruice was  will-worship, as in the next verse following, and ordayned by m not commanded by God, nor allowed of him, which kinde of ser∣uice and worship God doth hate. For so God speaketh of the sacri∣fices of the Iewes, Ierem. 7. ver. 22. I spake not vnto your fathers,  commanded them, when I brought them out of the Land of Egypt, con∣cerning burnt offerings and sacrifices. And Paul Coloss. 2. vers. 22. teacheth that such kinde of traditions all perish with the vsing and are after the commaundements and doctrines of men.3 The corruption of a notable part of God his worship. Thirdly, there is in this verse noted a corruption of a notable parte of the worship of GOD made by the Israelites, and so consequently their most filthie superstition is in like manner noted, while that euery three yeare they lay aside their tithes for the mainte∣nance of those their Idolatrous seruices, and the finding of them that labour about them, as their Priestes, &c. in such sorte as God commaunded it to bee done for the maintenance of the Leuites, that is, for the nourishing of the maintayners and workemen a∣bout his true worship and seruice. For so were the Israelites com∣maunded to laie vp theyr three yeares tithes for the mayntenance of the Leuites, and for such other like vses Deut. 14 ver 28. At the end of three yeare (saith Moses) thou shalt bring forth all the tithes of thine increase of the same yeare, and laie it vp within thy gates. Then the Leuite shall come, because he hath no parte nor inheritance with thee, and the straunger, and the fatherles and the widow wh are within thy gates, and shal eate and be filled, that the Lord thy G may blesse thee in all the worke of thine hand which thou doest. And for this cause doth GOD by the Prophet Malachias cap. 3. ver. 10. command the people to doe the like, promising a blessing therun∣to, Bring ye (saith God) all the tithes into the storehouse, that then may be meate in mine house (he meaneth for such vses as were ap∣pointed in the place of Deutronomie before cited) & proue me no herewith, saith the Lord of hostes, if I will not open the windowes of heauen vnto you, and powre you out a blessing without measure.
Vers. 5. And offer at thankesgiuing of leauen, publish and proclaime the free offerings: for this liketh you, O ye children of Israel, sayth the Lord. Two other kinds of super∣stition and ido∣latrie of the Is∣raelites.THe Prophet reckoneth vp two other kinds of their superstition and idolatrie. The one, for that the Israelites offered peace-of∣ferings vnto their Idols in Beth-el, after the imitation or example of the true sacrifices of God, whereof reade Leuit. cap. 6. from the beginning, vnto the end of the seuenth verse. 1. Their peace of∣ferings. But this in these Israe∣lites was but an apish imitation without faith, the commandement of God, and true end of the same, and therefore it was meere blas∣phemie. The other, for that they also made vowes and free will of∣ferings, 2. Their vowes and free will offerings. after the imitation of the true worship of God, and called vpon their gods with a most high voyce. The which although they seeme to be done after the imitation or following or true godlines, yet for as much as they were done in the honor of those vnto whō they were done, in that place, and of those by whom they were done, and for that end, they are meere idolatrie and will worship, and therefore are called in this place, the deuices and inuentions of men, and not the precepts or commandements of God, or the ser∣uice and worship of God. And that we may be throughly resolued or perswaded that this is so, there is added (That the Lord hath so sayd and pronounced) So then an apish imitation of the true wor∣ship of God, is not in deed and truth the true worship of God. Vers. 6. And therefore haue I giuen you cleannes of teeth in all your cities, and scarcenes of bread in all your places: yet haue ye not returned vnto me, sayth the Lord. The stubborne continuance of the Israelites in their sinne, and the sundry punishment for the same.AFter the setting downe of the outragiousnesse of the idolatrie of the Israelites, he describeth their obstinacie, or stubborne con∣tinuance in the same, the which appeareth hereby, for that they could not b any afflictions or punishments be drawne from the same, and be turned to worship and serue the true God. Now then in this verse and certaine others that followe, are reckoned vp sun∣drie their afflictions or punishments, among the which the first, and the same very great, is famin, 1. Famin. the which in this verse is mentio∣ned, and well knowne by the storie 1 King. cap. 17. where you may reade of that same most notable famin in the dayes of Elias, the
which continued by the space of three yeares and an halfe at the least. And 2. King. cap. 4. mention is likewise made of another fa∣min in the dayes of Elizeus. Vers. 7. And also I haue withholden the raine from you, when there were yet three moneths to the haruest: and I caused it to ra vpon one citie, and haue not caused it to raine vpon another: o piece was rained vpon, and the piece whereupon it rained not, ∣thered. Vers. 8. So two or three cities wandred vnto one citie to drinke wate but they were not satisfied: yet haue ye not returned vnto me, s the Lord. THe second punishment is Drought or drines,2. Drought. altogether mira¦culous and wonderfull, that it might euidently appeare, that the same was sent of God being wroth against them. For it rained  some cities, and in other some it rained not. Moreouer, there wa not water enough to giue the men themselues drinke: last of a whole cities came by heapes and companies to seeke for water, by meanes of the ouermuch thirst and drieth. Hereby appeareth th the seasons of the yeare are not gouerned and ruled by fortune,  by the starres themselues, but by God, whether they fall out to be fruitfull, or els barren. And thus much doth Paul teach Act. 14. vers. 17. when he saith, That God left not himselfe without witnesse in the he did good, and gaue vs raine from heauen, and fruitfull seasons, f∣ling our hearts with foode and gladnesse. Vers. 9. I haue smitten you with blasting and mildew: your gre gardens and your vineyards, and your figge trees, and your oli trees did the palmer worme deuoure: yet haue ye not returned v to me, sayth the Lord. 3. Barrennes of the earth and of the fruites thereof.THe third punishment, barrennes of the earth, and of the fruite of all sortes: wherein doubtlesse the wrath of God did appeare For not onely one sort of fruite failed: but all sorts. Therefore both the herbes, and also the vines, and figge trees, and oliues were bar∣ren at one time, and also beaten and strooken with a parching and burning winde, the which brought blasting: the palmer worme moreouer and the caterpiller deuouring and eating that which was left, as God by Ioel doth witnesse of a like plague cap. 1. ver. 4. where
he sayth: That which is left of the palmer worme, hath the grashopper eaten, and the residue of the grashopper, hath the canker worme eaten, and the residue of the canker worme, hath the caterpiller eaten. Vers. 10. Pestilence haue I sent among you, after the manner of E∣gypt: your young men haue I slaine with the sword, and haue taken away your horses: and I haue made the stinke of your tents to come vp euen into your nostrels: yet haue you not returned vnto me, sayth the Lord. 4. The pestilence.THe fourth punishment, the Pestilence. The fift, Warre, in the which so many men and horses were slaine, that the very stinke of them in the tents killed vp the Israelites. The sixt punishment, 5 Warre. Captiuitie. But the Pestilence was greatest, 6. Captiuitie. the which the similitude taken from Egypt doth declare. And of this Egyptian pestilence recordeth the Psal. 78. ver. 49.50. as especially sent of God, in these words: He cast vpon them the fiercenes of his anger, indignation and wrath, and vexation, by sending out of euill angels: He made away vn∣to his anger: he spared not their soule from death, but gaue their life to the pestilence. Vers. 11. I haue ouerthrowne you, as God ouerthrew Sodom and Go∣morah: and ye were as a firebrand pluckt out of the burning: yet haue ye not returned vnto me, sayth the Lord. 7. The subuersion and ouerthrow of their land after some fearfull and strange maner.THe seuenth punishmēt, the subuersion or ouerthrowing of their lands, either by some opening of the earth, or whether it hap∣pened by any other meanes, as by floud, or burning. For this the Scripture doth not set downe after what manner it was: but that this ouerthrow was wonderfull, and horrible or fearefull, and a ma∣nifest iudgement of GOD against the Israelites, appeareth in this place by a double comparison, to wit, of Sodom and Gomorah: and also of a fireband. By the simili∣tude of the fire brand, he signi∣fieth that all perished not, but that some were saued, al∣beit very hard∣lie. Of this fearefull destruction of Sodom and Go∣morah, from whence the first comparison is taken, Peter in his 2. E∣pist. cap. 2. ver. 6. sayth, That God turned the cities of Sodom and Go∣morah into ashes, condemned them and ouerthrew them, and made them an ensample vnto them that after should liue vngodly. And a∣greeably vnto Peter doth Iude also teach, that God his fearefull iudgement against Sodom and Gomorah, ought to be a warning vnto all others to flee from sinne, in the 7. verse of his Epistle. As
Sodom and Gomorah, and the cities about them, which in like manner as they did, committed and followed straunge flesh, are set forth for an ensample, and suffer the vengeance of eternall fire. The addition in the end of e∣uery one of the punishments.Furthermore it is to be noted, what is added vnto all the punish∣ments at the end of euery one of them (yet ye haue not returned vn∣to me.) For this addition sheweth that the minde of the Israelites was not onely sluggish and careles in so great miseries and punish∣ments, as who were not herewithall stirred vp and moued: but also that it was desperate and past recouerie in this idolatrie, the which they would by no meanes cast off, to returne vnto the true know∣ledge and worship of God, by true repentance of minde. And such are the punishments of obstinate or stubborne persons, as appea∣reth Isai. 5. ver. 25. Therefore is the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, and he hath stretched out his hand vpon them, and hath smit∣ten them that the mountaines did tremble: and their carkases were torne in the midst of the streetes, and for all this his wrath was not tur∣ned away, but his hand was stretched out still. And in the Psal. 32. ver. 9.10. Dauid counselleth that we should not be without sense and feeling of our sinnes, and as vnbridled colts runne on headlong in wickednesse, least that we be curbed and bridled by God, who hath many punishments for the vngodly. Be not (sayth he) like an horse, or like a mule, which vnderstand not: whose mouthes thou doest binde with bit and bridle, least they come neere thee. Many sorrowes shal come to the wicked: but he that trusteth in the Lord, mercie shall com∣passe him. Vers. 12. Therefore thus will I doe vnto thee, O Israel: and because I will doe this vnto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Israel. The conclusion of the place be∣fore going.THe conclusion of the whole former place with an exhortation. The conclusion is this, namely, that the punishments threatned ver. 2. and 3. to the Israelites the Peeres and Nobles, because of their sinnes before recited, shall assuredly come to passe, except they do earnestly repent. There followeth therfore an earnest exhortation and a weightie, (and conceiued also in the name of God himselfe) that they might auoyd these iudgemēts of God, & so consequent∣ly (whilest there is yet some time left) goe against the fearefull wrath of God, as it were to entreate him before hand, and that by earnest repentance of minde. Wherefore this verse hath these two especiall parts, to wit, a conclusion, and an exhortation. And this
place sheweth what is the most certaine and readie way to turne the iudgements of God from our beads: namely, if we refraine from our sinnes, and turne vnto God, and vnto a better mind. For by this meanes, and conuersion or turning of our minde, we do meet God euen running as it were vpon vs, and being angrie with vs, and doe finde him easie to be appeased with vs. In which manner of spea∣king there is a n="*" A Metaphor is a figure, wherby a word is chaunged frō his natural sig∣nificatiō vnto a like, as to smell, for to find out and in this place, to goe to meete, for to seek, to intreat, or to appease. Metaphor borowed from those that goe to receiue them that come vnto them. And these words (prepare thee) do not shewe what lieth in our power, but what is the nature of true re∣pentance: namely, that it must be a chaunge of life, and absteining from wickednesse, the cause of which worke in vs is the spirite of God. And therefore this selfe same must be begged of God, and sought for at his hand. Vers. 13. For lo, he that formeth the mountaines, and createth the wind, and declareth vnto man what is his thought: which maketh the morning darknes, and walketh vpon the hie places of the earth, the Lord God of hosts is his name. A reason of the former ex∣hortation.THe garnishing, or rendring of a reason of the former exhorta∣tion, least that the Israelites should either but coldly be moued at the same, such was the hardinesse of these men: or should heare it sleightly, as if God were not so greatly to bee feared, such was forsooth the pride of these men, and their confidence or trust in the helpe of men. Therefore here is shewed by a description of the maiestie of God himselfe, how he is both to be giuen eare vnto, and also to be feared. So Paul 1. Tim. 1. ver. 17. when as he sayth (Now vnto the King euer lasting, immortall, inuisible, vnto God onely wise, be honor and glorie for euer and euer, Amen) by shewing that glorie is due vnto God, he doth paint forth before our eyes the maiestie of God in liuely colours, because of our dulnes, who in our minds doe not conceiue it to be such, and so great. Now this the most sacred maiestie of God is in this place layd forth vnto vs by diuers effects indeed of his power, but not by all: yet especially by his name it selfe, whereby the true God is called the God of hosts. And so is he in like maner described Psal. 68. ver. 4. by his name, in these words: Sing vnto God, and sing prayses vnto his name: exalt him that rideth vpon the heauens, in his name (Iah) and reioyce before him. For names are not without cause giuen vnto God, nor in vaine. But the effects whereby the maiestie of GOD in this place is described, are here
reckoned vp to be fiue, takē partly from the first creation of things: and partly from the ordering and gouerning of them alreadie crea∣ted, Fiue effects of the maiestie of God. and the same most free and mightie, that is, according vnto his owne will, pleasure and power, without the controlement of any. Vnto the creation of things it perteineth, for that GOD is called both the former of the mountaines,1 He formeth the mountains. and the creator of the windes. So Psal. 104. ver. 4.8. the making of the windes and mountaines is at∣tributed vnto God: the windes where he sayth: He maketh the spi∣rits his messengers,2. He createth the wind. (for by spirits he vnderstandeth the windes) and a flaming fire his ministers. The mountaines, in these words: And the mountaines ascend, and the valleyes descend to the place, which thou hast established for them. And 3. Iohn. ver. 8. Christ vnto Nicodemus speaketh of the winde as directed to blow when and where GOD will, saying: The winde bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it commeth, and whither it go∣eth.3. He knoweth the thoughts. To the ordering and gouerning of the things created belon∣geth, that the same God is sayd to be the knower of the thought of man, nay the iudger thereof, yea and of man himselfe also: for God knoweth vs better then wee doe our selues. And therefore Paul to shewe that there is nothing so secret or deepe, but that the spirit of God doth pierce and sound the same, and so consequently know∣eth the very innermost thoughts of men, sayth Cor. cap. 2. ver. 1. The spirit searcheth all things, yea the deepe things of God. And Ioh. 3. ver. 20. Christ in that his long conference with Nicodemus, teach∣eth, that euery man that euill doth, hateth the light, neither commeth to light, lest his deedes should be reproued. By the which he sheweth, that as by the light of the Sunne men their actions are in such for manifested, as all men may discerne of them, being done in the same: so much more Iesus Christ, who in that which goeth imme∣diatly before calleth himselfe the true light, doth looke into the darkest corners of the hearts of men, and doth discouer and reproue the same. 4. He maketh light darknes. So doth it in like manner appertaine vnto the ordering and gouernment of things created, that God is sayd by the Prophet in this verse, when it pleaseth him to make darke the very light of the Sunne, and the morning, and in steed of the day to make dark∣nesse. So God by the hand of Moses maketh thicke darknesse in E∣gypt for three dayes together, as it is in Exod. cap. 10. ver. 22. The Moses stretched out his hand toward heauen, and there was a black darknesse in all the land of Egypt three dayes. And when Christ suf∣fered, God caused on the sudden that there was a darknesse ouer
all the land of Iewrie for a certaine space, as Matth. cap. 27. ver. 45. doth witnesse saying: Now there was a darknesse ouer all the land from the sixt houre vnto the ninth houre. Lastly, in that God is sayd, 3. He walketh vpon the hi places of the earth. To wake vpon the high places of the earth, this also appertaineth thereunto, namely, to declare the absolute, meere and alone power of God in the gouernment of the world, that we might vnderstand that nothing is able to withstand his will. CAP. 5. Vers. 1. Heare you this word, which I lift vp vpon you, euen a lamen∣tation of the house of Israel. The summe of this chapter.THe summe of this Sermon and chapter following, tendeth to this ende, that the Israelites may bee brought vnto true repen∣tance, if by any meanes it may be, both by the feeling and concei∣uing of the punishments to come, if they continue in their sinne, and also by thinking and considering vpon the goodnesse of God, and of his maiestie, whom they offend. Therefore both the iudge∣ments of God are here set forth against them, being obstinate and stiffenecked: and also the great maiestie of God is described. And by God his this calling of them to repentance, and by his care of the Israelites is shewed, how the wicked perish through their owne lewdnesse and stubbornnes: and not through any fault of God. Concerning this Sermon and exhortation, it was made some time after that which went before, that in the meane space GOD might see whether the Israelites being admonished or warned would repent. The which when they did not, albeit they were long looked for, they are by the same God called againe vnto peniten∣cie or repentance, that they may be altogether vnexcusable. And this verse hath two parts. For it doth expressely shewe, Two parts of this verse. both what God threatneth, and whom he threatneth. God threatneth (a bur∣den) and that full of lamentation and mourning, and miserie; 1. A burden. vnto all the Israelites. 2. To all the Is∣raelites. Therefore the word of God is not simply or alone declared vnto them, whereunto notwithstanding (euen because it is the word of God) they ought diligently to giue eare, and to heare the same: but the word of God full of punishments, teares, and mourning, by how much the more (if they haue any care of their saluation) they ought most heedfully to hearken thereunto, and be therewith touched and moued. For extreme or vtter destruction is
now threatned vnto them, being obstinate or stubborne, euen from God himselfe, that they should not say but that they had wa of their daunger in time. Vers. 2. The virgin Israel is fallen, and shall no more rise: she is  vpon her land, and there is none to raise her vp. The vtter o∣uerthrow of the Israelites.THe making more plaine of that which went in the verse before. For now God doth shew what that burden full of mourning the which he threatned before, to wit, the ouerthrowing of the whole kingdome and nation of the Israelites, and that in such for that there is no hope of recouering of their estate againe after∣wards, nor of raysing vp themselues againe. And this ouerthrows the nation is described by two wayes and words, to wit (of sall) yet in such sort that it cannot rise againe, the which is most m∣rable, and a signe of vtter destruction. And so much seemeth l∣mie to signifie cap. 8. ver. 4. when as at the commandement of the Lord he sayth vnto the rebellious Iewes: Thus sayth the Lord, Se they fall and not arise? shall he turne away, and not returne aga And secondly, their vtter ouerthrow is noted by the word (lea all alone) for when she is fallen, she shall be forsaken of all  neither shall she get helpe or ayde of any man, to lift vp he  againe. To what end the people is called by the name of a vir∣gin.Further, he calleth the people by the name of a (virgin) very ∣fectionatly, to moue them vnto the more pitie and compassion, as more tender and vehement or earnest affections, that at the  they may haue pitie both of themselues, and also of those their ∣der virgins which were among them. The singular number noteth the whole body, and not euery particular per∣son. Moreouer, albeit that GOD vse the singular number in saying (the virgin Israel) yet his mea∣ning is not that euery particular person of the Israelites shall pe∣rish, and so none at all be saued, but the whole bodie it selfe of  people and kingdome is signified, the which shall not any more b raysed vp, nor arise againe. Vers. 3. For thus sayth the Lord God, The citie which went out by thousand, shall leaue an hundreth: and that, which went out  an hundreth, shall leaue ten to the house of Israel. Occupatio, which is a fi∣gure whereby we answer be∣fore hand an obiection that might bemade.THe figure occupatio, or an answering before hand of an obi∣ction, wherein the punishment mentioned in the second ver
before going is more plainely declared, and shewed, how great & grieuous it shall be. And the end why it is made more plaine, is lest, as I sayd before, because that God in the former verse vsed the singular number, euery particular Israelite might be supposed that he should perish, hope of escaping being left vnto none. For God speaketh of the bodie it selfe of the people, and not of euery particu∣lar person of them. For there were some of them the which should be left aliue, albeit the number of them very small, and the same very fewe. And hereby is taught, How great the ruine of the peo∣ple shall be. how great the ruine and decaie of that people was like to be, to wit, euery tenth person of them shall be left in the house, or people of Israel, that is, of that king∣dome, the which was called the kingdome of Israel, and had fallen away from the kingdome of the twelue tribes, the which were once all ioyned together. Where it is likely that the Israelites which were left should liue and dwell.Further, it is not here expressed, where those which shall bee left, should liue and dwell, whether in their owne countrey, and promised land, or elsewhere, as in Media, or Colchis, or Hircania, in∣to which countreyes they seeme to haue been caried by the Assy∣rians. Others thinke that this is to be vnderstoode of Media, or Hir∣cania: but I suppose it to be ment of their owne land and countrey, where also some of the Israelites were left. For it is sayd here, The places here quoted 2. King. 22. & 2. Chro. 30. are misque∣ted, & contain no such thing. But I suppose that he taketh the name Isra∣el here for the Iewes, of the which some were left be∣hinde in the land. 2. King. 25. ver. 22. Ie∣rem. 40. v. 5, 9. they shall goe out by hundreths and by tennes, to wit, (out of their Ci∣ties.) They shall then be in their cities. Vers. 4. For thus sayth the Lord vnto the house of Israel: Seeke ye me, and ye shal liue. COmmoratiō, or stāding, to shew more largely what they ought to doe, where the end of the former threatning is declared, and some other causes added also. The end therefore of so hard and la∣mentable a punishment here threatned is, that the Israelites should repent, that is to say, turning vnto God from these so great sinnes, might be saued and liue. Other reasons are set downe in the verses following, why they should doe so. But hereby appeareth what is the end of these most sharp threatnings, The end why this punishmēt is threatned. namely that men should giue eare vnto them, repent, and be saued. For Ezech. 18. ver. 32. I desire not the death of him that dieth, saith the Lord: cause there∣fore one another to returne, and liue ye. And Paul sheweth that God his long suffering and bearing with vs in our sinnes, is, that there∣by we should be drawen vnto repentance, of the which those that
make none account he sharply rebuketh, where Rom. 2. cap. ver. 4,, 5. he saith thus: Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnes, and ∣tience, and long sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulnes of G∣leadeth thee to repentance? But thou after thine hardnes, and hart the cannot repent, heapest vnto thy selfe wrath against the day of wrath  of the declaratiō of the iust iudgemēt of God. Wherby appeareth the great louing kindnes of God, euen against men that are wicked  also his iust vengeance against the same continuing obstin at or s∣necked, & such as wilnot repent. Further, these two points are hee rehearsed in very good order, to wit, first, To seeke God: & second To liue. For the cause of life and saluation, & of our deliuerance o of troubles is, To haue God with vs: And the way to haue Go with vs, doth consist or lie herein, if we seeke him. For so  teacheth Mat. 7. ver. 7. Aske, and it shall be giuen you, seeke▪ and ye finde: knocke and it shal be opened vnto you. This cause then, namely to seeke God, in respect of our selues goeth before: the effect, it wit, To find & liue, followeth. But in respect of God, the cause, why we can both seeke him and also finde him, is his mercy. Here  are comprehended briefly both the nature and also the effect of  repentance: the nature, To seeke God: the effect, To finde  and liue. Vers. 5. But seeke not Beth-el, nor enter into Gilgal: and goe not  Beer-sheba: for Gilgal shall goe into captiuitie, and Beth-el  come to nought. AN explanation, or making more plaine of the sentence and ∣hortation before going, (seeke Iehouah, or the Lord) taken fr the contrarie. To seeke the Lorde is to abstaine from Idols,  which then were in Beth-el, and Gilgal, and Beer-sheba. For  first part of earnest repentance is to abstaine from euil, The first parte of earnest re∣pentance is to abstaine from euil. and to  test and abhorre the same, the which is hee expressed. And so we taught Psal. 34. ver 14. Eschew euill, and doe good: seeke pea and follow after it. The second parte is, To doe good, and to i brace the same, The second, to doe good. the which is contayned in the verse before go (seeke ye me) so that of these twaine now ioyned together we ha a true definition of repentance. True repentance then, is to absu from euill things, What true re∣pentance is. and to follow such good things, such as are co∣manded vs by God: as for example, to absteine from idols, and  serue the true God, and to seeke him. And this course tooke P
with the Thessalonians, as may appeare by their turning from idols, and seruing the true God, for the which they were much commen∣ded of the faithfull of other places, as Paul himselfe reporteth 1. Thess. cap. 1. ver. 9. in these words: For they themselues shew of you (he meaneth the faithfull in Macedonia and Achaia, and of other places) what maner of entring in wee had vnto you, and how you tur∣ned to God from idols, to serue the liuing and true God. And the re∣petition of this word (seeke) in this place, and in the verse before going, is very excellent: Seeke the Lorde, and seeke not Beth-el, &c. A reason why they ought to abstain from worshipping in those piaces. For Gilgal shall goe into captiuity, &c. This is a reason added to amplifie the matter with all, that they might the rather abstaine from the worship of those places, or hauing of them in any reuerent regard, albeit that they were then of the Idolaters deemed to bee most holy. For those places shall not be defended, no not by their owne Idols or gods, as they supposed them. Therefore shall you much lesse be saued by the selfe same gods. For Gilgal according to the signification of the name thereof shal be cut off, and rooted out: Beth-el shal be brought to (Auen) that is, vnto nothing. To what ende then doe you hope, or seeke for helpe from those places? Vers. 6. Seeke the Lord, and ye shall liue, least he breake out like fire in the house of Ioseph, and deuoure it, and there be none to quench it in Beth-el. The former ex∣hortation re∣peated, and amplified.A Repetition of the sentence of the fourth verse, that the exhorta∣tion before going, concerning the seeking of God, may be vn∣derstoode to be the more earnest, and the only sauing of the Israe∣lites, and the way to stay and pacifie the punishments threatned vnto them And the Prophet doth amplifie the exhortation repea∣ted, by the danger hanging ouer their heads, except they doe it. For he threatneth that it will come to passe, that a fire from God, and such punishment shal be sent vpon them (except they do seee God) that it will ouerthrow their whole kingdome, and common wealth and societie, and that there shall not be any able to reme∣die this so sore and great ruine Therefore the Prophet hath insrted or interlaced these reasons of the vanitie of the place, Gilgal, and Beth-el: of their great punishment to come, that the Israelites be∣ing warned of that their exceeding and assured danger, albeit they
were neuer so peruerse or wicked, might yet notwithstanding bee moed and touched, and pearced, and in the end returne vnto the duety, and vnto God. Vers. 7. They turne iudgement to wormewood, and leaue off righte∣ousnes in the earth. A Parenthesis, or putting in of another sentence betweene the verse that went before, and the next that followeth, not apper∣taining vnto either of them, but making a ful sense of it selfe, where∣by the Prophet turneth his speech and exhortation of seeking the true God, peculiarlie and especially vnto the Rulers of the people of Israel, vnto whom did appertaine the authoritie of ministring law, the ouersight of the people, the correction or punishment of vice, and the setting vp of Iustice among men, whose Idolatrie be∣fore, and in this place their negligence and carelesnes in executing of their office the Prophet doth most sharply reprehend and finde fault withall. An especial re∣prehension of the princes and nobles, and the same twofold. Therefore this verse doth containe an especiall and peculiar reprehension of the kings, nobles, and Iudges of the peo∣ple of Israel: albeit that the rest of the people also were not free frō neither of these sinnes, to wit, vngodlines, or Idolatry towards God, and iniustice towards their neighbors: but the Rulers of the people were especially hereof guilty, whom the Prophet doth for this cause reproue more sharpely, 1. The ouertur∣ning of iustice. and as it were by name. And their pecu∣liar and proper sinne is here shewed to be twofolde. First, for that they themselues did ouerturne all law, the authoritie of the admini∣stration or ordering whereof was notwithstanding, in their hands onely. For they did turne into cruelty and iniustice or wrong that their sacred or holy authority, the which in it selfe is most sweete and most holy. Therefore they changed this honey into most bit∣ter wormewood. And of such a peruerting of iustice doth the Pro∣phet Isai complaine cap. 5. ver. 7. when he faith that the Lordloo∣ked to haue had from his vineyard (which was the house of Israel and men of Iudah) Iudgement, but beholde oppression: for righteous∣nes but beholde a crying. The second sinne of the Rulers was, that they suffered all iustice to perish in others, 2. Th suffered  to perish  ers. as in the affaires and dealings of priuate persons, whom notwithstanding they ought to haue amended, and to frame them vnto the rules of equitie, or else to correct and punish them. And this is that which the prophet sayth, That they leaue off, or cast
aside iustice vppon earth, for that they did not better and amend the manners of men. Hereof are often complaints in the Prophet Isai, as cap 59. ver. 4. No man calleth for iustice: no man contendeth for trueth: they trust in vanitie and speake vaine things: they conceiue mischiefe, and bring forth iniquitie. And ver. 13, 14, 15. We haue departed away from our God, & haue spoken of cruelty and rebellion, conceiuing and vttering out of the heart false matters. Therefore iudgement is turned backward, and iustice standeth farre off: for truth is fallen in the streete, and equitie cannot enter. Yea, trueth faileth, and he that refraineth from euill, maketh himselfe a praye: and when the Lord saw it, it displeased him, that there was no iudgement. And so forth as in that same chapter followeth. Vers. 8. He maketh Pleiades and Orion, and he turneth the shadow of death into the morning, and he maketh the day darke as night: he calleth the waters of the sea, and powreth them out vpon the o∣pen earth, the Lord is his name. The second ex∣hortatiō of the Prophet vnto repentance.THe second exhortation of the Prophet, wherwith he stirreth vp the Israelites to earnest repentance of minde, that they should turne vnto the true God, and that they should not any longer dwel and lye slugging in their sinnes, wherewith they doe offend him. This exhortation is taken from the glorious, and yet true and very braue description of the power and maiestie of GOD, vnto whose sweete imbracings and bosome he doth call them backe. For he is that alone true God, most mighty and full of maiestie, who hath most free rule and power ouer all things: so that he can neither be mocked nor despised scotfree, nor yet be appeased with the toyes and deuises of men: all which things the Israelites supposed might be, the which in like maner all hypocrites did thinke, but falsly. For Paul teacheth Galat. cap. 6. ver. 7. That God is not mocked. And Iohn sheweth cap. 4. ver. 24. That God is a spirit, and that they that worship him, must worship him in spirite and trueth. The infinite power of God described by sū∣dry his works.But here in this verse is described that same infinite or endles power of God, by the creation of the world, and by the reckoning vp of things ordinary, and such as are plainly seene among vs, how hard and great soeuer other wise they be, as is the creation or ma∣king of the starres, and those bringing forth diuers effects, as of the starres called Pleiades, the which are stars of the spring, and calme, and fayre: and of the starre Orion (the which is a rainie and stormy
starre) such as is the mutual or orderly succession, and course of the night after the day, and the day after the night: and lastly, the se∣vering of the sea from the earth, and yet the springing and powrin out of waters vpon the face of the earth for the vse of men and beastes. Of all which we haue Psalm. 19. Genes. 8. Psalm. 104 Genes. 1. Vers. 9. He stregthneth the destroyer agaynst the mighty: and the destroyer shall come against the fortresse. Another descri∣ption of God by his extraordi∣nary workes.ANother description of the same power of God by his extraord∣nary and wonderfull workes: of which sorte is, that he throu∣eth downe most strong and mighty men, when as hee pleaseth punish them, and also beateth downe most strong holdes, and s∣tresses. And these are but certaine parcels of those workes, th which God doth in great numbers and infinitlie, both ordinary,  also chiefly extraordinary. Vers. 10. They haue hated him that rebuked in the gate: and they abhorred him that speaketh vprightly. A reason of the punishment of the Israelites, by the descrip∣tion of their corrupt life.A Rendring of a reason, the which by the description or layi out of the most corrupt life of the Israelites sheweth, why bo the former iudgements of God are threatned against them word∣ly, and also moreouer a new course of life must bee taken by then. And in all this description it is to be noted, that first the Prophe speaketh of such vices which were common vnto them all, and  of those which were proper vnto the Magistrates and iudges. F this so wicked a life as is here described, was the life of all the peo∣ple. Secondly, it is also to be noted, that but part onely of their lewdnes is here rehearsed, and not euery their particular vices,  a word, by this place, and by the seuenth verse it appeareth, what maner of life the life of thē is (who either worship not the true God or else worship not him truly) and what is the publike and priua order of their maners, and gouerning of the common-wealth, that is to say, most vngodly and wicked. The obstinacie and shameles∣nes of the Is∣raelites.But this verse describeth both the obstinacy or stubborne cōtinu∣ance of the Israelites in their sinnes and wickednes, in that (The hated the Elders) and other graue men, who reproued their mani∣fest vices publikely and in the gate (that is, in those places, in the
which men in those times were wont to assemble and come toge∣ther:) and also their impudencie or shamelesnes, to wit, for that they did detest and abhorre them, which did speake of thinges, and of their doings vprightly and truely, and as it was indeede. For they could not abide or suffer once so much as to heare the truth it selfe, much lesse that they had any purpose for themselues to be bettered and amended. Ver. 11. For as much then as your treading is vpon the poore, and yee take from him burdens of wheat, yee haue built houses of hewen stone, but ye shall not dwell in them: yee haue planted pleasaunt vineyards, but ye shall not drinke wine of them. A reckoning vp of other vices of the Israelite.A Reckoning vp of other vices, the which were manifest in these same Israelites, namely, of their cruelty and couetousnesse, and both these notorious. Of their cruelty, for that they handled and vsed most hardly and extreamely their owne brethren being also very needie and poore, as if there were not one drop of mercy left in them, to helpe them. 1 Their cruelty, Therefore this barbarous and cruell vexation of the poore Israelites and their brethren, is in this place sayd to be a treading downe of them: doubtles it is a signe of noto∣ious cruelty of mind. And therefore Dauid Psal. 109. ver. 16. pray∣eth that such merciles ones may haue their memoriall or remem∣brance cut out from among men, Because they remembred not to hew mercy, but persecuted the afflicted and poore man, and the sorrow∣full hearted to slay him.2 Their couetous∣nes. And Amos reckoneth vp the couetousnes of the Israelites in this, that if these poore silly soules had any thing  maintaine their life withall, the same also did these cruell ones ke a way from them. Nay, that which more is, they commanded hem to carry it home to their houses and barnes vpon their owne houlders. Therefore they tooke the life from these poore per∣ons, whilest through outragious and vnmercifull couetousnesse they bereft them of such food and sustenance, as they had left to liue withall. A threatning. Ye haue built houses of hewen stone, but ye shall not dwell in them, &c. In these words is a threatning, the which is here set in by the great indignation of God against such lewd wickednesse, as if he hould say, ye shal not therefore enioy these your cruell robberies, either shal the possession of these goods continue with you long, ot bee profitable vnto you. For ye shall not so much as drinke of
the fruite of the vines which you haue planted. And this among many other plagues, doth God also threaten vnto the disobedien vnto his word Deut. 28. You shall build then, but I will pull  downe againe, sayth God. And in this manner likewise doth he b the Prophet Malac. cap. 1. threaten the Edomites. Albeit there see∣meth in these words to bee a certaine amplification of the some crueltie and couetousnesse, A cer m∣plification of their crueltie and couetous∣nes. as if God should cast in their teethe that whilest these rich, mightie, and cruell ones doe rob and spo their poore brethren, they doe not this of any neede, or want,  that they may the more sumptuously and delicatly enioy the pleasures, and vaine and vnmeasurable riot and superfluitie. Vers. 12. For I know your manifold transgressions, and your migh sinnes: they afflict the iust, they take rewards, and they oppresse th poore in the gate. THe conclusion of the former description of the sinnes, wher unto the Israelites were giuen. In summe or briefly, God do shew that they were both (infinite) the which the word (manif doth import; Their sinnes infinite. Most hainous. and most hainous, the which the word (mightie) do signifie, and that therefore they are worthily to bee punished:  men conuicted and guiltie of notorious wickednesse. And this con∣clusion God proueth to bee true, The conclusion proued true. both by his owne person an knowledge: and also by the bedroule or example of the thing  selfe, 1. By the person of God. that is, of certaine vices, or that there can be none worse. A first by his owne person. For he sayth, and I my selfe, who am God and who vnderstand all things truely, doe knowe and witnesse thi Wherein by the person of the witnesse himselfe, that is, of God th speaketh, the hard conscience of men is the more roused vp, that  should not denye it, or lye dead in sinne, or flatter it selfe. Second∣ly, 2. By the exam∣le of certaine foule vices. by the example of most foule and filthie vices: ye oppresse the ius sayth he, and for meed and reward which you haue taken, you do by your sentences and iudgements acquit euery most lewd an wicked person. Therefore you receiue raunsome and buying out  sinnes most shamefully, and that in the gate, that is to say, in yo publike iudgements, the which ought to bee sacred and holie, ye and this moreouer ye doe against the poore and needie, who t∣sting to a good cause cānot buy your fauour, as that lewd & wicke guiltie partie doth. These also are most true witnesses of the publis ordering of matters, and of the desperat ouerthrow of iudgemen,
being now past recouerie: and are no doubt most grieuous sinnes also. For against such corruption in Iudges and iudgement doth the Prophet greatly complaine Psal. 82. ver. 2. saying: How long will ye iudge vniustly, and accept the persons of the wicked? I haue sayd ye are Gods (to wit, because those Iudges sate on God his throne to execute iudgement and iustice in his stead) and ye all are children of the most high. But ye shall dye as a man, (he meaneth because of their corrupting of iudgement) and ye princes shall fall like others. Vers. 13. Therefore the prudent shall keepe silence in that time: for it is an euill time. An admonitiō for the godly.AN admonition, the which is here put in to comfort and teach the godly, that they may vnderstand what they in the meane time and season are to doe, in so great corruption of all things both publike, and also priuate. And this is the counsel, nay the comman∣dement which the Spirit of God giueth, that the faithfull doe in the meane season serue God, and remaine quiet, looking and wayting, what, that is, how sorowfull shall be the end of this desperat and o∣uerflowing wickednesse. The silence therefore that in this place is prescribed or appoynted vnto him that is indeed a wise and godlie man, is not a blameable tonguetiednes, the which can heare and not reproue the blasphemies of God, and the heynous sinnes of the wicked reigning and being committed openly before their eyes (for this is a damnable timiditie, or cowardly fearfulnes, the which shall be punished in the lake that burneth with fire & brim∣stone Apoc. 21. ver. 8) neither is it any giuing assent vnto the wic∣ked or their wickednesse for feare, the which is bewrayed by our si∣lence: nor yet finally is it the neglecting and passing ouer of gene∣rall corruption, the which hath now taken hold on all degrees of men, as an euill that cannot be remedied (the which therefore must be borne withal, because it cannot be reformed) (for such wisedom is humane, or wordly, carnall, and politike only, and not christian) but the silence in this place commanded and commended, What manner of silence is here comman∣ded and com∣mended. is a god∣lie patience wrastling against the sinnes and vices of men, so farre forth as it can, and at no hands either bearing with, or assenting to them, the which notwithstanding doth neither complaine of God, nor yet yeeldeth vnto the common corruption: but abideth firme and sure in the feare of God, euen in the midst of the corruption of
the world, or of the Church, reigning and raunging ouer all. A in this sense Luk. 21. ver. 19. Christ sayth vnto his godly flocke: ∣sesse your soules by patience. And Isai cap. 30. ver. 15. sayth like  vnto the Church: Thus sayth the Lord God, the holie one of Israe  rest and quietnes shall ye be saued: in quietnes and confidence shall  your strength. And ver. 7. I cried vnto her, their strength is to sit  So in the midst of al their troubles Ieremy in his Lamentations  3. ver. 26. willeth the faithfull, saying: It is good both to trust,  waite for the saluation of the Lord. Therefore because that time,  course of the life of the whole people was then wicked, and su  might easily draw away the godly from the right way, and  duetie, they had neede of this silence, and patience. And he w now and in these dayes behaueth himselfe after this manner, The note of a wise mā in the midst of cor∣ruption and troubles.  that time did so likewise, is sayd to bee indeed a wise man, as  doth looke for the worke of the Lord, and diligently attend or  thereupon with patience, doing nothing vpon a head or rash  Isai. 28. ver. 16. the Lord sayth: He that beleeueth shall not ma  And so doth Dauid exhort the godly with diligence to atten  Lord his wonderfull working for the deliuerie of the poore an ∣flicted, and his punishing of the wicked, and then shutteth v  Psalme 107. with this verse 43. Who is wise, that he may obser  marke these things? For they shall vnderstand the louing kind  the Lord. Vers. 14. Seeke good and not euill, that ye may liue: and the  God of hosts shall be with you, as you haue spoken. A continuing, & an amplify∣ing of the ad∣monition be∣fore.A Continuing or amplifying of the same admonition that  before. For now the Prophet doth not speake vnto the go  alone, but vnto all the Israelites, that they may auoyd the iudge of God, threatned against them, and proue the same hope to  true, the which they boasted that they had in God. The Prop therefore warneth & teacheth them, what is the way to turne f them the wrath of God. True repen∣tance the only way to turne away the wrath of God. And this he sheweth to be but onely  that is, true repentance of minde. And the same he sayth to be  yet vnto them notwithstanding, how greatly soeuer God haue  readie shewed his iudgements: for God will not haue men to ∣rish, but to conuert or turne, and be saued. As he sayth by his P∣phet Ezechiel cap. 30. ver. 31.32. Cast away from you all your tr∣gressions,
whereby ye haue transgressed, and make you a new heart, and a new spirit: for why will ye dye, O house of Israel? For I desire not the death of him that dyeth, sayth the Lord: cause therefore one another to returne, and liue ye. An exhortatiō vnto repen∣rance, taken from the effects of the same.But in this verse repentance is also set forth by a full description of the same, that is to say, by the hatred of euill, & the loue of good. The which this verse with that which followeth, doth conteine. So then this first verse hath an exhortation vnto repentance taken from the effects: and the latter verse, or that verse which followeth, hath the definition of repentance. He therefore doth here exhort vnto repentance by a most notable effect of the same, the which is twofold, namely, by their life, and by the healthfull presence of God with them; both which will follow those that truely repent. By the which selfe same thing we do vnderstand why the Prophet so ear∣nestly doth monish or warne the Israelites to repent. The exhorta∣tion. The exhorta∣tion therefore, or the admonition, the which is conteined in this verse, is, Seeke ye good, and not euill. The reason, The reason. Because that so ye shall both liue, and God shall be with you. When as the Prophet sayth, Seeke ye good, and not euill, he sheweth that then at the last, good is truely sought, when as we cast away the things that are euill, and doe vtterly forsake them, and not when as we mingle good with e∣uill: as for example, idolatrie with reformation or amendment of manners: or contrariwise, amendment of manners with idolatrie. When as he sayth (ye shall liue) first he vnderstandeth that there shall be a deliuerance from the wrath of God, afterwards he doth therein also comprehend life, and good successe of things among them. For this doth the Prophet comprise vnder the word (liue). And where he saith (God shall be with you) he meaneth, as an helper, a keeper, and as your safetie and saluation. The Lord of hosts. There is added (The Lord of hosts) to the end the maiestie and power of that God vnto whose helpe they shall flee, may bee the more cleerely represented and shewed forth vnto them. Finally that which followeth (as you haue spoken, that is, haue hoped and boasted) sheweth that these men vnder the pretence or colour of their circumcision, the which they yet still retained, did promise themselues, that God would alwayes be fauourable vnto them, and that they did set the same (as a visour, being namely but a bare signe, and void of his effect among them) against the threatnings of the Prophets.
Vers. 15. Hate the euill, and loue the good, and establish iudgement in the gate: it may be that the Lord God of hosts will be mercif vnto the remnant of Ioseph. A description of true repen∣tance.A Description of repentance, the which God doth require at th hands both priuatly, and also publikly. And that is, the hat of euill, and the loue or desire of good. It by nature goeth befo that we should from our heart hate euill, and our sinnes, and  onely condemne them with the mouth: and then afterwards ∣loweth, that wee should with earnest affection loue good thing that is, those things which are commaunded by God: and not o counterfeit them for fashion sake and outwardly in our actions, a seeme to seeke God. And both these things is of God, or the wo of God in vs, and not our worke: albeit that we also must asser haue a will to repent truely. And God requireth this repentance  minde not onely in priuate, but also in publike actions, and iudge∣ments, as for example, that the Magistrates should iudge vprigh Lastly, he auoucheth that this is the only way which is left, whe by God may take pitie on them which remaine of that kingdo of Israel, after so many and so great ouerthrowes and punishme For so much doe these words signifie (if peraduenture, or it may  that God will be mercifull vnto the remnant of Ioseph). For it is  speech of doubting, but of assurance in the scripture. And so Ca Iosh. 14 ver. 12. when he desireth that portion of inheritance  which the Lord had giuen him, where the Anakims or Gyants i habited, sayth: If so be that the Lord will be with me, that I may d them out, as the Lord sayd. By which saying he doubteth not of G his strengthening him to driue them out, but noteth the hardnes of the matter, and stirreth vp others vnto the same hope, that God i assisting him, will be as good as his promise. Vers. 16. Therefore the Lord God of hosts, the Lord sayth thus, mi∣ning shall be in all streetes: and they shall say in all the highw, Alas, alas: and they shall call the husbandmen to lamentati and such as can mourne, to mourning. The amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer exhortatiōTHe confirmation, or amplification of the former exhortation vnto repentance, taken from the greatnesse of the punishmen
in a readines & to bee looked for otherwise, that is of the vnrepen∣tant: the which greatnesse is described and set forth by the adiuncts and the same diuers and sundrie. 1. By the effect. And first of all it is described by the effect, because it shall be such, and so grieuous a punishment & plague, the which remaineth for the obstinate and stubborne sin∣ners, as will not onely breed sorow, and a bitter feeling and sadnes in their heart: but also such as will procure open mourning, that is to say, publike gestures, as witnesses and bewrayers of their great heauinesse: because that this sorowe can be no longer smothered and kept in. Now this punishment is most heauie, the which shall draw forth and stirre vp such manifest and publike teares, & mour∣ning and knocking of their breasts. 2. By the place. The second is described by the place: for in all streetes and high waies these mournings and cry∣ings shall be made. The third, by the persons. 3. By the persons. For they shalbe made by all degrees of men, yea euen by the husbandmen, and vinedres∣sers, a kind of men otherwise most hard and tough, and able to en∣dure and beare out things: and that most heauilie, and in such sort as if they had been vsed and trained vp to mourning: but because of the greatnesse of the punishments, and miserie (the which euen these hard men shall also feele) they shall after this manner pub∣likly mourne with weeping teares with others. And that euen those persons the which are neuer so slow to repent, may vnderstand all these things to be most true, the Prophet rehearseth the power, and maiestie, and nature of God that cannot lye, and whose power no∣thing can resist or withstand, who threatneth these iudgements vn∣to them Titus. 1. God then, and that he which is the true Iehouah, & the Lord of hostes, that is, the Lord of heauen and earth, threatneth these things: and therefore they shall most assuredly come to passe vnto the vnrepentant. Vers. 17. And in all the vines shall be lamentation: for I will passe through thee, sayth the Lord. A reason why these kind of persons shall mourne.THis is a rendring of a reason, why the husbandmen, being such persons as can abide and endure hardnes, shall notwithstanding mourne, namely, because their labours, and their fields and vine∣yards shall be vtterly wasted. But it may also be an amplification, as if not onely the husbandmen the which doe till the ground ap∣poynted for corne and sowing: but also the vinekeepers them∣selues, the which doe deale with vines, that is, another kind of fields
fit and necessarie for the vses of man his life, shall lament after the same sort that the husbandmen do, because of the like punishmen and miserie, the which they shall tast of in like manner: for neith shall these be free from the iudgements of God. Wherfore by the words (husbandmen, and vine dressers) the Lord sheweth that  will take from the Israelites all foode and meates necessarie for  liue withall. The reason is added, Because I will passe through the midst of th The passage of God is of two sorts. God his pas∣sage ioyfull. Fearfull. The one ioyfull & to be wish for, wherewith he doth recreate and refresh vs. The other fearfull wherewith as a burning fire he doth consume and deuoure vs. O the former sort was the passage of God by the houses of the Israe∣lites in the land of Egypt, where he spared them, and slew the E∣gyptians, whereof is mention Exod. 12. ver. 13. in these words: A the bloud shall be a token for you, vpon the houses where ye are: so whe I see the bloud, I will passe ouer you, and the plague shall not be vp you to destruction, when I smite the land of Egypt. Of the other pa∣sage vnto the destruction of those by whom God passeth, we ha Exod. 11. ver. 4.5. About midnight (sayth God) will I goe out into th midst of Egypt, and all the first borne of Egypt shall dye. For as Mos witnesseth Deut. 4. ver. 24. The Lord is a consuming fire, and a al God. This place therefore of Amos must be taken of the latter p∣sage of God. And surely it is a fearfull thing to fall into the ha of God being angrie with vs. Hebr. 10. ver. 31. Vers. 18. Wo vnto you that desire the day of the Lord: what haue y to doe with it? The day of the Lord is darknes, and not light. A sharpe re∣prouing of those which were not mo∣ued with the threatnings of God, against the which they had many ex∣ceptions.A Sharpe rebuking of those, who after so many and so earnest ad∣monitions or warnings, were not moued with the threatnings of God, nor did tremble at them: who through a certaine brutish carelesnes being senseles, or waxen fierce through the contempt of God, wished to see those iudgements of God, that is to say, they did despise them. It appeareth by many places that the hypocrites of this nation wanted not their exceptions against the threatning of the Prophets: as namely, that they were Israelites, and so conse∣quently the seede of Abraham, and blessed of God: that they were circumcised, and therefore in the couenant of God: that they had the Temple of God, the which last exception was peculiar and pro∣per vnto the kingdome of Iudah: and not vnto the kingdome
Israel also. This exception therefore of the hypocrites, the Prophet refuteth or ouerthroweth two wayes. First, by this reprehension (wo.) For this reprehension teacheth that they are farre and wide deceiued, which sayd these things. For circumcision which is out∣ward, or he which is a Iew outwardly, is not the seede of Abraham, or true circumcision, or a Iew indeed, or the sonne of Abraham. So Paul. 2. Col. 4. ver. 11. teacheth, that the inward circumcision is the true circumcision, speaking of the faithfull among them, and say∣ing: Inwhom (meaning in Christ) also ye are circumcised with cir∣cumcision made without hands, by putting off the sinful bodie of the flesh, through the circumcision of Christ. And to the Rom. cap. 2. ver. 28. he sayth: He is not a Iew, which is one outward, neither is that cir∣cumcision, which is outward in the flesh. And Rom. 9. ver. 7. They are not (sayth he) all children, because they are the seede of Abraham. Therefore by this answer they shal seeke vnto themselues destruc∣tion, and not helpe or ayd at all. For this wo is threatned vnto them in the name of God, that is, there is threatned vnto them a curse, & anger, and punishment. Secondly, the Prophet refuteth them by the description of the Day of the Lord, that is of Iudgement (the which these boasted that they would haue, & wished for to come) the which sheweth most heauie destruction to fall vpon them. For this day, although it be the comming and day of the Lord, yet shall it be vnto them not a day of light, but of darknes. So the Prophet Zephaniah cap. 1. ver. 15. sayth: That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heauines, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of ob∣scuritie and darknes, a day of cloudes and blacknes. And the Prophet Isai. cap. 5. ver. 19. pronounceth a woe against them that, after this mocking manner of the Israelites in this place, wish for the proofe and experience of the Lord his worke and counsel, saying: Let him make speede: let him hasten his worke that we may see it: and let the counsell of the holie one of Israel draw neere, and come, that we may know it. The day of the Lord is indeed light in it selfe: but vnto those hypocrites it shall not be light. Vers. 19. As if a man did flee from a lyon, and a beare met him: or went into the house and leaned his hand on the wall, and a serpent bit him. The confirma∣tion of the for∣mer reprehen∣sion.A Confirmation of the former reprehension by a similitude, the which is set downe as it were by the way of answering an ob∣iection.
For worser euill shall betide them each day, then others, neither shall there be any place wherein they may bee safe against those euils. If they shall say, we shall be safe abroad or at home, the Prophet answereth, that they shall not be without danger, nei∣ther abroad, or without doores, nor yet at home or within. Moreo∣uer they shal go frō misery to miserie, frō punishment into punish∣mēt, & they shall alwaies grow worse and worse. If they she from a Lyon, they shall light vpon a Beare. If they shal suppose that they haue prouided some safety for thēselues, or that they haue taken i, being offered vnto them: they shal euen there be in like danger as if they had layd holde vpon a venemous serpent, which shall bee them. Their case therefore and estate, shall bee most lamentable. There is a like place Ierem. 48 ver. 43, 44. Feare, and pit, and sn (sayth he) shall be vpon thee, ô inhabitant of Moah, saith the Lord. He that escapeth from the feare, shall fall in the pit, and he that getteth  out of the pit shall bee taken in the snare: for I will bring vpon it, eu vpon Moab, the yeare of their visitation, sayth the Lord. And almost the selfe same words are Isai 24. ver. 17.18. And this also is set downe by the way of answering an obiection, that they should not thinke that by change of times, or places, or things, they can be in any better case if they remaine obstinate and stubborne is their sinnes. Vers. 20. Shal not the day of the Lord be darkenes and not light ∣uen darknes and no light in it? A repetition of the end of the 18. vers. and whereto it ser∣ueth.A Repetition, or rehearsing againe of the latter parte of the 18 verse, the which with a most weighty and earnest affirmati doth againe confirme vnto them the heauy effects and falling o of the day of the Lord against them, to the ende they should not sooth and flatter themselues by reason of their imagined excepti∣ons and pretences, and harden themselues against the threatnings of God. That which al hypocrites are wont to doe. This their cloud and mist therefore, wherewith they would couer and hide them∣selues, was diligently to be scattered and driuen away. Vers. 21. I hate and abhorre your feast dayes, and I will not smell is your solemne assemblies. Hypophora, which is a fi∣gure, by the which we an∣swere an obie∣ctiō that might be made either by our selues, or others: as here they might say, yea, but God wil be pleased at least wise with our sacri∣fices, &c.THe figure Hypophora, or the answering an obiection, which the hypocrites might make, lest they might suppose that with thei
sacrifices they might pacifie and appease God, and turne his threat∣nings from them. For God answereth that all those he hateth and abhorreth. And there are two partes of this verse, the one contai∣neth the words, whereby the Lord sayth that hee abhorreth all the worship and seruice done vnto him by the Israelites, such as at that time was done vnto him in Beth-el, Galgal, and Dan. The words are these, (I hate, I refuse, I wil not smel.) the which being set down loosely, and as it were vnioynted, without any copulatiue coniun∣ction to tie and knit them together, do argue and shewe a greater loathing of God in thē, & a more going of his stomack (as it were) against al those sacrifices. Again, in as much as God saith that they are hatefull and grieuous vnto him, not onely one manner of way, but declareth and setteth downe all those waies by the which men may and are wont to abhorre and loath a thing (for whatsoeuer li∣keth not men, they doe either hate it also, or refuse it only, or final∣ly they will not so much as smel vnto it, or tast it, that is, they vouch∣safe not to looke vpon it,) doubtles God sheweth that they are vt∣terly tedious vnto him, and by all meanes vnacceptable and disli∣king him, and therefore that they shall be vnprofitable, may hurtfull vnto the Israelites also. Two reasons why the wor∣ship of the Is∣raelites displea¦sed God.Now there are two reasons why this kinde of worship and ser∣uice of the Israelites displeased God, & rather moued him vnto an∣ger, then any wayes pacified or appeased him. The one for that it was a wil-worship, or seruice inuented of themselues, and orday∣ned of them without his commandement, and appointment. 1. Because they themselues ap∣poynted it with out the war∣rant of the word. For that such kinde of inuentions please not God may thus appeare by these places. Mat. 15. ver. 9. In vaine they worship me, teaching for do∣ctrines, mens precepts. Deut. 12. ver. 8. Ye shall not doe after all these things that we doe here this day: that is, euery man whatsoeuer see∣meth good in his owne eyes. And Paul 2. Col. ver. 22, 23. of these kind of traditions & inuentions of men sayth, That they all perish with the vsing, and are after the commandements and doctrines of men: which thinges haue indeede a shew of wisdome, in voluntary religion, & hum∣blenes of minde, and in not sparing the body: neither haue they it in a∣ny estimation to satisfie the flesh. 2 Because they placed therein the meanes of their saluatiō.The other reason why this worship pleaseth not God, is, for that they offered it vnto God, as a iust or full price and recompence of their sinnes. Therefore they placed the meanes of their iustifica∣tion, in those their workes, and not in the alone mercy of God, the which is a most grieuous blasphemy against God, whom it robbeth
of the most true and due prayse of our saluation. For the worship the which of such a minde and intent is done vnto God, although it be neuer so much commanded of God himselfe, yet doth it vtter∣ly displease him, because of the opinion of binding or making of God beholding vnto them thereby. And this is the cause that Isai cap. 1. vers. 12. in the person of God reiecteth and refuseth the sacrifices and other ceremonies, saying: When ye come to appeare before me, who required this at your hands to treade in my courts? And far more plainely he sheweth his great disliking and abhorring of thē cap. 66. ver. 3. in these words: He that killeth a bullock, is as if be slew a man: he that sacrificeth a sheep, as if he cut off a dogs necke: hee that offereth an oblation, as if he offered swines blood: he that remem∣breth incense, as if he blessed an Idol: yea they haue chosen their own wayes, and their soule delighteth in their abhominations. And this s the first part of this verse. A description of the worship of the Israelites.The second part doth lay forth and describe this worship of God. For it calleth it Feast dayes and solemne assemblies, vnder which words it comprehendeth the other partes of the same worship by the figure Synecdoche.Synecdoche, is a figure, when as the whole is put for the part or the part for the whole: as here the feast dayes and so∣lemne assem∣blies, for al the rest of their worship. And by this meanes the Prophet sheweth that euen the same worship which seemed vnto the Israelites the most holy, the greatest and most religious, was meere & vtter blas∣phemie against God, and therefore much more that the inferior partes of the same worship were so likewise, as for example, the sa∣crifices of priuate persons, and their lesse solemne feast dayes, the which they did not obserue and keep with so great religion as they did the other. Vers. 22. Though ye offer me burnt offerings and meate offerings,  will not accept them: neither will I regarde the peace offerings of your fat beasts. An amplificati¦on of the former sentence.AN amplification of the former sentence, the which containeth other parts of the external or outward worship of God by thē appointed after the imitatiō or example of the true sacrifices ordai∣ned by the true God, such as were the burnt offerings, & meat offe∣rings, & peace offerings of their fattest sacrifices: al which the Lord sheweth & affirmeth that he neither liketh of, nor regardeth or ca∣reth for, that they might stand the Israelites in steed to turne away the wrath of God, and his anger. In this verse like as in the former, both the words wherwith God detesteth this counterfeit worship,
and also the description of the sayde worship, is to bee noted and marked. Ver. 23. Take thou away from me the multitude of thy songes, for I will not heare the melody of thy violes. The conclusion of the former Exhortation.THe conclusion of the former exhortation or admonition, & final∣ly of this whole place, That they must earnestly repent, if they will please God, and doe such workes as are truely acceptable and liked of him. This repentance also here in this place, like as before in this chap. ver. 5. and 6. he describeth, first, by the casting away, or laying aside of euill, and especially Idolatry: secondly, by the ta∣king vnto them or following after good, and true righteousnes, in the verse following. Briefly then he willeth them to cast away all Idolatry, albeit neuer so delightsome and liking vnto them, and of neuer so many sortes, and ordained after a bad imitation or follow∣ing of the true worship of God, the which was vsed in the temple of Salomon, where was singing Psalteries, Harps, and that sundry and of many sortes, as it were, to delight GOD himselfe, and to stirre vp men to pray the more ardently or earnestly. And here∣upon were Singers, Leuites ordained and appointed, of which sun∣dry sortes of singing instruments ye may read Psal. 150. And of the singing Leuites 1. Chron. cap. 25. for albeit all musicall singing and tunes, the which were vsed by the Israelites on their feast dayes, and at their sacrifices, seemed vnto them to bee a most pleasant wor∣ship vnto God: yet God himselfe denieth that he is delighted with that tune, or that the same consent or agreement (which was in∣deede rather a discord, & a iarre) did please him, or was heard or al∣lowed of him, to wit, for the same causes the which I haue spoken of before in this chapter, ver. 21. that is, because they inuented them of their owne heads, and besides, put opinion of merit and pleasing God in them. What then will the Papists say of their Organes? Vers. 24. And let iudgement runne downe as waters, and righteous∣nes as a mighty riuer. A description that good which shal fol∣low the banish∣ment of Idola∣trie.A Description of that good, and righteousnes, the which shal fol∣low, Idolatry being forsaken: wherein the second parte of re∣pentance doth consist. For then both the affection or desire & loue of true righteousnes shall bee in their hearts, and also the outward
worke thereof, namely, iudgement shall euery where spring, bee scattered and flow abroad among them as it were water, or some strong and mighty streame, that is, it shall be seene, appeare, and be exercised. Therefore I in this place doe take the name of (wa∣ter, and of a riuer) in good part. These are wont to be spread fa abroad. I doe also take the word (Flow) in good part, for to be dispersed or scattered abroad, like as it is taken Iohn 7. verse 38 where Christ saith: He that beleeueth in me, as sayth the Scriptu out of his belly shall flowe riuers of waters of life. Briefly, we are taught in this place that the entrance into the true reformation or amen∣ding of euill maners, Reformatiō of life & maners must begin at the true wor∣ship of God. and of a wicked life must be begun at their worship of God, and the casting away of false superstition, albei that it doe please and like vs neuer so much. For Idolators contin∣ing Idolators, doe neuer truely repent. Vers 25. Haue ye offered vnto mee sacrifices and offerings in the wildernesse fortie yeares, ô house of Israel? AN indignation or great anger of God, whereby hee doth  earnestly complayne that at all times, yea of olde and longs gone, and not once onely, or that now only, and first of all, he ha been despised, prouoked, and set at naught by the Israelites a their fathers, that hereby the wrath of God may appeare to be th iuster against them. There is a like place Psal. 95. ver. 8, 9, 10. He ∣den not your hearts, as in Meribah, and as in the day of Massah, in  wildernesse. Where your fathers tempted mee, prouoked mee, thou they had seen my worke. Fortie yeares haue I contended with this gen∣ration, and said,The Iewes frō old, and as it were by succes∣sion haue beene disobedient vn∣to God. They are a people that erre in their hart, for they h not knowne my wayes. After the selfe same manner Christ dealeths ∣gainst the Iewes Mat. 23. ver. 35. whom he chargeth from olde, an by a continual succession to haue been persecutors, That (saith e) vpon you may come all the righteous blood that was shed vppon t earth, from the blood of Abel the righteous, vnto the blood of Zacha as the sonne of Barachias, whome ye slew betweene the Temple and the Altar. And so likewise doth Steuen charge them Acts 7. ver. 5 saying: Ye stifnecked and of vncircumcised hearts and eares, ye has alwaies resisted the holy Ghost: as your fathers did, so do you. There∣fore if these repent not, who are nowe called to repentance,  them vnderstand that they are most iustly punished by God, wh as among them, and of them hee hath alwayes beene despised
and the patience of GOD in bearing with them hath beene in∣credible. Three points of this verse.This verse hath three things to bee obserued or noted. First, What God speaketh. Secondly, To whom he speaketh. Third∣ly, after what maner he speaketh. Concerning the first, he sayth, 1. What is spoken that God and his worship was vtterly contemned or despised of this people, the which notwithstanding did name and boast them∣selues to be the alone and onely people of God. This contempt doe these wordes signifie (ye haue offered vnto mee neither sacrifice nor offerings.) For in these wordes hee comprehendeth all the parts of the worship of God both outward and also inward. For in their heart and secretly men feare not to despise him, whome o∣penly and outwardly they doe contemne. And hee increaseth this sinne by the circumstance of the place, and of the time. Of the place, because they did this euen there, where notwithstanding they were in safety, and nourished by the onely mercy of God, that is to say, in the desart or wildernesse. For there were they nourish∣ed both with (Water and Manna) which two were the dayly, but yet extraordinary benefit of God notwithstanding towards them: and also were defended from serpents and from their enemies by the only hand of God. The circumstance of the time is, for that by the space of whole fortie years, they continued in this contempt, as it is Psal. 95. ver. 10. the which place hath been set downe before in the beginning almost of the exposition of this verse. 2. To whome it is spoken.The second poynt to be noted here, is, whome God speaketh vnto, namely (the whole house) of Israel. So then GOD complay∣neth not of the vncircumcised, or of those which had entred into no couenant or league with him: but of that people who boasted themselues to be the inheritance of God: yea & of this whole peo∣ple God complayneth. For the greatest part of the people alwaies assented vnto those sinnes, and not one or two onely of the peo∣ple. 3. The maner of speaking.The third point is, the phrase, or maner of speaking, the which God vseth. And this is not only an Apostrophe, or turning of speech, whereby he directeth his talke vnto them expresly: but it is also an earnest interrogation, or asking of a question, where by he pric∣keth, nay pearceth their consciences albeit they were neuer so ob∣stinate or stifnecked.
Vers. 26. But you haue borne Siccuth your King, and Chiun y i∣mages, and the starre of your gods, which ye made to your selues▪ An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer sinne.AN amplification of the former sinne, to wit, that these men  not content to haue despised the true God, and his worship but also exercised and vsed afterwards all kinde of idolatrie, whe by they did the more prouoke God, and shewed themselues  euery one to be most manifest and obstinate or stubborne Ido∣tors, and despisers of God. There is alike place Act. 7. vers. 42.4▪ For there Steuen vseth against the Iewes the very selfe sa words in a maner: reade the place. But the sortes of idolatries e recited, are not to be restrained vnto that time of fortie yeares ∣ly, in the which the Israelites liued in the wildernes: but are to extended vnto that whole space, the which passed from the d the people his comming out of Egypt vnto the time of Amos: for that doth the Prophet briefely comprehend in this one verse. 1. Sundre kindes of idolatrie of this people, but especially three.And this verse hath two partes. The first containeth diu kindes of idolatrie, whereunto this people was giuen. For the na of Idolators, is altogether set on madding, and vnsatiable, or not be filled, as which namelie can neuer make an end, or measure  number of her idolatries: but inuenteth euerie day new fo But in this place there are reckoned vp three sortes:1. The worship of Moloch. first, the wor∣ship of Moloch the God of the Ammonites, whom they wors∣ped carrying certaine Temples or closets of his, the which were∣sie to be borne frō place to place, the which are here called the  bernacles of Moloch. So Act. 19. ver. 24 there were Temples m vnto Diana. The wordes are: A certainc man named Demetr siluer smith, which made siluer temples of Diana, brought gr gaines vnto the craftes men, &c. These Temples the French-m call (Cha'sses, that is to say, cofers, and boxes for bones, and sh for images. These Temples or shrines, or cosers, or such like, w carried either vpon mens shoulders, or else hanged and put abo their necks after the maner of Tablets, as they vse at this day in ∣pistrie.2. The worship of Chun. The second kinde of idolatrie is the worship of Chiun,  is, of another God of the Ammonites also, fet from a towne of th name nere vnto the Israelites, the which afterwards was ca Renpham. This god had his images open, and not cased vp in∣fers or boxes, like Moloch. Therefore this was the second kind and more manifest or open idolatrie, and also more against the ve
words of the law of God.3. The worship of the starres and host of heauen. The third idolatrie was the worship of the starres and host of heauen, against the which we haue Deut. 4. vers. 19. where Moses hauing a little before shewed the Israelites that God when hee spake vnto them out of the midst of the fire in Horeb, let them see no image of any creatures liuing or vnliuing, a∣mong the rest he setteth downe this: Least thou lift vp thine eyes vnto heauen, and when thou seest the sunne and the moone, and the starres, with all the host of heauen shouldest be driuen to worship them, and serue them, which the Lord thy God hath distributed to all people vnder the whole heauen. Their obstinate and stubborne continuing in all these idola∣tries.The second part of this verse setteth out their obstinacie, and the fault of this people stubbornely continuing in all these kindes of i∣dolatrie. These things you did, saith the Prophet. Therefore you cannot lay the blame vpon any others, and so consequently you are vnexcusable. Againe, (And yee haue made vnto you your Gods) that is to say, you haue made gods vnto your selues to worship, to wit, putting and thrusting me out of my place, and as it were from my degree and standing. You haue therefore showne your stub∣bornnes of minde in despising me, whom, when as you knew to be God, yea and peculiarly your God, you haue cast away notwith∣standing, and in my roome haue placed others, that is to say, those same most vaine idols. Vers. 27. Therefore will I cause you to goe into captiuitie beyond Da∣mascus, saith the Lord, whose name is the God of hostes. A Commina∣tion.A Commination or threatning, the which is set downe by way of a conclusion, that except they repent, it will so come to passe that God will carrie them into captiuitie, and that into farre coun∣tries, and into great miserie, that is beyond Damascus, in the Caspi∣an mountaines, and among fierce, cruell, and vnpleasant nations. This place doth Steuen also in the Actes cap. 7. vers 43. alleage a∣gainst the Iewes, and telleth them that for their many idolatries God threatned captiuitie vnto their fathers, saying: Therefore I will carrie you away beyond Babylon. This threatning (least these Is∣raelites might thinke that they were both mocked and dallied withall, or that they could auoide it) doth God confirme by his power, and the same infinite or endles. For he the very same who threatneth these things, is the God of hostes, and hath authoritie and mere and absolute soueraigntie ouer all things, the which hee
exerciseth and vseth according to his owne pleasure. Therefore no∣thing can withstand him. CAP. 6. Vers. 1. Wo to them that are at ease in Zion, and trust in the moun∣taine of Samaria, which were famous at the beginning of the na∣tions, and the house of Israel came to them. This Sermon also doth pecu∣liarly belong vnto the Israe∣lites. The opinion of most Interpre∣ters touching this Sermon.THis sermō following, like as al those before, is properly directed vnto the kingdome of Israel, albeit that in the beginning of th Chapter mention be made of Zion, and in the 8. verse, of Iacob▪ Which thing hath brought all the interpreters for the most part to this point, that they would haue in this place both the kingdome of Iudah, and also the kingdome of Israel to be reprehended or re∣proued, and to be ioyned together. But by the whole chapter it ap∣peareth otherwise, namely, that these things doe especially apper∣taine vnto the kingdome of Israel onely, vnto the which Amos was sent peculiarly: for notwithstanding that there be mention made of (Sion and of Iacob) this is not simplie for it selfe,Why mention is here made of Sion and Iacob, if this Sermon appertaine not vnto Iudah. but in another respect, and for another purpose, and for the confirmation of that reprehension which is here made concerning the Israelites. For this cause is it I say, why mention is here made of Sion and Iacob, as it shall anon appeare by the exposition it felfe. Moreouer, as  the chapter before going, he reproued both the Nobles and also the Iudges or Magistrates of this kingdome of Israel, & did thre∣ten vnto them most heauie iudgements of God: so in this hee first generally rebuketh the people themselues, then afterwards those, who among the people were of the wealthier sort, the more migh¦tie and richer, and therefore the more insolent or proud against o¦thers. God therefore among them was most grieuouslie offende by all sortes and degrees of men. Three partes of this verse.Now this verse hath three partes. First, a curse, and the same doth the Prophet threaten from God himselfe. For this is the proper sig∣nification of the word (Hoi) among the Hebrewes:1. A curse. and of (V) among the Latines: and (ouai) among the Greekes, and in Eng∣lish (Wo) that it betokeneth threatnings not from men, but fro God, that is vttered from heauen. And thus it is taken, 1. Sam. cap. 4 vers 7.8 in these wordes: Then the Philistines were afraide, a said, God is come into the hoste: therefore said they, Woe vnto vs: f
it hath not been so heretofore. Wo vnto vs: who shall deliuer vs out of the hand of these mightie gods? These are the gods that smote the E∣gyptians with al the plagues in the wildernes. And Isa. cap. 1. ver. 4. Wo finfull nation &c. And Mat. 23. ver. 13. Woe be vnto you Scribes and Pharises, hypocrites, &c. And in many other the verses there follow∣ing. And Apocal. 8. vers. 13. Wo, wo to the inhabitants of the earth, &c.2. To whom this curse is threat∣ned. The second part of this verse sheweth vnto whom he denoun∣ceth or to those that were subiect vnto the kingdome of Israel. And these he describeth or setteth out by their sinne or qualitie in these words, Which trust in the mountaine of Samaria. For this was the chiefe cause of their securitie, or carelesnes, why they despi∣sed the iudgements of GOD, because they iudged Samaria, the chiefe citie of that kingdome, to be inuicible or vnwonable. For it was most hardly besieged by the King of Syria, 2. King. cap. 6. ver. 24. &c. Yet was it not wonne, nor taken cap. 7. ver. 6.7. And they supposed the power of the kingdome, and their king also (by whome they iudged that they should be well inough defended a∣gainst all enemies) to be vnconquerable. Whereupon there was in them not only a certaine confidence or trust in the mountaine and citie of Samaria: but also such a trust, that they did wholly rest and stay therein, as in a defence that could not be wonne. And therefore they slept soundly, and without all feare against enemies and the threatnings of God. For such a kinde of securitie or carelesnes doth the Hebrew word (Schaan) betoken. And that the citie Samaria was the head citie of that kingdome, and seated or built vpon a Mountaine, appeareth 1. King. cap. 16. vers. 24. in these wordes: And he (to wit Omri King of Israel) bought the mountaine Samaria of one Shemer for two talents of siluer, and built in the mountaine, and called the name of the citie which he built, after the name of Shemer, Lord of the mountaine, Samaria. The third part of this verse,3. With what reasons he con∣firmeth his threatning. 1. Reason. teach∣eth with what examples and reasons the Prophet confirmeth this his threatning against these secure or careles Israelites. And hee confirmeth it by two, the first whereof is taken from their neigh∣bours at home, to wit in this verse, from the kingdome of Iudah, and men that were subiect thereunto, who were both the people of God, and had also themselues an head citie and a mountaine, wherein they trusted.2. Reason. The second reason and example is taken from strangers and those of other countries in the verses following. Therefore mention is made, but by occasion, of Sion, and of those
that trust in it, that is, of the Iewes or of Iacob, to wit, that the Pro∣phet might take from the Israelites that securitie or carelesnes,  might confirme his threatnings against them by an home exa∣ple, and such one as was neere vnto them. Moreouer, this reason was of very great weight. For it is  not only from the like, or from the equall, but also from the gre to the lesser.After what manner this reason may be taken from the like or equall. From the like or equall thus, as is here set downe.  Israelites trust in the mountaine Samaria: so doe the Iewes in mountaine Sion. The mountaine Samaria is the head of the peo of Israel, and a place well fortified and fenced: so mount Sio the head of the kingdome of Iudah, a place likewise well forti & fenced. The Israelites haue the strength of their kingdome the placed, there doe they hold their iudgements, and in the ad∣stration and ordering of publike matters thither haue they  recourse and resort, as it were vnto the Chamber of State, ora∣ctuarie and place of refuge, and the Oracle temple of the  land: after the same manner resort the Iewes vnto Sion. B as the Iewes were not in safetie from the threatnings of God cause of that their Sion: no more shall the Israelites be for that  Samaria. And concerning the Iewes, there was then a freshe∣ple of their miseries, and of the wrath of God against them▪  Ioas the father of this Ieroboam, vnder whom Amos spake  things, had taken Amasias the King of Iudah, made the citied ∣rusalem subiect vnder his power, and had lately in part br downe the wall thereof, as appeareth 2. King. cap. 14. vers. 1  where it is thus written: But Iudah was put to the worse before  and they fled euery man to their tents. But Iehoash king of Israel  Amasiah king of Iudah, the sonne of Iehoash the sonne of Ahazi Beth-shemesh, and came to Ierusalem, and brake downe the wall  ∣rusalem, from the gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, foure hdr cubites. So then the mount Sion did not defend them from  wrath of GOD. And this is the reason the which in this place  Prophet taketh from the like. The which reason notwithstand may be from the greater to the lesser,How this may be a reason frō the greater to the lesser. as thus: If mount Sion, w hath so many peculiar and singular promises of God, the Tem of God it selfe, the Sacrifices; deliuered not the kingdome of I from the iust iudgement of God: much lesse shall the mount Samaria defend the Israelites frō the threatnings of the same  when as it hath no manner of such promises. But concerning  mount Sion notable is that which is by Dauid spoken of it Psal
ver. 15.16. The mountaine of God (he meaneth mount Sion) is like the mountaine of Bashan: it is an high mountaine, as mount Bashan. Why leape ye, ye mountaines? As for this mountaine, God delighteth to dwell in it: yea, the Lord will dwell in it for euer. Vers. 2. Goe you vnto Calneh, and see: and from thence go you to Ha∣mah the great: then goe downe to Gath of the Philistims: be they better then these kingdomes? or the border of their land greater then your border? The second ex∣ample or rea∣son▪ whereby he confirmeth the threatnings of God against them. THe second example, whereby the Prophet confirmeth the threatnings of God against the Israelites. And it is taken from forreine and strange people, to wit, from the vncircūcised, yet their neighbours notwithstanding, and such as were knowne vnto the people of Israel: it is also taken from the like, after this manner: If God, because of their vnthankfulnesse, haue punished the nations and people borderers & neere vnto you, vnto whom he had giuen both power, and also a large dominion and kingdome, shall he not also punish you being no lesse vnthankfull then they were, and vn∣mindfull of the benefites of God, and of power and dominion, be∣stowed vpon you in fresh memorie, and of your kingdome also in∣larged? These things, which are rehearsed concerning the enlarged borders of the kingdome of Israel, and of the making greater of the same, were benefites of God then most fresh among them. For this selfe same Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas (vnder whom Amos liued and prophesied) had enlarged those borders of the kingdome of Is∣rael, and through the singular benefite of God, and compassion & mercie towards the people of Israel, had also obtained and gotten great power in comparison of those Kings, which had gone before him. For it is recorded of him 2. King. 14. ver. 25. That he restored the coast of Israel▪ from the entring of Hamath, vnto the sea of the wil∣dernesse, according to the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spake by his seruant Ionah the sonne of Amittai the Prophet, which was of Gath Hephar. And in this place there are three kingdomes reckoned vp for example sake, namely, the kingdome on the East, the head whereof was Calnch,Calnch. and it was a parcell of the kingdom of Nimrod sometimes, as it is Gen. 10. ver. 10. for there it is written, That the beginning of his kingdome was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of Shinar. The secondis the kingdome of Syria, whose chiefe citie in times past was Chamat, a great citie,Chamat. of
the which the Scripture maketh mention in many places. The third kingdome is of the Philistims,Gath. whose head citie was Geth, or Gath. And all these kingdomes did God sharply punish vnder Se∣nacherib afterwards, but yet euen then he had begun to weak them vnder this Ieroboam. Vnto these therefore doth God bid the Israelites turne their eyes, and learne to be wise by the exampl and punishments of others. Vers. 3. Ye that put farre away the euill day, and approach to the s of iniquitie? The rendring of a reason, whereby they are proued guiltie of many snnes.THe rendring of a reason, whereby the Prophet doth con the Israelites, or proue them guiltie of many faults very g∣uous, belonging some vnto the first table, and some vnto the ∣cond table of the law. And touching the first table, he proueth  guiltie of the manifest contempt or despising of God, & his th∣nings: of outragious wantonnes and crueltie concerning the se∣cond table. But this verse declareth that their manifest contemp the threatnings of God, and the most shamefull effect of the sa▪ The contempt is conteined in these words:What it is to put farre away the euill day. They put farre  from them the euill day, that is, through their reasons and e∣tions they perswade themselues, that the afflictions or trou which are threatned, doe not appertaine vnto them, or at least  shall not so soone come vpon them. The effect of this contem comprehended in these words, (and approach to the seate of in¦tie) that is, by this meanes, and mocking and contemning of  iudgements of God, ye establish the seate of iniquitie, to wit,  doe confirme and strengthen them in their sinnes, and giue a course vnto wickednesse. And thus much of the vices of the who people in generall, against whom the iudgements of God are he set downe. Vers. 4. They lye vpon beds of yuorie, and stretch themselues  their beds, and eate the lambes of the flocke, and the calues o  the stall. He dealeth now with the rich ones.NOw the Prophet doth particularly set vpon the richer & w∣thier ones among this selfe same people, whom he had ge¦rally noted in the former verse. And these also he condemneth  of outragious wantonnes & riot: and afterwards of crueltie ve.
And by the description it appeareth cleerer then the noone day, that this riot was a shamefull abuse of the singular benefites and gifts of God. And therefore is it worthily so sharply reprehended or reproued. For albeit that we may vse the gifts of God, yea & that (according vnto the plentifulnes of them bestowed vpon vs by GOD) somewhat more largely sometimes, with thanksgiuing, 1. Tim. 4. Psal. 23. yet ought we neuer to abuse those benefites. For when as that is done of vs, all their whole fruite and vse is turned into pompe, vaine boasting, arrogancie, pride, and nicenes or deli∣catnes of minde. Therefore then are our riches a token, and a foste∣ring of our vices, and not an helping of the poore, or a bestowing of them vpon certaine holy workes, for which vse God bestoweth ri∣ches and goods, that is, his benefites vpon vs. For the bestowing of these gifts after the manner of the world vpon the satisfying of the lusts of the flesh, is not any token of the children of God: For (as Iohn sayth 1. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 16.) all that is in the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life) is not of the father, but is of the world, whereunto the godly are not at any hand to fa∣shion themselues. Concerning this verse, it doth especially find fault with the riot and excesse of these wealthie ones in things otherwise necessarie, as is sleepe and meate.Their sleepe. They did sleepe not onely in beds well furni∣shed and made; but also in beds of yuorie, the which kind of mat∣ter was in those places most rare and scarsie,A note of great waste. and a token of a great waste of expences. For the throne of Salomon 2. Chro. 9. and the house of yuorie made by Achab 1. King. 22. are recorded as a rare and especiall matter. For there were fewe Elephants in those pla∣ces, and in the places neere there abouts: but yuorie was brought vnto them as farre as from Ethiopia, or from India, as may appeare by that of Ezechiel cap. 27. ver. 15. The men of Dedan were thy mer∣chants: and the merchandise of many yles were in thine hands: they brought thee for a present hornes, teeth, and pecockes. This then that the Prophet here speaketh of was an vnreasonable and vnmeasu∣rable waste of money. And the steddles of their beds were not only too sumptuous, but also the bedding of the sayd beds: for they had most plentifull, most wastfull, and most costly couerlets, and such like bed furniture. And thus much concerning their beds & sleepe. As for their meates,Their meate. these rich and wealthie ones did eate no flesh but such as was of speciall request and note, and therefore most
deintie and fit to foster the filthie lust of the flesh. For otherwise  is not forbidden to eate good meates. Vers. 5. They sing to the sound of the viole: they inuent to themsel instruments of musike like Dauid. Their excesse in things not necessarie.THe second kind of riot and excesse in things altogether not ∣cessarie, but wholly for pleasure: in the which also they abus the most holie example of Dauid, who did consecrate and dedic his musike vnto God. So then the instruments of musike alrea inuented; and others, the which they deuised anew, they did vtt∣lie abuse, vnto their filthie and wanton musike and pleasure. For ¦therwise it is lawfull for an honest man to recreate himselfe  godly musike,Musike in it selfe very law∣full. and it is an art in it selfe commendable, and very  beseeming a free man. But it is the abuse thereof that is to be ∣demned. Vers. 6. They drinke wine in bowles, and anoynt themselues with  chiefe oyntments: but no man is sorie for the affliction of Ioseph. 1 The third kind of encessiue riot in the Israe∣lites.THis verse hath two parts. The first conteineth the third kind the excessiue cost and riot, the which the Israelites were a goblets to drinke wine in, and in oyntments, that is, in things a¦gether superfluous (as wasting their goods & the benefites of G like mad men.) To be anoynted and to drinke in goblets, that is,  large cups, is not in it selfe forbidden: but to vse them vnto riot  drunkennesse, and alwayes to seeke for, and to occupie most co oyntments & of greatest price: and not to be content with me and common vessels, and meates, and the same wholsome (be they are good cheape:) is monstrous madnes of minde, and pr gall wastfulnes and spending of money, and finally a most assred signe and token of a minde throughly drowned in vices and ple∣sures, such as was in Caligula, Nero, Lucullus, and Heliogabalus. 2. They vse their excessiue plea∣sures in the midst of the troubles of their brethren.The second part of this verse is an exaggeration or making g∣ter of the former crimes by the circumstance of the time and of the persons. Of the time, in this, that they vsed those superfluous and ¦uer delicate pleasures euen then, when as there was yet now amo them great miserie and affliction of their brethren, and the sa being as it were present before their eyes to be beholden. By the
circumstance of the person their sinne is increased by this word (Io∣seph) for those were both their brethren,By Ioseph he meaneth the tribe of Ma∣nasses, who was the sonne of Ioseph. and also citizens of the same kingdome: with whose great miseries and breaches not∣withstanding the Ephramites themselues (in whose tribe Sama∣ria was, and where these excessiue riots were especially vsed) with the rest of the people of the kingdome of Israel were neuer awhit grieued, moued nor touched. Wherein no doubt a third most grie∣uous sinne of the Israelites is noted, to wit, their vnmercifulnes and crueltie towards their brethren and citizens. And touching this breach and miserie of Ioseph, it happened and fel out vnto the tribe of Manasses, which was beyond Iorden, vnder King Ioas, as appea∣reth 2. King. cap. 13. ver. 7. where it is written of Hazael king of Sy∣ria, that besides many iniuries which he had done vnto Ioas King of Israel, He had now left him of the people but fiftie horsemen and ten chariots, and ten thousand footmen, because he had destroyed them, and made them like dust beaten to pouder. From this great plague and o∣uerthrow these of the tribe of Manasses, the brethren of the Ephrae∣mites, and part of the kingdome of Israel, had not yet now recoue∣red themselues. Vers. 7. Therefore now shall they goe captiue with the first that goe captiue, and the sorowe of them that stretched themselues is at hand. A threatning against the former sinnes.A Threatning the which agreeth with the former most foule and shamefull vices, and denounceth a reuenging punishment for all these sinnes: to wit, for the contempt or despising of Gods cap∣tiuitie, and the same most swift and speedie: for their excessiue riot and pleasure, mourning shall forthwith come vpon these so wast∣full persons, careleslie and wealthily playing the wantons. They shall therefore be carried away, and that with the first of those na∣tions, the which the Assyrians shall leade into captiuitie. And these things shall fall out vnto thē, which imagined the day of the Lord, and these punishments to be farre from them. And this first capti∣uitie of the Israelites was made by the Assyrians, and fell out vnder King Oseas after the Syrians were carried away by the same Assy∣rians. Further, the immoderate pleasure of the same Israelites shall then be mourning, and want of all things.
Vers. 8. The Lord God hath sworne by himselfe, sayth the Lord G of hosts, I abhorre the pride of Iacob, and hate his palaces: there∣fore will I deliuer vp the citie with all that is therein. A confirmation of the former threatning.A Confirmation of the former threatning both by an oth of God & also by the cause. The oth is interlaced of God by himself,  by his life, after the manner of men, because God cannot sweare b a greater then himselfe.1. By an oth. And therefore the writer to the Hebrewe sayth, That when God made the promise to Abraham, because he b no greater to sweare by, he sware by himselfe, cap. 6. ver. 1. And th oth is added vnto the former threatning, that these stubborne per∣sons and hypocrites may be the more pierced and moued as it we with the feare of assured punishment. 2. By a cause.Further, those punishments are confirmed also by a cause, to , for that God doth now hate these loftie, proud, vnthankfull and n∣mindfull persons of the benefites from him receiued. For like as the fauour of God, and his good will towards vs is the cause of all hi benefites vnto vs: so his iust hatred against vs doth bring vpon  all euils and miseries. Furthermore, when as God saith (the pride  Iacob) he sheweth that he hath not cast them off, and hated then without a cause, or for nought, but for their horrible vnthankfulnes and pride, wherby they despised God the author and giuer of the life. For God doth especially hate the pride and haughtines of m. For as it is 1. Pet. 5. ver. 5. God resisteth the proud, and giueth grace  the humble. And 1. Iohn. 2. ver. 16. wee are taught, That all that is  the world (as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride  life) is not of the father, but is of the world. Whereof it commeth ao to passe, that the Prophet in the words which follow, doth ampli∣fie the unishments threatned before vnto these proud ones: fo they themselues shall not onely be carried away captiue: but also Samaria the citie it selfe, the head of the kingdome, and their hope, and confidence: yea and moreouer all the wealth thereof shall be giuen to their enemies, as a reward of their labours. Wherefore these altogether, both naked and spoyled, shall bee led away into captiuitie and miserie. So is the Lord wont in the end to be reuen∣ged on our wantonnes and pride, and by contrarie punishments to teach vs, what moderation and measure wee should haue vsed be∣fore, whilest we did enioy his benefites.
Vers. 9. And if there remaine tenne men in one house, they shall dye. An amplifica∣tion of the same punishment.AN amplification of the same punishment, in that they shal not only be slaine and taken of their enemies, but they shall also pe∣rish with sicknes, as being afflicted or plagued with the pestilence, and by other meanes, in that their Citie, in the midst of their coun∣trey and delights. They therefore shall die in such multitudes and on heapes, that by the same plague many shall be dead in their seuerall houses. For albeit in those houses be neuer so many, yet but a few of them shall be left aliue, as for example, if there be tenne in a house they shal dye. And these things seem to haue happened, whē as by the space of whole three yeares Salmanasar King of the Assy∣rians besieged the Citie Samaria, for that so long it was besieged, appeareth 2. King cap. 17. ver. 5. Then the King of Asshur came vp throughout al the land, and went against Samaria, and besieged it three yeares: for in this time many Israelites dyed no doubt in euery house. Vers. 10. And his vncle shal take him vp, and burne him to carrie out the bones out of the house, and shal say vnto him that is by the sides of the house, is there yet any with thee? And hee shall say: None. Then shall he say, Holde thy tongue: for we may not remem∣ber the name of the Lord. 1 The amplifica∣tion of the mor¦tality.THere are two partes of this verse. The first containeth the am∣plification of this mortalitie and death, the which the Prophet threatned that it should come to passe. The second, and euident cause of the same:2 The cause of the same. to the ende that these men being feared at the length and warned by these so many wayes, should repent from this their obstinate or stubborne wickednes, if by any meanes it might be. In the which is described and set forth the singular pa∣tience and loue of God towards men.The amplifica∣tion of this mor¦tality is two∣fold. And this amplification is twofolde, first, from the person of those that had care of the fune∣ral, or of the buriers of the dead. Secondly, from the number and multitude of the dead. From the person of the buriers and proui∣ders of the funeral: for there shal be so great scarsitie of them by reason of the mighty number of those that lie on dying,1. Frō the person of the Buriers. and of those which are dead already: the danger of the sicknes being so hot and raging euery where shall be so great, that there shall scarse
any be found, the which either be able or willling to put them into the ground and burie them. That which happened also in that same pestilence, the which Thucidides in his second booke of the Peloponesian warre, and Virgil about the end of the third book of his Georgicks, do describe. Therefore those which then shall bu∣rie others, and prouide for their funerals shall be of their chiefest friends, and neere of kinne vnto them, as their vncle by the father, or their vncle by the mother.2 From the num∣ber of those that die. From the number of those which dye this mortalitie is also amplified: This fame plague and mor∣talitie shall be so great, that many times in a whole streete there shall not be one left aliue in the Citie of Samaria. Therefore when as these buriers, which shall bury their friendes, shall aske theyr nighbour whether there bee another left aliue with him, he shall answere thus: There is none with me. There si none but I only left aliue in all this whole streete. The which wordes the Propheter-presseth by the way of mouing them to pitie and compassion, that hee may the rather moue the Israelites being obstinate and stub∣borne in their sinnes, that yet then at least wise they might take some pittie on themselues, whose case was like to be so miserable and lamentable. 2. The cause of this great pu∣nishment of the Israelites with mortality.And as for the cause of this so great and farre raging euill, the same is also here expressed, namely, for that in the same people and in the same Citie no man called vpon and worshipped the true God. For thus much doth these words and speech import (we may not remember the name of the Lord) Hereby the buryers and those that were occupied about the funerall doe giue earnest admoniti∣on or warning to him that is left aliue, that no man is to murm because of this so great a punishment and misery of this Citie Sa∣maria: but as hath been sayd before cap. 5. ver. 13. that they all do rest contented with the most iust iudgements of God, and doe rather condemne themselues, then accuse God of seuerity or cru∣elty. And this admonition or warning in them might arise at that time, and in that so great feeling of the punishment, either from the feare of God his iudgement, the which these buriers and these warners might conceiue by so many and so great plagues of God: or else from the earnest fayth of a few, the which at that time did yet remaine godly in that people, and did performe this same their last duety of godlines, which is to bury the dead. Whereupon they did by this plague and punishment admonish and warn those that were yet liuing, that they should repent, and patiently beare
God his iudgements. For vnder King Oseas the feare of God was a little restored among the Israelites. For it is sayd of him 2. King. cap. 17. ver. 2. That albeit he did euil in the sight of the Lord, yet not so (and in such sorte) as the kings of Israel which were before him. Vers. 11. For beholde, the Lord commaundeth, and he will strike the great house with breaches, and the little house with cleftes. The conclusionTHe conclusion, That these things shal come to passe in such sort as they were foretolde. The reason: Because God commaun∣deth it, that is, will rayse vp agaynst these hard and vnrepentant men, most cruell enemies, to wit, the Assyrians, as it afterward came to passe. There is a like place Isai 7. ver. 18.19. And in that day shall the Lord hisse for the flie that is at the vttermost parte of the floods of Egypt, & for the Bee which is in the land of Ashur, (wherby he meaneth the hoste of the Egyptians and Assyrians, the which at hi commaund shall come in swarmes like Flies and Bees) And they shall come and light all in the desolate valleyes, and in the holes of the rock▪ and vpon all thorny places, and vpon all bushie places. There is also in this verse the figure (Occupatio,The figure Oc∣cupatio. What that is, looke before, cap. 5. ver. 3. or answering of an obiectin that might be made) for they might alleadg against this threatning of the Prophet: but how hard soeuer the world go∣eth, we shall in some place or other shift for our selues either in the great houses, or else in the little ones This vaine hope the Prophet here cutteth off, to the end that they should not imagine that they could any where be it safety. For both their smal and also their great houses shall bee ouertrowen, and therefore nothing can defend and saue them: their whole Citie shall be wasted and spoyled and pulled downe. For as for their great and gorgeous houses, they shall perish and be destroyed with all kinde ruine, as with an heap and hoord of euils, rushing in vpon them. And their little houses shal be filled with clefts, and throwen downe to the ground. Vers. 12. Shall horses runne vpon the rocke? or will one plowe there with Oxen? For ye haue turned iudgement into gall, and the fruit of righteousnes into wormewood. God by argu∣ment proueth that he doth iustly punish them.A Nargument or reason whereby God proueth that hee is iustly auenged on them, and doth punish them. For this must hee needs doe, except he will be counted vniust. Therefore God pro∣ueth
by two similitudes, that there cannot, or could not bee any more agreement betweene their most lewd and wicked manen  his iustice, then there is agreement between a most rugged rock horses rūning or Oxen plowing therupō. For a stony rock is no  to be plowed, nor for a course to be made vpon it with horses. T countrey of Ithaca (sayth one) is not fit for a race with horses, b¦cause it is stony and rockie: neither do men vse to sow in a ban soyle, such as is a rocke. And therefore in Mat. cap. 13. ver. 5. Chri in the parable of the seede sayth, That it that fell on stonie gro where it had not much earth, sprung vp anon, because it had not d of earth, and when the sunne rose vp,The applicatiō of the two sims¦litudes. it was parched, and for lacke  rooting, withered away. Therefore as these things agree not toge∣ther, To plow in a barren soyle, To runne with horses in a ro place: so is it neither conuenient nor meete that God (who is  should cherish most wicked persons, such as are the Israel There is a like place Isai 28. ver. 24, 25. where things appertainig vnto husbandry are compared with the iudgement and natu God. Doth the plow man (saith the Prophet) plowe all the da sowe? Doth he open and breake the clots of his ground? When he h made it plaine, will he not then sowe the fitches, and sowe cummin, and cast in wheat by measure, & the appointed barley and rie in their place▪ The Maior. It standeth with the iustice of God to pu∣nish the wickedNow concerning the foundation and ground of this argume and reason, (to wit, that it is not meete that God should spare the wicked) it appeareth by many places of scripture to bee most true Psal. 94. ver. 20. Hath the throne of iniquitie (saith Dauid to Go) any fellowship with thee, which forgeth wrong for a law? And Paul Cor. cap. 6. ver. 16. Hath the Temple of GOD any agreement with I∣dols? whereby consequently he sheweth that there is no agreem between God and between any thing that is euil. And Isai 32. v. 1 the Prophet teacheth, That the worke of iustice is peace, euen the  of iustice and quietnes, and assurance for euer. Whereby he meaneth that as the fruits of God his spirit in the faythfull are iustice, p, and ioy, so God both liketh and loueth, and rewardeth the same: and on the other side that his iustice requireth, that he should pu∣nis the contrary. The Minor. Ie Iralites are most wic∣ed.The assumption, or minor proposition of this argument fol∣loeth in these words (ye haue chaunged iudgement into gall) that is to say, ye are most lewd and wicked. Therefore by the course of their whole life God doth argue and proue them guilty of horrible iniquitie. For God speaketh generally (ye haue changed) so tha
whether the magistrates, or piuat persons be looked vpon, they are both here proued guiltie. Further he saith, (Iudgement and the fruite of righteousnes) that is, whatsoeuer you doe owe vnto God or men, the same you haue corrupted, ouerthrowne, changed into co∣uetouses and cueltie, abusing vnto that your iniquitie and wic∣kednes all the dueties and partes of man his life and societie. So tht  were more tolerable to drinke and eate gall and wormewood, then to be iudged by your iudgements, to liue among you, and to haue delng with you. Behold what maner of life the life of those men is, the which despise the truth and worship of God, and how lamentable and miserable it is to haue conuersation and liuing with them. Vers. 13. Ye reioyce in a thing of naught: yee say, Haue we not got∣ten vs hornes by our owne strength? Another proofe of the minor In these termes of art, the which cannot so fitly be set wn in English, the ig∣norant Reader must craue the help of the learned.ANother argument or proofe of the assumption of the former Syllogisme, which was (you are most wicked) taken from their arrogancie or pride most outragious, whereby they did shew themselues to be sacrilegious or robbers of God of his honour, whilest they did attribute or giue that vnto their owne strength, the which they were to haue thanked God onely for, as was (for exam∣ple) the estate and glory of the kingdome, the which vnder Iero∣boam the sonne of Ioas they had recouered. But they attributed these things vnto themselues, that is, they made themselues their owne gods. Wherein is a proofe of their notorious ingratitude or vnthankefulnes towards God, and consequently a testimonie or witnes of their singular wickednes.The Godly de acknowledge al their good gifts to come from God alone, and doe praise him onely for the same. So then the godly speake other∣wise of themselues, and of their felicitie or happines, and of their strength: for they attribute all their good giftes vnto God, yea and that vnto him alone, as appeareth Psal. 44. ver. 6.7.8. for there Da∣uid saith in the person of the godly: I doe not trust in my bow, neither can my sword saue me. But thou hast saued vs from our aduersaries, and hast put them to confusion that hate vs. Therefore will we praise God continuallie, and will confesse thy name for euer. Likewise Psal. 89. vers. 17. Thou art the glorie of their strength, and by thy fauour our hornes shall be exalted.
Vers. 14. But beholde, I will raise vp against you a nation, O house  Israel, saith the Lord God of hostes: and they shall afflict y from the entring in of Hamath vnto the riuer of the wilderne▪ The conclusion of the former agument.THe conclusion of the former Syllogisme with a more plai laying open of the matter, to wit: when as there is no agree∣ment betweene God and euill men, but God the reuenger of in∣quitie punisheth them: and you for your partes are wicked, there∣fore God also will punish you. But hee doth furthermore in  verse lay forth this reason and the kinde of the plague or punish∣ment, wherein consisteth the explanation or making more plai of the matter, of the which I spake in the beginning of this verse The punishment then is,The kinde of their punish∣ment. most grieuous and hard exile or bani∣ment and captiuitie, whereinto they shall be carried not by any ra∣tion neer vnto them, and such as they knowe, but by a nation fae off: and not only part of them, or some one prouince of the king∣dome of Israel onely, but the whole countrie shall be afflicted  punished, euen so far and wide as that kingdome lieth and stretch∣eth. God then shall raise vp nations against the Israelites, and th from farre countries, to wit, the Assyrians, as appeareth 2. King. cap. 17. vers. 6. where it is recorded, That in the ninth yeare of Hosh▪  the King of Asshur tooke Samaria, & caried Israel alway vnto As▪ and put them in Halah, and in Habor by the riuer Gozan, and in  cities of the Medes. Of this comming of the king of Assyria agai them Isay prophsieth also cap. 7. ver. 18.19. which places are  downe but a little before in this chapter, namely ver. 11. These As∣syrians then shall cruelly range into all the quarters and borders  their kingdome, and shall driue the Israelites into narrow strai▪ and presse them, spoile and vexe them, from the entrance of the ∣tie Hamah or Emath,These places are like in re∣spect of the boundes and borders, but not in respect of the matter, fr the one speaeth of their captiui∣tie, and the o∣ther, of their deliuerance. and the riuer Euphrates, or from the East vn∣to the riuer of Egypt, or the riuer Sichor, the which from the West did separat the land of the Israelites from Egypt. Num. 34 ver. 5. and 8. There is a like place Isai. 27. ver. 12.13. And in th day shall the Lord thresh from the chanell of the riuer vnto the riuer of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered, one by one, O children of Israel. In th day also shall the great trumpe be blowne, and they shall come, which pe∣rished in the land of Asshur, and they that were chased into the land  Egypt: and they shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Ierusale▪
CAP. 7. Vers. 1. Thus hath the Lorde God shewed vnto mee, and behold, hee formed grashoppers in the beginning of the shooting vp of the lat∣ter growth: and loe, it was in the latter growth after the mowing. ALbeit that God in the Chapter before going hath declared, what things should in the end fall out vnto obstinat and stub∣borne persons, and chiefely vnto the Israelites; and especially that at the last they should be carried away with great miserie and scar∣sitie from their owne homes into vnknown countries: yet notwith∣standing both in this chapter, and in the other following, he shew∣eth and foretelleth vnto the same parties other afflictions or trou∣bles,To what end these other smaer punish∣ment are threaned. the which God would send vpon them before that same their last and vtter destruction, both to the end that he might call them backe (if by any meanes they were to be cured) from their wicked life: and also, that albeit these more gentle and forerunning pu∣nishments were not to continue and last alwaies, but at the length to cease and haue their end, yet they should not therefore think that the same greater iudgement of God against them should cease al∣so. Therefore least they should suppose that it should not either come at all, or else be turned into these more milder punishments, the which they suffered, the things that follow are now added. For both hypocrites, and also stubborne and profane or wicked per∣sons, doe easely sooth and flatter themselues in the shifting of, & in the interpreting or expounding of the threatnings of God, where∣with in the end they doe destroy and vndoe themselues. The connte of this cha.But touching this chapter it hath a description of sundrie pu∣nishments, the which fell out vnto the vnrepentant Israelites be∣fore that same last and vtter destruction specified cap. 6. vers. 14. before going: yet must we not thus thinke, that here such things are shewed by the Prophet, which had happened vnto the Israelites al∣readie (albeit that the Lord had chastised and warned them sundry waies before, as appeareth 2. King. 14. ver. 26.) but because that this Chapter is a prophesie, it containeth those things which were to come, and not such as were past alreadie.The desciptio of a grieuu famine in this verse and the two other fol∣lowing. Further, this verse with the two following, containeth a description and foretelling of the first punishment. And this was a most grieuous famine, the which, all kinde of fruites being eaten vp and deuoured by the grashop∣pers,
the Israelites felt and indured, as there is mention of the like Ioel. cap. 1. but in this place there are to be noted three things. The one,1. What is shew∣ed. what is shewed: the other, who sheweth it: the third, after what maner it is shewed. A great famine, as I said before, is shew∣ed, the which should fall out vnto them. And God is he that shew∣eth the same,2. Who sheweth it. the Lord of all things, and Iehouah, that is, the eueth∣sting and true God. He sheweth it by a vision, the which hee off∣red and laid before the Prophet.3. After what maner it is shewed. For he sheweth vnto him grashop∣pers, especiallie those which are calledThey are in l∣tire called Por∣ticiae, and may in English be named Leeke eaters. Prasocurides (which hae their names of eating vp the greene things of the earth, as leekes and lettice, and such like) that, of all kinde of grashoppers are the greatest hurters of herbes that bee tender and young growing vp, the which they doe most speedilie deuoure. And these did God forme or make, because as yet they were not: neither were they bred at all aduentures and by chaunce, but by God his decree. As concerning the time, wherein God sent them into the countried the Israelites, it was after the common hay mowing, or cutting of the grasse of the meddowes, when as rowen grasse beginneth  grow againe, and to spring vp. This is the first part of this vision. Vers. 2. And when they had made an end of eating the grasse of the land, then I said, O Lord God, spare I beseech thee: who shall r vp Iaacob? for he is small. The second part of this vi∣sion, shewing what these gras∣hoppers did. Synecdoche what it is, read Amos cap. 5. vers. 21.THe second part of this vision, declaring what these grashopp sent of God, did, namely they did vtterly deuoure and eate all the greene grasse and herbes, wherewith euery kinde of liui creature is wont to be nourished. Moreouer, I doe here vndersta the other graine and fruites of the earth, as of trees and other plain, to haue been eaten vp by these same grashoppers, by the figure Synecdoche. This vision therefore did portend or signifie first, a great famine of the beastes: and secondly of men themselues. for hay mowing is wont to bee at such times, as about the which other fruites doe begin now to waxe ripe. So then a great wasting of them is here noted for to come by these grashoppers. The prayer of the Prophet for the people, the which he ob∣taineth. vers. 3.And I sayd, O Lord, &c. The prayer of the Prophet taking pitti on so great miserie of the people, and therefore praying God, that he would either turne it away, or else mittigate or asswage it. The which he sheweth that he obtained at the hand of God. And the Prophet maketh this prayer, not that he would be against God, or
condemn his iudgemēts, but for that he is moued with a godly pit∣ty towards his afflicted brethren. Therefore in that Amos is a Pro∣phet,In what sense Amos prayeth for the peple against whom he prophesieth. he denounceth and declareth those iudgements of God: but in that he is their brother and a man, he prayeth and sueth for the Israelites. And there are two causes of the Prophet his commen∣ding this people vnto God, and seeking to haue them eased, in this place set downe. The one,1. Cause why he prateth for thē. because this people is of the seede and family or house of Iacob, and therefore that same elect and chosen people of God him selfe, vnto whome GOD promised his mercy. For in the Psalm. 89. ver. 33.34. God speaketh of them after this maner: Yet my louing kindnes will I not take from him, neither will I falsifie my trueth. My couenant will I not breake, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lippes, &c. as it there followeth more at large.2. Cause why hee praieth for thē. The second cause why hee prayeth for this people is, for that this selfe same people is small, that is to say, already, and hardly vsed and afflicted by their enemies. For this doth not agree with the good will and louing kindnes of God to ward men, yea and that which more is, with his especiall couenant towards his people, to afflict or punish him being afflicted or punished already; and being fallen, to thrust him further into the extreamest miserie of destruction. Lastly, that he shuld shew forth the great & fearful power of his iu∣stice vpō those that are his,It standeth not with God his mercy to vse ex tremity vnto▪ those that are his: for that he keepeth for his enemies. & men that are almost consumed alrea∣dy, and that he should quite and clean swallow them vp, being as it were at the last cast, and brought so low that they can scarse fetch their breath. And therefore Dauid in his Psalmes doth often pray that he wil not vse against his, but reserue for his enemies, his great wrath, strength and power to be powred and shewed forth vpon them: as Psalm. 89. vers. 6. Powre out thy wrath vpon the heathen that haue not knowne thee, and vpon the kingdomes that haue not cal∣led vpon thy name. But for the faithful he prayeth: Returne (ô Lord, how long?) and be pacified toward thy seruants. And Psal. 130. vers. 3, 4. If thou, ô Lord, straightly markest iniquities, ô Lord who shall stand? But mercie is with thee, that thou mayst be feared. Vers. 3. So the Lord repented for this. It shall not bee, sayth the Lord. The effect of the for  raie  Pro.THe effect of the former prayer, to wit, the appeasing of the wrath of God, and the turning away of the same from them, hanging now as it were ouer the heads and neckes of the Iewes▪
For the Prophet was heard of God: and therefore that same p∣nishment of famine ceased. It repented God of his anger against them, that is to say, God changed his minde, and hee that was a∣grie with them before, appeared afterwards to be fauourable, an reconciled or made friends with them.In what sense and after what maner God is said to repent. But GOD is said to repe by a certaine kinde of humane affection attributed vnto him our better vnderstanding, in as much as thereby we do by the ∣fects know his minde towards vs to be changed: not that God,  his will, which is alwayes one and the same, is chaunged: but  that, looke what effects of his anger and mercy he had from eu∣lasting decreed to be extant, and to be felt diuers, the same in th times he bringeth forth and sheweth.The true cause why Amos his prayer was heard. Further, the true cause  this appeasing of God, is not to be attributed vnto Amos, or  his prayer, but vnto Christ, or the mediatour: the effects of wh death afterward to ensue, were now felt of the people of God. Y the praiers of the godly offered in this name vnto God, are accep∣ble vnto him, and therfore heard of him. And therfore Iam.  saith: That the prayer of a righteous mā auayleth much, if it be fer. Vers. 4. Thus also hath the Lord God shewed vnto me, and beh the Lord God called to iudgement by fire, and it deured  great deepe, and did eate vp a part. The second vi∣sion.THe second vision, wherein the second punishment decreed ∣gaynst the Israelites is shewed vnto the Prophet. And this  shewed vnto him vnder the likenes of fire raging far abroad,  deuouring a certaine great deepe, and land or possession: and ful∣ly in the forme of fire with great shaking, and crackling, and lab∣ring, getting the vpper hand of great masses and heapes of thi that were in the way of it, or set agaynst it. Therefore this fire  sayd to be called to iudge or contend, and to fight, because  the matter layd agaynst it would not easily yeeld vnto it. This ∣fliction or punishment happened after the former already expo∣ded. And it was,When this fire was, and what it may be vn∣derstod to be. when as Thelgat Phalnasar King of Assyria ca∣ried away two tribes: and the halfe tribe of Manasses the which were beyond Iordan, and a part of the Kingdome of Israel. Of th history is mention 1. Chron. cap. 5. ver. 26. in these wordes. A the God of Israel stirred vp the spirit of Pul King of Asshur, and the spirit of Tilgath Pilneeser King of Asshur, and he carried them away euen the Reubenites and the Gadites, and the halfe tribe of Manesse
and brought them vnto Halah, and Habor, and Harah, and to the ri∣uer Gozan, vnto this day. See more hereof 2. King. cap. 15. ver. 29. and cap. 16. ver. 9. Of this also seemeth the Prophet Isai to meane cap. 9. ver. 1. where it is thus written: Yet the darkenes shall not bee according to the affliction, that it had when at the first hee touched lightly the land of Zebulun, and the land of Nepthali, nor afterwards when he was more grieuous by the way of the sea beyond Iordan in Ga∣lile of the Gentiles. For at that time that whole countrey and pos∣session, the which was as a deepe, as being seated in the valleyes and monnataines of Galaad, was consumed with fire, that is, affli∣cted, by reason of the most grieuous warres which were then, and the desolation, or wasting of the land, which was then brought in and made. Thus doth my friend Franciscus Iunius notably ex∣pound this place. Vers. 5. Then said I, O Lord God, cease I beseech thee: who shall rayse vp Iaacob? for he is small. See the mea∣ning of this ver. before in the ex¦position of the 2 verse of this chapter.THis verse hath been expounded before in this selfe same chap∣ter ver. 2. in these wordes: (And I sayd, O Lord God, &c.) For as often as affliction ariseth, so often must we pray, and not onely concefor all (during the whole terme of our life is God to be prayed vnto) as the Atheists, and Epicures or belly-gods doe affirme and hold. Vers. 6. So the Lord repented for this. This also shall not be, saith the Lord God. See verse 3. of this chapter.THis verse also is to be expounded after the same maner, that the third verse of this chapter before was. For where it is saide, (This shal not be) the meaning hereof is, this affliction shal not con∣tinue but shal be taken away, & this people shall be holpen & relie∣ued, that if it may be, they may repent, & being taught by their own punishment may returne vnto more thrift, and vnto true godlines. Vers. 7. Thus againe he shewed me, and behold, the Lord stoode vp∣on a wall made by line, with a line in his hand. The 3. vision.THe third vision the which containeth not onely a punishment: but also the destruction of Israel, for as much as the Israelites re∣pented
not being warned neither by the first, nor yet by the second punishment, nor turned themselues vnto God earnestly: for ab that at the last vnder Oseas their last King, that same outragio ∣grosse Idolatry were a little in some sorte repressed, or restrayne yet was not therefore notwithstanding the true worship of God stored or set vp among them, as appeareth 2. King. 17. And h first of all in this verse the vision it selfe is described: and the e∣sition thereof in the verse that followeth. The vision therefore  presented these two things vnto the Prophet, to wit, God himse who stoode vpon some wall: and also who held now in his ha rule, leauel or line. For to the ende that the signification of  vision might be the better vnderstood, and from whence it was ∣ken, God after this maner shewed himselfe like vnto a master ∣penter or chiefe builder, as he doth also Zach. cap. 2. ver. 1, 2. I similitude therefore seemeth to be taken from Carpenters and ∣sons weighing and considering some thing earnestly and diligent∣ly in a building. The which that they may do, whether anythi be at the first or newly to be built, or being already built, be to  corrected and amended: or finally whether it be to be leau they vse their line and squire, that they may do it by leauel, that  by most iust measure and rule, and that they doe not determine  set downe any thing rashly, or beyond the rules of their a  word, they frame it according vnto rule in all points. Vers. 8. And the Lord sayd vnto me, Amos, what seest thou A sayd, A line. Then sayd the Lord, Behold, I will set A line i  midst of my people Israel, and will passe by them no more. The exposition of the vision.THe interpretation and exposition of the vision. And this  hath two partes, The one contayneth an interrogation, or  question of GOD vnto Amos. The other the exposition of t vision or answere of Amos. And GOD asketh Amos in this ∣sion especially, and peculiarly, because it was of greater weight,  of a more sorrowfull euent or falling out and issue, then the ∣mer and therefore was the more diligently to be marked, told a heard of the people,What the Is∣raelites haue henceforth to looke for, who hitherto haue waxen worse through God his mercy. because that it now threatned the very dest∣ction of Israel. Wherefore they ought to bee pearsed herewith. And the expositiō shewed vnto the prophet tendeth vnto this e that they may vnderstand that euen nowe God himselfe doth e∣mine and trye the doings of the Israelites according vnto theer  or perfect rule of his iustice (that is, the which he hath prescribe
set downe in his law) that hee may iudge and giue sentence on them accordingly thereunto, and not now any more according vn∣to the grace, nuldnes, and gentlenes of his mercie, as he hath done before: because that thereby they haue not been made the better, nay they haue waxen worse. And therefore that it shall come to passe that he will pardon, ouerpasse, and forgiue nothing any more vnto this people, but will call all things vnto a iust accounts, leuel, rule and weight: like as Carpenters and builders are wont to trie and examine all things by line and by leuell. Vers. 9. And the hie places of Ishak shall be desolate, and the temples of Israel shall be destroyed: and I will rise against the cuse of Ie∣roboam with the sword. A confirmatiō of the former similitude.A Confirmation taken from the euent and falling out of things, or from the punishment the which shall come vpon them from God, iudging and examining their deedes and workes. This pu∣nishment is twofold. One, the which is in common and indiffe∣rently threatned vnto all the people, to wit,1. A generall pu∣nishment. That it shall come to passe, that their hie places and Chappels, that is to say, those places in which they doe especially trust because of their religiousnesse, shall be layd waste, and ouerthrowne: and their other munitions and fortresses in like manner, and places in which they supposed that they should be in safetie and finde some ayde. And he calleth those places,The Idol places in what sense called Sanctu∣aries or holie Temples. in the which the Calues & Idols were worshipped by the Israelites, Temples, Sanctuaries, or holie places, not that they were so indeed, but by yeelding vnto them the names the which they of superstition gaue vnto them: like as the Idols also of the heathen are, according vnto the opinion which they themselues haue of them, in the holie Scripture called gods. He calleth them also the hie places of Isaac,The hie places of their Idols why called the hie places of Isaac. because they were builded by the Israe∣lites in those places, in the which the Patriarch Isaac did somtimes offer sacrifice, but vnto the true God, and by the commaundement & appoyntment of God himselfe, when as there was not as yet any certaine Temple of God, in the which one and alone, God would haue sacrifices to bee offered vnto him: as then there was, to wit, the Temple at Ierusalem. Therefore there was not then the like reason of the Israelites for worshipping in those places, when as there both was a Temple appoynted by God for sacrifices: and when as they themselues in those hie places did sacrifice vnto I∣dols, and not vnto the true God. Wherefore the example of Isaac
did helpe them nothing at all, but rather all this was an apish, vai and counterfeit imitation or following of the worship of the  Patriarches,The woship of the Israelits an apish imitatiō of the old Pa∣triarches. like as was the worship of the Samaritans, where seemeth that they much boasted, by the speech that the woma Samaria had with Christ Ioh. 4. ver. 20. where she sayth: O ∣thers worshipped in this mountaine, and ye say that in Ierusalem is  place wherein men ought to worship. 2 A particular punishment for Ieroboam and his house.The second punishment here threatned, belongeth peculi vnto Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas, whose familie and house is s shall be smitten with the sword. The which thing came afterw to passe, as it is declared 2. King. cap. 15. ver. 10. where mentio made how Shallum rose vp against Zachariah the sonne of I∣boam, and slew him, in whom that line ceased. The words be th And Shallum the sonne of Iabesh conspired against him (to wi, ∣gainst Zachariah) and smote him in the sight of the people, and ki him, and reigned in his stead. Vers. 10. Then Amaziah the Priest of Bethel sent to Ierobo  of Israel, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the  of the house of Israel: the land is not able to beare all his w What followed vnto Amos af∣ter this sermon.THe consequent, that is what followed after this sermon o  Prophet. For the Prophet goeth on to shewe what befell  him among this people after that he had denounced against t so many threatnings of God: namely, how he was accused bo sedition or conspiracie against the King, and also of vngod among the Israelites: yea, and that by such a one, who would  counted the ringleader of others vnto godlinesse, and to be  holie. This by so many admonitions or warnings was not broug to passe, that either the Priests themselues, as they were called: or the King: yea, or the people repented themselues of their fo and wicked life, and turned vnto the true God. The which thg doth most manifestly proue, that both the obstinacie or stubbo∣nes of the Israelites was notorious,The contents of this verse. and also their treacherie and trothlesnes to Godward desperate,1. The accuser. or past hope of recouerie. Th∣fore the historie here now after this Sermon set downe is mo profitable.2. Vnto whom he accuseth. This verse generally containeth an accusation of Amos: where∣in these three things are to be marked. First, who accuseth. Second∣ly, vnto whom the accusation is made.3. Of what mat∣ter. Thirdly, of what matters
is made. Amasias, and the same a Priest in Beth-el, accuseth. The Prophet calleth him a Priest, by graunting vnto him that which he was taken of others for to be. For this fellowe in trueth was a wor∣shipper of Idols, a Priest and Sacrificer in Beth-el: and not a Priest of the true God. Now it appeareth that this was the chiefest and head Priest in that place, and not a common one of the meaner sort: but some great & especiall one of chiefe regard and account. And therefore his testimonie or witnesse against Amos was of the more weight and credit.The titles by Amos giuen vnto Amasias doe make more for his shame, then commen∣dation. But Amos maketh mention of this title of Amasias, that his fault may be seene to be the greater, who when as both by the reason of his name and also of his office, that is, of the Priesthood, the which he did beare, he ought before all the rest in that people to giue eare vnto the iudgements of God, he doth not∣withstanding first of all other cauill and find fault with them, and goeth about to ouerthrow them and to make them of none effect, by charging of the true Prophet of God, and accusing him of sedi∣tion, but yet falslie notwithstanding. After this sort did the Pharises accuse Christ Ioh. 11. ver. 48. If e let him alone (say they) thus,Christ by the Pharises accu∣sed of sedition. all men will beleeue in him, and the Romanes will come and take away both our place and the nation. And yet more plainly cap. 19. ver. 12. If thou deliuer him (cry the Iewes to Pilate, who sought to loose Iesus and set him free) thou art not Casars friend: for whosoeuer maketh himselfe king, speaketh against Caesar. So doe the Priests at Ierusa∣lem ause the Prophet Ieremie of treason,Ieremie by the Priests accused of treason. Ierem. cap. 26. ver. 11. Then spake the Priests and the Prophets (he meaneth the false Pro∣phets) vnto the Princes, and to all the people, saying: This man (to w▪ Ieremie) is worthie to die: for he hath prophesied against this citie,  ye haue heard with your eares. And cap. 38. ver. 4. hauing in the 26. chapter accused him before the Princes and rulers, & as it may seeme, missed of their purpose, they do here complaine of him vnto the King himselfe, saying, as the Prophet reporteth: We beseech you let this man be put to death: for thus he weakneth the hands of the men of warre that remaine in this citie, and the hands of all the people, in speaking such words vnto them: for this man seeketh not the wealth of this people but the hurt. So at this day the popish Prelates doe accuse vs of treason▪ when as wee preach the true word of God,The popish pre∣lates accuse the preachers of the Gspell of treason. because their kitchin waxeth cold through our doctrine. Amos is accused vnto the King himselfe, and that forthwith, and not vnto them that could iudge of the doctrine, whether it were of God: but vnto him, whose owne case it seemed for to be, to the end that by this meanes
Amos might bee the sooner condemned: namely, for that those words of Amos might bee thought to tend vnto the hurt of the king, therefore is Amos accused before the king. Finally, he is ac∣cused of conspiracie against the king,Amos accused of conspiracie and sedition. and of sedition alreadie stir∣red vp among the people, or at leastwise presently to be practised, the which can now scarce bee withstood, or by any meanes be pre∣uented. For thus was the people moued against the king through his words: so doe the hearts of all men faile alreadie for to defend their countrey, that all in generall haue lost all courage and hope to withstand their enemies, if they should come vpon them. The e∣rie selfe same policie euery where doe the popish Prelates & pre∣chers vse against the true doctrine of God now through the good∣nesse of God restored, the which they cannot abide that it should come vnto light, and be published abroad. For it doth scatter  driue away their darknes. Vers. 11. For thus Amos sayth, Ieroboam shall die by the sword,  Israel shall be led away captiue our of their owne land. The proofe of the accusation.THe proofe of the accusation by the prophesie it selfe of An whose words albeit Amasias doe not retaine and keepe,  setteth downe his meaning Although this which is sayd (I shall die by the sword) seemeth to be spoken of enuie against  by wresting of his words and meaning, that therewithall  might colour and cloake the rest, to wit, Amos conspireth  thee, and thy death and murther. For this Amos sayth, that it is ¦dained by God, that thou shalt die by the sword. The which  Amos did not speake and prophesie of Ieroboam, but of his  and familie. Vers. 12. Also Amasiah sayd vnto Amos: O thou the seer, goe  thou away into the land of Iudah, and there eate thy bre  prophesie there. The counsell of Amasias to A∣mos.THe admonition or counsell of the sayd Amasias vnto A wherein lieth hid the great subtiltie of this idolatrous Priest gainst the true Prophet of God. For these words of Amasias  as it were a shewe of his good will towards Amos, and of his ¦fulnes for him: but indeed and truth they thrust at the very  of Amos, and by all the wayes that may be, pull him from
fice. For they feare the Prophet, that he should not obey the com∣mandement and will of God. These arts and sleights of the wicked for the most part are described Psal. 55. ver. 21. where the Prophet sheweth how that in their most sugred words they hide most bit∣ter gall, and vnder faire speeches shrowd foule dealings, when he sayth: The words of his mouth were softer then butter, yet warre was in his heart: his words were more gentle then oyle, yet they were sword. See also a patterne of these fetches Matth. 4. ver. 3. and 6. in the ten∣tations of the diuell against our Sauiour Christ. The counsell of Amasias two¦fold.But concerning this admonition or counsell of Amasias, the same is twofold. The first, that (he goe away) that is, that the Pro∣phet Amos whilest he may, and honestly, and without let or with∣out daunger he may doe it, he make shift for himselfe, he depart of his owne accord, and get him into his owne countrey,1 That Amos go away. and there (if it seeme so good vnto him) exercise and vse his office, that is to say, prophesie. Secondly, (that he flee) that is, that Amos betimes with∣draw himselfe from the imminent and present daunger,2. That he flee. the which was very shortly for to come: because that he might run into great daunger of his life, because of such threatnings and prophesies de∣liuered touching the destruction both of the King, and also of the people. Wherein we see how this Amasias, a most vtter enemie vn∣to the true prophesie of God, doth notwithstanding couer that his hatred against Amos his prophet vnder an honest and cleanly pre∣tence, as if he had care and regard of the honour and safetie of the true Prophet of God, the which was there present. So doth this di∣uell turne himselfe into an angell of light, as did the false Apostles in Paul his time turne themselues into the Apostles of Christ, the which he sayth is no wonder 2. Cor. 11. ver▪ 14. For Satan himselfe is transformed into an angell of light.A most craftie counsell of the Papists vnto some gospellers. And this doe the most sworne enemies of the trueth of the Gospell at this day, the which would seeme ore reasonable then others of that crue, & to carrie a more fauourable mind towards such as are godly indeed, or also towards the faithfull Pastors of the Church of God. For vnder a colour of honest counsell, and such as tendeth to their safetie, so farre as in them lieth, they doe moue and exhort them to leaue their standing, and to giue ouer for a time, or els vtterly to forsake and lay aside their ministerie and worke of God. The which no doubt is a most great and most daungerous fetch and reach of the diuell, against the which the spirit of wisedome is to be begged with most earnest prayers at the hands of our good and mercifull God. For say they:
You may be safe and in honour, or credit and reputation at home among your owne, if you hold your selfe quiet, and giue ouer the office or religion. Doe not therefore so openly professe this elig∣on, but leaue of this ministerie of the gospell which you exercise. At leastwise tarrie a leasure and put it off for a season, &c. Three notes of the great sub∣tiltie of Ama∣sis.Furthermore, that the subtiltie and cunning of this Amas∣as was great (as a chiefe instrument of Sathan) like as also o∣ther varlets in such cases is wont to bee, it may appeare by these three points. First, in that hee calleth him by that honorable na of a Seer,1. In that he cal∣leth Amos by the honorable name of a Seer. as if he made some great account of him, & did acknow∣ledge and confesse him to be the true Prophet of God. For this  the first and in old time was wont to be the name of a Prophe,  we reade 1. Sam. 9. cap. ver. 9. Before time in Israel, when a m  to seeke an answer of God, thus he spake, Come and let vs go to the Sn for he that is called now a Prophet, was in the olde time called a S▪ So the craftier and closer enemies of the gospell are very liberal and franke in giuing of such titles vnto the true professors▪ T second poynt is hereby to be seene,2. In that he see∣keth to drawe him home into his owne coun∣trey. for that he draweth back  vnto his owne countrie, whereas he may be safe and withou d∣ger, and liue commodiouslie and very well. For our owne co doth by a certaine naturall sense and feeling allure and deligh  He then doth not send him into the deserts, and vnto far people  the vttermost partes of the world, as to the Garamantes and ∣ans, but among his owne people and countrey folkes. Whe the speech and perswasion of Amasias might seeme the mo  sonable, and more full of goodwill and loue towards Amo▪  third poynt is this,3. In that he will not haue him vtterly leaue prophesying, but that he prophesie not in Israel. that Amasias desireth not, that Amos hence should not prophesie any more at all: but that he should not  here in this place, that is, in the kingdome of Israel, and  in Bethel, but in Iudah, where there are many other▪ Prophets  his place, and like vnto himselfe, and are heard: there let him P∣phesie as much as him list, and spare not. What may seem  reasonable then these requests. Vers. 13. But prophesie no more at Beth-el: for it is the King ∣pell, and it is the Kings court. The reason, why Amos might not pro∣phesie in Beth∣el, takenTHis is a rendring of a reason why Amos neither ough  might prophesie in Beth-el especially, these things which  spake and vttered. And this reason is twofold, namely from the ho∣lines,
and also from the dignitie of the citie or place.1. From the holi∣nes of the place. The Holines is described in these wordes (It is the Kings chappell) the which wordes doe sound thus much, as if Amasias should say: This place is vnto vs all a most holy temple, ordayned by the commandement of the King, e as vnto you is your Temple at Ierusalem most ho∣ly▪ It is therefore vnlawfull for thee to speake any thing against the worship and holines o this temple. For thou mayest not here bee suffered, as namely being one that is blasphemous against our gods, and iniurious vnto this place the which is so holy. After such like maner Ieroboam the first would haue maintained the false and counterfeit holines of his altar in the selfesame citie Beth-el a∣gainst the Prophet of God, but he was punished for his labor. For when he srtched out his arme to haue had the Prophet stayed, his hand which hee put forth against him, dryed vp, and hee could not pull it in againe to him, 1. King. 13. ver 4.2. From the dig∣nitie of h same. The dignitie of the citie is declared in these words: (It is the Kings house) that is to say, it is the chiefest of the cities of the kingdome of Israel▪ And therefore thou cause speake nothing against it, but thou must drawe and pull the whole kingdome vpon thine head. Therefore (O Amos) in vtte∣ring these things thou shalt stirre vp sedition, either against thine owne selfe, or else in this kingdome. And as in this place falsely by this Priest, so Psal. 122. the commendation of the citie Ierusalem is truly b the. Prophet drawne from the holines and dignitie of the place Reade the whole Psalme. Vers. 14. Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no Pro∣phet, neither was I a Prophets sonne, but I was a heard man, and a gatherer of wilde figges. The answer of Amos vnto A∣masias twofold.THe answer of Amos vnto the former and subtill admonition or counsell of Amasias the Baalamitish Priest. This answer is also twofold.1. He directly de∣nith to follow his counsell. First, in the which Amos directly and flatly denieth tha be either may, or ought with a good conscience follow and obey the counsell or commandement of Amasias, because God expres∣lie hath giuen him otherwise in charge, and that he ought rather to obey God then man. And so are wee taught to doe by the answer which Peter and Iohn do make vnto the rulers of the Temple, for∣bidding them any more to preach in the name of Iesus Act. 4. ver. 19. For there they answer vnto them thus: Whether it be right in
he fight of God, to obey you rather then God, iudge ye. For wee can∣not but speake the things, which we haue seene and heard. Amos then declareth what God had commanded him to doe, that is, to preach those things the which he spake, yea and that vnto the people or Kingdome of Israel, and not vnto the Kingdome of Iudah, whi∣ther he was sent by Amasias. Therefore when God commandeth any thing to be done in any certaine place, or time, or manner, i must in euery point be so done, as he hath appointed, and wee may not vpon any occasion goe one haires bredth from that comman∣dement of God. There are examples in Saul, whilest he spareth the King Agag, and the fat cattell 1. Sam. 15. In the Prophet eating meate with the Prophet of Israel in the citie of Beth-el against the commandement of God, 1. King. 13. Because we must neither pu ought to,A description of the extraor∣dinarie calling of Amos. or take ought from the word of God. Further, this verse setteth downe the calling of Amos, and the same extraordinarie, vnto this office and charge of prophesying a∣gainst the kingdome of Israel, that it may bee knowne, that this which he doth, he doth of dutie. So then here is a description of a calling altogether extraordinary, the which neither is, nor was any way made by the meanes of men: but immediatly from God, not by man, nor of men, but by God himselfe, as Paul saith of his calling Galat. cap. 1. ver. 1. and 15. Therefore saith Amos, I became not such a one, that is, a Prophet, either by any succession of families as the Leuites come to their office, nor by the ordinance or re∣ing of any man which was my master and teacher. For there were among the Israelites certaine colledges or schooles of the Pro∣phets, as we reade 2. King cap. 4. ver. 38. where it may appeare that Elizaeus was as it were the master and head of them. After  (saith the text) Elisha returned to Gilgal, and a famine was in the land, and the children of the Prophets dwelt with him, &c. For pro of this also maketh the first verse of the sixt chapter of this foresaid booke.By children hee meaneth his disciples and schollers, albeit this place by some be taken otherwise. Hereunto also appertaineth that of the Prophet Isai cap. 8 ver. 18. where he saith: Behold, I and the children, whome the Lor hath giuen me are as signes and as wonders by the Lord of hostes,  dwelleth in mount Sion. But (saith Amos) I was not after this so trained vp and instructed. For I was altogether a countrey man an a heardman liuing in the fieldes, and after the rude and countrey manner, being little conuersant and knowne among men.
Vers. 15. And the Lorde tooke mee as I followed the flocke, and the Lord said vnto me, Goe, prophesie vnto my people Israel. Another point of an extraor∣dinarie calling.ANother part of an extraordinarie vocation or calling, to wit, than this calling was made by God himselfe. For Amos doth not onely here shut out the ordinarie meane (which is to be called by men) but also setteth downe the extraordinary, which is to bee ordained immediatly from God. Hoe therefore confirmeth him∣selfe to bee a simple countrey man by profession and kinde of life, and which was taken from the keeping of the flock vnto the office of a Prophet, like as it is also said of Dauid the King Psal. 78. ver. 70.71. He chose Dauid also his seruant, and tooke him from the sheepe∣folds. Euen from behinde the Ewes with young brought he him to feede his people in Iacob, and his inheritance in Israel. Lastly, Amos addeth expreslie the commandement it selfe of God concerning his pro∣phesying, and the persons vnto whom he was sent by God. Vers. 16. Now therefore heare thou the word of the Lord. Thou saist, prophesie not against Israel, and speake nothing against the house of Ishak. The second an∣swer of Amos vnto Amasias.ANother, or the second answer of Amos vnto Amasias, wherein he threatneth vnto him most grieuous punishment for that his rashnes in staying and letting (so far as in him was) the course and will of the word of God: that hereby all malapart and saucie per∣sons against God, or his Prophets may vnderstand, that whilest, so much as in them lieth, they doe stop and hinder the truth of God, it is so farre off, that hereby they shal bring any thing to passe or doe any good, that they shall win and bring vpon themselues most mi∣serable desrection. And therfore doth Gamaliel Act. 5. ver. 38.39. saie wise counsell to his colleagues and fellowes to leaue of their erprise against the Apostles, saying: Refraine your selues from these men, and let them alone: for if this counsell, or this worke bee of men, it will come to nought: but if it bee of God, yee cannot destroy it, least ye he found euen fighters against God. And so cap. 12. you shall reade how Herod wearied himselfe in vaine by seeking for the gratifying or pleasing of the Iewes to make Peter a spectacle of his bloodie crueltie, God wonderfullie mocking & disappoynting his ie all deuises. Examples of those which by thus striuing
haue wrought their owne bane, the holy Scripture afoordeth in great plentie, as 1. King. 18. ver. 4. Of the drying vp the arme of Ie∣roboam the first,Ieroboam. stretching out the same to stay the Prophet, whom God had sent to preach against his altar. In Sedechias or Zidkiiah,Zidkiiah. who opposeth or setteth himselfe against Michaiah, whose punishment Michaiah sheweth him, shall be to runne from chamber to chamber in the end to saue his life from the enemies, the which shall seeke to spill the same, 1. King. 22. ver. 25. Likewise Ierem. 20. In Pashur,Pashur. that smote the Prophet Ieremie, vnto whome he threatneth captiuitie. In Zedekiah, that seeking to saue his life by another course, then that which was taught him by the Prophet Ieremie, cap. 38. ver. 17.18. is taken by Nebuchadnezzar, and vsed most cruellie, cap. 39. ver. 7. The word of God against the wordes of Amasias.Moreouer, this verse opposeth or setteth The word of the Lorde Iehouah against the words of Amasias. He forbad Amos to prophe∣sie: but God commandeth him to prophesie. He promised securitie or safetie vnto Amos if hee would holde his peace, or run away▪ God pronounceth most grieuous punishments both priuat and al∣so publike vnto this Amasias, that could not patiently abide and suffer Amos prophesying. Vers. 17. Therefore thus saith the Lord, Thy wife shal be an harlot is the citie, and thy sonnes and thy daughters shall fall by the  and thy land shall be diuided by line: and thou shalt dye in ap∣ted land, and Israel shall surely goe into captiuitie forth of his land. 1. The priuat pu∣nishment of A∣masias contei∣ning foure things.A Double kinde of punishment is here shewed vnto Amasias,  I haue sid; a priuat and a publike. The priuat, the which ∣cheth Amasias himselfe especially and it is a most assured testimo∣nie or witnes of God being angrie with him, because of his so great boldnes in hindring and staying of the word of God. And this pri∣uat punishment of Amasias containeth these foure things.1. The whoredom of his wife. Fst, the whoredome of his wife, after that Beth-el it selfe shall be take by the enemies.2. The murther of his children. Therefore in this selfe same citie, and thou looking on, thy wife shall play the whore with the souldiers. The second And all thy sonnes and thy daughters (saith the Lord) shall bee sla cruellie by the enemies.3. The spoyle of his land. The third, Thy land or thy fieldes shalbe d∣ded among those selfe fame enemies whom thou doest denie shall  and whome thou canst not abide,4. Himselfe shall go into captiui∣tie. and heare. The fourth, And thou thy selfe shalt dye a captiue and prisoner in a strange land poll
land. As touching the publike punishment, it is the same the which hath been declared before, namely,2. His publike pu∣nishment com∣mon with the rest of his peo∣ple. Israel shall bee carried captiue into a strange land, yea and that in great companies or altogether, and being moreouer miserablie afflicted or punished. CAP. 8. Vers. 1. Thus hath the Lord God shewed vnto me, and behold a bas∣ket of Summer fruite. IN the chapter before going, God threatned vtter destruction vn∣to the kingdome of Israel because of his obstinacie or stubborne continuance in sinne. The selfe same thing doth he also in this and the next chapter confirme, that hee might shake off from the vn∣beleeuers and such as despise those threatnings, all securitie and carelesnes: take from the hypocrites all refuges and starting holes to shroud themselues in, the which they deuise to help themselues withall: and may earnestlie stirre vp, and giue minde and courage to the godly, of repentance, if any were left among them.Speedie punish∣ment threat∣ned vnto al the people in gene∣rall in this chapter. But in this chapter is foretold or rather confirmed to the whole people in generall a calamitie or punishment, the which was euen hard at hand, and should presently insue, as namely when as their notori∣ous and hainous sinne were now waxen through ripe and mellow: but in the chapter following, vnto their Temples and Chappels the like is denounced.Why these pu∣nishments are represented by visions and fi∣gures. Notwithstanding in both these places or chap∣ters this punishment is represented or shewed vnder visions and figures, both that the Israelites might more diligently and earnestly attend or consider of these prophesies: and also might the better be pearced and touched with them, albeit their hearts and mindes were neuer so stubborne and disobedient. Thus doth God witnes his good will and care towards this people: yea and towards all disobedient persons also, that they may vnderstand that they doe perish through their owne fault, and not through any fault in God. Touching this verse, it contayneth a bare vision of a thing of∣fered or layd before the eyes and sight of the Prophet. And it was a basket ful of fruits, the which were now growen to their ende or ripenes, and therefore to be plucked off,A basket ful of ripe fruites shewed vnto Amos in a visiō. and forthwith to bee bea∣ten downe, as Varro speaketh libr. 1. de Re rustic. cap. 68. Those (sayth he, speaking of fruits) which are ripe (the which appeareth by
the changing of their colour) if you take them not downe to eate, they shew themselues ready to be throwne downe. But to the end that the resemblance and likenes of the names of ripe or summer fruits,The Latine & English cannot expresse the trim resem∣blance of sound and letters be∣tween the he∣brew wordes, Kaits fruit, and Kets, the fine or end, with such a grace as they carry in their owne tongue. and of their ripenesse or ending which is in the Hebrew tongue, may in some sorte be retayned and kept in the Latine, this place were to be turned thus: Sic ostendit mihi visionem domin Iehouah, nimirum ecce canistrum finalium (id est aestiuorum) fru∣ctuum: that is: The Lord Iehoua shewed me a vision thus: to wit, behold a basket of final (that is to say summer) fruits. This word (Thus, or So) is added and set downe, that the Prophet may ex∣presly witnes, that he doth in euery respect in such sort report the matter it selfe, as it was by GOD offered and shewed vnto him. Therefore he doth commend the authority of the narration to in∣sue by the trueth of the same, to the end it may be heard with al di∣ligence and attention or heedfulnes, and marked, noted and con∣sidered. Vres. 2. And he sayd, Amos, what seest thou? And I sayd, a basket of summer:Kaits. fruit. Then said the Lord vnto me, TheKets. end is come vpon my people of Israel, I will passe by them no more. The declaratiō of the former vision.THe declaration of the former vision. And this verse hath three partes. First, an interrogation, or God his asking a question of the Prophet. Secondly, the Prophets answere vnto God. Third∣ly, the interpretation and exposition of the matter made by God himselfe. God asketh and speaketh vnto the Prophet, to stirre his vp more diligently to behold the thing, which hee sheweth vnto him: and so consequently to stirre vp the people and vs also. For so weighty visions, and so necessary for the Church of GOD are not lightly or sleightly, with a light arme or winking eyes to bee looked vpon or handled, but with stedfast and heedefull eyes and mindes. The Prophet answereth playnly, hiding, dissembling, o∣uerpassing, or adding nothing to the matter. Wherein his faith∣fulnes in his ministerie and office is declared, like as in Paul 1. Cor. cap. 4. ver. 12. for there he saith: Let a man so thinke of vs, as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. As for the rest, i is required of the disposers, that euery man be found faithfull. The declaration of this vision followeth, the which sheweth first what is signified by these finall or ripe fruites: Secondly, to whome in especiall the signification thereof appertayneth. By
these fruits is signified that the ende and destruction of the king∣dome and people of Israel is at hand (howsoeuer God before this time haue taken them and cherished them for his people) because that vnto them especially belongeth this signification of the end,1 The sgnificatiō of this vision.2 It concerneth the whole peo∣ple of Israel. or destruction. So before cap. 7. ver. 7. and 8. in the vision of God standing vpon a wall, and with a plumming line in his hande, the same vision did concerne the Israelites in generall. But by this si∣militude of finall, or summer fruits, not onely destruction is shewed vnto this people: but also the neerenes and speedines of the pu∣nishment to come is noted, that these fellowes should not thinke that they should long be borne withall at the hand of God.A reason why they shal final∣ly and speedily be destroyed. (I will passe by them no more) n these words there is a reason yeelded, why this finall and vtter destruction hangeth ouer their heads, and that immediately and out of hand to ensue and fall vpon this people, to wit, because GOD hath decreed and determined no more hence∣forth & hereafter to forgiue thē any of their sins either to come or also already past. For so much doe these wordes (I will not adde to passe by them, or, I will not passe by them any more) signifie, that is, I will not pardon or forgiue them, as Tullie speaketh. For to par∣don or forgiue, is to passe ouer the punishment of a fault, Epist. 15. ad M. Brutum: to wit, as if such sinne of the men, whom wee par∣don and forgiue, were vnknowen vnto vs. So to pretermit and o∣uerpasse, is taken for, to leaue vntouched and vnpunished, as Mat. 26. ver. 39. where Christ prayeth vnto his Father: if it be possible, let this cuppasse from me, he meaneth, Let not this punishment or death touch me. Let me not suffer it, let me be pardoned of it. So in the seuenth chapter of this Prophet before, and ver. 8. when God sayth, And I will passe by them no more, he meaneth: I will spare them no more, I will not forgiue them any more. Vers. 3. And the songs of the Temple shal be howlings in that day, sayth the Lord God: many dead bodies shall bee in euerie place: they shall cast them forthwith silence. The amplfica∣tion of these threatnings.THe amplification of these threatnings by the adioynts. For the iudgement of God against the Israelites shall bee so great, the which the Prophet declareth vnto them, that both their Temples shall be vtterly forsaken: and also that the songs and worships now done in them, shall afterwards be howlings, because that they shal quite cease, and shall not be exercised, or heard any more. Final∣ly,
there shall be an infinite number of the slaine and dead bodies of the Israelites, in euerie part of their kingdome, the which not∣withstanding no man shall openly burye and with mourning, but shall doe it holding his peace and still, whosoeuer he bee that out of so great a number and slaughter of them shall picke out some and burie them. And by thrs amplification is taken from them all the aide the which they looked for from their goddes, Temples, and religious worship, and there is foretolde vnto them an exceeding great plague and massacre, or slaughter of the people of Israel, the which shall be in euery quarter. Last of all there shall be in them all great feare and trembling by reason of their enemies, the which GOD shall send vpon them, they shall bee so horrible and feare∣full, and the Israelites so quailed and daunted in their hearts and courage. Vers. 4. Heare this, Oye that swallow vp the poore, that yee may make the needy of the Land to fayle. The figure A∣postrophe, or turning of speech, which is when as wee changeour talk from those to whom we spake vnto som other person or thing either present or absent, as in in this place, from the for∣mer punishmēt vnto the wic∣ked liuers de∣seruing the same.AN Apostrophe, or turning of his speech vnto the wicked ones, whereby he doth earnestly stirre vp and reproue all lewd liuers: but especially the couetous and cruell persons among this people, the which did deuour, spoyle and oppresse the poore through great subtilty and vnmercifull dealing, the which did spring from th vnsatiable or vnfilable couetousnes. This verse therefore doth set forth the summe or effect of this their cruelty and couetousnes, and the verse following sheweth the kindes and manner of them both. Therfore these men are called and as it were cited by name to heare these threatnings of God. And in this place both these vices of cruelty and couetousnes is paynted forth in them to be notorious in that they do not only look for the goods and wealth and substance of the poore and needy, and those euen their brethren: but that they also doe labour with all their might and maine to spoyle them. And this they doe after such a sorte, that by their willes they would not now haue any of their poore brethren to be left aliue, but that they should be all consumed. As if forsooth these iolly fellowe through their ouermuch cruelty and couetousnes did vtterly dece and abhorre the poore, who are their brethren, and the image of God himselfe. See whither in the end auarice and couetousnes doth draw and carie vs.
Vers. 5. Saying, When will the new moneth be gone, that we may sell corne? and the Sabboth, that wee may set foorth wheate, and make the Ephah small, and the shekle great, and falsifie the weights by deceit? The making more plaine of that which went before.AN explanation or making more plaine of that which went be∣fore, by the which the kindes of deceits and cruelty practised and deuised by the rich against their poore and needy brethren, are reckoned vp, and declared. And in this place there are rehearsed foure. The first,1. They thinke much to re∣fraine from traffick on the Sabboth, and feast dayes. That these vnsatiable or neuer filled couetous wretches could not away with so much as the Sabboth and newe moones (that is, feast dayes at that time of the moone holden) be∣cause that on those dayes they ceased from merchandise and traf∣fique, that is, from their deceits and vse of buying and selling. For they complayn, that there are too many holy dayes, and that they are held too long, because that in all that time they could haue no gaines, norsell any thing. This was in those dayes notorious coue∣tousnes, and also is at this day, when as men finde fault that the worship and seruice of God doth take from them occasions and commodities of lucre and gaine, and that the times appointed by the word of God for this matter are too long, and nothing but idle ceasings from worldly busines. The second kinde, They did dimi∣nish & lessen the publike or common weights,2. They did lessen the common weightes, not in the weights themselues, but in making too little weight & measure in their wares. because they would not make so good weight in selling and measuring of their wares, as by the common weights they ought, but would giue lesse weight then was meet, the which notwithstanding so lessened and curtold, they would haue to be taken for good and lawfull, and to be coun∣ted for full measure of their wares. This also is notorious couetous∣nes, the which doth falsifie and corrupt the common weights, so farre as it may. The third kinde is, that they doe increase the price of the coyne within themselues,3. They raise the price of the coyne. to make it to bee of more valewe then it ought. Therefore when ought is to be payd vnto them by the poore man, or him that is their debtor, they will haue more paid them in money for a crowne, then three pound french. They would haue the Floren among the Merchants to bee of more valew then twenty Souses. They alleadge for themselues, that the price or valew of the coyne is risen since the time that they sold their wares, or since the poore men receiued that money. The fourth kinde is, Their shameles corrupting,4. They doe make the common weights lesse thē they ought to be. or changing of the common weights
and measures, the which they did by subtiltie and false dealing. For those former falsifiers of the weights did keep the rates of the co∣mon weights iust, but they would not deliuer so much in weight and measure. But these fellowes did subtillie falsifie the common weights in making of them lesse, and yet would shewe them for iust and true weights. This also is shameles couetousnesse. Vers. 6. That we may buy the poore for siluer, and the needie for sh yea and sell the refuse of the wheat. Sundrie kinds of their cruel∣tie.AS before he set downe sundrie kinds of couetousnesse, so doe he here reckon vp diuers kinds of their crueltie, and the same also ioyned with couetousnesse. The first, for that they would for their money buy vnto themselues the poore man,1. They bought the poore for money, like bruit beasts. and haue him t be their owne after such sort, as they did buy any bruit beast. Ye these were both men, and also their brethren, whom therefore it was not lawfull for them to buy in such sort. And therefore they might not by the law of God vse those of their owne nation, wh they bought for their money, in such sort as they might other ser∣uants that were strangers, but were after certaine yeares to let th goe out free, as it is Exod. 21. ver. 2. &c. If thou buy an Hebrew s∣uant, he shall serue sixe yeares, and in the seuenth he shall goe out fr for nothing.2. They bought them for a matter of no∣thing. The second, for that they bought, or would buy thee for a most vile & low price, as for a paire of shoes, that is, for a mat∣ter of nothing; for the which valew they could not buy at any  his hand so much as a poore dogge, or silie sheepe: so great doubt∣les was their crueltie and vnmercifulnes, that they made  much account of men, yea and those their brethren also, as they did of the basest and smallest cattell.3. They vsed false dealing with their wares in corrupting the same. The third kind is, for that they vsed very bad and false dealing in the deliuerie of the ware & ∣ter, which they sold or gaue, to wit, they did mixe and mingle to∣gether the soyle and refuse with the graine in the barne, and  sell this mixture or medlie in stead of the good and sound come the which by bargaine and promise they were to deliuer, where∣with the men that bought it were not nourished. Therefore like there was in them notorious couetousnesse, so was there also op crueltie and deceit. By this occasion let our Merchant men of  times consider how they deale, and with what faithfulnes and vp∣rightnes they doe sell their wares, least that they also come with the compasse of these threatnings.
Vers. 7. The Lord hath sworne by the excellencie of Iaacob, surely I will neuer forget any of their workes. Two parts of this verse.THe threatning of a most grieuous punishment, the which is af∣terwards declared. As for this verse it hath two parts: namely, the threatning it selfe, and the confirmation of the threatning.1. A threatning. The threatning is, That God will not afterwards forget these their wic∣ked deedes, and so lewd workes, like as before (whilest that he spa∣reth them, and tarrieth for them and their repentance) he seemeth to haue forgotten them: but he will in the end punish them all most sharply, keeping the bedroule and number of them in his minde, as hath bin shewed before in the second verse of this chap∣ter. So in the second of Malach ver. 17. the Lord sheweth that he remembreth the speeches of the wicked, when as they by their bold answer seeme to thinke that he hath nothing to charge them withall. For thus in that place sayth the Prophet: Ye haue wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say: wherein haue we wearied him? when ye say, euery one that doth euill, is good in the sight of the Lord, and he delighteth in them. Or, where is the God of iudgement? And in his third chapter ver. 16. he doth in plaine words teach vs, that God keepeth a booke of remembrance of those that doe feare him, that he may recompence them in the end, though for a time they seeme to be forgotten: Then spake they that feared the Lord, (sayth Mala∣chie) euery one to his neighbour, and the Lord hearkened, and heard it: and abooke of remembrance was written before him for them that fea∣red the Lord, and that thought vpon his name. And Dauid Psal. 130. ver. 3. sheweth that none is able to abide it, if God enter into a strait reckoning with him for his misdoings: saying, If thou, O Lord, straitly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shal stand? And therfore Psal. 32. ver. 1. he pronounceth him an happie man that is not called to this sharpe reckoning, as the wicked ones that are vnrepentant in their sinning shall be, where he writeth: Blessed is he whose wickednes is forgiuen, and whose sinne is couered.After what manner God is sayd to remem∣ber, and to for∣get. But touching this that here the Lord is sayd (not to forget) it is to be noted, that remembrance and forgetfulnes are in the holie Scripture attributed vnto God by a certaine Anthropopathia, that is, by ascribing vnto him for our ca∣pacitie and better vnderstanding, such affections as are in man. 2. The confirma∣tion of the threatning.The confirmation of the former threatning is contained in the oth, the which in this place is expreslie set down by God, that these
hypocrites or rebels should not thinke that these were but vaine and bare words, and childish feare-bugs. And God sweareth here in this place by the excellencie of Iaacob, that is, by all the priui∣ledges and prerogatiues which he had giuen vnto them, wherwith they did excell the other nations of the world in happinesse both heauenly, and earthly. This excellencie is set out by Paul Rom. 3. ver. 1.2. What is then the preferment of the Iewe? or what is the profit of circumcision? Much euery maner of way (answereth he:) for chief∣lie, because vnto them were committed the Oracles of God. And a∣gaine Rom. 9. ver. 4.5. he reckoneth vp a great many of them, shew∣ing, That vnto them pertaineth the adoption, and the glorie, and the couenants, and the giuing of the law, and the promises. Of whom  the fathers, and of whom concerning the flesh, Christ came, who is God ouer all blessed for euer. Before chap. 6. ver. 8. God sware by himselfe. The name of Iacob is here recited, because that he, and also his po∣steritie was preferred before Esau and his seede, of the meere or only fauour of God towards the Israelites, and also Iacob himselfe, as it is witnessed Malach. cap. 1. ver. 2.3. Was not Esau Iacobs brother, sayth the Lord? yet I loued Iacob, and I hated Esau, and made his mountaines waste, and his heritage a wildernesse for dragons. Ver. 8. Shall not the land tremble for this, and euery one mourne that dwelleth therein? And it shall rise vp wholly as a floud, and it shal be cast out, and drowned as by the floud of Egypt. The amplify∣ing of the for∣mer sinnes.THe exaggeration or making greater of the former sins, where∣by the punishment which shall hereafter bee denounced or threatned, may appeare to be the more iust. But in this verse both the manner of speaking, and also the thing it selfe which is spoken, is to be considered.1. The manner of speaking to be considered. The manner of speaking is an interrogatice or asking of a question continued for a good space, wherewith the Prophet pricketh the consciences of them, and bringeth forth the land it selfe for a witnesse against their obstinacie and stubbor and sheweth the equitie of this punishment.2. The thing it selfe the tis spoken. Touching the thing it selfe which is spoken, it briefly tendeth vnto this end, that these fellowes might vnderstand that their works are so abominable and lewd (howsoeuer they doe flatter themselues, and sleepe in the same) that they are worthie of any kind of punishment whatsoe∣uer, not only priuate, but also publike, & not only against the men themselues, but also against the very sole and earth, whereupon
they dwelled, and committed those same sinnes. For by reason of the sinnes of men God destroyeth or punisheth the earth and land it selfe, the which was the seate of those sinnes, as is witnessed Psal. 107. ver. 33.34. He turneth the flouds into a wildernesse,The earth pu∣nished for the sinnes of the dwellers there∣in. & the springs of waters into drinesse, and a fruitful land into barrennesse, for the wic∣kednesse of them that dwell therein. So Gen. 3. ver. 17. for the sinne of Adam God curseth the earth, saying: Cursed is the earth for thy sake: in sorowe shalt thou eate of it all the dayes of thy life. Wherefore God teacheth that their sinnes doe deserue, that their whole land should be full of tumult and hurliburlie, and that all their affayres should be turmoyled and troubled, and turned vpside downe, that both the inhabitants of the land themselues, and the committers of these sinnes, and also others should mourne. Finally, that their whole land should be drowned with waters, and ouerflowed, like as their wic∣kednesse hath ouerflowed in it. And this ouerflowing he compa∣reth with that of Egypt, not in this respect, that the riuer Nilus by his ouerflowing doth make the land and countrey fruitfull: but in this, that his water being conueyed into the land, doth chase and driue away all the inhabitants from their places and homes, and bringeth in a foule and euill fauoured shape & sight vpon the land, such as appeareth after a great floud and ouerflowing of waters, the land remaining slimie and muddie after the same. So hereafter cap. 9. ver. 5. this same comparison is vsed againe. Vers. 9. And in that day, sayth the Lord God, I will euen cause the Sunne to goe downe at noone: and I will darken the earth in the cleere day. A description of the punish∣mēt the which should fal vpon them.A Description of the punishment that was to ensue vpon them, first by a similitude taken from such a thing as is wont to bring vpon men exceeding feare, and doth containe a most great sharp∣nes and bitternes of the punishment. And by this meanes God of his great louing kindnesse vnto mankind, would rouze vp these fel∣lowes snorting in their sinnes, that wee might vnderstand how pa∣tiently and louingly God dealeth with vs, and therefore that wee should confesse our selues to be the lesse excusable.The similitude The similitude is this, That God will cause the Sunne to goe downe at noone day: or (as is added for more plainnes sake) he will bring darknes vpon them in the cleere day. Therefore these euils shall fall vpon them both beyond their expectation or looking for (because they belee∣ued
not the word and threatnings of God) as it fell out vnto them, who obeyed not the admonitions or warnings of Noah Matth. 24. ver. 38. but following the lusts of their flesh in eating and drinking marrying, and giuing in marriage, vntill the floud came suddain vpon them, were drowned in the same: and they shall fall vpon them as punishments and most grieuous plagues and troubles  stormes and tempests, the which doe make the Sunne darke vnto vs at noone day.What the fi∣gure called a Metaphor is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12. The same Metaphor or borrowed speech is vsed i the second chapter of Ioel. Thus then this similitude of the Sunne and of darknesse doth signifie both these things, that is to say, both great punishments, and the same also suddaine and vnloo∣ked for. Vers. 10. And I will turne your feasts into mournings, and all you songs into lamentation: and I will bring sackcloth vpon all loyes, and baldnes vpon euery head: and I will make it as the mourning of an only sonne, and the end thereof as a bitter day. A description of this punish∣ment without any Metaphor.A Plaine description of the same punishment without any Meta∣phor, the which is painted or layd forth to be most lamentable, in holy matters, in politike matters: in publike and priuate mer in the beginning and in the end of the punishment and misee. Fo these three things doth this verse briefly shewe.1. In holie and politike mat∣ters. First, it sheweth th punishment in holie matters, and in matters politike, because their publike and common assemblies, their holie solemnities and the songs shall be turned into mourning both inward, and also ∣ward: also it sheweth publike affliction or punishment, in that the backes of all men in stead of cloathing, shall be couered with sack∣cloth: the heads of al men in stead of naturall haire shall be cor∣red with baldnes, the which shall befall them through sorrowe and griefe.2. In priuate. The priuate miserie it declareth hereby, that al shal mou as if euery one in particular did bewaile his onely begotten some Lastly,3. In the end. it sheweth that the end of this miserie shall be most lames∣table, whereas it is sayd (the end of them) shall be continuall per∣siuenes, and sorowe of minde, wherein they shall waxe old and  For these ten Tribes of the kingdome of Israel, carried away by the Assyrians, did neuer afterwards returne againe into the promised land. Therefore they perished and rotted in that their miserie.
Vers. 11. Behold, the dayes come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famin in the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer punish∣ment by an e∣speciall effect insuing of the same. AN amplification of this punishment described before, by an e∣speciall effect, the which shall follow of the same, namely, That those which shall also be then left in their owne countrey, together with those which shall bee carried away into strange landes, shall want the most true foode and comfort of their soules, that is to say, the preaching of the word of God. And to the end that some weight may be added vnto this threatning, God rehearseth that he himselfe, who threatneth the same, is the Lord of all things, and that same Iehouah the creator of all things, most knowne vnto them.Two things in this verse. And this verse containeth a description both of the Time and also of the matter. Concerning the time, these wordes, (Beholde, the dayes come) doe declare that it will presently come to passe.1. The time of this miserie. For they signifie, that those dayes are by and by at hand. So then the miserie the which is in this verse told of, did both follow after the captiuitie of this nation, and also went before it. For the Israe∣lites wanted also the preaching of the word of God before their exile and captiuitie, and carrying away by the Assyrians.2. The matter it selfe. As for the matter then or the effect, it is here set downe to bee horrible and fearefull: The bereauing them of the pure and outward preaching of the word of God, the which the Israelites feeling before hand the euils hanging ouer their heades, or now alreadie suffering them, longed after in vaine, and a little before their captiuitie, and also in their captiuitie. The greatnes of the miserie to want the true preaching of the word shew∣ed by a reason taken from a comparison.Further, by an argument taken from a comparison, it is shewed, how great a punishment and heauie a judgement of God against men fed before with the word of God, it is to bee left without the pure and outward preaching of his holy word, as it is said Psal. 74. ver. 9. where the faithfull complaine of this great miserie of wan∣ting the foode of the word, saying: Wee see not our signes: there is not one Prophet more, nor any with vs that knoweth how long. First, therefore in this comparing of the foode of the worde with the foode of the bodie, the greatnes of the miserie in wanting the same is declared in this, that it is called (a famin:) Secondly,1. A famin. in that as it is in deed, so it is also said to be greater then the Famin of the bodie, be it neuer so great, that is to say, wherein wee vtterly want both
meate, and also water, hauing not so much as it to quench our thi withall.Two Sects of Heretakes. These things are of great force against the Schuenfeldians and Anabaptists, which contemne or despise the outward ministe∣rie of the gospell. Vers. 12. And they shall wander from sea, to sea, and from the North euen to the East shall they run to and fro, to seeke the worde of the Lord, and shall not finde it. Hypotyposis is a figure, whereby we doe so liuely expresse and set out the doing of a thing, that it may rather bee thought to bee seene to be done, then to be told, as is in this place, their maruailous in∣deauour to finde the word of God by tra∣uailing far and neere, from sea to sea, from coast to coast, from all quar∣ters, places, and countries, &c.BY a certaine Hypotypôsis or liuely demonstration, he setteth or vnto them the most lamentable sorrow, and exceeding grea miserie of this effect, or punishment threatned vnto them: for hee sheweth and declareth, how great then shall bee their endeuour and diligence in seeking of the word of God, the which notwith∣standing they shall not thereby finde, nor enioy the same. Their diligence therefore and earnestnes is described, for that they shall seeke it from the Syrian sea, vnto the Arabian sea, and in euery quarter and coast of their owne countrie, in the East, in the West in the North, in the South. Secondly, for that they shall traile af∣ter it as it were by the foote, that is, they shall very narrowly and throughly search and peere into euery place, and yet shall not any where finde the word of God. For when as God offered himselfe vnto them, they did despise him. But God and his worde must the be accepted of, when as it is offered vnto vs. And therefore  counselleth vs very excellently to this end cap. 55. ver. 6. saying Seeke ye the Lord while he may be found: call yee vpon him while he i∣nere. Neither maketh the place of Matthew any thing here against cap. 7. ver. 7. Seeke, and ye shall finde. For whilest men do in such  seeke God and his word, as in this place is spoken of: they seeke him rather for their owne sake, then for true feare of God, namely that they may haue some comfort: not that they haue any min to serue and worship God simplie and for himselfe, but in regarde of some feare of hurt or perill towards themselues. And therefore Christ checketh the multitude, for that they rather sought him be∣cause he filled their bellies, then of loue towards his miracles, Iohn 6. ver. 26. in these wordes: Verely, verely, I say vnto you, yee seeke  not, because ye sawe the miracles, but because ye did eate of the loaes and were filled. There is a like place to this 12. ver. of this Prophet, Ierem. cap. 14. ver. 12. in the which, as here God telleth them, that seeking for the word of God they shall not finde it (to wit because
they sought it not aright) so there he sheweth that hee will not ac∣cept of their prayer and sacrifice, for that they were not done in true faith, but for some other sinister or wrong and bad respect. The wordes be these: When they fast, I will not heare their crie, and when they offer burnt offerings, and an oblation, I will not accept them: but I will consume them by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pesti¦lence. Vers. 13. In that day shall the faire Virgins and the young men pe∣rish for thirst. The conclusion.THe conclusion, None shal be spared: for the Virgins themselues, (be they neuer so deare vnto all persons, because of their com∣lines and beautie of their faces) shall perish for thirst, not now for the thirst of their soule and of the word of God, but through the thirst of their bodie.The thst of the bodie also threatned. For in this place the Lord doth threaten vnto them another thirst also. In like manner shall their young men, which can beare and endure thirst a long season, dye notwithstan∣ding for lack of drinke. For both these sexes to wit young men, and maidens, because that they are moyst, are wont to endure thirst lon∣ger then elder persons, but in this time they shall perish for want of drinke. Finallie, no kinde of men, howsoeuer otherwise excepted from common miseries, shall then bee deliuered from these most iust iudgements of God. Vers. 14. They that sweare by the sinne of Samaria, and that say, Thy God, O Dan liueth, and the maner of Beersheba liueth, euen they shall fall, and neuer rise vp againe. A reason of their former punishment.THe rendring of a reason with the repeating againe and rehear∣sing of the former punishment, to the end that these may be the more moued, and beleeue. The cause of their punishment is the mere idolatrie of these men. For they bestow the honor of the true God vpon idols: for we are to sweare by the name and maiestie of the true God onely. But these fellowes by their idols of Samaria, and of Beth-el. The repetition and conclusion of the punishment is: Therefore they shall vtterly perish. For they shall fall, and neuer rise againe.
CAP. 9. Vers. 1. I sawe the Lord standing vpon the altar, and he said: Smite the lintle of the doore, that the postes may shake: and cut them in pieces, euen the heads of them all, and I will slay the last of them with the sword: hee that fleeth of them, shall not flie away: and hee that escapeth of them shall not be deliuered. The last Ser∣mon of Amos.THe last prophesie and Sermon of Amos, the which confirmeth vnto the Israelites the same, which God had threatned vnto them before, namely, that the vtter destruction of this kingdome is at hand. Therefore doth this threatning also properly belong vnto the kingdome of Israel. And God by so many waies, and at so ma∣ny seuerall times auoucheth and foretelleth vnto them one and the same thing, to take away all excuse from the Rebels and hypo∣crites. But concerning this Sermon and prophesie, the same also is represented and shewed by a vision, that it may the rather moue the mindes of the readers and hearers, and that by the offering and laying before them of a strange and vnwonted forme and manner of the matter, he might bring them in feare, and make them atten∣tiue or readie to heare. And the peculiar and especiall ende of this prophesie and sermon is to shew, That God will take from the Is∣raelites, all their safest and surest aydes and starting holes as they thought, the which they placed especiallie, and chiefely in their i∣dols, and idol places, that is in the temples of their idols. And there∣fore God sheweth in this place, like as before, that hee will ouer∣throwe them, and that they the Israelites shall come into great mi∣serie and vtter destruction because of their wickednes. Two partes of this verse.Further, this verse hath two partes, to wit, a vision, and the expo∣sition of the same made by God himselfe the expounder thereof. The vision was after this maner:1. A vision. God stoode vpon a certaine altar, and commanded the vaulte or archroofe of the temple, in which that altar was, to be smitten, yea and moreouer, the postes (where∣upon both that arch-roofe and temple rested) to be pulled downe, and euery poste from the toppe to the foote, to be cut and diuided by the middle, so that euery poste might fall downe. These things were represented or shewed vnto this Prophet neither in Ierusa∣lem, nor yet in the Temple of Salomon, but at Beth-el, where then Amos conuersed or aboad, as before cap. 7. Yea and in the altar
and Temple of Beth-el, not that God by that his presence did coun∣tenance or allowe those places (the which were mere idolatrie) but that he comming into the thing present, and drawing his Prophet also thereinto, and vnto the consideration thereof, hee might the rather, and more assuredly shew vnto these superstitious persons, being such also as put great trust and confidence in their idoll of Beth-el, that God would at once take all these things from them, and therefore that they did in vaine flee vnto this both temple and altar. So 1. King. 13. God biddeth the Prophet to goe euen vnto the idolatrous altar of Beth-el, that he might with his finger poynt out the destruction of the same, not to shew that he made any ac∣count or reckoning of that altar, albeit that for the altars sake hee sent his Prophet euen vnto Beth-el. Neither is it a thing any more absurd or contrarie to reason, that God should be seene on this ido∣latrous altar, then afterwards in the temple of Salomon, when as it was profaned or defiled exceedingly, of which apparition of God in the Temple of God then greatly polluted see Ezech. cap. 1. for in that he appeareth vpon this impure altar, this is onely done to shew the more assured destruction thereof: not that thereby any dignitie or reuerence might be woune vnto this Altar. And this is my iudgement and opinion of the first part of this verse. 2. The exposition of this vision.The second part is the exposition of this same vision, the which in summe and briefely commeth vnto this poynt, that none shall be saued out of this calamitie or miserie, although he flee away ne∣uer so much, or seeke to withdraw himselfe, or doe trust in those temples and idols, as most safe couertes, and most sure and strong defences. For (to be after the postes or behinds the postes) as it is in the Hebrew, is to be hidden, and to repose for themselues, or to put great confidence and trust of saftie in those couertes. Vers. 2. Though they digge into hell, thence shall mine hand take them: though they clime vp to heauen, thence will I bring them downe. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer threat∣ning.A Confirmation of the former threatning by remouing and ta∣king away of their safest and surest aydes and places of refuge. For those men vse to seeke for either in heauen, or in earth: and the most safe are thought to be in the top of heauen, or in the bottome and deepe of the earth, whither the enemies cannot come, or the which are not wont to be searched and sought into. But euen there
or in these places these men shall haue no couerts to hide them∣sclues in. For the hand of God, which is euery where, will drawe them from thence and giue them vnto their enemies. Thus much also doth Dauid confesse of God his mighty power and presence, shewing that there is no man that can any where so hide himselfe, but that he will easily finde him out, when hee sayth, Psalm. 139. vers. 7.8. Whither shal I goe from thy Spirite? Or whither shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend into heauen, thou art there: if I lye downe in hell, thou art there. And so forth, vers. 9, 10, 11, 12. Vers. 3. And though they hide themselues in the toppe of Carmel, I will search and take them out thence: and though they be hid from my sight in the bottome of the sea, thence wil I commaund the ser∣pent, and he shall bite them. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer remouing of aydes from them.AN amplification of the sayde remouing and taking away of ayde spoken of in the second verse, to the end that these rebel∣lious persons might throughly resolue and perswade themselues, that nothing can priuiledge them from the wrath and iudgement of God, and keepe them in safety and out of daunger from the same. And here are other things reckoned vp, vnto the which men vse and are wont to flee & betake themselues, as vnto safe couerts to hide thēselues in, namely the tops of most high mountaines such as is the top of Mount Carmel: & the deepe of the sea it selfe. But e∣uen from thence also God shal cast them out & deliuer them to be spoyled and murthered of their enemies. For from the bottome of the sea shall Snakes or Serpents be raised vp of God, the which shal bite these fellowes, & with their venemous or poysoned teeth driue them from the waters euen whether they will or no. Vers. 4. And though they goe into captiuity before their enemies, thence will I commaund the sworde, and it shall slay them: and I will set mine eyes vpon them for euill, and not for good. Two parts of this verse.THis verse containeth 2. parts. The first, wherin is comprehended yet another amplification of the remouing of the former aides. The secōd,1. Another am∣plification of the remouing of the former aydes. in the which is a cōclusion of this remouing of thē. The second amplification of the remouing of the former aydes is con∣tayned in these words, (And though they goe into captiuitie before their enemies, thence wil I commaund the sword, and it shall slay them)
For God sheweth that these men shall not mitigate or lessen their punishment, albeit they willingly yeeld themselues vnto their ene∣mies, that by this meanes they might escape their death and mur∣ther. For whilest they shal yeeld vp themselues, & that willingly & of their owne accord, vnto the wil and pleasure of the conquerour, and shall goe into captiuity, yet shall they by the way bee killed with the sworde, by the said conquerour their enemie. So speaketh Isay of the cruelty of the Medes and Persians towards the Babylo∣nians, though they yeeld themselues and ioyne with them cap. 13. ver. 15. Euery one that is found shall be striken through: and whosoe∣uer ioyneth himselfe, shall fall by the sworde. And ver. 16. Their chil∣dren also shall be broken in pieces before their eyes, their houses shal be spoyled, and their wiues rauished. Likewise doth God threaten his owne people that they shal both goe into captiuity, and euen there also be consumed by the sword of their enemies. Ierem. 9 cap. ver. 16. I will scatter them also among the Heathen, whom neither they, nor their fathers haue knowen, and I will send a sword after them, till I haue consumed them. The very like is cap. 49. ver. 37. and almost in the same wordes. For hee that by God is appoynted vnto the sworde, because of his notorious sinnes must needes perish with the sword, and shall not be able to deliuer himselfe by captiuity or voluntarie and willing yeelding. And thus doth God shew Ierem. cap. 43. ver. 11. that the Egyptians the which should fall into the handes of Nabuchad-nezzar shall die euery one that death where∣unto he is appoynted, saying: And when he shall come (to wit Na∣buchad-nezzar) he shall smite the land of Egypt: such as are appoynted for death, to death: and such as are for captiuity, to captiuity: and such as are for the sword, to the sword. By the which is now gathered, that men which are stubborne, and hardened in their sins shal not anie where be safe and free from the wrath of God, neither in heauen, nor in earth, nor in the sea: Finally, neither in their countrey, nei∣ther among their enemies: neither fighting it out, neither yeelding themselues captiues, shal they escape that iust punishment. They must therefore repent. 2. The conclusion of this remo∣uing of their aydes.Now the conclusion of this remouing of their aides, followeth, and is taken from the rendring of a reason of the same, to wit, from the iust anger of God against them. There shall therefore bee no place, in the which they shall not be in miserie, because God (who with his eyes vieweth all things) shall not doe any thing for their good, nor haue any louing care of them: but shall deuise and dis∣pose
and ordaine all things for their destruction. The eye of the Lord shall be vpon them vnto euill, and that wholly and in all ca∣ses: and he shall no where looke vpon them for their good, or lo∣uingly. Vers. 5. And the Lord God of hostes shall touch the land, and it shall melt away, and all that dwell therein shall mourne, and it shall rise vp wholly like a flood, and shall be drowned as by the flood of Egypt. The confirma∣tion of the for∣mer conclusion by three effects.THe confirmation of the conclusion by the euent or issue and falling out of things afterward. For God shall manifestly ap∣peare angry & offended by the effects that shall follow, with these Israelites. And these effects are three. The first, There shall bee so great a smiting or affliction of this land,1 The punishmēt of the earth it selfe. that euen the very earth it selfe, which is a brute and dull or dead element shall tremble and shake, feeling this curse and anger of God against it. In which fearefull maner God powred forth his vengeance and tokens of his worthily incensed furie vpon the land of the Egyptians, at what time he deliuered his owne people thence, the horriblenes where∣of is at large described Psal. 114. ver. 3, 4, 7, 8. after this manner: The Sea saw it and fled: Iordan was turned back. The mountains lea∣ped like rams, & the little hils as lambs? The earth trembled at the pre∣sence of the Lord, at the presence of the God of Iacob, which turneth the rock into water pools,2 And vniuersall Mourning of al the inhabitāts. & the flint into a fountain of water. The second, The great and common or vniuersall mourning of the men or in∣habitants themselues, the which sheweth that this punishment is sent of God, and shall bee generall, and exceeding great. For all shall mourne, none being excepted, no not the stoutest hearts, or the most mighty, vnto the which the miseries of the common sorte doe not easily and vsually reach. The third is, The wastnes and deformity of the land it selfe after the driuing out of all the in∣habitants,3. The laying of the land wast. as if the whole land were couered and drowned with waters, and so consequently vntilled and desolate or lying waste like a wildernesse. Read chap. 8. before ver. 8.
Vers. 6. He buildeth his spheres in the heauen, and hath layd the foundation of his globe of elements in the earth he calleth the wa∣ters of the sea, and powreth them out vppon the open earth: the Lord is his name. THe second confirmation of the sayd conclusion and miserie to insue vpō the Israelites taken frō the peson of him that threat∣neth the same, to wit of God himself,The second cō∣firmatiō of the former conclu∣sion. who is both true and almigh∣ty, that is, which hath power ouer all things, whome nothing can withstand, who according to his pleasure (and yet the same very iust) changeth and ouerturneth when him pleaseth, the nature and course and state of things. Finally, who giueth vnto all things their being, which are, and haue a being.A descriptiō of God his omni∣potencie by the effects of the same, to wit. Therefore this verse contai∣neth a royall description of the omnipotencie, or almighty power of God, partly by the effects, and partly by his name Iehouah, that is euerlasting in himself, and giuing vnto al things life and strength. The effects are of two sortes. First, the Creation of all things of nothing,1. The creatiō of all things. Synecdoche, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 2. contayned vnder the word (Heauen) by the figure Sy∣necdoche. Therefore God created the heauen, of how long soe∣uer space and manifold stretching out it doe consist, as it were of diuers lower roumes and vpper roumes. The which heauen also he made most firme: and also hanging ouer the earth. And both these things, to wit, the Creation of the heauen, and also the firm∣nes of the same is both a great myracle, and also a notable worke and witnesse of the omnipotencie, or almighty power of God. 2. The power and rule of God o∣uer all crea∣tures.The second effect of his almighty power, is the rule and au∣thority of GOD ouer the things created, the which at his becke and pleasure he changeth, and establisheth: for example whereof there is in this place reckoned vp the ouerflowing of the Sea into the maine land, and the drowning of the same, as it sometime fell out in the vniuersall flood, and hath also often afterward since that time fallen out, and doth euen yet in some places at this day come to passe, as it did in Holland and Friezland some threescore years sithens, nay not past twenty yeres agone, as may be vnderstood by the Chronicle & history of those countries, for in those places ma∣ny countries haue been drowned with waters.
Vers. 7. Are ye not as the Ethiopians vnto me, ô children of Israel, sayth the Lord? Haue not I brought vp Israel out of the lande of Egypt? and the Philistims from Caphtor, and Aram from Kir? A Third confirmation from the person of those whom God spea∣keth vnto,A third confir∣mation of this miserie from the person of the Israelites. who, so farre forth as they are considered in them∣selues, are in no further regard and account before God then other nations. Therefore God will no more spare them then other peo∣ples, as the Ethiopians or Arabians, whome the Lord spared not for the same sinnes, being angry with them. Wherefore to make them know their original, and first estate and pedigree, hee telleth them by his Prophet Ezechiel cap. 16. ver. 3. Thine habitation and thy kindred is of the land of Canaan: thy father was an Amorite, and thy mother a Hittite. And so doth Ioshua also shew them cap. 24. ver. 2. where he saith vnto them: Your fathers dwelt beyond the flood in olde time, euen Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor,What Hypo∣phora is, see Antos cap. 5. ver. 21. The Hypopho∣ra or obiections of the Israelites might be: we were remoued from Egypt of God his especial fauour, there∣fore he will not punish vs. and serued other gods. But there is added in this verse a secret Hypophora, or answering beforehand of an obiection that might be made, least, because God vpon especiall fauour brought them out of Egypt, they might thinke that therefore it was lawfull for them to doe any thing, and that when they sinne, they haue an especiall priuiledge before any other people. The Lord indeede of his speciall grace brought them out of the land of Egypt, and slew mightie kings for their sakes, and as it is in the Psalme 135. ver. 12.13.14. He gaue their land for an inheritance, euen an inheritance vn∣to Israel his people. For the which the Psalmist highly extolleth the name of the Lord immediately, and sayth: Thy name, O Lord, endureth for euer, O Lord thy remembrance is from generation toge∣neration. For the Lord will iudge his people, and be pacified towards his seruants.The answer of God is, that this followeth not. Because he spareth not other nations in their sinnes, whom he remo∣ued out of their owne land, as well as them. But the Prophet Amos here answereth, that GOD brought other people, as well as hee did them, yea and such as were their neighbours, from one countrey into an other, whose sinnes notwithstanding he did not therefore leaue vnreuenged and vnpunished, as they themselues with their eyes doe see. And these people which in this place he speaketh of, are first the Philistims, whom GOD caused to remoue from Cappadocia into a countrey neere vnto the Iewes. So also did he sometimes bring Aram, that is the Syrians, who themselues are borderers likewise vnto the
Iewes. So also did he sometimes bring Aram, that is the Syrians, who themselues are borderers likewise vnto the Iewes, from the ci∣tie Kyr, or Cyr, or Cyrus into Syria. Of this remouing of nations something is spoken not impertinent vnto this place Deut. 2. ver. 23. for there Moses sheweth how the Anims the old inhabitants of the land of the Philistines, were driuen out by the Caphtorims, which are now the new Philistines, and had their originall from Caphtor a towne in Cappadocia, who came and dwelled in their steads. Vers. 8. Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are vpon the sinfull king∣dome, and I will destroy it cleane out of the earth. Neuerthelesse I will not vtterly destroy the house of Iaacob, sayth the Lord. A fourth con∣firmation both from the iu∣stice, and also the prouidence of God. Parts of this verse.A Fourth confirmation, both from the iustice of God, & also from his prouidence, the which is contained in a very notable and excellent common saying. And the prouidence of God is descri∣bed herein, for that God doth behold the meanes and doings of all kingdomes. His iustice, in that he punisheth vniust kingdomes, & in the end destroyeth them. But this verse hath two parts. The one, in the which this confirmation is declared. The other, the which comprehēdeth as it were an exception of this sentence in the king∣dome of Iudah.1. The confirma∣tion it selfe. As touching the declaration of the sentence or threatnings, there are two things in the same to be noted. First,2. An exception from the same. Two parts of the confirma∣tion. that not only certain smal or light punishments are in this place threat∣ned vnto whole kingdomes, but also, that their desolation and lay∣ing waste, yea and finally their vtter ruine and ouerthrow is here foretold. Secondly, that this punishment is threatned vnto all vn∣godly and sinfull kingdomes, that is to say,1. Vtter ruine. in the which the con∣tempt of God and iniustice doe raunge without punishment and scotfree. For how great and florishing soeuer they are,2. To sinfull king∣domes. yet God is more mightie then they, and therefore he wil vtterly destroy them. And so doth God threaten Isai. 60. ver. 12. The kingdome that will not serue me, shall perish, saith the Lord. But there is an exception added concerning the kingdome of Iudah peculiarly,The exception touching the kingdome of Iudah. not to the end the bridle should be let loose vnto that kingdome and people for to sinne, (for God hath most sharply punished the sinnes of this kingdome also:) but to shewe the singular and especiall fauour of God toward that kingdome aboue the rest, because of the couenāt, and the Messias promised vnto the same. The which benefite of
God, other people at that time wanted, and were without; accor∣dingy as it is in the Psal. 147. ver. 20. He hath not dealt so with eue∣rie nation, neither haue they knowne his iudgements. Vers. 9. For loe, I will commaund, and I will sift the house of Israel a∣mong all nations, like as corne is sifted in a sieue, yet shall not the least stone fall vpon the earth. The last con∣clusion. THe last conclusion, in the which the same threatnings against the Israelites are both confirmed: and also more plainly layd o∣pen and declared. They are confirmed, in as much as they are so often, and so earnestly repeated and rehearsed. They are laid down more plainly, because the manner is shewed, after which God will destroy and ouerthrow them.What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. Ver. 12. And here vnder the Metaphor of a winower or sifter of corne is threatned vnto euery particular Israe∣lite, and not onely vnto the bodie it selfe of the people, this most sharpe and grieuous punishment. For God will in such sort com∣prise al and singular the Israelites within this vanne or sieue of affli∣ction or punishment, that not one of them, although he bee neuer so small or little, shall escape, and shall be free, voyd, or dye without this tossing and shaking to and fro, and vp and downe. For hereun∣to appertaineth the similitude of a little stone, the which, albeit he be small and neuer so little, yet shall he not then fall vnto the earth, without shaking, that is to say, but that he shall be shaken, but that he shall be tossed and shogged to and fro with others in that same vanne or sieue. Iohn the Baptist, like as the Prophet Amos in this place, hath also vsed the similitude of a vāne or sieue Mat. 3. ver. 12. speaking of Christ his iudgement in these words: Which hath his vanne in his hand, and will make cleane his floore, and gather his wheat into his garner, but will burne vp the chaffe with vnquenchable fire. But here the manner how God will doe this,The manner how God will deale with the Israelites. is declared. For all na∣tions are sayd shall be stirred vp against the Israelites and their kingdome, least that either the power or the populousnes of that realme or kingdome might seeme to be able to place them in safe∣tie against God. Vers. 10. But all the sinners of my people shall die by the sword, which say, The euill shall not come, nor hasten for vs. An other ex∣planation.AN other explanation, or making more plaine of the matter, where the kind of punishmēt is more specially declared, where∣withall
the Israelites are to bee destroyed, to wit, they shall perish with slaughter, and with the sword, that is, by a most cruell death, and full of terror and feare. And there is added in this place also an explication or laying open of the matter more plainly of the most impudent or shameles lewdnes of these men, to the end that their so grieuous punishment may seeme to be the more iust.What manner of sinners the Israelies we. For they were not only wicked, and sinners in such sort as all men generally and naturally are, but notoriously vnfaithfull, and scoffers at God & his word: as namely being such who openly scorned the threat∣ning of God, and the oracles or prophesies of his Prophets, and de∣nied that these so great calamities or punishments should either come at them at al, or els that they should come so soone, and spee∣dilie, to wit, mocking God carelesly, as if they had made a couenant with death it selfe. Against such kind of scorners speaketh God by his Prophet Isai. cap. 28 ver. 15. which say: We haue made a coue∣nant with death, and with hell are we at agreement: though a scourge runne ouer, and passe through, it shall not come at vs: for wee haue made falsehood our refuge, and vnder vanitie are we hid. But reade what followeth in that place touching their punishment. And thus farre hath Amos threatned punishments vnto the Israelites. Vers. 11. In that day will I raise vp the tabernacle of Dauid, that is fallen downe, and close vp the breaches thereof, and I will raise vp his ruines, and I will build it, as in the dayes of old. The last part of this prophe∣sieTHere followeth the last part of this booke or prophesie, where∣in are contained comforts, & the same very great and eternall, founded, and in the end fulfilled in the Messias, promised vnto the whole familie and house of Israel, or Iacob. For he is the cause, and the foundation of all the promises of God towards his elect or cho∣sen, as Paul 2. Cor. cap 1. vers. 20. speaketh, That in him (namely Christ) all the promises of God are yea, and are in him Amen vnto the glorie of God through vs. And these selfe same promises re euery where to be found in the other Prophets also, because that one and the same Christ alone was the end of the Lawe, and the Prophets, vnto whon they all do send vs backe. Iames also maketh mention of this prophesie Act. 15. ver. 16.17. in these words: After this I will returne, and will build againe the tabernacle of Dauid,Ies te A∣  eh  pr∣phes  a∣pertaine vnto the calling of the Gentiles. which is fallen downe, and the ruines thereof will I build agine, and will set it vp, that the residue of men might seeke after the Lord, and all the Gentiles,
vpon whom my name is called, sayth the Lord, which doth all these things. And this prophesie doth he teach to appertaine vnto the kingdome of Christ, spread abroad by the preaching of the Gos∣pell, and vnto the calling and conuersion of the Gentiles vnto the true GOD, like as the true fulfilling of the same was both at that time, and also is now at this day. But Amos doth in such sort deliuer this comfort and promise, that first he promiseth the restoring of the kingdome of God by the Messias: and secondly sheweth the fruite and profite which shal ensue of this kingdome. Two parts of this verse.This verse then hath two things to be obserued and noted. First, a description of the restoring of the Church it selfe, or kingdome of God promised here figuratiuely.1. A description of the restoring of the Church. Secondly, a noting and poynting out of the time generally, in the which this shall come to passe, but not of the very moment and instant of time, as is in Daniel cap. 9. And whereof Peter in the first Epistle cap. 1. ver 10.11. witnesseth,2. A generall no∣ting of the time of the same. that the Prophets haue diligently enquired and searched, Which (sayth he) prophesied of the grace that should come vnto you, searching when or what time the spirit which testified before of Christ which was in them, should declare the sufferings that shall come vnto Christ, and the glorie that should follow. So then the true Church of God is here signified vnder the name of the (tabernacle or cottage of Dauid) be∣cause that like as Dauid was a figure of Christ, so his tabernacle was and is a token or Sacrament of the Church. And first of all the most miserable estate thereof is noted,The miserable estate of the Church. The glorious restoring of the same. when as this tabernacle is sayd to haue been a cottage. Againe, (that it was fallen, and had manie breaches and ruines or rentings.) But the restoring, yea & the same in most excellent manner is described, when as it is sayd, that it shal neuerthelesse come to passe, that both the building shall be reared vp againe, and all his rentings and breaches shall be repayred and amended: and that in such manner that the same dignitie, cōmen∣dation, fame & reuerence shal remaine vnto the same second resto∣red tabernacle, the which both was in the first tabernacle, and also was giuen vnto the same, as is also Agg. cap. 2. Indeede the body & tabernacle of the Church hath been pulled down both by the cap∣tiuitie of Babylon, the which happened afterwards: and also by the tyrannie of the Antiochi, and other kings of Syria, and likewise by the wicked doctrine of the Pharises: but it was restored againe by Christ, that same true Messias, and sonne of the Virgin Mary, and that indeed farre more gloriously and holily, and excellently, then was that first tabernacle vnder Dauid and Salomon. And this
is the most notable promise of the restoring of the Church.The time of the restoring of the church set downe in generalitie. Now the certaine time is rehearsed, in the which these things shall be done, but in generalitie. For God had not yet reuealed or opened vnto his Prophets the very article, moment and instant of time. Therefore Amos sayth, (in that day) to wit, in the which I will send my Messias promised vnto you. Vers. 12. That they may possesse the remnant of Edom, and of all the heathen, because my name is called vpon them, sayth the Lord, that doth this. The end of the building vp a∣gaine of the Church.THe end is shewed of this building vp againe of the Church, to to wit, that the true God (and he whom these contemne or de∣spise) may be worshipped of all nations, and that all people of the whole world may serue him, as the Prophet Malach. cap. 1. ver. 11. doth prophesie hereof, where he sayth: From the rising of the Sunne vnto the going downe of the same, my name is great among the Gen∣tiles, and in euery place incense shall be offered vnto my name, and a pure offering: for my name is great among the heathen, sayth the Lord of hosts. To which purpose doth Iames the Apostle conclude of this place of Amos, as hath bin cited immediatly before in the 11. verse of this chapter. Wherefore this place doth manifestly or plainlie containe the calling of the Gentiles, and the setting vp of the true worship of God among them, and the true obseruation or keeping of the same. So then not only the Israelites shall at that time bee in the Church and inheritance of God, but also the Idumeans, and o∣ther nations, because that they also shall call vpon the name of the true GOD, to wit, being taught thereunto by the Spirit of GOD through the preaching of the Gospell, as it is shewed by Paul a∣mong other nations in the example of the Ephesians, in the second chapter of his Epistle vnto them. But because this seemed vnto the Iewes a thing alwaies impossible, that the Gentiles should be con∣uerted and turned vnto the true God, this promise is confirmed by the person of God himselfe promising the same, because that he himselfe shall performe & bring it to passe, vnto whom nothing is hard, much lesse impossible, as the Angell Gabriel telleth the Vir∣gin Mary Luk. 1. ver. 37. saying vnto her, meuailing how she a vir∣gin should conceaue and beare Christ: With God nothing shall be vnpossible.
Vers. 13. Behold, the dayes come, sayth the Lord, that the plowma shall touch the mower, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seede: and the mountaines shall drop sweete wine, and all the hil shall melt. The manifold fruits of this restoring of the Church.NOw the fruites and commodities are reckoned vp, the which shall come of this restoring of the kingdome of God, and the same manifold or of many sorts. Yet notwithstanding, in all these by a proportionable sense and meaning, are vnderstood the spiri∣tual and healthsome gifts of God bestowed vpon those that are his,The earthly blessings here promised, are figures and to∣kens of spiri∣tuall and hea∣uenly graces. of the which the earthly (the which are here rehearsed) were signes, figures, and Sacraments, like as Christ his curing of our bodily dis∣eases, were significations of his healing of our spiritual infirmities, that is, the diseases and imperfections of our soules, to which end it seemeth that Matthew in his Gospell cap. 8. ver. 17. alleageth the place of Isai, He tooke our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses. And the writer vnto the Hebrewes seemeth thus far forth to giue testimony vnto the godly fathers of the former ages of the world, that they e∣uen then did vnderstand that the promises of earthly benefites should haue their full accomplishment and verifying in Christ, and in his heauenly inheritance and spiritual blessings. For thus writeth he of them cap. 11. ver. 14.15.16. They that say such things, dec plainly that they seeke a countrey. (whereby he declareth that they rested not in the outward promises of the earthly inheritance in the land of Canaan) And if they had been mindfdll of that countr▪ from whence they came out, they had leasure to haue returned. B now they desire a better, that is an heauenly (a plaine proof that they had a speciall regard vnto the spirituall signification of these earth∣lie promises) Wherefore God is not ashamed of them to be called th God: for he hath prepared for them a citie. And so doth August teach that these earthly blessings are to be vnderstanded to be mo fully and truely fulfilled in the spirituall, the which they did repre∣sent, Serm. in Mat. 18. & tractat. in Ioan. Euang. 49. But it was need∣full that these things should be promised, and in such sort to be de∣clared vnto the Iewes and Israelites at that time, because they we accustomed and acquainted with these figures and kinds of spe∣king. First of all therefore store and plentie of all kind of goo things,. Al kind of good things promi∣sed, and that in great plentie and abundance or all kind of good things is in this place promised, and sh∣wed that this is a most true fruite of the kingdome of God. And no
onely euery kind of good thing is promised, but the same also in most great abundance. For it is sayd that it shall come to passe that these shall bee cast vpon vs by God largely and plentifully, in such wise that after the former the which wee haue alreadie receiued, o∣thers forthwith shall succeed, or follow, yea whatsoeuer are neces∣sarie and needfull for the life of man, (as are corne and wine) whe∣ther they doe come by the industrie or trauaile of men (as by plow∣ing, sowing, vinedressing): or whether they come of their owne ac∣cord from the earth, as mountaines, or hils doe vse to bring foorth many things of that sort. There is a like place vnto this Leuit. 26. ver. 5. where Moses telleth them that heare the lawe, and followe the same, that they shall haue all kind of blessings heaped one in the necke of another: Your threshing (sayth he) shall reach vnto the vintage, and the vintage shall reach vnto sowing time, and you shall eate your bread in plenteousnes, and dwell in your land safely. But by these earthly things, matters healthsome or concerning saluation, and spirituall, are of vs to be vnderstanded. Vers. 14. And I will bring againe the captiuitie of my people of Is∣rael: and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabite them, and they shall plant vineyards, and drinke the wine thereof: they shall also make gardens, and eate the fruites of them. The second fruit of the re∣storing of the kingdome of God.THe second fruite of the Gospell, or restoring of the kingdome of God, to wit, deliuerance, and the same most full, from all cap∣tiuitie. For the greatest delicates and dainties are in exile and ba∣nishment vnioyfull, and vnpleasant: but in our owne countrey most welcome and ioyfull. So Psal. 137. ver. 4. the godly answere vnto their scoffing enemies, willing them to sing some of their Hebrewe songs: How shall wee sing (say they) a song of the Lord in a strange land? whereby they signifie that their musike could not be plea∣sant vnto them in their miserable captiuitie. And therefore but a little before in the same Psalme, they say that they hung vp their harpes, and sate by the riuer sides weeping. The godly therefore shall be deliuered and brought backe againe from that most mise∣rable exile, to wit, from the captiuitie of Sathan, and sinne, and the lust of the flesh, of the which tyrants men are held captiues before they haue faith in Christ.Deliuerance from spirituall captiuitie, and bondage. And this deliuerance shall not bee slight and slender, but a most full deliuerance, because men may dwell in their owne cities, and then plant there, and plow, and doe all those
things, the which all they whatsoeuer doe, the which dwell in their owne homes in greatest securitie and safetie. But these things are to be applied vnto the benefites of the Gospell towards the godly by Christ in a spirituall sense, such as may proportionably be gathered from these earthly promises, the which godly through Christ doe enioy great tranquilitie or quiet of mind and conscience, euen whi∣lest they liue here vpon earth, and therefore much more in that e∣uerlasting and blessed life. Vers. 15. And I will plant them vpon their land, and they shall no more be pulled vp againe out of their land, which I haue giuen them, sayth the Lord thy God. The third fruitTHE third fruite, the stabilitie or setlednes, and continuance of e∣uery godly and faithfull person in his owne seate and home, that is, in the same, wherein he shall be placed by God, the which is especially to be vnderstood of euerlasting life. And this is as it were an accesse or increase of both the former benefites. For many times neither doth plētie of good things delight vs, nor yet the dwelling in our own natiue coūtrey, if in the same there hāg ouer our heads continuall and assured feare, that we shall forthwith be depriued & spoyled of both these commodities: but when as vnto the former benefites of God there commeth also a promise of continuall secu∣ritie, or being without feare and daunger, and of enioying and kee∣ping of our goods, then may we in deed and in trueth bee iudged most happie.These things are chiefly to be vnderstood of our heauenly dwelling. But these things, as I haue sayd, are rather to be vnder∣stood of that heauenly land, that is, of heauen, in the which we shall be after this life, then of that earthly mansion, or dwelling: for be∣cause that this seate onelie is firme, stable, stedfast, and sure, to wit, heauen, and eternall life, ordained for vs of God. And thus much doth the place of the Hebrewes cap 11. ver. 14.15.16. a little be∣fore recited ver. 13. of this chapter, sufficiently enough declare. But this earthly land is oftē giuen vs of God to dwell in only for a time, out of the which we are afterwards driuen into other seates, either by enemies, or by the ouerflowing of waters. Wherefore let no man thinke himselfe to be here vpon earth placed by God in such sort, that he cannot be pulled out, but they which are in heauen, they only and alone are so placed and dwell, that they can neuer bee re∣moued. FINIS.
A Commentary of Lambertus Danaeus vpon the Prophet Oseas. CAP. 1. Vers. 1. The word of the Lord that came vnto Hosea the sonne of Be∣eri, in the dayes of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah Kings of Iudah, and in the dayes of Ieroboam sonne of Ioash King of Israel. The great dis∣obedience of the kingdome of Israel vnto God.IT appeareth 2. King. cap. 17. how great the disobedience and stubbornnesse of the people of Israel (that is, those which liued in the kingdome of Israel after the departure thereof from Iudah) was a∣gainst almightie God, who had so long time been vnto them a most mercifull fa∣ther. The which also is confirmed, Ierem. 25. for there was in them both vngodli∣nes and iniustice most obstinate,The long bea∣ring of God with the Israe∣lites. albeit that the Lorde for the space of more then two hundreth yeares had borne with them, and ear∣nestly both day and night had admonished or warned them conti∣nuallie by his Prophets. Whereupon that was needes to follow, the which Paul saith 1. Rom. 18. That in the end the wrath of God was reuealed against them from heauen it selfe: and that, as it is Ephe. 5. ver. 6. God should most sharply punish this disobedience. For by meanes of the vngodlines and vnrighteousnes of men and of those especially which call themselues the sonnes of God, the wrath of God is most worthely powred out vpon the world, and vpon such chiefely. For as Paul saith 3. Colos. ver. 6. For such things sake the wrath of God commeth on the children of disobedience. And so doth Moses threaten the Israelites, that for their disobedience they should perish like vnto other nations, Deut. 8. ver. 20. As the nati∣ons,
which the Lord destroyed before you, so ye shall perish, because yee would not be obedient vnto the voyce of the Lord your God. And to this end is all that to be referred Deut. 28. of the seuerall sortes of punishments which the Lorde hath in store for those that follow not his lawe and commandements. Wherefore God at the last de∣termined to ouerthrow and vtterly to destroy this people, that is, the kingdome of Israel, like as for the iniquitie of men he destroy∣ed the first world it selfe also in the dayes of Noe, as it is Gen. 6. But yet such is the mercie of God alwaies both towards all man∣kinde: but especially towards those the which do carrie the signe and token of his couenant (such as they were) hee would not pu∣nish them, but being a long time and much warned before of their destruction,God from time to time raysed vp Prophets among the Is∣raelites to put them in minde of their duties. if they continued still in the same sinnes. Therefore in a certaine continuall ranke as it were, and succession, he raised vp Prophets, the which should certifie those men, both of the most sharpe iudgement of God against them, if they did not repent, and of his mercie readie for them, if they would conuert and turne vnto him: and that they should shew and declare vnto them both, these sentences of iudgement and of mercie: and in their persons should foretell the selfe same things vnto the whole world: and now also vnto vs at this day, who by their examples ought to learne to bee wise.The office of the Prophets, where in it doth consist. Whereof it commeth to passe, that the office of the Prophets doth consist both in the shewing of the iudgements of God a∣gainst the sinnes of men, and also in promising his fauour and fire mercie vnto his Church through Christ. The which two poyntes ought especially to be obserued or marked of vs in the bookes of all the Prophets, which are extant or remaining among vs, like as also those are the chiefe parts and end of their whole ministerie or office. And among those Prophets the which God peculiarly or∣dained and sent vnto the Israelites, was this Oseas, whose holy wri∣tings are these extant, and the which continued in the exercise of this office by the space of very many yeares, and that continualle and without ceasing.Oseas not the first Prophet that was sent vnto the Israe∣lites. Why Oseas is placed first in the order of the bookes of the Small prophets. Yet was not this Oseas the first of those pro∣phets, whom God sent vnto that kingdome of Israel, and whoe writings are also now extant, as I haue shewed in my notes before these Prophets, and also vpon Amos: but because of the long con∣tinuance in his office, hee is preferred before the rest in setting downe the order of the bookes of the twelue small Prophets, and set in the first place. For he prophesied by the space of more the fourtie yeares. Therefore the whole argument and matter of his
writing and Prophesie doth consist both in shewing and setting forth of the iudgements of God against the wicked, and also in de∣claring of his mercie towards his church and the godly. Things to be noted in the first verse.This first verse then hath three certaine things to be obserued or noted. The one, what is the certaintie, and authoritie of the doc∣trine following, and the which is to bee propounded or deliuered. And it is very singular and worthie of greatest reuerence,1. The certaintie, and authoritie of this prophe∣sie. because it is the word of (Iehouah) that is, of that same indeede almightie and true God, and not the deuise of men, or the dreaming of the Prophet Oseas, or some odde fable or tale composed and made by art, for as Peter teacheth 2. Epist. cap. 1. ver. 16.18. the worde of God is not any fable fraught with deceite, but a matter of assured truth and certaintie, and therefore hee saith of the same vnto the faithfull, vnto whom he did write: We followed not deceiuable fables, when we opened vnto you the power and comming of our Lord Iesus, but with our eyes we same his maiestie, And we heard the voyce (of his father concerning him) when it came from heauen, being with him in the holy mount. This his word God would not haue to bee kept se∣cret and hidden: but to bee opened and declared vnto those men. And therefore the Prophet is commanded to deliuer it, And vnto him this word came from God himselfe. In the second place it is to be noted in this verse,2. Vnto whom the word of God was re∣uealed. vnto whome this word was reuealed that it might be declared, to with vnto Oseas the sonne of Beeri, that is, vnto that Oseas who at the same time was sufficiently knowne and famous among the Israelites by the honestie, name, godlines and diginitie of his father. For the setting downe of this name of his father doth not onely note out the familie or house of Oseas, but also the fa∣mousnes of the same, then well knowne. The third poynt is here declared, at what time Oseas prophesied.3. At what time Oseas prophesi∣ed. And this time is noted two maner of waies, namely both by the kings of Iudah: and also by the kings of Israel, as for the Kings of Iudah, Oseas prophesied in the dayes of Vzzias, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekias. For vnder all these he executed his office by the space of aboue fortie yeares, and vnder the King Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas, which was King of Israel. And him alone doth he name of the Kings of Israel, be∣cause that albeit hee continued his office vnder other Kings of Is∣rael also, yet was it more maruailous that in that time such iudge∣ments of God as these, should be declared vnto this people, whenas the estate of this kingdome of Israel was vnder this Ieroboam most florishing. For as it is 2. King cap. 14. ver. 25. He restored the
coast of Israel from the entring of Hamath vnto the Sea of the wilder∣nes. And it may appeare by Amos cap. 6. ver. 2. that in this kinges dayes, vnder whome he prophesied, the kingdome of Israell might compare with any other kingdome on any side of them both for wealth and largenes. For thus hee saith of the same: Goe you vnto Calneh, and see: and from thence goe ye vnto Hamah the great: the goe downe vnto Gath of the Philistines, be they better then these king∣domes or the border of their land greater then your border? By these things it is manifest,Oseas began to prophesie before the Prophet I∣say. that Oseas began to prophesie before the Pro∣phet Isai. For Isaias, as is gathered cap. 7. ver. 8. began threescore and fiue yeares before the captiuitie and ouerthrow of the Israe∣lites, that is, about the thirtith yeare of King Azarias, and seauen whole yeares after the death of this Ieroboam, of whom Oseas here maketh mention: and therefore by Isaias there is no mention made of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas. But Oseas began to prophesie, as the fourth verse hereafter sheweth, about the end of the raigne of Ieroboam.Oseas prophesi∣eth after A∣mos, and Ionas. Therefore he prophesied also after Amos the Prophet, as I haue said vpon Amos, and almost threescore and two yeares after the death of the Prophet Elizaeus. Whereof there is 2. King. cap. 13. ver. 14. He prophesied also after the Prophet Ionas. Vers. 2. At the beginning the Lord spake by Hosea, and the Lord said vnto Hosea, Goe, take vnto thee a wife of fornications, and children of fornications: for the land hath committed great wh∣dome, departing from the Lord. A plaine decla∣ration of God his dealing with the Pro∣phet.A Plaine laying open of the processe insuing. For Oseas reporteth the very words themselues by God reuealed vnto him: and that in such order as the same were by God declared vnto him. For he saith, In the beginning and at what time, the Lord spake vnto me by that same extraordinary maner, he commanded, that I should take vnto me a wife, &c. The Prophet therefore hereby doth signifie, that God spake vnto him, and commanded him often times, that hee should deliuer many things vnto the people of Israel: but the first reuelation, the which was made vnto him by God, and the thing that first of all hee was commanded to open, doe, and propound vnto them,1. What God commanded O∣seas. was this, that he should take vnto him a wife, &c. This verse then containeth two things: the one, what GOD spake, or commanded Oseas. The other, why hee commanded him any such thing, as is here in this place mentioned.2. Why he so cō∣mandeth him. And touching
the first, God commanded, that Oseas should take vnto himselfe in marriage a wife, and that not any one whatsoeuer,1. Oseas comman∣ded to marrie a common harlot. The children begotten called bastards. but such a one expreslie as some times had been a knowne and stinking strumpet, yea and the which continued an harlot after that she was married. Oseas then married a strumpet, of whome hee should beget after∣wards children, the which by reason of that blot and infamie or e∣uill name of their mother, were here named by the Prophet, and also commonlie by others, the children of an harlot, or bastards.This place misse-vnder∣stood by some. For this is not the meaning (as some suppose of these wordes) (children of an harlot, or of fornications,) as if the minde of the Pro∣phet were, that the wife, which Oseas at the commandement of God had married, was first his strumpet, and that he begat the chil∣dren on her in fornication: but Oseas begat them in lawfull marri∣age, the which notwithstanding because of that same dishonestie and vnchastnes of their mother knowne vnto euery man, and of her not laide a side after her marriage, were called the children of an harlot. But albeit this place of some be vnderstoode in this sense, as I haue expounded it: yet I had rather yeeld vnto their opinion,The better sense and mea∣ning of this place. who write that these things are in such wise tolde by the Prophet, as if they had been appointed by God to bee declared onely, and not commanded to be done indeede. This therefore (Take vnto thee a wife) is thus much to say, declare this from me saith the Lord, as if thou thy selfe hadst taken vnto thy felfe a wife, the which was before a strumpet, and vnchast: yea and moreouer remained such a one also after marriage, as appeareth cap. 2. of this prophesie, vers. 5. Now the reason why God would haue such a thing as this pro∣pounded and setforth by the Prophet, as if it had been done by him,2. Oseas comman∣ded to propounds this similitude vnto them, to signifie their spirituall for∣nication a∣gainst God their husband. is this. For that God by this similitude of a married woman and a wife, playing yet still the strumpet after marriage, would teach, that the fame people whome hee had taken to wife, had alwaies most shameleslie played the harlot. For both of old, that is, before they were taken of God to be his people, they were idolators in the person of Abraham Iosh. 24. ver. 2. Yea and much more also after that they were taken and ioyned vnto God for his inheritance by a peculiar couenant, as the prophet will shew hereafter, cap. 2. ver. 5. Further, he defineth, what, and what maner of fornication this for∣nication of the people, or of the land is: that is to say, it is to turne aside from the true worship of God, and to cleaue vnto idols: the contrarie whereof Paul doth declare in the Thessalonians to their
great prayse and commendations 1. Thess. 1. ver. 9. writing of them thus: For they themselues (he meaneth other faythfull in Macedo∣nia and Achaia) shew of you what maner of entring in we had vnto you, and how ye turned to GOD from Idols to serue the liuing and true God. This whoredome therefore whereof he speaketh is spirituall, like as this marriage of God with vs is spirituall, as Paul sheweth speaking of the marriage of the Church of the faythfull among the Corinthians with Christ after this manner: I am iealous ouer you with godly iealousie: for I haue prepared you for one husband, to pre∣sent you as a pure virgin vnto Christ. Vers. 3. So he went and tooke Gomer, the daughter of Diblai, which conceiued, and bare him a sonne. A cōtinuing of the former pro∣cesse, shewing,THe continuing of the former processe. For Oseas goeth on to shew, what followed the same commanding of God vnto him. And first of all he teacheth that this marriage by the commande∣ment of God was in such sort of him propounded and tolde vnto the people,1. The propoun∣ding of this ma¦riage. as if he had indeede and in truth marryed such a wife, that is to say an harlot. Secondly, he declareth what fruit and chil∣dren were begotten by that maryage:2. The children comming of the same. and what the signification of them is, that is, what is the minde and meaning of God herein. Now the purpose and meaning of God was, vnder the name and fi∣gure of this kinde of marriage to haue shewed and declared the no∣torious treacherie and faithlesnesse of the Israelites towardes him, wherein when as that wife no doubt was greatly honoured by her husband,3. What God signifieth here∣by. she notwithstanding on the contrary parte by a singular kinde of vnthankfulnesse did wonderfully dishonour her husband and therefore did grieue him,1. The faithlesnes of the Israelites the wife to∣wards God their husband. and prouoke him agaynst her, as i is Ezech. 16. Moreouer God by this similitude teacheth, that his anger towards this people is most iust, as who namely hath recei∣ued so great an iniury at their hand:2. That therfore his anger is most iust to∣wards them. for the husband hath most worthy cause to be angry with his wife that still continueth playing the harlot. Further, the name of the Prophets wife is here set downe,  wit, Gomer, that is to say, Perfection, such a one as God had made this people after his marriage with them,The name of the Prophets wise. to wit, most plentifuly enriched and garnished with all giftes and graces. And this Go∣mer was the danghter of Diblaim, that is, of a most desolate an waste wildernes. For at the first, the condition and estate of th
family or house, that is, the familie or house of Abraham and Ia∣cob, of the which this people was borne, was most lamentable and base, in Assyria, & in Egypt, euen like vnto the estate of a nation as vnknowen, & dwelling in a place that is vtterly desolate or a meere wildernes, and destitute or voyde of all things. Thus much of this marriage, and of that wife. And as for the fruit of this mar∣riage, they are three children begotten of Gomer, of the which the first, who he was, and what is the signification thereof according vnto the meaning, and minde of GOD, the verse following doth declare. Vers. 4. And the Lord said vnto him, call his name Izreel: for yet a little and I will visit the blood of Izreel vpon the house of Iehu, and will cause to cease the Kingdome of the house of Is∣rael. The children begotten by this marriage represent the state of the Is∣raelites, past, present, and to come.THe Lord purposing to set down what the estate of the people of Israel both before time was, and also what it was at that time and in time to come should bee, doth in like manner set downe three children, as if they had been by the Prophet begotten of Go∣mer the harlot, the same being of diuers names, and also sexe. And as touching the first of these children, it is a man childe, whose name should be Izreel. The signification and reason of this name is expressed here∣after. This Izreel doth declare the estate of the people of Israel, such as it was before, that is, from the time that Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas began to raigne, vntil the beginning of this prophesie. For as much then as the state of this kingdome was not onely tolerable but also flourishing, and that this Ieroboam had restored the olde borders vnto the kingdome of Israel, taken away before by the Sy∣rians, this their estate is very well, and worthily compared vnto a man, that is, vnto a male childe.The first childe named Izreel and what this name betoke∣neth. But this male childe is called Izreel, according vnto the name of the Citie, where Iehu had be∣fore slaine the posterity of Achab, 2. King. cap. 9. wherein there is no doubt an allusion or resemblance made both vnto the name of Israel (betwixt which and (Izreel) there is a great likelyhoode both in sound and letters) by the which this people being deuided from the kingdome of Iudah did name it selfe, and vaunted of the same; and also vnto that citie, the which,Izreel the chief citie of the Is∣raelites was first to seele the heauy iudge∣ments of God as it was first made by Iehu famous & renowmed through the reuengement of the contempt
or despising of the true God (for in the same the first murthering of the house of Achab was cōmitted) so was it first of all to feele these most greuous threatnings of God against this people. And this doth the reason of this name here yeelded shew, the which containeth 3. things:  first, the cause of God his iudgement vpon that Citie Izted especially: secondly, the time of the same: the third, the misery and condition or estate of this whole kingdome,  the which should af∣terwards ensue.Why the childe is called Iiz∣reel. And the cause of this name was, that Iizreel, that is, this man childe should betoken that same before time most flou∣rishing and mighty citie, the which in the Kingdome of Israel was called Iizreel, and was the palace of the house of Iehu. For God a∣gainst that citie and territorie of the same, and the inhabitants ther∣of would auenge the blood which was shed by Iehu, whilest that of himselfe, and by his he doth destroy the house of Achab: for hee slew Ioram in the territory or fielde of Iizreel: and the rest of the sonnes of Achab, which were left aliue (albeit they were slayne in the Citie Samaria) yet are they said to bee slaine of the Princes and nobles of the citie Iizreel: at lestwise the heads of them being mur∣thered were brought thither, that is, to Iizreel, vnto King Iehu, as as appeareth 2.Why Iehu is punished in his family, for do∣ing that which God comman∣ded. King. cap. 9. and 10. Further God auengeth this blood of Achab vpon the house of Iehu, although that it were shed by his commandement, because that Iehu in the destroying of the house of Achab did not fulfill the will of God, but his owne will, that is to say, he did not restore the worship of the true God, but he suffered the same Idolatrie to be in that kingdome, the which was there before. Wherefore these slaughters are reckoned, and that worthily to haue been meere, or no better then killing and cutting of throats by the high way sides, the which were committed by Ie∣hu. Therefore Iehu slew Ioram his Lord rather to obtayne the kingdome, then to restore vnto the true God his right. For all was the which are vniust, be they either ciuill, or forraine, are great throat-cuttings.2 The time of the fulfilling of these things. And thus much of this name of his sonne Iizreel As for the time of the fulfilling of this iudgement, hee sheweth that there remaineth a very short space for the same by these wordes (yet a little) For Oseas began to prophesie about the ende of the raigne of Ieroboam: and after the death of the same Ieroboam came these things to passe, the which are here spoken of, or at lea wise began to bee fulfilled.3. The condition or estate of this people. Lastly, the condition or estate of the whole people, is here declared and shewed what it 0173 0203 V 3 shall bee, to wit, it is foretolde that it shall come to passe, that the said House
Israel shall vtterly and throughly cease to bee a kingdome. The which afterwardes came to passe vnder King Oseas, about fortie yeares more or lesse after these things were foretolde. Vers. 5. And at that day will I also breake the bowe of Israel in the valley of Izreel. Two parts of this verse.A More plaine making of the former matter. For hee declareth both the maner of the doing of these things, and also the place where they shall be done. The maner of the doing of these things is, that God shall break all the strength of this kingdom,1. The maner of doing of these things. The figure Sy∣necdoche, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. vers. 21. the which is here signified vnder the name of a (bowe, one part of the strength in warre being put for all) by the figure Synecdoche. So Dauid Psal. 44. ver. 6. when he sayth: I doe not trust in my bowe, neither can my sworde saue me, meaneth that reposed not his confidence in a∣ny instruments of warre whatsoeuer, but onely in the helpe of the liuing. God. The place wherein these things shall be done,2. The place wher¦in these things shalbe done. is the valley of Iizreel, in the which Ioram & his companions were slaine. For as it is 2. King. cap. 8. ver. 29. King Ioramwent downe to Izreel to be cured of the wounds which the Syrians had giuen him at Ramah, when he fought against Hazael King of Syria. And there was slain by Iehu in Izreel, where the Israelites shall sustaine a great slaugh∣ter of their enemies and Assyrians. Vers. 6. Shee conceiued yet againe, and bare a daughter, and God sayd vnto him, call her name Lo-ruchamah: for I will no more haue pittie vpon the house of Israel: but I will vtterly take them away. What this daughter beto∣keneth.THe second birth of Gomer is declared. And this a daugh∣ter, that is, a woman, not a man whose name is expressed, and the reason of the name. This daughter doth betokē the estate of the people of Israel, such as it was after the death of this Ieroboam, that is to say, decayed, weake, and lying open vnto the strength of the e∣nemie, like as a woman is weake and little able to shift for her self. And this fell out vnder Phace the sonne of Romelia, 2. King. 15. ver. 29. where is shewed how the King of the Assyrians did vexe and molest them, and tooke their cities, in these wordes: In the dayes of Pekah (or Phace) King of Israel, came Tiglath Pileser King of Asshur, and tooke Iion and Abel, Beth-maachah, and Ionoah, and
Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Galiah, and all the lan  Naphtali, and carryed them away to Asshur. Wherefore the ab∣ged estate,The daughters name, Lo-ru∣chama, No pi∣tied, and what it signifieth. and the weake strength of this kingdome are comp vnto a woman, and not to a man. And this daughter is called  ruchamah, because that the estate of this people was in such so afflicted by God, that he would not afterward take any pitti t∣on, nor afterwards rayse it vp and restore it, albeit they themse vnder King Oseas neuer so much attempted or assayed to doe  same. Hereof commeth the signification or reason of the  For this daughter is commaunded so to be called, because that  hereafter would not pittie, that is, vse mercy towards this peop but purposeth and mindeth vtterly to ouerthrow them, as it ca to passe because of their desperate wickednes. Vers. 7. Yet will I haue mercie vpon the house of Iudah, and  saue them by the Lord their GOD, and will not saue then by bowe, nor by sworde, nor by battell, by horses, nor by horse∣men. The figure Hy∣pophora, or an∣swering of an obiection that might be made. See what Hy∣pophora is, A∣mos cap. 5. ver. 21.THis is the figure Hypophora, or answering of an obiection th might be made, wherby God meeteth with a doubt of the god∣ly, and doth the more bite and grieue the Israelites. And first he dealeth with the question: Whether then will God roote out and d∣stroy al the seede of Abraham and Israel, or will hee reserue and sa some: God answereth, that he will saue that other kingdome, t which was called the house of Iudah, and was the true and law issue of Israel, the posteritie of Dauid: the very church of GOD▪ where the Temple, where the sacrifices ordayned by God, and the true doctrine flourished. And hee doth bite and grieue the Israe∣lites, that whilest they are destroyed, their neighbours notwithsta∣ding and brethren the Iewes, and those, whome the Israelites  greatly hated, and for their worshipping of the true God, laughe to scorne, are neuerthelsse saued. That which came to passe vnde king Ezechias. 1. The cause of the sauing of the Iewes.Further, both the cause and also the maner of this sauing and deliuering of the Iewes is expressed. The cause is, The onely mer∣cy of God towards them, the which Oseas foretolde before that these rebellious Israelites should be destitute or void of.2. The maner of their deliue. ance. As for the man of their deliuerance it is extraordinarie. For God at that time will help and saue the kingdome of Iudah, by no weapons, or horses, or
bowe, battell, or other meanes vsed among men in warre, but by such a way as is altogether xaordinary: for the Iewes draue away their enemies by the onely inuocation or calling vpon of the name God, when as Ierualem was besieged of Sennacherib, and Rapsa∣ce. 2. King. 19. And so doth Dauid giue this glorie vnto GOD, Psal. 20. that h will giue victory vnto his king neither by chariots nor horses, but by his owne strength, at the prayer of the faithfull. I therefore doe translate this place thus: But I will haue mercy on the house of Iudah, &c. So that by the way of contrariety, and by the aduersatiue coniunction (but) I make this sentence of the sauing of the house of Iudah contrary vnto that which went before of the de∣struction of the house of Israel. Vers. 8. Now when she had wayned Lo ruchamah, she conceiued and bare a sonne, Vers. 9. Then sayd God, Call his name Lo-ammi: for yee are not my people: therefore I will not be yours. The third birth or childe of Go∣mer.THe third birth of Gomer, the which sheweth what shall be the last state of the sayd people of Israel, and at such time as they shall be destroyed. But this childe was not forthwith and by and by borne, but after some space time comming between, within the which the daughter was wayned which was borne before him. And doubtles, this same kingdome of Israell, albeit that it were cutte shorter, continued yet a little space of time. For Phace, or Pekah the sonne of Romeleas reigned twenty yeares, 2. King. 15. ver. 27. vnder whome notwithstanding, the power and strength of that Kingdome was broken and weakned. Three points of the 9. verse.But this verse the 9. contayneth three things: The sexe of the childe, His name, And the reason of his name. This childe was a man-childe.1. The sexe of the chide, which was a man childe. For vnder Oseas the last King of the Israelites the strength of this Kingdome seemed after some sorte to be restored. for albeit that they were now vnder the Assyriās, yet now notwith∣standing the estate of that people seemed somewhat tollerable, be∣fore they fell away from the Assyrians, and vntill that Samaria was besieged by Salmanazar king of the Assyrians, because of the tre∣cherie and rebellion of King Oseas. For euen yet then the strength of the Israelites was so great, that for the space of three whole yeares they withstood the Assyrians, and all their greatest forces. 2. King. 17. whereupon that estate of this kingdome, although their
last state, is compared vnto a man childe, and not vnto a woman. And he is called,2. The name of the childe, Lo∣ghammi, or Lo∣ghnammi. Lo-ghammi, that is, Not my people, as Paul doth expound it Rom. 9. ver. 25. For there speaking of the calling of the Gentiles, hee citeth the place of this Prophet cap. 2. vers. 23. after this manner: I will call them my people, which were not my people: an her beloued which was not beloued, alluding vnto the names of Lo-ammi, and Lo-ruchamah.3. The reason of the name. The reason of the name, because  should come to passe after this destruction, that the same whole part of the seede of Iacob & Abraham, that is, the ten tribes, shoul not any more be reckoned the people of God: nor should retaine the couenant of God, or any signe thereof: but that they shoul liue miserablie dispersed among barbarous nations, among the which they should neither keepe nor celebrate circumcision, and the memory of the true GOD (as namely hauing forgotten alto∣gether the God of Abraham) when as the Iewes notwithstanding in the captiuity of Babylon diligently retayned both, as a token o the couenant of God yet remaining with them.The people of Israel in their captiuitie re∣tained no seale of God his co∣uenant. So then the peo∣ple of Israel in their captiuity retained no seale of the couenant of God: and there fore ceased to be the people of God, and the true God ceased also to be the God of this people, or to be counted and called, and acknowledged their Father: And therefore they were in deede Lo-ghammi, that is, Not his people. Vers. 10. Yet the number of the people of Israel shall bee as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured nor tolde: and in the place where it was sayd vnto them, yee are not my people, it shal be sayd vnto them, ye are the sonnes of the liuing God. A comfort for the smal num∣ber of the god∣ly yet remai∣ning.A Comfort, which the Lord interlaceth to rayse vp, cheare and comfort the small, but yet deare number vnto him of the godly▪ the which did yet remaine in that people. For albeit this kingdome should perish, yet should not the Church of GOD in that people perish therefore notwithstanding. For God would gather it out of the middest of this people, of the which notwithstanding being dispersed among the Assyrians there should not be any more a bo∣dy, and in which people there should remaine no signe visible, o to be seene of the couenant of God. To be short, God gathereth his Church out of all peoples, much more out of the Israelites. Wherefore this prophesie of the gathering together and preser∣uing of the church appertayneth vnto the calling of the Gentiles
also, & not only vnto the calling backe of these ten tribes of Israel, as Paul teacheth Rom. 9. cap. ver. 25. alleadged before in the verse immediatly before going, where the Apostle, as it is euident to be seen of euery one, doth purposedly cite it to proue the calling of the Gentiles. Two parts of this verse.This verse therefore contayneth two things, one of the preser∣uing in the meane season, and restoring of the church, and the same most plentifull or in great number,1. The preseruing and estoring of the Church. so that it may afterwardes be compared vnto the sand of the sea which is infinite, and cannot be numbered nor measured. And this did then come to passe, when as the Gentiles through the preaching of the Gospel were called vn∣to Christ. The other, it declareth those,2. Out of whome God will ga∣ther his church out of whom GOD will afterwards gather the selfe same Church, to wit, out of all them, the which were not his people before, or at that time. Therefore this promise is generall, as Paul teacheth Ephes. 2. ver. 1. where he sheweth that God quickned the Ephesians which were dead in sinnes, and tooke them also into the number of his Church, as it followeth anon after the beginning of that chapter. So then those which before were not the people of God, the same afterwardes were made his, not onely people and inheritance, but also his sonnes, and the Temple of the liuing GOD, such as were both the Gentiles and also the Israelites being conuerted vnto the Gospel, and gathered together by Christ into one sheepfold, as Christ tea∣cheth Iohn 10. ver. 16. where speaking of the Gentiles in time to be gathered vnto the Church of the Iewes he sayth: Other sheepe I haue also, which are not of this folde: them also must I bring, and they shall heare my voyce: and there shal be one sheepfold and one shep∣heard. And vnto these doth Peter Epist. 1. cap. 2. ver. 9. giue very glorious titles, when he calleth them, A chosen generation, a royall Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar (or purchased) people, to shewe foorth the vertues of him that hath called them out of darkenes into his marueylous light. Vers. 11. Then shall the children of Iudah, and the children of Israel be gathered together, and appoynt themselues one head, and they shall come vp out of the land: for great is the day of Izreel. A confirmatiō of the former promise consi∣sting of three partes.A Confirmation of the former promise of the restoring of the Church, and that in most great number, from the declaring of the thing and manner of the same, albeit that the kingdome of Is∣rael,
shall perish.1. The two king∣domes shall be frieny vnited And here are three things told that they shall then come to passe, when as GOD will gather together that same his Church. First, that Iudah and Israel, that is, both those kingdomes shall come together into one, the diuision of mindes being taken a∣way, the which was before betweene them both. For when as God through the Gospell gathered the Church vnto Christ, all such di∣stinction, hatred, and grudge of sexe of men, kingdomes, & nations, which was before, was taken away.2. They shall all chse vnto themselues one and the same head. The second poynt is, That all these shall choose vnto themselues one and the same head, to wit, Christ giuen vnto them by God. For it is not in the power of the Church to choose her owne head, but he that is by God himselfe set for the head thereof, he onely may be the head. Eph. 1. ver. 22. for so Paul there witnesseth of God, That he hath made al things subiect vnder the feete of Christ, and hath appoynted him ouer all things to be the head to the Church. But when as men being instructed by the word of God doe allow of that head, follow, and embrace him, for∣saking all others, they are sayd to set ouer themselues an head, the which notwithstanding God gaue and set ouer them.3. They shal come vp out of those countries, into the which they haue been scat∣tered. The third thing is, They shall goe vp captiues out of those countries, into the which they were dispersed or scattered before, that they may bee ioyned together into one bodie. Therefore least this scattering of them into other places might seeme to be a let, that these Israelites being carried away should not come vnto Christ, and that the Church should not be so copious or plentiful and many in number, as is promised, they themselues are sayd, that they shall then come vp out of those countries where they were before held captiues. For they shall be scattered abroad, because that the day of Izreel, that is, in the which this kingdome shall be afflicted or punished, shall be horrible and fearefull, and shall vtterly scatter this people into diuers countries, as appeareth 2. King. cap 15. ver. 29. and cap. 17. ver. 6. where the seuerall places are named, from whence they were caried by the Assyrians. In the first place it is recorded thus: In the dayes of Pekah king of srael came Tiglath Pileser king of As∣shur▪ and tooke Iion, and Abel▪ Beth-maachah, and Ianoah, and Kedesh, and Hazor, and Gilead, and Glilah and all the land of Naphtali, and carred them away to Asshur. In the second place the words are these: In the ninth yeare of Hoshea the king of Asshur tooke Samari, and carried Israel away into Asshur, and put them in Halah, and i Habor by the riuer of Goshan, and in the cities of the Medes. But all this captiuitie and scattering notwithstanding, they among them
which are the elect of God, shall afterwards be gathered together by God, that they perish not. CAP. 2. Vers. 1. Say vnto your brethren Ammi, and vnto your sisters, Ru∣chamah. A confirmatiō of the former promise of Gd, frō that whih should follow of the same.A Confirmation of the former promise of GOD from the conse∣quent, or that which should follow: nanely, from the name, by the which those Israelites are commanded to be called, vnto whom God promised mercie and fauour in the chapter before going. For God doth not commaund any thing to be done in vaine, or giueth any name vnto any thing, or commandeth any name to be giuen, without the true effect to insue of the same. Wherefore when as God expresly commandeth them to be called (beloued) he doth no doubt by this name confirme that his mercie towards them. And as concerning this verse, it containeth two things. The one, the name by the which they were to bee called afterward.1. The name, whereby the Israelites shoud be cal∣led. The other, those, by whom these Israelites shall be thus named. The name is both (my people) and also (hauing obtained mercie.) The which two are euidently opposed or set against the two former names, by the which before the most miserable estate of this people, by reason of their sinnes, was described in the chapter before going vers. 8.9. Wherefore the condition and estate of this people shall be cleane otherwise, when as the Lord shall begin through Christ, and the preaching of the Gospell, to be mercifull, and fauourable vnto thē, as vnto oth nations also, as Paul in like manner doth expound it Ro here ver. 25. he translateth these words (hauing obtained mericie) Hegapemenen, that is to say, Beloued, the which is all one. 2. By whom the Israelites all thus be called.As for the other poynt by whom they shall be thus called: first, he commaundeth these Israelites, that is to say, men by reason of their sinnes before forsaken of him iustly, to bee so called by their brethren, and sisters, that is, by the Iewes, whom God before cap. 1. ver. 7. promised that he would saue, and keepe for his people,1. By the Iew. euen at such time as the Israelites are abandoned and put away: and se∣condly, by all the true faithfull:2. By al the faithu. that both the Israelites may vnder∣stand, & also the oter peoples the which were left by God in their wayes, that they shall afterwards be truely gathered together in the Church of God: that they shall be shoed and ioyned in fellowship
vnto the true faithfull, and that companie, whom God hath alwaies taken for his especiall people and inheritance. Therefore the true faithfull are commaunded to acknowledge those, whom God cal∣leth, for their brethren and sisters, for the sonnes of the liuing God, for the people of God, and such as haue obtained mercie, and not to despise them in regard of themselues, because they come, and are called after them. So in the chapter before going ver. 10. they are called God his people, and the sonnes of the liuing God. And Ephe. 2. ver. 12.13. Paul sheweth, that They which sometimes were without Christ, and were aliants from the common wealth of Israel, and were strangers from the couenants of promise, and had no hope, & were with∣out God in the world, were now in Christ Iesus, being a farre off before, made neere by the bloud of Christ. And cap. 4. ver. 4. he telleth them that There is one bodie, and one spirit, euen as they were called in e hope of their vocation. And Rom. 9. ver. 25.26. he confirmeth the former titles that the conuerted Gentiles should be called by, with the testimonies of the places of Oseas cap. 1. ver. 10. And cap. 2. ver. 23. hereafter following. This then doubtles is a singular comfort, and a most true fulfilling of the former promise of God. Vers. 2. Pleade with your mother: pleade with her: for she is not  wife, neither am I her husband: but let her take away her fornica∣tions out of her sight, and her adulteries from between her breasts. An admonitiō fer the godlie.AN admonition, whereby the true Israelites are taught what is their duetie, when as they heare these promises of God, to wit, that they reproue others of their people that are obstinate and stub∣borne for their idolatrie, that they call them back vnto repentance, and finally foretell them of the most heauie iudgement of God a∣gainst them, if they hereafter abstaine not from their receiued ido∣latrie, and the rest of their sinnes. And this admonition hath God set downe, both to shewe that his good will towards them, which are saued out of this whole people which are most corrupt, is alto∣gether free without any their deseruing, and also to make those stubborne Israelites excuseles: in as much as being admonished both by God himselfe, and also by their brethren, that is, men most deare vnto them, yet they repented not, and turned vnto him, which kind of offward and vntoward dealing Christ complaineth of against the Iewes of his time, who could not any way bee with∣drawn from their sinnes, neither by gentle, nor yet by rough admo∣nitions, of whom he sayth Matth. 11. ver. 16. Whereunto shall I liken
this generation? It is like vnto little children, which sit in the markets and call vnto their fellowes, and say: wee haue piped vnto you, and ye haue not daunced, we haue mourned vnto you, & ye haue not lamented. In this verse to be noted,But there are two things especially to be noted in this verse. The one, the kinde of speaking it selfe, the which is most significant by the doubling of the word (pleade ye, pleade ye):1. The phrase or kind of spea∣king it selfe. and by the often re∣peating of the whoredoms, that is, the idolatries of this people, the which they had both diuers and manifold, and the same such also as they were most dearely in loue withall: which thing the plurall number (fornications) doth declare, and also these words (sight, or face, and breasts) in which parts of their bodie the Israelites are said to haue openly shewed and cherished or sostered that their filthi∣nes, after the maner of desperate and common or shameles strum∣pets, the which doe carrie both in their face, and in their breasts, and bosomes, their paintings, sosse and slabber, & wanton attirements, and artes, wherewith they prouoke and stirre vp men vnto filthie lust, and to lye with them: for they dresse, trimme, attire, and colour and paint both their face, and also most shameles breasts to entice and allure men withall.2. The matter it sefe. And these things are to be noted in the kind of speaking. The other poynt to bee here marked containeth the thing or matter it selfe, the which of the godly Israelites is to be told by way of admonition vnto the whole bodie, that is, to the rest of the Israelites, to wit, that they had violated or broken that same ho∣lie couenant or marriage of God with them. And therefore that now they are not the people, wife and spouse of God, by reason of those their most filthie fornications. For that spirituall marriage is broken, and God is not now the husband of this people, because he hath forsaken them, or put them away as it were by diuorcement. For so are sinners to be terrified or feared with the threatnings of the iudgements of God, that they may repent. Conferre and com∣pare with this place other the like in the other Prophets, as first that of Isai cap. 50. ver. 1. in these words: Thus saith the Lord, where is that bill of your mothers diuorcement, whom I haue cast off? Or who is the creditor, vnto whom I sold you? Behold for your iniquities are ye sold, and because of your transgressions is your mother forsaken. Se∣condly, Ierem. 3. ver. 8. where GOD speaketh thus: When I saw, how that by all occasions rebellious Israel hath plaied the harlot, I cast her away, and gaue her a bill of diuorcement: yet her rebellious sister Iudah was not afraid, but she went also and playd the harlot. And third∣ly, almost the whole 16. chapter of Ezechiel.
Vers. 3. Least I strip her naked, and set her as in the day that she was borne, and make her as a wildernesse, and leaue her like a drie land, and slay her for thirst. A liuely set∣ting out of the daunger that was to fall vpō them.A Liuely setting out of the daunger that was like to insue, where∣in the necessitie of the former admonition is shewed, to wit, by the exceeing great daunger, the which did euen then hang ouer the heads both of the bodie of the kingdome it selfe, and also their successors and posteritie. And first of all he dealeth with the daun∣ger the which was then in breeding against the whole bodie. And that is such, that the condition and case of this whole nation shall become most miserable, vnlesse it cast away her idolatries. Three things to be noted in this verse.In this verse three things are shewed to hang ouer the head of the whole land. First, that this nation shall of God be made so na∣ked as she was at the first, when as God adopted and chose it vnto him at the beginning, the miserble estate whereof at that time is at the full set done Ezech. 16. The second,1. God will make the land as na∣ked as it was at the first. that after he hath in this order forsaken her before, he will make her into a wildernesse, that is, bring her into a great laying waste both of cities, and also of men, that is to say,2. He will lay it waste. that he will send enemies vpon her, the which shall robbe and spoyle all things, shall destroy their townes and cities, and slay the inhabitants. The third is, that in the end he will also kill it,3. He will cause it to dye for thirst. and cause it to dye for thirst, that is, will afflict or punish it with a most miserable and lamentable kind of death. Out of which appeareth, that all our happines, yea that which is earthly also, doth depend or hang vpon the onely mercie and goodnesse of God to∣wards vs Matth. 5. ver. 45. the which when as through our sinnes we doe turne away from vs, then doth great penurie and want of all things inuade or come vpon vs. And this doth Dauid acknow∣ledge Psalm. 30. ver. 7. when hauing made great reckoning of the assurednesse of his former most prosperous estate, he sayth vnto God: But thou diddest hide thy face, and I was troubled. And so Psal. 4. ver. 6. by his answere the which he maketh vnto the common question of the worldlings concerning the attaining vnto good things, he plainlie enough declareth, that God his fauourable and louing countenance towards vs, is the cause and procurer of the same. Many (sayth he) say, who will shewe vs any good? but Lord, lift vp the light of thy countenance vpon vs.
Vers. 4. And I will haue no pitie vpon her children: for they be the children of fornications. A danger that shall fall out vnto their po∣steritie.NOw he preacheth of the daunger, the which hangeth ouer the heads of the children of that nation, that is, ouer their posteri∣tie also: namely, that it will come to passe, that God afterwards will not take any pitie on them, but will forsake them vtterly also, & cast them away. See before concerning this matter cap 1. ver. 6. The which thing afterwards came in deede and in trueth to passe, as ap∣peareth 2. King cap. 17. Now of that which hath gone before, is ga∣thered, that neither that companie, assemblie,Idolaters, and idolatrous as∣semblies, albeit they haue some outward to∣kens of the co∣uenant of God, are not proper∣ly the Church of God. or congregation which is an idolater, is the Church of God properly: albeit that out∣wardly it retaine some outward signe and token of the couenant of God: neither that they which are of this companie and assemblie, and doe worship idols, albeit in old time they were circumcised, or now be baptised, are indeed the people of God, because that in this place ver. 2. such a congregation is denied to bee the wife of God: and the children which are borne therein, are sayd to be bastards, & not lawfull, true, and the children of God in this selfe same verse. Let the Papists then looke and consider,A note for the Papists. what they haue to iudge of themselues, although they neuer so much bragge, and boast, and thunder, and giue out great words that they are the Catholike Church. Vers. 5. For their mother hath played the harlot: she that conceiued them, hath done shamefully: for she sayd, I will goe after my louers, that giue me my bread and my water, my wooll, and my flaxe, mine oyle, and my drinke. A reason of the threatning of these iudge∣ments.THis is a rendring of a reason, why God doth iustly threaten such a iudgement and daunger against the Israelites: and therefore would haue it foretold vnto them. And the reason is, because that this whole nation hath played the harlot, and that most shamefully, and towards God most despitefully, whilest in such sort it worship∣peth idols. Whereof may easely be perceiued how great, and how execrable or accursed a sinne idolatrie is, albeit that men doe either please themselues in the same, or iudge it to be no sinne, or doe of∣ten affirme and define it to be great godlinesse. And idolatrie is,What ido¦trie is. ei∣ther when any other, then the true God is worshipped: or when as
the cause of our good gifts and benefites is ascribed vnto any other, then vnto the true God, and thankes therefore giuen to any other: or also, when as the true God is otherwise worshipped of vs, then he himselfe hath commaunded. And this verse setteth forth that same notorious idolatrie of the nation of the Israelites, the which is more largely described 2. King. cap. 17. and Ierem. cap. 25. There∣fore she playeth the harlot, whilest she worshippeth idols: and that so shamelesly and openly, that she is defiled with whoredomes and adulteries. For the Altars of their idols, and the worship of them were set vp in euery place, they were solemnised and reigned euery where, albeit that things neuer so beastly and filthie were there cō∣mitted and done, as Sodometries, whoredomes, and fornications, murtherings of children, dedications and consecrations of al things made vnto idols. Finally, the people did this most obstinatly or stubbornly, and against GOD most reproachfully. For the whole nation did professe and say, That those idols were their gods, whom they loued, and the which alone they acknowledged for gods: af∣ter whom they would goe: that is, whom they laboured diligently to worship and serue. In a word, which were vnto them the giuers and bestowers of all good things vpon them, as of bread, water, flare, oyle, wine, &c. with all which good gifts and benefites they did (through the goodnesse and bountie of the true God) abound, and yet gaue thankes for them vnto their idols, but not vnto the me God. What can be more like vnto the doings of the Papists the this? Vers. 6. Therefore behold, I will stop thy way with thornes, and make an hedge, that she shall not finde her paths. The threat∣ning of a most grieuous pu∣nishment.THe threatning of a most grieuous punishment: namely, of great straites and troubles, whereinto God at the last shall bring and force this nation, so that at that time there will be no gadding and running vnto their idols, and idoll Temples, to wit, they shall so straightly and narrowly bee besieged by their enemies, that then they cannot get forth of their cities, and runne vnto Bethel & Dan, where they had their idols placed. Therfore their paths shall be be∣set and hedged in with thornes, that albeit in their hearts & mindes they doe seeke after those their forged and framed Gods, yet can they not with their feet go vnto them: although being in such sort afflicted or troubled they doe call vpon them, yet from them shall
they feele no helpe nor comfort. And these things doe indeede fall out vnto idolaters.The true God is alwaies neere at hand vnto his Church. But the true GOD is alwayes neere vnto his Church, and doth not at any time forsake the same, and is not to be sought after from place to place, as if he did flee away from her: neither is he at any time sought or called vpon in vain, but as Christ teacheth Matth. 7. ver. 7. If they aske, it shall be giuen them: if they seeke, they shall finde: if they knocke, it shall be opened vnto them. And the Psalmist comfortably to this effect and purpose writeth Psalm. 145. ver. 18. The Lord is neere to all that call vpon him: yea, to all that call vpon him in trueth. Vers. 7. Though she followe after her louers, yet shall she not come at them: though she seeke them, yet shall she not finde them: then shall she say, I will goe and returne to my first husband: for at that time was I better then now. A confirmatiō of the former troubles threat¦ned vnto them.A Confirmation of the troubles threatned before, taken from the effect that should follow. For they shall be so great, that in the end the Israelites shall be compelled and constrained to returne vn∣to God himselfe, whom they had forsaken before. This happened vnder Oseas the last king of the Israelites, who in part restored the worship of God among that people, as may appeare 2. King. cap. 17 ver. 2. where it is reported of him, That although he did euill in the sight of the Lord, yet not in such sort as the other Kings of Israel that were before him. Wherefore this place of Oseas is not to be vnder∣stood of true repentance of minde, whereby idolatrie is vtterly cast away, and the true worship of God set vp in the roume of it: but of that same hypocritical repentance, to wit, when as men being pres∣sed downe with the weight and burthen of afflictions or troubles, are in the end compelled to confesse that it went more happilie & better with them, when as they serued the true God.After what sort hypocrites repent, and call vpon God. Therefore if then peraduenture they seeke the true God, and doe call vpon him, they haue not care of it, nor do it for God his selfe sake: nor of ear∣nest loue or feare of him: but onely for their owne sake, that is, for feare of punishment hanging ouer their heads, that by this meanes they may be deliuered from the miseries and troubles wherewithal they are oppressed. So Achab repented for feare of the iudgements of God. So did the Niniuites at the preaching of Ionas. So also doe Ivnderstand this place of false and fained repentance onely: & not of true repentance, the which at that time was not in this people, as
appeareth in the verse following. Although I make no doubt but that the elect, or chosen of God are sometimes by God in such sort humbled and cast downe by afflictions, that being admonished or warned thereby, they doe truely and earnestly repent: whereof we haue example Luk. 15. ver. 17. and 21. of the prodigall sonne. And in Dauid Psal. 119. ver. 71. where he acknowledgeth that by affli∣ction he was brought to the knowledge of the law of GOD. For there he consesseth thus: It is good for me that I haue been afflicted, that I may learne thy statutes. Vers. 8. Now she did not know that I gaue her corne and wine, and oyle, and multiplied her siluer and gold, which they bestowed vpon Baal. He plainlie sheweth that their repen∣tance was hy∣pocriticall, and fained.AN explanation or making plaine of their hypocriticall repen∣tance. For the Prophet sheweth what manner of conuersion or turning vnto God, this of the peoples was, that is, how counterfeit and fained: and therefore that it did not turne away from them the iudgements of God threatned before in the third verse. And here the Prophet noteth two things. The first, that in this the whole counterfeit repentance of the people (the which they professed or made shewe of by reason of the very great afflictions which they suffered) God by that people was not truely acknowledged to bee the author both of those good things the which this people did in∣ioy;1. The Israelites ascribe the cause of their benefites vnto others thē God. and also of that plentie or aboundance, the which ouerflowed as it were vnto the selfe same people: but rather that the causes of this double benefit was by them ascribed vnto Idols, and Baalims, or els vnto the Israelites themselues: the which is notorious blas∣phemie against God. Therefore whether we haue any certaine be∣nefites, albeit in neuer so small plentie; or whether the same be ma∣nie and in aboundance, all this is the gift of the true God, the meete bountie & grace of God: neither is the praise of this bounteousnes to be ascribed either vnto idols, or els vnto our selues in any case. The other poynt of this verse is,2. They made i∣dols of the gold and siluer, and of the other be∣nefites ordai∣ned worship vnto them. That these Israelites euen at that time, when as they repented in such manner as they made shewe of, did of those gifts of God, that is, gold and siluer, make Baalims and Idols: and of the oyle, wine, & corne (the which the selfe same Israelites had receiued of the true God) they did ordaine and set vp worship vnto the same Baalims, and not vnto God. Then the which what can be more reproachful against the true God, and also more
blasphemous? Now as for those thinges the which are here sette downe of the repentance of the Israelites, the same did happen e∣specially vnder Oseas the last king of the Israelites, but yet before al∣so at other times and vpon the like occasions: the which no doubt doe proue and shew this conuersion or turning of this people vnto the true God to haue beene altogether counterfeit and fayned. Vers. 9. Therefore will I returne, and take away my corne in the time thereof, and my wine in the season thereof, and will recouer my wooll, and my flaxe lent, to couer her shame. A grieuous & iust threatningA Threatning both most grieuous, & also most iust against the same Israelites: for the former declaration of their repentance sheweth that the iudgements of God against them are most iust. For they are men so past al hope, so coūterfeit, and such hypocrites, that they must needes be punished. For they which would not re∣turne vnto the true God being tamed with so many punishments and miseries: but fayned themselues to repent of their former life, did in deede and in trueth very notably mocke GOD. As for the threatnings be here mentioned they doe containe sundry kindes of punishments to ensue, to the ende that hypocrites should vnder∣stand, that they shall neuer mock God scotfree, or without punish∣ment: and also that wicked persons, and Idolators, and backsliders may know,Sundry punish∣ments to ensue vpon the wic∣ked Israelites. that (howsoeuer for the time they do flatter themselues) yet they doe in the end pull vpon their heads most sharpe and grie∣uous punishments, wherewith they shall be ouerpressed. And the first kinde of punishment to ensue is penury and want of all things,1. Penury and want of all things. the which doe appertayne vnto the foode and apparelling of men: like as in those two things especially the life and commoditie of men is contained, as Paul teacheth 1. Tim. 6. ver 8. when he willeth Christians to be content being prouided of these necessaries, say∣ing: Therefore when we haue foode and rayment let vs therewith bee content. Therefore as GOD alone giueth these things: so in like maner doth he take them away. Vers. 10. And now will I discouer her lewdnes in the sight of her louers, and no man shall deliuer her out of mine hand. SHame and publike infamie or reproach is the second kind of pu∣nishment here threatned.2. Publike shame and reproach. For vnto the former misery this second
shall be added, that is, vnto the great want of all things shall also be added reproach and scorning, the which shal openly be made of them: and this not at the hands of euery one of mean regard indif∣ferently: but euen of those very same, whome the Israelites them∣selues did before so greatly account of, that is, they shall be laugh∣ed to scorne of the Idolators, whom they praysed, imitated of fol∣lowed, and preferred before the true seruants of God. These shall openly mocke them in their greatest misery and want of all things. Secondly, the third kind of punishment is in this verse also rehear∣sed, to wit,3. Their want & reproach shall be perpetuall. This the both want and reproach of the Israelites shall be perpetuall. For no man shall deliuer this hypocriticall people out of the hand of God, and from that affliction. Further, let all hypocrites note that these things are threatned also vnto them. Vers. 11. I will also cause all her mirth to cease, her feast dayes, her new moones, and her Sabboths, and all her solemne feasts. THe fourth kinde of affliction to ensue, to wit,4. Taking from them all pub∣like ioy and mirth. The depriuing or bereauing them of all publike ioy and mirth (whether the same be taken in matters politick, or religious and diuine) and the ceasing of the same: and so consequently great mourning, sorrow and hea∣uinesse, the which shall be ioyned vnto their both want and perpe∣tuall ignominy or reproach on euery side and in all places. For at least wise to them in such sorte afflicted some comfort of minde should be left either of matters politicall, or of holy matters, and of feasts and worship dedicated vnto GOD, that by some meanes they might mittigate or asswage this their mourning and affliction. But occasion and graunting, and meanes of all ioy shall bee taken from them. And surely it is meete and reason, in as much as such punishment (as is here threatned against wicked persons, Idolators, and back sliders) is a certaine earnest & sensie of euerlasting death appointed for them, that they should also bee depriued and voide of all comfort, and ioy, and of all mirth and gladnes. And in this place the Prophet hath comprized all kinde of publike and priuate comfort. For the same is taken either of publike meetings, feasts, and ioyes: or of religious assemblies, as when the worship of God is celebrated or exercised. But God taketh away and denieth both these kindes vnto them: the first or ioy in politicke matters, vnder this word (mirth or gladnes) the other that is ioy or comfor in reli∣gious matters, vnder the other wordes, by the which for the most
part those holy reioycings are signified in the Scriptures, as is, so∣lemne feast dayes, namely such as falleth out yearely: also the feasts of the new moone, the Sabboths, and lastly, such other feast dayes as fall out in the yeare, and are commanded by God. Vers. 12. And I will destroy her vines and her figge trees, where∣of she hath sayd, These are my rewardes that my louers haue gi∣uen me: and I will make them as a forrest, and the wilde beasts shall eate them. THe fifth kinde of affliction, Exceeding great wastenes of the whole land.5. The laying wast of their whole land. For God shall denie vnto them not onely the in∣crease and fruits of the fields, trees, and plants: but shall moreouer destroy the trees themselues, and shall damme and stoppe vp the fountaines and springs of all good giftes and benefites. For God shall destroy and pull vp by the rootes, their vines, and wilde figge trees, and other trees growing in their land of their owne accorde, to wit, for a perpetuall testimony or witnesse of his wrath against them. Finally, he shall lay waste, and bring into a wildernesse the fieldes them selues, yea and also their whole countrey, so that af∣terwards it cannot be tilled by men: but shal be eaten vp and inha∣bited by wilde beasts. So sharpe doubtles and heauy, but yet iust are the iudgements of God against our sinnes and Idolatries, that we should all of vs betimes thinke vpon them, feele them, and auoid them: or otherwise continuing in our wickednes be oppressed with those punishments, and perish with the world, as Paul telleth the Corinthians epist. 1. cap. 11. vers 32. whome hee willeth to iudge themselues that they be not iudged. Forwe (saith he) when we are iudged or chastened of the Lord, that we should not be condemned with the world, for these punishments doth the world and wicked men feele euen now at this day, and that dayly. Vers. 13. And I will visite vpon her the dayes of Baalim, wherein she burnt incense vnto them: and shee decked her selfe with her earings and her iewels, & she followed her louers, and forgat me sayth the Lord. The conclusion of the former punishment.THe conclusion of the former punishment declaring the cause of the same. God then will in such sort be auenged of the contēpt or despising of his name and worship: and will punish those pro∣phane
and heathenish Idolatries of this people. The dayes of Baalim,The Israelites serued Idols a∣boue 200. yeres are that same whole time wherein the kingdome of Israel serued Idols. And this time was very long, and far aboue more then two hundreth yeares continually did this wickednes reigne in that people. And as this time was long, so also was the Idolatrie of these men very strange and outragious: the which thing the si∣militudes following doe declare and shew, to wit, That this people did decke vp themselues with earings and iewels, when as they worshipped their Baalims, that is to say, willingly spared for no furniture, no cost, no braue apparell and attiring in the doing ser∣uice and worship vnto these Idols: so bedlam madde are men for∣sooth that are Idolaters in the garnishing and honouring of their gods, the which are nothing but the idle inuentions of their owne brains. But we on the contrary part are too couetous and pinching in the doing of cost for the name and honour of the true God. The which course euen at this day to our great griefe of minde, we doe see to be taken of the Popish Idolators. But let them not be decei∣ued. For God doth not alwayes tarrie and wayte for the repen∣tance of euery one so long space of time, as he did for these Israe∣lites. Let them therefore forthwith, and by and by repent. And let vs in like manner depart from our sinnes and wickednes. Final∣ly, sayth the Lord, This nation hath forgotten me. The which was a notorious and wōderful ingratitude or vnthankfulnes, and infideli∣tie to worship Idols, and to forget the true God, by whome they aboue all other people of the world by a peculiar and especial co∣uenant were in Abraham adopted or chosen for his people & pro∣per inheritance. Therefore they were vnexcusable and most wor∣thily punished by God with so grieuous punishments. Vers. 14. Therefore behold I will allure her, and bring her into the wildernes, and speake friendly vnto her. A comfort for the smal num∣ber of the godlyA Comfort wherewith God lifteth vp the remnant of this peo∣ple, the which haue continued in the feare of God, and willeth them to hope well in the middest of most sorrowfull afflictions or troubles, how desper at soeuer in the iudgment of men, things may seeme to be, and that there may be thought to bee no hope at all of the restoring of the church at that time. But this verse contay∣neth foure especiall poynts to be noted.1. The orderly hanging toge∣ther of this sen∣tence noted in the word laken. First the orderly hanging together of this sentence, the which is shewed by the hebrew word
(laken) the which some translate (for this cause) others (therefore) but I translate it (wherefore). For it is not a word rendring a rea∣son, of that which God will doe after the accomplishment of the former punishments. It seemeth therefore to be a note of God me∣ditating or deuising and bethinking, and as it were determining with himselfe what he will doe, after that he hath represented or layd before himselfe the miserable condition and estate of this peo∣ple. Secondly, there is to be noted,2. Who promiseth who promiseth those things the which do follow, or who speaketh: to wit, he that is God indeed, speaking the trueth, and almighty: I, saith he: lest any man might doubt of the comming to passe of the matter, albeit neuer so hard in the opinion of men. Thirdly, what God promiseth, to wit,3. What God promiseth. the restoring of his church, euen in the remnant and residue of this people the which was before most grieuously afflicted, albeit, the same be very smal. The which is afterwards particularly declared, but in this place there is first generally set downe after what man∣ner God will before hand prepare the same remnant, before that he wil gather out of them the same church vnto himself. First of al ther∣fore, he will so inwardly moue them by his holy spirite, that they shall long after God, and seeke his word: I will allure them, sayth hee. After the same sorte God speaketh before, Amos 8. ver. 12. of their longing and seeking after the word of God. So Dauid Psal. 42. ver. 2. expresseth his longing after GOD, saying: My soule thirsteth for God, euen for the liuing God: When shall I come and ap∣peare before the presence of God? And agayne Psalm. 84. ver. 2. My soule longeth, yea, and faynteth for the courts of the Lorde: for mine heart and my flesh reioyce in the liuing God. Secondly, he shal speak vnto that remnant with a sounding voice in the outward ministery by his Prophets and Apostles, and their lawful successours. Third∣ly, God speaketh those things which shall be vnto them most hole∣some, wished for, ioyfull, and pleasant and well liking to theyr hearts, to wit, he shall speake of their saluation, of their peace with God, of the forgiuenes of their sinnes. All which thinges are most ioyfull newes, and indeede the Gospel of Christ. So Psal. 85. ver. 2, and 10. Dauid saith: Thou hast forgiuen the iniquitie of thy people, and couered all their sinnes. Mercie and trueth shall meete: righte∣ousnesse and peace shall kisse one another. And so is the Psal. 126. full of most sweet ioyes that the godly after their returne from the cap∣tiuitie shal be filled withall. The fourth thing here to be noted,4. Whē this great mercy shall bee shewed vnto them. is the time, after the which this so great mercie of God shall happen
vnto them, namely, after that God hath afflicted or punished this nation of Israell, and that after such a sort, that, as at the first they wandred in the most waste desart of Sinai: (when as they were de∣liuered out of Egypt) so when as they shall be brought againe euen vnto the same condition and estate, and shall be driuen againe into an horrible desart, because of their long captiuitie in the mountains of Media: for thither were they dispersed as appeareth 2. King. 17. These things then were not to come to passe forth with and by and by: but then at last after the long exile and captiuity of this peo∣ple among strange, and sauage nations and countries. And these things shall then especially come to passe, when as God shall haue pittie on Israel, and that whole people shall be saued, and by fayth shall receiue Christ, as Paul teacheth that it shall come to passe Rom. 11. ver. 26. where he writeth: And so all Israel shall be saued, as it is written, The deliuerer shall come out of Sion; and shall turne a∣way the vngodlines from Iaacob. Yet notwithstanding these things did in parte fall out as often as God in any age before that same ge∣nerall calling, did by the preaching of the Gospel conuert or turne any of them vnto him: or else by the preaching of his Prophets brought them vnto his true worship, as vnder King Ezechias. Vers. 15. And I will giue her her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for the doore of hope, and she shall sing there as in the dayes of her youth, and as in the day when she came vp out of the land of Egypt. A making more plaine of the matter.AN explanation or making of the matter more playne: for God doth seuerally and particularly set downe what the promise of the restoring of the Church in the remnant of this people doth con∣taine, and how great benefites it doth comprehend, that, according∣ly as it is meet,1. God promiseth them earthly blessings. it may of vs most especially be accounted of. And first God promiseth earthly benefites. For godlines, sayth Paul, hath promises not only of the life to come, but also of this brittle fleeting, and present life 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8. But these benefites by the figure Synecdoche are comprehended vnder the name of (vineyards) because that among other nourishments of the life of man a chiefe place & reckoning is of wine,What Synec∣doche is, see A∣mos cap. 5 ver. 21▪ wherewith the strength of our body is verie greatly sustayned, like as the goodnes of God is greatly by the Prophet cōmended for the benefit of the same Psal. 22. & 104. Yet that the rest are here comprehended appeareth by the verses
21. and 22. hereafter following. Furthermore,2. He promiseth them most plē∣tifully. by an argument from comparison God promiseth these benefites most aboundant, that is, great store and plenty of them. For looke after what man∣ner, and how great he gaue those benefites, when as at the first hee brought them into the promised land, so great also afterwards will he bestow them on them. Therefore they shall reioyce as in the day of their youth, &c. Lastly, he wil giue them most vnlooked for, and so shall these benefites be the more welcome vnto them,3. He promiseth them most va∣looked for. like as when at the first in the valley of Achor God gaue vnto them the sight and vse of that holy and most fruitful land. For that valley was as it were the beginning of those benefits & first entrance into that hope, whereby they saw and knew indeede, that they should in short time enioy & possesse those good giftes of God. For Hiericho was destroyed, and there they gathered together both in that citie, and in that valley an infinite masse of gold and siluer, lof. 6. vers. 19. where Ioshuah willeth that it shuld be consecrated vnto the Lord, saying: But all siluer and golde, and vessels of brasse and yron shal be consecrate vnto the Lord, and shall come into the Lords treasurie. Vers. 16. And at that day, sayth the Lord, thou shalt call me Ishi, and shalt cal me no more Baali. Another kinde of benefites.ANother kinde of benefites the which then also GOD will be∣stow vpon his, that is, Spiritual benefites, the which being sun∣dry and manifolde, there is but one sort of them in this place recko∣ned vp, to wit, the mutuall mariage of GOD and them. For this marriage is betweene God and all the godly. 2. Corinth. 11. And Christ Mat. 9. ver. 15. compareth himselfe vnto a bridgroome, and his disciples vnto the bride, where he sayth: Can the children of the marriage chamber mourne, as long as the bridegroome is with them? So Cant. 4. ver. 8. Christ calleth the Church his spouse, as also in ma∣ny other places of that most holy, sweete, and excellent song, say∣ing: Come with me from Lebanon my spouse,God so hateth Idolatry that he wil not haue his people vse so much as a name that hath been su∣perstiticusly abused. euen with me from Le∣banon, and looke from the top of Amanah, &c. For our soules are the spouses of Christ. And this shal appeare by the wordes the which the Church shal vse. For she shal cal that same true God and Icho∣uah, her husband, and not any longer her Baal, or by the name of Baal; albeit that name doe oftentimes signifie an husband also. But lest there should any signe or senfie of Idolatry remaine among the godly euen in the very names, the godly talking and speaking
of God shal no more vse the word (Baal:) but shal cal him Icho∣uah, and their husband. And such titles doth the Prophet Isa giue vnto God cap. 54. ver. 5. where we read thus: For heeth made thee is thine husband (whose name is the Lord of hostes) and thy redeemer the holy one of Israel, shall bee called the God of the whol worlde. And truely we ought to hate euen the very names of Idols, neither is it lawful to vse them when as we speake of God. Final∣ly, we may neuer talke of any filthy matters, but by way of execu∣tion, or detesting and abhorring of them. And therefore Psal. 16. ver. 4. Dauid witnesseth, That he will not with his lippes make men∣tion of the names of their Idols. And Paul Ephes. 5. ver. 3. sayth: B fornication, and all vncleannesse, or couetousnes, let it not bee once ∣med among you, as becommeth Saints: yea vnder the Gospel Paul, Cor. 6. vers. 15. opposeth or setteth Baal against Christ saying: What concord hath Christ with Belial? Vers. 17. For I will take away the names of Baalim out of mouth, and they shall be no more remembred by their names. An amplficatiō of the former promise.AN amplification of the former promise. For the faythfulnes of this spirituall marriage shall be so sincere and pure euen on the behalfe and parte of the godly, that, God so firmly ioyning and turning their hearts vnto him, they shall within themselues blou out, doe away, and vtterly cast out both from their minde and mouth, al remembrance of Baal, that is, spiritual fornication, and the occasion thereof. Vers. 18. And in that day will I make a couenant for them, with the wilde beasts, and with the foules of the heauen, and with that that creepeth vpon the earth: and I wil breake the bow, and the sworde, and the battell out of the earth, and will make them to sleepe safely. THe third kinde of benefites, the which, although it bee referred vnto earthly benefites,A third kind of benefites. yet is it diuers from that which is contai∣ned before ver. 15. For there foode and sustenance was promised: but here peace and great tranquillity or quietnes. And this kinde of benefites also is an especial gift of God, the which is opposed or set agaynst the former calamities and miseries of this people, the which by warres they had now already so often felt. Of this bene∣fite
of GOD towardes the godly the lawe maketh mention Deut. 28. Also Psal. 25. ver. 13. where the Psalmist speaking of the godly man, sayth: His soule shall dwell at ease, and his seede shall inherite the land. And Psal. 144. ver. 14. among other the blessings in that Psalme reckoned vp, he addeth: That there be none inuasion, nor go∣ing out, nor no crying in our streetes. Further, there is in this place promised vnto the Church peace both with the bruite beastes and also with men themselues. And with the bruit beasts, because that by the beasts men are wont to bee troubled; and beastes, together with the hurt that they may doe vnto men, is reckoned vp among the foure sortes of God his plagues Ezec. 14. ver. 21. For thus saith the Lord God:God his foure sore iudgments How much more when I send my foure sore iudgments vpon Ierusalem, euen the sworde, and famine, and the noysome beast, and pestilence, to destroy man and beast out of it? And Eliphas Iob 5. ver. 23. doth in like maner rehearse this security from the feare of the beasts of the fielde, as a speciall fauour of God towards the godly when hee sayth: For the stones of the field shall be in league with thee, and the beasts of the field shall bee at peace with thee. But when God shall performe this blessing here promised, the godly shall haue peace and securitie, or freedome from danger euen from all kinde of beasts, whether they haue their being in heauen (that is in the ayre) or in the waters, or in the earth. For they are all at God his command to execute his iudgement, vpon the disobedient vnto his word. And hereof we haue example in the Lyons sent in by God vpon those Idolatrous nations, whom the king of Assyria placed in the Land of Israel, who slew them (as they themselues complaine) because they knew not the manner of the God of the land, 2. King. cap. 17. ver. 26. Yea the Church of God shall be at peace with men also. For all warres shall be whist, and such things as are vsed for the making of warres withall, as bow, sworde, speare, &c. shall be broken in pee∣ces by God, that the Church euen in this world may dwel safely a∣mong men and publikely and openly serue the true God, and wor∣ship him according to his worde. And this is acknowledged for God his great benefite Act. 9. ver. 31. where it is mentioned, That the Churches then had rest through all Iudea, and Galile, and Sama∣ria, and were edified, and walked in the feare of the Lord, and were multiplyed by the comfort of the holy Ghost. So Psal. 46. ver. 9. Dauid speaketh of God, that He maketh warres to cease vnto the ends of the world: he breaketh the bowe, and cutteth the speare, and burneth the
chariots with fire. And Isai imputeth it vnto one of the fruites of the Gospell, that God wil knit the hearts of the godly by the same con∣uerted, in such a godly loue and amitie, that they shall be at peace and concord one with another cap. 11. ver. 9. Then shall none hurt nor destroy in all the mountaine of mine holinesse (sayth God:) for the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that co∣uer the sea. The like he reporteth cap. 2. ver. 4. That they shall breake their swords into mattocks: and their speares into siethes: nation shall not lift vp a sword against nation, neither shall they learne to fight any more. Vers. 19. And I will marrie thee vnto me for euer: yea, I will marrie thee vnto me in righteousnesse, and in iudgement, and in mercie, and in compassion. A repetition & further decla∣ration of one of the former benefites.A Repetition and declaration of that benefite, the which is con∣tained before vers. 16. that it may of vs bee better vnderstood, what manner of benefite it is, and how great it is. And it is rehear∣sed againe, because it is the foundation and cause of the rest of the gifts of God towards vs. There haue been inserted or set betweene this benefite there mentioned and here againe repeated, certaine things in the meane season touching earthly blessings: because that in the reckoning vp of so great store and plentie of the gifts of God towards his Church, neither order nor method can exactly or perfectly be kept: for the power and meditation or thinking of the wit of man vpon them, is ouerwhelmed with the multitude of thē, much lesse that the discourse of our speaking of them, and recko∣ning of them vp can be exact and perfect as it ought to be. So then this verse and that which followeth doe shewe wa t manner of marriage this spirituall marriage of God with vs is,What maner of marriage that of God is with vs shewed by sundrie ef∣fects of the same. and after what manner wee are to enter into it. And this first verse teacheth what manner of marriage it is, by the sundrie effects thereof, of the which this is the first, that this couenant and marriage is perpetuall, and not for a time. For albeit that sometime it seeme for a season to bee broken off: yet it lasteth and indureth notwithstanding. For God his election by Christ is vnuariable or vnchangeable,1. It is perpetuall. as his good will and louing affection towards his Church cannot be chaunged or broken off by any meanes whatsoeuer, as appeareth Rom. 8. in the end of the chapter, Who shall separate vs (sayth Paul most com∣fortably) from the loue of Christ? Shall tribulation, or anguish, or per∣secution,
or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or sword? In all these things we are more then conquerours through him that loued vs. For I am perswaded that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate vs from the loue of God, which is in Christ Iesus our Lord. Secondly,2. It is most holie, and constant in respect of God. this selfe same marriage in respect of God is in righteousnesse and iudgement, that is to say, it is most holie and constant or stedfast. For I take the word (righteousnesse) in this place for the things & promises them∣selues, wherein the bargaine and couenant of this marriage doth consist. And all these are most holie, and most iust, to wit, such as is this, that we may haue the true God for our God: that we may wor∣ship him, and he on the other side will haue and take vs for his peo∣ple. For all these couenants are the substance of this marriage, and doe containe truely most lawfull and most holie promises. I take the word (iudgement) for the constancie and stedfastnesse of the former conditions or couenants. For all these doth God for his part performe and stedfastly fulfill. And in respect of our selues,3. It is in mercie and compassion in respect of our selues. this selfe same marriage is in the bounteousnes and compassion of God to∣wards vs, that is to say, it doth euery where shewe and declare the singular bounteousnes of God proceeding from his meere mercie and compassion. So is it declared in the Psalme 85. And these things doe set out what manner of marriage our spirituall marriage with God is. Vers. 20. I wil euen marrie thee vnto me in faithfulnes, and thou shalt know the Lord. How this mar∣riage betweene God and vs is contracted.NOw the Prophet teacheth how this same spirituall marriage is begun and contracted of vs with God: namely, in faith towards God alone, and in the sincere and true knowledge of him. And in deede they are the true Church and Spouse of God, the which doe know God truly: and that not after any sort whatsoeuer: but out of his word written. So doe I in this place vnderstand this verbe (Thou shalt know) by Rom. 10. ver. 14. where inuocation or calling vpon God is sayd to come by faith, and faith by hearing, and hea∣ring by preaching, &c. And it is not sufficient or enough to know God out of his word written: but faith also must be had in him, whereby wee may with all our heart rest in his promises through Christ, and depend or hang vpon him alone. But here faith went
before knowledge:Faith going be∣fore knowledge, and how? because that in the holie Scriptures oftentimes the effects are wont to be rehearsed before the causes, as being bet∣ter knowne vnto vs: but yet in the order of causes knowing, or knowledge goeth before faith. Vers. 21. And in that day I will heare, sayth the Lord, I will eue heare the heauens, and they shall heare the earth. Why certaine earthly bles∣sings are here againe repea∣ted.LIke as in the verses before the Prophet repeated or rehearsed a∣gaine some spirituall blessings, to the end that he might beate them the more and more into our heads, and shewe that they were diligently to be considered and weighed of vs: so doth he here al∣so repeate or rehearse againe, and set downe certaine earthly bene∣fites, both that they might assuredly perswade themselues in the penurie and want of all things, that yet notwithstanding these should come, and that they should be giuen them of God: and al∣so that they might vnderstand by what meanes and after what sort so great store and plentie of good things, as was promised be∣fore ver. 19. might be powred out vpon them. And this selfe same is of force to confirme and strengthen vs also in the promises of God, how greatly soeuer we are to struggle and wrastle with a de∣sperate estate of all things. Three things to be noted.But here are three things to be noted. The one, the time, (In that day) that is, at that time, in the which God shall gather his Church of the remnants of Israel:1. The time. and not forthwith, or at such time as they peraduenture might thinke that it should come to passe, the impa∣tiencie of their mindes pressing them.2. Who promi∣seth. The second, who promiseth these things, that is, Iehouah, that is to say, he that is the true God, true of his word, and almightie, whose will nothing can withstand. The third,3. What he pro∣miseth. what he promiseth, to wit, a most readie and most cer∣taine way, whereby great plentie and store of all things and earthly blessings shall insue and followe. For the Lord God shall heare the heauens, and the heauens the earth: and on the contrary side great scarcitie and want of all things happeneth, when as the heauen is of brasse, and the earth of yron Deut. 28. that is to say, the tempera∣ture and disposition of the heauen is not answerable nor agreeable vnto the earth, that it may bring forth her fruites, and God giueth not the euening and morning rayne Iam. 5. ver. 7. The which the godly husbandman with long patience looketh for at the hands of God. For, Behold (sayth Iames) the husbandman wayteth for the
precious fruite of the earth, and hath long patience for it, vntill he re∣ceiue the former and latter rayne. And so doth Zacharie teach them to begge the same of God for the increasing of the fruites of the earth, cap. 10. ver. 1. saying: Aske you of the Lord rayne in the time of the latter rayne: so shall the Lord make white cloudes, and giue you showres of rayne, and to euery one grasse in the field.How God is sayd to heare the heauen. But God is sayd (to heare) the heauen, because the heauen after a certaine manner doth pray vnto God, that it may doe his duetie in making of the earth fruitfull, and so the same may bring forth food and sustenance for men. For all creatures after a sort doe feele that they were made for the sake of men: and therefore they doe groane with them, and doe labour and trauaile in the helping of them, according vnto the charge layd vpon them by God, the which their charge that they may fulfill, they are sayd to pray vnto God, and to be heard of him. And touching this poynt, Paul writeth Rom. 8. ver. 22. after this manner. For we know that euery creature groaneth with vs also, and trauaileth in paine together vnto this present. Vers. 22. And the earth shall heare the corne, and the wine, and the oyle, and they shall heare Izreel. A Confirmation by the euent or that which should followe.A confirmatiō. There shall therefore bee very great store of all kinde of suste∣nance, albeit denied vnto them before, yet at that time notwith∣standing, as of corne, muste or new wine, oyle, &c. ver. 9. before in this chapter denied them: yea and also in the selfe same place there shall be this abundance of all things, where there was before the great curse of God, and want of all things, to wit, in the territories and ground of Izreel, vnto the which God before cap. 1. ver. 4. and 5. threatned most grieuous punishments, and great barrennes of al fruites. For when as God ceaseth to be angrie with vs, all things al∣so cease to be hurtfull vnto vs, and begin to be fauourable. Vers. 23. And I will sowe her vnto me in the earth, and I will haue mercie vpon her, that was not pitied, & I will say vnto them, which were not my people, thou art my people: and they shall say, thou art my God. The conclusion.THe conclusion, the which also is made by an allusion and re∣semblance vnto the name of Izreel. God therfore will acknow∣ledge
the Israelites, whom before cap. 1. ver. 6. and 9. he called (Lo∣ruchamah, and Lo-gammi) for his people, inheritance, Church, and will bestow vpon them his mercie through Christ: Yea that land which before was called Iizreel, as hated vnto God, a shop of ido∣latrie, and theater or open stage of crueltie, shall be now Iizreel▪ that is, that blessed seede, out of which God gathereth his Church. For of Iizreel God will sowe his Church, that is, he will acknowledge and make that land and countrey his owne, and a peculiar inheritance vnto himselfe. But these things shall at that time most truely hap∣pen and come to passe, when, as Paul sayth, Rom. 11. ver. 26. all Is∣rael, and not only the tribe of Iudah, or Beniamin shalbe saued, and conuerted or turned vnto Christ by the preaching of the Gospell. Yet they haue and doe come to passe in part, when some of thee Israelites at any time either by the Prophets, or by the preaching of the Gospell are conuerted vnto the true God. CAP. 3. Vers. 1. Then sayd the Lord vnto me, Goe yet, and loue a woman (be∣loued of her husband, and was an harlot) according to the loue of the Lord toward the children of Israel: yet they looked to other gods, and loued their wine bottles. An other Ser∣mon much like vnto those which went be∣fore. Why the same things are so often rehearsedANother Sermon, the which briefly repeateth or rehearseth that which hath been set forth in the chapters going before: it ad∣deth or putteth to onelie one thing more, to wit, the time, wherein the gathering together of the Church out of the remnants of the kingdome of Israel, shall be. And it was needfull that these things should be often spoken, both by reason of the most miserable estate of this kingdome, the which happened within a little while after∣ward: and also because that by reason of the longnes of the time, wherein the things which are promised vnto them, shall come to passe, the godly might bee discouraged, and waxe faint hearted. Therefore to the end that they may bee throughly confirmed or strengthened, these things are set forth and rehearsed afresh. So in the Prophet Isai almost from the 40. chapter vnto the 66. the same promises of God are often rehearsed. So likewise in the Reuelation the same threatnings of God after a diuers manner, and vnder di∣uers figures are iterated or repeated again, to the end that men may the better & more certainly beleeue that they shall come to passe.
Three things to be noted in this verse.Now this verse hath three certaine poynts to be obserued or no∣ted. The one, The person of him that speaketh: and that is Iehouah. For hereby there commeth assurance and authoritie vnto this pro∣mise, when as he which declareth the same,1. The person speaking. is that same true God which cannot lye, as Paul sayth Tit. 1. The second, What God wil∣leth to be done, to wit,2. What he spea∣keth. he commaundeth that the Prophet doe yet once againe represent or shewe himselfe vnto the same people of Israel, as if againe he married a wife, the which being very greatlie loued of that her first husband, neuerthelesse most lewdly played the harlot, or rather the whore most shamefully. So then I doe in this place take the word (Reangh) for an husband, as Paul Philip. 4. ver. 3. doth generally translate this word (Suzugon) a yoke-fellow: and Ieremie the 2. it is also taken for an husband. Furthermore the word (Naph) the which is taken for those onely that are married, doth perswade the same, or leadeth vnto this interpretation. And this vision is like vnto that which was rehearsed before cap. 1. The third poynt sheweth the cause of this vision. And that is,3. The cause of this vision. for this that the people, or that kingdome of Israel, greatly beloued of God their husband, had notwithstanding shamefullie played the harlot, and was defiled both with most manifest or open idolatrie, and also with most wicked filthines and wantonnes of life. For these words (they looke vnto other gods) note their bedlam madding after idols: and these (they loue their bottles of wine) betoken their wicked life, drunkennes, bodily whoredome, and other such like vices. So is this kingdome called a kingdome of tossepots and drunkards Isai cap. 28. ver. 1. Woe to the crowne of pride (sayth the Prophet) the drun∣kards of Ephraim, for his glorious beautie shalbe a fading flower, which is vpon the head of the valley of them that bee fat, and are ouercome with wine. Vers. 2. So I bought her to me for fifteene pieces of siluer, and for an homer of barley, and an halfe homer of barley. The second part of this vision.THe second part of this vision, wherein is described or set foorth the execution of the former commaundement. The Prophet therefore obeyed: and speaketh vnto the people by the comman∣dement of God, in such sort as if he had betrothed vnto himselfe such a wife. But he sheweth that this selfe same, whom both her first husband loued, and which the Prophet had appointed for his wife, was at the first of very base regard, and of a seruile condition. For
the Prophet bought her vnto him, and that not for so great a pri as other bondslaues are wont to be sold for: but farre better cheap▪ For other seruants for the most part according vnto the law of Go Exod. 21. ver. 32. were esteemed at 30. sicles of siluer, that is at f∣teene Talers: but this his wife that should bee, is bought but for f∣teene sicles of siluer, that is, for seuen Talers and an halfe, a sm matter and of very little price being added vnto the sayd summe,The Taler, or Daler is an outlandish coyne of some fiue shillings valew, or there abouts, of the which there are very many seuerall sorts, and of seuerall prices. such as might be the valew of an homer and an halfe of barley. An these things doe the more notablie set forth and shewe how gre the mercie and fauour of God was towards this people chosen  him to be his inheritance: and how great on the other side was the vnthankfulnes of this people towards God: that we also may ap∣plie the selfe same vnto our selues. Vers. 3. And I sayd vnto her, Thou shalt abide with me many dai: thou shalt not play the harlot, and thou shalt be to no other , and I will be so vnto thee. THe third part of this vision or commaundement of God vnto Oseas.The third part of this vision. And it containeth what he was to doe, before that he ma∣ried to wife this woman, the which had before so shamefully playd the whore. And he must keepe her with him a good space, betro∣thed onely vnto him, and as yet not his married wife: yet so that in the meane while she should not play the harlot, but containe and keepe her selfe chast, and reserued for the mariage to come. There∣fore the promise, force, and remembrance of the condition of ma∣riage to come betweene that woman and the Prophet remained still. So then there ought to be no playing the harlot in the meane season. But the fit time of consummating or finishing vp the mar∣riage, was of that Spouse quietly to be wayted, and tarried for. For in the meane while both of them ought to addresse, reserue, and stay themselues vnto the marriage to come, by vow, mind, and that most assured promise, & not to commit whoredom with any other. Vers. 4. For the children of Israel shall remaine many dayes without a King, and without a Prince, and without an offring, and without an image, and without an Ephod, and without Teraphim. AN explanation or laying open of all this matter more plainlie. For he sheweth more plainlie the signification of that time,
wherein the marriage betweene Oseas and the woman betrothed vnto him, was commaunded so long to be differred or put off.A more plaine laying open of the differring of this mariage And this is, by such a kind of signe and token, that God sheweth, that it shall come to passe, that the people, and that same kingdome of Is∣rael for a very long season, and for many not onely dayes or yeares: but whole ages shall remaine in such sort ouerthrowne, and lye cast downe, as hath been foretold, and shall not by any meanes at that time bee acknowledged for a people or nation. And yet notwith∣standing that in the meane season this selfe same people is not vt∣terly accursed with God, or cleane out of remembrance. For the hope and most assured promise remaineth of a couenant and spiri∣tuall mariage, that shall yet now hereafter be entred into and made againe with God. Therefore God is alwayes mindfull of that peo∣ple. Three parts of this explanatiōThis explanation containeth three parts. The first rehearseth the time, that is, those many dayes, in the which this Spouse of the Pro∣phet remained only a spouse.1. The time of O∣seas his wife remaining only betrothed, and not married. And those dayes are that same long a∣ges, in the which that same kingdome and people of Israel remay∣ned, and doth yet now at this day remaine in banishment, and a∣bandoned and cast off by God, vntill, as Paul sayth, the fulnes of the Gentiles bee entred in. So then this people of Israel hath now this long season layen, and yet presently doth lye as it wee vnknowne, and almost blotted out by destruction. And these dayes are to bee measured or reckoned from the time of the captiuitie of the ten tribes vntill that age, wherein God, casting off the Gentiles, shall bring backe and call againe all Israel vnto him, as I haue sayd, and as it appeareth Rom. 11. ver. 26. alleaged oftentimes before. That which shall at the last come to passe and bee fulfilled in the latter times of the world, as is shewed ver. 5. hereafter. For albeit when as God deliuered the Iewes out of the captiuitie of Babylon, (and not the Israelites properly) certaine of these Israelites mixed and ioyned themselues vnto the Iewes returning, and together with them came againe into the holie land, as appeareth by the booke of Esdras cap. 7. and albeit that by the preaching of the Gospell done by the Apo∣stles and their Successors afterward, many out of euery nation came vnto Christ, as is gathered out of the Acts cap. 2. and by the conuer∣sion of the Gentiles: and so consequently many of these Israelites also were gathered vnto the Church of God: yet al this notwithstā∣ding, the fulfilling of this time, whereof here is spoken, shall be then at the last, when as the whole Israel shall be conuerted vnto Christ,
the Gentiles because of their horrible and notorious blasphemies being refused of GOD. And this is the first part of this explan∣tion. 2. What it signi∣fieth, that this spouse is said not to haue played the har∣lot during the time of her e∣spousage.The second part is, what it signifieth, that this selfe same spouse is sayd not to haue played the harlot in the meane season, to wi that this nation so long as they liued in that their miserable estate and condition, had no publike or open idolatries: as it had, when i was a kingdome deuided from the kingdome of Iudah. Therefo al that whole time of their banishment, vntill that their conuersion, they were, and shalbe without idols, idoll Temples, manifest and o∣pen worshipping of idols, without images: nay also without E∣phod and Teraphim, or any similitudes and pictures, all which lie they vngodly had, and openly retained, during the time of their florishing and prosperitie. But when as the selfe same nation shall be called vnto Christ, yet shal it not put in vre againe their outward common wealth gouernment and politike lawes of Moses, as Ber∣nard writeth vpon the Canticles Serm. 67. and 68. whatsoeuer o∣thers would go about to proue and conclude out of the 9. of Amos, ver. 11. where GOD sayth, That in that day he will raise vp the ta∣bernacle of Dauid, that is fallen downe, and close vp the breaches thereof, and that he will raise vp his ruines, and build it, as in the dayes of old. Reade the exposition of that place before. 3. What the sit∣ting or remai∣ning of Oseas his spouse vnto him many daies, ver 3. be∣fore, doth signi∣fie.The third part of this explanation, what the gesture of sitting, or the commandement of sitting or abiding ver. 3. before, doth signi∣fie: namely, that this kingdome vtterly ouerthrowne, shall lye s  were a dead bodie, and shall so remaine a very long season. For this kingdome shall lye without a king, and without their prince, as it now appeareth. For no man doth now truely know, where are those same ten tribes long agoe caried away by the Assyrians, and which are their seates or abidings at this day. For they haue not i the whole vniuersall world any outward forme of their common weale, kingdome, or dominion. Yet notwithstanding God hath a care of them in the meane season: and they remaine as it were seede put into the ground: or as a bodie buried to rise againe (be∣cause of the old and ancient couenant of GOD with them) the which in his due time shall shewe forth it selfe, and declare and confirme the fulfilling of the things here spoken of. But some hold opinion that the Turkes came of those ten tribes, the which doe hate most deadlie all kindes of idolatries.
Vers. 5. Afterward shall the children of Israel conuert, and seeke the Lord their God, and Dauid their king, & shall feare the Lord, and his goodnes in the latter dayes. Two parts of this Verse.A Comfort the which doth altogether agree with the place of Paul Rom. 11. ver. 26. of the generall conuersion of the Iewes. But this verse containeth two things,1. A comfort. The comfort and the time of the same. The time is, The ending of dayes, the which I vnderstand not only of the time of Christ his being shewed in the flesh:2. The time of the same. but al∣so of the very last times and age of the world. For then at the last shall all Israel be conuerted vnto Christ by faith in the Gospell, to wit, when as the fulnes of the Gentiles shall haue entred in. For so doth Paul euidently expound this place.The comfort. The comfort which here is promised, briefly is, the conuersion of this people so cast off be∣fore, and so past all hope of recouerie, vnto God notwithstanding, and their vniting and knitting into the Church. They shall then be conuerted, to wit, vnto God, and that by faith of the Gospell con∣cerning Christ, whom these shall embrace, albeit the Iewes cruci∣fied him. And further here is declared manifestly, who shalbe con∣uerted, and after what manner. And the children of Israel shall bee conuerted, that is, those selfe same, which being seuered from the kingdome of Iudah, were called Israel. For Paul saith, All Israel, and not the Iewes alone shall embrace Christ through the preaching of the Gospell. And they shall so repent, that first they shall seeke the true God for their God; and not straunge gods any more, vnto whom they looked before: but (Iehouah) that is, the same God that is almightie. Secondly, the same Israelites shall seeke Dauid their king, that is, the true Christ, of whom Dauid was a figure, and the author of the seede. For Christ, as he is man, is of the seede of Dauid. In this place therefore Dauid is taken for that same true Da∣uid, that is Christ, who was the trueth of that Dauid which was the king, and who hath an euerlasting kingdom in the Church of God, the which is the house of Dauid. And therefore Luk. 2. ver. 32.33. the Angell telleth the Virgin Mary, That the Lord God shall giue vn∣to him the throne of Dauid his father, and that he shall reigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome shall be none end. But these selfe same Israelites had wickedly pulled and rent themselues from the kingdome of Dauid, that is, from the Church 1. King. 12. yet at that time they shall ioyne themselues vnto the Church, and that
most earnestly. Lastly, they shall with feare and admiration or wondering at so great a benefit of God towards them turne vnto God. For this feare or trembling in this place is nothing else but an admiration, & that very exceeding, at the so great mercy & good∣nes of God towards them. So Ierem. 33. ver. 9. God sheweth that he will in such sorte deale for Ierusalem, and the captiue Israelites, that all that shall heare of it shall feare and tremble for all the good∣nes, and for all the wealth that he will shew vnto that citie. It is not then such a feare and a trembling as shall driue away, and fray men from God: but such as shall allure and draw men vnto God. CAP. 4. Vers. 1. Heare the word of the Lord, ye children of Israel: for the Lord hath a controuersie with the inhabytants of the land, be∣cause there is no trueth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land. Another sermō against the peo¦ple and priests.ANother Sermon, wherein first the people generally, and after∣wardes the Priests particularly are condemned of most grie∣ous sinnes: and therefore most heauy iudgements of GOD are threatned against them both. And this threatning of God is herein this place set after the cōfort going before both, lest by means ther∣of vngodly and wicked men should flatter themselues in their sins, & promise vnto themselues escaping without punishment: & also that it might be as it were an answering vnto an obiectiō, as name∣ly thus,  If God will hereafter acknowledge vs for his, why doth he nowe bruise and in a maner kil vs with so many punishments?  He answereth, Because your sins deserueth is, frō the which ye do not at al repent you.. Parts of this verse. This verse hath three partes. The first contayneth an exhor∣tation to harken vnto the word, yea and that of Iehouah, that is, the true God, to the end they may appeare to be the more disobe∣dient and stubborn if they do not now hear it being requested and exhorted thereunto.1. An exhortatiō. Hereby is seene howe great our sluggishnes and sloth is, who euen at that time must bee stirred vp and pricked forward to heare, when as God himselfe speaeth. The second part sheweth, who are so earnestly exhorted to heare, namely, The children of Israel,2. Who are ex∣horted. that is, the whole people, and not only one part thereof. This sluggishnes if it were in the people of God, how great may it be noted to be, and alwayes to haue beene in other mortall
men? The third part layeth foorth the matter it selfe,3. Whereunto they are ex∣horted. vnto the hea∣ring whereof both all of vs in generall, and euery faythful person particularly ought to giue eare. And this is a controuersie and contention of God agaynst all the Israelites, the which he is desi∣rous to haue debated whether in iudgement or out of iudgement by way of conference, that he may proue them to bee guilty, and that of most grieuous sinnes.Metonymia is a figure where∣by one thing is put for another like vnto the same, as here, the land for the dwellers in it. Therefore by a figure called Meto∣nymia the land is here taken for the Israelites the inhabitants or dwellers therin. Further, there are reckoned vp three most grieuous kinds of sins, the which raigned commonly and openly among these men, that is, Infidelitie, and cruelty, the which appertayne vnto the second table, and ignorance of the true God and his word, the which is to be referred vnto the first table of the lawe of God. And this igno∣rance is the fountaine of the other twaine, that is,1. Vnfaithfull dealing. 2. Cruelty. 3. Ignorance of God. of vnfaythful dea∣ling and cruelty: for where the true God is not knowen, there must all kinde of notorious offences needes bee rife: as may appeare Rom. 1. ver. 28, 29. and so forth, where is at large rehearsed a long bead roll of notorious sins following the ignorance of God. Then the which vices what is more vsuall and common in the worlde at this day. Vers. 2. By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and who∣ring they breake out, and blood toucheth blood. A confirmatiō of the former accusation.A Confirmation of the former accusation of the people, and the iust foundation or ground of the controuersie of GOD with them. For he confirmeth it by the effects themselues of those vi∣ces which hee reproueth in them, the which are manifest and pe∣culiar. And here first of all hee reckoneth vp the effects of two vi∣ces (the which hee named before vers. 1.) the which appeared by their manners to be most knowen, and by the common course and fashion of the life of them all. The effects of vnfaithfulnes are their periurie, lying, adulterie. The fruits of their cruelty voyde of all bountifulnesse and liberality among them, are stealing and mur∣ther, and these latter so continuall, so vnpunished, so vsuall, that they brake out as it were into a common custome among them: and they ioyned murthers vnto murthers, and blood vnto blood, being restrayned with no feare, and with no punishment, eyther publike or priuate. And these manners doe bewray a desperate li∣centiousnes
of vices vtterly past all hope of recouery, and therefo most sharply by God to be punished. With this accusation of this people agree also these places of Scripture. Isai cap. 1. ver. 21, 22, 23 where he cryeth out against the sinnes of Ierusalem in this manner How is the faythful Citie become an harlot? it was full of iudgem and iustice lodged therein, but now they are murtherers. Thy  is become drosse: thy wine is mixt with water. Thy princes are rebel∣lious, and companions of theeues: euerie one loueth gifts, and followe after rewardes: they iudge not the fatherles, neither doth the wid cause come before them? And Amos cap. 6. ver. 6. complayneth o their excessiue feasting and reuelling without any compassion and brotherly fellow-feeling of the miseries of others, saying: They dri wine in bowles, and annoynt themselues with the chiefe oyntments,  no man is sory for the affliction of Ioseph. So Micheas cap. 1. vers. . calleth the dumme elements, yea and GOD himselfe to testifie a∣gainst them for their sinnes like vnto Oseas in this place: He (saith he) al ye people, hearken thou ô earth and al that therein is, and let the Lord God be witnes against you, euen the Lord from his holy Temple. And cap. 2. ver. 12. he nameth the particular notorious vices of the mightier among thē, saying: Woe vnto them that imagin iniquitie, & work wickednes vpon their beds: when the morning is light they practise it, because their hand hath power. And they couet fields, & take thē by violence, and houses, and take them away: so they oppresse a man, and his house, euen man and his heritage. Vers. 3. Therefore shall the land mourne, and euery one that dwel∣leth therein shall be cut off, with the beasts of the field and with the foules of the heauen, & also the fishes of the sea shal be taken away. A threatning of God his iudg¦ment for their sins, and the same two fold.A Threatning of the iudgement of God against the Israelites for the two former sinnes of them, to wit, vnfaithfull dealing within themselues, and cruelty voyd of all humanity and curtesie. And the threatning of this iudgement of God is two folde: namely, a∣gainst the countrey, land or soyle it selfe: Secondly, against all the inhabitants or dwellers in the Countrey,1. Against the countrey it self whether men, or brute beasts,2. Against al the inhabitants, whether men, or beasts. and the same of all sortes, that is, cattel, foules, and fishes the which shall both mourne, and by little and little consume and pine away, and finally shall be wasted and perish. Whereby ap∣peareth that this punishment was some contagious and infectious
disease, the which God sent both vpon the men and also vpon all kind of liuing creatures, such as is the pestilence, or some such like, as is described Deut. 28. ver. 35. where Moses writeth thus: The Lord shall smite thee in thy knees, and in thy thighes, with a sore botch, that thou canst not be healed: euen from the sole of thy foote vnto the toppe of thine head. And this punishment must needes be very sore, when as this sicknes or punishment touched the fishes themselues (the which in a maner doe dwell in another world from vs) and not on∣ly the foules and beasts of the field. Further, to the end that men may be the more pierced and deepely touched, God doth not one∣ly destroy them themselues, as those which haue sinned: but also such things as are necessary for man to liue withall: and that iustly: for whilest the master of the house is punished, the selfe same pu∣nishment doth worthily redound or fall vpon such things also as are vnder his subiection, to the ende the iudgements of God may be the more feared of vs. Vers. 4. Yet let none rebuke nor reproue another: for thy people are as they that rebuke the Priest. An amplifica∣tiō of their hor∣rible wickednesAN amplification of the wickednesse of the Israelites described before, taken from the maner of the same, and that very horri∣ble and feareful. For vnto this passe was that their lewdnes growne and come, that they would not now suffer themselues to be gently admonished, nor sharply reproued, such as Christ likeneth the peo∣ple of his time vnto Luk. 7. ver. 32. saying: They are like vnto chil∣dren sitting in the market place, and crying one to another, and saying: We haue piped vnto you, and ye haue not daunced: we haue mourned to you, and ye haue not wept. Nay these of whome Oseas speaketh, were not content, nor would suffer themselues to bee proued faulty in those sinnes by the seruants of God, or of any good man whatsoe∣uer, hauing a care of their saluation. Wherefore all the godly are willed to be silent, and to cease from both admonishing, and also rebuking of them. For they doe but lose their labour, which doe it. Finally this their stubbornesse is shewed by a similitude to be de∣sperate and past recouerie.The stubborn∣nes of the Israc lites past reco∣uerie. For they are like vnto those who with∣stand the Sacrificers or Priests of God euen to their faces, and that shamelesly: the which Priests by the worde of God it selfe doe re∣proue the sinnes of men. And these kind of persons are condem∣ned Deut. 17. ver. 12. in these words: And that man that will doe
presumptuously not harkening vnto the Priest (that standeth before the Lord thy God to minister there) or vnto the iudge, that man shall dye, and thou shalt take away euill from Israel. Nay without al doubt these kinde of men are most peeuish, stubborne in their sinnes, and altogether desperate or past hope of amendment. Such it seemeth were the Asians,Phygellus. Hermogenes. among whome were Phygellus and Hermogenes of whom Paul complayneth 2. Tim. 1. ver. 15. where he writeth vn∣to Timothie: This thou knowest that all they which are in Asia, bee turned from me: of which sorte are Phygellus and Hermogenes. And such also were Hymeneus and Alexander, whome 1. Tim. 1. ver. 20. Paul sayth,Hymeneus. Alexander. that he deliuered vnto Satan, that they might learne not to blaspheme. And albeit that all those whosoeuer, that are obstinate or stubborne in their sinnes, are not by the Pastors to be giuen ouer (for Paul willeth Timothie, and in his person al ministers, to Preach the word: to be instant in season, and out of season: to improue, rebuke, exhort with all long suffering and doctrine. 2. Tim. 4. ver. 2.) Yet those which are altogether past amendment, and will not so much as lend their eares vnto holy admonitions, are to be left, such as were those the which murthered Steuen, whom Act. 7. ver. 51. he calleth Stifnecked, and of vncircumcised harts and eares: and those who by Christ are cōpared vnto hogs, vnto whom pearls are notto be cast. Vers. 5. Therefore shalt thou fall in the day, and the Prophet shall fall with thee in the night, and I will destroy thy mother. The iudgment of God against the Israelites, amplified by three places.LIke as in the verse before going, the Prophet amplified the stub∣bornnesse of the Israelites, so also doth he now in this place am∣plifie the iudgement of God which was to ensue against them, that he may shew it worthylie, or as they haue deserued, to be such as they should feele it for to be. And he doth amplifie it by three pla∣ces. First,1. By the persons that shall then perish. What the fi∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see Amos cap. 8. ver 4. by the persons, the which at the same time shall perish and dye. And these are, both the People it selfe (vnto whome by the figure Apostrophe he turneth his speech for the more vehemen∣cie, or earnestnes sake, and also that thereby they may the more bee stirred vp) and also the Prophets of this people, that is, the false prophets, the which haue brought them vnto such con∣temning or despising of God, and ignorance of the trueth of God. For as Christ saith, If the blind lead the blind they shall both fall into the ditch. Mat. 15. ver. 14. So this Prophet cap. 9. ver. 8. complay∣neth of these ducing of the people by the false prophets: The watch∣man
of Ephraim (saith he) should bee with my God: but the prophet is the snare of a fouler in all his wayes. And therefore Ezechiel cap. 14. ver. 10. sheweth that they and the people that seeke vnto them shall be punished alike: And they shall beare their punishment: the punishment of the Prophet shall be euen as the punishment of him that asketh. Both of them therefore shall worthily bee punished, be∣cause that these, to wit, the false prophets haue deceiued the people, and they, namely, the people themselues would bee deceiued, and preferred a lye before the trueth. Such as these Paul 2. Thessal. 2. ver. 11, 12. saith: That God shall send vnto them strong delusion, that they should beleeue lyes, that all they might be damned which beleeued, not the trueth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnesse. Secondly,2. By the circum∣stance of time. hee doth amplifie this iudgement of God by the circumstance of time. For they shall perish (day and night) that is, at all times, and when they shall think to be in prosperitie, as also in aduersitie. For the night couereth many, endeth strifes, & stoppeth & staieth the flying away of many: yet shall it not deliuer those from perill and daun∣ger. For darkenes is no darkenes but light vnto God, from whose presence it cannot hide men, as Dauid confesseth Psal. 139. vers. 11, 12. If I say, yet the darkenes shall hide me, euen the night shall be light about me. Yea the darkenes hideth not from thee: but the night shineth as the day: the darkenes and light are both alike. And where as here the Prophet maketh mention of the night, he seemeth to al∣lude or haue respect vnto the vaine boasting of the false Prophets, who falsly gaue out that they receiued from God, night reuelations, that is, in the night time reuealed vnto them. But they therefore in the selfe same time chiefly shall be punished by God.3. By the great∣nes of the af∣fliction. The third part of this verse doth amplifie the punishment by the greatnes of the affliction. For it shal be so great that the mother of this people, that is, the land it selfe wherein they haue their abode, shall be layd waste, and shall feele this iudgement of God. The land therefore is called a Mother, because those fruits, wherewith wee are nouri∣shed by God, doe growe out of the earth. Wherefore of the pro∣phane or heathen writers the earth is also called The mother of all things, and giuer of life. And hee termeth the soile it selfe by the name of a mother, to moue the hard affections of these men, that they might be throughly touched with the feare of so great pu∣nishments, as who by and for their stubbornnes, haue miserably pulled the same both vpon their own heads, and also vpon the head of their mother.
Vers. 6. My people are destroyed for lacke of knowledge: Because thou hast refused knowledge, I wil also refuse thee, that thou shalt be no priest vnto me: & seeing thou hast forgotten the law of thy God, I will also forget thy children. He dealeth a∣gainst their ig∣norance of the wor of God. Order. AFter that he hath intreated of the two vices, the which he set downe in the first place, now he commeth order∣ly vnto the third, namely, vnto the ignorance of the true knowledg of the word of God. And this he teacheth to be the fountaine of al the sinnes of the people, of their stubbornnes and disobedience, and other vices: and so consequently of the destruction, ruine & misery of this people. Two parts of this verse.This verse hath two partes. The first, Concerneth the people. The second, The Priests themselues, who ought to instruct the peo∣ple in the word and feare of.1. Concerning the people. As touching the people, God pro∣noūceth that they shal be destroyed, that is, that they shal be pulled vp by the roots,2. Concerning the Priests. and vtterly killed and spoiled for euer growing any more. The cause is added or set downe, Because this people w without knowledge. Here first of all the worde (knowledge) is restrained vnto th knowledge of GOD:1. The people. The word know¦ledge taken here Secondly, vnto the knowledge of the tru God, and not of any counterfeit God: finally, vnto the true w∣ledge of that same true God,1. For the know∣ledge of God. the which is to bee had thro  holy Ghost out of his written word only, and not out of the ∣tions and deuices of men. It is not therefore to bee referr  that knowledge of God,2. The knowledge of the true God the which hath remayned and is in∣ly by the light of nature left vnto vs▪ & by the things and cr the which we see and doe beholde with our eyes:3. The true know¦ledge of the true God. For the Isr were not voyde of this, but the name of knowledge betoken  vnderstanding of the secret of God reuealed to the faithful  written word, and so is the Greke word (gnôsis) euery whe∣ken in Paul. So the word knowledge is taken Isai 5. ver. 13. w hee sayth in the person of God: Therefore my people is gone into captiuitie because they had no knowledge. So cap 11. ver. 9. rendring a reason why violence and wronge, and hurting one of another should cease in the faythfull conuerted by the Gospel, he saith: For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lorde, as the waters that couer the sea. Moreouer,2. The Priests. as concerning the Priests, who haue beene the
cause of this ignorance, they also shall be punished of God, and that iustly: and not only they themselues, but also their children and al their posteritie. For God in the end made al this kind of Priests to be miserable & scorned, who both before & then also haue taught and did teach the Israelites most naughtily and falsly: first, in the captiuity of Assyria: afterwerds in all the rest of the time following, as it now also appeareth in the other Leuites and Priestes, and in their posteritie and children which are remayning in the Iewish na∣tion. Whereby appeareth that a most grieuous punishment is threatned by the Prophet vnto sacrificing Priests, that is, vnto all wicked teachers euen vnder the Gospel, of whom and their punish∣ment Peter writeth at large in these wordes, 2. epist. cap. 2. vers. 1, 2, 3. But there were false Prophets also among the people, euen as there shall be false teachers among you: which priuily shall bring in damnable heresies, euen denying the Lord that hath bought them, and bring vpon themselues swift damnation. And many shall follow their damnable wayes, by whome the waie of trueth shall bee euill spoken of. And through couetousnes shall they with fayned words make merchan∣dise of you, whose iudgement long agone is not farre off, and their dam∣nation sleepeth not. The cause of this punishmēt. of the Priests.Further, the cause is added, and the same most iust, of this so fearefull iudgement of God against them, to wit, for that these fel∣low who should haue instructed others in the true knowledge of d, and did professe the same, yet notwithstanding did first them∣lues despise the same knowledge, yea and forgat it also, and there∣fo could not teach it vnto others. Wherefore they shall by God de priued and bereaued of their dignitie, and shall bee put from their degree and Priesthood. So Christ threatneth the Scribes and Pharisies Mat. 21. ver. 41. who with their own mouthes pronounce the it owne sentence against themselues, when they answere vnto is demaund what shal be done vnto those wicked husband men, who lld the Lord and heire of the vineyard: He shall (say they) ruelly destroy those wicked men, and shall let out his vineyard vnto o∣en  and men, which shall deliuer him the fruits in their seasons. o Ezech. 44. vers. 12. the same iudgement is rehearsed against the lese words: Because they serued before their Idols, and cau∣sd the house of Israel to fall into iniquitie, therfore haue I lift vp mine ndgst them, sayth the Lord God, and they shall beare their ini∣itie, he selfe same at this day falleth out vnto the Popish Bi∣ops.
Vers. 7. As they were increased, so they sinned against me: there∣fore will I change their glory into shame. The punish∣mēts of false and loytring teachers.NOw from this place the Prophet entreth into those punish¦mēts, the which God threatneth vnto these false or negligent teachers, that by this example al others that are set ouer the church for the gouernement and teaching of the same, may learne to doe their duetie: for as Paul saith, the office of a Bishop is (ergon) that is to say (a worke) and not onely (time) that is a certaine dumme dignitie and honor 1. Tim. 3. ver. 1. This is a true saying, if any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desireth a worthy worke. And therefore Isai in their colours painteth out those that rather seeke the gayne then to discharge the paine, and the profite before the teaching of the flocke cap. 56. ver. 10, 11. in this manner: Their watchmen are all blinde: they haue no knowledge: they are all dumme dogges: they cannot barke: they lye and sleepe, and delight in sleeping. And these greedie dogges can neuer haue enough: and these shepheards cannot vnderstand: for they all looke to their owne way, euery one for his ad∣uantage, and for his owne purpose. Therefor Oseas here amplifieth both the sinne and also the negligence or sluggishnes of the Priests, that the punishment of God against them may appeare to bee the more iust.The prophet by comparing the honor of the Priests aboue the rest of their brethren, in∣creaseth their sa in staining and blotting of the same by negligence and false doctrine. And first of all in this place he doth it by the comparing of the honor, the which they had obtayned from God among that people aboue the other tribes of the sayd people, as appeareth 1. Sam. 2. ver. 28. where God by the Prophet putteth Eli the Priest in mind of the same dignitie whereunto he called Aaron and his po∣steritie aboue the rest of the people, saying: And I chose him out of all the tribes of Israel to be my Priest, to offer vpon mine altar, and to burne incense, and to weare and Ephod before me, and I gaue vnto the house of thy father all the offerings made by fire of the children of Isra∣el. Reade more largely hereof Malach. 2. vers. 4, 5, 6, 7. For the Tribe of Leui only was by God preferred before the other tribes in the exercising of the ministerie or office of his seruice and wor∣ship: and in the selfe same tribe of Leui, the Priests, that is the sons of Aaron, were without al doubt preferred likewise by God before their brethren of the same tribe. For the Priests alone attended vp∣on the Temple it selfe, the altar, and sacrifices, as appeareth Numb. 18. in the beginning, and so certaine verses following. But in the higher degree of honor that they were placed in by God; so much
the more filthilie, shamefull, and manifestly did they despise God. First, because euery vice of the minde hath in it so much the more easie a blot to be seene, as the partie that offendeth therein, is grea∣ter in place and dignitie then another offending in the same. Se∣condly, because they sinned more shamefully, and disobediently then the rest of the common people. And therefore they are more grieuously to be punished. Wherefore God threatneth that it shall come to passe, that he will turne the honour which he hath giuen them into their open ignominie or reproach and shame. For GOD honoureth those which honour him, and despiseth those which de∣spise him 1. Sam. 2. ver. 30. Vers. 8. They eate vp the sinnes of my people, and lift vp their mindes in their iniquitie, (or vnto their iniquitie.) An amplifica∣tiō of the sinne of the priests and of their contempt of God.AN amplification of the fault and contempt of God, the which was committed by these Priests. For they did not only despise the knowledge of the true God: but they also abused the sacrifices of God vnto their couetousnesse, leacherie, drunkennesse and glut∣tonie, and gaine and profite. And these are sinnes the which both are, and also haue at all times been common, & peculiar vnto false Prophets, as Peter teacheth 2. Epist. cap. 2. vers. 3. alleaged a little before, vers. 6. of this chapter. For they make merchandise of the soules of men. The same doth Micheas teach also cap. 3. ver. 11. The heads thereof (sayth he) iudge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophesie for money. The same likewise doth Paul teach 1. Tim. 6. ver. 5. where he willeth Timothie to auoyd vaine disputations of men of corrupt mindes, and destitute of the trueth, which thinke that gaine is godlinesse. And lastly Christ himselfe doth the like Matth. 23. ver. 14. where hee cryeth woe against the couetousnesse of the Scribes and Pharises, saying: Woe be vnto you Scribes and Pharises, hypocrites: for ye deuoure wi∣dowes houses, euen vnder a colour of long prayers: wherefore ye shall receiue the greater damnation. Yea, and more ouer the false Apostles doe abuse true godlinesse to fill the lusts of their bellies, of whom Philip. 3. ver. 19. Paul sayth, their bellis is their God,Two poynt to be noted. and whose glorie is their shame, which mind earthly things. But this verse hath two especiall poynts to bee noted. The first, of what Priests and Sacrifices Ose as speaketh,1. Of what priests and sacrifices the Prophet speaketh. when as there were no true Priest, nor any true Sacrifices then among the Israelites, of
whom onely he now intreateth. For the true Sacrificers or Priests, and the true Sacrifices were by God ordained onely at Ierusalem, where was the Temple. I answere. Albeit those which at that time sacrificed among the Israelites, were neither true Priests, according vnto the true rule: and that their sacrifices, which were made vnto Idols, were no true sacrifices: yet he speaketh according vnto the iudgement and opinion which the Israelites themselues, and their Priests, had of them, and he calleth those, Priests, and their killings of beasts, sacrifices: because that they did them in such sort, at least∣wise in their owne iudgement, as if they had been true Priests, and as if those sacrifices also had been true sacrifices ordained by God himselfe. So the idols which of themselues are nothing, yet vnto the Idolaters are gods. And so according to their opinion doth Paul call them 1. Cor. 8. ver. 4.5. when he sayth, That there be ma Gods, and many Lords. So those horned and dumme false Bishops, are vnto the Papists, Bishops. Therefore if this matter bee conside∣red according vnto their opinion, they did as much abuse both the Priesthood, and also the sacrifices, as if they had been true Priests. And this is the first poynt that is to be noted. The second poynt is, how they abused those their sacrifices, to wit in this,2. How they abu∣sed their sacri∣fices. that they turned vnto a meere or only occasion of their couetousnesse, leacherie, gurmandise, euen the very selfe same sa∣crifices, the which they held and taught to bee ordained vnto the worship of God, holines and godlines of the mind, & also forgiue∣nes of sinnes.To eate the sinnes of the people, is to eate the sacrifices, which they of∣fered for their sinnes. So then they did eate the sinnes of the people, that is to say, they did sweetly and delicatly deuoure the sacrifices for their sinnes offered of euery one of the people, they did eate them I say, to satisfie the lust and gurmandise of their bellie, and this was the end of the sacrifices the which they propounded vnto themselues, and the which only they respected and regarded. So in the Pope∣dome euery the most holy things are by the Priests conuerted & turned into an occasion of lucre and gaine. Lastly, (they lifted their minds vnto the iniquities of the people) that is to say, they hearke∣ned, when as the sinnes of the people were many, or increased, as if then there were a good haruest for them at hand So the Confessio∣ners,The popish Confssrs. or ghostly fathers, and Shriuing priests among the Papists, ga∣ther a most rich and plentifull crop of the sinnes of men: and looke by how much any man doth confesse himselfe to bee more misera∣ble and sinfull, so much the more gaine doe they sucke and pick our of him. So Paul saith, that such Pastors haue a great pray and bootie
by women laden with sinnes. For such, (sayth he 2. Tim. 3. vers. 6.) or of this sort are they which creep into houses, and leade captiue simple women laden with sinnes, and led with diuers lusts. Vers. 9. And there shalbe like people, like priest: for I will visite their wayes vpon them, and reward them their deedes. The threat∣ning of a more grieuous iudge∣ment.THe threatning of a more grieuous iudgement of GOD against the same men also. For God doth not only forget them, & shall thrust them from the ministerie of the Church, as hath been sayd before ver. 6. but moreouer God shall vtterly ouerthrow and quite and cleane race out their whole ministerie, that afterwards there shall be no difference betweene the people and the priest, that is to say, there shall afterward be no priest among them: there shall bee remaining no mention, regard, or dignitie of this order. So Isai. 24. ver. 2.3. There shall be like people, like priest, and like seruant, like ma∣ster, like maide, like mistres, like buyer, like seller, like lender, like boro∣wer, like giuer, like taker vpon vsurie. The earth shalbe cleane emptied, and vtterly spoyled: For the Lord hath spoken this word. This no doubt is a most iust punishment, that those dignities, the which haue de∣spised God, and contemned him, should also themselues by God be done away, and remoued, and vtterly abolished or ouerthrowne. And this the histories and experience of all times hath taught, and doth teach. So at this day Nobilitie is extinct or rooted out among the Grecians, because they greatly abused the same. So is the office of Bishops in Asia, where there was exceeding great abuse of the same. For as it is 1. Sam. 2. ver. 30. Them that honour God, he will ho∣nour, and those that despise him shall be despised. The time, and cause of this punishment.Further, the Prophet noteth both the time, and also the cause of this punishment. The time, when this ministerie shall be done a∣way of God, to wit, when as God shal visite, and reward vnto them their wickednesse. The which that it shall one day bee, the wordes themselues doe euidently declare, albeit the set moment or minute of time be not here expressed. The cause of this punishment, is their wayes, that is to say, their wicked manners: also their transgression and rebellion, or falling from the true God, when as he notwith∣standing had declared himselfe more vnto them, then vnto other nations; and vnto their priests more then vnto the rest of the peo∣ple.
Vers. 10. For they shall eate, and not haue enough: they shall commite adulterie, and shall not increase, because they haue left off to take beede to the Lord. AN amplification by way of making the matter more plaine. For now the seuerall punishments are reckoned vp and declared, wherewith God will punish and plague these priests, and that pro∣portionably vnto their sinnes, that looke after what manner they haue sinned, after the same they may be punished. Two sinnes rec∣koned vp in this verse, glut∣tnie and whoredome.But in this verse two kinds of sinnes are rehearsed, vnto the which is added a reason of the same also. Wherefore like as they abused their sacrifices both vnto the cramming and ouergorging of their bellies, and also vnto their wicked whoredomes, to wit, being full gorged with meate (for lust and wantonnes flowe from wine and good cheare) so they shall eate, but not be satisfied. For our satisfy∣ing commeth not of the store of meate that we eate, but of the bles∣sing of God vpon the same. For as it is in the Psalme 105. vers. 16. God calleth a famin vpon a land, & vtterly breaketh the staffe of bread. That is, as he giueth it strength to nourish for a blessing, so for a plague he taketh at his pleasure that power and vertue from it, whereof insueth famin and hunger. And as they did eate and were not filled, so they shall commit whoredom with many women for to get children, & yet their houses shall not be increased, but rooted out and perish. For these men haue a proud desire to continue their stocke and seede, but they shall be without seede, and shall beget no children. Being like to those of whom the Psal. 49. ver. 11. spea∣keth, that thinke their houses and habitations shall continue for euer. The reason of this punishment is, because that they haue after such manner, and so stubbornly and shamefully forsaken God, that they haue no way kept nor cared for his commaundements. For in old times issue, and fruitfulnes in hauing of children, was a blessing that was promised vnto men fearing God,Fruitfules in hauing of chil∣dren was in old time reckoned for an especiall blessing of God and not vnto prophane or lewd persons, and despisers of God. And therefore vnto the man that feareth God it is promised in the Psal. 128. ver. 3. after this ma∣ner: Thy wife shall be as the fruitfull vine on the sides of thine house, & thy children like the oliue plants round about thy table. And vnto vs also that loue God, the number of children, especially such as bee godly, is a token of God his mercie towards vs. For by this meanes God doth witnesse, that he will be worshipped of vs in many ages,
and reigne in our families. Wherefore let them praise God which haue begotten and brought vp many children to be dedicated vn∣to God. Vers. 11. Whoredome, and wine, and new wine take away their heart. THis is the figure called Epiphonêma, or acclamation,What the fi∣gure Epiphone∣ma is, see Ionas cap. 2. ver. 9. whereby the Lord doth yet more fowlie detest the former vices of the priests, and sheweth them to bee most miserable, as the which doe bring them vnto a most shamefull passe: namely this, that now they are no more capable, or such as can receiue any faithfull admoni∣tion, repentance, vnderstanding: but liue like vnto bruite beasts gi∣uen onely to the filling of their bellie, and satisfying of their lust. And this doth Peter teach in euery age to fall out vnto other false Prophets in like manner 2. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 14.18. of whom he affir∣meth that they haue eyes full of adulterie, and that cannot cease to sinne, beguiling vnstable soules: For they swell in speaking words of va∣nitie: they beguile with wantonnes, through the lusts of the flesh, them that were cleane escaped from them which are wrapped in error. And experience it selfe proueth this to bee true both in the popish Bi∣shops, and also Chanons, who are slow bellies, euill beasts, wholly giuen to whoredome and wine. Further, here is in three words de∣scribed the life altogether of an Epicure, or plaine belly-god, name∣lie, (whoredome, wine, and new wine.) And the Prophet doth distin∣guish or make a difference betweene wine and new wine, both to shewe the gurmandise of these men, who mixed and drunke olde wine with Muste, that is, with new wine for pleasantnes sake: and also their vnsatiable wanton lust, who by this meanes did the more earnestly stirre vp themselues vnto whoredome. Now these things take from men their heart, or minde. For both drunkennesse and al∣so whoredome doe very greatly weaken the reason and vnderstan∣ding: yea, moreouer they ouer whelme and dul the common sense, and instruments of the same, so that they seeme rather beasts then men, which are giuen vnto these vices. With this place agreeth this saying taken out of Virgil his Epigram. Quum mentes hominum furiauit vter{que} (.i Bacchus & Venus) Et pudor & probitas & metus omnis abest. Ergo. Nec Veneris, nec tu vini capiaris amore: Vno namque modo vina Venus{que} nocent.
In rude meter thus: Where wine once and women inrag'd haue the braine, All shame, feare, and goodnesse no longer remaine. On wine then, and women set thou not thy minde: For them both like hurtfull at last thou shalt finde. And so forth, as there followeth. The like is that saying of Ierome, Wine is poyson: from the which notwithstanding no Orders of Monks, professe they neuer so great holines, doe abstaine. Vers. 12. My people aske counsell at their stockes, and their staffe teacheth them: for the spirit of fornications hath caused them to erre, and they haue gone a whoring from vnder their God. A continuing of the threat∣ning against the whole peo∣ple.THis is a continuing of the threatning of the wrath and iudge∣ments of God: but the same is now directed vnto the whole people and not vnto the priests alone, as was the former immediat∣ly going before. And the reason why GOD doth now turne his speech vnto the whole people, is, that the Israelites, that is, the rest of the people, which were not priests, should not thinke themselues (whilest they are ignorant of the true God, whilest they serue o∣ther then him) to bee cleere and free from sinne before God: and therefore suppose themselues also to bee voyd from punishment, because not they, but the priests, are properly the cause of this euill; for these ought to teach the people. But according vnto the answer of Christ in the Gospell, not onely the blind guides themselues, but they also that follow those blind guides, are iustly punished, Mat. 15. ver. 14. If the blinde leade the blinde, both shall fall into the ditch. Furthermore, this selfe same sheweth, into what, and how shameful blasphemies of GOD, and horrible punishments they doe fall, the which vnder any pretence or colour whatsoeuer shall despise the true knowledge of God, drawne from his word. Two parts of this verse.And this verse hath two things to be noted. First, the kind of ido∣latrie or superstition, whereunto this people was giuen. The se∣cond part sheweth the cause of this so shamefull blasphemie.1. The kind of i∣dolatrie. The kind of sinne then, was not only common idolatrie, but that most shamefull manner thereof,2. The cause of the same. whereby the idolaters, as being curious, vaine, and ambitious men, doe enquire at their idols of things to come. The Prophet Isai noteth the same vice in the Israelites cap. 2. ver. 6. where he sayth: Surely thou hast forsaken thy people, the house
of Iaacob, because they are full of the East maners, and are Sorcerers, as the Philistims. And againe, cap. 47. ver. 13. where he biddeth them in mockage seeke vnto their Astrologers and Soothsayers, that they, if they can, should foretell them of the miseries that were to fall vpon them, or were able to saue them from them: Let now the Astrologers, the starre-gasers, and Prognosticators stand vp, and saue thee from these things that shall come vpon thee. And this sinne of enquiting after things to come at idols, or any other, together with those that professe this knowledge, by what names soeuer they be termed, hath long since by God been condemned Deut. 18. ver. 10. for there God by Moses cōmandeth thus: Let none be found among you that vseth witchcraft, or is a regarder of times, (Tremchus tran∣slateth them Planetarios) or a marker of the flying of foules, or a Sor∣cerer, or a charmer, or that counselleth with spirits, or a Soothsayer, or that asketh counsell at the dead.How great a sinne it is to en∣quire of things to come at id. Doubtles this sinne taketh from God his gouernment of this world, and giueth it vnto idols, at whō the issues and falling out of things to come are looked for, and en∣quired. It is therefore a most shamefull blasphemie against God. Further, in this place the vanitie of this kind of idolatric is refuted and mocked in one word, when as these idols, of whom the fore∣tellings of things to come are asked, are called (wood or stocks) that is, a dead thing, and a staffe, that is, a dumme and dull thing: for so are idols called in contempt of them. The cause of this filthie ido∣catrie in the Is∣raelites.And the cause or reason why the Israelites were giuen vnto this so filthie idolatrie, is this: because they had fallen away from the true God, and from his knowledge, and right and lawfull worship, and with great endeuour had betaken themselues vnto that spiritu∣all fornication, that is to say, vnto the worshipping of idols. They were therfore deceiued by the selfe same spirit, of whom they were taught to worship idols, and by whom they were moued thereun∣to, that they should at idols also aske the knowledge of things to come. For God giueth efficacie or strength of error vnto Sathan a∣gainst those which haue not receiued the loue of the trueth, or haue forsaken the same, as Paul teacheth 2. Thess. 2. ver. 10.11. writing, that the comming of Antichrist is by the working of Satan, with all power and signes and lying wonders, and in all deceiueablenes of vn∣righteousnesse, among them that perish, because they receiued not the loue of the truth, that they might be saued. And therfore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeue lyes, and giue care vnto such predictions or foretellings, and vaine promises, and enquire
and seeke after them.This Broccard is a peeuish Pro¦phet yet now li∣uing in Holld or at leastwise dead but very lately, of whom you may reade more in the fore notes. Let them therefore hereby beware, the which at this day enquire at Mathematicians, or Broccardical Sooth-sayen concerning the state of their things to come. Vers. 13. They sacrifice vpon the toppes of the mountaines, and burne incense vpon the hils vnder the Okes, and the Poplar tree, and the Elme, because the shadow thereof is good: therefore your daughters shall be harlots, and your spouses shall be whores. An amplifica∣tion of their idolatrie.AN amplification of the Idolatrie of this people, taken from their exceeding great earnestnes in worshipping of Idols. For they doe it euery where, and in all places. They appoynt and dedicate al sortes of high trees vnto this sinne and wickednes: briefly the Ido∣latry of these men is rather a madnes, then a sicknes. The Prophet Isay cap 57. ver. 7, 8, 9, 10. doth most liuely expresse their madding and gadding after Idols, sparing for no cost, nor trauel in worship∣ping of the same, in this wise: Thou hast made thy bed vpon a very hie mountaine: thou wentest vp thither, euen thither wentest thou to offer sacrifice. Behinde the doores also and postes hast thou sette vp thy remembrance: for thou hast discouered thy selfe to another then mee, and wentest vp, and diddest enlarge thy bed, and make a couenant be∣tweene thee and them, and louedst their bed in euery place where thou sawest it. Thou wentest to the Kings with oyle, and diddest encrease thine oyntments, and send thy messengers farre off, and diddest hum∣ble thy selfe vnto hell. Thou weariedst thy selfe in thy manifold iour∣nies, yet saydest thou not, There is no hope; thou hast found life by thine hand, therefore thou was not grieued. Wherefore God foreseeing this their outragiousnes in this sinne, set downe a law to restraine the same Deut. 12. ver. 13. where he speaketh thus: Take heede that thou offer not thy burnt offerings in euery place that thou seest, but on∣ly in the place which the Lord shall appoynt thee. But there is a pu∣nishment prepared for this so vile a sinne,A punishment answerable vn∣to their sinne. and that according vnto the proportion of this spirituall fornication, that is, of Idolatrie with bodily fornication. For God threatneth that it shall come to passe, that those women whom among themselues they would haue to be most chast of all others, the very same shall among themselues commit fornication or play the whores. And these are their daugh∣ters and their spouses, whom euery man would haue to bee chaste before his maydes, yea in a maner before their married wiues. And indeede the fornication of a spouse or betrothed wife with another
before marriage is most filthy, as is also a man his daughters vn mar∣ried: yet is not therefore the whoredome of the married wiues any whit the lesse, or the lighter: but the Prophet thus speaketh ac∣cording to the iudgment of man, that they should vnderstand that  fornication should bee most grieuous vnto them, like as their fornicatiō was vnto God most grieuous & lothsome. After this ma∣ner doth God repay home iust punishments vnto iniquitie and sin. Vers. 14. I will not visite your daughters when they are harlots, nor your spouses when they are whores: for they themselues are separated with harlots, and sacrifice with whores: therefore the people that doth not vnderstand, shall fall. A reason why these Idolators should in such wise be puni∣shed.THis is a rendring of a reason wherewith the Prophet confirmeth it to be most meet and right that these fornicators against God, should themselues also in their owne houses for a punishment see and suffer those most filthy fornications. Therefore this part of this verse is to be read by way of interrogation, or asking of a question: as thus: will I not, or shall I not visit your daughters when they are harlots, and your spouses, when they are whores? For that these separate with harlots the which they sacrifice with whores?A comparison shewing that their punish∣ment shall be proportionable or agreeable vnto their sin. Further there is here set downe a comparison and proportion to expresse more cleerely this equitie of the punishment of God against them, to wit, That as these doe separate or put apart all the best & most choyce of their goods, to sacrifice vnto Idols together with their whores (for with Idolators these vices for the most part are common and goe together, to wit, spirituall fornication and bodily whoredome, the which are committed together, and in the same Temples. For as one sayth, the women come thither, that is, to those Temples for to beholde and gaze, they come that they may be beheld and ga∣zed vpon: and therefore, that place sayth the same writer, hath the hurts & losse of chast shamefastnes, that is in those places they are many times dishonested.) So thē as they giue & bestow euery their best things vpon their Idols, when as they commit spirituall whor∣dome with them: likewise shal those women kinde whom they ac∣count most deare as are their daughters, & their spouses, play the whores and harlots most impudently, or shamelesly among them. Lastly, the conclusion of this whole place is added in these wordes:The conclusion of this place. This people that doth not vnderstand, shall fall or perish: to wit, be∣cause they are without the true knowledge, worship, and feare of
God. For here (vnderstanding) without the which the Israelites are sayd to be, doth not only comprehend the true knowledge of God, but also his true worship and fear, or the practise of this knowledg as in 1. Ioh. cap. 2. ver. 4. where he writeth: He that sayth, I knowe him, (that is, God) and keepeth not his commandements, is a lyar, and the trueth is not in him. For these two are alwaies to be linked toge∣ther, to wit, knowledge and practise. Vers. 15. Though thou, Israel, play the harlot, yet let not Iudias sinne: come not ye vnto Gilgal, neither goe ye vp to Beth-auen, no sweare, the Lordliueth. An admonitiō for the king∣dom of Iudah.AN admonition, the which properly appertaineth vnto the peo∣ple and kingdome of Iudah, at that time separated from the kingdome of Israel. For the Iewes are admonished, that they also sinne not after the example of the Israelites their brethren, and neighbours: and that they mingle not themselues with them, or defile themselues in their Idolatries, or any other their sinnes what∣soeuer. For it appeareth sufficiently, that the Israelites by the ex∣ample of the Iewes, and the Iewes by the following of the Israelites, ranne into all wickednes. Read for proofe hereof Ezech 16. from the verse 45. almost to the end of the chapter. Moreouer experi∣ence it selfe doth teach, that neighbour people are easilie corrupted by neighbour people. For those things the which are practised or done among people dwelling neere together, those which are their neighbours, and doe dwell neere vnto them, doe easily imitate or follow, and take vp the same. So the Romanes quickly receiued the South sayings of the Hetruscians. Wherefore we are both pub∣likely and priuately with all diligence to beware such so easie cor∣ruption and infection. For in this case also doth the rule of Paul 1. Cor. 15. hold: Euil communication corrupteth good maners. 2. Parts of this verse.But this verse hath two partes. The first doth generally pro∣pound or set forth the prohibition or forbidding, that the Iewes should nor corrupt themselues after the likenes of the Israelites,1. Generally set∣teth dwne a prohibition fro Gd vnto the Iewes. and especially that they should not giue themselues ouer vnto Idolatry or Idols, the which is expressed by the word Fornication or playing the harlot. And this communicating or taking part with other men their wickednes, god calleth (sin or guiltines) that is a most grieuous offence cleauing properly vnto them which doe sinne after the ex∣ample of others: whereby they also become guiltie before God, as
they in like maner are guilty whom they doe imitate or follow: and therefore worthy of the iudgement of God. This guiltinesse, the which by the mouth of God him selfe is pronounced or declared a∣gainst those which are partakers of other mens sinnes (as Paul spea∣keth 1. Tim. 5. ver. 22. where he saith to Timothie, be not partaker of other mens sinnes) is opposed or set against the many excuses, the which those both alleadge, and also faine vnto themselues, that imitate or follow other mens deedes, and sinnes: for being reproued they make excuses for themselues. The second part of this verse is an explication, or making more plain of the sinne,2. Maketh the same more e∣uident and plaine. from the which the Iewes especially were to abstaine. He therefore rehearseth two sortes of Idolatry, common and most vsual among the Israelites (I confesse) but yet horrible before God. The one for that they went to Gilgal and Bethel (the which here is called Beth-auen) that they might there doe seruice and sacrifice vnto their Idols.1. Their idolatry at Gilgal and Beth-el. Gilgal in this place I take not for the border of the kingdome of Israel, and as it deuided the boundes thereof from the kingdome of Iudah: but for a most famous Idol Temple, the which was builded in those places, and was commonly of all the Israelites frequented or gone vnto, and with great superstition worshipped and had in re∣uerence. See hereafter cap. 9. vers. 15. cap. 12. ver. 11. And before Amos 4. ver. 4. and cap. 5. ver. 5. Beth-auen is named for Beth-el,Why Beth-el is here named Beth-auen. to procure hatred vnto that place by so hard and bad a name. For it was now no longer the house of God (as the name doth importe) but an house of Idols, or of iniquitie and wickednes, as Beth-auen doth signifie. Concerning the naming of it Beth-el read Gen. 28. ver. 19. There was more ouer another Beth-auen, and by the pro∣per name thereof so called in the promised land, the which is di∣stinguished and seuered from Beth-el, and was in the borders of the tribe of Beniamin neere vnto Hai, whereof read Iosh. cap. 7. ver. 2 and cap. 18. ver. 12, 13. Hereof we doe gather, that glorious and godly names of Cities doe not excuse them before God, or couer the euils that are there by the citizens committed. So the Temple of God is called, a denne of theeues. For the names are changed the things being changed, or else godly names doe turne vnto the greater hurt both of the places, and also of the inhabitants or dwel∣lers in them, if they in godlinesse bee not answerable vnto their names. 2. Their abusing or swearing.The second kinde of their most filthy Idolatry, is the propha∣nation or defiling and abusing of swearing. The which is then
done, whē as we either sweare by the name of idols only, as is foūd fault withall Amos 8. ver. 14. when he sayth: They that sweare by the sinne of Samaria, and that say, Thy God, O Dan, liueth, & the ma∣ner of Beer-sheba liueth, euen they shall fall, and neuer rise vp againe: or when as together with the name of the true God the name of ∣dols is vsed also in swearing. So was it at that time vsed to be done by the Israelites, the which the Iewes in this place are forbidden to imitate or follow. And against these that sweare by God and by i∣dols, the Prophet Sophonias cap. 1. ver. 5. threatneth that God will plague and punish them, where he writeth, that God will cut off them that worship the host of heauen vpon the house tops, and them that worship and sweare by the Lord,We must sweare by the name of God only. and sweare by Malcham. For wee must sweare only by the name of the true God, and not by the name of Idols, or Saints. And therefore Deut. 6. ver. 13. Moses giueth this commaundement vnto the Israelites, saying: Thou shalt feare the Lord thy God, and serue him, and shalt sweare by his name. And Iere. cap. 5. ver. 7. accounteth this swearing by other thē by the true God, to be a forsaking of God, and a sinne so great that God cannot spare them that vse it, speaking there in the person of God after this ma∣ner: How should I spare thee for this? Thy children haue forsaken me, and sworne by them that are no Gods? Vers. 16. For Israel is rebellious as an vnruly heifer. Now the Lord will feede them as a Lambe in a large place. A reason, why the Israelites are not to be followed of the Iewes.THis is a reason, why the Israelites are not to be imitated or fol∣lowed of the Iewes, and this same reason is two-fold. The first is taken from the most foule and filthie fruit of the idolatrie, & wic∣kednesse of the Israelites. And this is, That the Israelites being giuen ouer vnto those their sinnes,  and throughly inured and acquainted with them, haue now ceased by any meanes to bee ruleable and o∣bedient vnto God: nay they haue vtterly shaken off his gouernmēt and yoke, as an vnruly heifer. Therefore lest the selfe same doe hap∣pen vnto the Iewes, let them not bee partakers of the sinnes of the Israelites. And this is a description of wickednesse altogether past recouerie. For they are not compared vnto men in such sort rebel∣lious: but vnto bruit beasts, and vnreasonable creatures, to the end that the blockishnes of these rebellious and stubborne persons may be shewed, and their foolish and peeuish minde bee described and layd forth as it were in his colours.
2. A second rea∣son why the Iewes should not imitate the Israelites.The second cause is, a most lamentable effect of the same stub∣bornnes of the Israelites against GOD, the which followed their idolatrie, and falling away from the true worship of GOD. And this is a most grieuous iudgement of God, wherewith they are ortly to bee punished, the which estate and condition the Iewes should not vnwisely drawe and pull vpon themselues. And this iudgement of God against the Israelites is painted out vnder a si∣militude taken from the estate of a poore lambe of an yeare olde, and most fearefull, yea solitarie also, and feeding in a ground or field of roomth and largenes enough indeede, but where as it can see no other sheepe with it. Vnder this similitude is foretold the laying waste of the land of Israel, by reason of their sinnes, the which then first happened, when as the three tribes which were beyond Ior∣dan, were carried away by the Assyrians: and afterward when as the other tribes of the kingdome of Israel were caried away also by the same Assyrians. Therfore let not the Iewes pull vpon themselues the like punishment: and so consequently let them not bee parta∣kers of their sinnes. Vers. 17. Ephraim is ioyned to idols: let him alone. The conclusion.THis is the conclusion, whereby the most miserable estate of the Israelites is described, that they were now vtterly and whollie become idolaters: and therefore there is no part to bee taken with them, but they were to be forsaken and left in that their filthinesse, as those that were not at all to bee cured.Diuersitie of iudgements a∣bout the mea∣ning of this place. Now some doe attribute these words vnto God speaking vnto the Prophet: others attribute them vnto the Prophet himselfe speaking vnto the Iewes. In effect it is all one. Yet I for my part had rather haue them to be the words of the Prophet concluding and ending that his exhortation vnto the Iewes in the name of God.What the fi∣gure Epipho∣nema is, see Io∣nas cap. 2 ver. 9. It is therefore the conclusion by way of an Epiphonema or acclamation, like as was before vers. 11. of this chapter. 1. What Synecdo∣che is, see A∣mos cap. . ver. 21.This conclusion containeth two things. The one sheweth that this people of the Israelites, and the same vniuersally (for so by the figure Synecdoche I doe in this place take Ephraim for the whole kingdome of Israel) doth now whollie cleaue and is ioyned vnto their idols, and idolatrie, and hath fallen away vtterly from the true God and his worship. And therefore that now there is not one drop of true godlinesse remaining in them. The other part,  teacheth that
which is the consequent, or followeth of the former, That therfore this people is to bee fled from of the godly, the which haue a desire to serue God sincerely or purely, and haue not a minde to defile themselues, or at least wise which would not themselues also fall in∣to the most great daunger of falling away from God. So Paul. 2. Cor. 6. forbiddeth that we should not haue fellowship with the infi∣dels or vnfaithfull ver. 14.15.16. Be not (sayth he) vnequally yoked with the infidels. For what fellowship hath righteousnesse with vnrigh∣teousnesse? and what communion hath light with darknes? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? or what part hath the beleeuer with the infidell? And what agreement hath the Temple of God with idols? So the people of God are commanded to get them out of the midst of Babylon Apoc. 18. ver. 4. Goe out of her my people (sayth the voyce from heauen) that ye be not partakers in her sinnes, and that ye receiue not of her plagues. So Isai 48. ver. 20. Goe ye out of Babel: flee ye from the Chaldeans with a voyce of ioye. Furthermore, those images ori∣dols are here called (Gnat sabbim) either for that they bring labour and sadnes in fearing of men:Gnat sabbim. or because they were the pictures of things labouriously polished, framed, or wrought. And by this meanes the vanitie and filthines of idols is declared and described, how greatly soeuer notwithstanding they bee esteemed of their i∣dolaters and worshippers. Vers. 18. Their drunkennes stinketh: they haue committed whore∣dome: their rulers loue to say with shame, Bring ye, bring ye. A confirmatiō of the former conclusion.A Confirmation of the former conclusion by their most filthie v∣suall, and commonly reigning works. For the vices of the Israe∣lites which are here reckoned vp, are the fruites and effects of that their falling away from God, by the which all order, gouernment, modestie, iustice, is declared to be taken away among them. And therefore all publike honestie is signified to bee now banished, and absent from them. And here the Prophet reckoneth vp three vices most vsuall among them, nay, which were rife in euery one of the people,Drunkennes. Whoreome. to wit, Drunkennes, as before ver. 11. with the which hee matcheth continuall fornication, and such as in a maner was com∣mon and openly vsed,Couetousnesse. as before ver. 11. The third vice, is Couetous∣nes, and that in their very Iudges, whose words here expressed by the figure Mimesis,Mimesis, or I∣mitation is a figure whereby we doe expresse the wordes, or gestures, or ma∣ders of ano∣ther, sometime in the good part and sometime in the euill; as here in the euil part he expres∣seth the wrdes of the rthe∣begging Iud∣ges, Bring ye, bring ye. or imitation, or vttering them, as the Iudges, in their owne persons, were wont to doe, to wit (Bring ye, bring ye)
doe shew how knowne, shameles, and vnbrideled the begging of these Iudges was, who shamed not openly to craue gifts. Yet doe these corrupt or spill the very best Iudges, and do blinde their eyes, and therefore Deut. 1. ver. 15.16. Moses sayth, that he charged the Iudges to iudge righteously, and that they should haue no respect of persons in iudgement, but should heare the small as well as the great. And Amos cap. 4.1. vpbraydeth thē in like sort, as doth our Prophet in this place, for that they say to their masters, Bring, and let vs drinke. And this shameles begging in Iudges and others of the like affection, Salomon Prouerb. 30. ver. 15 pleasantly expres∣seth, when he sayth: The horseleach hath two daughters, which crye, giue, giue. But where as he calleth them stubborne or vnrulie wine, (for so according to Tremelius, he translateth that which others translate, their wine stinketh) this is the figure Metalepsis,Metalepsis, or Transsumptiō, is a figure, whē as the effects and actions of men, are attr∣buted vnto the things them∣seues, whereby men are stirred vp to doe the same. The which is made plaine by the example Al∣beit that some doe otherwise describe this fi∣gure, the which notwithstan∣ding in some cases can hard∣ly be discerned from the figure Metonymia. or Trans∣supmtion (but others cal it rather Metonymia, of the which reade O∣seas cap. 4. ver. 1.) where the deedes or effects of men, are attributed vnto the things themselues, with the which men being moued, doe the same. As here for example, when he followeth this translation (their wine is sturdie, stubborne or vnrulie) sturdines, stubbornes, or vnrulines is attributed vnto the wine, the which is in the men that drinke too much of the same, whereby they become bold, stub∣borne, sturdie, and vnrulie, when they are drunken, that is, full of wine. So a worke or writing is called learned, by the which men doe become, or, are made learned. Compare with this place Pro. 20. ver. 1. where in like manner that is sayd of the wine and strong drinke it selfe, the which is in men that take too much, or are ouer∣come with the same: Wine (sayth Salomon in that place) is a moc∣ker (that is, it maketh men that are drunken with it, to be mockers) and strong drinke is raging, (that is, setteth men in a rage or a mad∣nes, when they take too much of it) and whosoeuer is deceiued there∣with is not wise. For drunkennes thrusteth forth the coward, or vn∣armed man into battel, and maketh men dull, not forecasting of pe∣rils or daungers that may insue, and so consequently, bold and de∣sperate. Finally wines, some are called pleasant, otherwise swinish, othersome lyonish, because that they make men to be such, that are drunken with it, to wit, in conditions and maners like vnto swine, or lyons. Further, all these vices are amplified, or rather the most desperate estate of the Israelites past recouerie, by the maner of ex∣cuse, where with these fellowes did couer themselues: to wit, They cast ouer their vices as a cloake the publike licentiousnes or disor∣der
and ignominie, or reproach. So then reproach and shame was their recouering, their buckler, or defence, and helpe when they were reproued. And moreouer this place sheweth, if there bee any bad custome, or if any vices doe publikely reigne and get the vp∣per hand, that the same notwithstanding bring or giue no prdo or excuse vnto sinnes, or men that doe sinne. For Paul Rom. 1. ver. 21. teacheth, that the generall ignorance of the heathen was not by the vniuersalitie thereof priuiledged against God his iudgemēt, be∣cause that they had so much light left vnto them by the view of the creation, as made them voyd of all excuse, for that knowing God, they did not glorifie him as God, neither were thankfull. For the onely word of God written ought to bee vnto vs for a true rule of our whole life against all licentiousnes or disorderous liuing and li∣bertie in sinning,A golden rule for the directiō of al our ac∣tions. bee it neuer so publike, common, and vnpuni∣shed. Vers. 19. The winde hath bound them vp in her wings, and they shall be ashamed of their sacrifices. An answere vnto the last part of the for∣mer verse.AN answere vnto the last part of the former verse, wherewith ob∣stinate or stubborne persons, doe thinke with themselues to co∣uer very well themselues and their vices, when as they obiect the common manners, bee they neuer so corrupt, shamefull, and re∣prochfull, for a buckler for their sinnes. God therefore maketh an∣swere that all such excuses are vaine, and not worth a rush. And this their vaine and balde excuse he sheweth and setteth out by a simi∣litude and Metaphoricall kinde of speaking,What the fi∣gure Meta∣phora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. when as he sayth, that the winde shall carrie away with it this defence or reproach, that is, this publike course and excuse of their liuing, and binde it to her wings to bee conueied into the vtmost and vnknowne parts of the world, so that there shall no such excuse as this remaine for them. So in this sense sinnes are said to be cast into the sea. So a Poet saith speaking of periuries, And he commandeth the swift South windes to carrie them into the sea: whereas he teacheth that periuries are not to be seared, or that they are to be contemned, or set at naught, These men therefore shall be confounded and ashamed, whatsoe∣uer faire glose they set vpon their idolatrie, and whatsoeuer defence they seeke from any where. Wherefore he concludeth, These stub∣borne and stiffenecked persons shall be ashamed in the ende, be∣cause of their idolatrous sacrifices, neither shall the common going
of this sinne without punishment excuse them vnto God. Let the whole world marke this, and by the same learne to be wise. CAP. 5. Vers. 1. O ye priests heare this, and hearken ye, O house of Israel, and giue ye eare, O house of the King: for iudgement is toward you, be∣cause you haue been a snare on Hizpah, and a net spred vpon Ta∣bor. Another Ser∣mon.A New Sermon, but such a one as is very fitly ioyned vnto that which went before. For the former Sermon properly respected or concerned the whole people (albeit that something were inser∣ted or put in by the way touching the priests, as the most true cau∣ses of that ignorance of God, the which was in the people) but now this Sermon striketh all the heads themselues of this people, that is, both them of the Church (who here are called by the name of priests) and also them of the common wealth, whom GOD here comprehendeth vnder the names of the house of Israel and the house of the King: albeit I will not denye the same vices to haue been also in the people the which reigned in these princes: but so farre forth, as the common people is wont to imitate or follow their princes and heads, which are set ouer them. For this is a common saying, Such as are the Princes, such are also the rest of the citi∣zens. Two parts of this verse.But this verse hath two things first of all and generally to be ob∣serued and marked. To wit, the alluring & exhorting of these prin∣ces or heads to heare. And secondly,1. An exhortatiō. the shewing or setting downe of the matter it selfe, whereof they are warned and accused.2. The matter it selfe, whereof they are accu∣sed. The first part hath two sorts of hearers, The priests, and the rulers of the cōmon wealth. The first part sheweth both who are requested here by the Prophet, or spoken vnto expresly and by name: and how diligently and ear∣nestly they are stirred vp to heare. And all those are requested to heare, which are rulers ouer the people, of the which generally there are two sorts: namely the Priests, and the Gouernors of the common wealth. The Priests haue the rule of holie matters, or of things appertaining vnto the seruice of God among the people. And albeit to speake properly, that the Priestes of these Israelites, that is, of the kingdome of Israel were in deede & trueth no Priests, as neither of the tribe of Leuie for the most part, nor of the familie of Aaron: nor attending or doing their seruice in the Temple of
God: nor offering any lawfull sacrifices: nor vnto God: yet by the figure Katachrêsis,Katachresis, or misusage of speech, is a fi∣gure, whereby we improperly giue names or titles vnto per∣sons or things, the which in deede and in trueth belong not vnto them, as the exāples here alleadged de make verie plaine. or misusage of speech they are called Priests, as the popish Bishops are called Bishops, to the end that they may vnderstand by the very name and degree of dignity the which they attribute vnto themselues, that they are most iustly condemn Of Gouernors and Magistrates of the common wealth there are in this place made two sorts: namely, the house it selfe of the King, that is to say, the chiefe Magistrate, as is the King himselfe, his Nobles, Courtiers: and the inferiour Magistrate, that is to say, such other gouernors and officers which in euery citie bare rule in ministring of law matters, and ordering of the common wealth, the which are here called the house of Israel, because that these inferiour Iudges were heads of the people, and doe represent the whole people. So the Consistorie, or Senat of the Church is called the Church Matth. 18. ver. 17. So then all these are stirred vp to heare, and that most di∣ligently. For hereunto appertaineth it that the Prophet speaketh seuerally vnto them, distinguishing his speech and frame of words as it were loosely and without ioynts and coniunctions copulatiue to knit and binde it fast together, whereby he calleth euery one of these orders by their name and seuerally. Vnto this also it maketh that the Prophet vseth these words, Heare, hearken, giue eare: for these words doe signifie that there is required of them very great attention or eare-giuing. For God doth craue and looke for it at their hands. And hereby appeareth that all sorts of men, be they of neuer so great excellencie and dignitie: and that all orders and states of the common wealth in the Church of God, how high soe∣uer they bee (as is the royall dignitie and honor of a King) are not∣withstanding subiect vnto the word of GOD, because that is the scepter of the kingdome of God, and the voyce of God himselfe, vnto the which all and singular the members of the Church ought to obey, yea and all mortall men besides. For so Paul speaketh of the maiestie, might, and power of the Gospell, when he compareth it vnto the powerfull weapons and munitions of warre 2. Cor. 10. ver. 5. Casting downe the imaginations, and euery high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captiuitie e∣uery thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. Part. The matter it selfe, whereof they are accu∣sed.Now is set foorth the matter it selfe, or the accusation against these rulers of the people, the which is manifold or of sundrie sorts, as appeareth by the verses following: but here in this verse one kind alone of their wickednesse, and the same most grieuous, is re∣proued,
and described by a very shamefull similitude. The Prophet therefore pronounceth or sheweth first of al, that these iudgements or threatnings of God the which he is to vtter, are properly direc∣ted and doe appertaine vnto them. The reason, because that they e in the people, although the rulers of the same yet most merciles and cruell theeues: not Fathers of the people, not Pastors: but Wolues and Destroyers. For they are a net vnto the common peo∣ple, and the same spred, that the people committed vnto them may fall into their nets. They are such, as are those theeues and robbers, who in Mispha and Tabor did rob the passers by, and such as they could meet withall.The craftie crueltie of the rulers. The Prophet therefore doth signifie that these princes and rulers with great subtiltie, deceites, and guiles were wont to intrap the poore people, whom afterwards they might both spoyle of their goods, and when they had spoyled them, trea∣cherously and mercilesly murther them. And these are the vsuall and common arts, courses, maners, and most wicked kind of life, v∣sed notwithstanding (as it is well knowne vnto all men) of all Ty∣rants, or men that abuse publike authoritie, albeit otherwise in it selfe lawfull. Vers. 2. Yet they were profound to decline to slaughter, though I haue been a rebuker of them all. The first am∣plification of the former wickdnesse.THe first amplification of the former wickednesse, taken from the maner, which these vsed in spoyling and killing of the peo∣ple committed vnto them, whose keepers and pastors they ought to haue been. For to the end they might the more easely robbe and spoyle them, and exercise their crueltie against their flock commit∣ted by God vnto their trust, they doe seeke most deepe and hidden or secret places, that is, deceipts and subtilties. And after this ma∣ner doth Dauid describe and set out in their colours such kinde of craftie and subtile oppressors in these words Psal. 10. ver. 8, 9, 10. He lieth in waite in the villages: in the secret places doth he murther the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poore. He lieth in waite se∣cretly, euen as a lyon in his denne: he lieth in waite to spoyle the poore: he doth spoyle the poore, when he draweth him into his net. He crow∣cheth and boweth: therefore heapes of the poore doe fall by his might. In this therefore did these princes and rulers imitate, or do after the maners and disposition of most wicked and craftie theeues raung∣ing and rouing vp and downe in the woods, who to the end they
may the more safely murther and cut the throates of trauailers and wayfaring men, they stay for them in most hidden and secret dales and valleyes, and prepare such ambushments to intrap and catch them as they are least aware of.What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. And further by this Metaphor of profound or deepe places and corners are signified the diuellish & most craftie counsels of tyrannous Magistrates against the people, (whom they are wont at their pleasure both to spoyle and to mur∣ther) the which notwithstanding by them are couered with most glorious pretences and edicts, so that nothing is more filthie and shamefull then these diuellish shifts, and nothing more deepe then these secret and deepe deceipts and subtilties. So Apocal. 2. ver. 24. God sayth to them of Thyatira that haue not knowne the deepnes of Satan, (meaning his secret and hidden craftines and subtiltie co∣uered vnder the glorious titles of high & most singular knowledge and learning) he will put vpon them none other burthen. But here in this verse God by way of contraries doth expound and declare himselfe, what maner a one he will be vnto these tyrannous op∣pressors, to wit, he will oppose or set himselfe against all their sub∣tilties, be they neuer so subtill. So then when he sayth (I haue been a rebuker, or there shall be a chastising or rebuking vnto these) he mea∣neth that he will chastise, correct and punish them: yea and that all of them, so that neither their dignitie, nor their subtiltie shall be able to couer any of them, or to deliuer them from the hand of God. Wherefore, although they be the rulers of the people, yet notwith∣standing haue they a Iudge, that is aboue them, or higher then they. Vers. 3. I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou art become an harlot, and Israel is defiled. A Rendring of a reason, the which setteth the nature of GOD a∣gainst that double counsell of the craftie princes.The cleere sightednes of God set against their hidden subtilties: and the trueth of their deedes and life mat∣ched against their cloured wickednesse. And against their craftie subtilties and hypocrisie, and their couered fetches, he setteth the cleere sightednes of God, wherby he throughly know∣eth all and euery of vs both within, and also without. And against their sinnes so well coloured and ouerpainted, God matcheth the trueth it selfe of their deedes and life. The trueth is so, that these ty∣rants labour to cast a cloude or a mist ouer their deedes tyrannicall, that is, most full of couetousnesse and crueltie, and that in the ende do they accomplish before men: but not before God, what depths,
and subtilties, and craftes soeuer they doe seeke out and hunt after. For God knoweth them, and pronounceth or declareth their deeds to be most filthy whordomes, & most vncleane wickednes. Wher∣fore this verse contayneth a most certaine contrarietie set against hese words of the verse before going (Going aside they seeke deepe corners) that is, they lay colours and pretences or gloses ouer their haynous offences, shewing here that God for al their hiding & co∣uering, knoweth and seeth them well enough. This contrarietie then, as I haue sayd, standeth vpon two poynts, of the which the first setteth the cleare sightednes of the eyes of God, and his most high knowledge, the which he hath of euery particular man, and their counsels against the deceits of these Princes and Rulers. For God is he that knoweth the heart and all things are manifest or o∣pen in his sight. As the writer to the Hebrewes cap. 4. ver. 13. wit∣nesseth, saying: Neither is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open vnto his eyes, with whom we haue to doe. Wherefore God saith, I know Ephraim: this Israel is not vnknowne vnto me, that is to say, these kings and princes of the kingdome of Israel: but they are well and throughly knowne and seene into of me, what they hide in their heart, what they doe, what they thinke and dissemble, I knowe it all. Therefore by the name of Ephraim I thinke the kings to be noted: and by the name of Is∣rael, the Counsellers. For out of the tribe of Ephraim came the first kinges of this kingdome. The house of Israel were called the Counsellers before. God therefore knoweth them all, both as a witnesse, and also as one that will bee a iudge, and a punisher of their wickednesse. The second part of this contrariety pronounceth plainly of the deedes of these Princes, to wit, that they all are so wicked and fil∣thy as is fornication or whoredome: so that they make them all to be vncleane and defiled howsoeuer they may seeme vnto them∣selues to haue well coloured them, and that the same among men be thought to be iust. Compare this place with the Psal. 94. vers. 7, 8, 9, where the vngodly thinke to keepe their Tyrannie and op∣pression from the knowledge of God, as the Prophet in that place bewrayeth their pretences, saying: Yet they say, The Lord shall not see: neither will the God of Iaacob regard it. Vnderstand ye vnwise among the people: and ye fooles, when will ye be wise? He that planted the eare, shall he not heare? or he that formed the eye, shall hee not see? where he saith, Thou art become an harlot, I take the word fornica∣tion
in this place generally for euery kinde of most filthy sinne, as it is taken in Paul Ephes. 5. ver. 3. and 5. for vncleannesse:Whordom here taken generally for euery filthy act as to the E∣phesias it is ioy¦ned with vn∣cleannes, and seemeth to be set for all kinds of the same. and not onely for vnlawfull lying of man with woman, or for idolatry. For it is expounded by the Prophet himselfe by the word defiled, where he addeth by and by (and Israel is defiled.) After the same mane and in the same sense and meaning doe I take the selfe same word in the verse following. Vers. 4. They will not giue their mindes to turne vnto their God: for the spirit of fornication is in the midst of them, and they haue not knowne the Lord. The second am¦plification of the wickednes of the Piests and Rulers.THe second amplification of the same wickednes both of the Priests, and also of the nobles and Princes, taken from the vnre∣courable obstinacie or stubbornnes of their minde. For they are so forlorne and drowned in their vices, and delighted with the same, that they will not by any meanes amend the same their wicked life, or once so much as thinke, or goe about to doe the same. 2. Parts of this verse.And this verse hath two especial points to be noted. The one the description or setting out of a sinner past hope of amendment: The other the cause of the so miserable estate of such kinde of per∣sons, the which is here shewed to bee twofold.1. The descriptiō of a desperate sinner. Concerning the first, those are sayd to be past recouerie, the which by no meanes do labour to amend or reforme their wicked life, nor giue themselues vnto those workes, and actions of life, by the which they may bee conuerted vnto God: but the which perseuere or continue in those workes, by the which they are turned from God daily more and more. Such therefore runne dayly from worse to worse, of whom it is sayd in the Psal. 64. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. They haue whet their tongue like a sworde, and shot for their arrowes bitter words: to shoote at the vpright in secret: they shoote at him sodainly, and feare not. They en∣courage themselues in a wicked purpose: they commune together to lay snares priuily, and say, who shall see them? They haue sought out iniquities, and haue accomplished that which they sought out, euen e∣uery one his secret thoughts, and the depths of his heart. By so lamen∣table effects therefore is vnderstoode who are desperate sinners, & such as cannot repent: for whom therefore most grieuous iudge∣ments of God doe awayte and remaine. Now to turne vnto God is to conforme and frame their life according vnto the law of God. And now there is here expressed what are the causes of this so
miserable a fall and estate of such kind of sinners. The one is,2. The causes of their so misera∣ble estate. The spirite of vncleannes and of filthy lusts wherewith they are lead, and fully gouerned. The other, The ignorance of the true God, and his word written, the which it selfe is also the cause and foundation of the former, that is, of the spirite of vncleannes. And surely,1. The spirit of vncleannes. they which know not God, are not ruled by the spirite of God. For as Paul teacheth Rom. 8. ver. 14. As many as are led by the spirit of God,2. The ignorance of God and his word. are the sonnes of God. And they which are not led by the spirite of God, they must needes follow the spirit of the flesh, and of the di∣uel for their guide and Captaine. For if you liue after the flesh (saith Paul in the same chapter ver. 13.) ye shall dye: but if ye mortifie the deedes of the body by the spirit, ye shall liue. For wee are subiect and obey either God or the diuel, and so consequently the lustes of the flesh. For as it is Mat. 6. ver. 24. We cannot serue two masters, God, and the diuel. And Luk. 16. ver. 13. we are likewise taught the ve∣ry same. So then there is no meane. Hee that is without the spi∣rit of God, hath the spirit of the diuel. Vers. 5. And the pride of Israel doth testifie to his face: therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquitie: Iudah also shall fall with them. A confirmatiō of the former accusation.A Confirmation of the former accusation by the pride of the Is∣raelites, and by their boasting in their sinnes, nay in their hay∣nous wickednes: where in is contayned the third amplification of their lewdnes, as being such, who not onely sinne desperately, but also doe glory, and are proud of their outragious offences. These men therefore became daylie more proude, more disdainfull, and intollerable: which thing sheweth their minde to haue been de∣sperate. So are the wicked rich ones described Psal. 73. ver. 7, 8, 9. Their eyes (sayth Dauid) stand out for fatnes: they haue more then their heart can wish. They are licentious, and speake wickedly of their oppression: they talke presumptuously. They set their mouth against heauen, and their tongue walketh through the earth. Therefore here in this place God bringeth this selfe same their pride for a witnesse against them of their lewdnes, that looke whereof the vngodly are most proud, by the same most especially they may be condemned of GOD, and the same may bee a most heauy witnesse against them. And now in the second parte, or in the parte of this verse fol∣lowing
God doth adde and set downe the punishment of this so great and so wicked stubbornnes and disobedience,2. The punishmēt of their great disobedience. the which by the former description appeareth to be most iust. And this punish∣ment containeth the ouerthrow and destruction of the whole nati∣on, and of the Princes themselues especially (the which here als are noted by the name of Ephraim and Israel.) All these Princes, Priests, and nobles therefore shall fall, that they themselues toge∣ther with their dignitie shall nowe bee no more at all in this king∣dome. For this kingdome also it selfe shall bee destroyed for the same cause. Wherefore by this it appeareth most plainly hoe greatly the sinnes of the Rulers doe hurt both themselues, and also the whole people and kingdome ouer which they doe rule. There is added moreouer in stead of a confirmation,The figure Hy∣pophora. What this is, see Amos cap. 5 vers. 21. and as a certaine Hy∣pophora, or answering of an obiection (Iudah also shall fall.) For the Israelites albeit that themselues were neuer so corrupt and wic∣ked, were wont notwithstanding against such threatnings of the Prophets to obiect the examples and manners of the Iewes, who were neuer a whit better then they, yea many times worse: and yet were they called and sayd to be the people of God by the same Prophets, and such as should be saued, and the beloued of GOD. And to shew that the Iewes were worse sometimes then the Israe∣lites, the testimony of Ezechiel cap. 16. ver. 51. is sufficient, where he speaketh of them thus: Neither hath Samaria (by which hee meaneth the Israelites) cōmitted halfe of thy sinnes, but thou hast ex∣ceeded them in thine abominations, and hast iustified thy sisters in al thine abominations which thou hast done. The Prophet Oseas there∣fore answereth, The Iwes also shall fall, because of the same sinnes, that you should not for this cause sooth and delight your selues in your sinnes: or in them promise vnto your selues escaping without punishment, because others also sinne as well as you. Vers. 6. They shall goe with their sheepe and their bullockes to seeke the Lord: but they shall not finde him: for hee hath with∣drawen himselfe from them. THe amplification of the former iudgement or punishment pro∣nounced against them,An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer punishmēt because that then, how earnestly and di∣ligently soeuer they goe about and labour to appease God with their sacrifices, and to seeke him, they shall not haue him either mercifull vnto them notwithstanding, or finde him. And surely
this is a most iust punishment of so great disobedience of men con∣tinuing in sinne, that like as they themselues were hardened at the admonitions of God: so God also should waxe hard and deafe at their prayers. And that nowe therefore he should not heare them nor helpe them being oppressed, although hee bee called vpon by them neuer so much. So Hebr. 12. ver. 17. it is saide of Esau ma∣king at the first small account of the blessing, That afterward hee was reiected, and found no place to repentance, though he sought the blessing with teares. And Ierem. cap. 11. vers. 11. God sayth of the obstinate Iewes, Behold I will bring a plague vpon them, which they shall not be able to escape, and though they crye vnto me I will not heare them. And to the same effect, and almost in the same wordes he speaketh Ezech. 8. ver. 18. Therefore will I also execute my wrath: mine eye shall not spare them, neither will I haue pittie: and though they crie in mine eares with a loude voyce, yet will I not heare them. This verse hath two chiefe poynts to be considered. The one,2. Parts of this verse. The preposterous or ouerthwart desire of the vngodly persons, who then at last remember God in their most grieuous miseries and afflictions or troubles,1. The wicked flee vnto God onely in their trou∣bles. that they dreame that they can appease him with externall or outward things onely, as with fatte, or costly sacrifices, or with a great company of sacrifices. And therefore in such a case or at such a time they spare neither sheepe, nor the whole heard it selfe of greater cattell. But they offer not vnto God those things which are true sacrifices indeede, and acceptable vn∣to him, as is faith, repentance of minde, conuersion or truely tur∣ning vnto him, the remembrance of the couenant made with them for the Messias sake. And therefore Dauid Psal. 40. ver. 6. knowing that God respecteth not the outward sacrifice onely, sayth: Sacri∣fice and offering thou didst not require: (for mine eares hast thou pre∣pared) burnt offering and sinne offering hadst thou not required. But Psal. 51. ver. 17. he sheweth with what sacrifices God is well plea∣sed, where he sayth: The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirite, a contrite and a broken heart▪ O God, thou wilt not despise. Wherefore Paul Rom. 12. vers. 1. exhorteth the Christians that they giue vp their bodies a liuing sacrifice, holy, accept able vnto God, which (hee sayth) is their reasonable seruing of God. But God is then said to be found of vs (who otherwise is euery where) when he is felt of vs to be fauourable, a helper, mercifull, and hearing vs.2. Why God is not found of them, that seeke him. The other poynt here to be noted is, why God is not found of them that seeke him? to wit, because God doth altogether with∣drawe
draw himselfe from obstinate persons, and such as are past hope of amendment. For they haue cast away all faith in him, yea that which they had once tasted of, of which like kinde of men you read Hebr. 6. And without fayth no man can finde God. God indeed hateth sinnes, and the same doe driue away God from vs. And Isai cap. 59. ver. 2. telleth the people of his time, saying: Your ini∣quities haue separated betweene you and your God, and your sins haue hid his face from you that he wil not heare. To which purpose see Psal. 5.God forsaketh not al sinners at the first. But God doth not forsake all sinners, nor yet forthwith and by and by, so that he will quite and cleane turne himselfe from them. For he is present with them that call vpon him. But when as men haue willingly fallen into so deepe a gulfe of vngodlines, that they are past amendment, and doe sinne with the whole affe∣ction and delite of their minde: then God doth forsake them, and withdraweth himselfe from them. For they which are such, haue vtterly cast off the holy Ghost: nay to say the trueth, they neuer truly had him, but were hypocrites and dissemblers, of whom Iohn saith epist. 1. cap. 2. vers. 19. They went out from vs, but they were not of vs: for if they had been of vs, they would haue continued with vs. And therefore cap. 3. vers. 9. hee further affirmeth, That whosoeuer is borne of God sinneth not (that is, giueth not himself ouer wholly vnto sinne) for his seede remaineth in him, neither can bee sinne because he is borne of God. Wherefore of such kinde of despe∣rate and malicious sinners God is not found. Vers 7. They haue transgressed against the Lord: for they haue begotten strange children: now shall a moneth destroy them with their portions. An amplifica∣tion of their wickednes ta∣ken from the circumstance of the person of God, and also from the person of the Israelites themselues.AN amplification of their wickednes, that both the cause of God his withdrawing himselfe from them may be vnderstoode: and also the greatnes of their shamelesnes and disobedience. The am∣plification is taken from the circumstance of the person of God, whom these haue forsaken. For he is Iehouah, that is, that same true, most mighty and alone God. Also from the person of the Israelites themselues, the which by an especiall couenant had vowed themselues vnto that God: and as it were by a contracted mariage had agreed within themselues, that the same God should be their husband; and they the chaste spouse of God, playing the harlot at no hand. And therefore Paul 2. Cor. cap. 11. vers. 2. in
regarde of this spiritual marriage betweene Christ and his Church, sayth of the Corinthians a member of the same, That he was ielous ouer them with a godly ielousie, because he had prepared them for one husband, to present them as a pure Virgin vnto Christ. See before touching this marriage cap. 2. ver. 16. And yet this couenant not∣withstanding, they had ioyned themselues vnto others, and had played the harlots both in body, and also in minde. In mind with Idols, as hath been sayd before. In bodie with strange women a∣gainst the commandement of God Deut. 7. by whom they had be∣gotten strange children, that is, not of the seed of Abraham, or of another, then the blood of Abraham, to wit, they had begotten them of a strange woman the which should be notwithstanding a part of the people of God. Of this matching with strange women, see Ezra 10. Nehem. 13. And by this meanes they did commu∣nicate or impart the heritage vnto others thē vnto the true sonnes of Abraham, against the graunt and pleasure of God, that is, of the true Lord and right owner of that land. Which is vnlawfull to bee done euen among men, and in those lands which we hire, and paye farme and rent for: much more is it vnlawful in that land, the which God had appoynted to the seede of Abraham only. Their punish∣ment shalbe a∣greeable to their sinns.Last of all is set downe, with what punishment they shall in the end be punished by God for this so vile pleasure in playing the har∣lots, to wit, with a punishment answerable and most agreeable vn∣to their sinne. For a moneth, that is to say, their monethly termes, and that same most filthy corruption shall deuour and defile them, and weaken all parts of their bodie. Others take the word (moneth) for their seede, the which they shall not bee able to keepe, like as harlots and vnchast women cannot keepe the same. But I for my part had rather to referre this punishment vnto termes, fluxes or issues of seede, hemeroids, or the Piles, and such like bloodie issues, the which may happen as well vnto men as women sometimes. And these kindes of diseases are very troublesome, and grieuous, the which in the end doe bring a consuming of the whole body vn∣to those which are haunted with them, and weaken the partes of their bodies, take away the colour of the face, and to bee shorte, weare them a way by little and little, and consume, and eate vp their whole body with paines most grieuous, that which they finde, and haue proofe of, which are taken with the sicknes of Naples, that is the filthy disease of the poxe. And this to be true in the Iewes at this day, experience doth teach, who are knowen peculiarly to
haue many foule bloody diseases. For the Iewes said, Let the blood of Christ be vpon vs, and vpon our children Mat. 27. ver. 25. And a∣mong other diseases the which for their not walking according vn∣to God his commandements, are threatned vnto them Deut. 28. ver. 27. issues and followings of blood is reckoned, where Moses writeth thus: The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt, and withe the emeroids (vnder which he comprehendeth all maner of bloodie issues) and with the scab, and with the itch, that thou canst n be healed. So then experience it selfe doth plainly confirme mine o∣pinion, and my interpretation. Vers. 8. Blowe ye the trumpet in Gibeah, and the shaume in R∣mah: crie out at Beth-auen, after thee, ô Beniamin. A confirmatiō of the former threatnings of God.A Confirmation of the former threatnings of God against the Israelites and Iewes by the adioyntes. For it appeareth that they shall both perish, in as much as God doth will the same to be forthwith proclaymed, and that openly in the borders of both peo∣ple and kingdomes. And therefore God will haue cryers of this punishment and destruction to be sent, the which should affirme that thing to come to passe, the which God by Oseas hath foretold. And this place is a very notable Hypotyposis,The figure Hy∣potyposis, which what it is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12. or liuely setting fon of the matter, where by it seemeth in such sort to bee described as if it were represented or shewed to be seene with the eyes in a ma∣ner. This description hath two things to be noted. First the place where these things are willed to be proclaimed.1. The place wher this proclama∣tion is to bee s e. And this is not cōmāded to be done in one place alone, but in diuers, as namely in Gabaa, or Gibeah, Rama, & Beth-auē, al which were border towns betweene both kingdomes. For thus, when as warres are proclay∣med by Heraults, the warre is proclaymed, and published to bee notified in those Cities and townes especially, which are the boun∣ders of the kingdome. But it is added also, (in all Beniamin) the countrey of which tribe bordered vpon those townes, and that be∣hinde and not before them, and the Prophet himselfe also prophe∣siyng in Israel. Wherefore Beniamin is sayd to be after or behinde in respect of the scituation of the place, after such sorte as it stoode then before the eyes of Oseas turning himselfe vnto Israel, vnto whom he spake. And Oseas maketh mention of Beniamin about the other tribes, because that the first tempest of GOD his iudge∣ments
laide harder vpon that tribe then vpon the rest, and therefore it is expreslie set downe by name. For out of that quarter com∣monly the Iewes and the Israelites crushed each others with warres. 2. The phrase or maner of spea∣king.The second part of this verse containeth the kinde or maner of speaking here vsed by the Prophet, which is vnioynted as it were and loose, and not tied together with any bands of coniunctions coplatiues. Therefore he repeateth one thing after diuers maners, both that hee might thereby the more stirre vp both nations, and confirme and auouch that the thing which here is rehearsed, should come to passe indeed and in trueth. Hee therefore thus speaketh with great earnestnes, to awaken these dull and blockish fellowes. Vers. 9. Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke: among the tribes of Israel haue I caused to know the truth. A shewing what was by the Heralts to be proclaymed.AN explanation or making of the matter more plaine. For hee layeth downe the thing, the which by these Heralts was to bee proclaimed, To wit, that Israel should be destroyed, and brought into an horrible or fearefull wast or wildernes. And although that vnder the name Israel the whole people bee comprehended, yet in my iudgement these threatnings also doe peculiarlie and especial∣lie concerne the Priestes and Nobles of Israel, as may appeare by the course of this whole chapter.The time, when these things shall come to passe. And he doth set downe the day or the time, wherein these things shall come to passe, to wit, that time in the which God will no longer, as he then did, chastice and cor∣rect Israel in bare wordes onely, but in deed, and wil make this selfe same ouerthrow and punishing of them to bee knowne by the e∣uent or falling out of the matter, vnto all the tribes and prouinces of that kingdome of Israel. The which thing came to passe, or was fulfilled, by the Assyrians vnder Oseas the last King of the Isra∣elites. Therefore albeit that God oftentimes doe seeme to be slack and to make delayes, or from day to day to put off the punishment of mens sinnes, yet in deed and truth be sheweth in the end that he hath spoken the truth, and hath not threatned in vaine: because that those threatnings doe at the last appeare and come to passe.
Vers. 10. The Princes of Iudah were like them that remoue the bound: therefore will I poure out my wrath vpon them like water. The figure Me∣tasthasis, or Transition, is when as we ei∣ther brieflie repeate what hath been said, or else shew what remai∣neth to be said. When both these things are performed to∣gether, then is it called a per∣fect transition: when but one of them, as in this place, then is it called an imperfect tran∣sation, or pas∣sing to another matter.THe figure Metasthasis, or Transitio, or passage to another mat∣ter. For after that the Prophet hath set out the punishment the which did hang ouer the heads of the Israelites: he passeth vnto the Iewes, whose sinnes and punishment like to insue for the same hee now declareth also. And that these things also doe appertaine and are to be referred vnto the Priestes and Nobles of the kingdome of Israel especially, the wordes themselues of the Prophets doe de∣clare. This verse hath two partes. The first sheweth the sinnes of the Iewes, and that by a metaphor (which what it is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12) or similitude. For they are compared vnto those that re∣moue and maliciously confound land markes. Whereupon insue great hurliburlies and disordering of things, yea and sometimes warres and fallings out euen among citizens themselues, or among kingdomes. Hereof is that saying of Ouid: Termine, siue lapis, siue es defossus in agro Stipes, ab antiquis tu quoque nomen habes. Si tu signasses olim Tyreatida terram, Corpora non letho missa trecenta forent. In English thus: Thou God of bounds, if stone thou be, Or doule deepe set in ground, Of old thou also hast thy name, And thus the same doth sound. If in times past thou bounded hadst And mark'd the Tyrean soile, Three hundreth persons then by death Should not haue tane the foile. A law of God against remo∣uing of markes and bounds.Wherefore this sinne is most sharply punished in the law of God Deut. 19. ver. 14. there is a law set downe touching this mat∣ter after this maner: Thou shalt not remoue thy neighbours marke, which they of old time haue set in thine inheritance, that thou shalt in∣herit the land, which the Lord thy God giueth thee to possesse it. And Deut.A curse against the same sinne. 27. ver. 17. there is a curse pronounced against those that commit this sinne. Cursed be he that remoueth his neighbours marke: and all the people shall say: So be it. Hereof also is much spoken in the
ciuil lawes of the Romans, in the whole title Digest. De termino mo∣to. Now the Princes & the Priestes of Iudah did confound, remoue, and alter the markes set by God Deut. 19. in distinguishing and seuering of ciuill and Church matters, the one from the other, for that the Kings did with great pride of minde assay, and would haue vsurped, or vnlawfully taken vpon themselues the priuiledges and offices of the Priestes, as appeareth 2. Chr. cap. 26. by Vzzia his at∣tempting to burne incense in the Temple of the Lord. And also 2. King. 16. ver. 10.11. By Ahaz his prescribing Vriiah the Priest, to make an idolatrous Altar after the paterne of that of Damascus: for when as the Magistrate how faithfull and godly soeuer hee bee encrocheth vpon the office of the pastors: and on the contraric when as the pastor of the Church taketh on him the office of the politick Magistrat, doubtles there must needes follow great distur∣bance and disordering of things: and the markes and boundes which God hath set in the due gouernement of this world are pul∣led vp, and al things are turned topsie turuie, and doe run to wrack, ruine and decay. This therefore was the sinne of the princes of Iudah. Now followeth the punishment,2. The punish∣ment of the former sinne in remouing of markes. namely not onely the anger of God, but also his red hot or burning anger, that is, the most ex∣ceeding great heate of the wrath of God against them. And this heate of the wrath of God shall not fall vpon them by droppe meale, but shall be poured downe vpon the heads of them. For the anger of God shall light vpon them, and follow after them withall his might and maine, sway and weight. And it shall be pou∣red out vpon them as water, that is to say, most plentifully and in great aboundance, and on eery fide bursting forth and diuiding it selfe into all places, like as water poured out, is wont to doe. This is indeede a most sharp and heauie punishment of proud Princes, and such as confound or alter the boundes set by God, whereby God beateth downe their stubborne pride and power: albeit that for the most part such kinde of fellowes are not afraide of men at all: but range about without punishment, being held vnder and kept back with no feare of lawes nor punishments of man. Let therefore princes and rulers whatsoeuer, consider how great a iudgement of God hangeth ouer their heads, when as they meddle with those things which appertaine not vnto them, and will order them at their pleasure: without any warrant from Almightie God.
Vers. 11. Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in iudgement, because h willingly walked after the commandement. THis is a rendring of a reason, why the Israelites, and especiallies their Princes, as also those of Iudah, shall be punished with so sore a punishment, as hath been described before, and shall also be shewed hereafter, to wit, that they shall be layd open for a pray, and shal be bruised and oppressed with that weight of God his iudge∣ment against them:The cause of this punish∣ments. The cause (I say) hereof is this, for that they both of them, altogether wittingly and willingly and desirouslye, embrace, followe and keepe the Commandements, the which are contrarie vnto the word of GOD. But the commaundements the which in this place are cōdemned,Against what commandements the Prophet here speaketh. are not politike lawes, the which should prescribe true godlinesse and modestie among men 1. Tim. 2. (for those we are to obey) but they are such ordinances of Kings, as being allowed of the Nobles and Peeres of the Realme, the peo∣ple was thereby at the first brought vnto idolatrie by Ieroboa the sonne of Nabat the first founder of this kingdome of Israel, and afs∣terwards by his Successors 2. King. 17. So then these commaunde∣ments are that same will-worshippes, which Paul condemneth Colos. 2. ver. 23. of which he sayth, That they haue indeede a shewe of wisedome, in voluntarie religion and humblenes of minde, and mens sparing the bodie, &c. They are the precepts of men, wherewith God euery where with so loude voyce doth witnesse that he is worship∣ped in vaine, Isai. 29. Amos 4. ver. 4. where the Lord accounteth the for transgressions, in what regard soeuer the people haue them For thus in that place he speaketh of them: Come to Beth-el, and trans∣gresse: to Gilgal, and multiplie transgression: and bring your sacrifices in the morning, and your tithes after three yeares. And Christ out of Isai. Matth. 15. ver. 9. telleth the Scribes and Pharises that they wor∣ship him in vaine, teaching for doctrines mens precepts. Idolatrie ther∣fore without all doubt, is in this verse condemned in both those kingdomes, and out of this verse it is taught that it reigned among the people of them both. And the same was alwaies set vp among the Israelites and Iewes, by the edict or proclamation of their Princes, as it is now a daies done in the Popedome by the writs and commandement of Princes.
Vers. 12. Therefore will I be vnto Ephraim as a moth, and to the house of Iudah as a rottennes. The greatnesse of their punish∣ment set out by two similitudesAS in the verse before going the Prophet described a very great sinne, and such as was ratified and warranted by the authoritie of their princes and rulers: so now he setteth downe, and that vnto the princes both of Israel and also of Iudah, the greatnesse of the pu∣nishment, wherewith the selfe same princes shall be punished. And this is no new punishment, the which is here rehearsed: but an am∣plification, or a more especiall laying open of that which hath been alreadie threatned. For he painteth out the greatnesse thereof by two similitudes. And here are two things to be noted, to wit,1. What punish∣ment is threat∣ned. what punishment is here threatned, and vnto whom. The punishment is most heauie: namely, because these princes shall bee eaten vp and consumed in long continuance of time, and by little and little,2. To whm it is threned. and not forthwith or at once: neither shall they cease to bee vexed: but as a moth vseth to eate a garment by little and little, and to fret it by peece meale, so shall they be vexed by little and little, and conti∣nually. So were they threatned before ver. 7. to be consumed with a lingering disease, as also Deut. 28. ver. 51.52. Moses sheweth a∣mong other plagues that shall fall vpon them for the despising of God his commandements, that forraine enemies shall waste them and all theirs, both corne, fruite, and cattell, wine, and oyle, &c. by little and little, vntill they bee quite and cleane destroyed. The like similitude of a moth is vsed Psal. 39. ver. 11. where the Prophet wri∣teth after this maner: When thou with rebukes doest chastise man for iniquitie, thou as a moth makest his beautie to consume: surely euery man is vanitie. Therefore as the moth doth eate away the beautie,The simide of a garmat eten with moths, is vsed also Iob. 1. ver. 28. and euery the best part of a garment: so shall euery the best things of both these kingdomes, that is, of Israel and of Iudah, by the ene∣mies be by little and little carried away, and taken from them. That which was done in the kingdome of Israel by the Assyrians: and in the kingdome of Iudah by the Babylonians or Chaldees. For by these was both these kingdomes at the first broken, and spoyled of their richest countries, and littled in their borders. To the selfe same purpose appertaineth also the similitude of Rottennes in the latter end of this verse. See Iam. 5. ver. 5. to much like effect the like com∣parison of the rust and cancre in the gold and siluer of the cruel and merciles rich men, the which he threatneth shall eate their flesh also,
as it were fire. Further, the punishment which the Prophet here spea∣keth of, is threatned vnto both the kingdomes, to with, that of Israel, and also that of Iudah: and vnto those especially, the which in them both were the princes and peeres of the people, that men should not deceiue themselues with vaine names and titles. Vers. 13. Further more. When Ephraim sawe his sicknesse, and Iudah his wound, then went Ephraim to Asshur, and sent vntoA king that should help thē. King Iareb: yet could he not heale you, nor cure you of your wound. Their distrust in his promises reproued.ANother sinne of both this people, and the same most shamefull: namely, distrust in Gods promises, and therefore their infideli∣tie is plainly reproued in this place. And a most certaine and sure signe and proofe hereof is, that both peoples when as they were pressed by their enemies, ran not vnto the true God, but vnto the helpe of people that were infidels, to wit, vnto the Assyrians, Egyp∣tians, and vnto others, as if there either had been no God among them: or as if the true God, had not been God, and true of his pro∣mise. So Ahaziah sending in his sicknesse to Baal-zebub, to know whether he should recouer or no, is sharply reproued by the Pro∣phet Elijah 2. King. 1. ver. 6. who saith vnto his seruants in the name of the Lord: Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that thou sen∣dest to inquire of Baal-zebub the God of Ekron? And in the Psal. 44. ver. 20. the godly say: If we haue forgotten the name of our God, and holden vp our hands vnto a strange God, shall not God search this out? And therefore is there a very fore and heauie curse pronounced a∣gainst those that forsaking the true God, flee into Egypt for helpe, Isai. cap. 31.1, 2, 3. in these words: Woe vnto them that goe downe in∣to Egypt for helpe, and stay vpon horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many, and in horsemen, because they are very strong: but they looke not vnto the holy one of Israel, nor seeke vnto the Lord. But he yet is wisest: therfore he will bring euill, and not turne back his word, but he will arise against the house of the wicked, and against the helpe of them that worke vanitie. Now the Egyptians are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit, and when the Lord shall stretch out his hand, the helper shall fall, and he that is holpen shall fall, and they shall alto∣gether faile. Two parts of this verse.This verse hath two parts. The first setteth forth the sinne of these peoples seuerally. Therefore I interpret the particle van,1. A new sinne of lo the people. (Fur∣thermore) that it may bee vnderstood that a new sinne is now de∣scribed,
yet such a one the which sprung no doubt of idolatrie, and the contempt or despising of God. Ephraim therefore ran vnto the Assyrians, as appeareth 2. King. 15. ver. 19. where Menahem the v∣surper bribeth Pul the King of Assyria, to be fauourable vnto him: and Iudah vnto any King whatsoeuer, that would promise him helpe. So then Iudah fleeth not vnto any one King onely, but vnto diuers Kings, and all of them idolaters, to wit, as distrusting the pro∣mises of God towards them, and making more account of the help of idolaters, and iudging it more certaine then the helpe of the true God. They flee vnto the Assyrians 2. King. 16. They flee vnto the Egyptians Isai. 31.1. They flee vnto the Israelites 2. Chro. 25. ver. 6. Isai. 8. ver. 6 Reade cap. 10. ver. 6. hereafter. Therefore they ran not vnto the Assyrian alone: vnto whom the Israelites especially loo∣ked against the Syrians: albeit the Israelites themselues also hired the helpe of the Syrians oftentimes: or took them vnto themselues as league-fellowes against Iudah. Further, there is a great force in these words: He sawe his sorowe or his paine, and his wound. For by the selfe same they were sufficiently admonished, or put in minde to flee vnto God, and not vnto those idolaters. The second part of this verse sheweth the vanitie of this helpe which they sought after. For these Phisitions did not cure their wounds, nay they tooke no care of them at all. For 2. Chro. 28. ver. 20, 21. we reade that the wicked king Achaz was rather troubled then holpen by the king of Assyria: yea though he gaue vnto him large gifts, yet it helped him not. And Isai. 31. ver. 5. cited but a fewe lines before, it is shewed that those which sought vnto Egypt for helpe, were thereby harmed, and not helped. For neither the Israe∣lites, nor yet the Iewes were any thing at all furthered or eased by these their aydes. Thus doth our hope that is disagreeing and con∣trarie vnto the word of God, deceiue and disappoynt vs. Vers. 14. For I will be vnto Ephraim as a lyon, and as a lyons whelpe vnto the house of Iudah: I, euen I, will spoyle, and goe away: I will take away, and none shall rescue it. A reason why the former aides shall not stand them in any stead.THe rendring of a reason, why the former aydes shall be vnprofi∣table both vnto the Israelites, and also vnto the Iewes: namely, because God the auenger and punisher of their sinnes and life, will pursue them both, and will breake in pieces and destroy them with most grieuous punishments, and being stirred vp with wonderfull
anger and might and power. Therefore none shall deliuer them out of the hand of God. There are therefore two things here to be considered. The first, who shall stand against them, to wit, Iehouah, that is to say, the true God,Who shall stād against them. and he that is almightie, who himselfe wil pursue them. Ther∣fore there is a great vehemencie and force in this word (I) three times together rehearsed in this place. 2. After what sort God will pursue them.The second thing to be noted in this verse, is, after what maner, that is, with how great force, might and power God wil pursue thē, and breake them in pieces: namely, like vnto a lyon gaping after his pray. At which time the lyon is wont to bee most fierce, cruell, and to gather all his strength together. And therefore there is an exam∣ple brought in this place of lyons of two ages, or of yonger and ol∣der lyons (albeit that some translate the first word a Leopard) that these princes as well of Iudah as of Israel, should not dreame any way to escape (but by repentance of mind, and earnest turning vn∣to God:) how mightie soeuer they seeme vnto themselues to be, & well vnderpropped and stayed vp with the aydes of such kind of Kings, that is, Kings most mightie, & of most great power. But God himselfe will take them away, as his owne, and lawfull pray: and therefore no man shall rescue them. For who can withstand the will and power of God? Let these things make vs more wise, and take away from vs all vaine confidence and trust. Vers. 15. I will goe, and returne to my place, till they acknowledge their fault, and seeke me: in their affliction they will seeke me dili∣gently. An amplifica∣tion of the pu∣nishment by continuing the former simili∣tude.AN amplification of the punishment by the continuing in the similitude, the which is taken from lyons. For this punishment shall continue long. Therefore like as a lyon, after that he hath ta∣ken his pray, returneth vnto his denne, that there he may at his plea∣sure enioy the same: so God after that he hath layd these open vn∣to the pray and power of their enemies, will returne and betake himselfe vnto his owne place, that he may a long season miserably vexe them, being thus laid open vnto their enemies, and vntill they learne to repent.Two parts of this verse. 1. The long conti∣nuance of their punishment.Therefore this verse hath two poynts to be obserued, To wit, the longnes or continuance of the banishment or captiuitie, and pu∣nishment threatned both vnto the Israelites, & also vnto the Iewes,
the which is signified in these words (I will goe away, and returne, vntill, &c.) Secondly, the cause of this so long affliction or punish∣ment:2. The cause of the same. namely, that these (who haue liued so long as rebels) may re∣turne vnto a better minde. The which thing cannot be brought to passe but after long punishment. For looke how much the more hard the yron is, & the more hard the heart of man is, with so much the more long punishments and hammers it is to bee beaten and layd on vpon. And therfore Psal. 32. ver. 9.10. Dauid exhorteth the wicked and vngodly, that they should not waxe senseles and brui∣tish in their maners and conuersation, being like vnto an horse, or like a mule, which vnderstand not, whose mouthes a man must binde with bit and bridle, least they come neere him. And therefore (sayth he) many sorowes shall come vnto the wicked. So that it appeareth to betrue which the prophane and heathen authors doe write: That the punishment of God is slow and long ere it come vpon the sins of men: but in the end God doth recompence the slacknesse of the punishment with the grieuousnes, or greatnesse of the paine. And out of this selfe same place also appeareth, how that we are not in a∣nie case to abuse the patience and long suffering of God Rom. 2. Lastly, how iust alwayes the iudgements of almightie God are a∣gainst men, how hard and long continuing soeuer they seeme to be. For whom God doth long chastice and correct, all that same while he doth stirre them vp, and call them vnto repentance. But men are deafe: and for the most part make small benefite and pro∣fite in those iudgements of God. A description of true repen∣tance, which hath two parts.Further, here is described true repentance of minde, the which in the elect or chosen is the effect and fruite of long afflictions: and moreouer the scope or end that God propoundeth or setteth down vnto himselfe, when as he afflicteth, or punisheth them. And this true or earnest repentance doth consist of these two parts, to wit,1. An vnfained acknowledging of sinne. the vnfained acknowledging of a man his sinne, whereby he which repenteth, doth confesse, and acknowledge from his heart before God, that he is in deede and in trueth guiltie. Secondly,2. Conuersion or turning vnto God. of conuer∣sion or turning vnto God, whom the selfe same partie, who doth in such sort detest and lothe his sinne, seeketh notwithstanding, as his most mercifull father in Christ. Therefore this second part of re∣pentance must needes spring from true faith, and the laying hold of the grace of God prepared for vs for Christ his sake: like as the first part proceedeth from the law, and from the earnest feeling & taste of a man his owne sinne, the which striketh into vs an horror
and a feare. From thence commeth it that we do feare sinne. And therefore Paul 2. Cor. cap. 7. vers. 11. excellently setteth out the ma∣nie singular effects that came of their godly sorrow for the negle∣cting of their duety concerning the incestuous Corinthian, in these wordes: For behold, this thing that yee haue been godly sorie, what great care it hath wrought in you, yea, what clearing of your selues: yea, what indignation: yea, what feare: yea, how great desire: yea, what a zeale: yea, what punishment in all things ye haue shewed your seluet, that you are pure in this matter. CAP. 6. Vers. 1. Come and let vs returne to the Lord: for he hath spoyled, and he will heale vs: he hath wounded vs, and he will binde or vp. A continuing of the former sermon.THis is a continuing of the sermon, the which was made in the chapter before going. For in the last verse he had sayd that the godly Israelites being at the last stirred vp with so many miseries and punishments should seeke the face of the Lord, and most ∣ligently make haste and runne vnto him. The which in my iudg∣ment is to be referred vnto diuers times; as for example, vnto the beginning of the raigne of Oseas the last King of the Israelites. 2. King. 17. vers. 2. For he was, though bad, yet not so bad as oth Kings before him:The figure Pro¦sopopoeia or fai¦ning of a per∣son, is when we set downe the speech of ano∣ther, as here the Prophet doth the speech of the odly cō∣uerted. vnto the times of King Ezechias, where some of the Israelites repented. 2. Chron. 30. vers 25. And lastly, vnto the times of Iosias King of Iudah, when hee held the Passeouer,  it is 2. King. 23. Also 2. Chron. 34. vers. 19. Nowe then the Pro∣phet sheweth and declareth the selfe same thing, namely, how o after what sorte they shall seeke GOD. For hee teacheth howe great their diligence shall bee, and their indeuour in knowing the true God, and in seeking of him. Wherefore the Israelites are by the figure Prosopopoeia or sayning of a person, brought in speaking,2. Parts of this verse. to the ende that their conuersion vnto God may bee the better set before the eyes of the Readers. 1. The godly their exhorting one another to turne vnto God.And this verse hath two especiall things to be noted. First, the godly their stirring vp and exhorting one another to returne vnto God. See the like in the godly Isai 2. vers. 3. where you shall find it thus: And many people shall goe and say: Come and let vs goe vp vnto the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iaacob, and
he will teach vs his wayes, and we will walke in his pathes. And they shal desire not only to come vnto God a little way, or in some part: but also to be conuerted, or turned vnto him, that is, with all their heart to repent, and now henceforth to become subiect vnto God: to follow his word as a light shining before them: and they will haue a minde vtterly to cast away their Idols. And this conuersi∣on or turning vnto God, is the chiefest part of repentance, and as I haue sayd, springeth of true sayth in Christ. 2. The cause of their exhorting one another.In the second place the cause of their exhorting one another is to be obserued or marked. And this is the only mercy, bounteousnes and loue of GOD through Christ towards those that are his, how∣soeuer they haue been rebellious and disobedient before, the which his loue it is easie to gather by his promises towards them in all the holy Scriptures. So then by the laying hold on the mercie of God towards them, and that by true confidence or trust of minde, euen the godly themselues, who before had most grieuously offended God▪ do notwithstanding come home againe, and conuert or turne vnto him. For they know that God will heale and binde vp their wounds. For as the Psalmist sayth Psalm. 147. vers. 2, 3. The Lord doth build vp Ierusalem, and doth gather together the dispersed of Is∣rael. He healeth those that are broken in heart, and bindeth vp their sores. And Psalm. 103. vers. 3. He forgiueth all thine iniquity, and health all thine infirmities. And Isai 57. vers. 18. God sayth of the recalling of the sinner: I haue seene his wayes, and will heale him: I will lead him also, and restore comfort vnto him, and to those that la∣ment him. And therefore Ierem. 3. vers. 22. he crieth: O ye disobe∣dient children, returne and I will heale your rebellions. And the peo∣ple there make answere: Behold we come vnto thee. For thou art the Lord our God. And cap. 30. vers. 17. God most louingly and com∣fortablie speaketh vnto his church: For I wil restore health vnto thee, and I will heale thee of thy wounds, sayth the Lord, because they called thee, The cast away, saying, This is Zion, whom no man seeketh after. They desire then to returne vnto God, as vnto their phisition. This conuersion, is the other part of repentance. Vers. 2. After two dayes will he reuiue vs, and in the third day he will rayse vs vp, and we shall liue in his sight.An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefit ta∣ken from the greatnes and speedines of the same. AN amplification of this benefite of God taken both from the greatnes, and also from the speedines of the same. From the
greatnes,1. Frō the great∣nes. for that God in such sorte cureth and healeth those that be his, that not onely their woundes growe together, and be made whole and sound againe: but also their former strength, might, courage, lustines and liuelines shall a fresh and fully be restored vnto them againe by God, how greatly and grieuously soeuer they were wounded before. The which thing the Prophet doth signifie by the wordes of (reuiuing and raysing vp) Examples hereof wee doe see in the myracles of Christ done vnto mens bodies, in the which the diseased were in such sort healed, that there remained no print or token of the former infirmitie had it continued or hanted them neuer so long. And therefore Christ sayd: Arise, take vp thy bed, and walke. Iohn 5. And likewise Act 3. vers. 8. it is reported of the lame cripple begging at the gate of the Temple, that he was in such sorte restored by Peter and Iohn, that hee leaped vp, stoode, and walked. And doubtles concerning our spirituall woundes also, that is to say, our sinnes, Christ doth in such sorte take them away, that after the last resurrectiō, neither the punishment, nor the guilt, nor any senfie of them remaineth, or shall remaine in vs. For all these things Christ shall heale and destroy in vs, so that wee may boldely say, as it is in Paul. 1. Cor. cap. 15. vers 55. O death, where is thy sting! O hell,Our estate shal be better in Christ, thē that which we shuld haue had in A∣dam. where is thy victory? Nay Christ shall then re∣store vs vnto a farre better condition and estate then was that, which wee should haue had by the first Adam, when hee was pure, without sinne, and in his innocencie, by howe much our hu∣mane nature is more neerely and straightly ioyned with God, that is to say, with the fountaine it selfe of goodnes in Christ (as who namely is true God, and true man, in one and the same person) then in Adam, who only was the Image of God, but not God him∣selfe, as Christ is. And this is the greatnes of GOD his bene∣fite towardes his, the which is prepared for vs by Christ a∣lone. 2. The speedines of the benefit.The speedines of the same benefite is described and set forth to be very great. For within the space of two dayes, or at the fur∣thest, of three daies, God bestoweth vpon his Church these so great benefites, that is to say, in a very shorte time. For the mention, or wordes of (two dayes and three dayes) doe signifie a most shorte space.A most singu∣lar comfort a∣gainst our im∣patiencie. For God alwayes helpeth those that are his, when neede is, and in the very poynt and pinch, or moment and minute of time that he thinketh conuenient. For as Paul teacheth vs 1. Cor. 10. vers. 13. God is faithfull, which will not suffer vs to be tempted aboue
that we be able, but will euen giue the issue with the temptation, that we may be able to beare it. Touching this power of God in bring∣ing most hard things to passe, and in helping of those that are his, there is a most notable, & of al other a most excellēt example in the resurrection or rising again of our Lord Iesus Christ: of whom for this cause many doe take and expound this place but too stricktly or narrowly. For it appertaineth generally vnto euery helpe of God, the which he performeth towards his. And the same is al∣waies in respect of God speedie, howsoeuer it may seeme vnto our impatient flesh vnto the contrarie, vnto whom notwithstanding it is ioyfull and welcome whensoeuer it commeth. Vers. 3. Then shall we haue knowledge, and indeuour our selues to know the Lord: his going forth is prepared as the morning, and he shall come vnto vs as the raine, and as the latter rayne vnto the earth. A second am∣plification of the former be∣nefite.THe second amplification of the former benefite of GOD to∣wards his that doe truely repent from their idolatrie, and wic∣ked life. And this amplification is drawen partly from the increase, the which shall daylie be more and more: and partly from the fruit and profite the which shall growe thereon, and appeare most great, as it were from a rayne that falleth vpon the earth in due season. Therefore this benefite of God shall not be momentary, or for a little and a short time: but continuall. For the godly shall goeforward, and profite daylie more and more in the true know∣ledge of God out of his written word, the which selfe same is the fountaine and cause of their conuersion or turning vnto God. They shall therefore know God, the which thing is opposed or set against that same ignorance, the which the Prophet reproued in them be∣fore: and they shall goe forward in that same true knowledge of God, and shall dayly in the same haue more happy successe, pro∣fit, and growing forward. The fruite of the same benefites of God shall be most plentifull, the which is vnderstood by the cause ex∣pressing one thing in words, and in sense and meaning betokening another thing. For this comming of God vnto those that are his, and his fauour and help is compared vnto such a rayn as commeth in due season, yea to the latter rayne, that is, such a raine as falleth in Summer. And this rayne is wont to bring forth most plentifull fruit. Againe, it shall be as the morning, that is to say, then shall
the presence of God be vnto his most ioyful and welcome.What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. These Metaphors doe liuely paynt out the exceeding great gladnes of the godly, and of the Church, when as it is healed and holpen by God. Vers. 4. O Ephraim, what shall I doe vnto thee? O Iudah, howe shall I intreate thee? For your goodnes is as a morning cloude, and as the morning dew it goeth away. An admonitiō to the godly to continue in wel doing.AN admonition, whereby God exhorteth those which are his be∣ing thus brought into the way to continue, that they doe not faint, waxe wearie, giue backe of that their earnestnes, and become colde afterwardes, the which is a vanity, lightnes, and inconstan∣cie in good things, that haunteth all men, yea euen the godly. And God here by the figure Hypophora,The figure Hy∣pophora. What this is, see Amos cap. 5 vers. 21. or answering of an obiection sheweth, if they depart from that right way the which they haue once entred into, that this commeth to passe not through his, but through their owne fault. For he hath sufficiently and throughly done his parte in teaching them both by words and also by stripes: but they on the contrary parte haue alwayes shewed themselues light and inconstant, and so also will hereafter shew themselues to bee. Two partes of this verse.But this verse hath two partes. The first is the answering of an obiection that might bee made, whereby God most iustly re∣moueth from himselfe all the whole blame both of the former wic∣kednes of the Israelites,1. The answering of an obiection. and Iewes, and also of their rebellion which should follow. So then in this place the same God speaketh vnto both the Israelites, and also the Iewes, because he was the God of them both. The like he doth Isai 5. vers. 4. in these words, when hee sayth: What could I haue done any more to my vine∣yarde? 2. The turning of the fault vpon themselues.The second part is a turning of the fault of them both vpon thē∣selues because of their lightnes, and continual inconstancie in wel∣doing and thinking. For by and by both these peoples fell vnto i∣dolatries, and vnto a lewd and wicked life, as appeareth by the ho∣ly histories, vnder Ioas king of Iudah 2. Chro. 24. vers. 17, 18. And after the death of Iehoiada, came the Princes of Iudah, and did reue∣rence vnto the King, and the King hearkened vnto them. And they left the house of the Lord GOD of their fathers, and serued groues and idols: and wrath came vpon Iudah and Ierusalem, because
of this their trespasse. Vnder Manasses 2. Chron. 33. who succeeded Ezechias a singular good Prince. Also vnder Oseas king of Israel, 2. King. 17. These examples ought to feare and to moue vs. Ther∣fore let vs take heede, est he that now standeth, do fall afterwards,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12. as Paul counselleth 1. Cor. 10. vers. 12. Moreouer, vnder the Me∣taphors both of dewe, which riseth in the morning, and forthwith melteth away: also of a morning cloude which is by and by dis∣solued, or vanisheth away, there is notably described the lightnes, vanitie, and inconstancie of the nature and disposition of man in wel-doing, and wel-willing, that no man should trust in his owne strength. From whence then commeth our perseuerance or con∣tinuance in good things but from God? Vers. 5. Therefore haue I cut downe by the Prophets: I haue slaine them by the words of my mouth, and thy iudgements were as the light that goeth forth. A confirmatiō of this turning of the fault vp∣on them, taken from a double work of God.A Confirmation of this turning of the fault vpon the Israelites and also vpon the Iewes taken from the worke of God himselfe, the which is here described to be twofold. The one, The matter it self, that is to say, the punishments by the Prophets threatned vnto them sinning, the which afterwards came to passe vpon them: yet for all this did they not repent.1. The punish∣ments that should fall vp∣on them. And thus much doth God signifie by his Prophet Isai cap. 1. vers. 5. where he sayth: Wherefore should ye be smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more: the whole head is sicke, and the whole heart is heauy. And so he noteth the conti∣nuance in their sinne by the Prophet Ieremie cap. 2. vers. 22. spea∣king thus: Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee much sope, yet thine iniquitie is marked before me, sayth the Lord. There∣fore by these words of (slaying and killing) by the Prophets, are sig∣nified the iudgements of God, the which fell out indeede vnto both these peoples because of their sinnes. For then these were both slaine and killed, as appeareth Zach. 1. vers. 6. where God speaketh vnto them after this maner: Did not my words and my statutes, which I commanded by my seruants the Prophets take holde of your fathers? And they returned, and sayd, As the Lord of hosts hath determined to doe vnto vs, according to our own wayes, and according to our works so hath hee dealt with vs. And they were slayne by the wordes or mouth of God, that is, by those threatnings, the which the Pro∣phets at the appoyntment and commandement of God did deliuer
and declare vnto thē by mouth. But these phrases or kinds of spea∣king doe not giue vnto the Prophets, or Apostles, or their Succes∣sors the power of any earthly sword, the which God hath reserued, or giuen vnto the politike Magistrate onely, as Paul teacheth Rom. 13. and 2. Cor. 10. ver. 4. he witnesseth, that the weapons of their war∣fare are not carnall, but mightie through God to cast downe holdes. For these words, sword, slay, kill, &c. are Metaphoricall or Allegoricall. 2. God in his law hath taught, what is to be followed, and what to be a∣uoyded.The other worke of God is, that the selfe same God in his law, (wherein hee hath plainely and clearely declared vnto men his iudgements and will) hath taught them sufficiently, what was to be followed and done: and also what was to be auoyded and left vndone. Therefore whether men bee moued either by feeling of stripes, or else with doctrine alone, God laide both these meanes before them, and was purposed both these waies to keepe them within the compas of their dutie. Wherefore these wordes (The light of thy iudgements, &c.) I doe take and vnderstand of the lawe of God, the which was giuen by Moses, wherein is set downe more clearely then the day light the duetie of man, the iudgements of God laid open, and the care of God shewed for the instructing of vs aright in euery respect, to the end that men which liue wicked∣ly may be made vnexcusable. Vers 6. For I desired mercie and not sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt offerings. GOd repeteth the summe of all the commandements, the which he taught them, least hee might leaue them any excuse of their ignorance:The complaint of the Israe∣lites and Iewes. or that they should not seeme iustlie to complaine, as if they were punished vndeseruingly. For these men complained of the iudgements of God brought forth against them, as not deser∣uing the same, as if they had fulfilled the lawe of God, whilst for∣sooth they offered sacrifices diligently,God his an∣swer. and obserued and kept the onelie outward ceremonies of his law. But God answereth, that he did not chiefely and especially desire those sacrifices, and outwarde things: but rather mercie towards their neighbour, and the true knowledge of himselfe out of his holy word written. Therefore as there are two tables of the law of God: so is there in this place de∣scribed a double end thereof by the prophet, who beginneth at the second table, the effects whereof are better knowne vnto vs. For the end thereof is Mercie, Bounteousnes, or Charitie towards our
neighbour: and the summe of the first table is the true knowledge and vnderstanding of God. There is a like place vnto this 1. Sam. 15. ver. 22. Where Samuel saith vnto Saul, Hath the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offerings and sacrifices, as when the voyce of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey, is better then sacrifice, and to hearken, is bet∣ter then the fat of Rammes. And Matth. 9. ver. 13. and 12. ver. 7. this selfesame place of Oseas is alleadged by Christ against the Scribes and Pharises. And Mic. 6. ver. 8. against those that trust vnto the mul∣titude of their sacrifices the Prophet speaketh thus: He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee: surely to doe iustly, and to loue mercie, and to humble thy selfe, to walke with thy God. And Paul Rom. 13. ver. 8. willeth them, saying: Owe no∣thing to any man, but to loue one another: for he that loueth another hath fulfilled the law. See Paul Rom. 13. Vers. 7. But they like men haue transgressed the couenant: there haue they trespassed against me. An antithesis, or setting down the contrarie vnto that which went before.AN Antithesis, or setting downe the contrarie vnto that which went before, wherby God sheweth, and opposeth, or matcheth the stubborne and most shamefull disobedience of the Israelites a∣gainst his diligence, in prescribing or setting down of holie and ho∣nest things vnto them. For this all care, and doctrine of GOD in teaching of them, did them no good at all: nay, they stoutly despi∣sed it, and treacherously brake the couenant of God. There is a like place, and setting downe of the contrarie vnto that which God re∣quired at their hands Psal. 81. ver. 10, 11. expressed in these words: I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt: o∣pen thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. But my people would not heare my voyce, and Israel would none of me. and so forth. 1. The contempt of God.This verse containeth two things. One, to wit, the contempt it selfe of God and his couenant shewed by the Israelites. The other, the maner, or the amplification of this contempt.2. The maner of the same. As touching the contempt, these men transgressed the law of GOD, whereof hath been spoken before. And this his law hath God set downe & made as the marke and rule of all our actions,  without or beyond the cō∣passe whereof if any man raunge, he no doubt goeth awrie, and out of the way. Furthermore, he calleth this law a Couenant, because that by the comming in of this law, God and the people conditio∣ned and couenanted to and fro, or each with other, touching a cer∣taine
mutuall and perpetuall priuiledge and couenant betweene themselues, Exod. 20. Deut. 6. Rom. 9. ver. 4. Ephe. 2. ver. 12. And the people for their part couenanted to obey God: and God for his part conditioned to shewe himselfe a father of this people, by how much the more shamefull on their behalfe the breach of his law ap∣peareth for to be. The amplification of this contempt is herein, for that the Israe∣lites are sayd first, to haue transgressed and despised this couenant of God so contemptuously and reachelously, as if this couenant of God had been the couenant and condition of some vaine and mor∣tall baggage fellow, or some weake person of no request & regard. Secondly there is added, that they did this selfe same thing trea∣cherously, and against their expresse promise, and faith giuen vnto God.Bagedu. For so doth the Hebrew word signifie. And therefore this sinne and rebellion is the greater. Vers. 8. Gilead is a citie of them that worke iniquitie, and is polluted with bloud. A confirma∣tion of the an∣tithesis or con∣trarietie set downe before.A Confirmation of the Antithesis or contrarietie, taken from the examples of hainous sinnes in all degrees and orders of men. And first of all of the crueltie ranging euery where, and being com∣mitted of thē and among them, and reigning euen in whole townes and cities.Galaad a shop and storehouse of all wicked∣nes and cruel∣tie. For that of Gilead, or Galaad was knowne to euery bo∣die. For that countrie was at that time the shop, and house of all iniquitie and crueltie. Therefore I take Galaad for the countrie it selfe, in the which at that time euery citie was full of bloud, and wickednesse for want of punishment. And for this cause was that countrie afterward first punished by God most sharply, and also by infidels, as when it was first taken by Pul King of the Assyrians 1. Chro. 5. ver. 26. Further, the townes and cities of this countrie are called townes of them that worke iniquitie, townes flowing and defi∣led with bloud: finally, townes in which the print and footing of cruell persons is set so deeply, that they cannot be blotted or wiped out. The which kind of speaking carrieth a great vehemencie and force, and painteth out the most shamefull, and most cruell maners of the inhabitants or dwellers in that countrie. And therefore the Prophet Dauid Psal. 55. ver. 9, 10, 11. doth after such like maner de∣scribe the wickednesse of Saul, and of the inhabitants of Ierusalem, when he prayeth vnto God against their crueltie and subtiltie after
this wise: Destroy, O Lord, and diuide their tongues: for I haue seene crueltie and strife in the citie. Day and night they goe about it vpon the walles thereof: both iniquitie and mischiefe are in the midst of it. Wickednesse is in the midst thereof: deceipt and guile depart not from her streetes. Vers. 9. And as theeues waite for a man, so the companie of priests murther in the way by consent, for they worke mischiefe. A laying out of the matter more plainly.A Laying out of the matter more plainly. For he sheweth by what meanes men grew there to be so wicked, and became to bee so cruell, and that not one sort of them alone, but all the degrees of this people. And first of all their priests, whom he teacheth secretly to haue agreed vpon, & to haue made meetings within themselues to slay and spoyle men; and looke what mischiefe soeuer, they had once conceiued in their minde, that same did they in the end lewd∣ly put in proofe and practise.A double accu∣sation of the priests. Wherefore there is here contained a double accusation of the priests. The one, of their wicked meeting together to spoyle men vnder the pretence of godlinesse and sacri∣fices. That which one or two of thē alone doth not,1. They agree to spoyle men vn∣der a shewe of godlines. but their whole order with one consent, as if they were certaine cōpanies of theeues besetting the passages and high wayes sides. After which sort Da∣uid setteth out the qualities and conditions of the oppressor and cruell man Psalm. 10. ver. 8. in these words: He lieth in waite in the villages: in the secret places doth he murther the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poore. Whereupon the societie, confederacie, or fellowship of these priests, is here called and compared vnto com∣panies of theeues that lye in waite for trauailers and passers by. 2. They put their counsels and deuises in exe∣cution and practise.The other accusation of the priests is, That whatsoeuer they de∣uised and thought within themselues wickedly and vngodly, the same doe they subtillie and craftilie put in execution and practise. In the first accusation therefore the crueltie and craftinesse of the priests is described: In the second their desperate lewdnes and wic∣kednes. Both these flatly agreeth with the popish sacrificing Masse priests, and may be fitted against them most truely: and let vs take heed that it may not be so iustly against vs also. Vers. 10. I haue seene villenie in the house of Israel: there is the whor∣dome of Ephraim: Israel is defiled. The life of the Princes and of the people.IN the second place he reckoneth vp the life of the Princes and rulers of the people of Israel. In the third, of the whole people,
mutuall and perpetuall priuiledge and couenant betweene themselues, Exod. 20. Deut. 6. Rom. 9. ver. 4. Ephe. 2. ver. 12. And the people for their part couenanted to obey God: and God for his part conditioned to shewe himselfe a father of this people, by how much the more shamefull on their behalfe the breach of his law ap∣peareth for to be. The amplification of this contempt is herein, for that the Israe∣lites are sayd first, to haue transgressed and despised this couenant of God so contemptuously and reachelously, as if this couenant of God had been the couenant and condition of some vaine and mor∣tall baggage fellow, or some weake person of no request & regard. Secondly there is added, that they did this selfe same thing trea∣cherously, and against their expresse promise, and faith giuen vnto God.Bagedu. For so doth the Hebrew word signifie. And therefore this sinne and rebellion is the greater. Vers. 8. Gilead is a citie of them that worke iniquitie, and is polluted with bloud. A confirma∣tion of the an∣tithesis or con∣trarietie set downe before.A Confirmation of the Antithesis or contrarietie, taken from the examples of hainous sinnes in all degrees and orders of men. And first of all of the crueltie ranging euery where, and being com∣mitted of thē and among them, and reigning euen in whole townes and cities. For that of Gilead, or Galaad was knowne to euery bo∣die. For that countrie was at that time the shop,Galaad a shop and storehouse of all wicked∣nes and cruel∣tie. and house of all iniquitie and crueltie. Therefore I take Galaad for the countrie it selfe, in the which at that time euery citie was full of bloud, and wickednesse for want of punishment. And for this cause was that countrie afterward first punished by God most sharply, and also by infidels, as when it was first taken by Pul King of the Assyrians 1. Chro. 5. ver. 26. Further, the townes and cities of this countrie are called townes of them that worke iniquitie, townes flowing and defi∣led with bloud: finally, townes in which the print and footing of cruell persons is set so deeply, that they cannot be blotted or wiped out. The which kind of speaking carrieth a great vehemencie and force, and painteth out the most shamefull, and most cruell maners of the inhabitants or dwellers in that countrie. And therefore the Prophet Dauid Psal. 55. ver. 9, 10, 11. doth after such like maner de∣scribe the wickednesse of Saul, and of the inhabitants of Ierusalem, when he prayeth vnto God against their crueltie and subtiltie after
this wise: Destroy, O Lord, and diuide their tongues: for I haue seene crueltie and strife in the citie. Day and night they goe about it vpon the walles thereof: both iniquitie and mischiefe are in the midst of it. Wickednesse is in the midst thereof: deceipt and guile depart not from her streetes. Vers. 9. And as theeues waite for a man, so the companie of priests murther in the way by consent, for they worke mischiefe. A laying out of the matter more plainly.A Laying out of the matter more plainly. For he sheweth by what meanes men grew there to be so wicked, and became to bee so cruell, and that not one sort of them alone, but all the degrees of this people. And first of all their priests, whom he teacheth secretly to haue agreed vpon, & to haue made meetings within themselues to slay and spoyle men; and looke what mischiefe soeuer, they had once conceiued in their minde, that same did they in the end lewd∣ly put in proofe and practise.A double accu∣sation of the priests. Wherefore there is here contained a double accusation of the priests. The one, of their wicked meeting together to spoyle men vnder the pretence of godlinesse and sacri∣fices. That which one or two of thē alone doth not,1. They agree to spoyle men vn∣der a shewe of godlines. but their whole order with one consent, as if they were certaine cōpanies of theeues besetting the passages and high wayes sides. After which sort Da∣uid setteth out the qualities and conditions of the oppressor and cruell man Psalm. 10. ver. 8. in these words: He lieth in waite in the villages: in the secret places doth he murther the innocent: his eyes are bent against the poore. Whereupon the societie, confederacie, or fellowship of these priests, is here called and compared vnto com∣panies of theeues that lye in waite for trauailers and passers by. 2. They put their counsels and deuises in exe∣cution and practise.The other accusation of the priests is, That whatsoeuer they de∣uised and thought within themselues wickedly and vngodly, the same doe they subtillie and craftilie put in execution and practise. In the first accusation therefore the crueltie and craftinesse of the priests is described: In the second their desperate lewdnes and wic∣kednes. Both these flatly agreeth with the popish sacrificing Masse priests, and may be sitted against them most truely: and let vs take heed that it may not be so iustly against vs also. Vers. 10. I haue seene villenie in the house of Israel: there is the whor∣dome of Ephraim: Israel is defiled. The life of the Princes and of the people.IN the second place he reckoneth vp the life of the Princes and rulers of the people of Israel. In the third, of the whole people,
that, as I haue sayd, all the degrees and estates of that kingdome may bee held guiltie before God: and therefore there is here also contained a most euident confirmation and proofe of the accusa∣tion of the Israelites, the which was begun before, as in the former verses, to wit, 8. and 9. So then the Princes are accused of whore∣dome. And these are vnderstood questionles vnder the name of the house of Israel and Ephraim, as I haue sayd before cap. 5. ver. 1. But this whoredome is called an horrible matter, and a villanie, and no∣torious offence, to the end that in this place we should vnderstand not any kind of whoredome whatsoeuer to bee noted, but that the which of all other doth most greatly displease God. And that is i∣dolatrie, the which was first ordained and set vp by the Princes, by the King himselfe, and the Nobles of the kingdome of Israel, who were Ephraimites, and afterwards by the selfe same defended: af∣ter whose example the rest of the people committed whoredome afterwards, that is, worshipped idols, and polluted or defiled them∣selues before God. For such as are the Princes, sayth Plato, such the rest of the citizens are wont for to bee. The whole world frameth themselues after the example of the King. And therefore 1. King. 12 ver. 30. you shall finde, how easely the whole people were drawne vnto idolatrie, after that Ieroboam had once builded vp the Altars and golden Calues at Dan and Beth-el: For the people went (because of the one) of the calues, euen to Dan. And after this manner did the Princes of Israel sinne. The people sin after the ex∣ample of the Princes.The people also did afterwards pollute and defile themselues with the same idolatries and superstitions, vnto the which they saw their Princes to be giuen. And therefore it is added, Israel is defiled with whoredome, to wit, the which the Princes of this people of Ephraim did teach them. Wherefore now in this place, as I haue sayd before, I thinke the worde (Israel) to bee taken for the whole people. Therefore the sinnes, and especially the sinnes of idolatrie, excuse not the people before God. Vers. 11. Yea Iudah hath set a plant for thee, whiles I would returne the captiuitie of my people. An amplifica∣tion of this ido∣latrie reigning among the Is∣raelites.AN amplification of the idolatrie, which reigned among the Is∣raelites. For in such price was it among them, in such honor, in such dignitie, so great was the loue of it, such the commendation, so earnest was their minde toward it, and such was the labour and
indeuour of these Israelites to spred it abroad among others, that they had infected Iudah it selfe also with this sinne. For the Israe∣lites had sowen the most shameful seedes therof among the Iewes, the which afterwards grew vp, and brought forth their crop, that is their fruite, and the same most vnhappie, and lamentable, but yet most plentifull, and speedie.What a Meta∣phor is, see A∣mos. cap. 4. ver. 12. Wherefore it is a Metaphoricall kinde of speaking, when as the contagion and infection of the idolatrie of the Israelites by them at the first conueighed, scattered, and im∣parted vnto the Iewes, and afterwards growing vp among the Iewes themselues, is called an haruest, (or as some translate it, a plant). Furthermore, the time is rehearsed, wherein the Iewes were in such sort corrupted and infected by the Israelites: namely, whilest God brought them backe againe being captiues, that is, taken by the Israelites. This historie appertaineth vnto the times of Achaz king of the Iewes 2. Chro. 28. for then were the Iewes ouercome & taken by the Israelites, yet were they liberally, and freely by them let goe againe. Through which benefite it is likely that the Iewes were moued to fauour both the Israelites, and also their religion, that is, their idolatrie: and from thence took those seedes, the which afterward grew vp, and made them more readie and forward vnto horrible idolatrie vnder Achaz their king, as appeareth 2. Chro. 28. ver. 22. and in that which there followeth. So easie doubtlesse is the nature of man to bee drawne into idolatrie, and with so small adoe can idolaters deceiue men, as the fish is beguiled with the baite. And so quickly, as it is 1. Cor. 15. ver. 33. doth euill speakings corrupt good maners. So also euen at this day many being rewarded with benefites from the Turke, doe first of all grow into a liking of Tur∣kish blasphemie: and in the end become Turkes themselues also. So in like manner in our time now, many professors of the Gospell become Papists, being allured with their bounteousnes and libera∣litie. For benefites doe often so beguile vs, that we fauour our be∣nefactors and weldoers to the reproch of God himselfe: the which notwithstanding ought not in any case to be allowed, nay, it is to be condemned.
CAP. 7. Vers. 1. When I would haue healed Israel, then the iniquitie of E∣phraim was discouered, and the wickednesse of Samaria: for they haue dealt falsely: and the theefe commeth in, and the robber spoyleth without. AN ouerplus or addition vnto that which went before. For in the former chapter he declared the corruption of all degrees of this kingdome of Israel: but here he giueth in as it were for an aduan∣tage, or an ouer-draught and measure, the particular horrible and lewd corruption and course of life of the Nobles & Princes (whom before he had briefly reprehended with the rest) and doth more di∣ligently set downe and handle the same, as the fountaine and wel∣spring of all that corruption, the which he had condemned before. Wherefore this now insueth and followeth of the former argument or matter, which the Prophet hath alreadie handled, that the pub∣like state of this people may be knowne to haue been desperate, & very miserable: like as in the chapter before going, the priuate e∣state of these men was shewed to haue been corrupt and wretched. Three parts of this verse.But this verse containeth three things. For first of all is shewed what was the occasion of finding out of this mischiefe, the which he hereafter rehearseth.1. The occasion of finding out of the sin or euill, which the Pro∣phet here re∣hearseth. And this was, That whilest God as a most ex∣cellent Phisition, laboureth to heale this people, and is desirous to deale with their sinnes and to cure them, as if it were diseases and wounds, and whiles he intendeth throughly to search into the cau∣ses of the same, as Phisitions vse for to doe: he doth at the last re∣peate, that the causes of all these euils are in the Princes themselues of this people, and in the very mother or head citie of the kingdome Samaria. For they doe most shamefully and fouly corrupt and spill the rest of the citizens and inhabitants with their example. For the experience of all ages teacheth that saying of Plato to be true, That such as the Princes and Rulers are, such also are the rest of the citi∣zens. And as one sayth, The examples of the Gouernors doe flowe forth vnto the people. The which thing also Isocrates in his Oration vnto Nicocles, and Agapetus vnto Iustinian the Emperour, doe write. By how much the more it behoueth Princes and Rulers to liue holilie, least that by their shamefull life they doe not only o∣uerthrow
themselues: but also their subiects. So then whilest the causes of these vices, which reigned in the people, are diligently sought into of God, the Princes are found out to bee the fountaines of this whole mischiefe. 2. Who are here especially con∣demned.Another poynt in this verse worthie the noting is this, Who are here especially condemned and described. I answere, to wit, both the Princes themselues, that is to say, the King, and his familiars and friends the Nobles and Peeres of the Realme: and also the chiefe citie of the kingdome, Samaria. Therfore by the name of (Ephraim) is signified the Princes (out of which tribe the first king of this peo∣ple, to wit, Ieroboam, and so consequently the Princes, had their o∣riginall) and by the word (Samaria) is noted the head citie of the whole kingdome, and not any citie whatsoeuer, nor any one of the people whatsoeuer is here reproued by the Prophet. For the mise∣rable condition and estate of those which sate at the sterne of the common wealth, and their lewd and wicked life is here liuely de∣scribed, as the most plentifull and first head-spring of the rest of the wickednesse. And if in any place els of the holie Scripture the pub∣like desperat estate of any common wealth be set out, it is especial∣lie in this place, and in this kingdome of Israel. 3. What is sayd of these Prin∣ces, and of their head citie.Now the third thing the which is to bee marked in this verse, is, What is said of these Princes and their head citie, that is to say, what maner of wickednesse, corruption and life this of theirs was. And first of all it is set downe in generall: then particularly by the seue∣rall parts and sorts of their lewdnes and wickednesse. And general∣lie, when as their wickednesse is termed iniquitie, and falsehood: nay in the plurall number wickednesses, and subtilties or falsehoods, that these Princes may be proued to haue abounded in all kind of lewd∣nes, together with their chiefe citie: and not with one or two hai∣nous sinnes: albeit notwithstanding that some sinnes hereafter reckoned vp, and some outragious offences were committed licen∣tiously among them, and with full sway reigned and florished. Fur∣ther, iniquitie and falsehood in this place do betoken vnfaithfull dea∣ling, the which hurteth and wrongeth our neighbour, against the law of God, and dutie of charitie: and that both in the deed it selfe (for they are sayd to haue committed falsehood, or to haue dealt false∣lie, that is, to haue effected their craftie counsailes) and also by de∣ceite, or sleights, and shifts, and lyes. For these Princes were most notorious lyars, deceiuers, most vaine. Now the suites and sorts of this wicked life, and that reigning in Samaria the chiefe citie of the
kingdome among the Princes are, at home Deceit: and abroad Violence. For at home they are theeues, as being such who by sub∣tilty and crafte take away from the poore that which is theirs, and deuise shiftes to pull from their subiects their goods. But abroad and without their cities they are gathered together by heapes, after the manner of theeues and robbers, to robbe and spoile euery man. The life of some Noble men of our time as they are called, could not be better paynted out then it is in this place represented and shewed forth vnder the name and person of the Princes and Rulers of Israel. Vers. 2. And they consider not in their hearts, that I remember al their wickednes: now their owne inuentions haue beset them a∣bout: they are in my sight. The first am∣plification of the former wickednes.THe first amplification of the former wickednes, from the man∣ner of committing the same. For these Princes are in such sort theeues at home, & also violent & robbers abroad, that they burie within themselues all remembrance and feeling of the iudgements of God, as if either there were no God at all: or as if he were not iust, or not executing and taking punishment vpon the wicked deedes of men, especially of his owne people. The which is an e∣speciall argument or token of impiety or vngodlines and all retch∣lesse shamelesnes in all men, but chiefly in Princes. That which notwithstanding hath been in all ages, and is now adayes also to be seene in many Nobles and great men. Dauid Psalm. 50. vers. 21. after that in the person of God he hath blamed them for preten∣ding and making shew of religion, yet being in life and conuer∣sation most wicked, partners with theeues and whoremasters, de∣ceitfull, and slanderers, signifiyng these outragious offences to bee openly committed among them, he addeth: These things hast thou done, and I held my tongue: therefore thou thoughtest that I was like thee: but I will reproue thee, and set them in order before thee. And Psalm. 94. vers. 7. hauing before expressed the violence & arrogan∣cie of tyrants, declaring that in the committing of these things they cast off all remembrance and feeling of God, sayth: Yet the Lord shall not see: neither will the God of Iaacob regard it. There∣fore vnto that their wickednes these Princes ioyne for the most part notorious vngodlines also, as namely being such, who either vtterly denie God, or else take away his iustice and prouidence
from out of mankinde, and from out of the life of man. The carefulnes of God to pu∣nish, set against the carlesnes of men that think in sinning to e∣scape without punishment. Now their owne inuentions haue beset them about: they are in my sight.) This is an Antithesis or a setting down of the contrary vn∣to that which went immediately before of their supposall, that God seeth them not in the doing of these things, the which oppo∣seth or setteth against the former sencelesnesse and blockish minde of these Princes the perpetual or continual care of God cōcerning the doings & practises of men, & his thinking vpon the punishment of their wickednes. It is therefore so far off, that therefore GOD should not remember them, or thinke vpon the punishing of them, how great Princes soeuer they are, that their iniquitie is alwayes present before his sight: and doth on euery side beset them, and hemme them in, that in no part of them they can be seene sounde and pure, or remaine hidden or couered. For that their wickednes lyeth open on all partes, like as a garment the which men doe weare, or wherewith they are clothed on all partes, is to bee seene on euery side. There is a like place Psalm. 73. vers. 6. where the Prophet sayth of the vngodly puffed vp by prosperitie, That pride is as a chayne vnto them, and cruelty couereth them as a garment. And againe Psalm. 109. vers. 18. in these wordes: As hee clothed himselfe with cursing as with a garment, so shall it come into his bow∣els like water, and like oyle into his bones. Therefore what pardon soeuer men that are hypocrites may fayne vnto them for their sins, hauing forgotten God and his iustice, they are deceiued; be they of common people, or be they Princes. For God will punish them both in the ende: and the great ones the more grieuously, by how much they haue done the more hurt by their example. Touching this point, see Rom. 2. from the third verse and forward euen to the ende of the chapter. Let Princes therefore endeuour and la∣bour to bee an example or patterne of an honest life vnto the rest of the people. Vers. 3. They make the king glad with their wickednes, and their Princes with their lyes. The second am¦plification of the wicked life of the Peeres and Nobles.THe second amplification of the wicked life of the Nobles and Peeres of Israel taken from the effects of the same. They with their lewdnes, which is heathen like and shamelesse, doe corrupt and vtterly spoyle, not onely themselues, but also the King himself, and other princes the which retained or kept some parcell of mo∣destie,
godlines, and honestie. Two partes of this verse.Two things therefore are to be noted in this place, first, whom they make to be worse. Secondly, by what meanes they doe it. And for the first: They corrupt not the people alone (for as I haue sayd before,1. Whom they corrupt. they doe put aside and turne the people also out of the right way by their example) but also the other Princes,2. By what mean. in whome there remained some sparkes of godlines. And not only the prin∣ces, but they corrupt and spill the king himselfe also.1. The people and other Princes, and the King himselfe also. By how much the more hurtfull is the wickednes of these Nobles vnto the whole cōmonwealth. For what can there be hole & sound in the rest of the body, when as the king, and the head it selfe of the kingdom is sick and ill at ease? And therefore in a sense not much vnlike Christ sayth of his Apostles and disciples Mat 5. ver. 13. Ye are the salt of the earth: but if the salt haue lost his sauour, wherewith shall it bee salted? It is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to bee troden vnder foote of men. And cap. 6. vers. 22. The light of the body is the eye: if then thine eye be single, thy whole body shall be light. But if thine eye be wicked, thē al thy body shal be dark. Wherfore if the light that is in thee be darkenes, how great is that darkenes? Doubtles the manners of the courtiers of our time are here by the Prophet most truely described, so that they cannot be more truely paynted forth by the pensil of the Painter. 2. With their flat teries, lies and wickednes.The Prophet likewise setteth downe by what meanes these selfe same doe win the Kings vnto them, to wit, They make them merrie, and glad with their flatterings, lyes, and wickednes. They deale therefore after this sorte, as that they would seeme onely to delight the king, whilest they liue so wickedly, forge lies, and final∣ly deale so lewdly. Thus then by little and little, and as it were by drop meal, they do drop & powre in the vilenes of their life into the mindes of kings vnder a pretence and seasoning or sawcing of the same with pleasure, the which they bring vnto Princes: and doe teach them to liue and to deale after the same manner, and with the same allurements.A point worth the noting. Pleasure, sayth Plato, is the bayte of euill. For we doe easily drinke in those vices, the which doe make vs merrie and withall doe offer and shew vs delight, although they be most shamefull and present poysons. Wherefore euen kings are to ab∣staine from all filthy pleasure, and to keepe a diligent watch and ward ouer those that are their friends and familiars. Let them shunne the wicked: and take vnto them the godly and vertuous, according vnto that patterne which Dauid setteth downe for the
ordering and reforming of a Princes house and Courte Psalm. 101. Vers. 4. They are all adulterers, and as a verie ouen heated by the baker, which ceaseth from raysing vp, and from Kneading the dough, vntill it be leauened. A lewd & bad practise of some wicked courti∣ers.A More plaine laying open of this matter. For he sheweth forth that kinde of wickednes of Courtiers especiallie, wherewithall lewd and baggage Courtiers doe make glad and delight the king. And this is first of all, whoredome it selfe: and secondly, the rehear∣sing and boasting of their most shamefull companying and vnlaw∣full lying with women, whereby they stirre vp the king vnto lust, and delight him.The figure Au∣xêsis or increa∣sing, is when as by degrees as it were, we do go from the lower vnto the high∣er, yea vnto the highest, and a∣boue the high∣est sometimes: as here the Pro¦phet from their whoredome go∣eth as it were ene stephigher, and increaseth the same by likening it vn∣to the extream heat of an ouen made so hote as possibly the ba∣ker by all dili∣gence can de∣uise & make it So then these wicked Noble men are fornica∣tors, nay most filthy whoremasters, and most earnestly giuen that way first themselues, and secondly they are most shameles baudes vnto their kings. For by the figure Auxêsis, or incereasing of the matter as it were by degrees, & by a similitude taken from an ouen or furnace, and a Baker, is declared how burning hot this fleshy lust of these men, that is, of these Courtiers, is: for looke howe a furnace or ouen once heated by the baker, and from out of the which the fire hath not been remoued or taken away through any negligence or slouth of the baker, looke I say, how greatly that same furnace burneth, and is glowing hot: so hote, raging and burning is the lust of these Nobles and Courtiers, vnto the which also they doe stirre vp the king himself, and do in such sorte make him glad, and corrupt him. And what is more knowen and common at this day them these Arts in the Courts of Kings and princes, to allure kings, and to drawe them vnto their partes and sides? Vers. 5. This is the day of our king: the Princes haue made him sicke with flagons of wine: he stretcheth out his hande to scor∣ners. AN amplification of the former wickednes of the Nobles and Courtiers from three places, namely, from the time, the adioints,The former wickednes am∣plified from three places. and persons. And from the time, for that euen at the selfe same day that the king holdeth the remembrance of the kingdome ei∣ther giuen him by God, or obtayned by himselfe,1. From the time. or keepeth his birth day, neither doe they themselues abstaine from these intem∣perancies,
vices, corruptions, and drinkings: neither doe they suf∣fer or grant the king himself, or other Princes to abstaine. Yet these a e such daies in the which thanks are rather to be giuen vnto God, both by the Kings themselues, and also by their Princes, then af∣ter this maner, to giue ouer themselues vnto wantonnes and sinne: in as much as then they call to minde againe the remembrance of the benefite receiued from God, and the same indeede a most singular benefite. Example in the Psalm. 2. and 18.21. and 22. where Dauid celebrateth or keepeth the remembrance of his en∣stalling in his kingdome, or of his coronation. Example also in Mat. 14. ver. 6. where the birth day of King Herod is holden, albeit not in such manner as it ought to be. So then (the day of the king) is taken for that day, in the which the King holdeth and keepeth publikely the remembrance of some especiall benefite of God to∣wards him. And this was the first circumstance of time, the which increaseth this sinne of these Courtiers. Secondly, the adioints also do make the former lewdnes of the Princes greater,2. From the ad∣ioynts. to wit, For that they haue added vnto this burning lust of the flesh, or whoredome singular intemperancie, and sur∣fetting or gurmandise. For they drinke not wine out of cuppes, but out of flagons and bottels, the which they carouse all out, and that so intemperately, that both themselues, and also the King and other princes (the which by them are vrged vnto such quaffings) waxe sicke in the ende thereby. So then they sinne two wayes, namely, by the abusing of the gifts of God, to wit, meates and wine: and also their health (the which in like manner is the gift of God) the which by this meanes they doe lose, hurt, and impaire. And this is a signe and token of notorious and most intemperate gur∣mandise. And these vices alwayes for the most parte are linked and yoked together, namely, whoredom and surfetting or drunkennes. For as one sayth, without good cheare and wine lust is colde. But now there is added also a certaine third thing, that is to say, That the King being accustomed vnto such a loose, vnbridled and wic∣ked life, in the ende stretcheth out his hands to (or with) scorners, that is to say, is delighted with men that contemne or despise God, both learneth and alloweth or liketh their maners, and adioyneth himselfe vnto them. And finally at the last he himselfe casteth off all feare of God, all shamefastnes and modestie: by whose exam∣ples the rest also become scorners of God. Now a scorner, is a moc∣ker of God, as Peter epist. 2. cap. 3. ver. 3. calleth him, that is to say,
an open gyber and iester at the Godhead, power, and maiestie of God, so that he which is such a manner of person, can now no lon∣ger be kept within the bounds of his dutie, or be touched with any shame. Whereby is vnderstoode, howe lamentable and miserable the estate of those common-wealthes is, in the which such Princes beare rule as are giuen vnto drunkennes and wine, or els doe fol∣low whoredome. For they doe not onely neglect or foreslow the publike busines or matters of the common-wealth, growing bru∣tish and senselesse through wine and women, but also doe quench and put out in themselues and others all remnants of religion and sparkles of the feare of God through their example. Worthily therefore is surfetting in the Proverbs forbidden both vnto Kings & also vnto all those which haue the gouernment of the common∣wealth. Prov. 31. ver. 4, 5. where it is said: It is not for Kings, O Lemu∣el, it is not for Kings to drinke wine, nor for Princes strong drinke, least he drinke and forget the decree, and change the iudgement of all the children of affliction. And from hence also we learn howe Kinges by little and little are corrupted by Courtiers, and by certaine de∣grees are framed and drawne vnto great Iewdnesse and wicked∣nesse. The third place of this amplification, is from the Persons.3. From the per∣sons. These whorehunting and drunken Noble-men, doe not onely corrupt themselues, nor the people; but others besides, yea euen the Princes of the kingdome, nay the King himselfe also, as I haue shewed be∣fore, vpon whome lieth the whole charge of the common-wealth. Wherefore these, whilest they spill the King, doe ouerthrowe the whole common-wealth, as being the publike enemies of the same. Thus then it appeareth, how great a mischiefe in euery kingdome the corruption of the Court is. Vers. 6. For they haue made readie their heart like an ouen, whiles they lie in waite: their baker sleepeth all the night: in the morning it burneth as a flame of fire. The second am∣plification of their former wickednes.THe second amplification of the former wickednes, taken from the Consequent or that which followeth hereupon. In the ende these Nobles do so boile and burne with all kind of hainous sinnes, as an ouen or furnace is glowing hote, beeing most extreamely heated by the baker, and from whom the fire through negligence hath not beene remooued. Nay in the end they lie in waite against
their Kings and Princes. And in deede these commonly are the degrees, whereby at the last these courtly-nobles doe come vp and clime vnto this treacherousnes, that they lie in waite euen for their King himselfe, to take him away, and to destroy him, and to enter into conspiracies against him. First of all, they binde the King vnto them through their lewdnes, and besot him with all kinde of vices. Secondly, they cause him to become a mocker, that there may re∣maine in him no sparke of goodnes and honestie. Furthermore, when he will not be ruled by them in all points, then doe they af∣terwards disdaine & despise him, as a blockish person, and a dūme image. And finally, they in the ende conspire against him: or they set their minde against him, being now in such sort become a man infected and past all hope of recouerie in all kinde of sinne, that they doe lie in waite for him the selfe same their King. For looke in what common-wealthes or kingdomes such Courtiers and Nobles are,The author or the printer mi∣staketh in the report of these histories, for Menahem, and not Phaceias or Pekakiah, kil∣led Sellum. as in this place be described, there neuer wanteth store of con∣spiratours, seede of ciuill warres, and causes of seditions, the which by these parties are scattered and spread abroad. The which thing fell out in the kingdome of Israel, in the last times of the Kings of Israel. For Sellum killed Zacharias, Phaceias slewe Sellum, Phacee the sonne of Romelias killed King Phaceias. 2. King. 15. Moreouer, the wicked minde of these Nobles is described by the metaphor taken from a furnace or ouen, as before ver. 4. that it may plainly appeare that these doe exceedingly boile and burne within themselues in all kinde of sinnes:What a Meta∣phor is, see A∣mos, cap. 4.12. and so long as they are and continue such, it is manifest that they themselues are burned of their owne sinnes. So Otho corrupted Nero, as Cornelius Tacitus reporteth. So the drudges and slaues of the Court spoiled and spil∣led the Emperour Commodus, the sonne of Marcus, as Herodianus writeth. Vers. 7. They are all whote as an ouen, and haue devoured their iudges: all their Kings are fallen: there is none among them that calleth vnto me. A Confirmation of the former description of these Princes ta∣ken from the effects,The former description of the wicked Nobles confir∣med by three effects. the which are in this place reckoned vp three in number, and the same most grieuous, and such as doe wit∣nesse a most disordered estate of the common wealth, and a most miserable licentiousnes or ouer great libertie of vices. The first of
these is, a most exceeding great heate and violent sway of al vi∣ces, the which boyleth vp,Of their great earnestnes in committing all kind of sinnes. and heateth in the breasts of these men, as a most hote furnace. And surely experience of things teacheth this to be most true, that nothing can be seene more wanton then the manners of these once forlorne Nobles: nothing more mala∣pert then their lust, nothing more shamelesse then their boldnes, and finally, nothing more hote and earnest then their desires, be they neuer so vniust and vnlawfull, in such sort forsooth doe they abuse the height and glorie of their authoritie and dignitie, as if there ought to be no let vnto them, nothing to hinder their wish∣ings, and as if all things were to be at their becke and commaund. Therefore whatsoeuer enterprise they would haue effected, be it neuer so shamefull, filthie, vngodly, and vniust, they thinke it law∣full to bring it to passe: and therefore in all their actions, their de∣sire of bringing the same about, and of putting them in practise, boyleth and seetheth as it were a most hote and fierie furnace. 2 Of their eating vp the Kings treasures and ouerthrowing of the state.The second effect is, that these same wicked Courtiers doe con∣sume their Iudges, that is, both their Kings, and also their Princes, whome they ought to maintaine & increase. For partly they emp∣tie and draw drie the treasuries of their Princes, whome they haue at their owne commaund, and doe robbe and spoile the same, craf∣tily getting and stealing the Kings coyne into their owne handes: and partly they doe ouerturne and in the end destroy their Princes, and their most florishing estate with those their wicked counsels. The which thing to be most true, both the historie of all ages, and also this time of ours will most euidently and clearely witnesse. For the Nobles, and these lewd and bad Courtiers doe in the end bring their Lords and masters into such narrow straights for money and other matters, through their most wicked vices, counsels, charges, and priuie whisperings, that their Kings themselues can not after∣wards winde out againe from this pouertie, but lie ouerwhelmed in the same, and perish therein at the last with their kingdome. 3 Of their dri∣ving away of all feare of God and godimes out of the harts of their kings and rulers.The third effect, that by the meanes of these Nobles, and badde Courtiers, all feare of God and godlines is in such sort shaken off from the Kings, that when as they perish, they call not vpon God, as namely beeing vtterly vnmindefull and forgetfull of him, the which is great vngodlines, vnto the which notwithstanding those Princes are drawne, which giue care vnto these lewd Courtiers, or beare any fauour or liking towards them. This because it hath ap∣peared sufficiently in the Kings of Israel, many of the which haue
died naturally, or bin slaine violently without the calling vpon of the true God: there is no neede that it should be confirmed or prooued with any more examples. But here out appeareth, vnto what passe in the end that estate groweth of a kingdome or com∣mon-wealth, wherein such Nobles and wicked Courtiers, & moc∣kers of God can doe all things, and haue the Kings at their becke: and what manner of death and life that of their Kings themselues in such a state vseth for to be, such namely as the death and life of Atheists or godlesse and most wicked persons accustomably is. See the Psal 101. in the which Dauid maketh protestation, that he will purge his Court and kingdome of such bad members. And Psal. 75. he complaineth of the like growing of thinges out of square through the badde practises of such kinde of persons, and shew∣eth that he will be carefull to bring things vnto a better course, and that hee was not tongue-tied at such abuses in the wicked, in these wordes: The earth, and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolued: but I will establish the pillers of it I said vnto the foolish, Be not so follish: and to the wicked, Lift not vp the horne. And there is an old saying and a true concerning those Courts, where such wic∣ked Courtiers beare all the rule and sway, Let him get him out of the Court, which hath a desire to be godly. Vers. 8. Ephraim hath mixt himselfe among the people. Ephram is as a cake on the hearth not turned. The conclusion describing their vngodli∣nes, and the iudgements of God bent a∣gainst them for the same.THe Conclusion, wherein is described the vngodlines of these men, and the iudgements of God against them declared. Their vngodlines in this, that Ephraim hath mixed himselfe with the Heathen, and such people as are altogether Idolatours, both in ma∣king marriages with them (by the which they became more cor∣rupt) and also in other things, leagues, traffiques, and entring into societies or fellowships, all which things by the lawe of God they were forbiddē for to do. So thē, here in this place Ephraim is shew∣ed to haue become vtterly Heathenish, and so consequently that Israel whome God had chosen and culled out as a peculiar people vnto himselfe, and had commanded by Moses to be holy, and to remaine pure and seuered from the vncleannes of the infidels. And so much the more sharnefull and vnexcusable the sinne of this peo∣ple appeareth nowe for to be, and their rebellion the greater. The word Ephraim, albeit by consequent it may signifie the whole people of Israel, yet properly and chiefly in this place, it is here ta∣ken
for the Nobles. For their ruine and fall doth shewe and drawe with it the miserie and destruction of the whole people, the which was afterwards to ensue. And this was one vngodlines of the Israe∣litish Nobilitie, as the fountaine and originall of al their wickednes and corruption, to wit, their common mingling of themselues, and their societie or fellowship with vncircumcised people. For godli∣nes was then vtterly exstinct or put out among them. Now followeth and is described their punishment, to wit, these selfe same both Nobles and people,2 Their punish∣ment for the same. shall be most pleasantly de∣uoured and eaten vp of these Heathen vnto whome they a dioyne themselues, as if they were some fine and daintie cake, the which is wont to be baked onely on one side, that it may be the more plea∣sant in eating. For such iunkets, spice cakes, and such like other daintrels are wont to be baked but on one side, and not on both sides. Therefore looke howe greedily those cakes are eaten vp by the guests; so sweetly is the whole cuntry of the Israelites eaten vp, that is to say, consumed, wasted, pilled, deuoured of the infidell people with whome they mingle themselues. That which euen at this day also appeareth to be true in those common-wealths and godly kingdomes, the which draw and seeke vnto themselues for∣raine helpes and aydes, especially of Infidels: For in the ende they are vtterly consumed by them. And this also is a most grieuous punishment, and sheweth the estate of that common-wealth to be most miserable the which is ouerthrowne by their aydes-men and helpers. Wherefore that same straight societie or fellowship with infidels is alwaies hurtfull and vnluckie vnto the godly. Vers. 9. Strangers haue deuoured his strength, and he knoweth it not: yea, gray haires are here and there vpon him, yet he knoweth not. A Making of the matter more plaine. For he describeth or set∣teth out after what manner the Israelites shall be consumed or destroied by the infidell people, namely, that these nations shall eate, waste, and carrie away the strength of the Israelites: and at the last, Israel shall be made most weake, faint, and feeble, who notwithstanding shall not thereby be brought to repen∣tance, nor yet acknowledge his owne miserie. 3 Things to be noted in this verse.Wherefore this verse hath three things worthie the noting. One, that he sayth, strangers shall deuoure his strength. For by the name
of strangers and forraine people, I vnderstand the Infidels, with whom Israel hath ioyned himselfe by leagues,1. That strāgers shall deuoure them. marriages, or other publike contracts and conditions. These in requiring stipends, tri∣butes, or pensions, shall eate vp the strength, that is to say, the wealth of the Israelites, the which they shall whollie consume. For the publike or common treasurie shall bee drawne drie and cleane spent, and the people vndone, by the paying and giuing of those pensions, and tributes. 2. That gray haires are here and there vpon him.The second poynt to be noted is, That he sayth, gray haires are scattered, or here and there vpon him. For by the figure Metalepsis or Transsumption, I here take gray or hoare haires for infirmitie or weaknes, the cause for the effect, or adioynt: for because that olde men are feeble,What the fi∣gure Metalep∣sis is, see Oseas cap 4. ver. 18. faint, and weake, especiallie when as they come vn∣to extreme olde age (in the which there is hoarenes of haires for the most part) therefore I doe here expound hoarenes to bee taken for the feeble and weake state of that kingdome, such as it was vnder the last kings thereof Phaceias, otherwise Pekahiah, and Oseas. 3. That he saith: But Israel vn∣derstādeth not.Lastly he sayth, But Israel vnderstandeth not, that is to say, hee doth not for all that consider nor weigh that his miserie, nor is thereby made any whit the more wise. But here the repeating and doubling of the same sentence or reproofe is to be noted. For this repetition sheweth that either the blockishnes, or the disdaine and pride of this people was the greater, the which did not acknow∣ledge or know themselues, nor their weakenes: nor that condition and estate wherewith they were so miserably intreated by straun∣gers. Great therefore is the blindnes of the godly, when as they flee vnto the aydes of Infidels, and besides they doe forsake their god∣linesse. Vers. 10. And the pride of Israel testifieth to his face, and they doe not reture to the Lord their God, nor seeke him for all this. THe first amplification of the same both pride and blockishnes of the Israelites,The first am∣plification of the pride and blockishnes of these Israelites so hardly notwithstanding and grieuously oppres∣sed, for that albeit this their blockishnes were knowne vnto all mē: nay, that all men did plainly and openly witnesse that their pride was miserable and vnhappie, they neuerthelesse repented not for the same, neither yet became the better minded, nor were turned to call vpon God: nay rather growing more stubborne, malapert and cruell thereby, they added transgression vnto transgression; like
vnto those whom God complaineth of by his Prophet Isai. cap. 1. vers. 5. who the more they were punished the worse they waxed: and therefore he complaineth on them in this wise: Wherefore should ye bee smitten any more? for ye fall away more and more: the whole head is sicke: and the whole heart is heauie: or vnto those of whom cap. 5. ver. 20. he sayth, That they speake good of euill, and euill of good, which put darknes for light, and light for darknes, that put bit∣ter for sweete, and sweete for bitter. This wilfulnes therefore of the Israelites was froward and stubborne. 2. Parts of this verse.This verse hath two parts. One, wherein it is sayd: Their pride witnesseth to their face, &c. The other, when it is sayd, But they re∣turned not vnto the Lord. As touching the first part,  it hath been ex∣pounded before cap. 5. ver. 5. Concerning the latter,Expounded be∣fore. it proueth that the blockishnes and senslesnes of this people in their miseries, and their contemning or despising of God was very great and notori∣ous.  For afflictions at the least wise are wont to call vs backe to the thinking vpon God,In that it is said: They re∣turned not vn∣to the Lord. and to put vs in minde of our infirmitie and weaknes, that wee might seeke and aske for ayde and helpe at the hands of God. But these in all their afflictions returned not vnto God, nay they did not so much as once seeke after him. For by the figure Auxêsis,What the fi∣gure Auxesis is, see Oseas, cap. 7. ver. 4. he sheweth that it was a signe of greater forgetful∣nes of God, not so much as to seeke after him, and to haue been carefull of God their helper, then not to haue turned vnto him, and stayed vpon him as their only helpe, and to haue changed their life vnto the better. But when as men haue once vngodly begun to turne aside from true godlinesse, they alwayes runne vnto worse, and become more obstinate by the iust iudgement of God. Vers. 11. Ephraim also is like a doue deceiued, without heart: they call to Egypt: they goe to Asshur. The secōd am∣plification of the two former vices of the Is∣raelites.THe second amplification of both vices of the Israelites, rehear∣sed in the verse before going. And this amplification is two∣fold. The first, by a comparison of the foolishnes of the Israelites with a doue, a bruite creature. The Israelites were no more wise, or had no more wit in their miseries, thē a bruit beast is wont to haue,  and especially a doue, a creature that cannot prouide for her selfe,By comparing of them vnto a doue. and fearefull, aboue other creatures. And therefore Dauid Psal. 55. ver. 6. sayth: Oh that I had wings like a doue, then would I flie away, and rest. Christ indeede willeth that wee should be simple as doues:
but he addeth, and wise as serpents Matth. 10. ver. 16. Where by is shewed that there is no wisedome in doues.2. For seeking ayd at the Egyp∣tians and Assy∣rians. The second place of this amplification is, That they call the Egyptians and the Assyrians to helpe them, and goe vnto them for ayde, vnto the Assyrians be∣fore cap. 5. ver. 13. vnto the Egyptians, as appeareth 2. King cap. 17. By the rehearsal of both these nations, first, the painfull iourney and trauaile of the Israelites is described, when as notwithstanding they had God neere vnto them, if so bee they would haue sought vnto him. Secondly, the helpe that they sought at the hands of prophane and heathen men, is condemned, to wit, of men that were Infidels, and vncircumcised. Furthermore, it was vnprofitable and hurtfull vnto those Israelites For these nations ouerthrew the Israelites, vn∣to whom they came as helpers 2. King. 17. Isai. 30. and at the last de∣stroyed them. Of the which is gathered, that the helpe of God a∣lone is most sure. Vers. 12. But when they shall goe, I will spred my net vpon them, and draw them downe as the foules of the heauen: I will chastice them, as their congregation hath heard. A confirmatiō of their vaine labour in see∣king forraine ayde.A Confirmation of their vaine and vnprofitable labour in seeking helpe at the Egyptians and Assyrians, taken from the issue and falling out of this practise. For God himselfe shal make these helpes voyd, and vtterly vnprofitable. The reason, because God shall spred his net vpon them going to seeke and craue such helpe, that they may be taken, and held backe, that either they cannot goe so farre, or els obtaine and finde any helpe at all at their hand. For God shal cast them downe in this their pride, and vaunting and lifting vp themselues, because of those prophane or heathenish helps which they hoped for, euen as a bird flying is notwithstanding by the fou∣ler cast downe, being taken with his nets, or with lime twigges. Fi∣nally, God will chasten the Israelites, as they haue heard before that he hath done, and as it hath been publikely told them by the Prophets, whiles the Prophets vsed their congregations, and repro∣ued them. Whereby appeareth, that this Oseas liued after other Prophets,Oseas prophe∣sth after E∣lizaeus, Ionas, Amos, and o∣thers. who had now alreadie threatned the iudgements of God vnto the Israelites. As was Elizaeus, Ionas, Amos, and many others, which had gone before, as it is 2. Chron. 24. vers. 18.19. where is shewed, how after that the Iewes vnder king Ioash had fallen to i∣dolatrie, Iehoiada the good priest being once dead, God sent Pro∣phets
vnto them from time to time to recall them, and to bring thē home againe into the right way, in these words, as we finde there written: And they left the house of the Lord God of their fathers, and serued groues and idols: and wrath came vpon Iudah and Ierusalem, because of this their trespasse. And God sent Prophets among them to bring them againe vnto the Lord: and they made protestation a∣mong them, but they would not heare. Vers. 13. Woe vnto them: for they haue fled away from me: destruc∣tion shall be vpon them, because they haue transgressed against me: though I haue redeemed them, yet haue they spoken lyes against me. A reprehensiō.A Reprehension: for God doth most sharply inueigh against the Israelites, because that they haue both departed from him, and when as they fained that they would returne vnto him, that was done wholly in great hypocrisie and dissimulation of minde.Three things to be noted. Here therefore are three things to be noted: A most grieuous kind of re∣prehension or reprouing, the which this word (woe) declareth.1. A grieueus re∣buke. The punishment threatned vnto them by this (woe) namely, vastation, that is to say, laying of them waste,2. The punishmēt threatned thereby. and destruction of the whole countrie. The cause of this punishment, the which is here alleaged to be three-fold. One, for that they were manifestly departed from the lawe and worship of the true God,3. A three-fold cause of the same. and had forged vnto them∣selues other gods, and worshipped them: moreouer they had fol∣lowed another rule of life, then the law of God giuen them by Mo∣ses. And the Prophet vseth such an Hebrew word, the which shew∣eth the singular in constantnesse or vnstedfastnesse of this people a∣gainst God.1. Their falling away from the law of God. Nadedu. For suddenly and for a most light cause fell they away from God through their idolatries. This is one cause. Another cause is, because that they dealt vnfaithfully besides the couenant, name∣ly, made and set downe betweene God and them,2. Their breaking of the couenant betweene God and them. I will be thy God, and thou shalt be my people. And of this couenant renued more fullie to the faithfull in Christ Peter maketh mētion, to put them in mind that in life and conuersation they be answerable thereunto Epist. 1. cap. 2. ver. 9. where he sayth: But ye are a chosen generation, a royall Priesthood, an holie nation, a peculiar people, that ye should shew forth the vertues of him that hath called you out of darknes into his meruai∣lous light. The third cause,3. They lyed and dissembled with God, whē in their trou∣bles they called vpon him. for that when as they called vpon God in their afflictions, or troubles, and God deliuered them, and redee∣med
them from their enemies, they did this dissemblingly, and ly∣ing vnto God. For they fayned and made as if they worshipped the true God, when as notwithstanding they did nothing from their heart, and in true godlines and faith. Conferre with this place that of the Psalm. 78. vers. 36. where, after that Dauid had shewed before, that their fathers in their afflictions called vppon God, and sought him early, and acknowledged him to bee their strēgtth & their redeemer, he addeth: but they flattered him with their mouth, and dissembled with him with their gongue. But God, as Pla∣to sayth, is not a Sophister, neither is mocked, nor will be mocked, as Paul also telleth the Galathians cap. 6. ver. 7. where he sayth vn∣to them: Be ye not deceiued: God is not mocked: for whatsoeuer a man soweth, that shall he also reape. Vers. 14. And they haue not cried vnto mee with their hearts, when they howled vpon their beddes: they assemble themselues for corne and wine, and they rebel agaynst me. What it is in this place to speake lyes vn∣to God.A Making playne of the former sentence, what it is to speake lies vnto God. It is to call vpon God, with the mouth, and with wordes, and an outward sound or noyse, but not from the minde sincerely, or vprightly and truly: That which is the property of hy∣pocrites. This their crying therefore, for as much as it is without repentance and motion of the minde, God calleth an howling. For after the maner of howling dogges they doe indeed murmur and make a great noyse, but they prayed not. So prophane and wic∣ked Esau cried & sighed for the priuiledge of the birth-right stolen from him through his owne fault, but he repented not, as the wri∣ter vnto the Hebrewes witnesseth cap. 12. ver. 17. in these wordes: for yee know how that afterwards also, when he would haue inherited the blessing, hee was reiected: for he found no place to repentance, though he sought the blessing with teares. An amplifica∣tion of their former hypo∣crisie. When as they assemble themselues for corne, &c. In these words there is an amplification of their former hypocrisie and contempt or despising of God taken from the circumstance of things compa∣red together. For wine, corne, oyle, and other necessaries for this fleeting and brittle life they easily, willingly and continually assem∣ble together, and deliberate or take aduise by what meanes they may get these things for themselues. But touching the restoring of the worship of God not so much as one word spoken: nay more∣ouer
when they meete together for this purpose euen then doe they transgresse and rebell against God. For they aske these things which are the gifts of the true God, at the hands of their Idols. But Psal. 4. ver. 7. Dauid teacheth that the cōtrary vnto this is to be done, thas is to say, that he did a great deale more reioyse in God his fauor & assurance of his mercy & loue towards him, then the worldlings did or could doe for the enioying of their earthly commodities whatsoeuer. For (sayth he) thou hast giuen me more ioy of heart, then they haue had when their wheat and their wine did abound. Whereby appeareth, how shameles, stubborne, and manifest forgetfulnes of the power and maiestie of God raigned among the Israelites, who when as they diligently looked vnto their other matters and busi∣nes, this one thing yet had they no regarde of, the which appertai∣ned vnto the restoring of the true worship of God. Therefore they continued securely or carelesly in their sinnes. But first of all the kingdome of God is to be sought for, and not these earthly things, as Christ teacheth vs Mat. 6. vers. 33. when he sayth: Seeke ye first the kingdome of God, and the righteousnes thereof, and all these things shall be ministred vnto you. Vers. 15. Though I haue bound, and strengthened their arme, yet doe they imagine mischiefe against me. THis is an Antithesis, or setting downe of the contrarie vnto that which went before.God setteth his benefits against their vnthank∣fulnes. For God opposeth or matcheth against the former contempt of the Israelites touching his name, his bene∣fites, the which hee had bestowed vpon the Israelites. Hee hath bound their wounds, he hath strengthened their armes, and yet all this notwithstanding they rebell against God, for that vnthanke∣fulnes is more foule and shamefull the which blotteth out, and ma∣nifestly despiseth the fresh and continued benefites of God. And looke by how much the greater they are, so much the lesse excusa∣ble this ingratitude or vnthankfulnes is. And vnto such ingrati∣tude these Israelites were fallen, as is shewed in this place. As for the binding and strengthening of the armes of Israel, it is referred vnto those histories and times, when as God gaue vnto them strong kings, the which deliuered them out of the hands of their enemies, restored vnto them their olde boundes and borders, and finally re∣nued the auncient glory and renowme of that kingdome, such a one as was Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas king of Israell 2. King. 14. God
therefore forgetteth not his benefites towards vs, although we re∣member them not. Vers. 16. They returne, but not to the most high: they are like a deceitfull bowe: their princes shall fall by the sworde, for the rage of their tongues: this shall be their derision in the land of Egypt. The cōclusiō or issue of their contempt of God and his punishments.THe conclusion, both of the contempt of God proceeding from the nobles of Israel, and of the punishment to insue for this con∣tempt was this, that by no meanes they eyther returned before, or doe now returne vnto the true God, who in this place is termed The most high. Therefore these rebellious Nobles of Israel, although they were neuer so much admonished and chastened by God, re∣mayned yet still for all that Idolators turned from God, nay Athe∣ists, or godles persons: then the which impietie or vngodlines there is none greater. Finally, they liued like vnto a deceitful bow, which in shew seemeth to strike the enemie, but indeede woun∣deth or killeth him that shooteth therewith. So these Nobles see∣med in shew to defend the people from their enemies, to take or∣der for the ministring of law, to worship God, to carrie and haue a care of the common-wealth: but in trueth they spoyle the people, betray them to their enemies, maintayne Idolatrie, nourish strifes, and vnder pretences and shewes of doing for their good, robbe the people committed by God vnto them, and their trust. And to be short, they themselues ouerthrowe their owne common-wealth. And the like similitude doth Dauid vse against their fathers many yeares before Psalm 78. vers. 57. saying: They turned backe, and dealt falsly, like their fathers: they turned like a deceifull bowe. Their punish∣ment.The punishment of them shall be this. They shall fall by the sworde, and they shall stirre vp against themselues mutuall warres through their pride, and poysonednes of their tongues, and shall procure and forge vnto themselues their owne punishment and miserie. Therefore both their pride, and rage of their speech, their boasting, disdaine, and vaunting of their tongue shall destroy them. To conclude, they shall be a laughing stocke vnto the E∣gyptians their borderers whome they shall call to helpe them. After this manner then doth God punish vs with our owne hande, and, as I may so terme it, cutte our throates with our owne sword.
CAP. 8. Vers. 1. Set the trumpet to thy mouth: He shall come as an Eagle against the house of the Lord, because they haue transgressed my couenant, and trespassed against my law. A new sermon full of terror.THis is a new sermon full of terrour against all Israel, to the ende that at last they may be strooken with feare. And the people is reproued of most vngodly falling backe from the kingdome and priesthoode, the which were two especiall foundations and ho∣ly markes of seuering this people from other nations, because both of them did represent Christ the Messias that was for to come Psalm. 110. Two parts of this verse.This verse hath two partes: the one containeth the manner or order of denouncing or declaring of the iudgement of GOD the which was to come, to wit,1. The manner of declaring this iudgement. that the same should publikely bee shewed or proclaimed with a trump or trumpet, as it were by a Cryar or publike Herault. The second part contayneth the matter it selfe the which is to be declared, and to whom it must be declared.2. The matter to be declared, & to whome, to wit, vnto the people seuerally from the No∣bles & Priests. It is declared vnto the whole people from the Nobles alone, or from the Sacrificers or Priests. And he calleth the people the house and inheritance of God, because of the peculiar couenant of GOD made with the whole seede of Abraham, and Iacob, of whome were those tenne tribes. And this name carrieth with it a great emphasis, or vehe∣mencie & force, because that it is obiected vnto these same people thus honoured and aduanced by God, that they had contemned, nay cleane forsaken the lawe of GOD, and this peculiar coue∣nant. The thing it selfe here de∣clared is the iudgement of God against them.The thing it selfe which is declared, is the iudgement of God against them, and the same to come most speedlly, and to be ex∣ecuted vpon them most mightily, and with inuincible or vnouer∣comable power. So an Eagle excelleth among other foules both in swiftnes, and also in strength. The reason is added, because that this people had denied and forsaken God, who was so bounteous towards them, & had shamefully transgressed and rebelled against him, as is afterwards more largely shewed.
Vers. 2. (Israel shall crie vnto me, My God, we know thee.) Hypophora, or the answering of an obiection, what it is, see Amos cap 3. vers. 2.THis is the figure Hypophora, or the answering vnto an obie∣ction that might be made, wherby he taketh away from themal excuse or hope of auoyding and escaping of this iudgement, the which with the verse following is to be read by a Parenthesis, which is the inclosing of a sentence within two such halfe circles as this ()the one at the beginning and the other at the ending of the same, thereby signifiyng that if the sentence in such a manner inclosed, were left cleane out, yet were the sense ful and perfect notwithstan∣ding. If then they take exception and say. We will crie vnto thee, O Lord we haue knowen thee, we are thine Israel, wherefore these e∣uils shall not touch vs. God answereth, They shall indeede crie vnto me, they shall say these things vnto me. But for all that shall they not escape, nor be free from this my iudgement. Wherefore God by the figure Mimesis,What the fi∣gure Mimesis is, see Oseas cap 4. vers. 18. or imitating and following their speech hath expressed the words and hypocrisie of this people promising vnto themselues deliuerance from the miseries and punishments threatned vnto them. But in vaine do we promise vnto our selues deliuerance, when God denieth the same. Vers. 3. (Israel hath cast off the thing that is good: The enemie shall pursue him. The answere to the former obie∣ction with a reason of the same.THe answere vnto the obiection of the former verse, together with the reason of the same, Why those that doe crie vnto God, shall neuerthele not be deliuered, because al this their crying is hypocri∣tical or dissembled. A token whereof, and the same most certaine is, That this Israel who saith that he knoweth God, and confesseth him to be good, forsaketh him not withstanding, that is to say, de∣parteth from all partes of his duety, and of the will of God, hath de∣parted, and yet still continueth in the same rebellion. But sayth Paul, let him depart from all iniquitie, which calleth vpon the name of the Lord, that he may giue out proofe and tryall that he calleth vpon God earnestly, or in trueth, 2. Tim. 2. ver. 19. wherefore in as much as these Israelites are indeede most notorious hypocrites, and stubborne Rebels, they shall not escape the wrath and iudgements of God, how great shew soeuer they make of godlines. But theire∣nemie shall pursue them, and they shal haue experience and trial of
those iudgements of God, the which are foretolde them by the word of God. Vers. 4. They haue set vp a King, but not by me: they haue made Princes, and I knew it not: of their siluer and their golde haue they made them Idols: therefore shall they be destroyed. An explanatiō of the first vers. of this chapter.A Making more plaine of the first verse of this chapter, where it was said (They haue forsaken the couenant of God) for of this forsaking there are brought two examples, and both of them very shameful, wicked and horrible, & a most assured testimony or wit∣nesse of theyr desperate rebellion and stubbornnes against GOD. They fell away from the kingdome, the which God had set vp in the onely familie of Dauid representing Christ.1. They fell away from the king∣dome of Dauid For they them selues and not God, chose vnto themselues a King, to wit, Ieroboam the first, 1. King. 12. vers. 20. w3812 here we reade thus: And when all Israel had heard that Ieroboam was come againe, they sent, and called him vnto the assembly, and made him King ouer all Israel: none fol∣lowed the house of Dauid, but the tribe of Iudah onely. Whereupon the other kings that followed, were afterward after his example or∣dayned, and allowed, and kept among those ten tribes.  But if any man will obiect that which is 1. King. 11. vers. 11, and 29. that God ordayned Ieroboam to be king, and foretolde the same first vnto Salomon, and afterward to Ieroboam himselfe by his Prophet Ahi∣iah:  I answere, That it may appeare by the history of the creating of Ieroboam, that the people was ignorant of that which was foretold vnto Ieroboam by the Prophet Ahiah. Therefore of an only hatred and feare of Roboam (whose Treasurer or Receiuer Aduram this people had slaine) the ten tribes chose vnto themselues Ieroboam for their king, least they should bee without a Captaine to fight a∣gainst Roboam, the which these ten tribes that fell a way did fore∣see would come to passe otherwise. This is their falling away from the kingdome. 2. They fell away from the wor∣ship of God, & from the priest hood.Their second falling away is from the true worship of God, and from the Priesthood, and from the temple, in the which priest∣hood there was another most expresse and plaine figure of Christ to come. So then these men, whilest they departe and fall away from the Temple, the worship of God, and the priesthood orday∣ned by God at Ierusalem, so farre as in them lay, they depriued themselues both of Christ and all the blessings of GOD, which
through Christ pertayned vnto them,An amplifica∣tiō of this their second falling away. and finally from the coue∣nant it selfe of God. Furthermore this second falling away is am∣plified in this that they both most ingratefully or vnthankfully tur∣ned the benefites giuen vnto them of God, as gold and siluer, into the shame and reproach of God himselfe whilest they make calues thereof: and also in this that they make these Idols themselues, the which are but false Scarbugs, and shapes of things altogether foo∣lish, and vnbeseeming God. Wherefore God concludeth that it shall come passe, that those iudgements, the which he denounced or declared before, shall fall out vnto them, and that in such sorte, that these, two wayes vnfaithful and trecherous persons shal in the end be cut off and destroyed. Vers. 5. Thy calfe, O Samaria, hath cast thee off: mine anger is kindled against them: howe long will they bee without inno∣cencie? The figure Hy∣pophora, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. vers. 18.THe figure Hypophora, or the answering of an obiection, wherby he taketh away from these Israelitish Idolators the false shewe and colour of securitie or not fearing any danger, the which they imagined vnto themselues, to wit, that it should come to passe, that they should be defended of those their Calues.What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣is, see Amos cap. 5. vers 21. Answer Nay, these Calues, which Samaria (and by the figure Synecdoche this name of the head citie comprehendeth all the ten tribes) which Samaria, I say, had made vnto it selfe, and doth worship for gods, these Calues shal leaue and forsake Samaria. The reason is added, because the heauy displeasure and iust wrath of God shall pursue this people. And nothing can escape the hand of God Psalm. 139. Wherefore neither shall these Calues of golde defend this people giuen to I∣dolatrie. Finally the most iust cause of this anger of God is expres∣sed by an interrogation, or asking a question, to wit, because this people it selfe hath thus so long while giuen ouer both the seruice and worship of God, and also the care and regard of holines and in∣nocencie of life. For How long (saith the Lord) doe these not care for innocencie? Doubtles they haue had no regarde of it now these many ages. Wherefore God is worthily angry against them, and that most grieuously, so that he will punish them, and that nothing shall be safe and helpefull vnto them. For if God be against vs, who shall be for vs?
Ver. 6. For it came euen from Israel: The workman made it, there∣fore it is not God: but the Calfe of Samaria shall be broken in pieces. A complaine, amplifying the idolatrie of the Israelites by three places.A Ganaktêsis, that is, a complaint, by the which these Israelites worshipping of the Calues is amplified from three places. The first from the author. For that this kind of idolatrie is the proper and peculiar deuise of the Israelites themselues. For they inuented and deuised this kind of idolatrie in the desert or wildernesse Exod. 32. For albeit that the Egyptians did worship oxen and beasts,1. From the au∣thor of it, to wit, themselues yet they worshipped them not dead but aliue. But this people worshipped a dead Calfe, that is to say, represented in a golden image, & so con∣sequently a dead creature. Wherefore the idolatrie of the Israelites was more shameful then that of the Egyptians: and in this place it is truly sayd of them, that this kind of idolatrie was inuented by the Israelites, and was not shewed and taught thē from those nations whom they knew. Wherof it cōmeth to passe, that this their fault a∣gainst God is the more shameful, & their rebellion lesse excuseable. 2. From the ma∣ner of it, to wit, the art of the workman.The second place of amplifying this their sinne, is from the ma∣ner of the same, the which is most manifest. For the workman fra∣med, frameth, maketh, made that caluish Idoll. Therefore could they not be ignorant, by what meanes this new god was made. For they all saw when it was made. Wherfore by this the mind of these and of all other idolaters, appeareth to be the more blockish, who worship, and reuerence that thing for a God, that is, eternall, liuing, and giuing life vnto others, the which notwithstanding they see to be made with their eyes. 3. From the thing it selfe, and ex∣perience.The third place of this amplification is from the thing it selfe, and from experience. For this calfe which is worshipped of them, cannot be God: but it is only an image of a bruit and beastly crea∣ture eating grasse or hay, as the Psalmist speaketh of it Psal. 106. ver. 20. where he sayth: Thus they turned their glorie into the similitude of a bullock that eateth grasse. Therefore so much the more shame∣full is their idolatrie, who compare God, or the nature of God vnto such a thing, and doe suppose and iudge it to be any such like mat∣ter. Lastly, the proofe of this whole thing is here set downe, taken from the euent or falling out of the matter. For this Calfe of Sama∣ria, and God of the Israelites shall be broken into shards and pieces. By which words not only the vanitie of this idoll is shewed: but al∣so
the iudgement of God the which shall fall out vpon the same i∣doll, is declared: namely, that it shall come to passe, that it shall be broken in small pieces, as a brittle, earthly, and vaine matter. Vers. 7. For they haue sowen the winde, and they shall reape the whirl∣winde: it hath no stalke: the bud shall bring forth no meale: if so be it bring forth, the strangers shall deuoure it. Another am∣plification of their idolatrie.ANother amplification of the idolatrie of the Israelites by a simi∣litude, the which he taketh from husband men, when as they sowe and reape their fields. And this doth the Prophet set forth by a certaine Sarcasmos, or sharpe biting taunt and mocke. Two parts of this verse.And this verse hath two parts. The first containeth the amplifi∣cation of their idolatrie described before. The second, the punish∣ment of the same.1. The amplifying of their i∣dolatrie. So then their idolatrie is compared vnto a winde, and vnprofitable matter and vaine, the which notwithstanding in shewe carrieth a great pompe, buzzing, and noyse. So is idolatrie it selfe,2. The punishmēt of the same. 1. and all the labour, counsell, indeuour, hope, and expectation of idolaters in their gods. The which is proued to be true by the ef∣fects. For the thing it selfe sheweth idols to bee vaine things, yea hurtfull vnto those themselues which doe trust in them. For they doe reape of that their most bad sowing worse fruites also, that is to say, from the winde by themselues sowen they do gather a whirl∣winde, that is, they doe pull vpon themselues a tempest ouerthrow∣ing and destroying all things. For it is a thing most righteous and meete, that such as was their sowing, such also should be their crop and haruest either good or bad. So hereafter cap. 10. yer. 12. he sayth, That if they sowe vnto themselues in righteousnes, they shall reape after the measure of mercie. And therefore the Lord by Iere∣mie willeth the Iewes to breake vp their fallow ground, and not to sow among the thornes cap. 4. ver. 3. And contrariwise Prouer. 22. ver. 8. Salomō sheweth bad fruits to come of bad sowing, saying: He that soweth iniquitie, shal reape affliction, and the rod of his anger shal faile.  And therefore Eliphaz in Iob. cap. 4. ver. 8. sayth, As I haue seene, They that plow iniquitie and sowe wickednesse, reape the same. Neither maketh that of the Psalme 126. ver. 5.  They that sowe in teares, shall reape in ioy, any thing against this. For that tearefull sowing, or sow∣ing made in teares by the godly, was the seede of that spirituall ioy, which they reape afterwards, as comming and springing from true faith in God.
The second part of this verse containeth the threatnings of God against this idolatrie. And the same are most great and fearefull, the which doe open and make plaine the sentence going before. For they are answerable vnto the furious or mad counsels of these ido∣laters. Therefore they also shall sowe their fields: but because they did it without the feare of God, they shal gather nothing. For he la∣boureth & soweth in vaine, which calleth not vpon God, or which despiseth God. And these shall gather nothing, both because the crop shall deceiue their expectation or hope in the fields, and also when it is gathered in, it shall yeeld no meale: or els that meale which it doth yeeld, forraine and strange people shall deuoure, and the plowers, reapers, and generally the Israelites shall eate none of it. And this is one of the plagues among many other, the which God threatneth vnto the disobedient vnto his word and law Deut. 28. vers. 38. saying: Thou shalt carrie out much seede into the field, and shalt gather but little in: for the grashoppers shall destroy it. Ther∣fore no labour of ours can be happie and haue any good successe, if God be angrie with vs. Vers. 8. Israel is deuoured, now shall they be among the Gentiles as a vessell wherein is no pleasure. An amplisica∣tion of the for∣mer threat∣nings taken from the ef∣fects.AN amplification of the former threatnings taken from the most fearefull effects which shall follow of the same. And first of all, Israel himselfe shall be deuoured of the selfe same strangers, as also their haruest, that is to say, all their wealth shall be carried away by them, their cities shall be destroyed, and the people slaine. There∣fore vnder this kind of speaking is noted great miserie,  to the ende the Israelites might feele that same great punishment, earnestlie weigh it, and feare it. Secondly, they shall be cast out among the Gentiles, that is, the strangers themselues, as an vnprofitable and disliked vessell. The which is no doubt to bee vnderstood of their most hard banishment or captiuitie, in the which they were con∣temned of all people and nations. For the Assyrians being conque∣rors had no keepe nor care of preseruing the captiue Israelites, as had the Babylonians of the Iewes by them carried into Babylon, whom they preserued, and had in great price, as you may reade of Daniel and his fellowes Dan. 2. ver. 47. &c. whereas the Israelites reaped at the hands of their enemies such discourtesie, as the Psal. 137. maketh mention of: yea, and whereof the Iewes tasted also at
the besieging and taking of their citie, their enemies being stirred vp vnto this crueltie through the prouocation of the Edomites, al∣beit that afterwards in their captiuitie some of them through God his great mercie sped better. For herein the condition and case of the Israelites and Iewes was not all one, because these had not vt∣terly and altogether cast off the worship of God, as had the Israe∣lites. Vers. 9. For they are gone vp to Asshur, as a wilde asse caring alone for himselfe: Ephraim hath hired louers. A reason of their former punishment.A Rendring of a reason of the former punishments, least that the Israelites might complaine of so fearefull a iudgement of God. For he amplifieth their iniquitie, as he termeth it hereafter ver. 13. and sheweth that they haue vtterly cast away the helpe of God, & despised the same, that in their afflictions they might flee vnto men, and the same such as were idolaters, and couetous, and hauing care for none but for themselues. Therefore they had cleane forgotten the couenant of God, of the which the Prophet spake before cap. 5. ver. 1. and his promises, or els they thought them vaine, or despised them. So then in this place not only the distrust of the Israelites, but their falling away, and their desperate fleeing and departing from God is significantly described.  First, They went vp vnto the Assy∣rians: therefore they did it with great labour, seeking forraine and farre off helpe, and the same idolatrish: when as notwithstanding they had God present, and their helper at hand, if they had called vpon him,  and trusted vnto his couenant. Secondly, they fled vnto the Assyrian being as a wild asse, that is, a solitary beast, and conse∣quently fierce, cruell, and profitable onely for himselfe, and gaping after gaine. In these words, and vnder this similitude is painted out the both couetous, and also the cruell nature and disposition of the Assyrians, whom the Israelites called vnto them, when as notwith∣standing God, whom they had despised, was, and had been most manifest vnto them, and alwayes most mercifull. For this is the na∣ture of the wild asse, as appeareth by these places Iob. 38. ver. 8. Who hath set the wilde asse at libertie? or who hath loosed the bands of the wilde asse? And Iere. 2. ver. 24. the people for their stubbornnes and vnrulines are likened vnto a wilde asse, of whom he sayth that they are as a wilde asse, vsed to the wildernesse, that snuffeth vp the winde by occasion at her pleasure, who can turne her back? All they that seeke
her, will not wearie themselues, but will finde her in her moneth. And Dan. 5. ver. 21. it is reported, that Nabuchadnezzar, when he was dri∣uen from the companie of men, had his conuersation among the wilde asses. Last of al, it is here sayd of these Israelites, That they hired them with money, they had them not freely, but payed roundly for their helpe: but God requireth no reward for his benefites. Wherefore (as Iames counselleth) If any man lacke wisedome (or any other ne∣cessarie grace) let him aske of God, which giueth vnto all men liberal∣lie, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be giuen him. For God rather respecteth the inward sinceritie and puritie of a faithfull heart, then the offring of outward sacrifices Psalm. 51. Further, these Israelites call vnto them the Assyrians whom they loue, and whom the Assy∣rians loue not againe, so that, as it is Ezech. 16. ver. 33. this people of Israel committing fornication against God, besides the maner of all other harlots, doth her selfe giue a reward vnto her louers, and receiueth none of them: the which is a most plentifull witnesse of shameles lust, and of a common shameles harlot. The same thing falleth out to all those, which preferre the helpe of man before the helpe of God in their troubles and miseries. Vers. 10. Yet though they haue hired among the nations, nowe will I gather them, and they shall sorrowe a little, for the burden of the King, and the Princes. The punishmēt for their forsa∣king of God.A Punishment also shall pursue and followe after such sinne of forsaking God. Therefore it is shewed in this verse, that it shal come to passe. The repeating of the cause also carieth with it a ve∣hemencie or force, to wit, in that forsaking the true God and his helpe, the Israelites chose rather not onely to haue the Gentiles and their prophane and heathenish helpes blaspheming God: but also to hire them with rewarde, and with monie. And this punish∣ment is answerable vnto their sinne. The Israelites hire straungers, and gather them together: so shall they also be gathered together by God, and shall dwell as captiues by bandes and companies a∣mong their enemies. They hire them with monie, and charge themselues with tributes, that they may haue that King, to wit, the king of the Assyrians for their helper: so shall God greatly burden and charge these selfe same Israelites, because of this king of Assy∣ria, and for the burdens and tributes, the which they shall pay vnto him. So then, they haue begunne a little to burden themselues, but
God shall load them more heauily: the which is to be vnderstoode by the figure Aposiopêsis,Aposiopesis, or the holding backe of some∣thing, is when as we leaue some thing vn∣spoken, vpon some affection or sorow, the which may o∣therwise be ea∣sily supplied & vnderstoode. or holding backe of some thing that was to be spoken, and the same appeareth and is gathered by the fense and meaning of this place. Looke therefore after what maner we doe sinne and offend against God, after the same for the most part are we punished by God. Vers. 11. Because Ephraim hath made many altars to sinne, his al∣tars shall be to sinne. LIke as the Prophet hath alreadie described the rebellion of the Israelites against God, in seeking helpe of men that were Ido∣latours, and also the punishment which should therefore insue: so doth he now recite the shamefull & desperate idolatrie of the same persons in the casting off of the true worship of God (such as he himselfe hath prescribed or appointed vnto thē) & in forging vnto themselues a false worship; the which their sinne no lesse also then was their former, shall in the ende feele and haue no lesse punish∣ments. And first of all is set downe the idolatrie it selfe,2 Parts of this verse. and the fu∣rious or excessiue and outragious increase of the same among the Israelites: secondly, the punishment the which shall immediately and worthily insue thereupon.1 The bedlam i∣dolatrie of the Israelites. Their idolatrie was herein, for that they had builded vp strange altars, that is, such as God disallowed, to wit, in Dan and Beth el: their increase and outrage, for that they had multiplied them,2 The punish∣ment of the same. 1 2 and daily also did increase them, and this to that end, that they might depart the further from the true worship of God (the which was exercised at Ierusalem according vnto the appointment of the law of God) and sinne the more grieuously a∣gainst God. There followed this sinne a most iust punishment, namely this, that these altars were an occasion vnto them of grea∣ter rebellion against God, and of more grieuous transgression and more hainous sinne against God. Therefore they were vnto them a snare and a trappe, from whence they could not vnwinde and get out themselues: no not vnder Oseas their last king, who began not∣withstanding some little reformation of this idolatrie, but it came in the end to none effect. 2. King. 17. Now this punishment of God is most iust, that the same thing which men doe frame and seeke out vnto themselues, wittingly & willingly, as an occasion of sinne, should urne and be vnto them an occasion of sinne also, as Dauid Psal. 109. ver. 17. testifieth that it falleth out vnto the wicked, say∣ing:
As he loued cursing, so shall it come vnto him, and as he loued not blessing, so shall it be farre from him. The like hath Salomon, Prov. 29. ver. 6. where he saith: In the transgression of an euill man is his snare (meaning that his owne sinne intangleth him:) but the righteous doth sing and reioyce. It is therefore a punishment most meete and iust, that men should eate the beanes that they themselues haue threshed, that is, that they should be beaten with their owne rod. Vers. 12. I haue written to them the great things of my law: but they were counted as a strange thing. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer wickednes, taken from the bounteousnes of God towardes them.AN amplification of the former wickednes from the bounte∣ousnes of God towardes them, whereby they are made vtterly vnexcusable. For they can not excuse themselues with any pretense or cloake of ignorance, because that God had abundantly or plen∣tifully instructed them concerning the lawfull way and manner of worshipping him. For he himselfe had giuen and written them his law touching this whole matter, Exod. 31. and had deliuered vno them precepts, in the which they were throughly taught concer∣ning their dutie toward God, as appeareth Psal. 19.119. and in the Psal. 103. ver. 7. Dauid affirmed of God,The dignitie of the law increa∣sed by the Pro∣phet. The he made his waies knowne vnto Moses, and his workes vnto the children of Israel. And he increaseth the dignitie of this lawe and doctrine, for as much as he saith that in it were precepts either pretious (the great things of his law), such namely as were neuer giuen vnto any other nation: or, as others translate it (most large and plentifull) as which doe containe, prescribe,It is not called the kings high way, but the kings lawe. But the sense is all one. For after a prouerbiall kind of speaking it is called the kings lawe, as the high way is called the kings way, be∣cause like vnto it, the law of God is plaine without crookes and turnings. and euidently comprehende and teach all the points and parts of ordering and leading of our life holily. In the first sense Moses extolleth the dignitie of the people of Israel a∣boue all other nations, Deuter. 4. ver. 8. in these words: What na∣tion is so great, that hath ordinances and lawes so righteous, as all this law which I set before you this day? In the latter sense of the largen and plentifulnes of the precepts in it conteined, this law is called perfect Psal. 19. also by Iames it is called the Kings high way, cap. 2. ver. 8. His wordes be these: But if ye fulfill the royall (or the Kings) law, according to the Scripture, which saith, Thou shalt loue thy neigh∣bour as thy selfe, ye doe well. But what insued of all this, that God gaue them so plaine, pretious, plentifull, or perfect a law? The Isra∣elites counted this so holy, plentifull, and perfect lawe for a strange doctrine, and nothing appertaining vnto them, and despising it vt∣terly,
they vngodly framed vnto themselues another way of wor∣shipping of God. The which is a token of extreame contempt of God. Vers. 13. They sacrifice flesh for the sacrifices of mine offrings, and eate it: but the Lord accepteth them not: nowe will he remember their iniquitie, and visit their sinnes: they shall returne to Egypt. THe consequence, the which conteineth both the condemning of this whole forged and ordeined worship besides and against the Law of God: and also a most grieuous punishment of those which follow that worship.1 The condem∣ning of this their kinde of worship. As for the condemnation, it is contai∣ned herein, because that God neither liketh nor alloweth the sa∣crificers themselues, nor their sacrifices, albeit they bring vnto God neuer so great, vowed, and free-will gifts, as it were ouer and aboue the prescript or appointment of the law, and doe eate the flesh for a token of great ioy of minde, and of their readie good-will to God ward, whiles they sacrifice after this manner: or as a signe of true thanksgiuing, the which in this sort they yeeld vnto God. For the flesh of the sacrifices was eaten in the sacrifices of thanksgiuing. All these things, be they set out with neuer so gay coloured shewes doth God refuse Esai. 1. and also 66. And why so I pray you? be∣cause these things are done besides his word, albeit vnder such pre∣tense, that he, which is God, be worshipped. So Paul 2. Colos. con∣demneth all wil-worship. 2 The punishmēt for the same.Now the punishment shall follow, to wit, God beeing offended with these sacrifices of theirs (the which are so many sacriledges or robbings of him of his honour) shall in the end remember and call to minde all their iniquities, wickednes, and sinnes, that he may pu∣nish them all at once. He will therefore punish this contempt, God will visit their sinnes, and be auenged on them, in so much that as they before-times in their afflictions were wont to flee vnto idola∣trous people: so also when as they shall be thus punished by God, they shall run vnto the Egyptians, who themselues are idolatours also,The Israelites destroyed for seeking help at Egypt. so stubborne shall they be in contemning or despising the helpe of God. And yet notwithstanding was this one chiefe cause of the destruction of this people: for trusting vnto the aydes of the Egyptians, they rebelled against the Assyrians. Herewith the As∣syrians being prouoked, did afterwards leade away these ten tribes captiue into Assyria, and helde them in miserable captiuitie and
bondage. So then, in the end there is a most heauie and sharpe pu∣nishment for idolatrie, with howe faire a pretense so euer it be cloa∣ked, that we should alwaies flee from it. Vers. 14. For Israel hath forgotten his maker, an buildeth Tem∣ples, and Iudah hath increased strong cities: but I will send fire vp∣on his cities, and it shall deuoure palaces thereof. An amplifica∣tion both of their sinne, and also of their punishment.AN amplification both of the sinne of the Israelites, and also of their punishment. The amplification is two-folde. First, from the greatnes of the wickednes. For the Israelites had forgotten their Creatour and maker. The which is a thing voide of all naturall af∣fection, and against the very sense and feeling of nature,  and there∣fore vnexcusable, Rom. 1. The selfe same euen at this day, agreeth and serueth against all idolatours. Secondly, they corrupted their brethren, to wit, the Iewes, by their example.  For hereunto apper∣taineth that, which in this place is said of the Iewes. And in such sort did the Israelites infect the Iewes with this their poyson, that the Iewes did nowe rather trust vnto their cities and townes, after the examples of the Israelites, then vnto God. And therefore they make hast in building of them, as if they should be a more sure de∣fence for them against the rushing in of their enemies, then the co∣uenant and promises of God himselfe. For thus they saw the Israe∣lites building vp palaces and fortresses for a defence for themselues, who nowe did not esteeme or make any accounts of the couenant of God. So infectious, doubtlesse, an euill is the sinne of idolatrie, that it by and by taketh hold vpon, polluteth, & defileth the neigh∣bour nations, otherwise not giuen vnto that sinne 2. King. 17. The amplify∣ing of their pu∣nishment.The punishment which shall insue vpon this sinne, is here also amplified. For it shall not onely be vpon the Israelites; but it shall reach also vnto the Iewes, who suffered themselues to be corrup∣ted by the Israelites. For their strong cities and those palaces so la∣boriously & diligently built vp, shall be consumed with fire, as well as the munitions or fortresses of the Israelites. Whereby appeareth, that vnto whomesoeuer the infection of idolatrous superstition doth come, vnto the same also in the end shall the punishment of the same sinne come, to the end that we should haue the more di∣ligent & earnest watch ouer our selues to keepe vs from the same, a thing whereof the holy Scripture doth warne vs, 1. Ioh. 5.
CAP. 9. Vers. 1. Reioyce not, O Israel, for ioy as other people: for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God: thou hast loued a reward vpon euery corne floore. The figure Hy∣pophora. What it is, see Amos, cap 5. ver. 21.THis is the figure Hypophora, or answering of an obiection that might be made, wherewith God answeareth the foolish securi∣tie or carelesnes of the Israelites, because that vnder Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas king of Israel, and some other kings that follow∣ed him, they inioyed peace, power, and strength, and a tolerable e∣state of things. And therefore they hoped that they should escape vnpunished; and made no great reckoning of the former threat∣nings, or stoode in any great feare of them. And this is a thing the which hypocrites are wont to doe, by the present reasonable estate of earthly thinges, and onely for the time, prosperous vnto them, faining God also to be appeased with them, and therefore sleeping in their sinnes. God therefore denieth that ioy of the Israelites to be true ioy, or to be such, as for the which they should flatter them, selues, or reioyce in such sort as they doe, the which enioy sounde ioy. Neither is the sentence once by God pronounced against thē, therefore reuolted or called backe, because that for a little brunt and breath of time, they seeme vnto themselues happie, and to be at rest and quiet. Therefore he saith: Reioyce not, O Israel, as other people, and as they doe, who haue true ioy of minde from God. For thou art not free from punishment. And surely when as the vngod∣ly cry peace, peace, then vtter destruction hangeth ouer their heads. 1. Thess. 5. ver. 3. And therefore Ierem. cap. 8. ver. 11. the Lord com∣plaineth of those false prophets which haue beguiled his people with sweete words and promises of peace, hardening them there∣by in their sinne, where he saith: They haue healed the hurt of the daughter of my people, with sweete words, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace. And this in the end doe the deceiued people finde, and confesse in the same chap. ver. 15. saying: We looke for peace, but no good came, and for a time of health, and behold troubles. Further there is in this verse here set downe a reason by way of answering of the former obiection,A reason, why they shall tast of this punish∣ment. why they shall feele that same punishment, the which was threatned vnto them, to wit, be∣cause that both before this time they had committed fornication
with idols: and doe now also goe on whoring after them, commit∣ting the same vpon euery corne floore, for most filthy reward, that is, the reward of an harlot being drawen and allured thereunto. For they had their idols, and their altars in euery corne floore, and in e∣uery wine presse, in the which they did offer sacrifice vnto those their gods, that plenty and store of corne, wine, and other things necessary for the life of man, might be giuen vnto them. The which was and is playnely the reward of an harlot, when as a rewarde is giuen vnto idols, that is, vnto spiritual harlots. And all these things indeede are both promised and also giuen by the onely and true God, and not by idols, whatsoeuer idolators do wickedly think and contend to the contrary. For saith Paul 1. Cor. 8. vers. 6. There is one God, which is the father, of whom are all things. And so is Dauid perswaded, that howsoeuer or whence soeuer others looke to ob∣tain their desires and things necessary for this life, he shall by the lo∣uing fauour and countenance of God towards him haue more ioye and comfort of heart, and peace of conscience, then the vngodly in all their aboundance, vnto whomsoeuer they impute the same the which commeth onely from the goodnes and bounty of God Psalm. 4. vers. 6, 7. Many say, who will shew vs any good, but Lord lift vp the light of thy countenance vpon vs. Thou hast giuen me more ioy of heart, then they haue had, when their wheate and wine did abound. Vers 2. The floore and the wine presse shall not feede them, and the new wine shall fayle in her. A confirmatiō of the former the eatning ta∣ken from the effects.A Confirmation of the former threatning and answere concer∣ning the punishment of GOD being not remoued from their necks. And it is taken from the effects the which the Israelites themselues shall shortly feele, and the which effects are a reuenge, and the same most righteous of the filthy whoredome and Idolatry by them committed in all corne floores, and wine presses. What then are those effects? Answere.The effects. Neither shall the corne nourish them, nor the wine giue vnto them drinke. For there shall be none. Both the haruest and the vintage shall deceiue them. They shall ga∣ther no fruits, but as Aggeus threatneth to those of his time, The heauens ouer them shall stay themselues from dewe, and the earth shall stay her selfe from fruit cap 1. vers. 10. And as hee sayth in the se∣cond chapter and the seuenteenth vers. When one came to an heape of twenty measures, there were but tenne: when one came to the wine
presse to drawe out fifty vessels out of the presse, there were but twenty. Or if they gather any fruits, yet shall they not bee fed with them, either for that those fruits shall putrifie and rotte, or els the vertue or power of nourishing shall be taken from the meates by God, as is like wise threatned by God in Aggeus cap. 1. vers. 6. Ye haue sowen much (saith he) but bring in little: ye eate, but haue not enough: ye drink▪ but ye are not filled: ye cloth you, but ye be not warm: and he that earneth wages putteth the wages into a broken bagge. And to this effect God threatneth them by Moses Deut. 28 vers. 38. Thou shalt carrie much corne into the field, and shalt gather but little in: for the grashoppers shall destoy it. Or finally, it shall be taken away by the enemies, as was threatned before cap. 8. vers. 7. So then God doth chastice vs after diuers manners. Vers. 3. They will not dwell in the Lordes land, but Ephraim will returne to Egypt, and they will eate vncleane thinges in Asshur. The punishmēt amplified from three places.AN amplification of the punishment to ensue vpon these idola∣tors, and the same taken from three places. First, from their ba∣nishment or captiuity, and the same most lamentable. For the Israelites shaldwel no longer in that land wherin then they were,1. From their cap¦tiuitie. to wit, the land of God, and the blessed land: a land giuen them by God for a signe of their adoption, and his peculiar couenant with them, but shal be cast forth, and led away into captiuity. The secōd place of this amplification is frō the place & people among whom the Israelites shall be in banishment and captiuitie,2. From the place of their capti∣uitie. that is to say, a∣mong the Egyptians & Assyrians, their most mortall and deadly e∣nemies: yea and moreouer they shall voluntarily and of their owne accord, goe into captiuitie and banishment vnto those their ene∣mies the Egyptians in especiall, by reason of the intollerable mi∣series the which they shall feele in their natiue soyle and countrey, and in that land the which sometimes was most blessed and hap∣pie. The third place is from the great want of all things, or hun∣ger, the which shal then sal out vnto them, and from their vngodli∣nes.3. From their vn∣godlines, and want of all things. For there they shall eate meates polluted or vncleane, and such as were of old forbibden them, being both driuen therunto by necessitie: and also of contempt or despising of God. Whereof the godly Iewes indeede, had alwaies an especiall regarde, so that they would not suffer themselues by any meanes to bee drawen to the
eating of such things as by the law of God were vnlawfull, as may appeare by the example of Peter Act. 10.14. who being an hungry and falling into a trance, whiles they made ready for him, and ha∣uing all maner of meates offered vnto his viewe, and being by a voyce from heauen willed to kill and eate, maketh answere, Not so, Lord: for I haue neuer eaten any thing that is polluted or vncleane. Vers. 4. They shall not offer wine to the Lord, neither shall their sacrifices be pleasant vnto him: but they shall bee vnto them as the bread of mourners: all that eat therof, shall be polluted: for their bread for their soules shall not come into the house of the Lord. The figure Hy∣pophora, what it is, see Amos cap. . ver. 21.THe figure Hypophora, or answering an obiection that might be made. For if the Israelites should take exception and say: We neuerthe les wil sacrifice vnto God in our captiuity in Egypt and in As∣syria (as hypocrites are wont to imagine vnto themselues any thing to perswade themselues withall that they shall escape the iudge∣ments of God, and haue a most certain and assured way to appease him be he neuer so angry with them) the Prophet maketh answere after two sortes: They shall not offer wine, that is to say, they shal not be able then to sacrifice and make offering vnto God, when as they shall be in captiuity: nay albeit they do offer and sacrifice, yet not∣withstanding God will not there accept of their offerings and sa∣crifices as welcome and pleasant vnto him. For they shall be vn∣to him as the meates of those that mourne, and of those that haue touched a dead bodie, and by this meanes haue polluted or defiled themselues: which kinde of meate is neuer brought into the temple of the Lord, as being indeede polluted, or vncleane, and not wel∣come vnto God Deut. 12. For those that had to doe about dead bodies, or touched them either wittingly, or vnwittingly, as the preparers of their funerals, and dealers about their burials, and such others which medled with or about them, were for a time by the law of God held for separated persons, and vncleane, and whatso∣euer they touched all that time, or did eate, or carry was reckoned vncleane, polluted and defiled, as we read Agge. 2. vers. 14. in these words, Then sayd Haggai, If a polluted person touch any of these, shal it be vncleane? and the Priests answered, it shall be vncleane. And in Numb. cap. 19. vers. 11. this is made more plaine, where we find it written thus, He that toucheth the dead bodie of any man shall bee
vncleane euen seuen dayes. And vers. 16. Also whosoeuer toucheth one that is slaine with a sworde in the field, or a dead person, or a bone of a dead man, or a graue, shall be vncleane seuen daies, This is the ve∣ry same which is said here (Their sacrifices shall be as the meate of those that mourne) the which is eaten whilest they are in preparing and setting forth of the dead body, neither can it bee brought into the temples of God, to wit, because it is polluted, and forbidden to be offered. Therefore not whatsoeuer any men offer vnto God, is acceptable vnto him, but onely that which the godly offer through Christ. Vers. 5. What will ye doe then in the solemne day, and in the day of the feast of the Lord? THe figure Epiphonema, or Acclamation, whereby in reciting of the sacrifices and solemne feast dayes (the which were especi∣ally dedicated or appointed for the doing of sacrifices) he beway∣leth the miserable case of the Israelites in that their captiuitie.The figure E∣piphonema, what it is, see Ionas cap. 2. vers. 9. And this he taketh fitly by the verse before going. For he sheweth that these shal be most sorrowful in those dayes especially, because that liuing in banishment they shall neither haue place allowed them for the celebrating or keeping of those solemnities, neither monie wherewithall to make those feastes in those dayes (as they were wont to do before, and as God also had commanded the same to be done) and to recreate themselues before the Lord, or else before their Idols, so short shall their things bee, and so hard shall it goe with them, and so miserable shal they thēselues be. Concerning the commandement of God for the keeping of these feastes and so∣lemnities, reade Numb. 10. and Deut. 12. Further, the calling to remembrance of our happy and ioyfull estate the which sometimes we had, vseth to be sorrowfull, especially in those places, dayes and circumstances, the which doe a fresh stirre vp and renue vnto vs the memorie and remembrance of that our former case and con∣dition. For then doe our miseries and cares, and teares waxe sore as it were againe by this putting vs in minde of our former lost e∣state. And this doth the most grieuous and doubled sorrow of the Godly shew, at the sight of their dumbe and still harps hanged vp vpon the trees in Babylon, as it is in the Psalm. 137. And from thence springeth that same prophane or heathenish saying of pro∣phane or heathenish men, When as thou art not hee whom thou
wast, what cause is there why thou shouldest desire at all to bee, that is to say, to liue? For we ought to be, and desire to be, so long as God doth not call vs from that place, wherein he hath set vs: al∣beit that the remembrance of our happines either lost, or changed, be neuer so hard and grieuous vnto vs. Vers. 6. For loe they are gone from destruction: but Egypt shall ga∣ther them vp, and Memphis shall burie them: the nettle shall possesse the pleasant places of their siluer, and the thorne shall bee in their tabernacles. An amplifica∣tion of their miserie, taken from three places.AN amplification of this miserie of the Israelites, the which they should suffer in their exile or captiuitie, yea euen in Egypt, vnto which place they did flee of their owne accord, as it were vnto a most safe and sure Sancturie. And all these things are described or set out so lamentable, both because they should in such manner come to passe: and also for that these hypocriticall persons, and such as had been now so long vsed and acquainted with idolatrie, could hard and scarcely be moued vnto repentance by the earnest threatnings of the true God. But the place of this amplification is threefold. The first from the greatnes of this affliction to come. For in that countrey of Egypt,1. Frō the great∣nes of the af∣fliction. and in that captiuity or banishment they shall not liue, but because of miseries and want they shall goe away there, that is, they shall die and perish, and fayle, and that in such heapes, the citie Memphis (into the which many Israelites after the destruction of Ierusalem had betaken themselues) should bury and put into one graue a great number of them at an heape, and not e∣uery one of them as they dyed, seuerally and in a graue by them∣selues alone. Wherefore the miscries of the Israelites in those pla∣ces must needes be great, where they came to their end and dyed in such number and multitude. Conferre this place with the 43. chap. ter of Ieremie. The second degree of this amplification is from the place it selfe, to wit, Egypt, and Memphis. For this countrey,2 From the coun¦trie and place whither they should goe. and this citie in the same did the Israelites especially make choice of, as most strong, safe, and healthsom fortresses, in the which mourning after Ierusalem was destroyed, they might liue quietlie and healthfully. But in as much as this refuge was expresly for∣bidden them by God, it was accursed. And therefore when as the people of Israel as it is Num. 14. ver. 3. would haue gone back again into Egypt, this fact marueilously displeased God, as also Ieremie
44. vers. 7. he sheweth that the going of the people of that time downe into that land was the cause of their destruction, for that by committing grieuous idolatrie in that place, they prouoked the hea∣uie wrath of God against them. For thus doth Ieremie say vnto them: Thus sayth the Lorde of hostes, the God of Israel, wherefore commit ye this great euill against your soules, to cut off from you man and woman, childe and suckling, and leaue you none to remaine? In that ye prouoke me to wrath with the workes of your hands, burning in∣cense vnto other gods in the land of Egypt whither ye be gone to dwell, that ye might bring destruction vnto your selues, and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all nations of the earth. No maruaile therefore if such a fleeing and couert fell out there very hardly vn∣to them, and that their dwelling was noysome and infectious vnto them. For when as God doth curse the Assyrians, and our aydes because of our distrust in him: In the midst of Tybur (as one sayth) we finde Sardinia, that is, in places most pleasant the most cruel pe∣stilence doth destroy vs, and speedy and vnlooked for diseases do there ouertake vs.3. From the ad∣ioints. The third place of this amplification is from the adioynts. They themselues shall not onely be in this sorte misera∣ble: but also their owne proper natiue soyle and countrey shall be turned into a wildernes. For both nettles, and thornes, and briars, and bushes shall possesse their kings palaces, and gorgeous gilded houses, and it shall possesse them as it were by inheritance, that is to say, for euer. By which words no doubt the Prophet cutteth off and taketh away from them all hope of returning and enioying a∣gayine of those their palaces. Vers. 7. The daies of visitation are come: the daies of recompence are come: Israel shall know it: the prophet is a foole: the spiri∣tuall man is madde for the multitude of thine iniquitie: there∣fore the hatred is great. The conclusion of the former threatning & of the causes of the same.THe conclusion and shutting vp of the whole former threatning, & of the causes thereof. Of the threatning, because that those iudgments of God shal in the end come to passe, & the same also most lamentable and heauie. Wherefore that time is called a day of visitation, that is, of great and extreame miserie, the which the Israelites shall feele. For so is the worde (visitation) taken in this place, as it is also Sophon. 1. ver. 14. where he saith: The great day of the Lord is neere: it is neere, and hasteth greatly, euen the voyce of the
day of the Lord: the strong man shall cry there bitterly. So is it like∣wise taken Ierem. 49. ver. 8. in these words: Flee, ye inhabitants of Dedan (they are turned backe, and haue consulted to dwell) for I haue brought the destruction of Edom vpon him, and the time of his visita∣tion. Thus then shall these thinges fall out vnto them most iustly. For they are a iust reward and recompence of their vngodlines, in∣iquitie and idolatrie, and finally of their contempt of God, whose true Prophets and doctrine these men refused, and entirely embra∣ced the false and lying prophets. Therefore the conclusion and summe of the causes of this wrath of God against the Israelites, is comprehended in these words, The daies of recompence, the which causes by way of explanatiō, but yet briefly, are afterwards here set down: but they are first recalled al of them vnto their proper & true fountaine, to wit, for that they despising the worde of God, fol∣lowed the deuises of men, and the authors of those deuises, name∣ly the false prophets.Titles in this place giuen vnto the false prophets by the holy Ghost. And these false prophets doth the Spirite of God describe by sundrie epithets or titles, to the ende they may be the more hated of all the godly, what outwarde shew so euer they doe pretende or make of doctrine and holinesse. He calleth them therefore in regard of their doctrine, fooles and madde men, name∣ly as being such, who doe faine that they heare and see the thinges the which they neither see nor heare. Such a one in our time was G. Postellus, the canker of Christianitie; such at this day are the Papists, and those which at the first sought the foundations of po∣pish doctrine out of the apparitions or appearings of the deade, and of reuelations made vnto them, and the speakings of idols vnto them. Last of all he calleth them, full of wind, that is, of vani∣tie and lying. And as touching their manners, what these false pro∣phets were, and are, may casily be vnderstoode, and it is also set downe in the verse following, when as they are described to be the haters and persecutors of all good men, and such as are in deede godly. Last of all, the prophet vseth a certaine briefnesse and short∣nesse of speech, and comprehending in fewe words those causes of the iudgements of God against them, saith: That all these former iudgements of God against the Israelites, are worthily put in exe∣cutio, because of the multitude of their iniquities: and espe∣cially because of the hatred of the said Israelites, both within them selues, and one against another, and also against all the godly, and such as truely worship God. For they hated them with more then mortal or deadely hatred, as the verse following sheweth. For he
which hateth the godly, hateth God him selfe. Vers. 8. The watchman of Ephraim should be with my God: but the prophet is the snare of a fouler in all his waies, and hatred in the house of his God. A confirmatiō of both the sinnes of the Is∣raelites, taken frō the effects.A Confirmation of both the sinnes, that is to say, both of the multitude of their iniquities, and vngodlines of the Israelites, and also of their hatred against all the godly. And it is taken from the effects and examples, the which were euery where seene in that kingdome and people. And first of all it hereby appeareth, that all the Israelites were notoriously wicked and vngodly, in that whole Ephraim, that is to say, the whole nation it selfe, and not onely one or two, watcheth, searcheth, inquireth, if any doe cleaue vnto the true God, and his pure doctrine, that they may afterwards perse∣cute and vexe them. The which no doubt is a signe of notorious & vnrecouerable rebellion and iniquitie against God, and of a com∣mon and generall conspiring among them selues against the god∣ly. The selfe same thing is done in this our time in Spaine by the In∣quisitors, whome others call Inquinators of the Romish faith. For they generally doe slay the godly. As for the hatred of the said Is∣raelites and false prophets, especially against all holy men, there is hereof brought a notable proofe in this place, for that the selfe same false prophets, doe not onely manifestly and openly persecute them, who professe them selues to be godly: but doe more ouer lay snares for the godly, that they may discouer, and catch them, if they any where lie hidden: and are the continuall foulers, hunters, and watchers of the godly, to doe them some harme, as the 10. Psalme vers. 7. describeth such maner of persons, where it saith of the op∣pressour, His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraude: vnder his tongue is mischiefe and iniquitie. He lieth in waite in the village: in the secret places doth he murther the innocent: his eyes are bent a∣gainst the poore. For these false prophets here spoken of doe so ex∣ceedingly hate the godly, that they vtter and bewray their hatred against the true faithfull openly in the middes of the chappell of their idols, and in the Temple of their gods, whiles they either ex∣communicate them from their companie, or els rayle agains them like madde men, as appeareth in the 7. chapter of Amos, or else doe strike them also, as Zidkiiah did the Prophet Micaiah 1. King. 22. ver. 24. So at this day doe the Popes and bishops of Rome, and their flatterers the Monkes, handle those that are in deede godly,
and such as doe professe the sound doctrine of Christ, so that our age could not possibly be more liuely described. Vers. 9. They are deepely set: they are corrupt as in the daies of Gi∣beah: therefore he will remember their iniquitie: he will visite their sinnes. An amplifica∣tion of their former iniqui∣tie.AN amplification of the iniquitie of the Israelites described be∣fore, the which is taken from the degree or qualitie, the which may and is wont to be most notorious and shamefull in that kinde. And God dealeth in such sort with them, and with all stubborne sinners, whome in the ende he most sharpely punisheth, that they may vnderstande that they are worthily payde with such a punish∣ment: because that vnto their most grieuous sinnes there are due also most grieuous paines and torments. 2. Parts of this verse.But this verse hath two parts; one wherein he doth paint out this grieuousnes of their hainous offences: the other, wherein hee also describeth the punishment the which shall insue and followe for the same.1 A painting out of the grie∣uousnes of their iniquitie. As for that same highest degree of the iniquitie of the Israelites, it is both by the thing it selfe, and also by an example. By the thing it selfe, for it is said to haue bin a most deepe and most aduised rebellion and corruption:2 The punishmēt for the same. they set them selues into a most deepe corruption. So then, whatsoeuer mischiefe, and howe great soeuer may deuised or done by most wicked persons, is effected & fulfilled by these men:1 The greatnes of their iniqui∣tie. how farre soeuer the vngodlines of men is wont to spread it selfe abroade, so farre stretcheth the wickednes of these men: how deepely soeuer the most desperate that can be, doe plunge themselues into all notorious wickednes; so deepely haue these set themselues into all hainous offences. Finally, this verbe (Schachat) signifieth vtterly and throughly to corrupt a man him∣selfe, vnto the which verbe when as there is added gnamiku,Schachat gna∣miku. that is, (to pearse deepely) it appeareth, with howe great vehemencie and force of words is shewed the exceeding great either depth or height, vnto the which in the ende the obstinate and wilfull doe either descend or ascend. And that is likewise declared by an ex∣ample, the which of all other was the most foule and filthie, to wit, when as in the middes of the people of God, one whole citie com∣mitted adulterie against their brother, and the same a Leuite, yea and moreouer their guest beside. Reade the storie Iudg. 19. of the Leuites wife most shamefully abused by the beastly Gibeo∣nites,
in reuenge of the which villanous act, insued that most la∣mentable and bloudie battell, which there at large is mentioned. The second part of this verse doeth declare the punishment, which was to insue of so great abundance and breaking in of wic∣kednes,The punishmēt of the same. as it were of a floud or water ouerflowing all places. God will remember their iniquitie. The reason is, because God is Iudge of the world. For if he remember the sinnes of vnfaithfull and vn∣beleeuing persons, howe much more will he call to remembrance the sinnes of the faithfull. Yea, (and he will punish this iniquitie.) For this iniquitie is a most grieuous sinne,The sinne of the Gibeonites in most shame∣full abusing the Leuites concu∣bine. as are those like there committed by the Israelites, wherof mention is made in this place, and therefore such as doe prouoke the wrath of God against them, and are to be punished. For against such wickednes the wrath of God is reuealed from heauen, as against all vngodlines, and vnrighte∣ousnes of men, which withhold the truth in vnrighteousnes, as Paul speaketh 1. Rom. vers. 18. And for such things cōmeth the wrath of God vpon the children of disobedience Eph. cap. 5. ver. 6. Wherefore Dauid willeth the worldly rich puffed vp with prosperitie, to be∣ware of this punishment, Psal. 73. ver. 27. when he saith: For loe, they that withdraw themselues from thee, shall perish: thou destroyest all them that goe a whoring from thee. Vers. 10. I found Israel like grapes in the wildernes, I sawe your fa∣thers as the first ripe in the figge tree at her first time: but they went to Baal-peor, and separated themselues vnto that shame, and their abominations were according to their louers. An other am∣plification of the former ini∣quitie. What a Meta∣phor is, see A∣mos, cap. 4.12.AN other amplification of the same iniquitie of the Israelites, and of all others, which fall away from the true worship of God vnto idolatrie. And this is taken from things compared together: For God compareth his benefits bestowed vpon them, with their rebellion and stubbornnesse. But here the metaphors of the wordes are to be marked,2. Parts of this verse. the which are not onely pearles garnishing the sentence; but doe also explane or make plaine, and set forth the thing it selfe very notably,1 A rehearsall of Gods bene∣fits. which God casteth them in the teeth withall. This verse therefore hath two parts. First, a rehearsall of the be∣nefites of God:2 The disobedi∣ence of the Is∣raelites. and secondly, the stubbornnes and disobedience of the Israelites, euen from their infancie, and when as at the first they began of God to be chosen for his people, and were in a most de∣sert,
place, and as yet in a poore and afflicted estate and condition. The benefite of God is three-fold. First, God chose their Elders,  that is to say, God vouchsafed the first fathers of this people, to wit, the twelue tribes, his adoption, before other people, of his owne grace, and that freely, and not for any merite or deseruing of theirs. The second, He loued them entirely, and so exceedingly,  as the wayfa∣ring man being wearie doth the grapes, and the first ripe of the figs, the which he liketh well of when he findeth them in the way.  The third benefite, whereby is described the force and the vehement af∣fectiō also of this loue of God towards the Israelites, in these words, He chose them when as they were in the desert, and destitute or voyde of all things, fugitiues, poore, and lying open vnto al iniuries. These are the benefites of God towards this people. 2. Their disobe∣dience.But what was the minde of this people, what was on the other side their obedience? None at all, but their necke and their rebel∣lion was vntameable: yea, and that from the very first beginnings of their adoption, when as men notwithstanding, which haue re∣ceiued a benefite at the hands of men, are wont at the first time of their benefites bestowed vpon them, to bee thankfull, obedient, teachable, and finally dutifull vnto those their benefactors and well doers. But these Israelites rebelled by and by in Beel peor: separa∣ted themselues from God: preferred before the true God a most beastly Idoll carrying the shape of the secret parts of a man. Last of all, they alwayes from that time, and continually according vnto their owne pleasure increased and not amended that their idola∣trie, and rebellion. This is the iniquitie of the Israelites. Concerning this their ancient idolatrie with that beastly Idoll, there is mention Numb. 25. ver. 3. in these words: And Israel coupled himselfe to Baal peor: wherefore the wrath of the Lord was kindled against Israel. And Psal. 106. ver. 28. They ioyned themselues also vnto Baal-peor, and did eate the offrings of the dead. Vers. 11. Ephraim their glorie shall flee away like a bird: from the birth, and from the wombe, and from the conception. A threatning of Gods iudge∣ment against their rebellion.A Threatning of the iudgements of God, and the same most grie∣uous, because of their rebellion described before. And briefly here in this place is foretold the destruction or ouerthrow of the whole nation: and afterwards answere is made vnto diuers obie∣ctions, which were wont to bee brought by the Idolaters, or Israe∣lites.
The rooting out or destruction of the nation is contained in this verse,The rooting out of the na∣tion. The glorie of Israel shall flee away, as birds are wont to flee away out of their cages. And this word (shall flee away) importeth thus much: shall vanish away, shall vtterly perish, shall be no more at all. So Dauid Psal. 90. ver. 9. speaketh of the swift vanishing away of the yeares of man: For all our dayes are past in thine anger: wee haue spent our yeares as a thought. Againe, Psal. 102. ver. 3.11. For my dayes are consumed like smoke, & my bones are burnt like an herth. My dayes are like a shadowe that fadeth, and I am withered like grasse. In deede all the outward glorie and brauerie of man doth perish at the last, & whatsoeuer in the Scripture is called grasse, doth wither, as Peter speaketh Epist. 1 cap. 1. ver. 24. All flesh is grasse, and all the glorie of man is as the flower of grasse. The grasse withereth, and the flower falleth away: but in this place there is a greater threatning de∣scribed. And this appeareth by these words following: euen from the birth, from the wombe, and from conception. For in these words is a going vp as it were by degrees, & also an amplification of this pu∣nishment & destruction. For it shall be with his beginning, middle, and end. It shall therefore be perfect, & not alone begun, or else in some one part of it onely. Further, by (glorie) I vnderstand in this place the sonnes or issue of the Israelites.What is vn∣derstood by (glorie) in this place. For euy sonne is called the glorie or honor of his father. And therefore Dauid Psal. 127. ver. 4.5. accounteth the store of them for a singular blessing, whereof a man ought to reioyce, & not to be ashamed, when he sayth: As are the arrowes in the hand of the strong man: so are the children of youth. Blessed is the man that hath his quiuerfull of them: for they shall not be ashamed, when they speake with their enemies in the gates. And Sa∣lomon Pro. 17. ver. 6. sayth: Childrens children are the crowne of the elders: and the glorie of the children are their fathers. And so is this word glorie here to be expoūded by the verse that followeth. There were no doubt many notable things in the Israelites, so farre foorth as they were the seed of Abrahā: but this same encreasing & main∣taining of the nation by the sonnes succeeding their fathers, was an especiall meanes of the preseruing of the couenant of God among them, nay in the world it self, the which questionles is to be accoū∣ted to haue been the singular glorie of this nation. For by this meanes our Lord Iesus Christ was borne of them. Vers. 12. Though they bring vp their children, yet will I depriue them from being men: yea, woe to them, when I depart from them.
The figure Hy∣pophora, or an∣swering of an obiection What this fi∣gure is, see A∣mos cap. . ver. 21.THe figure Hypophora, or answering an obiection, whereby God answereth a certaine obiection of the Israelites, refuting and despising these threatnings of God, to wit, that their children and issue shall not be destroyed in such sort. For they will nourish and bring vp their children. But the Lord answereth, I will kill and vtterly destroy the selfe same your children or sonnes, the which you shall bring vp, so that there shall not any remaine of your twelue tribes, and nation. The reason is set downe, because your e∣state shall bee in euery respect most miserable, when as I shall bee angrie with you because of your sinnes. Therefore when as I shall depart from you for this cause, and shall not protect or defend you any longer with my fauour, hand, and power, your children shall be destroyed, that there shall not any more afterward be any nation or bodie of a people of them, albeit that some of them may remaine and be lest aliue. For the anger of God is the fountaine of all cala∣mities and miseries, as his good will towards vs through Christ, is the welspring of all good things. So Dauid confesseth Psal. 4. ver. 6.7.The text of these quotatiōs are not here set downe, because that they haue been often be∣fore alleaged to like purpose. that whencesoeuer the wicked & vngodly looke to receiue their hope good, he is perswaded that the light of God his countenance towards his elect, shall throughly furnish them with all heauenly and spirituall ioy and comfort, and consequently with all other things requisite and needfull for the behoofe of this life, like as Psal. 30. ver. 7. he also acknowledgeth all his prosperitie to stand by the strength of the Lord. Woe therefore be vnto them, with whom the Lord God is angrie. Vers. 13. Ephraim, as I sawe, is as a tree in Tyrus planted in a cot∣tage: but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murtherer. Another obie∣ction of the hy∣pocrites.ANother answere to another obiection of theirs, wherewith he beateth backe another exception of the same hypocrites: name∣ly, that the killing and rooting out of their children shall not be so easie a thing to be performed. For this kingdome of ours (say they) is so strong and well fenced, if the bounds and borders thereof bee considered, and especially of the tribe of Ephraim: as that most noble citie Tyrus is strong, the which was neere and a neighbour vnto them. God answereth, albeit as they suppose,God his answer to the former obiection. nay in the iudge∣ment of all men, this countrie of the Israelies bee as safe, as is any the most strongest and most fenced citie safe in the iudgement of men: yet shall her children neuerthelesse be slaine and destroyed. For they themselues shall bring forth their children vnto this de∣struction.
And this may bee vnderstood to haue been brought to passe two maner of wayes: namely, either whiles the fathers sent foorth their children vnto battailes, so that afterwards they were slaine: or whiles the fathers themselues being now captiues did bring foorth their children, and shewed them vnto their enemies, asking for them to put them vnto death. The which latter interpre∣tation I doe rather follow and embrace. Vers. 14. O Lord, giue them, what thou wilt giue them: giue them a barren wombe, and drie breasts. The figure E∣piphonema, or acclamatio. What this fi∣gure is, see Io∣nas cap. 2. ver. 9THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamatio, whereby the Prophet doth very affectionatly and pitifully bewaile the estate of this peo∣ple, euen by making prayer vnto God, that they themselues being both idolaters and hypocrites, whom so great a punishment did touch, might be warned, and repent from their wickednesse. It is therefore an earnest prayer of the Prophet, and full of affection and pitie toward his nation. For the Prophets were not voyd of all affe∣ction and pitie, albeit that boldly and without feare, according vn∣to the charge committed vnto them by God, they did declare and vtter the iudgements of God vnto their people.Reade both these places, which are to long here to set downe. And I for my part doe not thinke this to be a curse here in this place, as is that which is contained in the Psal. 109. from the 6. verse, and certain other there following, where the Prophet Dauid wisheth destruction vnto his enemies. And as is that of Ieremie cap. 18. ver. 19. to the end of the chapter, where he prayeth against his aduersaries: but I take it ra∣ther to bee a prayer wherein the Prophet desireth to haue so great miserie and punishment to bee turned from this people. And this shall so be, if God himselfe doe rather lay or send vnfruitfulnes and barrennes vpon their wiues: and not if he giue their children to be slaine and miserably murthered of the cruell enemies: That which before God threatned should come to passe. Wherfore he doth not pray against the punishment of so wicked men, although they bee his countrie men: but that they may rather bee punished by God himselfe, then by men, because, as Dauid sayd, it is more tollerable & farre better to fall into the hands of God, then into the hands of men that are our enemies. And therefore when he had the choyce giuen him for a punishment of his sinne, in causing the people to be numbred, either of seuen yeres famine, or three moneths fleeing before his enemies, or of three dayes pestilence, he answered and
sayd: I am in a marueilous straite: let vs fall now into the hand of the Lord: (for his mercies are great) and let me not fall into the hand of man. Sam. 2. cap. 24. ver. 14. Therefore sayth the Prophet, Lord, giue what thou wilt giue, that is to say, Chasten them both as thou hast threatned concerning the destroying of their children, and also as it is meete that it should be done: but roote thou out, O Lord, that nation thy selfe, by laying barrennes vpon their mothers, and not that the Israelites should fall into the hands of their most cruell e∣nemies, of whom thou hast spoken. For this is done to the laugh∣ing to scorne of thine owne selfe, when as prophane, or wicked and heathen men doe see themselues to haue gotten the vpper hand, and doe destroy thy Church. Vers. 15. All their wickednesse is in Gilgal: for there do I hate them: for the wickednesse of their inuentions I will cast them out of mine house: I will loue them no more: all their princes are rebels. Two parts of this verse.A Garnishing and setting out of the matter, wherein he both re∣peateth the cause of the former threatning, and also the threat∣ning it selfe. Therefore this verse hath two parts. One,1. The cause of the former threatning re∣peated. wherein the cause is set downe againe. The other, wherein the same threatning is repeated, but now more plainly, & by parts. For here he expresly threatneth the princes: in the verse following, the rest of the peo∣ple: vnto all which he threatneth vtter destruction.2. The threat∣ning it selfe re∣peated. And as for the cause of so great a iudgement of God against all men, and at that time against the Israelites, is, and alwayes hath been chiefly such i∣niquitie as reigned euery where in Gilead or Galaad both in the ci∣tie,  and also in the whole countrie without any punishment.Idolatrie. Crueltie. Now this iniquitie was of two sorts, to wit, idolatrie and crueltie, as ap∣peareth both by the bookes of the Kings, and also by this Prophet before cap. 6. ver. 8.4. ver. 15. And hereafter cap. 12. ver. 11. Where∣fore it is sayd, That the whole sinne or wickednesse of this people was in Gilead. For there more, then in the other prouinces of the kingdom of Israel, abounded and reigned both these iniquities, and euery kind of hainous offences as well against God, as against men. Whereas therefore it is here sayd, That all the wickednesse was in Gi∣lead, this must be vnderstood comparatiuely. And thus much of the cause of the punishments. And now are repeated the punishments themselues,The hatred of God. the which were hereupon to insue. And the first is, Hatred of God. For God ha∣teth
all those which worke iniquitie and liue wickedly, or vngod∣ly Psal. 5. Secondly, the abandoning and casting off of the Israelites. For he threatneth that he will driue this part of the people out of his house, that is, out of his inheritance, familie, and people. Like as when God did acknowledge them for his, and did loue them, they were part of his familie, and of God his peculiar people. Therefore in this place I take the word (house) not for the Temple, not for the worship of God, whereof they are sayd that they shall be depriued, but for the inheritance, priuiledge and familie, the which God had peculiarly adopted or chosen vnto himselfe in the feede of Abra∣ham, and had promised vnto him. For when he calleth him out of Vr of the Chaldees, he saith thus vnto him Gen. 12. ver. 2. I will make of thee a great nation, and I will blesse thee, and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing. I will also blesse them that blesse thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. And againe cap. 15. ver. 1. it is sayd vnto him in a vision: Feare not Abraham, I am thy buckler, and thine exceeding gre re∣ward. And Exod. 19. ver. 6. God sayth thus of the children of Israel: Ye shall be vnto me also a kingdome of Priests, and an holie nation. To this purpose reade Psal. 81. So we Christians, which through Christ haue succeeded or come into the place of their familie, are called a holie nation, a people whom God claimeth vnto himselfe as his proper and peculiar people. And therefore 1. Pet. 2. ver. 9. Peter sayth vnto the faithfull: Ye are a chosen generation, a royall priest∣hood, an holie nation, a peculiar people, &c. And Tit. 2. ver. 14. Paul tea∣cheth, that Christ gaue himselfe for vs that he might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to be a peculiar people vnto himselfe, zealous of good workes. Now both these punishments, namely, that GOD should hate them, and also cast them off, are iustly threatned vnto them, because that they can neuer bee loued of God, who doe liue vngodly, nor yet bee by him acknowledged for his. And therefore Paul. 2. Tim. 2. ver. 19. sayth: The foundation of God remaineth sure, & hath this seale, the Lord knoweth who are his, and, let euery one that calleth on the name of Christ, depart from iniquitie. And these effects are the first, and immediat, which doe proceede or spring from our sinnes, The hatred of God against vs, and his casting of vs off. After these followeth affliction, and our destruction. The applying of the punish∣ments first of all vnto the princes.But now in the last branch of this verse God applieth those two punishments, and the same indeede most grieuous, vnto the prin∣ces of the Israelites first of all, whom he denieth that he can loue
hereafter, because that they aboue the rest were rebels, and disobe∣dient. And it is a thing most meet, that those which hurt others with their example, before whom they ought to shine in holines of life, should first feele the punishment of this their transgression, and so consequently the hatred of God, and their casting off from him, and in the end, most heauie punishments. Vers. 16. Ephraim is smitten: their roote is dried vp: they can bring no fruite: yea, though they bring foorth, yet will I slay euen the dearest of their bodie. The applying of the same pu∣nishments vnto the whole peo∣ple.IN the second place the selfe same effects of sinnes are applied vn∣to the whole people, that they should not thinke themselues free from punishment, because they followed the example of their prin∣ces. So when a blind man either choseth a blind man for his guide, or followeth him, both of thē worthilie fall into the ditch, as Christ teacheth Matth. 15. ver. 14. when he sayth of the Scribes and Phari∣ses: Let them alone: they bee the blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind leade the blinde, both shall fall into the ditch. But God now dea∣ling with the people, doth not onely rehearse his hatred against them, and the casting of them off: but also expresseth the punish∣ment it selfe, and the affliction, wherewith he will punish them: be∣cause that the common people are of a more grosse and dull wit, the which is to be stirred vp with the feeling it selfe of the punish∣ments. The punishment is here the same which was before: but it is more distinctly declared, that it may the more easilie be cōceiued euen of the people, albeit neuer so rude and grosse. So then the punishment to come is first of all set downe generally in these words, Ephraim shall be smitten by God. Secondly, by way of making the matter more plaine, there is added what maner of punishment it shall be, The roote of them shall wither: They shall bring foorth no fruite, that is to say, the nation it selfe shall leaue no issue at all: nay it shall be put out, and vtterly destroyed. Yea, if there be some borne of them, how diligently soeuer they bee kept by their parents, ten∣derly brought vp, and loued and looked vnto by them, GOD not∣withstanding shall destroy those that are borne, or their sonnes, whom they shall beget and bring vp, that they be not any more one nation gathered together, seuered from other people, and one bodie. See before ver. 12.
Vers. 17. My God will cast them away: because they did not obey him: and they shall wander among the nations. The conclusion confirming the former threat∣nings.THe conclusion, by the which all the former things are confir∣med, namely both the casting off of this people, and also their most miserable estate. God shall despise, and hold for forsaken the Israelites, that is to say, those ten tribe, because as hee sayd hee will cast them forth of his family, and race them out of his couenant. Therefore those which shall remaine of them, before they be vtter∣ly destroyed, shal be vagabonds, or wanderers too and fro among the heathen, and Idolators. The reason of this so great punishment of this people is, because this people obeied not God, that is to say, obeied not his commaundements, which they vnderstood not. What then is there at this day to be hoped for or rather to be fea∣red of the rebellious world the which casteth off Christ, or falleth a∣way from his Gospel, wee doe easily vnderstand by the frmer threatnings, and examples of these Israelites: nay we haue experi∣ence by reason of our owne sinnes. For in a manner all Christen∣dome is now already destroyed by the Turkes for the same offen∣ces, that is to say, idolatrie and cruelty. CAP. 10. Vers. 1. Israel is an empty vine, yet hath it brought forth fruit vn∣to it selfe, and according vnto the multitude of the fruit thereof he hath increased the Altars: according to the goodnes of their land they haue made fayre images. This chap. albe it that in many poynts it agree with the for∣mer, yet hath  somthing pe∣ciar and pre∣per, vnto it selfeALthough this chapter do meruailously well agree with the for∣mer, as the sermons of the Prophets haue been like one vnto an other, euen as were the maners of the corrupted people alwayes the same, so also is one and the same doctrine of repentance often to be repeated and to be beaten into their heads, as Paul Philip. 3. vers. 1. witnesseth, that he is not ashamed, or that it doth not grieue him to write the same things vnto them, and for you (sayth he) it is a sure thing. Yet hath this chapter his certaine peculiar argument or contents diuers from that before going, namely, for that here the aydes the which the Israelites thought to be most sure and safe vn∣to them, are threatned to be taken from them, to wit, their Idols,
and their kings. And moreouer the Prophet here in this chapter doth also declare vnto this people the same destruction for their i∣dolatrie, and forsaking of the true God.Often admo∣nishments for one and the same thing are not in vaine in God his iudge∣ment & pur∣pose, howsoeuer men may think the contrary. Neither are they in vaine so often admonished or warned of the selfe same thing. For God by this meanes maketh them inexcusable, and sheweth how great his mercy and patience is euen towards men that are most obsti∣nate and stubborne. And last of al we do learne by this example, how hardly and scarcely, and almost not at al they are roused vp and drawen from their vices, the which haue once giuen ouer them selues vnto them, especially from idols, so farre doubtles haue they swallowed down the bayte of this poyson, that they cannot after∣wards be rid of it, and cast it out of their mouth againe. Now this verse and it which followeth, doe containe the causes of God his iudgement, the which shal be declared afterward. The summe of the wickednes of these Israe∣lites.As for this present verse it setteth downe the summe of their wickednes, that is, their vnappeased and mad minde, and earnestnes of this people neuer satisfied in worshipping of Idols. The which thing we see euen at this day to bee in the popish Idolators. For they make themselues vtterly vnapt to be taught of GOD, and e∣stranged from him, that they may wholly serue their Idols. And questionles no man can at once and together obey or serue God and Satan. For as Christ sayth Mat. 6. vers. 24. No man can serue two masters: for either he shall hate the one, and loue the other, or else hee shall leane to the one and despise the other.Israel an emp∣ty vine. Wherefore Israel, that is to say, the whole nation and kingdome of the ten tribes is here cal∣led an empty vine, as namely the which did not now bear any fruit acceptable vnto God Isai 5. But if it brought forth any, it brought it forth liking to themselues onely, and agreeable to their idolatrie. Therefore albeit that this people were as a vine, diligently dressed of God, yet it bringeth no solace or comfort vnto God, that is, vnto their vine dresser and husbandman: but all the workes and fruites of this people doe serue themselues onely, and the Idolatry and re∣ligion which they had forged and inuented. A proofe of the vnthankeful∣nes of this peo∣ple.The proofe of the great ingratitude or vnthankfulnes of this people followeth. For as they abound with wealth, fruits, and all kinde of good things, so doe they multiply their Idol temples and altars, and appoynt for their images diuers worship and seruice, costly, chargeable and gorgeous, and do sacrifice vnto them sump∣tuously, according vnto the abundance and store of the good things, which they receiue from the true God. So then the Israe∣lites
bestow nothing vpon the true God: but all vpon themselue and their Idols, which Israelites were notwithstanding a vine plan∣ted, plowed, and increased by God and not by Idols. Vers. 2. Their heart is deuided: now shall they be found faultie: he shall breake downe their altars: he shall destroy their images. AN increasing of the former idolatrie, for that they doe not wor∣ship, and haue worshipped those false gods onely outwardly with giftes and rewardes,An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer Idolatry. but also with their heart and whole mind. In a word, they were wholly how great and whatsoeuer they were, meere and filthy idolators both in body, and also in minde, both inwardly, and also outwardly. But this sentence maketh nothing for this, that they should not be thought to sinne, which cleaue vnto Idols only with their bodies, and in outward shewe: but by this phrase or kinde of speaking God sheweth that the Israelites were fully and wholly worshippers of Idols. But as for those, which de∣nie themselues to be idolators, if they serue Idols onely with their bodies, let them heare Paul Rom. 10. vers. 10. With the heart man beleeueth vnto righteousnes, and with the mouth confession is made vn∣to saluation. For he teacheth that both are required, that is to say, both the minde and the bodie, to serue God aright or well: And that worthely: for God is the maker of them both in vs. Thus then the Israelites bestowed not onely their outward goods vpon their Idols: but also their minde and heart. Whereupon nowe follo∣weth the most iust sentence of God against them, whereby they are first pronounced guiltie: and secondly to be punished, as this their wickednes deserueth. Therefore, sayth God, These are faul∣tie, or guilty, and that in such sorte and maner, as the most wicked of∣fenders are wont to be guiltie. For thus much doth the word Asch∣mah signifie.Aschmah. The faultines or guiltines goeth before the punish∣ment. For none are punished by God, but such as are first in trueth found guilty in themselues, and proued by GOD so to bee. The which is true, and to be vnderstoode both of actuall and also of o∣riginal sinne. For all infants are guilty in Adam, as they are also ac∣counted, as in their roote:All infants guilty. afterwards there followeth them as a pu∣nishment for this guiltines the corruption and deprauation or ma∣king ill of their nature They are therefore guilty: and consequent∣ly to be punished. And first of all the things themselues shall bee punished by the which both all men doe sinne, and haue sinned,
and also the Israelites, so vngodly, wherein they doe place so sure and strong an ayde: and secondly, they themselues, shall be cha∣stised by God. The things themselues, by the which the Israelites offended God, are these altars and Images: in the which also they put their trust. Therefore both their altars and their images shall be destroied by God. And this thing came to passe partly when as Iosias the king of Iudah brake down the altars of the Israelites, and partly when as the people themselues were wholly carried away into captiuitie 2. King. 17.God shall be∣head their al∣tars. And whereas it is sayd that God shall breake downe or rather behead their altars, this hath a greater em∣phasis or force, and is spoken to strike the more shame into them. For it is likely that these Altars must haue had their crownes, and proud pearching vp pillers, the which God threatneth that he wil throw downe and breake, that afterward they may appeare may∣med and curtold of that proud head and ornament. The which was done both by Iosias, and also before by the Assyrians. Vers. 3. For now they shall say, we haue no King, because we feared not the Lord: and what should a King doe to vs? What the fi∣gure Mimesis is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18.A Making of the matter more plaine, wherby God by the figure Mimesis, or imitating and taking vpon him their speech, doth represent or shewe the notorious wantonnes of this people, and their retchles and vnpunished licentiousnes or ouer much libertie in running commonly vnto all kinde of wickednes, to the end that his iudgements, albeit neuer so heauy against this people may seem the more iust. First of all therefore he describeth that their vnpu∣nished and vnbrideled boldnes to commit any euill whatsoeuer, and imitateth or followeth and taketh vpon him their words. Their words were, We haue no King, that can keepe vs vnder: he only hath so much power and authority ouer vs,The bold words of the vnruly people. as we do yeeld vnto him, and will and are contented that hee shall haue ouer vs. We feared not the Lord: What therefore may stay vs now from the executing and putting in practise of all kind of wickednes and hay∣nous offences freely, and according vnto our owne hearts lust and pleasure? Doubtles nothing. Now these were the speeches of the people, by the which is pointed out notorious and desperate lewd∣nes of men, like vnto that iudge in the parable recited by our Saui∣our Luk. 18. vers. 2. of whom he reporteth, That he feared not God,
neither reuerenced man:Anarchie, or such an estate where there is no King, nor go¦uernour, or be∣ing there, gouer¦neth not, is the mother of all lewdnes and loosenes of life. also their anarchie or disordered life vnder no rule nor gouernment, the which is wont to bee most hurtfull, and not only the companion, but also the nurse and mother of all enormitie and malapertnes. And therefore it is so often repeated in the booke of Iudges, that such and such most outragious of∣fences raigned and were committed in the land, because there was no King in Israel, as among the rest Iudg. 19. vers. 1. we read thus: Also in those dayes when there was no King in Israel, a certaine Le∣uite dwelt on the side of mount Ephraim, and tooke to wife a Concu∣bine out of Beth-lehem Iudah. And his Concubine playd the whore there, and went away from him, &c. So likewise cap. 21. ver. 25. after the setting downe of the great disorder of the Beniamites in stea∣ling away the maidens at the dauncing in Shiloh, there is added as the cause: In those dayes there was no king in Israel, but euery man did that which was good in his eyes. For we are held backe as it were with a bit or bridle from the committing of euill, either with the feare of God or terror of men: which, when as they are either none at all, or broken in sunder by the violence and sway of sinnes rush∣ing in, there must needes be a most broad window set open vnto all lewdnes and iniquitie. The which vseth there to be done, where∣soeuer anarchi or want of gouernement raigneth. Wherefore Pe∣ter 1. epist. cap. 2. vers. 17. counselleth very well, That we both feare God, and also honor the King, that we may liue godly. And finally, that is a notable saying of Chrysostome, That it were better that there be some king among men,Chrysostome. be hee neuer so bad, then to haue no King at all. And this was at that time the most miserable e∣state of the Ifraelites, as appeareth. And this came to passe among them hereupon, for that hee which was the stronger got the King∣dome: and for that Kings were not chosen among them after a∣ny lawfull maner and by due voyces, but each thrust out & mur∣thered other by armes & ciuil wars, and did intrude or thrust them∣selues into that same sacred and holy dignity. And therefore they ruled onely according vnto the pleasure and appoyntment of the people, the which they doe, that raigne by violence, and not by right, and therefore they doe not that which is beseeming them, and appertaineth vnto the duety of a King.
Vers. 4. They haue spoken wordes, swearing falsly in making a couenant: thus iudgement groweth as wormewood in the fur∣rowes of the field. An amplifica∣tion of their vn ru boldne de∣scribed before.AN amplification of the malapert boldnes described before, and the same also raigning commonly among the people. It is ta∣ken from the effects, the which are alwayes wont to followe a∣uarchi or want of gouernement (that is, where no feare of God, nor of the King, that is, a man doth restraine vs from euill) And this verse hath two partes, one, wherein these effects are recited:Two parts of this verse. The other, wherein the punishment that should follow; is descri∣bed. As for the effectes of Anarchie,1. The effects of Anarchie. all the euils that followe the same, are not here recited: but only two, which are especiall and most grieuous ones,2. The punishmēt following the same. and the which doe drawe after them infinite others. Of the which one is, That all things then ouerflow with periuries among men, and first of all in priuate contractes and af∣faires. So then these vse swearing,1. Swearing and periurie. when as they deale for any thing priuately within themselues, yea and adding great execrati∣on or cursing thereunto, as it were giuing themselues vnto the di∣uell, or praying God to execute his iudgements and plagues vpon them if they performe not their promises, and such like. For there are diuers kindes of swearing, as you may reade Mat. 26 vers. 72, 74. in the fact of Peter denying his master first by simple affirmati∣on, then by an oth, and thirdly by cursing and banning of himself. Yet doe they in those cases also forsweare themselues, neither doe they keepe their fayth, nor performe their promises.Publike periu∣rie. The other euill is, that they vse those periuries in publike couenants and bar∣gainings, when as they make them with other nations: so that they keepe not their faith and promise made by oth, neither pri∣uately, nor publikely: but are in all poynts and cases wicked, ha∣ted of God and men, periured persons, faithles, and couenant brea∣kers. That such vnfaithfull and trothles dealing raigneth both in Anarchie or where there is no gouernour, & also in that state where the people beare al the rule, as wel the histories do testifie, as especi∣ally Zenophon lib. de Repub. Atheniens. And experiēce it self taught the same among the Israelites, when as within themselues they kept not faith either publiely, or priuatly, nor yet kept it with other na∣tions, as with the Assyrians for example. Whereupon they procu∣red vnappeasable wars with them, against themselues, in the which in the end they vtterly perished.
Now the other part of this verse containeth the punishment to come, to wit, the iudgement of God against them, which shall be spread so farre, that it shall appeare both at home and abroad, and vpon their fieldes, yea and also vpon the furrowes and ridges of their fields shall it growe: but as wormewoode, namely because it shall be vnto them most bitter and heauie. For I referre the worde (iudgement) in this place,Iudgement. vnto those great punishments, where∣with God in the ende was auenged on that their wantonnes, Athe∣isme or godlesnes, Anarchie, and periuries, yea and with the which he doth punish them euen at this day: the which punishments God in this place pronounceth that they shall on euery side flowe and rush in vpon the Israelites, and that being most bitter, as is the herb Rue, or wormewoode. And that this sentence of God is most iust, appeareth hereafter in this selfe same chapter ver. 13. Vers. 5. The inhabitants of Samaria shall feare, because of the calfe of Beth auen: for the people thereof shall mourne ouer it: and the Chemarims thereof, that reioyced on it for the glorie thereof, be∣cause it is departed from it. The first am∣plification of the punishmēt.THe first amplification or explanation and making plaine of the punishment. For as he described the wickednes of the Israelites by partes: so doeth he also the punishment hanging ouer their heads: that by both these meanes these idolatours might be moo∣ued, although they were obstinate or stiffe necked, and be called backe vnto repentance of minde, if any way it may be. Further, God threatneth that the same hope which they propounded or set before them selues, as their last anchor and refuge, shall be taken from them, to wit, their idols, on whome they trusted, as their gods that should defend and keepe them. And here is liuely, and by way of amplification described, how great a frightment of heartes, and trembling of minde shall followe hereupon in this whole people: whereby is gathered, that all sorts of men, and all degrees of this people put the hope of life and of their deliuerance in their idols at that time.All the Israe∣lites at that time hoped for deiuerance at their idols. For when as all shall mourne, lament, and be dismayde for the calues of Beth-auen, that is, of Beth-el, that should be taken from them, it is vndoubtedly true, that all did trust in them. And first of all, and aboue all the rest, the inhabitants of Samaria doe feare, that is, of the heade citie of the whole kingdome. What then, shall the citizens of lesse fortified and fenced cities, and the dwel∣lers
in townes doe? how shall they tremble? I expound (The inha∣bitant of Samaria) to be spoken by an emphasis, or vehemencie, to giue them to vnderstand, that others then must much more feare. Secondly, after the Samaritans, all they shall mourne which are the people of these heyfers (for so in contempt he calleth the calues, heyfers: like as to signifie his lothing and abhorring of the same, he calleth Beth-el, that is, the house of God, Beth-auen, that is, the house of iniquitie) The people then of these heyfer buddes are the citizens of Dan and Beth-el, cities, in the which these calues were placed. Last of all, the priests of these calues shall mourne ex∣ceedingly, as who by the ouerthrowing of them loose the stay and maintenance of their life and liuing. And these Priestes are called Camarim or Chemarims, either because they did weare blacke ap∣parell,Chemarims. or else because they were al gathered together and dwelling in cloisters, like vnto our monkes: or else because with loud voyce they did yell out hymnes vnto their gods in their idol-temples. Which three points are euidently seene in the popish monkes, and doe very fitly agree vnto them. Vers. 6. It (or he) shall be also brought to Asshur for a present vnto king Iareb (or to the king that defendeth) Ephraim shall receiue shame, and Israel shall be ashamed of his owne counsel. The second am∣plification of the same puni∣shment.THe second amplification of the same punishment threatned against the idols of the Israelites, taken from the place into the which they shall be carried, and from the condition the which they shall be in. For they shall be captiues, and fall into the hands of their enemies, and finally like vnto other spoiles and boo∣ties, they shall be brought vnto the king of the Assyrians, euen the selfe same king, whome they notwithstanding shall one day chuse, and had before chosen for their defender and ayder. Wherefore the condition of these gods, that is to say, of these idols, shall be most miserable. For they shall be carried away, and goe into captiuitie, euen into Assyria, that is, into landes most farre off. Moreouer, in those selfe same places they shall not be worshipped as gods, but deuided as spoiles, and they shall not be giuen vnto the gods of the Assyrians, but vnto the king, that is, vnto a man only, and not a god, as they fasly supposed their idols for to be: lastly the idols shal then loose all that their deitie, or godhead and maiestie. And by these things is vnderstoode both the vanitie of idols (the which are not able to defend them selues) and also their falsenes, as such, namely
the which in the end doe loose their godhead at the pleasure of mē.  If any man obiect, that the selfe same hath hapned vnto the Tem∣ple of God, and vnto the Arke, and therefore that the God of that Temple is vaine, and false:  I answer, that this came to passe vnto them the selfe same God denouncing or threatning it, and after such manner reuenging the contempt or despising of his name, the which God notwithstanding did not therefore loose his Maiestie, either among those enemies, as appeareth by the Edicts or procla∣mations of Nebuchadnezzar; or yet helde his peace continually, as these idols doe: but in the end, in spite of the teeth of all men resto∣red both his people and also his worship afresh, and againe, as ap∣peareth by the edict or decree of Cyrus the king,I can not yet finde how this quotation can any way serue for to prooue that, for the which it is quo∣ted, vnlesse it be alledged to shew that how so euer God for a time seeme to haue the foile in his distressed Church, yet in the end he ri∣seth vp like a mightie man, and is auenged on his enemies, vexing the same, as in that place he was vpon the Philistims. The third am∣plification of the punishmēt of the Israelites God only is to be trusted vnto. The best men are vanitie, & therfore not to be trusled in. Psal. 78. ver. 65. Last of all, he concludeth with a great auowing (the which is con∣tained in the repeating of the worde, shame) that it shall come to passe that Israel shall be confounded, and shall be ashamed, to wit, for this his counsell in worshipping these caluish gods. For by this meanes they forsooke the true God, and became idolators. Which one thing especially was their destructiō, as it also is the ouerthrow of other men, and of most florishing kingdomes. Vers. 7. Of Samaria, the King thereof is destroyed as the fome vpon the water. THe third amplification of the punishment against the Israelites, that is, against idolators. And it is taken from the circumstance of the persons, whome this punishment shall take hold on. The i∣dols therefore of the idolators shall not onely be ouerthrowne by God; but also the kings of those idolatrous people. For they are an other helpe, that idolators rest vpon. For they onely looke vnto earthly thinges, and put their trust in the arme of flesh, and not in God. Yet is there another helpe prescribed or appointed vnto vs, and to be sought of vs, Psal. 0. vers. 7. where the godly say: Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God. And Psal. 62. ver. 7, 8, 9. In God (saith Dauid) is my saluation, and my glory, the rocke of my strength: in God is my trust. Trust in him alway, ye people: powre out your hearts before him, for God is our hope. Yet the children of men are vanitie, the chiefe men are lyes: to lay them vpon a balance they are altogether lighter then va∣nitie. So then, the first foundation of the hope of these Israelites, are their idols, and secondly their kings, and the power of men. But
what shal be done with these kings of theirs? They also shal be cut off, and that in a moment of time, and with a light arme, or very ea∣sily: to wit, in such sort, as the fome arising vpon the waters ceaseth to be, vanisheth away, and is smitten off. And verely, where as it is said, A man is but a bubble, euen the same appertaineth vnto kings also: and therefore Esay giueth this counsel, cap. 2. ver. 22. saying: Cease you from the man, whose breath is in his nostrels: for wherein is he to be esteemed. And we haue seene immediatly before out of the Psal. 62. That the chiefe men are but vanitie and lies: and Kings are as easily throwne downe by GOD, as other men. For Psal. 76. ver. 12. Dauid affirmeth, That God shall cut off the spirite of Princes: he is terrible to the kings of the earth: and therefore are they as easily cast down from their seates by God, and also slaine of him, as are any other men in like manner. Vers. 8. The high places also of Auen shall be destroyed (euen the sinne Israel) the thorne and the thistle shal grow vpon their altars: and they shall say to the mountaines, Couer vs, and to the hils, Fall vpon vs. The fourth amplification of the punish∣ment to come.THe fourth amplification of the punishment to come, taken from the places them selues, into the which it shal breake. For not only the idols themselues shal be destroied, and the kings also; but the places in like manner, in the which the idols were worshipped in the land, & in that kingdome of Israel, as are their idol-temples, high places, altars, and such other like places. Surely all colour of escaping the iudgement of God, must be taken away from idola∣tors, because that they imagine and forge vnto them selues infinite exceptions and defences against it. Furthermore, al thinges must needes be rooted out and taken away, the which haue serued to the hurting and dishonouring of the maiestie of God, as appeareth by the 40. chap. of Esay, ver. 19, 20.But the place cap. 30 ver. 22. is a great deale more plaine for this purpose, as I take it. where God derideth the vanitie of men in sparing for no cost, charges, and labour in making of idols, which in their foolish opinion should not be mooued but stande sure for euer, whereas a little after he sheweth that both these, and al that put their trust in them, when the Lorde shall once blowe vpon them, shall wither, and the whirlewinde shall take them away as stub∣ble. Wherefore the ouerthrow of the places, which haue beene de∣dicated to the worship of idols, is here fore-told, and the same sig∣nified to be most lamentable and reprochful, setting downe the cause hereof, to wit, for that they were the very sinne of Israel, that is, the sinne of idolatrie was contained in those places, wherewith
the Israelites and the same ten tribes did chiefly offend of God, and prouoked him against them, aboue the rest of their sinnes. For there was not onely idolatrie among those ten tribes, but other of∣fences also reigned there, as we haue seene: but God was more an∣gred with their idolatrie, then with their other sinnes: whereof it commeth to passe, that these words (euen the sinne of Israel) being set down by a parenthesis, and put in the same case with that which went before,What Paren∣thesis is, see O∣seas cap. 8. v. 2. are of very great force and weight. Againe, the whole ruine of these places is threatned, and not in some part, and as I haue said, it is threatned to be full of reproch and shame. For the briars and thornes, and other like bad weedes, which are heaths of desert places, and vnpleasant, shall come vp and growe vpon their ruinated and broken downe altars. So Esay cap. 5. ver. 6. God threat∣neth that he will lay his vineyard wast, that it shall not be cut nor dig∣ged: but briars & thornes shal grow vp in it. And c. 7. v. 24. he sheweth that the whole land shall in his anger be so ouergrowne with thē, that it shal become as it were a wildernes, and a couert for al wilde and hurtfull beastes, that a man, except he be well armed, shal not be able to passe there, but with danger of his life: and therefore he saith: With arrowes and with bowe shall one come thither: because all the land shall be bryars and thornes. Furthermore, this selfe same punishment shal be ful of horrour and sudden feare, like to make them runne madde withall, to wit, because it shal be vnlooked for of the idolators.The punishmēt shal be ful of wonderfull & suddaine feare. Wherefore they shal be so awhaped and tremble at the same casting downe and ouerthrowing of their altars, that they shal preferre death before life: and they shal be ouertaken with so great terrour and sorrowe of minde, that they shal say vnto the mountaines, Couer vs, and vn∣to the hils, Fal vpon vs. This phrase and kinde of speaking doth Christ repeate Luc. 23. ver. 30. and the like is Esay 2. ver. 19. when as he describeth or setteth forth the exceeding trembling and dis∣maying of minde that shal come to passe, the which men shal con∣ceiue of the vnlooked for and sudden iudgements of God against them, and when as he sheweth that they shal not be safe in any place. So when Dauid wil signifie his desire to haue his enemies brought vnto that plight, that they shal be so feared as that they shal not know what counsel to take, nor which way to turne them selues, he praieth against them Psal. 35. ver. 6. after this manner: Let their way be darke and slipperie: and let the Angel of the Lorde persecute them.
Vers. 9. O Israel, thou hast sinned from the dayes of Gibeah: there they stoode: the battell in Gibeah against the children of iniquitie did not touch them. The rendring of a reason why they shall be so grieuously pu∣nished.THe rendring of a reason why God wil so grieuously punish thē, to wit, because that of olde they haue begunne to sinne against God, and haue not since that time repented, although they haue bin admonished or warned by the most manifest iudgements and threatnings of God. And here is a very long time rehearsed, where∣in the Israelites liued most wickedly, and against the commaunde∣ments of God, namely from the daies in the which the Gabaonites, or Gibeonites committed that most shameful villanie, the which is reported Iudg. 19. This selfe same fact was called before cap. 9. ver. 9. a most exquisite, rare or passing wickednes, or most deepe corruption. Doubtles it appeareth by this place, that the same hi∣storie is very auncient, and that the Gibeonites sinned in that sort straight after that they were by Iosua brought into the promised lande, and inioyed the possession thereof quietly, that is to say, so great a benefite of God, and the same so very lately bestowed vp∣on them. For that which is there reported, I iudge to haue fallen out before the gouernment of Othoniel. R. Solomo Iarchi writeth that those things came to passe vnder the Iudge Othoniel. How so∣euer it be, that lewd fact, and so cruel and wicked deede of the Isra∣elites is most old and auncient.The stubborne & disebedient nature of these Israelites. Therefore they doe not nowe first of al begin to offend God in this manner, without al seare; but e∣uen so soone as they entred into the selfe same lande, which they then possessed as yet. Afterwarde, their obstinacie and stubborne nature is also declared, as namly being such, who were not brought vnto repentance, no not with those most grieuous punishments, the which they sawe by God to be laide vpon the Gibeonites be∣cause of that hainous offence. For thereupon insued a most la∣mentable battel: the tribe of Beniamin was almost vtterly rooted out by God: the other eleuen tribes were grieuously slaine, and that twise. Yet did these men neuer cal to minde those so great iudgements of God, that thereby they might become the better, and might learne to be wise by their home punishments and ex∣amples. So then, that same so grieuous warre which at that time was made against those sonnes of Belial, or wicked sonnes, that is to say, against those lewde Gibeonites (in the which doubtles the
most great displeasure of God appeared most manifestly against the wicked) this warre, I say, mooued not them, feared them not, that is, tooke not holde on them, to wit, that they did thinke vpon it, and called to remembrance that both themselues, and those wicked persons were for this cause punished by God, and therfore that they should abstaine from sinne hereafter. But from that day and time they alwaies waxed worse and continued in their wicked life. The which was a most desperate boldnes, and most stubborne rebellion against God. Vers. 10. It is my desire that I should chastise them, and the people shall be gathered against them, when they shall gather themselues in their two furrowes. A conclusion for their assu∣red punishmēt, inferred vpon the former verse, and also their vngodly life. The punishmēt twofold.A Consequence, the which out of the former verse, and their vn∣godlines iustly gathereth and inferreth as it were for an ouer∣plus & aduantage this conclusion, to wit, that it shal come to passe, that like as these haue liued wickedly according vnto their owne minde and pleasure: so shal they be punished by God according to his wil and pleasure. And this punishment also is in this selfe same verse more plainly laide out by way of explanation, and it is here shewed to be of two sortes. First, they shal be chastised (or bound) by God, that they shal not be able to defend themselues a∣gainst their enemies rushing and breaking in vpon them.1. They shall be bound by God. For they which haue their hands tied, and which are bounde, are not able to defend themselues against strokes: but he open vnto other mens in∣iuries and stripes, to be beaten at their pleasure. By this means God teacheth that all the aydes, weapons, and furniture of warre, dili∣gently prouided by the Israelites, shal stand them in no stead, but shal be vnprofitable vnto them. 2. Sundrie natiōs shal be gathe∣red together a∣gainst them.The second punishment is, That sundrie peoples, and not one na∣tion onely shall by God bee gathered together against them, that they may vnderstand, that albeit they were left loose and vnboūd, yet that they should notwithstanding be oppressed and ouercome of so great a number of enemies. Further, to amplifie the matter withall, it is added by God, I will binde them in their lands, grounds, furrowes and dwellings, the which they possesse, and plow, and where they liue and dwell daintilie. For the kingdome of Israel was partly on this side the riuer Iordan, and partly beyond the riuer Ior∣dan also. So then the Israelites shall be punished by God, and that
iustly and worthely, in both those countries beyond, and on this side Iordan, the which he compareth to a plowed field. Vers. 11. And Ephraim is as an heifer vsed to delight in thresh∣ing: but I will passe by her faire necke: I will make Ephraim to ride: Iudah shall plow, and Iaacob shall breake his clods. An amplifica∣tion of the e∣quitie of this punishment.AN amplification of this equitie and iustice in punishing of thē, because that the Israelites contemned or despised all the labour of God in calling them backe, and dressing and tilling them as it were a field, and mocked euen God himselfe: the which is an vn∣godlines to be punished, & worthie of as great punishment as may be. But because in the former verse God vsed the Metaphor of fur∣rowes borowed from husbandmen, and tillage,What the fi∣gure Meta∣phora is, see A∣mos cap. 4.12. & put in that place for dwellings: so he doth now also continue the same in this verse, as he doth likewise in the verse following. For by this meanes and similitude the great labour of God might the better bee expressed and shewed in tilling, plowing, and cherishing both those king∣domes and people, to wit, that of the Iewes and Israelites, as appea∣reth by the parable of the vine Isai. 5. Two parts of this verse.This verse hath two parts. The first appertaineth vnto the king∣dome of Israel. The latter vnto the kingdome of Iudah. The whole kingdome of Israel is here by the figure Synecdoche vnderstood by the name (Ephraim) and the kingdome of Iudah,1. Concerning the kingdome of Is∣rael. by these words (Iudah and Iaacob.) Therefore as concerning the kingdome of Is∣rael, or those ten tribes:2. Concerning the kingdome of Iudah. The figure Sy∣necdoche, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. vers 21. first God sheweth what their disposition & nature was vnder the similitude of an heifer, the which had rather to tread out or thresh the corne, then to plow, that is, which was gi∣uen to pleasure and ease, and would take but little paine in doing her dutie: but wished forthwith to redeiue the fruite of her labour. For such are the cattel, which had rather to tread out the corne, that is, quietly and eating to doe some thing lightly vnder the roofe and at home, then to plow abroade and in the fields, that is,1. The kingdome of Israel. in the open ayre, and heate to take great paynes and worke. Thus then in these words doubtlesse is described the nature of dissolute or loose and idle persons, and such as are altogether giuen vnto pleasures. And albeit these by nature were such, yet GOD notwithstanding with great diligence dressed and tilled them. For he vsed both his lawe, the which he gaue them by Moses: and also the labour and trauaile of diuers Prophets, the which he raised vp vnto them, that he might
ride vpon them, and as an honorable Rider, sit vpon them, breake them, beate downe the fiercenes of their nature, and that he might rule and reigne in their hearts. And these things are declared and made plaine by the selfe same Metaphor borowed from horsemen and plowers. Therefore the Lord sayth, I haue passed by the fairenes of her necke, that is to say, I haue layd an honorable yoke vpon thē, and I my selfe would ride vpon that people as vpon mine owne pe∣culiar and proper horse for honor sake decked and trimmed by me. Wherefore these words (I haue passed by the fairenes of her necke) are neither spoken against them in despite,The words of the Prophet are spoken in the honour of the Israelites, & not in their reproch. nor yet as if God inful∣ted or triumphed ouer them, as if God in contempt or despite cast downe, bruised, pressed and trode downe with his feete the fayre neckes of these men, like as that vngodly Pope of Rome Alexan∣der the third in reproch trode vpon the necke of Frederick the Em∣perour: but there is in these words rehearsed a singular benefite of God towards the Israelites, and an honor for them, that God had them as it were an horse for his owne saddle, made much of them, handled & vsed them. And this do I referre vnto that time, where∣in God gaue his lawe vnto all Israel, whereunto I am moued by the argumēt of the verse following. For then God when he went about to bring that people vnder his yoke, and when as it was at that time a most mightie and strong nation, it is said then to haue had a faire∣nes of necke, or a faire necke: whereby the nobler and better kind of horses are wont to be knowne. Hereunto also appertaineth that which is added, I haue ridden Ephraim. For God by his Prophets the interpreters of his law, hath very often assayed throughly to breake that people, and to bring them in subiection vnto him Isai. 5. And thus much of Israel. 2. The kingdome of Iudah.Now Iudah found and felt plentifull fruite by the selfe same tra∣uaile and labour of God. For God did plow and harrow them vn∣to him. By the words of (plowing and harrowing) I vnderstand the docilitie or aptnes of Iudah to learne, & that same their obedience, whereby it came to passe, that this kingdome both serued God, and also receiued a most plentifull blessing of God, and did very well prouide for themselues. By which comparison the rebellion of the Israelites is shewed to be the greater. For Iudah had no other pre∣cepts or commandements then Israel: and the one was no more diligently dressed and tilled by God then the other. And yet did not these things profite Israel, because of the stubbornnes of his minde: but benefited Iudah very much because of his aptnes to
learne, and heed taking. Vers. 12. Sowe to your selues in righteousnesse: reape after the mea∣sure of mercie: breake vp your fallow ground: for it is time to seeke the Lord, till he come, and rayne righteousnesse vpon you. A Making of the matter more plaine. For GOD sheweth here what maner of riding vpon the neckes of the Israelites, that of his was. Namely, that he gaue vnto them his law, whereby they were taught to liue godly and holily, to be obedient vnto him, and finally to seeke and worship the true God. And hereupon there was promised a great reward, as appeareth by the second, third, and fifth precept of the Decalogue or ten Commandements.What the ri∣ding and sit∣ting of God vpon vs is. Therefore the giuing of the law, and the preaching of the word of God, was, and is yet at this day that same riding and sitting of God vpon vs: the which he that casteth away and despiseth, casteth away euen God himselfe, as Christ telleth his Apostles Matth. 10. ver. 40. say∣ing: He that receiueth you, receiueth me: and he that receiueth me, receiueth him that sent me. Moreouer, this verse hath two parts. The one setteth downe that doctrine which the law of God containeth.Two parts of this verse. And this is two-fold. For first the law teacheth precepts of the whole righteousnesse,1. The doctrine which the law containeth be∣ing two-fold. that is, of liuing godly and iustly, the which workes the same law willeth vs to sowe, that is, in very act and deede to performe. The law then giuen by God teacheth to sow righteousnesse, and that wholie, that is to say, both that righteousnesse,1. Teaching pre∣cepts of al righ∣teousnesse. whereby we are commanded to loue God with all our heart: and also that righteousnesse, whereby we are commanded to loue our neighbour as our selues, that it may be a seede in vs, and in our hearts, the which may fructisie or bring forth fruite, and increase in euery good worke, as Paul willeth the Colossians cap. 1. ver. 10. where he sheweth, that he ceaseth not to pray for them, that they might walke worthie of the Lord, and please him in all things: being fruit full in all good workes, and increasing in the knowledge of God. Secondly,2. Promising all kind of good thins to the keepers thereof. the same law promiseth vnto the keepers thereof an haruest of mercie, that is, euery kinde of good things, to wit, both spirituall, & also earthly, as Paul teacheth 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8. in these words: Godlinesse is profitable vnto all things, which hath the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. And therefore the Psalmist Psal. 31. ver 19. crieth out, and sayth: How great is thy goodnesse which thou hast layd vp for them that feare thee?
and done to them that trust in thee, euen before the sonnes of men? And this is more at large declared Deut. 28. and euery wherein the holie Scripture vnder the name of (peace.) The same lawe willeth vs to breake vp our fallowe ground, that is, to cast off the oldeman, to put on the new, that laying aside our former kind of life, we should consecrate and giue ouer our selues wholly vnto God, and vnto his will. For this was the end of the law and of the Prophets, to teach vs new works, that is, such as are contrarie vnto our corrupt nature, and fight and striue against the same, the which workes we are to doe. This is the fallowed ground of which the Prophet speaketh in this place. See what Paul writeth to this effect 3. Colos. ver. 8, 9, 10. But now put ye away euen all these things, wrath, anger, maliciousnes, cursed speaking, filthie speaking out of your mouth. Lye not one to ano∣ther, seeing that ye haue put off the olde man, with his workes, and haue put on the new, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created him. And thus much hath the first part of this verse. The second part, cōtaining a reason, why they ought so to sow and reape; teaching two things.The second part containeth a reason, why they ought to sowe in such sort, & also to reape in such sort, that is to say, Because the time is come to seeke the Lord: and because that he commeth, and will after this sort teach vs righteousnesse. By which appeareth two things. First, that God doth not at all times in this maner offer him∣selfe vnto men, as a gentle Schoolmaster, and Rider, & our plower, but when as it pleaseth him.1. That the bene∣fites of God are then to be ac∣cepted, when they are offe∣red. Then we must not refuse so singular a benefit when it is proffered. For there repentance will be too late, which despise the law of God, and his Prophets, exhorting them vnto their dutie. And therfore God speaketh vnto the Iewes to this purpose Zach. 1. ver. 4, 5, 6. saying: Be ye not as your fathers, vnto whom the former Prophets haue cried, saying, Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Turne you now (note that he sayth now, signifying that God his mercie is then to be embraced, when as it is offered) from your euill waies, and from your wicked works: but they would not heare nor hearkē vnto me, sayth the Lord. Your fathers, where are they? and do the Pro∣phets liue for euer? But did not my words and my statutes, which I com∣manded by my seruants the Prophets take hold of your fathers? & they returned, and sayd, As the Lord of hostes hath determined to doe vnto vs, according vnto our owne wayes, and according vnto our workes, so hath he dealt with vs. Secondly, this part of the verse teacheth, that God doth no otherwise till vs,2 God teacheth vs by no other way but by his word. no otherwise instruct and learne vs, yea also that God is no otherwise found of vs, thē by that his word, the which was written and deliuered by his seruants, least any man
should seeke or imagine any other way of finding or worshipping God, then that which appeareth out of his written word. Vers. 13. But you haue plowed wickednesse: ye haue reaped iniquitie: you haue eaten the fruite of lyes: because thou diddest trust in thine owne wayes, and in the multitude of thy strong men. The Israelites practise the cō∣trarie of that they were com∣manded.AN Antithesis, or setting downe of the contrarie vnto that which went before, in the which the rebellion of the Israelites is com∣pared with the former precepts giuen by God. For so farre off is it, that they obeyed them, that they took altogether a quite & cleane cōtrarie way. For in stead of righteousnes cōmanded vnto thē, they plowed wickednesse, that is, they followed and embraced wicked∣nesse in stead of righteousnesse. The like complaint doth God make against the Iewes and Israelites his vineyard Isai. 5. ver. 7. in these words: Surely the vineyard of the Lord of hostes is the house of Israel, and the men of Iudah are his pleasant plant: and he looked for iudge∣ment, but behold oppression: for righteousnesse, but behold a crying. These Israelites therefore of that their plowing doe reape iniqui∣tie, as a crop springing of that sowing, and that necessarilie. For as Iames sayth cap. 1. ver. 27. Pure religion and vndefiled before God e∣uen the father, is this, to visite the fatherlesse, and widowes in their ad∣uersitie, and to keepe himselfe vnspotted of the world. And as he fur∣ther writeth cap. 3. ver. 15. The fruite of true wisedome and righte∣ousnesse is sweete, and euery good worke with peace. And as it is ver. 17.18. The wisedome that is from aboue, is first pure, then peace∣able, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercie and good fruits, without iudging, and without hypocrisie. And the fruite of righteousnesse is sowen in peace, of them that make peace: but the fruite of vnrighte∣ousnesse is most bitter, and euery wicked work, and finallie the ter∣rour and feare of conscience. For as Isai sayth cap. 48. ver. 22. There is no peace vnto the wicked. Such then are the fruites of lying, that is, of idolatrie, and such are the effects of forged religion and doctrine, to wit, all vnrighteous workes, as superstition, hypocrisie, denying of the true God, rebellion, and these fruites proceede from the vn∣cleane and vnbeleeuing, who, Though they professe that they knowe God, yet (as Paul writeth Tit. 1. ver. 16.) by workes they denye him, and are abominable, and disobedient, and vnto euery good worke repro∣bate. And such are the wil-worships and superstition of hypocrites, and such like, the which, as it is Colos. cap. 2. ver. 23. Haue in deede a
shew of wisedome in voluntary religion and humblenes of mind, and n spring of the bodie, neither haue they it in any estimation to satisfie the flesh.The cause of the great wic∣kednesse of the Israelites two-fold. Now the true cause and fountaine of this wickednesse and so great vngodlinesse, which the Israelites practised in stead of righte∣ousnesse, is here shewed to bee two-fold. To wit, one, for that they trusted in their owne wayes. And these so doe, the which preferre the deuises of their owne minde, and their good intents (as they call them) before the expresse word of God:1. They trusted in their owne wayes. and which thinke that they shall be safe and happie besides or against the word of God, to wit, by such meanes as they themselues haue deuised, and which liketh them. The second cause and fountaine is, for that the selfe same Is∣raelites were addicted or stayed vpon the multitude of their great and mighty men,2. They stayed vpon the mul∣titude of their mightie and strong men. that is, they put their trust in an arme of flesh. The which two sorts of men no doubt doth preferre their owne glorie, and the glorie, power, and wisedome of men, before God himselfe, and so consequently doe forsake God, cleaue vnto a lye, liue onely after their owne fashion and pleasure, not according vnto God his precepts and commandements. And hereof in the ende springeth all lewdnes, all superstition, and all vngodlinesse. And therefore Ie∣remie 17. ver. 15 there is a curse pronounced against those that trust in flesh, where he hath these words: Thus sayth the Lord, oursed be the man that trusteth in man: and maketh flsh his arme, and with∣draweth his heart from the Lord. And Ioh. 5.44. Christ asketh the Iewes, saying: How can ye beleeue, which receiue honour one of ano∣ther, and seeke not the honour that commeth of God alone? And in the 12. chap. ver. 43. Iohn hauing shewed that many of the rulers be∣leeuing in Christ, & durst not confesse him, for feare they should be cast out of the Sinagogue, addeth this as a cause thereof: For they loued the praise of men, more then the praise of God. Vers. 14. Therefore shall a tumult arise among thy people, and all thy munitions shall be destroyed, as Shalman destroyed Beth-ar∣bel in the day of battell: the mother with the children was dashed in pieces. A threatning of most grie∣uous punish∣ments against the contemnersA Denouncing or threatning of most grieuous punishments a∣gainst such contemners or despisers of God, and rebellious per∣sons against his commandements. For among them all things are pronounced to bee miserablie wasted, spoyled and consumed, and that with ciuill warres: yea and all their most fortified forts of that
countrie, and castles built to keepe away forraine enemies, shall be destroyed: and that with ciuill warres, the which they themselues shall stirre vp within themselues one against another. For so doe I expound that which is sayd, There shall a tumult arise among thy people. Therefore this spoyle and laying waste shall be committed not by forraine enemies, but by the inhabitants of the countrie themselues: because the Israelites shall arise one against another in ciuill warre: the which is a most miserable kinde of battaile, and punishment. For in ciuill warres all things alwayes are most mise∣rable. Yet thus doth God oftentimes punish idolatrous people, and Kings, to entangle them with home-warres, and to set them toge∣ther by the eares within themselues. And that this so afterwards came to passe, the historie of the kingdome of Israel doth confirme or proue 2. King. cap. 14. and so following. Neither shall this laying waste, ruine, and destroying of the whole countrie and the cities thereof come to passe onely by the meanes of ciuill warres: but it shall moreouer fall out to be so great, that there cannot any grea∣ter be made by any enemie, be he neuer so mortall and deadly. For it shall be such, as was that of the countrie of Arbel, the which ouer∣throw was giuen by Salmanazar 2. King. 18. ver. 34. for there the proud captains of Saneherib vpbrayed the Israelites with that ouer∣throw, when as they aske them, Where is the God of Hamah, and of Arpad? Meaning that Arpad, in which Arbel was, was destroyed by Salmanazar.Arbel was in a most fearefull and cruell ma∣ner destroyed by Salmana∣zar, which here is called Shalman, the fame of which ouerthrow was then fresh a∣mong the Is∣raelites. And this countrie of Arbel is beyond the riuer Eu∣phrates, and at that time the fame of that ouerthrow was come vn∣to the neighbour people and nations dwelling neere vnto it, yea e∣uen vnto the Israelites, as of a destruction and ouerthrow of things very straunge, fearefull, and such whereof the like had not been heard before. Finally, the mother with her children shall by the in∣habitants bee dashed against the rockes and stones, the which is a kind of barbarous and outragious crueltie, such as the Babylonians in the taking of Ierusalem vsed against the poore Iewes, and there∣fore they pray vnto God that he in his iustice will cause them to be requited and payed with the like Psalm. 137. ver. 8.9. O daughter of Babel, worthie to be destroyed, blessed shall he be that rewardeth thee, as thou hast serued vs. Blessed shall he be, that taketh and dasheth thy children against the stones.
Vers. 15. So shall Beth-el do vnto you, because of your malitious wickednes: in a morning shall the king of Israel be destroyed. A reason of this their punish∣ment.THe rendring of a reason, wherby their idolatrie set vp in Beth-el is drawen into hatred. For that is the cause of all this euill and punishment. Lastly, the former punishment is here amplified. For because of it their kings also shal be destroyed, and that in a mo∣ment, so that no hope shall remaine and be left vnto them. CAP. 11. Vers. 1. When Israel was a childe, then I loued him, and called my sonne out of Egypt. This chapter with those that follow somwhat differ in argu∣ment or matter frō the former.THis chapter together with the rest that follow, containeth an∣other argument in some sorte diuers and differing from the for∣mer. For vnto this place both the iudgements and also the threat∣nings of God haue been rehearsed against the Israelites because of their sinnes. But now henceforth euen vnto the e of the booke the continuall bounty, and vnmoueable good wil of God for his mercy and couenant sake, is declared towards those which of those Israelites shall repent, and feare God. And albeit in this chapter, as wel as in those that follow the Prophet doe make mention also of the sins of the Israelites, and likewise of the punishments hang∣ing ouer their heads for the same: yet is this done not principally, but by the way and by occasion: namely to this end, that the mercy and grace of God may appeare to be the greater, who neuerthe∣lesse saueth such as they were, that is to say, persons so disobedient and worthy of such a punishment. Further it may appeare by the fift verse of this chapter,The time about the which this sermon with those that fol∣low, was made. that this sermon with those that followe, were made, after that the kingdome of Israel was now become tri∣butary vnto the King of Assyria, the which was done first by Ma∣nahem King of Israel, who yeelded to pay a great tribute vnto Pul King of Assyria, comming vp against him, as it is recorded 2. King. 15. vers. 19. in those wordes: Then Pul the sonne of Asshur came a∣gaynst the land: and Menahem gaue Pul a thousand talents of siluer, that his hand might be with him, and establish the kingdome in his hand. So then the former sermons seeme to haue been before this time. And this whole place hath a rehearsall of the couenant of
God with the Israelites, because that was the most true foundation of this perpetuall and continued good will of God towardes this people repenting, that is, towards the remnants thereof. For God for this cause out of this most stubborne people chose some not∣withstanding. Two parts of this verse.As for this verse, there are two partes of it: one wherein God sheweth his free loue toward that people: The other, in the which he rehearseth a most assured argument or token,1. God his free loue vnto this people. and a most nota∣ble effect of this his loue. The loue of God, and the same, as I said, most free, is shewed in these words: When Israel was yet a childe, I loued him.2. A notable ar∣gument and ef¦fect of the same For I take the hebrew word (ki) in this place not so much to note the cause, as the time, wherein God shewed that they were loued of him. He therefore loued this people, when as it was yet a childe. The word (childe) by the figure Metalepsis I vn∣derstand of the miserable and seruile or bond condition,1 What the fi∣gure Metalep∣sis is, see Oseas cap. 4. vers. 18. What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. wherein this people at that time was when as God began to loue them: and metaphorically also of the age and weaknes of them in regarde of their enemies, to wit, the Egyptians. Therefore when as God at the first shewed that he earnestly loued these tenne tribes (of the which the kingdome of Israel did consist) they were among the E∣gyptians, weake, feeble, and impotent or without strength like vn∣to children, and were bond, and intreated hardly: for the worde (Nagnar) signifieth also a seruant and one that is bonde, as also doth the worde (puer) among the Latines, and (pais) with the Greekes. Israel then or at that time was indeede a childe, that is to say, both weake, and also a seruant, when as God loued him. Con∣cerning this their estate, and God his then mercy towards them, conferre this place with that of the Psam. 81. vers. 6, 7. where wee finde it thus: I haue withdrawen his shoulder from the burthen, and his handes haue left the pots. Thou calledst in affliction, and I deliue∣red thee, and answered thee in the secret of the thunder. And with Exod. 20. vers. 2. where God himselfe putteth them in minde both of their former condition, and of his deliuerance speaking to them in this wise: I am the Lord thy God, which haue brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. Now this was a most large and plentifull testimony or wit∣nes of his loue, in that he brought the selfe same tribes out of E∣gypt, hauing now adopted or chosen them vnto his sonnes. Which myracle and worke of God is most knowen.This place ap∣plied vnto Christ. But Math. cap. 2. ver. 15. applieth this same vnto Christ, whom God the father for a time
led aside into Egypt because of the persecution of Herod. In the which it is true that the couenant of GOD with the Iewes at that time seemed to bee vtterly broken off, when as GOD because of their vnthankfulnesse withdrewe his sonne out of the whole countrey of Israell: and then it seemed to bee againe restored, when as afterward hee called the selfe same his sonne backe a∣gaine into the same land of Israel. But, as I sayd, Matthew apply∣eth these things vnto Christ, because that the same thing was to be fulfilled in the head, the which figuratiuely and in a shadow was done in the whole body. Vers. 2. They called them, but they went thus from them: they sa∣crificed vnto Baalim, and burnt incense to images. An amplificati¦on of the for∣mer benefit.THe first amplification of the former benefite of GOD by the contrary, that is, by the contrary stubbornnes of this people, who had receiued so great a benefite from God. For albeit they were most often put in minde hereof by the Prophets, to acknow∣ledge the same, yet for all that did they not acknowledge God, or consecrate and giue themselues vnto him: nay the more diligently they were called backe vnto this duetie, so much the more disobe∣diently they departed from him, and forsaking the same true God their benefactor, did cleaue both vnto Baalims, and vnto their ima∣ges. This is the summe of the amplification. 2 Things here to be noted.But there are two things here to be noted. The one, to wit, that God was not contented once, or to haue bestowed one benefit on∣ly vpon the Israelites,1 The bestowing and continu∣ing of benefits vpon them. wherwith notwithstanding he called them as it were from death vnto life: but also continued them afterwarde. For he raised vp vnto them, and gaue them continually Prophets, and his seruants, the which might put them in minde of their due∣ty towards God. And so God promiseth by Moses Deut. 18. vers. 15. That he will rayse vp vnto them a Prophet like vnto him from a∣mong them: euen of their brethren, vnto whom they should hearken. And Act. 7. vers. 37. this is againe confirmed by the Martyr Steuen. And likewise Zach. 1. 2 That thereby they are not bettered, but waxe worse & worse.The other poynt to be noted is, that the Israelites all this not∣withstanding became the harder, and the worse, departed the far∣ther, and the more from God, by how much they were called back more neerely and often vnto him, the which no doubt is a shew & a note of desperate, or vnrecouerable and past and all hope disobedi∣ence and stubbornnes of minde.
Vers. 3. I led Ephraim also, as one should beare them in his armes: but they knew not that I healed them. The second am∣plification of the same bene∣fite.THe second amplification of the same benefite, taken from the place: but the person onely by whome they were admonished or warned, is here changed. For in the verse before he speaketh of the Prophets, but in this place of God. The Israelites therefore de∣spised not onely the Prophets of God, but also God himselfe tea∣ching them, and diuerse waies going about to bring them into the way againe. Nay moreouer (that which is a signe of brasen-faced shamelesnes, and vnamendable rebellion against God) the more earnestly they were by God brought into the way, and called back from idols, the more egerly and hotly did they worship those their idols: and embraced them the more straightly and sweetly in their armes and bosomes. Finally, they neuer acknowledged themselues to haue bin relieued by God in their greatest afflictions (for here he compareth afflictions vnto most grieuous diseases, and resembleth the deliuerance from those afflictions vnto the healing and medi∣cine of a griefe:) but such was the obstinate and stubborne malice of their minde, and their vncurable idolatrie, they attributed all be∣nefites, all deliuerances of theirs vnto their idols, as vnto the authors of them, and for this cause sacrificed vnto them,This place espe∣cially concer∣neth the ene∣mies of God his people, but ge∣nerally all such as doe imitate them in the like sinnes. and not vnto the true God, as hath bin shewed before cap. 4. ver. 14.8. ver. 11. And of this complaineth God against them by the Prophet Ioel cap. 3. ver. 5. after this manner: Ye haue taken my siluer and my golde, and haue caried into your temples my goodly and pleasant things. Vers. 4. I led them with cordes of a man, euen with the bands of loue, and I was to them, as he that taketh off the yoke from their iawes: and I layde the meate vnto them. The third am∣plification of the former be∣nefite.THe third amplification of the same benefite described before. And it is taken from the entire or earnest and most louing affe∣ction of God himselfe. For there could not any thing be done more kindly vnto the Israelites, then it which then was done by God vn∣to them: neither could there any thing be performed more louing∣ly vnto them. For God witnesseth that at that time he drewe and brought forth the Israelites by al those waies and meanes, whereby any thing is done or bestowed vpon any man heartily, louingly,
and friendly. For he defended them against the Egyptians egerly pursuing after them, he fed them with meate from heauen by the space of 40. yeares, he kept their garments whole and sound in the wildernes, he saued them harmlesse from wilde beastes, he led them in all their whole iourney with great carefulnes by a fierie pillar by night, and by a cloude by day. And thus much doth Moses testifie of God in his song, Deuter. 32. ver. 10, 11. when hee saith: He found him in the lande of the wildernes, in a wast, & roaring wildernes: he led him about, he taught him, and kept him, as the ap∣ple of his eye. As an egele stirreth vp her nest, fluttereth ouer her birds, stretcheth out her wings, taketh them, and beareth them on her wings, so the Lord alone led him, and there was no straunge god with him. What then could be done more kindly and courteously towardes them? And truly Paul frō this place, tearmeth that good wil where∣with God loueth vs, philanthropia, or loue towards man. Tit. 3. v. 4. So then, God at that time brought them forth, and afterward che∣rished them and made much of them with the cords of a man, or of loue, and the same most thicke, that is, with most manifest and ma∣ny signes, waies, and tokens of his loue: and did in like manner for them, as he that taketh the yoke from the iawes of a beast, that the yoke wring not, nor strangle not the beast: and finally laieth meate before it, which the beast may eate. After this maner God relieued, deliuered, & nourished that miserable and poore people perishing with famine and labour in Egypt. By how much the greater is their ingratitude or vnthankfulnes, who not onely despised and set at nought so great a benefite, but also bestowed vpon them by God with so louing a minde. Vers. 5. He shall no more returne into the land of Egypt: but Asshur shall be his King, because they refused to conuert. A threatning of sundrie pu∣nishments and miseries a∣gainst the Is∣raelites.A Threatning, the which is made against the Israelites, because of the former rebellion, and the same of many punishments and miseries. And first of all, because they would not repent, and re∣fused to returne vnto the true God, beeing neuer so much warned thereunto, the Prophet threatneth that it shall come to passe, that they shal obey, and be subiect vnto strangers and forraine kings, and those not their neighbours, or neere vnto them (as were the kings of Egypt) but such as dwelt most farre from them, and there∣fore such as should be most fierce and cruel vnto them, as the kings
of countries lying most farre from vs are wont to be, when as once they get the vpper hand and soueraignitie ouer vs. For al things are disposed and ordred among vs by their gouernours and presidents, (who are wont to be most couetous and cruel) there is none or ve∣ry seldome fellowship and dealing of vs with them, because of the difference of language and maners: finally there is no loue of them to vs ward, whome they suspect of rebellion. Therefore such kings doe vexe and burden the people distant so farre from them, both with garrisons and with tributes, that as much as they can, they may diminish their strength, and take from them all possibilitie of shaking off their yoke from their necks. Hereof it commeth that this kinde of punishment is reckened vp for a great curse Deut. 28. ver. 49. &c. The Lord (saith Moses) shall bring vpon thee a nation from farre, euen from the ende of the worlde, flying swift as an egle: a nation, whose tongue thou shalt not vnderstande. A nation of a fierce countenance, which will not regard the person of the old, nor haue com∣passion of the young. Wherefore here is threatned a most grieuous punishment, when as it is foretold the Israelites that they must take vpon them and come vnder the yoke and gouernment of such for∣raine kings, They shal not returne into Egypt. Neither in deed should they at any time haue returned thither to stay there, or to seeke ayde thence, as it appeareth Deut. 17. ver. 16. where among other thinges the which the king that the Israelites should chose ouer them was to auoide, it is said: In any wise he shall not prepare him ma∣ny horses, nor bring the people againe to Egypt, for to increase the num∣ber of horses, seeing the Lord hath said vnto you, Ye shall hence forth goe no more that way. Againe the Lord saith vnto them by Ierem. cap. 42. ver. 14, 16. But if ye say, we will not dwell in this land, neither heare the voyce of the Lord your God, saying. Nay, but we will goe into the land of Egypt, where we shal see no warre, nor heare the sound of the trumpet, nor haue hunger of breade, and therewill we dwell, then the sword that ye feared, shall take you there in the land of Egypt, and the famine, for the which ye care, shall there hang vpon you in Egypt, and there shall ye die. Likewise Esay 31. They should not, I say, there∣fore at any time goe into Egypt, but trust and stay onely vpon the promises and helpe of God alone: yet notwithstanding should their bondage and subiection be more tolerable vnder their neigh∣bours, with whome they had some traficke and dealing, then vnder these nations so farre distant from them, namely the Assyrians, whose tributaries they nowe were, as we haue seene but a little be∣fore
2. King. cap. 15. Another iust punishment. Asshur shall be their King, that is, the king of the Israelites. And this also is a iust punishment of their disobedience and stubborn∣nes. For they were not conuerted, or rather returned vnto the worshipping of the true God by any meanes, by any exhortations, by any care of God, or admonitions of his Prophets. Wherefore they are iustly thus punished by God. For like as they tooke vnto themselues a strange god, so shal they also haue and feele a strange king. Thus then beeing no way to be reclaimed, they are like vnto those whome Christ complaineth of Matt. 11. ver. 16, 17. when he saith: But whereunto shall I liken this genration? It is like vnto little children which sit in the markets, and call vnto their fellowes, and say, We haue pyped vnto you, and ye haue not daunced: we haue mourned vnto you, and ye haue not lamented. Vers. 6. And the sworde shall fall on his cities, and shall consume his barres, and deuoure them, because of their owne counsels. AN other kinde of punishment, the which is threatned vnto Ido∣latours, namely,Another kinde of punishment. namely, that it shall come to passe, that their most fen∣sed cities: and also their members or barres shall perish. And by the name of members or barres, I doe vnderstand both the citizens themselues, and also the villages, the which belonged and were ap∣pertaining vnto those fortified and fenced cities, as appeareth Ios. 15. Therefore not onely they themselues shall be pressed with that forraine and heauie yoke; but also all their aydes shal be laide wast: which thing came to passe both by their ciuill, and also by their for∣raine warres. Yea (they shall be consumed) that is to say, they shal not onely be destroied in part, but they shall vtterly be cut off, that they be not any more a people. And this shal fal out (because of their counsels) to wit, their idolatrie and rebellion against God. See be∣fore cap. 10. ver. 6. So God threatneth them with vtter destruction Deut. 28. ver. 20. where he speaketh by Moses: The Lord shall sende vpon thee cursing, trouble, and shame, in all that which thou settest thine hande to doe, vntill thou be destroyed, and perish quickly, because of the wickednes of thy workes, whereby thou hast forsaken me.
Vers. 7. And my people are bent to rebellion against me: though they called them to the most high, yet none at all would exalt him. A Rendring of a reason. For he sheweth why God will so punish them for their counsels, to wit,A reason of their punish∣ment. because the people them selues that is, all of them remaine turned away from God, and doe sticke fast in the same stubbornnes of minde, howe much so euer they be admonished or warned to the contrarie neuer so much, and sun∣drie waies by the Prophets and other the seruants of God called backe againe vnto the true God. I expounde the particle (vau) which some translate (and) by the word (for.) that it be either a yeel∣ding of a reason, or else serue to lay out the matter more plaine. 3. Things to be noted.But in this verse there are three things to be obserued or noted. First, where as it is said, My people are bent, or cleaueth vnto that rebellion, or turning away from God, the which they haue once made.1 The worde people. For by the worde (people) there is not onely one or two vn∣derstoode, but all of them are thereby noted and comprehended. This rebellion therefore of the Israelites against God, as that of all idolatours is wont to be, was common and generall, which left but a fewe sound, free from that wickednes, and vntouched. One or twaine may peraduenture be excepted: but the greater part of the whole kingdome is questionlesse here condemned, as Elias in his time seemeth to complaine vnto God 1. King. 19. ver. 10. when he saith vnto him: The children of Israel haue forsaken thy couenant, broken downe thine altars, and slaine thy Prophets with the sword: and I onely am left, and they seeke my life to take it away. Hereunto also appertaineth that which followeth by and by: They doe not exalt him at all, or together, or one with another. For this phrase or man∣ner of speaking sheweth, that there was but a verie fewe left, the which in that people did worship the true God. He therefore de∣clareth that there was a departing made from God generally, and that idolatrie was receiued euery where in all places, and of all per∣sons. In the second place is to be noted, that it is saide, (My people.)2 The word (my) For this wickednes of the Israelites was so much the more foule and shamefull, in as much as God had chosen, vouchsafed and se∣uered this people by an especiall couenant for to be his owne pro∣per, and for an inheritance vnto himselfe. And therefore God saith vnto the Israelites Exod. 19. ver. 5. Now therefore if ye will he are my voyce indeede, and keepe my couenant, then ye shall be my chiefe trea∣sure
aboue all people, though all the earth be mine. And in considera∣tion of God his especiall fauours vouchsafed this people before all others, Dauid also Psal. 147. ver. 20. witnesseth of God saying: He hath not dealt so with euery nation, neither haue they knowne his iudge∣ments. The third thing to be noted in this verse is that which is ad∣ded,3. The rest of the sentence noting the desperate stubbornnes of the whole na∣tion. Though they call them to the most high, yet they do not together, or at all exalt God, or acknowledge him, forsaking and casting away their Idols. For in these words is described the desperate stubborn∣nes and disobedience of this people and nation. One or two per∣aduenture were conuerted vnto God by the preaching of the Pro∣phets: but the whole neuer a whit: neither was there any Edict or Decree made by the Kings, that leauing and forsaking their Idols, they should embrace & receiue the true worship of God according vnto his word, & law giuen by Moses. There were then some god∣ly left among them, and chosen of God among that people, which were moued with his threatnings, and did conuert or turne them∣selues, but those were very fewe, and a small number. But the bodie it selfe of the people, the publike state and companie of that whole kingdome retained and maintained their idolatrie: and mocked & condemned those few godly persons. Thus doubtlesse did all euils growe and preuaile among the Israielites, and especially idolatrie, that when as Osea their last king would haue takē it away, he could not. He did in some part diminish or lessen it: but he tooke it not cleane away. For it is sayd of him 2. King. cap. 17. ver. 2. That he did euill in the sight of the Lord, but not as the Kings of Israel, that were before him. Vers. 8. How shall I giue thee vp, Ephraim? how shall I deliuer thee, Israel? how shall I make thee, as Admah? how shall I set thee, as Zeboim? mine heart is turned within me: my repentings are rou∣led together. A confirmatiō beonging vnto those fewe that repented at the threatnings of the Prophets.A Confirmation, which appertaineth vnto those fewe which re∣pented at the threatnings of the Prophets, and were in deede godly: but this promise of God, and so tender affection of minde belongeth not vnto the whole bodie of the people. Therefore al∣beit that same smal remnant deserued to perish also with the whole bodie: yet because they retained the seede of true godlinesse, and had not vtterly cast away the remēbrance of the couenant, as those
other wicked ones had done: so also doth GOD promise that it shall come to passe, that he will not destroy them, and vtterly roote them out, as he will those obstinate and stiffe necked ones, but will of his great mercie preserue them, and for his owne free promises made vnto such godly persons. Two things to be noted.But in this verse there are two things to be noted. To wit, the pro∣mise of GOD vnto such as truely repent: and the phrase or ma∣ner of deliuerie of this promise in words. As touching the promise,1. The promise. it commeth in summe and effect to this poynt: That those which feare God, albeit they bee often punished,2 The phrase or maner of spea∣king in the de∣liuerie of the same. are neuer notwithstan∣ding vtterly destroyed, or doe perish. For GOD will haue his Church, whose members they are, to be perpetual, as it is in the Psal. 89. ver 29. where he promiseth that he will establish his couenant with Dauid, and with the godly of his posteritie, saying: His seede also will I make to indure for euer,  and his throne as the dayes of hea∣uen. And Psal. 72. doe the faithfull in the midst of all their troubles make their earnest praiers vnto God, assuring themselues, that how soeuer for their sinnes they are for a season afflicted, yet shall they neuer finally and vniuersally be consumed. So then the godly are neuer in such maner destroyed by God, as was Sodoma, or as was Seboim, or as Adama, the which cities were vtterly destroyed by God as appeareth Gen. 19. ver. 24, 25. Then the Lord rayned vpon Sodom and vpon Gomorah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heauen, and ouerthrew those cities, and all the plaine, and all the in∣habitants of the cities, and that that grew vpon the earth. And Deut. 29. ver. 23. God threatneth that al that land (he meaneth of the stub∣borne and obstinate sinners) shall burne with brimstone and salt, it shall not bee sowen, nor bring forth, nor any grasse shall growe therein, like as in the ouerthrowing of Sodom and Gomorah, Admah and Ze∣boim, which the Lord ouerthrew in his wrath and in his anger. Which examples GOD would haue to remaine vnto the ages to come of his fearefull anger agaynst obstinatlie wicked sinners Amos 4.2. Peter 2.6. And most plainlie in the Epistle of Iude ver. 7. where, like as in the other places, it is expreslie noted, that these fearefull iudgements are set foorth to the terrifying of all like obstinate sinners. As (sayth Iude) Sodome and Gomorrhe, and the cities a∣bout them, which in like manner as they did, committed, and fol∣lowed straunge flesh, are set foorth for an ensample, and suffer the vengeance of eternall fire.
Now the whole phrase or kind of speaking is to be expressed by attributing vnto God the affections of men for our better capaci∣tie, and vnderstanding. But this affection is described and set forth vnder the name of an heart turning it selfe into all parts, and of bo∣wels, and mercies boyling and yearning with all pitifull compas∣sions. The which two members (to wit, the heart, and the bowels) are in vs the seates of most vehement or earnest affections, & espe∣cially of loue: and then chiefly do they stirre and moue themselues, and waxe warme when it toucheth those whom we loue, and the minde resteth in doubt, whether we should be angrie with them, or rather forgiue them. But all these things are spoken of God accor∣ding to our capacitie and vnderstanding, into whom neuerthelesse there falleth not so much as the least shadowe of changing, if he be considered in himselfe. For in him as Iames speaketh cap. 1. ver. 17. there is no variablenes, nor shadowing by turning. Vers. 9. I will execute the fiercenes of my wrath: I will not re∣turne to destroy Ephraim: for I am God, and not man: the holie one in the midst of thee, and I will not enter into the citie. A confirmatiō of the former promise, with a reason of the same.A Confirmation of the former promise together with a reason of the same. God therefore promiseth that he will not execute vpon those remnants of Ephraim, the punishments which they de∣serue, and that he will not bee angrie against them, accordingly as their sinnes doe prouoke his wrath. He will indeede punish them, but he will not ouerthrow them: the which notwithstanding the iust and righteous heate of the vengeance of God against al sinnes of men requireth to be done. God then will abate of his right, and in them the mercie of God shall triumph aboue iudgement. Final∣ly, he will not enter into their cities, to destroy them: but will suf∣fer them both to be, and also to be inhabited by them. These things first came to passe when as many of these ten tribes both vnder E∣zechias, and also Iosias Kings of Iudah went vp to Ierusalem vnto the Temple of God 2. Chro. 30. and 34. Secondly, vnder the Gos∣pell of Christ, when as by his preaching God conuerted vnto him and saued the Israelites,A twofold rea∣son of the con∣firmation of this promise. and Galileans, and Samaritanes. The reason of this promise followeth, and the same two-fold. First, from the nature of the true God, It is God that speaketh these things,1. From the na∣ture of the true God. and not man. And these two are opposed or set one against another, as constancie against inconstancie, that which is vn∣changeable
against that which is changeable. And so doth Samuel reason against Saul touching the certaintie of the renting of the kingdome from him, because God had so decreed, who is not changeable 1. Sam. 15.29. For indeed (sayth Samuel) the strength of Israel will not lye, nor repent: for he is not a man that he should repent. So then looke what God hath once decreed touching the sauing of his, the same is established, and not to bee moued or changed. For God doth not change his sentence and minde, as men change, and therefore Gods thoughts are not like vnto mens thoughts, as he himselfe witnesseth Isai 55. ver. 8. where he sayth: For my thoughts are not your thoughts, neither are your wayes my wayes. Finally, the gifts of God towards his are without repentance, as Paul writeth Rom. 11. ver. 29. For the gifts and calling of God are without repen∣tance. God therefore will of his mercie preserue those that are his. Secondly,2. By the decla∣tion and laying open of this na∣ture by two titles or por∣perties. by the declaration of this nature of God is confirmed also that the remnants of Israel shall be saued. For as Paul Rom. 9. ver. 27. alleageth out of Isai cap. 1. ver. 9. Though the number of Israel were as the sand of the sea, yet shall but a remnant be saued. For other∣wise it should come to passe, that all Israel by reason of their sinnes, should be as Sodom, and Gomorah, as Isaias in the former place re∣porteth. This nature of God is here declared by two titles and pro∣perties of the same, to wit: for that God is strong, and holie. He is strong, as namely whose decree and will no creature can let,1. God is strong. no nor yet stay so much as one minute from execution in due & iust time: for he remoueth all impediments or lets forthwith. Secondly, he is holie, yea, and that in the midst of them, to sanctifie them,2. God is holie. and blot out their offences by Christ. For their sinnes are they, which other∣wise doe stay the effect of GOD his mercie and promise concer∣ning the sauing of those remnants. But he which is holie, will sanc∣tifie those remnants: for to that end he is sayd to be in the midst of his elect and chosen, that he may sanctifie them: and also that he may be sanctified by them, that is, be serued and worshipped. So then God will saue, and doth saue them for the keeping of his wor∣ship and glorie. And these two titles are in this place rehearsed ve∣rie fitly, to answere the sundrie obiections, the which doe come in∣to the mindes and consciences of the godly, when as they do think of these promises of preseruing them in the midst of the ruine and going to decay of the world.
Vers. 10. They shall walke after the Lord: he shall roare like a lyon: when he shall roare, then the children of the west shall feare. The first am∣plification of the benefit or∣dayned for the repentant.THe first amplification of the benefite ordained for them that re∣pent, and described before. And this is taken from the adding or comming of another benefite vnto it. For God addeth benefites vpon benefites, and heapeth them vpon those that are his. Then the godly shall not be destroyed, that is, shall not be rooted out: nay moreouer they shall followe Iehouah, or walke after the Lord. For God shall in such sort change their hearts, that they shall embrace, professe, allow him, and his precepts and commandements both in faith, and also in an holie life: for this is to walke after the Lord. Fur∣ther, the maner, time, and place of the performance of this benefite is here expressed.The maner of this benefite. The maner, for that God shall roae as it were a lyon, to stirre and rouze vp them to followe him, albeit they were neuer so drowsie and dead of sleepe before. And they shall trem∣ble and feare, and be moued at that roaring of God. They shall therefore awake being pearced with the feare of the iudgements of God, and shall at the last runne vnto God calling them. This was done oftentimes:The time. First, when as Ezechias, and Iosias kings of Iudah did by their letters and messengers stirre vp those which were left of the godly of those tenne tribes, to worship the true God. Secondly, when as Iudas Maccabaeus, and his father did the like. Lastly, and most fully when as Christ himselfe did it by him∣selfe: and also by his Apostles afterward, and through the prea∣ching of the Gospel made by them. The which time especially is here noted. For God threatned the vnbeleeuing worlde, and doth threaten it, when as the doctrine of the Gospel and of reconciliati∣on is propounded or set forth vnto it, if the world shall then refuse and despise the same.The place. Last of all the place is noted, from the sea or from the wrest, that is to say, from the vtmost parts of the promi∣sed land, the which was bounded and inclosed with the west, that is to say, with the Syrian sea: and the lake of Tyberias, the which also is called the sea. The godly therefore from all places shall runne vnto God especially, when Christ preacheth, being strooken with the feare of the iudgements of God: the like was done after∣ward at the preaching of the Apostles: and last of all the same shal fall out, when as the same Iewes in the ende of the worlde shall at the last be conuerted vnto Christ.
Vers. 11. They shall feare as a sparrow out of Egypt, and as a doue out of the land of Asshur, and I will place them in their houses, sayth the Lord. The second am¦plification by the accesse or increase of a third benefit.THe second amplification, by the adding or comming to of the third benefite, and the cōfirmation of the former is set before by the earnest repeating of the same. For otherwise this thing might seeme a matter incredible or not to be beleeued, when as those ten tribes were in such sorte dispersed, and some of them were in ba∣nishment and captiuitie in Egypt, and othersome in Assyria. But the Lord will gather them vnto himselfe both out of Egypt, and al∣so out of Assyria, to wit, by the preaching of the Gospel of Christ. And finally he will adde this third benefite vnto them, that after∣ward they shall remaine safe in their owne houses, that is, in the Church of God: and secondly in their owne land. Which came to passe when as they serued God vnder Ezechias and Iosias, and af∣terward vnder Christ. CAP. 12. Vers. 1. Ephraim compasseth me about with lies, and the house of Israel with deceit: but Iudah yet ruleth with God, and is faithful with the Saints. The drift of this chapter is the same with that which went before.FIrst I refer this verse, which in the chapter before going is rec∣koned for the tweltfth, vnto this place and chapter, as the begin∣ning of the same. And as for this chapter the drift and purpose of the same is all one with that which went next before, namely, that God may witnes his exceeding mercy and bounteousnes, and the same free and perpetuall toward the godly, and his elect, to the end that they may trust in God, and turne vnto him, and hope well in the midst of affliction or trouble. And therefore the sinnes of men, as for example of the Israelites, are in such sorte set downe in this place, that they bee voyd of all excuse: and on the other side the constant counsel and decree of God in sauing his, euen out of that same wicked people is added that the grace of God may appeare to be the more excellent: and the more free without any deseruing. So that as Paul speaketh Rom. 5. vers. 20. Where sinne abounded, there the grace of God abounded much more. This is the drift of the whole chapter. But God beginneth with the reckoning vp of the
sinnes of that nation or people,A rehearsal of the sins of the Israelites. to wit, of the Israelites, the rem∣nants whereof repenting he spareth notwithstanding, yea, and yet now also he daylie spareth the godly sonnes of vngodly parents, as vs namely, which are borne of Idolatrous parents. Moreouer that he may shew those sinnes to be most grieuous, hee doth both sette downe their antiquitie, or the time and beginning of them: and al∣so their most euil effects, and by comparing of the Israelites, whom Oseas here reproueth, with their forefathers, of whom they did so greatly glory, he proueth them to be most haynous. As for the o∣riginall or beginning of their sinning within themselues it is very old and ancient:Th Israelites sinners of olde. For these Israelites doe not now first of all make a beginning to sinne agaynst God, but haue done it long agoe, and that most faithlesly, and when as they had as yet no home examples of publike or generall apostasie or falling away from God. Where they themselues were the first authors of this euill vnto their bre∣thren also, to wit, they were ring-leaders vnto the Iewes to fall a∣way from the true worship of God. And therefore Ezech. cap. 16 vers. 46. telleth them, saying: Thine elder sister is Samaria, and her daughters that dwell at thy left hand, and thy younger sister, that dwel∣leth at thy right hande, is Sodome, and her sisters. The time of their falling a∣way, and their shamelesnes in the same.Wherfore in this verse is set down both the time of this first fal∣ling away of the Israelites from God, and the same publike or ge∣nerall, that is to say, of the whole nation: and also their vnbridled shamelesnes, when as Iuda at the same time notwithstanding did as yet keepe and generally retaine the true worship of God, and pure religion of their fathers and faith of the Saints whole and sound. The Ephraimites compassed mee about, that is, the whole house or kingdome of Israel (the which comprehended the tenne tribes) 1. King. 12. ver 19, 20. compassed me about, and deceiued me on euery side, sayth the Lord, with a lie and deceit. The meta∣phor is taken from the subtilty of those men,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12. which deceiue a man, whom they make shew, and faine that they would reuerence, en∣tertaine, and honor, most shamefully and treacherously vnder the colour of attending vpon him, that is, vnder a shew of duety, and as it were guarding and defending of him. So the Israelites falling a∣way from the kingdome of Iudah, from the true priesthood, the true worship of God the true Temple, would seeme notwithstanding most busily to worship God, and also most holily, when as they set vp and ordayne the worship of the Calues in Dan and Bethel 1. King. 12. ver. 26. & so to the end of the chapter. But al this worship
was but deceit, the which was done vnto God, when as in truth not he but Idols were worshipped by them: it was a lie, because that then God was worshipped, not according to his word, but ac∣cording to the deuises and dreames of men. Confer this place with 2. King. cap. 17. vers. 9. and so following.All idolators vnder the shew of duety & re∣ligion doe mock and deceiue God. So then vnder the colour and shew of duety and religion these Israelites and all Idolators do most grieuously, and shamefully lye vnto God, and craftily com∣passe him about, as if they were his guarde, whome notwithstan∣ding so much as in them lieth, they doe herein deceiue, mocke, and robbe of his honour. And doubtles this sentence refuteth or ouer∣throweth all the reasons and good intents of Idolators be they in shew neuer so glorious. The Israelites fall first away.Moreouer, these tenne tribes then fell away at that time, when as Iudah did yet still lawfully holde that gouernement and king∣dome graunted vnto them by God: and when as the whole nati∣on remayned, and continued constantly, yea and generally, in the worship of God, and fayth of their Elders, and of the Saints, as were Abraham, Isaac, Iacob, Moses, Dauid, &c. Wherefore the begin∣ning of this falling away came first from the Israelites, and the same prouoking and stirring vp themselues vnto this departure or euill without any example of their brethren, to wit, the kingdome of Iu∣dah, or of their auncestors and elders. By howe much the more shamefull their wickednes appeareth for to be. Thus Israel at that time fell away, when as the raigne of Iudah was lawfull ouer them (for by the appoyntment of the mighty God the house of Dauid had rule ouer them all) and also when as the worship of God was yet pure, and true fayth whole and sound in the other tribes, that is, in the tribe of Iudah and Beniamin. Vers. 2. Ephraim is fed with the winde, and followeth after the East winde: he increaseth daylie lies and destruction, and they doe make a couenant with Asshur, and oyle is carried into Egypt. The second am¦plification of the falling a∣way of the Is∣raelites.THe second amplification of this departure and falling away of the Israelites, taken from the most lamentable issue and effect insuing thereupon, among themselues first, and secondly among the Iewes their neighbours, and imitating or following their sins. And first of all among the Israelites themselues this was a double effect of their departure from the worship of God, and kingdome
of Iudah,1. They multiply their lyes. namely, for that feeding themselues with those their vaine deuises they do multiplie, and daylie more and more increase both their lies, and also their miserie and destruction: and second∣ly for that hauing now manifestly shaken off the helpe of God vt∣terly,2 Forsaking God, they buy the help of Infidels, and that most deerely. they doe seeke the leagues of people that are infidels, as of the Assyrians and Egyptians, vnto whome they bring most large and precious giftes Ezech. 16. Thus the sinne of Idolatry in especial, neuer standeth and stayeth in that first degree, where it first began but dayly groweth and increaseth, vntill that in the ende it lead  wholly from God, & vtterly destroy vs. And this is the cause of the growing of it from worse to worse, for that men do feed themselues with the wind, that is to say, do please & like themselues in their for∣ged superstitions, and doe thinke the same to be a most safe de∣fence against the threatnings of God the which are extant in his word against idolators. Therefore whatsoeuer men forge and de∣uise in the worshipping of GOD, the same doth the Prophet call The winde, and the East winde, that is to say, a most pestilent and most hurtfull, and vaine inuention. From that fountaine doe day∣ly spring greater and greater euils and sinnes. For deceits and lies doe increase daylie both toward God and also toward men. For after that the feare of the true God is taken away from men, there is now no conscience, as Varro also affirmeth. Surely so that hypo∣crites may beguile men only, they haue no regarde at all of God, whome they doe not truely know any longer after they haue once cast away his true worship and word. But as they multiplie lies: so doe they also their owne destruction and miserie: for according vnto the greatnes of their sinnes, so also doe the iudgements of God therein become the sharper, and are multiplied. Finally in the end they growe to this passe, that these idolators doe trust in men, and not any longer in God, seeke the helpe of then, and not of God: and procure the same vnto themselues as things profita∣ble for themselues, with great summes of money, and paying well for them notwithstanding. And so did the Israelites 2. King. 15. vers. 19. Then Pul the sonne of Asshur came agaynst the land, and Menahem gaue Pul a thousand talents of siluer,Menahem re∣deemeth peace at the hand of the king of the Assyrians at a great price, to wit, 2. hundred thousand poūd at the least. that his hand might be with him, and establish the kingdome in his hand. So doth Achaz king of Iudah: and experience it selfe teacheth this to be true in o∣ther Princes at this day.
Vers. 3. The Lord hath also a controuersie with Iudah, and will visite Iaacob acording to his wayes: according to his works will he recompence him. Another most lamentable ef∣fect of the tras∣gression of the Israelites light∣ing vpon their brethren the Iewes, imita∣ting their sins.ANother effect most lamentable of the same transgression of the Israelites against God falling not vpon themselues, but vpon the Iewes, a people neere vnto them, to wit, their brethren, & who imitated or followed this Idolatry of the Israelites, and therefore complaint is made against them 2. King. 17. vers. 19. where it is sayd: Yet Iudah kept not the commandements of the Lord their God, but walked according to the fashion of Israel, which they vised. Reade before from the 13. verse of this selfe same 17. chapter concerning this matter also. Wherein may seeme to be the second amplifica∣tion of the former wickednes of the Israelites. So then the Iewes also shall be punished by God. And there is nothing more vsuall and more easie vnto men, then to follow the vices one of another: but God which is iust punisheth these also which are the imitators and followers of other mens sinnes. For he hateth sin in all men and people whatsoeuer, whether it be in them by the imitatiō of others, or by any proper & free motion & inclinatiō of him that so sinneth. Wherefore these idolatrous Israelites sowed a controuersie be∣tweene God and Iudah, or Iacob, because they prouoked the Iewes to sinne by their example. And sinne stirreth vp, and soweth di∣uorcements and strifes or controuersies betweene vs and GOD. And accordingly vnto this doth Isai cap. 59. ver. 2. teach the Iewes, saying: Your iniquities haue separated betweene you and your GOD, and your sinnes haue hid his face from you, that he will not heare. And I doe referre the name of Iacob in this place vnto the kingdome of Iudah only, as appeareth that it is sometimes so taken by that place of Genesis cap. 49. vers. 7. I will deuide the Leuites in Iaacob, and scatter them in Israel. For there are two kingdomes rehearsed, the which arose vp afterward in those twelue tribes or families and sonnes of Iacob, vnder Roboam the son of Salomon. And the Lord wil not only contend with Iacob or with the Iewes: but wil also pu∣nish them because of their wayes and works, that is to say, because of their Idolatry, the which they also followed: but yet not so ge∣nerally: nor yet so outragiously and stubbornly as did the Israelites. Wherein there seemeth a reason to be drawen from the lesse vnto the greater.A reason from the lesse to the greater. For how much more shall God contend with the Is∣raelites,
and punish them, if God contend with the Iewes, and pu∣nish them, which sinned lesse, and through the example of the Isra∣elites, according vnto that saying: If this be done in the greene tree, what shall be done in the drie? Luk. 23. vers. 31. Vers. 4. He tooke his brother by the heele in the wombe, and by his strength he had power with God. Another am∣plificatiō of the same falling a∣way of the Is∣raelites.ANother amplification of the same departure and most shame∣full falling away of the Israelites from the true God. And it is taken from the indignitie and haynousnes of the matter, the which is shewed by the comparing together of the persons, to wit, of these with their father Israel, or Iacob. Therfore in this place there is a comparison made of the posteritie with their auncestors and el∣ders, and especially with Israel their father, of whome they were wont greatly to glory and boast both within themselues, and also amōg other people. Thus thē is the offence of the Israelites shewed to be so much the more shamefull and haynous, by how farre away these do depart & swarue from the vertues & steps of Iacob, that is, of their father a most holy man, and of whom they doe so well like and allow. Therefore taking occasion by the word Israel vers. 1. and Iacob vers. 3. there is shewed what hee did, how much hee la∣boured, how much hee swet, that he might both serue and wor∣ship that God,The vertues of Iacob. whom these his posteritie forsooke and cast away. Finally, here is described or set out with how great indeuour both of minde and body, yea and from the very instant and minute of his natiuity or birth, he diligently sued and sought after that same friendship and good will of the true God, that these his posteritie may be made the le excusable. And the selfe same may readily be obiected against vs, who doe so coldly embrace the true light of the Gospel, the which notwithstanding our auncestors so dili∣gently sought after,Signes of the carefulnes of Iacob to obtain the fauour of God. and followed. Now there are three signes described, by the which it appea∣reth, with how great earnestnes of minde Iacob or Israel (for these are all one Gen. 32.28.) sought, embraced, and retained the good wil, grace, and fauour of GOD. The first signe is, That when as he was yet with his brother Esau in the womb of his mother,  hee held the heele of his brother Esau, that Esau should not come first out of the wombe, that is, that Esau in respect of time should not bee the first borne, and haue the blessing of God Gen. 25.26. After∣ward
came his brother out, and his hand held Esau by the heele. Name∣ly as if Iacob thought very then when he was not yet borne into the light, of the preuenting or going before Esau in the friendship and fauour of God, and of getting the grace of God from him, with so great a desire soothles was he holden euen then (being as yet in the womb, and an infant) to win God on his side, and to embrace him notwithstanding. For when as the blessing of God by all likelyhood was due vnto the first borne, this priuiledge of the birthright, Ia∣cob went about to take from his brother euen then, like as hee did afterward Gen. 25. ver. 31. When he said vnto him comming hun∣grie home: Sel me euen now thy birth-right, that by this meanes al∣so he might get the blessing of God from his brother, and con∣ueigh it vnto himselfe. That which afterward came to passe Gen. 27. And albeit these things so fell out by reason that God had fore∣tolde that so it should be, as appeareth Gen. 25.23. The Elder shall serue the yonger, and by the election of God, who loued Iacob, and hated Esau, Malach. 1. ver. 3. yet notwithstanding is it true that these things also were done by Iacob in this sort when he was yet a childe, according vnto the dispensation, and measure of his faith, the which being then an infant and yet vnborne, hee had notwith∣standing with God, like as it is written of Iohn the Baptist Luc. the 1. ver. 41. And of the Prophet Ieremie cap. 1. ver. 5. who were sanc∣tified in the wombe of their mothers, and ordained vnto those great matters the which God effected afterward by their ministe∣rie. And all these things doe argue or proue the earnestnes of Iacob in getting the fauour of God, and as it were forestalling of his grace, euen from his mothers wombe, and from the very first moment of his natiuitie or birth. The which notwithstanding these Israelites, that is to say, his posteritie did not imitate or follow: and therefore are they so much the worse. The second signe is, that the same Iacob, as a most valiant prince, and most strong and stout champion, fought against the Angel himselfe, which seemed to bring some let vnto him, whilest he exe∣cuted the charge of God concerning his returning into the land of Chanaan. This is described Gen. 31. ver. 3. where mention is made how God had said vnto Iacob: Turne againe into the lande of thy fathers, and to thy kindred, and I will be with thee. And againe cap. 32. ver. 24. where Laban is charged from God not to hinder him in this course, and to speake to Iacob nought saue good. Whereby appeareth howe great earnestnes of minde there was in their father Iacob to
serue God, to doe his commaundements, and finally to keepe his good will towards him continually. For he fought stoutly for the executing of the commandement of God, and that against an An∣gel, not onely against a mortall man: he fought long and much, and therein shewed that he had inuincible strength to serue God, and that no labour was tedious vnto him. Therefore in that fight he appeared as a prince, and a most skilfull and valiant captaine, and not as a common souldier Gen. 32. ver. 28. Whereupon his name is changed, for the Angel saith vnto him: Thy name shall be called Iaacob no more, but Israel: because thou hast had power with God, thou shalt also preuaile with men. For in the ende he obtained the victorie and vpper hand euen against that Angel. Therefore he ruled, or shewed himselfe a prince and stout wrastler, striuing for the truth and promises of God against the Angel. But this Angel was Christ, who also is called Iehouah hereafter ver. 5. For so is Christ often called the Captaine of his Church, and an Heade, and an Angel. So Esay 9. ver. 6. among other titles giuen vnto our Saui∣our Christ, he is called, The prince of peace. So Iudg. 6. ver. 22. he is called an Angel: for there we finde thus: And when Gideon percei∣ued that it was an Angel of the Lorde, Gideon then saide, Alas, My Lord God: for because I haue seene an Angel of the Lord face to face, I shall die. And this Angel fought with Iacob taking vpon him the shape of a man for a time. He fought with Iacob, that he might first tempt him, and afterwards confirme him in the faith of his pro∣mises, and make him an inuincible or vnconquerable champion. And the Angel suffereth himselfe to be ouercome, because he him∣selfe gaue strength vnto Iacob sighting with him, to ouercome him. Moreouer Iacob became lame of that fight, to the ende hee should vnderstand that he ouercame not by his owne strength, or by his owne strength gat the vpper hand of the Angel. Let vs also hope for the same things at the hand of God, so often as he fighteth louingly against vs. For he doth this to confirme or strengthen vs: and not to bring vs into tentation in his iust iudgement, that wee should be ouercome of euill. And therefore Dauid saith vnto God Psal. 26. ver. 2. Prooue me, O Lord, and trie me: examine my reynes, and mine heart. And Iames teacheth the faithfull that this kinde of tentation or triall which God vseth towardes those that are his, bringeth forth patience. cap. 1. ver. 3.
Vers. 5. And had power ouer the Angel, and preuayled: he wept and prayed vnto him: he found him in Beth-el, and there he spake with vs. A Repetition. For he cōtinueth in setting forth vnto the Israelites the selfe same earnestnes of Iacob, because that it was a thing both of very great waight, and a most assured and certen token of his most zealous minde in worshipping God: and briefly an home example, and that same very fact and deede, for the which he was called Israel, which was before called Iacob. Wherfore the vertues of our auncetors are diligently of vs to be considered. For they are home examples, the which doe make vs inexcusable, except we doe imitate or follow them. And it is the third signe,  whereby Israel de∣clared his earnestnes, and contention or striuing in minde in win∣ning the fauour of God, to wit, for that he desired the blessing of God euen with teares and weeping. The which were in Iacob most assured tokens of this most earnest affection. This is reported Gen. 32. ver. 26. and 29. Last of all he got the same blessing of God, and receiueth testimonie or witnes thereof from God, not once, but of∣tentimes, as then when hee stroue with the Angel, as I haue said, Gen. 32.28. and afterwardes in Beth-el, Gen. 35.10. For the new name he receiued in token of the fauour of God towards him, the which name was giuen him by God himselfe. For in stead of Iacob he was named by God, Israel, a very high and royal name.The Prince, or Champion of God. Nei∣ther was that same talke and testimonie of God with Israel, giuen onely for the sake, or in respect of Israel, but also for his whole po∣sterities sake which should be borne of him, that his posteritie might vnderstand that they also should be blessed of God, that they should be strong and happie in God, so that they would shew and retaine the same earnestnes in seeking of God, the which Ia∣cob their progenitor and originall of their stocke vsed. Therefore saith the Prophet, Euen then also God spake vnto vs,The faithfull posteritie of Iacob blessed in their father. when as he bles∣sed Iacob. For in him he chose vs also his seede, and blessed vs, if we docontinue in the same faith toward God, in the which our father Iacob liued. Vers. 6. Yea the Lord God of hosts, the Lord is himselfe his memo∣riall. A Staying still in the same matter,A continuing in the same matter. wherein the Prophet doth de∣clare both who that God was whome Israel so greatly sought
after, and moreouer addeth as it were for an aduantage, a conse∣quence or conclusion at the length, to mooue and rouse vp the Is∣raelites. As for the declaration and making plaine, or shewing who that God is, whome Iacob followed, that is contained in this verse: and the consequence or conclusion in the verse following.What God he was, whom Ia∣cob so earnestly embraced. That God therefore, whose good will Iacob or Israel did so earnestly embrace, is both the God of hostes, and also is called Iehouah by his proper and peculiar name. For this name did God him selfe shew vnto men, as his memoriall or remembrance, as the Greekes speake, to wit, that men might knowe the true God by this name,Mnemosynon. might remember him, might seuer him out from idols, might acknowledge his power to bee infinite, and the cause of all things that are. And therefore Exod. 3. ver. 14, 15. after that Mo∣ses hath asked of God, what hee should say vnto the Israelites his name to bee, tell them saith GOD, (I am) hath sent mee vnto you: this is my name for euer, and this is my memoriall vnto allages. For he is that Iehouah, the which is both of himselfe, and by him∣selfe: and also giueth vnto all things that are, their being, as Paul sheweth Act. 17. ver. 28. For in him (saith he) we liue and moue, and haue our being. And Apocal. 1.8. I am Alpha, and O Mega, the be∣ginning and the ending. God then hath reserued this name vnto him∣selfe, as his owne proper name,I take this place to be misse quoted, for Exod. 6. ver. 2. and as his token and marke of him∣selfe. There is a like place, Exod. 13. ver. 3. Psalm. 68. ver. 4. And this explication or shewing what God Iacob serued, dooth refute or o∣uerthrow and condemne all that worship which the Israelites vsed vnto idols. For Iacob did not worship idols, but the true God, the true Iehouah. Therefore you doe not imitate or follow your father Iacob. So saith he Aeneid. lib. 2. At non ille, satum quo te mentiris, Achilles Talis in hoste fuit Priamo:— Englished by Phaer thus:The wordes of Priamus vnto Pirrhus. Not so did he (whom falsely thou beliest to be thy sier): Achilles with his enemie Priam deale:— Vers. 7. Therefore turne thou to thy God: keepe mercie and iudge∣ment, and hope still in thy God. The conse∣quence or con∣clusion.THe consequence or conclusion, wherein the Israelites are called back by the example of Israel to worship the true God. And first of all by the precepts of the second table: afterward by the sighes of the first table is shewed, what manner of persons they
ought for to bee. The second table setteth downe our duetie to∣ward our neighbours, the which consisteth specially of these parts, of Mercie, that is, free bounteousnes towards our neigh∣bours: and Iudgement, whereby wee giue vnto them those things, the which wee owe vnto them by bargaine and promise. The first table containeth our duetie towards God, the which consisteth of faith in him, and of continuall hope in his promises, that wee neuer trust in any other thing, or God: or set our hope any where els, but only vpon the true God, and therfore our selfe same hope compre∣hendeth the calling vpon God, and also giuing of him thankes, the which hope resteth on the true God. And these are the parts of true repentance and amendment of life, that is of our conuersion or tur∣ning vnto God, and the most certaine notes, and plentifull fruites, which ought to be in all those, which truely worship the true God. Vers. 8. He is Canaan: (or a Merchant) the balances of deceit are in his hand: he loueth to oppresse. A setting down of the contrarie vices of the Is∣raelites, vnto those vertues required of thē in the former verse.AN Antithesis, or setting downe the contrarie vnto that which was required of them in the verse before. For the Prophet op∣posethor setteth against both his former exhortation, and also the dutie of the Israelites, their vices, and that those which are against the Commandements of the second table. For there hath aboun∣dantly been spoken before of their idolatrie, and sinnes against the first table. And as before he made mention of Iudgement and Mer∣cie, the which by the law of God wee ought to performe vnto our neighbours: so in this place he rehearseth the deceit of the Israe∣lites, the which they committed and vsed in buying and selling, and in other contracts: and moreouer their oppression, the which is op∣posed or set against mercie and gentlenes, and free doing good. So then Israel is Canaan, that is, a craftie Merchant, & Deceiuer, which vseth deceitfull and false balances and weights, in his dealings and bargaines against the commandement of the law Deut? 25: ver. 13. Thou shalt not haue in thy bagge two maner of weights, a great and a small. And moreouer these are wholly bent and set vpon this, how one of them may oppresse another. Therefore they doe not onely hurt one another by craft or deceits, but also by violence & warre, the which two kindes doe comprehend the other vices contrarie vnto our charitie and duetie towards our neighbours, as Paul also doth 1. Thess. 4. ver. 6. when he willeth, that no man oppresse or de∣fraude his brother in any matter.
Vers. 9. And Ephraim sayd, notwithstanding I am rich: I haue found me out riches in all my labours: they shall finde none iniquitie i me, that were wickednesse. An amplifica∣tion of their former wicked∣nesse.AN amplification of the former wickednesse of the Israelites ta∣ken from a reasoning, whereby they did diminish or lessen those their most grieuous vices, and did beguile and flatter themselues. To wit, for that vsing deceit and violence against their neighbours, they did not (as they would haue it thought) sinne so greatly, that their offence was to be tearmed wickednesse, or iniquitie, sinne, o any hainous transgression. Therefore if there were in these their deedes or life, any blemish, spot, or fault, the same notwithstanding they would haue to be tearmed some light or small sinne,All hypocrites lessen their of∣fences. but not so grieuous, and such as God was greatly displeased withall. Thus then did these hypocrites, like as all others are wont to doe, lessen their notorious and outragious offences. They dare not altogether denie that there is any fault in those things (which in the eyes of all men appeare to be wickednesse) or that there is no want or blemish in their charitie or duetie: but they excuse themselues, as if this defect or want were not to be vrged or pressed, and followed so hardly, & in such sort to be cōdemned, that therfore they ought to be iudged worthie of some great punishment euen before God: finally, they deny that it is to be called an hainous offence or mischieuous deed So Psal. 94. ver. 7. when as the vngodly murther and slay the inno∣cent, and otherwise most grieuously transgresse: yet they say, The Lord shall not see: neither will the God of Iaacob regard it. But this their opinion and reasoning they also goe about to confirme and maintain, as other most wicked hypocrites are wont wittingly and aduisedly to dote and bee mad, and to chatter and churmer against God.The reason of the wicked, to proue their dealings to be allowed of God. They reason forsooth from the prosperous and happie suc∣cesse of their trafick & merchandise, by the which dealing after this sort with their neighbours, they grow rich notwithstanding, & ga∣ther together great wealth and substance: which happines and pro∣spering, say they, is a tokē that there is no fault in their bargainings, buyings, and sellings, nor any thing in their life that God hateth: for God would not then blesse them. In this doubtlesse they doe well, that they thinke all blessing and euery good gift to be of God. For Iames 1. ver. 17. teacheth vs, That euery good giuing, and euery perfect gift is from aboue, and commeth downe from the father of lights. And
the Psalmist saith, Psal. 127. &c. That, except the Lord build the house, they labour in vaine that▪ build it: except the Lord keepe the citie, the keeper watcheth in vaine. But herein they reason very ill,Wealth and store of worldly goods are not a wayes tokens of God his fa∣uour. whiles they thinke and will haue these riches and earthly goods to bee alwayes a note and most certaine token of the fauour and good will of God towards men waxing rich by any meanes whatsoeuer. Which thing Christ denieth Matth. 5. ver. 45. when he sayth, That God maketh his sunne rise as well on the euill, as on the good: and sendeth raine on the iust, and vniust. And Salomon Ecclesiast. 9. ver. 1, 2. most euidently teacheth the same in these words: I haue surely giuen mine heart to all this, and to declare al this, that the iust, and the wise, and their works are in the hands of God, and no man knoweth either loue or hatred of al that is before them. All things come alike to all: and the same condi∣tion is to the iust and to the wicked, to the good, and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that sacrificeth, and to him that sacrificeth not: as is the good, so is the sinner, he that sweareth, as he that feareth an¦th. Vers. 10. Though I am the Lord thy God, from the land of Egypt, yet will I make thee to dwell in the tabernacles, as in the dayes of the solemne feast. AN Antithesis, or setting downe of the contrarie vnto their de∣seruings, expressed in the verse before. For to the end that the stubbornnes and disobedience of the Israelites may appeare to be the greater, God opposeth or matcheth against this their stiffe neckednesse his owne benefites, and the same continuall, and euen from the first times alreadie bestowed vpon them.1. The antiquitie of God his be∣nefites toward them. And first of all 02 the antiquitie or ancientues of the benefites of God is contained in this verse: and secondly the continuing of them is declared. The antiquitie, or so long beginning of them was, so farre as their mind can looke backe, or behold them from long time past:2. The continu∣ing of the same so that they 02 no sooner began to be a people, and a notion seuered from others, but they straight felt those infinite benefites of God,  whom not∣withstanding they contemned or despised so stubbornly, and trea∣cherously, and peruersly. For euen from since the land of Egypt this selfe same God, whom these doe not acknowledge for their God, began to bee their God, that is, their keeper, maintainer, pre∣serue, and benefactor. For he defended them against the iniuries,
the which were done vnto them by Pharao King of the Egyptians, as he himselfe doth witnesse Exod. 3. ver. 7.8. saying: I haue surely seene the trouble of my people which are in Egypt, & haue heard their crye, because of their taskemasters: for I know their sorowes. Therefore I am come downe to deliuer them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them out of that land into a good land, and a large, into a land that floweth with milke and butter. For had not God defended them, the children of Israel had vtterly perished, and that an hundreth times among the Egyptians, in as much as both the Egyptians, and also their King hated them with more then deadly hatred, and bare such spite and enuie euen vnto the whole nation of the Israelite, that they decreed at once to destroy them all. And therefore Exod. 1. ver. 10. The King sayth vnto his people: Come let vs worke wisely with them, lest they multiplie, & it come to passe, that if there be warre, they ioyne themselues also vnto our enemies, and fight against vs, and get them out of the land: but God did euen then saue them: and af∣terward altogether deliuered them and rid them from the gouern∣ment of the Egyptians, bringing them out of Egypt, and that with a mightie, armed, and strong hand, as it is in the Psalm. 105. ver. 23.24, &c. Then Israel came out of Egypt, and Iaacob was a stranger in the land of Ham. And he increased his people exceedingly, and made them stronger then their oppressors. In the second place is added the continuing of the benefites of God, yet I made thee to dwell in tabernacles, as in the festiuall and so∣lemne dayes. The word (Gnod) the which they translate (yet) sig∣nifieth rather in this place (furthermore) that the Prophet may de∣clare that God neuer ceaed to handle this people gently, from the time that he began to be their God. He therefore cherished them, and that with a meruailous care and loue. For when as they dwel∣led in the wildernesse, and in tabernacles or tents: yet notwithstan∣ding God nourished them there, as if they had dwelled in a soyle a∣bounding with all store of things, and gaue vnto them all things, & in so great plentie, as if it were in the solemne, and feast dayes, that is exceeding great God then in the midst of the desert or wilder∣nesse prouided for them, entertained, and nourished them daintilie and cheerefully with birds, and Manna, as it is in the Psal. 105. ver. 37. and so to the end of the chapter.
Vers. 11. I haue also spoken by the Prophets, and I haue multiplied visions, and vsed similitudes by the ministerie of the Prophets. A Staying in the rehearsall of God his be∣nefites toward them.A Staying in the same matter, wherein God proueth the conti∣nuing of his benefites towards the Israelites by the effects, and the same most excellent, and vnto Israel himselfe most healthsome. And these effects are, they raysing vp of Prophets among the Israe∣lites, by the which Prophets he sundrie wayes taught these Israe∣lites, awaked them, and called them backe vnto their duetie, and re∣pentance of minde, and of life. And this questionles is a most sin∣gular benefite of God, and greater then any earthly gift, and any fruitfulnes of the earth whatsoeuer, to wit, whē he sendeth his faith∣full seruants and Prophets vnto vs. And therefore the people grie∣uously complaine of this want vnto God Psal. 74. ver. 9. where they say: We see not our signes: there is not one Prophet more, nor any with vs that knoweth how long. Three wayes of declaring the will of God by the Prophets.But in this place God comprehendeth three kindes or wayes, whereby the Prophets declare and expound the will of God, and all the which he diligently, and often vsed to conuert, & draw back the Israelites: but all in vaine. For he lost his labour: for they con∣tinued in their old stubbornnes of mind, and kept their old wont in seruing of Idols continually. And so many wayes doth God reckon vp, lest he might seeme to haue ouerpassed any thing. The first way,1. Simple and plaine spea∣king. wherby God doth cōmunicat, or impart himself vnto the Prophets, & by the Prophets vnto vs, is plaine & simple speaking or deliuerie of the word, whereunto neither any vision or similitude is added. The 2. kind is, when as God speaketh by some vision, that is to say:2. When some vi∣sion is added vnto the word. whē God addeth vnto his word, & speaking, some external or out∣ward shape, wherein he appeareth, and the which doth represent and resemble his maiestie, and finally some outward signe of his presence. So Numb. 12. ver. 6. God sayth: Heare now my words, if there be a Prophet of the Lord among you, I will be knowne to him by a vision, and I will speake to him by a dreame. So Psalm. 89. ver. 19. the Psalmist sayth: Thou spakest then in a vision to thine holie one. And Matth. 1. ver. 20. The Angel warneth Iosepth in a dreame, to take Ma∣rie for his wife. So Ezech. 1. and 10. God speaketh vnto Ezechiel by sundrie visions. The third kind is,3. When by some outward figure God by his Pro∣phets represen∣teth the thing, which he com∣mandeth. when God besides sheweth some figures and similitudes, the which doe represent the thing it selfe, the which he commaundeth or will haue to be done. So Isai. 20.2.
The Prophet is willed to put off his sackcloth, and shooes, and to goe naked, and barefoote. So Ierem. 27. ver. 2. He putteth bonds vpon his necke, and yokes, and sendeth them vnto sundrie kings of the heathen. The like is to bee seene Zach. 2. and 3. and 6. Of these things I haue spoken in my notes before these Prophets. Vers. 12. Is there iniquitie in Gilead? surely they are vanitie: they sacrifice bullocks in Galgal, and their altars are as heapes in the furrowes of the field. A comparison shewing the great vnthank∣fulnes of the Israelites.A Comparison, whereby God sheweth the notorious ingratitude or vnthankfulnes of the Israelites, and idolaters. For by this selfe same Antithesis, or contrarietie and comparison, the wickednesse and transgression of the Israelites against God is meruailously in∣creased. It is increased also by the kind of speaking it self, the which God vseth, that is, by asking of questions, and these answers the which he vseth, and the which doe the more conuince and assured∣ly proue their desperate, and graceles vnshamefastnes, and outra∣gious stubbornnes, and shewe them to be vnexcusable. God there∣fore demandeth, when as I haue shewed my selfe such a one vnto these,God his que∣stion. and so louing and fauourable, and that continually: what doe these on the contrarie part in Gilgal, or in the whole countrie of Galaad or Gilead, and is there any iniquitie in that place commit∣ted by them, whereby they despise and cast me off? And he answe∣reth, yea verely. For these doe nothing in all that countrie, but those things which are most wicked,His answer. and most vaine, and commit mani∣fold iniquitie. For they sacrifice bullocks there, the which now is not lawfull, albeit they did offer them vnto the true God, because such sacrifices ought onely to be made in the Temple of Salomon, according vnto the commandement of God Psal. 132. but they did not sacrifice them vnto God, but vnto Idols. Finally, so mad are these Idolaters, that in furrowes, and euery ridge of their sowen or plowed fields they haue those their idolatrous Altars set vp, and there doe they sacrifice vnto their Idols: by the which the greater contempt or despising of God appeareth. For the more that ido∣latrie reigneth among men, so much the more shamefully and ma∣nifestly the true worship of God is either defaced or taken away, and the knowledge of the true God is abolished. See before cap. 9. ver. 15.
Vers. 13. And Iaacob fled into the countrey of Aram, and Israel serued for a wife, and for a wife he kept sheepe. A reprehension shewing plainly the great vn∣thankefulnes of this people.A Reprehension, by the which is shewed yet more plainely how vnthankfull these are vnto God, by the first and miserable e∣state and condition of their father Iacob, of whom they boasted so greatly. For by how much the more vile, obscure, and base the original and beginning of this people was (as may doubtles be seen in Iacob or Israel, of whom they came) so much the more vnthank∣full are these, who through the only benefite of GOD grew and were aduanced afterward into so great dignitie, & yet notwithstā∣ding had cast off God the author of this their happie estate. So E∣zechiel 16. by the comparing together of the estate of both this people, their great rebellion and wickednes is shewed. So the first, and the same Idolatrous and miserable estate of Abraham is set forth, that the benefite of God, the which from Abraham was spread abroad vnto that nation, may be declared to be the greater: Hereof doth Ioshua cap. 24. vers. 2. put the Israelites in minde say∣ing vnto them in the person of God: Your fathers dwelt beyond the flood in olde time, euen Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of Nachor, and serued other Gods. So Psalm. 105. vers. 12.13. God putteth them in minde of their first poore and base estate pro∣mising them the land of Canaan for the lot of their inheritance, Al∣beit they were fewe in number, yea very fewe, and strangers in the land and walked about from nation to nation, from one kingdome to another people. So Isai 51. ver. 2. the Prophet sayth vnto them: Consider Abraham your father, and Sarah that bare you: For I called him a∣lone and blessed him, and increased him. So Iuuenal Satyr. 8. (al∣beit in an vnlike matter) speaketh vnto the Romanes glorying and being proud of their Ancestors and of their deedes after this maner: Et tamen vt longèrepetas, longé{que} reuoluas, Nomen, ab infami gentem deducis Asylo: Maiorum primus quisquis fuit ille tuorum, Aut pastor fuit, aut illud, quod dicere nolo. In English thus: And yet although that thou from far, A place in Rome much A like vnto our Sanctuaries, founded first by Romulus, and priuiledged for the safety of al bad persons & malefactors to flee vnto. The base estate of Iacob.And high do fet thy name, 0103 0207 V 2 Thou from Asylum hast thy stocke
A place of sorie fame. Whoeuer in thy pedigree Were first, and bare the bel, A shepheard was, or else the thing, The which I spare to tell. Further this vile condition and base estate of Iacob, is shewed by two reasons. The one, for that he was a fugitiue in Mesopota∣mia, Gen. 28. The other, for that he was seruant vnto Laban, yea and a Pastor or shepheard: and not such a seruant as was Vsher of the hall,1 In that he was a fugitiue. or porter, or steward, or placed in any other charge and of∣fice of reputation, and good account in seruice, but appointed only to keepe the flockes of sheepe.2 In that he was a seruant. In a word, Iacob was reckoned and serued among those seruants the which were but of meane ac∣count and regard, and that for a wife, that is, that hee might geete a wife. So base no doubt was he iudged, that he could not get and seeke himselfe a wife by any other way, but by being a seruant: not by riches, dignitie, flower of his age, nor briefly was he your first fa∣ther Israel, commended and set out with any other matters, where∣by men are wont to procure vnto themselues other mens families, and get themselues wiues, and marriages: but as one that was most poore, and most base, and a seruant, he was constrayned to gette himselfe a wife by his owne labour, and base seruice, and as it were to buy her: when as other husbands notwithstanding are wont to be bought with a dowrie of their wiues. Further, the seruice of Iacob for a wife is twice set downe in this verse, both to make the matter more plaine, and what kinde of seruice it was: and also for as much as Iacob had two wiues, he serued for them both seuerally, and at diuers times. Gen. 29. Now how miserable the condition both of a fugitiue and also of one that is a shepheard seruant is, ex∣perience it selfe doth sufficiently teach: and hereby also it may be gathered, for that banishment and bondage, are among men ac∣counted as death. Vers. 14 And by a Prophet the Lord brought Israel out of E∣gypt, and by a Prophet was he reserued. The secōd part of the reprehē∣siō shewing the benefites of God toward this peo¦ple comming of so base a fatherTHe other parte of the reprehension, to wit, wherein are descri∣bed the benefites of God against a people borne of so base and poore a father at the first. Therefore the name of Israel in this place is taken for the whole nation, which came of that Israel, which
was a seruant and a fugitiue. This nation therfore so base did the al∣mighty God notwithstāding choose vnto himself for his inheritāce, took it for his own, cherished it most tēderly, broght it out of Egypt, that is, out of a most filthy prison (wherin it was shut vp) & finally, preserued it in that long iourney against all enemies, and vntill he had brought them into that same promised land. Hee then reser∣ued them and brought them out of Egypt, and that by his Prophets Moses; and afterwards Ioshua. Of this deliuerance speaketh Da∣uid Psal. 77. vers. 15.20. where hee saith: Thou hast redeemed thy people with thine arme, euen the sonnes of Iacob, and Ioseph. Thou didst leade thy people like sheepe by the hand of Moses and Aaron. And Psal. 105. vers. 26. Then sent he Moses his seruant, and Aaron whome hee had chosen, &c. And Hebr. 4. vers. 8. For if Iesus (meaning Ioshua) had giuen them rest, then would he not after this day haue spoken of another. And these are singular and especiall benefites of GOD: chiefly, for that God employd and appoynted his Prophets (that is, his most choyce and dearest seruants) vnto the seruice and de∣fence of this people. And our vnthankfulnes which haue the pure gospel, is no lesse, for as much as God also stirreth vp his excellent seruants to teach vs, & hath stirred them vp now these many years continually together. For as Paul writeth to the Ephesians cap. 4. vers. 11, 12. Christ gaue some to be Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Euangelists, and some Pastors, and Teachers, for the gathering together of the Saints, for the worke of the ministerie, and for the edi∣fication of the bodie of Christ, &c. Vers. 15. But Ephraim prouoked him with hie places: therefore shal his blood be powred vpon him, and his reproach shall his Lord reward him. AN Antithesis, or shewing of the contrary practise in the Israe∣lites, being not answerable vnto the former benefites of God, whereby the wickednes of all the Israelites, which despised the like bounteousnes of God, is amplified.Two partes of this verse. For this iniquitie appeareth to be so much the more manifest and greater, by howe much on the contrary the rebellion of these men,1. Describeth the wickednes of the Israelites. What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos 5. vers. 21. and the goodnes of GOD towards them notwithstanding, are more neerely compared and matched together. And this verse hath two parts. The first setteth forth the wickednes of all the Israelites, who are here by the figure Synecdoche comprehended vnder the name of Ephraimites, These
notwithstanding (saith he) prouoked God, and that most bitterly. After ward he sheweth this to haue been done two wayes, both by cru∣elty or blood: and also by their reproch and filthy Idolatry, the which they so outragiously followed, that they preferred and iud∣ged the aydes of idolatrous nations to be more safe and sure then the ayde and promises of God. The which thing in the end turned vnto their destruction, and so consequently vnto their reproch and shame 2. King. 17. And last of all it was the most true cause of their ruine and decay. And thus much doth the first part of this verse containe. 2. Sheweth the iudgements of God against them for their cruelty, and i∣dolatrie.The second part sheweth the iudgements of God to insue vp∣on them for the same, to wit, God will rewarde them their cruelty and blood, the which they haue shed. Before vers. 8. the Prophet made mention of the oppression, which was committed by them: so then they were cruel against their neighbours and brethren. Secondly, God & their Lord will reward vnto them their reproch, that like as with their distrust and idolatrie they haue reproached and shamed God and their Lord: so they being by God layd open to the pray, and made voide of helpe and ayde, shall become re∣proachfull, and a laughing stocke vnto other nations. Finally, they shall become a tale, and an hissing to the common people, as the holy scripture speaketh. So Ieremie 18. vers. 15.16. it is saide, that for the Idolatry of the people, and the seducing and leading them out of the way by false Prophets, Their Land shall be desolate, and a perpetuall derision, so that euery one that passeth thereby, shall be asto∣nished, and wagge his head. For so is God wont to repay like for like vnto his enemies, & despisers, that he may punish them with equal or like punishment, such as was their sinne Psal. 78. vers. 66. For as the Philistines thought to haue shamed the Israelites, and their God also: so were they plagued with shamefull diseases in their hinder partes. CAP. 13. Vers. 1. When Ephraim spake there was trembling: he exalted him∣selfe in Israel: but he hath sinned in Baal, and is dead. An other Ser∣mon differing from the for∣mer in some particular con∣tents, but a∣greeing in the scope, and sum of doctrine.THis chapter containeth another sermon of Oseas, diuers from the former in regard of some particular contents, yet most like vnto that former in respect of the drift and summe of the doctrine.
For this whole chapter tendeth to this end, to shew that God will bee fauourable to the remnants of this people of Israel, the which shall conuert or turne vnto God, and shal in the end gather them together of his great mercie, and call them back againe vnto him, ver. 14.15. albeit that the most shamefull and filthie sinnes of this people doe not at all deserue this, or perswade hereunto. In the meane season God by all meanes, and by reasons taken from all places calleth back all the Israelites, that is to say, the ten tribes, the which had treacherouslie withdrawne themselues from his true worship, that if by any meanes it might be, God might saue them all and not a part onely, and remnant of them. And by these admo∣nitions or warnings so often repeated the Israelites are made the lesse excusable, and their disobedience is shewed to be the greater, and the more stubborne. Wherfore in this chapter God exhorteth and calleth the whole nation vnto repentance: and in this verse he dooth it by the rehearsing of both their estates, to wit, that in the which this people was, & flourished so long as they serued the true God, or was not so much giuen vnto idolatrie (as it was then) and of that state, in which they now be, after that they haue begun to worship idols so outragiouslie, and those also of all sortes.The first estate of the Ephrai∣mites. As for their first estate, it was happie: For then, When Ephraim spake, and gaue sentence among the other tribes, they were feared. For they had gotten vnto themselues reuerence and authoritie among all the Israelites, in so much that they obtained the kingdome among those ten tribes, and that this tribe of Ephraim made the other tribes to feare them, and ruled ouer them as their head. For Iero∣boam (which first ordained and set vp the kingdome of Israel) was an Ephraimite 1. King. 11. ver. 26. & he made the citie Sichem the chiefe citie of that Kingdome, in mount Ephraim, in the which afterward he and Nadab reigned and dwelled 1. King. 12.25. Then Ieroboam built Shechem in mount Ephraim, and dwelt therein, and went from thence, and built Penuel. But after that the familie of Iero∣boam was rooted out, and the kingdome taken by Baasa of the tribe of Issachar 1. King. 15. ver. 27. the seate of the kingdome and the chiefe citie was Thersa or Tirza, ver. 33. And this Thersa or Tirza was beyond Iordan, in the countrie of Galaad, or Gilead neer vnto Thapsus 2. King. 15. ver. 16. And Thapsus or Tiphsah, (which of Stephanus is called Thapsacus, and of Plinius lib. 5. cap. 24. Am∣phipolis) is situate by the riuer Euphrates, at leastwise beyond Ior∣dan 1. King. 4. ver. 24. For there it is said that Solomon ruled in all the
region on the other side of the riuer, from Tiphsah euen vnto Azzah, &c. Wherefore the authoritie and preheminence of the tribe of E∣phraim was now in part diminished,The autoritie of the tribe of Ephraim in part dimini∣shed. when as the chiefe citie of the kingdome was translated into another tribe. And this came to passe, because those two Ephraimite kings, namely Ieroboam and Nadab were idolators. And this was the first condition or estate of Ephraim, and the same in deede happie, before that it fell vnto idolatrie. But after that outragious and filthie idolatrie began among them,The second e∣state of the E∣phraimites. and the worship of Baal, and all kinde of idols to bee recei∣ued, and worshipped for God, then began Ephraim to be most vn∣happie, to be counted weake, and for dead, and of no authoritie a∣boue the other tribes. That which happened first vnder King A∣chab. For he first brought Baalims into Israel seeking to please his wife Iezabel of Sidonia 1. King. 16. ver. 31.Achab was the first that brought Ba∣alims into Is∣rael. For there by way of admiration it is asked thus concerning him: For was it a light thing for him to walke in the sinnes of Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, except he tooke Iezabel also the daughter of Eth-baal King of the Zidonians to wife, and went and serued Baal, and worshiped him? And thus hee worse prouoked God then all the former Kings of Israel. Finally, he opened a window vnto all kinde of idolatrie, were it neuer so ab∣surd or against reason, and blasphemous. For that which was or∣deined and set vp by Ieroboam, might seeme to haue some colour and excuse, for that Aaron in the wildernes did set vp and cast a calfe for the Israelites, whom the people themselues worshipped Exod. 32. ver. 4.5. For whon the molten calfe was made and shew∣ed them, then they said: These bee thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt, when Aaron saw that, he made an altar before it, &c. and they offered burnt offerings, and brought peace offe∣rings, &c. But the worship of Baalims could not be defended by a∣ny home example of the Israelites, and it was altogether profane or filthie, and heathenish. Whereupon euen from that time especially the matters and strength of the Israelites began to goe to wracke and to bee diminished and troubled by the Syrians and Arabians. For Achab himselfe with his armie was slaine by Benadad the King of the Syrians at the citie Ramoth Gilead,Achab slaine at Ramoth Gi∣lead, by Bena∣dad King of Syria. when as he would haue taken it againe, and recouered it out of the hands of the Syrians, which had gotten and taken it before. Afterward also their pow∣er began to decay vnder the other kings of the Israelites: there were ciuill warres, and daily murtherings one of another among them:
lastly, the estate of this nation was miserable and pittifull, and they themselues were laid open for a pray vnto their neighbours. Their strength was so small, or rather none at all, as is the strength of a dead man. Samaria in deed was alwaies the chiefe citie of that king∣dome 1. King. 16. This seemeth to haue been situate in the tribe of Ephraim: or at least wise in that countrie, the which was common vnto the tribe of Ephraim, and the halfe tribe of Manasses, and therefore a certaine kingly and royall dignitie might yet still bee thought to remaine in the tribe of Ephraim: but yet now at this time the strength of that kingdome was very small. And therefore it was a name without a bodie, or onely a bare shadow of a great name, as one saith of old Pompeius. Vers. 2. And now they sinne more and more, and haue made them molten images of their siluer, and idols according vnto their owne vnderstanding: they were all the worke of the craftesmen: they say one to anotherOr as some translate, while men doe sacrifice. The first am∣plification of the idolatrie of the Israelites, taken from three places while they sacrifice a man, let them kisse the calues. THe first amplification of the idolatrie of the Israelites, that the complaint of God, and the punishment of this sinne may ap∣peare to be the more iust. It is amplified frō three places, & shewed how great hurt there commeth thereby, that the Israelites being warned by their owne punishment and harme may be called back vnto repentance, if so bee that they can bee called back.1. From their continuance in idolatrie. The first 02 place is taken from their continuance in idolatrie. For after that they once tooke vpon them the worship of Baalims, the Israelites grew and waxed worse and worse. Thus doubtles doe they alwaies fall to worse and worse, which haue once cast away the true wor∣ship of God. They frame vnto themselues euery day new idols, they be at new charges, they bestowe wastefully vpon these super∣stitions euery their best and most pretious things. And finally this their dooing hath no meane nor measure. For a windowe being once opened vnto idolatrie, men run daylie into new worshippings of new Gods: and as euery new religion best liketh them, or is for∣ged by them according to the pleasure of their minde, so doe they receiue and set it vp: as it is done at this day in the popedome, where there are daily new orders of Monkes, new feast dayes, new Saints, new Patrons arise vp, and are receiued. Therefore according vnto their vnderstanding, and owne pleasure, the Israelites doe daily cast
and melt new images, and that of siluer. 2. From the mul∣titude of their idols.The second place of amplification is from the multitude of their idols. For they admit and receiue euery idoll for God. For idolators are not content with the Gods, which they alreadie know: but by what kinde of craftesman soeuer a new forme and shape of an idol is forged, painted, made, how fond, euill fauoured, strange soeuer it be, the same notwithstanding do idolators allow by and by, spee∣dily take vp and receiue, and worship, although it be the worke of a man, yea and a mortall man, and also a dumme and a dead worke. Psal. 115. 3. From their ex∣cessiue or out∣ragious affecti∣on, or supersti∣tion toward these idols.The third place is from their outragious affection and loue of them toward these idols, or from their superstition. For whilest these men doe offer bullocks and sacrifices vnto any idoll, and doe sacrifice, some of the sacrificers or Priestes doe sit by, and are ap∣pointed to admonish or will others to kisse the Calues made by Ie∣roboam, so desirous forsooth are they, that honor should bee giuen by any of the people vnto their idols, and that none should depart out of their idoll Temple, hauing not saluted or worshipped them. This kisse was a signe of reuerence, as appeareth by the second Psalme where they are willed to kisse the sonne, least he be angry, &c. Therefore the rage and madnes of these men was horrible in com∣mending and worshipping their idols. And for as much as idola∣trie once receiued, bringeth so many euils with it, wee must flee from it with all our might and maine: and if it haue once stolne vpon vs, wee must hate it worse then dogge and snake, and by and by shake it off, and cast it away from vs. Vers. 3. Therfore they shall be as the morning cloude, and as the mor∣ning dewe that passeth away, as the chaffe that is driuen with a whir lewinde out of the floore,The second amplification of this sinne by 3. similitudes. and as the smoke that goeth out of the chimney. 1. Of a morning dew, or cloude.THe second amplification of the same sinne, the which is taken from the miserable estate, whereinto they were now fallen, the which is described by three similitudes, the first of (a cloude) of the morning,2. Of chaffe car∣ried away with the whirlwind. and presently vanishing away, or of the (morning dewe) 02 which is by and by scattered away by the Sunne: the second, of (chaffe) diuersly carried and driuen away by a great winde, or whirlewinde out of the floore:3. Of smoke going out of a chim∣ney. The third, or smoke going out of a chimney, and the which straight perisheth, or passeth away, and is
no more seene. The like similitudes in a maner are 2. Pet. 2. ver. 17. where he sayth that the false Apostles, and such other like lewd per∣sons, are welles without water, and cloudes carried about with a tem∣pest. And Ieremie in the imperfection of his faith, and in his impa∣tiencie, not finding God his assistance at the present, as he would haue had it, compareth God vnto a riuer or water that faileth, that is, that suddenly riseth, and suddenly falleth againe cap. 15. ver. 18. Why (sayth he vnto God) art thou vnto me as a lyar, and as waters that faile?What is signi∣fied by the for∣mer similitudes By these types or similitudes is shewed that there was yet some glorie and beautie of this kingdome: but yet fleeting and such as quickly passed away, and should forthwith perish. That which came to passe by reason of their mutuall ciuill warres one a∣gainst another within themselues: and also by ouerthrowes recei∣ued from forrainers and straungers, as from the Syrians, and Assy∣rians. In summe, here is described the destruction of this nation, and the same neere at hand, howsoeuer yet now for a time by some meanes this kingdome did sustaine or vphold it selfe, and flourish. Vers. 4. Yet am I the Lord thy God from the land of Egypt, and thou shalt know no God but me: for there is no Sauiour beside me. A consutation of this their i∣dolatrie, the which confu∣tation is mani∣fold.A Confutation of this idolatrie, the which reigned among the Is∣raelites then: and doth now also among men at this day. Wher∣fore men are now called backe from idols vnto the true God, not only by the discommoditie and hurt which idolatrie bringeth: but also by their duetie or office, and by reason it selfe, the which doth plainly ouerthrow idolatrie, if so be that men will heare reason. And this confutation is manifold. First, from the most ancient and pe∣culiar, or especiall couenant of God with this people: and againe from the most holie and ancient promise of this people. For God had peculiarly chosen this people for his owne, and seuered them out from others, and promised that he would be their God, euen from the very deliuering of this people out of the land of Egypt: and on the other side this people had by a mutuall couenant & pro∣mise vndertaken that they would be the people of this God onely. And therefore Exod. 20. ver. 3. God commaundeth them saying:1. From the co∣uenant of God with them, and their promise againe vnto him. Thou shalt haue none other Gods before me. And againe ver. 23. Ye 02 shall not make therefore with me gods of siluer, nor gods of gold: you shall make you none. And from that time of their deliuerance out of Egypt vnto the time of this Prophet, there passed betweene almost
800. yeares. Wherefore the more old and ancient this couenant of God and the people within themselues was, so much the more re∣uerently and holily ought it of them to bee kept, that this people should not worship any other God. And therefore should cast a∣way all idols. See before cap. 12. ver. 10. And therefore Psal. 81. ver. 8, 9, 10. God giueth them an earnest charge concerning this mat∣ter, and promiseth them plentiful blessings, if forsaking all other gods they will cleaue onely vnto him, saying: Heare, O my people, and I will protest vnto thee: O Israel, if thou wilt hearken vnto me, and wilt haue no strange god in thee, neither worship any strange god (for I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt) open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it. For, as I haue sayd, then there had passed a couenant on both sides betweene God and this people, a solemne ceremonie and oth being made betweene them, by how much the sinne of this people not keeping the promise by them so solemnly made, was the greater. And God also in Christ hath made a couenant with vs at this day, and hath chosen vs pecullarly for his people, which Christ (as Paul witnesseth Tit. 2.14.) gaue himselfe for vs, that he might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to bee a peculiar people to himselfe, zealous of good workes. 2. From the bene∣fites of God to∣wards this peo∣ple.The second refutation of their idolatrie is taken from the benne∣fites of God toward this people. For this people neuer had or found any other Sauiour, any other God, and Defender besides this God. Therefore idols ought to bee remoued and put away, from whose hands neither the Israelites, nor any other men are to looke for any benefite, helpe, or saluation, neither can they obtaine it from them. And thus much doth God most cleerely and plainly teach vs Deut. 32. ver. 39. when he sayth: Behold now, for I, I am he, and there is no gods with me: I kill, and giue life: I wound, and I make whole: neither is there any that can deliuer out of mine hand. Vers. 5. I did knowe thee in the wildernesse in the land of drought. 3. From a parti∣cular benefite of God towards them.THe third refutation or ouerthrowing of their idolatrie taken from a peculiar and especiall benefite of God toward this selfe same people, whereby God most euidently shewed himselfe to be the nourisher, keeper, father, and finallie the true God and Sauiour of this people. And the benefite (whereof mention is made in this place) is the care the which God had ouer thē dwelling in the wil∣dernesse by the whole space of 40. yeres. For God fed thē there by
so many yeares, and that with meate from heauen, he kept them in health safe and sound, yea during all that long time and iourney he saued their garments also and their shooes whole, and from wea∣ring. So Moses telleth them Deut. 8. ver. 4. saying: Thy rayment waxed not old vpon thee, neither did thy foote swell those fortie yeares. And God himselfe cap. 29. ver. 5. in these words: And I haue led you fortie yeares in the wildernesse: your clothes are not waxed old vpon you, neither is thy shooe waxed old vpon thy foote. The greatnesse ther∣fore of this benefite of God is declared by the circumstance of the place, and the same two-fold. For it was both a desert, and also a ve∣rie hot and drie countrie. And therefore when the people murmu∣red for want of water for them and cattel to drinke, God comman∣ded Moses to strike the rocke, and water gushed out for the people to drinke Exod. 17. ver. 6. God nourished them notwithstanding in that same desert or wildernesse, to wit of Arabia,The desert of Arabia. where want of all things and meates feareth all men, and is seene. For among all o∣ther deserts and rough vntilled and barraine places of the whole world, this one wildernesse of Arabia is most terrible, huge, wide, & wanting all things needfull to liue withall. So Moses describeth it Deut. 8. ver. 15. when he sheweth that God was their guide there in the great and terrible wildernesse (wherein were firie serpents & scor∣pions, and drought, where was no water, who brought forth water for them out of the rocke of flint. With this agreeth Dionysius Alexan∣der in his Description of the world, and Ierome in the life of Hiba∣rion, in so much that those which trauaile that way euen at this day, are constrained to carrie with them so many dayes meate as the iourney of that wildernesse is long. God gaue the selfe same Irae∣lites drinke in a land most drie and thirstie, which hath no waters, and openeth no fountaines. This therefore was a singular miracle and benefite of God also, as who namely deliuered them so often frō death, and the same most present death (to wit, lest they should daily perish either for thirst or for hunger) as those fortie yeares had both houres and dayes, in the which they remayned in that drie and thirstie wildernesse, and in that barren place, and voyd of all things. I speake nothing of other daungers, into the which the Israelites might fall, nay, into the which they did oftē fall, whiles they remai∣ned in the wildernesse, & by meanes wherof they might an hundred times haue been destroyed and consumed, vnles they had by a cer∣taine especiall care of God been preserued, as for example, against wild beasts, serpents, and the Amalechites, the inhabitants thereof.
Vers. 6. As in their pastures, so were they filled: they were filled, and their heart was exalted: therefore haue they forgotten me. Two parts of this verse.AN amplification of the benefite of God, against the which on the other side is opposed or set the ingratitude or vnthankful∣nes of the Israelites,1 The benefite of God. that is, of all idolaters, and the same more then bruitish and beastly. So this verse hath two parts. One, which con∣taineth that same benefite of God. The other, the vnthankfulnes of the people.2 The vnthank∣fulnes of the people. As for the benefite of God, the same is shewed to haue been exceeding great towards them hereby, because that God at the last placed them in that same promised land, as in most plenti∣full and rich pastures,1. The benefites. where in stead of that that before they were abiding in a desert place, and voyd of all things, they doe now dwel in a most strong land, and abounding with all things. So then vn∣der this one word (pastures) is described that same so great com∣moditie, the which the Israelites got and enioyed in that land, God so guiding and leading them thither. After their pastures, or as in their pastures, sayth the Prophet, namely they now dwelt, that is to say, they liued in that land ioyful and happie, like as they doe which possesse medowes and pastures, of the which without any labour of theirs they receiue all the commodities of this life. Therfore they are filled in such a countrie, into the which God at the last brought them. For in that land they abounded with al store of good things: for it was a land flowing with milke and honey Psal. 81. They were filled, I say. And this repetition doth not onely garnish and set out the sentence, but also confirmeth or proueth the great plentifulnes of that land. And thus doe these things increase and set forth the benefit of God towards the Israelites. On the contrary side, the lewdnes and vnthankfulnes of this people is proued by a double argument or reason,2 Their vnthāk∣fulnes proued by 2. reasons▪ one for that the heart and minde of these men was exalted, so that they thought highly of themselues, and did claime those good things vnto them∣selues, and attribute them vnto their owne industrie or labour and diligence:1. Their heart was exalted. and did not account them as receiued from the fauour and grace of God only. Therefore they lifted vp their mindes, as if they had them of themselues. 2 They forgat God.The other reason prouing their vnthankfulnes is, for that they did forget God. The which for the most part is wont to come to passe of that former vice, to wit, pride of minde. And this is one of
the vices that Ezechiel cap. 16. ver. 49. reckoneth vp in the Sodo∣mites as the ground of many others, as may appeare: Beholde, this was the iniquitie of thy sister Sodome, pride, fulnes of bread, and abun∣dance of idlenes was in her, and in her daughters: neither did she streng∣then the hand of the poore. For when as men doe challenge or at∣tribute vnto themselues those things which they haue receiued of God, then doe they robbe God of his prayse, and in the ende for∣get him. For at the last, as Habacuc speaketh, they sacrifice vnto their net, and not vnto God cap. 1. Vers. 7. And I will be vnto them, as a very lyon: and as a Leo∣pard in the way of Asshur. The threat∣ning of a pu∣nishment a∣gainst the Is∣raelites.THe threatning of a punishment, the which shall be layde vpon the Israelites by God, because of that their vnthankfulnes: and consequently vpon all those which slide and departe from the true worship of God vnto idolatrie, I will be vnto them, saith God, as a Lyon, and that an olde Lyon. For so doe I translate those verbes by the future tense. But as concerning Lyons Plinius out of Polybius lib. 8. Natural. Histor. cap. 16. writeth, That they when they bee olde, doe greatly lust after men, because that strength faileth them now to pursue and follow after wilde beasts.The Nature of an old Lyon. Wherefore it is not without emphasis or force, that God bringeth the similitude of a ly∣on, especially of an olde lyon, that is, one that is more cruell vnto men, that he may the more terrifie and feare the Israelites, and all Idolators. The Lord addeth: I will be vnto them as a Leopard in their waies and iourneyes. For I will lie in wayte for them, and marke whither they goe, and which way, that I may set vpon them, teare them, and slay them vpon the sodaine, and priuily before they be aware, as the Leopard vseth for to doe.The Leopard▪ And to this purpose doth the pro∣phet Ieremie vse the similitude of a Leopard cap. 5. ver. 6. where he sayth: A Leopard shall watch ouer their cities: euery one that goeth out thence shall be torne in peeces, because their trespasses are many, and their rebellions are increased. And Plinius lib. 10. Natur. Histor. cap. 34. See Aelianus likewise lib. 2. de histor. Animal. where hee sayth, That the Leopard in taking of his pray is farre more subtill and crafty then the Ape. And by this double similitude which God bringeth, we vnderstand that God wil not deale with them by open force onely: but also as by lying in wayt, that is to say, that
he will steale vpon Idolators vpon the sodaine, when they thinke vpon no such matter: that he may punish both them most sharply because of their vnthankfulnes towards him, & also these their such blasphemous superstitions. And therefore Psalm. 2. ver. 12. the Psalmist exhorteth that they yeeld and submit themselues vnto Christ, least that vengeance and destruction come sodainly vpon them, before they thinke on it: Kisse the sonne (sayth he) least he be angry, and yee perish in the waye, when his wrath shall sodaynely burne. Vers. 8. I will meete them, as a Beare that is robbed of her whelpes, and I will breake the kal of their heart, and there will I deuour them like a Lyon: the wilde beast shall teare them. An amplifica∣tion of the same punishment by a double simi∣litude.AN amplification of the same punishment. For God by a dou∣ble similitude painteth out the grieuousnes thereof, that Idola∣tors, and men hardened in their sinnes, at the length might be mo∣ued, and repent by some meanes at the horror or terriblenes of so great a punishment. Moreouer, I translate all these verbes by the future tense, I wil meet, I wil teare, I wil deuour, that they may shew & containe a punishment to come, and not already past. The Lord therefore sayth, I will meete them, as a Beare robbed of her whelpes, at which time she is already of her selfe a fierce and cruel beast, and becommeth most furious & eager. See AElianus de Histor. Animal. lib. 5. cap. 14. This similitude Hushai 2 Sam. 17. ver. 8. vseth of Da∣uid vnto Absalon, to signifie the fiercenes of him and his men in re∣uenging the iniurie offered them by Absalon, Thou knowest (sayd Hushai) thy father and his men, that they be strong men, and are cha∣fed in minde, as a Beare robbed of her whelpes in the field. Finally, as a Lyon, saith the Lord, yea as a great Lyon and most strong, I wil teare them, and rent them, and deuour their kall, or bowels, that is to say, I will deale most cruelly against them, to wit, (for God him∣selfe doth expound this in this verse) by sending most cruell beasts in vpon them, the which at the commaundement and appointment of God, shall execute all these things, by tearing the Israelites in the wayes, and by lying in waite for them and deuouring them in their iourneyes. To be shorte, wilde and cruel beastes are often in the Scriptures reckoned vp among those foure horrible and fearefull plagues, with the which God punisheth wicked men Ezech. 5. ver. 17. God sayth vnto the Iewes: So will I send vpon you famine, and e∣uill
beasts, and they shall spoyle thee, and pestilence and blood shall passe through thee, and I wil bring the sword vpon thee: I the Lord haue spo∣ken it. And cap. 14.21. For thus sayth the Lord God, How much more, when I send my foure sore iudgments vpon Ierusalem, euen the sword, and famine, and the noysome beaste and pestilence, to destroy man and beast out of it. Vers. 9. O Israel, one hath destroyed thee, but in me is thine helpe. The figure E∣piphonema, what it is, see Ionas cap. 2. vers. 9.THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, wherein both the cause is shewed of so great miseries, the which shall fall out vnto the Israelites: and all this notwithstanding there is here also painted out the compassion of God toward this nation perishing in their owne wickednes. And this speech of the Prophet consisteth vpon sentences opposite or cōtrary one to another, by the which the mat∣ter it selfe is made the playner. And briefly by this meanes the iu∣stice of God is cleared from all cauilling, and false accusation, and men are shewed in trueth to bee the cause of their owne destructi∣on. Therefore that which Augustine sayth, is most true, O man, it is of thine owne, that thou art vnto thy selfe a diuel, and author of death: but it commeth from GOD, that thou art saued▪ So then this course of thy wicked life hath destroyed thee ô Israel: For that hath brought thee into these miseries, because it hath prouoked the anger and iust iudgement of God against thee, wherewith thou art vndone, and in the end shalt vtterly fall, and be destroyed. So Deut. 33. ver. 27. wherefore the vngodly and rebels doe pull vpon their owne heads the punishments, wherewith they are punished, and that through their owne fault, and willingly. Hereof commeth that Paradoxe or strange opinion in shew, of Chrysostom, but o∣therwise indeede most true, No man is hurt but of himselfe. For in trueth men are causes vnto themselues of death and of punish∣ments. That which the prophane or heathen Greeke Poet, I meane Homer lib. 1. Odyss. doth teach very well. But our helpe and our saluation is from God onely. And so doe the godly confesse and say Psalm. 124. ver. 8. Our helpe is in the name of the Lorde, which hath made heauen and earth. Wherefore I translate the worde (ki) (but) that this sentence following (but in me is thine helpe) may bee opposite or contrary vnto that which went before, to wit, one (that is, thy wickednes) hath destroyed thee: and may make it playne by the aduersatiue particle (but).
Vers. 10. I am: where is thy King, that should helpe thee in all thy cities? and thy Iudges, of whom thou saydst, giue me a King and Princes? A twofold rea∣son of the for∣mer sentence.A Rendring of a reason of the former Epiphonema, or acclamation and sentence: and the same twofolde. The one direct, as I may so tearme it, the which is taken from the nature of God. The other indirect,1. Direct. the which is drawen from the remouing or taking away of that same chiefe ayde, the which the Israelites had chosen vnto themselues,2 Indirect. to wit, their king and Princes in whom they tru∣sted very much.  So then the first reason briefly indeed, but yet plainely sheweth, that God is neuer the author of death, destructi∣on, or perdition vnto any. For he is he, which is of himselfe, and who of himselfe can only be the cause of life. The Lord therefore sayth, I will be, and I am. So Exod. 3. ver. 14. God declareth that his power, whereby all things are, and haue their being, and are vp∣holden, by the selfesame word, to wit, I am. He is then: wherefore properly he cannot be the cause of not being vnto any thing. And this is the proper nature of GOD, and the first reason, the which I called direct. The latter reason refuteth all other foundations and groundes of their owne helpe,  saluation and deliuerance, sought out by them selues, that is, which the Israelites through the great error of their minde had inuented and deuised vnto themselues. And these doth God remoue and take away, that men may learne to stay vpon God alone. But here in this verse is but one of their grounds rehearsed, namely the kings and princes, vpon whom the Israelites at that time leaned more then vpon others, see before cap. 3. vers. 4. that by the figure Synecdoche the Prophet may comprehend the rest,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see A∣mos cap. 5. ver. 21. and by a reason from the greater vnto the lesse shewe that they shall be vnprofitable vnto them. The Israelites therefore desired for themselues a King, and Princes to raigne ouer them by a perpe∣tual succession, the which after the manner of other Princes, should haue the superioritie and rule ouer them, should order their bottels, and defend them from forraine enemies, as if there were not ayde enough in those iudges, the which God for the time raysed vp vn∣to them, that is to say, they did put more trust in mortall men, then in the one and eternall God, and seeke for more ayde and helpe at their hand, then they did from God. And therefore 1 Sam. cap. 8.
ver. 20. being wearie of their iudges, they make answer vnto him, Nay, but there shall be a king ouer vs, and we also will be like all other nations, and our King shall iudge vs, and goe out before vs, and fight our battailes. But this thing displeased Samuel (as appeareth before in the same chapter ver. 6.) When they said, Giue vs a King to iudge vs: and Samuel prayed vnto the Lord. And it hath a great vehemen∣cie and force, and a bitter mocking of them, in that God here as∣keth them, Where is now their King, and these deliuerers, whom they so greatly desired vnto themselues, as if they should alwaies be safe vn∣der them? So Esai. 57. ver. 13. God mocketh the idolators saying: When thou criest, let them that thou hast gathered together deliuer thee: but the winde shall take them all away: vanitie shall pull them a∣way: but he that trusteth in me, shall inherit the land, and shall possesse mine holy mountaine. Vers. 11. I gaue thee a King in mine anger, and I tooke him away in my wrath. A Confirmation of the former sentence, whereby God will re∣moue and take away,A confirmation of the former sentence. and dooth remoue and take away that ayde and helpe which the Israelites did put in their Kings and Prin∣ces. And it is taken from the euent or issue and falling out of mat∣ters, the which was daylie to bee seene most lamentable among them, and contrarie vnto that confidence and trust that the Israe∣lites had in their Kinges and Princes. For it was a thing which was before the eyes of all men, to wit, that God did giue, remoue, take a∣way often and daily, not onely according to the pleasure of his minde: but also in his furie and hot wrath and anger, those Kings and Princes, in whom these Israelites and all idolators doe so great∣lie trust. Isidorus lib. 3. cap. 4. de summo Bono. Moueth this question:  When as the Apostle saith. There is no power but from God: how saith the Lord of the rule and Princedome of some: They shall reigne but not by me, and afterward by the same Prophet, I will giue them a King in my wrath? As if he should say, not from mee being well pleased, but from mee being angrie with them.  Whereby plainly appeareth, that both the good power and also the euill power is of GOD: but the good power or gouernour hee giueth when hee is pleased: the euill when hee is displeased with vs. So then God giueth and taketh Princes, as he pleaseth, because that he is the King of Kinges, and Lord of Lords, who of his mere and ab∣solute power, and full right and authoritie giueth all the kingdomes
of the world, to whome he will, and gouerneth and ordereth them by whom he will. And therefore the Prophet Isay saith of God, cap. 40. ver. 23. He bringeth the Princes to nothing, and maketh the iudges of the earth, as vanitie. And hereun to agreeth the Psalmist Psalm. 76. ver. 12. speaking of God thus: He shall cut off the spirite of Princes: he is terrible to the Kings of the earth. See more to this purpose Dan. 3. Thus far then kingdomes and Kinges doe defend vs,How far Kings can help, or not help vs. can doe some thing, are of force and power, as God will haue them to be of force, and our fortresses. But when as hee decreeth that they shall be of no strength, they bring vs no helpe or ayde at all. Further, God pronounceth or saith, that not onelie Kinges are by him giuen and taken from these men, as things during but a lit∣tle while, fraile, weake, bubbles, and such as cannot defend and maintaine themselues, much lesse others: but hee further addeth, that this is done of him in his furie and hot anger, that is, after such sort, as those things are taken away, the which God will haue vtter∣ly to perish, and to be holden accursed: and therefore consequent∣lie such as are to be auoyded and hurtfull vnto vs, not onely vnpro∣fitable vnto vs. And this was done by God in the kingdome of Is∣rael, especiallie in the ciuill warres: and also in sundrie forreine warres 2. King. 15. and 17. for when there was no certaine tribe in that kingdome, nor any certaine familie appointed by God, out of which the Kings should be created and made: he that could doe most by strength and might, obteined the kingdome, and thrust the other from the throne. Vers. 12. The iniquitie of Ephraim is bound vp: his sinne is hid. Another con∣firmation of the former sentence.ANother confirmation of that which God said, that it should come to passe that the Israelites should finde no helpe in these Kings, but that these Kings should perish in the furie and iust anger of God. And it is taken from the Antecedent, or that which goeth before, to wit, for that God keepeth the sinnes of the Israelites, and hath them laide vp with himselfe, and not pardoned or done away. And looke whose sinnes God marketh and reteineth or keepeth, with those questionles he remaineth offended and angrie, & there∣fore they are to be punished, and cannot abide in saftie: for in the Psal. 130. ver. 3.4. it is said: If thou, O Lord straitely markest iniqui∣ties, O Lord, who shall stand? But mercie is with thee, that thou maist be feared. For our sinnes must first bee blotted out and buried with
God, and vtterly be forgotten, before we can be saued, or be in saf∣tie, and finally before we can feele any healthsome ayde, either from God himselfe, or from any other creature whatsoeuer.No helpe from God, nor com∣fort from any other creature, vntil our sinnes be pardoned & done away. But if our sinnes be once pardoned, and the remembrance of them done away, then as the Prophet Isay saith cap. 1. ver. 18. Though they were before as crimsin, they shall bee made white as snowe: though they were red like scarlet, they shall be as wool. So long therefore as the cause of our miseries remaineth, that is our sinnes, the effect also re∣maineth, to wit, the anger of God toward vs, and consequently the punishment must by and by follow. Further, the Prophet vseth a double similitude to shew that the sinnes of idolators are most di∣ligently marked and kept by God, the which hee will remember in his time. The which thing Iob complaineth to haue been done con∣cerning himselfe and his sinnes cap. 7 ver. 21. saying vnto God: Why doest thou not pardon my trespas, and take away mine iniquitie? And againe cap. 10. ver. 5.6. Are thy dayes as a mans dayes? Or thy yeares as the time of a man, that thou inquirest of mine iniquitie, and searchest out my sinne? For the sinnes of the faithfull are not sealed vp with God to bee kept, but are all blotted out by the bloud of Christ 1. Iohn. 1. ver. 9. If wee acknowledge our sinnes, hee is faithfull and iust, to forgiue vs our sinnes, and to clense vs from all vnrighteous∣nes. Againe cap. 2. ver. 1.2. If any man sinne, wee haue an aduocate with the father, Iesus Christ the iust. And hee is the reconciliation for our sinnes: and not for ours onely, but also for the sinnes of the whole world. Onely the sinnes of the vnfaithfull are in such sort bound vp in a fardle or bundle in their time to be punished, because they are not clensed by the bloud of Christ, because of their owne infideli∣tie or vnfaithfulnes, and therefore the Lord hath alwaies his hand lifted vp, and stretched out to strike them for euer, as he had against the Amalekites, of whom, as it is in Exod. cap. 17. ver. 16. He swore, that hee would haue warre with Amalek from generation to ge∣neration. Ver. 13. The sorrowes of a trauailing woman shall come vpon him: he is an vnwise sonne, else would he not stand still at the time, euen at the breaking forth of the children. The conclusion of the former threatning of God.THe conclusion of the whole former threatning and reasoning of God, whereby is concluded that the Israelites and all Idola∣tors shall be punished. So then at the length and at the last the Is∣raelites
shall sorrowe and mourne, to wit, because of the punish∣ments, which in the iust iudgement of God they shall feele against themselues. For these sorrowes which they shall beare and feele, shall bee like vnto the paines and throwes of a woman in trauaile, and therefore they shall be most sharp and grieuous, and not com∣mon or light and easie to be borne: because that the punishments of these men shall be most bitter, as namely their sinnes and offen∣ces are, and haue been most hainous and shamefull. For by this si∣militude of a woman in trauaile are signified most great and grie∣uous paines, and so punishments, which shall bring vnto them de∣struction. The like similitude is Psal. 48. ver. 6.They that trouble, shall be troubled. Feare came there vp∣on them, and sorrow, as vpon a woman in trauaile. For the punish∣ment must bee proportionable, and answerable vnto the offence. And therefore Paul 2. Thess. 1. ver. 68. Telleth the Thessalonians, That it is a righteous thing with God to recompence tribulation vnto them that trouble them, rendring vengeance vnto them that doe not knowe God, and which obey not the gospell of our Lord Iesus Christ. The foolishnes of the Israe∣lites doth not excuse them.Moreouer the words following doe ratifie and confirme this conclusion of the iust iudgement of God to insue vpon them. For (saith the Prophet) this Israel is an vnwise sonne. Now this vnwise∣nes or foolishnes of the Israelites doth not excuse them, but it is here added the rather to accuse them the more, because it procee∣deth of malice, and is not lawfull ignorance. And this wilfull igno∣rance was reproued before by this Prophet cap. 4. ver. 6. where in the person of God he complaineth of them, saying: My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge. And all ignorance or foolishnes is such, that is, proceeding from malice, when as men will not heare God offering himselfe vnto them, and teaching them: and when they will not obey and harken vnto him calling them back vnto re∣pentance. So it is said, The people perisheth, because they are with∣out knowledge Isay. 5. ver. 13. And here is an argument or proofe brought of their purposed and malicious or wilfull foolishnes.A note of the wilfull foolish∣nes and igno∣rance of the Is∣raelites. To wit, for because this Israel wittingly and willingly standeth still in the mouth of the matrix or wombe, and in his so great sorrowes and paines, when as he might come forth by and by, that is, for that they remained obstinate and stubborne so long a while in those their sinnes, albeit being admonished or warned by God of the pu∣nishments to come and hanging ouer their heads for the same, and so earnestlie moued by God vnto repentance, they might if they would, or did beleeue God, deliuer themselues from these dangers.
The Prophet therefore continueth this similitude, the which he had begun from the paines and trauailing of women with child. Vers. 14. I will redeeme them from the power of the graue: I will de∣liuer them from death: O death, I will be thy death: O graue, I will be thy destruction: repentance is hid from mine eyes. A promise of helpe and deli∣uerance.A Promise of helpe, and deliuerance vnto those, which shall con∣uert or turne their minde vnto God, both that these by this meanes may be stirred vp vnto true repentance of heart: and also, that those faithfull ones, which were left in that people, might hope well in the midst of the afflictions or troubles of the vngodly, and should not faint, and bee discouraged. For God promiseth, that it shall come to passe, that he will saue them continually: and pre∣serue them against all danger and captiuitie, yea and finally against present death it selfe. And this is the first promise of God toward the remnant of the Israelites, and all those that repent, to wit, that when as others perish, they shall be deliuered and saued notwith∣standing. For as Paul writeth to the Romanes cap. 8. ver. 31, 36, 37. If God be on our side, who can be against vs? And albeit, As it is writ∣ten, For thy sake are we killed al the day long: we are coūted as sheep for the slaughter: Neuerthelesse in all these things wee are more then con∣querors through him that loued vs. For as it is 1. Cor. 11. ver. 32. When we are iudged, we are chastened of the Lord, because wee should not bee condemned of the world. For God will redeeme thē from the graue, and deliuer them from death it selfe, albeit that they seemed to bee abiding in the very iawes and mouth of hell. And this mercie of God toward himselfe doth Dauid acknowledge Psal. 30. ver. 3. say∣ing vnto God: O Lord, thou hast brought vp my soule out of the graue: thou hast reuiued me from those that goe downe into the pit. The rea∣son followeth: because God shall be the death of death it selfe: the destruction of the graue it selfe: and that for euer, and alwayes, in the fauour of those that are his. So great doubtles is the power of God ouer all things, that he hath rule euen ouer death it selfe, and the graue, and doth destroy them when he pleaseth, for the good and fauour of those that are his. And this doe wee that are the faithfull daylie feele, the whilest we are deliuered out of the midst of troubles and dangers, in the which we had cast away all hope of deliuerance, as Paul doth witnesse of himselfe 2. Cor. 1. ver. 9, 10. in these words: Yea, we receiued the sentence of death in our selues, be∣cause
wee should not trust in our selues, but in God, which raiseth the dead, who deliuered vs from so great a death, and doth deliuer vs, in whom wee trust, that yet hereafter he will deliuer vs. But this bene∣fite of God shall then in most full measure fall out vnto vs, when as we shall fully inioy that eternal and euerlasting life after the rising againe of our bodies by and through Christ, as Paul expoundeth this place 1. Cor. 15. ver. 54.55. Vers. 15. For he shall grow. Though he grew vp amōg his brethren,After that. an East wind shall come, euen the winde of the Lord shall come vp from the wilder∣nesse, and drie vp his veine, and his fountaine shall be dried vp: he shall spoyle the treasure of all pleasant vessels. Another pro∣mise of God to∣ward the faith full.ANother promise of God toward the selfe same godly, and men that from Idols turne themselues vnto the true God, and do re∣pent. And this is a most excellent increase vnto the former bene∣fite. The godly shall not only be saued by God euen in the midst of the punishments of the vnfaithfull: but also they the selfe same shall in health and saftie fructifie or bring forth fruite, and that a∣mong their brethren, that is to say, among the other godly & elect of God, whom they shall greatly edifie and profite with their ho∣lines and doctrine. And this also may be referred vnto the multi∣plying of the nation, and increasings of that people: and not only vnto the fruite, the which they shall bring forth by their example, in stirring vp and confirming or strengthening others vnto godli∣nes. For this latter is the most true end both of our adoption made by God, and also of our conseruation, to wit, the edifying or profi∣ting of others. And so Christ Ioh. 15. ver. 16. teacheth his Disciples That he hath chosen them, and ordained them that they go and bring forth fruite, and that their fruit remaine. So Dauid testifieth of him∣selfe Psal. 32. ver. 8. that he will instruct and teach others in the way of godlines, wherein they ought to walke, when he sayth: I will in∣struct thee with mine eye. And this is a great thing which is added, (among their brethren). For so much the more acceptable is this fruite, be∣cause it redoundeth vnto the Church also, and vnto the edifying of the godly. So by the selfe same reason doth Paul praise the Colos∣sians 1. Colos. 10. when he prayeth for them, That they might walke worthie of the Lord, and please him in all things, being fruitfull in all good workes, and increasing in the knowledge of God. Furthermore, the time also is added after which these things shall
come to passe.The time of the comming to passe of these things. And this setting downe of the time is indefinite or not certaine, the which comprehendeth a long space of time: and not the very moment, instant, and poynt of time, as Luk. 21. ver. 25. when he sayth, Then there shalbe signes in the sunne, and in the moone, and in the starres, &c. So Matth. 24. ver. 29. Immediatly after the tri∣bulation of those dayes shall the sunne be darkened, and the moone shall not giue her light, &c. Now this time was added in this place, that the promise before going might appeare to bee more true and cer∣taine, the time of the fulfilling whereof also is certaine, set, and de∣termined with God. For these things shall not be done, before that the same East winde, to wit, the Assyrian shall in such sort haue affli∣cted or punished the Israelites, that the fountaines and veines, from whence the Israelites doe flowe and spred abroade, may seeme by him to haue been stopped, and their springs dried vp, that is, before that he may seeme by destruction vtterly to haue blotted out that nation. For in such maner did the Assyrians waste the Ephraimites especially (whereas the seate of the kingdome, and the kings stock was for the most part) that they might seeme to haue taken from them all abilitie and power afterwards to growe vp, increase, and beare fruite any more. Whereby this benefite of God appeareth to haue been the greater, in that the Ephraimites shall bring foorth fruite, and shoote vp out of that dried vp fountaine, as it seemed vn∣to the Assyrians. Last of all, the former things shall not come to passe, before that the Assyrians haue spoyled them of al their goods. And this selfe same wind and enemie is sayd to be of God, because he was sent vpon the Israelites in the iust anger and wrath of God: & he is sayd to be an East wind, that is, most troublesome and boy∣sterous: yet but a wind, the which in the end shall cease and vanish away. Vers. 16. Samaria shall be desolate: for she hath rebelled against her God: they shall fall by the sword:Here begin∣neth the next chapter in most translations. their infants shall be dashed in pieces, and their women with child shall be ript. Another noting out of the time of the comming to passe of these things.ANother poynting out of the time, after which the Ephraimites are to be multiplied. And this noting out of the time is added, not onely that this benefite of GOD may bee perceiued to bee the more miraculous worke of God, when as out of so desolate a both nation and countrie, so many families notwithstanding shall arise: but also, if the Israelites shall be stubborne, that they may repent &
change their life into the better, being admonished or put in mind of so fearefull a iudgement of God to insue vpon them. Of the like miraculous both preseruing and also increasing of his Church doth God speake Isai. 6. ver. 13. thus: But yet in it shall be a tenth, and shall returne, and shall be eaten vp as an elme, and as an oke, which haue a substance in them, when they cast their leaues: so the holie seede shall be the substance thereof. And cap. 60. ver. 22. A little one shall become as a thousand, and a small one as a strong nation: I the Lord will ha∣sten it in due time. But here in setting downe the time of the fulfil∣ling of these things, the Lord hath respect also vnto this, that the Is∣raelites, when these iudgements of God shall begin to be extant, or to come abroade, should not say, as they were wont proudly to boast, we will build vs vp stronger places, then those which our e∣nemies haue destroyed. For so they bragge Isai. 9. ver. 9.10. They brickes are fallen, but we will build it with hewen stones: the wild fig trees are cut downe, but we will change them into cedars. 1. The destructiō of Samaria.But in this verse there are two things declared. The one is, the destruction of Samaria. The other, the cause of this calamitie or de∣struction. The destruction shall be most lamentable: For Samaria it selfe the chiefe citie of the kingdome shall be desolated,2. The cause of the same. that is to say,  layd waste, and voyd of citizens. The little infants and poore yong children shall be dashed against the stones (this is a kinde of fiercenes and horrible crueltie Psal. 137. ver. 9.) The women great with child shall be ript in two pieces by the enemies.  The rest shall perish with the sword. And the cause of this so great miserie and punishment to fall vpon them is, for that the Israelites haue rebel∣led against God, and haue forsaken him, embracing and following Idols. Let all Idolaters note and consider this. CAP. 14. Vers. 1. O Israel, returne vnto the Lord thy God: for thou hast fallen by thine iniquitie. The last Ser∣mon of Oseas.THis chapter containeth the last Sermon of Oseas, the which is wholly spent in setting foorth of the goodnesse and mercie of God vnto the godly. Neither is the former threatning, comprised in the 15. and 16. verses of the chapter going before, against this. For there he speaketh vnto the whole bodie: but here, onely vnto the remnants of that people, or that part which shall repent. There∣fore
this is as it were a certaine exception vnto the generall threat∣nyng which was made before. So Isai cap. 1. ver. 25. when as the Lord had before generally found fault with the vngodly, he retur∣neth vnto the remnant and sayth, Then I will turne mine hand vpon thee, and burne out thy drosse till it bee pure, and take away all thy tinne. So cap. 10. vers. 20. And at that day shall the remnant of Is∣rael, and such as are escaped of the house of Iaacob, stay no more vpon him that smote them, but shall stay vpon the Lord, the holie one of Is∣rael, in trueth. For the Lord had at that time both in that people, and hath also nowe in many nations (the which seeme vtterly to haue cast away God) his elect or chosen, albeit vnknowen vnto vs, whom hee forsaketh not, and which are taken out from the com∣mon destruction of the rest▪ But in this verse the whole people indeede is exhorted vnto repentance: and there is added a reason of this exhortation: yet in very deed and in effect the elect of God onely are exhorted, the which onely doe feele the fruite and effect of these exhortations of God: for in those onely doth the spirite of God worke: and they onely doe shew themselues teach∣able and willing to heare. Yet doth not God in the meane sea∣son mocke those other rebels, whom he exhorteth, albeit they re∣pent not. For it commeth to passe through their owne fault, and not Gods, that they are not conuerted, as who namely do not obey God warning them. This verse hath two parts: The first, wherein this people is called backe vnto God. The second,Two parts of this verse. which contayneth reasons of this calling backe. Israel, that is to say, this people,1. The calling backe of this people vnto God. are they that are called backe, whom God adopteth or chooseth vnto himselfe by an especiall and peculiar couenant: as he hath also chosen vs af∣terward by Christ, vnto whom he hath giuen the Sacrament of Baptisme,2. The cause of the same. lest wee might think that this exhortation appertained not vnto vs. They are called back vnto Iehouah, that is to say, the true God, to wit, that casting away their idols, they should hence forward worship that eternall or euerlasting GOD,  who alone is God, and Iehouah. And this calling backe is defined to be a con∣uersion or returning, because that these before had turned them∣selues away from that same true God: and had turned vnto false gods. For this is the nature of true repentance, that we should for∣sake the euill which we followed before: and embrace the good, which we hated. And thus much doth the first parte of this verse containe.
2 There are two causes of the ex¦hortatiō taken,The latter parte comprehendeth the causes of this exhortation, and conuersion: and the same twaine; of the which the first is ta∣ken from the duetie of the Israelites, to wit, because that this true God was peculiarly their GOD,1. Frō their duty. and so consequently it was their duety to worship him. He sayth therefore, Returne vnto the Lord thy God. For there is no doubt but that these wordes haue relation and respect vnto that singular or especiall couenant the which by a solemne oath was made with Abraham betweene God and this people. So Exod. 20. God sayth: I am the Lord thy God. The o∣ther or second reason is taken from a moste lamentable euent or falling out of the matter,2 Frō the lamen∣table falling out of things vnto them by their forsaking of God. by triall and experience whereof they ought now to be wise. For they had nowe already fallen in parte, for that they had forsaken this God, which iniquitie of the Israelites is by a certaine excellencie called Iniquitie, because idolatrie is and hath been the greatest cause of all the iniquities of Israel, and the chiefest cause of all other iniquities, and the which also euen now at this day doth very greatly prouoke God. Vers. 2. Take vnto you words, and turne to the Lord, and say vnto him, take away all iniquitie, and receiue vs graciously: so will we render the calues of our lips. A Staying in the laying out more plainely of the former matter: for he doth not onely exhorte them vnto repentance,A staying in the making more plaine, of the former matter. but also describeth what manner of repentance it ought to be, as Ioel cap. 2. Therefore there is here contayned a full declaration of true re∣pentance. Moreouer, the Prophet seemeth to speake of publike repentance, & not of priuate repentance only, albeit that priuat re∣pentance hath, and doth bring forth al these signes & tokens of it also. For in this place the Prophet doth not only require an inward feeling of sorrow, the which sinners doe conceiue because of God whom they haue offēded, but words also, that is, he requireth a ma∣nifest protestation and declaration of this their mind, and inward sorrow. Wherefore he sayth: Take vnto you wordes: speake vnto the Lord himselfe with wordes, that is to say, let this your conuer∣sion or repentance, and turning vnto God, appeare vnto all men, both by inward and also by outward signes, that it bee not fained, nor vnknowen: but that ye may edifie all, and by your example cal backe others vnto the same God. And these wordes which the Prophet biddeth them to take, are a publike prayer vnto God, and such as must be made in wordes, as may easilie bee gathered by
the wordes themselues, the which the Prophet here deliuereth vnto them. The prayer of the repentant containeth two things.This prayer of those that repent contayneth two thinges, first, that God would forgiue all their iniquities. For first there commeth vpon those that truely repent, and ariseth in them a fee∣ling and sorrow of sinne, and therefore their prayer beginneth at the begging of forgiuenes of their sinnes,1 A begging of forgiuenes of their sinnes. as appeareth out of the fiftie one Psalm vers. 2, 3. where Dauid his words be these: Wash mee throughly from mine iniquities, and cleanse mee from my sinne. For I knowe mine iniquities, and my sinne is euer before mee. And they desire to haue them forgiuen them, that is, freely to bee re∣mitted or released and taken awaie by GOD, because they know that they can bring no ransome vnto God for their sinnes of them∣selues: but in this, that they can pay for them, and haue to pay for them, that all the same is giuen them of GOD himselfe through Christ, whose onely death and blood, is the ransome, that is, the full price for our sinnes 1. Tim. 2. vers. 6. Who gaue himselfe (spea∣king immediately before of Christ) a ransome for all men. Further∣more they pray, that al their iniquitie may be taken away, and not onely some parte of it, because they knowe that there is no sinne before God which deserueth not euerlasting death. For as Paul writeth Roman. 6. vers. 23. The wages of all sinne is death. And thus much hath the first part of the prayer of the godly penitent or repentant. 2. Desireth bene∣fites also of God, and offe¦reth him praise and thankes∣giuing. Now the latter part desireth benefites of God also, and offereth him praise and thankesgiuing. And here is the true nature of Chri∣stian repentance described, the which expresseth and resembleth both the words, and maners, and also the prayers of her mother, that is to say, our faith in Christ, from the which no doubt it sprin∣geth. For from whence commeth this so great trust, that I say not with Paul 2. Cor. 3. ver. 12. Boldnes of sinners and miserable wret∣chedmen, and accusing themselues of guiltines before God, that all this notwithstanding, they doe both craue and also looke for bene∣fites from the selfe same God? It commeth doubtles from faith in Christ, that is to say, from that assurance of minde, the which the holy ghost giueth vnto them, that their sinnes are freelie forgiuen them through Christ the sonne of God, and that they are all relea∣sed vnto them, and that the same God whom they haue offended, is now through the same Christ become a God and a father fauou∣rable and louing vnto them, and not a Iudge, so that they can say
with Paul Rom. 8. ver. 33. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen? So Dauid also repenting beggeth benefites at the hands of God both for himselfe, and also for the Church of God Psal. 51. ver. 12. for himselfe: Restore me to the ioye of thy saluation, and stablish me with thy free spirit. ver. 18. For the church: Be fauou∣rable vnto Zion for thy good pleasure: builde the walles of Ierusa∣lem. Wherefore their opinion is false which doe separate or seuer true repentance of minde from faith: or doe thinke that this vertue doth spring from any other place then the rest doe, that is from any other fountaine then faith. The godly penitent therefore doe say, and that the holy ghost by the Prophet so prompting and teaching them: Lord bestowe good things, or benefites vpon vs, to wit, such as appertaine vnto our saluation, and earthly also, because they know him by Christ to be reconciled or made friends, and appeased with them. For this is a true saying, As often as a sinner shall sigh, I will no more thinke vpon his iniquitie Ezech. 18. And this other Esai. 1. ver. 16.18. Take away the euill of your workes from before mine eyes, al∣though your sinnes be as scarlet, they shall be white as snowe. Finally, God doth cast them into the sea, that they may not any where ap∣peare, or come vp into remembrance before him. And these things doe the godly penitent aske of God. The godly pe∣nitent doe offer also vnto God thankesgiuing.These selfe same also doe offer thankesgiuing, and the same not onely conceiued in heart, but also witnessed and openly pronoun∣ced with the mouth and lippes. And this same thankesgiuing they do call Calues, and sacrifices or offerings of their lippes. And so the writer to the Hebrewes willeth the faithfull also for to doe cap. 13. ver. 15. saying: Let vs therefore by him offer alwaies the sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruite of the lippes, which confesse his name. The metaphor is taken from other sacrifices, the which were offe∣red vnto God with the hands,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amòs cap. 4. ver. 12. and not with the lippes, as were bul∣locks, and lambes, and calues. So Dauid repenting offereth thankes∣giuing vnto God Psalm. 51. ver. 15. Open thou my lippes, O Lord, and my mouth shall shew forth thy prayse. The which thing it selfe, to wit, thankesgiuing like as the former part of this sentence also, namely prayer, springeth from faith in Christ, the which the godly albeit they be sinners haue. For faith is the fountaine of thankesgiuing, the which is giuen vs by God, as it is also of our inuocation or pray∣ing, as Paul witnesseth Rom. 10. ver. 14. saying: But how shall they call on him, in whom they haue not beleeued?
Vers. 3. Asshur shall not saue vs, neither will we ride vpon horses, neither will we say any more to the worke of our hands, yee are our gods: for in thee the fatherles findeth mercie. Another part of the prayer of the godly peni∣tent.ANother part of the same prayer, which the Prophet teacheth the godlie, that they may truelie giue testimonie or witnes of their repentance, both before God, and also vnto others in the Church. And this is such a prayer, as wherein they doe renounce or bid a farewell both vnto all the aydes and helpes of men, and al∣so doe abiure or forsweare and condemne all their idolatrie. For this is another part of true repentance of minde, to wit, wherein we cast away and detest our euill or sinne. For we must not onely em∣brace the thing which is good, as for example, acknowledge God to be our father, praise him, giue him thankes: but we must also for∣sake all euill, and remoue all rebellion away from vs. Now this euil,God is for the most part pro∣uoked vnto an∣ger two waies wherewith God is especially prouoked, is commonly twofold, to wit, For that either men doe trust in men, and make flesh their hope: or else they doe make vnto themselues idols,1. When men trust in men the which they doe worship and place in the stead of the true God. Against the former God pronounceth a curse Ierem. 17. ver. 5. in these wordes: Thus saith the Lord, Cursed be the man that trusteth in man,2. When in stead of the true god they doe wor∣ship Idols. and ma∣keth flesh his arme, and withdraweth his heart from the Lord. And concerning the other Psal. 81. ver. 89.10. The Lord by way of pro∣testation most earnestly prayeth and requesteth of the people that they will not receiue any strange God beside him, and promiseth a great bles∣sing to them, if they performe this his charge. These both twaine, the most filthie fountaine of innumerable sinnes,1. The godly are taught to for∣sake all mans ayde. the godly are here taught to condemne. And for the first, to cast away al aydes of men, euen those, whom they thought most safest and surest, and before most diligently and earnestly sought after them, these I say, they are taught to forsake in these wordes: The Assyrian shall not be able to helpe vs. Therefore wee will neither run vnto him, dispatching by horses that long iourney the which is betweene vs and him: nei∣ther will wee hereafter ride vpon horses, to get him for to ayde vs. For the Israelites were alwaies woont with great labour and char∣ges, to procure vnto themselues the Assyrians, as such an helpe as was inuincible or vnouercomable, as I haue shewed before cap. 8. ver. 8. and cap. 12. ver. 2. 2. To cast away all idolatrie.And couching all idolatrie (which is the fountaine of this wic∣ked
trust in men) they learne to abiure or forsweare that in these wordes. We will not say any more vnto the worke of our hands. Thou art our God. The reason is added, the which is taken from experi∣ence it selfe, and from the nature of God, to wit, for that the true God, is that one and onely God, vnto whom all men ought to flee: and vnto whom whosoeuer doe goe, albeit they bee most weake, they doe obtaine mercie, and consequently shall finde ayde and helpe against their most mightie enemies. That which fatherles children by their example doe teach,Fatherles chil¦dren finde helpe of God. who, when as they lye open vnto the iniuries of all men, and are most feeble, yet are they by him defended against all men, which thinke to hurt them, or spoile their goods, preuaile they in authoritie neuer so much among other men. And therefore Dauid Psal. 94. ver. 6.7.8. putteth the merciles oppressors of them in minde, that howsoeuer because of their vn∣abilitie to defend themselues, and their right, they suppose that they may scotfree and without punishment ouerrunne them, that the Lord doth both see it, regarde it, and will be auenged on them for it. And Psal. 146. ver. 9. he saith: The Lord keepeth the strangers: he relieueth the fatherles and widdowe: but he ouerthroweth the waie of the wicked. Therefore all others, if so be they flee vnto God, ought to hope for the like from the same God, and therefore to forsake the helpes of idols, and of men, and to hope and trust in that one God onely and alone. Ver. 4. I will heale their rebellion: I will loue them freelie: for mine anger is turned away from him. The answer of God vnto the prayer of the penitent.THis is an answer, whereby God witnesseth that the repentance and prayers of those that are his, are acceptable vnto him. Ther∣fore being now reconciled or made friends with them, hee answe∣reth their petition and prayer, as he had often promised by his Pro∣phets that he would doe. So he promised in Isai. cap. 58. ver. 9. Then shalt thou call, and the Lord shall answer: thou shalt crie, and hee shall say, here I am, &c. So cap 65. ver. 24. Yea before they call, I will an∣swere, and whiles they speake I will heare. So Psal. 89. ver. 26. He shall crie vnto me, Thou art my father, My God, and the rocke of my salua∣tion. And hereby is shewed how great the fruite of true repentance is,The great fruite of repen∣tance, and whence it hath the same. as which namely maketh God so familiar and louing vnto vs, but not of any worthines of repentance it owne, nor yet in respect that it is our worke, but for & by Christ, who by his spirit begetteth it in vs.
Sundrie kinds of the gifts of God towards the godly.And now here at this and from this place begin the exceeding great promises and graces of God by Christ towards those that are his, wherein consisteth the shutting vp or end of all the old prophe∣sies. Therefore in all the rest of this whole chapter are reckoned vp sundrie kinds of the gifts of God towards the godly. And first of all those which goe first in the order of nature, that the rest may bee giuen and added. And to the end that we may haue God appeased with vs,1. For giuenes of sinnes. the forgiuenes of our sinnes is the first in order of all God his benefites. For so long as he remaineth offended with vs, so long can we hope for no good thing from him, albeit by nature he be ne∣uer so bounteous. For Isai. 59. ver. 2. he sayth vnto them: Your ini∣quities haue separated between you and your God, and your sinnes haue hid his face from you, that he will not heare. And Paul Rom. 5. ver. 1. sheweth, that there is no peace between God and our consciences, vntill we haue the forgiuenes of our sinnes sealed vp by faith in our hearts, that in Christ before him we be accepted for righteous. Then being iustified by faith (sayth he) we haue peace towards God through our Lord Iesus Christ. Againe, ver. 9, 10. Much more then, being now iustified by his bloud, wee shall be saued from wrath through him. For if when wee were enemies, wee were reconciled to God by the death of his Sonne, much more being reconciled, we shall be saued by his life. And this forgiuenes of sinnes here in this place is described by a Metaphor taken from the curing of wounds. I will cure,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4 ver. 12. or heale their turning away, or rebellion, sayth the Lord, and their offences, be they neuer so grieuous, and hainous, such as is that their turning a∣way, or rebellion, whilest men forsake God, and cleaue vnto Idols. Further, euery sinne is a disease and wound of the minde, and the greater that the sinne is, so much the more greatly is our mind sick also. Therefore when as God of his only free grace forgiueth vs our sinnes, he then doubtlesse healeth our wounds, but our spirituall wounds. And so Dauid speaketh, saying of God Psal. 147. ver. 3. He healeth those that are broken in heart, and bindeth vp their sores. And after that God for his owne sake hath done away our sinnes,2. The loue of God towards vs. he be∣ginneth for to loue vs: to wit, for that he doth in Iesus Christ his on∣ly begotten Sonne acknowledge vs to bee pure and vnblameable. For his righteousnesse doth hide, clothe, and couer vs Ephe. 1. And this loue of God is his second benefite toward vs. For the good will and loue of God followeth the forgiuenes of our sinnes, and this se∣cond benefite commeth in order vnto that former: but not contra∣rie wise, that is, God first, forgiueth our sinnes, and then loueth vs,
and not, first loueth vs, and afterwards forgiueth our sinnes. And God loueth vs of his owne accord, & not for any deseruing of ours, or for any excellencie of our nature, or for any our vertues: but free∣lie, and because he will. Lastly, is added the third benefite, so verely God doth heape benefites vpon benefites towards those that are his,3. His anger is turned away from vs. to wit, his anger is turned away from vs, so that now he think∣eth not to punish vs, but mindeth and purposeth to doe vs good. For where the anger of God is, there also is punishment: where God is appeased and fauourable, there floweth and is felt good will, and euery kind of good thing, as appeareth by the verses fol∣lowing. Vers. 5. I will be as the dewe vnto Israel: he shall grow as the lillie, and fasten his rootes, as the trees of Lebanon. A Staying still in the same matter. For other benefites of God are reckoned vp towards the godly, the which doe followe after those former. And here first of all in this verse and that which fol∣loweth, is rehearsed the multiplying of their seede,4. Multiplying of their seede. and fructifying or increasing of the nation. This promise was a token vnto the fa∣thers of the spirituall grace of God, and of that same blessed seede, the which was as yet then for to come, to wit, it was, an earnest, or pledge, confirmation, and signe of Christ Deuter. 28. Further, the same is promised vnder diuers similitudes: and that nothing here spoken should seeme to be impossible, because of the miseries and troubles the which should fall out in this people, in the first place that is set downe the which may take all such difficulties or doubts out of the mind of men.1. The similitude of dewe. To wit, that God himselfe, and the blessing of God shalbe like vnto a dew, wherwith this nation being sprinck∣led shall spring and increase exceedingly, how fewe soeuer shall be left aliue in it. For the earth being moystened with the dew of hea∣uen, and with the showers of God: and also plants and trees being watred with raine, doe bring foorth both their seede, and also their flower. So the writer vnto the Hebrews cap. 6. ver. 7. sayth, that the earth which drinketh in the raine that commeth oft vpon it, and bring∣eth forth herbes meete for them by whom it is dressed, receiueth blessing of God. And so the Psalmist Psal. 65. ver. 9. speaketh of the fructify∣ing of the earth by God his watring, & blessing of it in these words: Thou visistest the earth, and waterest it: thou makest it very rich, &c. Wherefore when as God promiseth that he through his fauour wil
performe to this people and seede left, be it neuer so small, the same thing, the which the dewe giueth vnto herbes and trees, no man may doubt, but that out of those remnants an innumerable people may come, and also shall come. I will be a dew vnto Israel, sayth the Lord. Whereof shall come to passe, that Israel shall flourish and spring as a Lillie, and shall spred his rootes as Lebanon, that is to say, as the trees of the mountaine Lebanus, the which are most high and tall.2. The similitude of the trees of Lebanus. And looke how trees are lifted vp with their tops vnto hea∣uen, so much doe they go downward with their root into the deepe of the earth, that is to say, so much the greater rootes doe they send foorth, whereby they may be vpholden, as Virgil teacheth, and that truely, lib. 4. Aeneid. Therefore it shall come to passe, that the rootes of this nation (albeit neuer so short) when as it shall be conuerted vnto God, shall be most broad and wide, & stretch out themselues euery way, and on euery side.3. The similitude of the Lillie. Concerning the Lillie flower how pleasant and sweete he is vnto vs, the common consent of all men doth teach: as also for that of the most naturall Philosophers his flower (which is somewhat broad) is compared with the Rose. And these sundrie kindes of Metaphors doth God vse, both to confirme this spreading abroade and increasing of this nation:What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. and also to shewe, and declare how ioyfull and wished for the same shall be. Vers. 6. His branches shall spred, and his beautie shall be as the Oliue tree, and his smell as Lebanon. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer promise.AN amplification of the former promise concerning the multi∣plying of the seed of this nation, that the same may be the more confirmed against all the doubts which might arise in the minds of men. The seede therefore of the godly, and of such as doe repent, & turne themselues vnto the true God, and especially of the Israelites, shall not only be manifold, and greatly increasing: but also come∣ly and beautifull, and odoriferous or well smelling. The boughes therefore of this nation shall be spred abroad, after that it shall re∣turne vnto God, how tender, weake, and smal soeuer they were be∣fore. So of the despised stocke of Isai, or Iesse was Christ borne, Isai. 11. ver. 1. And Paul Rom 11. sheweth that these things shall come to passe in the last times of the world, and after that the fulnes of the Gentiles is entred into the Church of God. Therefore these things are not onely generally to bee vnderstood of any companie of the godly in any nation whatsoeuer: but especially of the Iewes and
Israelites, when as by the preaching of the Gospell they shall bee conuerted, and come vnto Christ. Their boughs therefore and branches shall be spred most farre abroad, as Dauid vnder the simi∣litude of a vine brought out of Egypt, speaketh of the increasing of the Church of the Iewes and Israelites Psalme 80. ver. 10, 11. The mountaines were couered with the shadowe of it, and the boughes there∣of were like the goodly cedars. She stretched out her branches vnto the sea, and her boughs vnto the riuer. The same shall bee comely and beautifull to looke vpon, as the oliue which is of a most pleasant co∣lour. So all do reioyce, whilest they see the seed of the godly spring∣ing vp. Lastly, the same boughs of Israel shall be of a sweete smell, as the trees of Lebanus, the which do beare frankincense, a gumme most pleasant, delectable, and sweetly smelling. For these trees I thinke to be vnderstood in this place. For the smell of frankincense is most pleasant, in so much that frankincense was wont to be vsed of al nations in their holy seruice and Temples. And the same grow∣eth plentifully in the mountaine Libanus. Wherefore of that place Frankincense is called in Greeke Libanos.Frankincense in Greeke cal∣led Libanos, and why. Nothing could be sayd more elegantly, nothing more grauely, nothing to commend and set forth the issue and increase of the Church more fitly, then these amplifications and speakings here vsed. In a word, the seede of the godly, & especially of the Israelites shalbe spred farre abroad, plea∣sant to behold, most acceptable for their sauour, and holy maners, and sweet smell of good life, so that all men shall be edified by that seede, and reioyce of it, Psal. 1. Vers. 7. They that dwell vnder his shadow shall returne:They shal liue with corne. they shall re∣uiue, as the corne, and flourish as the vine: the sent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon. The third be∣nefite: Tran∣quilitie and peace.THe third benefite distinctly or expresly set downe by the Pro∣phet, the tranquilitie & peace of the sayd godly, whom the Lord shall reserue and multiplie. This tranquilitie is signified vnder the name of (the shadowe of God) in the which the Prophet promiseth that they shall sit, after that they shall be returned vnto God. Now the shadowe of God in the holy Scriptures doth signifie a most safe and strong tower, and defence. Psal. 17. ver. 8. Keepe me as the apple of the eye: hide me vnder the shadowe of thy wings. Therefore in this shadowe they shall sit quiet. And this vnto the former benefites is such an increase as is to be wished for, that this nation being multi∣plied,
shall moreouer safely and quietly inhabit that countrie, into the which it shall by God be called backe againe. The fouh be∣nefit, They shall liue with corne.4. The fourth benefit, plentie of sustenance to liue withall. Therefore they shall not onely dwell safely: but they shall liue also commodiously, and they shall there be nourished or fed by GOD with very good meate. Psal. 23. and Psal. 81. ver. 16. God telleth the Israelites how he would haue main∣tained and nourished them, if they had walked in his wayes, say∣ing: And God would haue fed them with the fat of wheate, and with honie out of the rocke would I haue sufficed thee. This plentie & store of sustenance to liue withall, is also a blessing of God toward those that are his, and a fruite of godlinesse. For faith hath the promises of this life present, and also of the life to come, sayth Paul. 1. Tim. 4. ver. 8. And therefore Dauid Psal. 31. ver. 19. in admiration or won∣dring at the kindnes of God in prouiding for those that doe feare him, sayth: How great is thy goodnesse, which thou hast layd vp for them that feare thee? and done to them that trust in thee, euen before the sonnes of men? The fift benefit, The floure, that is,5. Their liuelines and strength. the strength and liuelines of this people, and their remembrance shall be hap∣pie. As for their strength and liuelines it shall bee as the vine, the which, at what time it floureth, is of, so fresh a smell, and so liuely a state, that not onely the vineyard it selfe, that is, the place in which the vine is planted, smelleth most sweetly, and is filled with this sa∣uour: but also the whole quarter that is neere vnto it, in so much that if there bee any serpents in those places, they are chased and driuen away with the smell of the vine: so wholsome and liuely is the force and strength of the vine. So the floure and strength of those godly, especially of the Israelites (when as by the preaching of the Gospell they shall be conuerted vnto Christ) shall be sweete, and neuerthelesse firme and strong, that they may endure lustie a long season, like as was the most fragrant & liuely smell of the gar∣ments of Iaacob, which when Isaac smelled, he blessed him, & said: Behold, the smell of my sonne is as the smell of a field, which the Lord hath blessed Gen. 27. ver. 27. Their remembrance also (or sent) shall be most pleasant vnto all men, as is the smell of vines, or wine of Li∣banus, that is, it shall continue most long and neuer be forgotten, as Dauid also speaketh of the remembrance of the godly Psalm. 112. ver. 6 Surely he shall neuer be moued: but the righteous shall be had in euerlasting remembrance. For the kinde of wine here spoken of is most excellent and most strong, yet of most pleasant smell, the which of Plinius lib. 14. Histor. Natural. cap. 7. is called Tyrian or
Beritian wine, because the Saylers (which carried that wine from countries beyond sea to Rome, or into Greece) did difanker from the hauen of Tyrus or Berytus, whereupon that wine is called Ty∣rian wine. Vers. 8. Ephraim shall say, what haue I to doe any more with Idols? I haue heard him, and looked vpon him: I am like a greene firre tree: vpon me is thy fruit found. 1 The phrase.A Confirmation of all the former benefites, if so be that the Israe∣lites doe repent. And here the phrase or manner of speaking is to be noted:2. The thing it selfe. and also the thing it selfe. The kinde of speaking is passionate, that is to say, full of the singular affection of God to∣wards the Ephraimites, vnder whose name he comprehendeth all the Israelites,  as the seede of Abraham, and by him chosen and ta∣ken vnto his peculiar people by an especiall couenant. God there∣fore doth speake vnto them, and warneth them fatherly, that they will cast away all their Idols, to wit, because he hath nothing to do with these Idols, that is to say, Scarbugges, and things that in shew may seeme to be to bee feared: but such as indeede and in trueth are most vaine and lightly to be esteemed. And men cannot serue both God and Mammon together, that is, two contrary masters. Therefore they must needes forsake their Idols, that they may serue the true God. For as Christ teacheth Mat. 6. vers. 24. No man can serue two masters: for either hee shall hate the one and loue the other: or else he shall leane to the one, and despise the other. And therefore 2. Cor. 6. ver. 15. Paul asketh: What concord hath Christ with Beli∣all? Wherefore that Idolators may earnestly repent, let them heare this protestation and sentence of GOD concerning them, That the true God hath nothing to doewith Idols: that if they will haue, preferre, and choose him, they must vtterly refuse and forsake them. Now then, when as idolatry shall bee taken away among them, what doth God promise? Forsooth hee confirmeth that all the former benefites shall come to passe vnto them. For God will answere them when they call vpon him, and will heare them. He will behold and looke vpon them, the same God will defend and keepe them, casting and turning his eyes into all partes of their sal∣uation and deliuerance. Furthermore, he will be vnto them as a firre tree, and a most tall and high tree, vnder whose shadow they
may liue ioyfull and safe. For God will keepe away from them all heate and tempest, so that they may comfort themselues with that saying of the Psal. 121. ver. 5, 6. The Lord is thy keeper: the Lorde is thy shadow at thy right hand. The sunne shall not smite thee by day, nor the moone by night. Finally their fruit shall be ready and at hand from God, and shall by and by be found. For nothing can let God bearing good will towardes them, and desirous to doe them good, but that those things shall be fulfilled the which God hath promised before bounteously and largely. Vers. 9. Who is wise, and he shall vnderstand these things? and pru∣dent, and hee shall knowe them? for the wayes of the Lorde are righteous, and the iust shall walke in them: but the wicked shall fall therein. What the fi∣gure Epiphone∣ma is, see Ionas cap. 2. ver. 9.THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, whereby all men are both stirred vp with an carnest admonition to meditate or think vpon, and embrace the former promises of God: and also is shew∣ed, what difference there shall alwayes be in this world betweene the good and the bad. Finally, howe ill the wicked prouide for themselues, whilest they refuse God his so louing calling them vn∣to him, is here also in like manner declared.Three partes of this verse. Wherefore this verse hath three partes. The first exhorteth all men, in whom there is re∣maining but one graine of true wisedome,1. An exhortatiō to all men to heare this so lo∣uing voice of God. that they will giue most diligent eare vnto this so milde and sweete voyce of God. Who is wise? Let him then vnderstand, marke, and consider the thinges which GOD promiseth vnto them that repent. So speaketh the Psalmist Psal. 107. vers. 43. Who is wise that hee may obserue these thinges? for they shall vnderstand the louing kindnes of the Lord. For God is angry and displeased, when as men doe shewe themselues bruitish, and doe despise those his most sweete voyces and admo∣nitions. Of such kinde of blockishnes and dulnes the Prophet com∣plaineth Psal. 82. ver. 5. after this manner: They know not, and vn∣derstand nothing: they walke in darkenes, albeit all the foundations of the earth be moued.2 A shewing that those are iustly punished, who reuse to heare this his so lo∣uing voice. And thus much contayneth the first parte of this verse. The second parte giueth vnto God his righteousnes, that a bit and snafle may be put into the murmurings, and mouthes of all men, and that men may vnderstand that in vaine and wicedly
they do complain of god, whē as they are punished by him for their sins & for despising such his promises. For all the wayes of the Lord are right and iust, Psal. 25. ver. 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and trueth vnto such as keepe his couenant and testimonies. And therefore it is said Psal. 105. ver. 10. All thy workes prayse thee, O Lord, and thy Saints blesse thee. For albeit the vngodly doe fret and fume against the iudgements of God, and accuse God of partia∣litie, that is, as if hee were an acceptor of persons, that is, a maker more of the person of one then of another: yet this sentence re∣mayneth vnmoueable, All the wayes of the Lord are right, and his wisdome shall be iustified, that is, shall appeare eueriewhere to bee iust, that as it is in the Psalm. 51. ver. 4. He may be iust when he spea∣keth, and pure when he iudgeth. For (as Christ saith) Luk. 7. vers. 35. Wisdome is iustified of all her children. God therefore is to bee heard, whose voyce and word if it be contemned and despised, men shall afterward be grieuously punished, and that iustly. Wherefore it is sayd in the Psal. 95. ver. 7, 8. To day, if ye will heare his voice, har∣den not your hearts, &c. And the punishment is set downe in the last verse: wherefore I sware in my wrath, saying: surely they shal not enter into my rest. The third part sheweth the difference, the which is alwaies seene betweene the good and the bad,3. A difference betweene the good and the bad in the hea∣ring and not hearing of the same. when as God com∣mandeth or counsaileth any thing, to wit, for that the iust doe sub∣mit themselues and are obedient vnto God: for they know that all his wayes are right. But the fallers backe, that is, the sinners, and the wicked doe stumble and fall at the word of God, because they doe despise it, nay, of purposed malice they doe breake it, and so farre as in them lieth teare it in peeces. Whereupon God is vnto thē a great hurt, euen then when as he louingly exhorteth them vn∣to saluation, he is, I say, vnto them a stone of offence, at the which they stumble not of ignorance, but willingly, and doe offend wit∣tingly, and therefore doe prouide very ill for themselues, whilest they will not, and doe refuse to vnderstand and know those things, the which God speaketh vnto them, and the which hee teacheth them. So Christ is called a stone of offence or stumbling, namely, vnto the wicked, and such as are rebels vnto God Isai 8. vers. 14. And he shall be as a sanctuarie: but as a stumbling stone, and as a rock to fall vpon to both the houses of Israel, and as a snare, and as a net to the inhabitants of Ierusalem. So Simeon prophesieth of him vnto his mother Marie, Luk. 2. ver. 34. Behold, this childe is appoynted
for the fall and rising againe of many, and for a signe which shall bee spoken against. And so Peter speaketh of him 1. epist. cap. 2. vers. 7, 8. Ʋnto you therefore, which beleeue, it is precious: but vnto them which be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner, and a stone to stumble at, and a rocke of offence, euen to them, which stumble at the word being disobedient, vn∣to the which thing they were euen ordained. And those which stumble wittingly at that word and stone, they are crushed in peeces, and weyed and pressed downe by it, as Christ himselfe teacheth Luk. 20. vers. 18. saying: Whosoeuer shall fall vpon that stone, shall bee broken: and on whomsoeuer it shall fall, it will grinde him to powder. This then is the estate and condition of wicked men, and such as rebell agaynst God. Wherefore we must desire of God by earnest prayer, that we follow not their steps. Prayse be vnto God.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus vpon the Prophet Micheas. CAP. 1. The scope and drift of this pro¦phet, twofold.THe scope and drift of this Prophet, like as of the rest, is twofolde. Threatnings, and the promises of God: and that against both the houses and families of Iacob,1. Threatnings. that is, the kingdome of Iudah, and the king∣dome of Israel:2. Promises. albeit that many of the Prophets were seuerally sent, some vnto the Iewes, and others vnto the Israelites onely: but this Prophet is sent vnto them both. But as concerning the promises, when as they appertayne onely vnto those that are godly or faithfull indeede, or vnto the elect of God, they seeme rather to be directed vnto the kingdom of Iudah, (in the which the Church was more pure) then vnto the kingdome of Israel, where the worship of God was vtterly ouer∣throwne, and a very fw found truely fearing God. But as for the threatnings, they are alike denounced or declared vnto both king∣domes because of their outragious sinnes and deedes, the which were full partly of impietie towards God, and partly of iniustice towards men, and did swarme euery where without punishment in both those kingdomes. Therefore Micheas doth call men earnest∣ly vnto repentance, like as Amos doth also: if not, then he threat∣neth vnto them most grieuous iudgements of GOD, the which doubtes came to passe vnto both those peoples, that wee at this day ought at any hand to waxe wise by the example of these two nations. For A prudent man (as Salomon sayth Prouer. 22. ver. 3.) seeth the plague, and hideth himselfe: but the foolish goe on still, and are punished.
Vers. 1. The word of the Lord that came vnto Micah the Mo∣rashite, in the dayes of Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezechiah kings of Iudah, which hee saw concerning Samria, and Ierusalem. Foure partes of this verse.THis verse hath foure things to bee noted. First, the summe of this whole Prophesie and ministerie of Micheas. And this is, that he should shew the words and will of God extraordinarily re∣uealed vnto him, and not his owne will,1. The summe of this prophesie. or the will of any man else. This will of God he declareth to haue beene reuealed vnto him, and that extraordinarily, when he saith (which he saw, or which came vnto him.) For this vision is not a seeing or beholding with the eyes of the body: but a lightening and informing of the mind of man made by God touching his owne will, and that by an ex∣traordinary manner, the which his will God will haue declared vn∣to others by him, vnto whom he doth reueale or open the same. And whereas this prophesie of Micheas is said to be both the word of God, and also extraordinarily reuealed vnto him, it is commen∣ded vnto vs in a double respect, and great authoritie is gotten vnto it, that no man should thinke that it can be contemned or despised without punishment. For it is the voyce of God himselfe, and not of man. 2. To whom this reuelation was made.The second thing here to be noted is, to whome this reuela∣tion was made, that is to say, of the things to be declared afterward, to wit, vnto Micheas, who (to make a difference betweene him and others) calleth himselfe a Morashite, to wit, to distinguish or marke out himself from that Micheas the sonne of Imlah, of whom mention is made 1 King. 22. ver. 8. and who was before this Pro∣phet certaine ages. This Micheas therefore was of the tribe of Beniamin out of the towne Morastha, whereof mention is made hereafter vers. 14. Finally Ieremie maketh mention also of this prophesie cap. 26 vers. 18. saying: Micha the Morashite prophe∣sied in the dayes of Hezechiah king of Iudah, and spake to all the peo∣ple of Iudah, saying: Thus sayth the Lord of hostes: Zion shall be plow∣ed like a fielde, and Ierusalem shall be an heape, and the mountaine of the house shall bee as the high places of the Forrest. 3. T whom this prophesie is di∣rected.The third poynt is, vnto whom this prophesie is directed, to wit, vnto both the kingdomes of Iudah, and Israel, the which were the tearings in pieces, the pullings in sunder, and the ren∣ting of the one familie of Iacob. And he first maketh mention of
the kingdome of Israel, because it was more guiltie before God: and not because it was of greater dignitie. 4. The time of this prophesie.The fourth thing to be noted is the time of this prophesie. For he was latter in age then Isaias: like as Isaias himselfe followed A∣mos, as I haue shewed before in Amos. And this our Prophet pro∣phesied vnder three Kings of Iudah, to wit, Iotham, Achaz, and He∣zekiah, vnto whose time Isaias came also, but not Amos. Now this noting of the time bringeth credit vnto this Prophet and historie. For vnder these Kings the state was most corrupt, and the manners of both the Iewes, and also of the Israelites most Iewde, as namelie when as at that time Zacharias, Sellum, &c. slew and spoyled by mutuall ciuill warres one against another in the kingdome of Isra∣el. Secondly, it witnesseth, the prouidence and care of God for those that are his, who together and at the same time vsed so many ad∣monitors or warners to call againe his people into the right way. For by this doe both the Iewes and also the Israelites appeare to be vnexcusable, being so often warned by God, and yet notwithstan∣ding going on so wickedly in their sinnes. Vers. 2. Heare, all ye people: hearken thou O earth, and all that there∣in is, and let the Lord God bee witnes against you, euen the Lorde from his holy temple. A confirmation of the foretel∣ling of things insuing, and of this prophesie.A Confirmation of the ensuing prediction or foretelling of things, and of this prophesie, the which is taken from a most earnest calling to witnes of the whole world against both these na∣tions, least that either they should despite it, and disdaine to heare it, or else when they doe heare it, should mock at it, as vaine Scar∣bugges, and threatnings not to be regarded nor accounted of. For Micheas calleth the whole world to witnes, that both these things which hee speaketh are of God, and also shall without all doubt come to passe vnto them, if they repent not. And why Micheas had neede of so earnest a confirmation of his doctrine, besides that (which is contained in the former verse) this is a reason, for that he had to doe with both kingdomes, and not with one alone: as A∣mos delt only with the Israelites, Sophonias onely with the Iewes. Either of which people in as much as they were both proude, and also of an hard and stiffe necke, euen when they were seuerally ad∣monished and reproued: how much the more stoute and resisting may wee deeme them to haue been against these threatnings of
God, being spoken vnto and accused ioyntly? For such men or people which seuerally and particularly are stoute and bolde, the same being gathered and ioyned together, are altogether head∣strong and impudent or shameles. Wherefore first of all especiall authoritie and credit was to be wonne vnto this doctrine. And this our Prophet doth, from a double kinde of witnesses, which he citeth for it, namely first, of the whole world: secondly, of the true God himselfe, whom they might know to be the punisher of sinnes. Two parts of this verse.So then there are two partes of this verse. The first citeth men for witnes. The second, God himselfe, and both these witnesses he bringeth indifferently as well against the Iewes,1. Citeth men for witnes. as against the Is∣raelites. Further in citing of these witnesses of men the maner of speech is to be marked, the which is as it were loose and vnioynted,2. God himselfe. and not knit together with coniunctions coplatiue. For he stirreth them vp to heare diligently and heedfully, because the matter is of great waight, the which is here spoken of. And not onely men themselues, but also the senseles element of the earth is called to witnes, by the figure Prosopopoeia, or feining of persons,Prosopopoeia what it is, see Oseas cap. 6. ver. 1. as it also is 1. Isai. But in God the witnes, his maiestie is to be noted, the which is here, and in the verses following described. Here, when he is cal∣led Iehouah the Lord, and sayd to come out of his holy temple, that is out of the Temple of Ierusalem, where for the many signes and Sa∣craments of his presence hee is saide for to dwell. And all these things doe shew this witnes to be both holy, and also true, and for to bee feared. For nothing can bee obiected against it, and the things are true, which are confirmed by such a witnes. And God is said to come out of his Temple, not, that he is not euery where, and in all places, but by reason of the especiall experiment or proofe and triall of his iustice or mercie, the which was done and felt in that place 1. King. 8. So then this kinde of feeling in respect of vs is called the presence of God, and his comming vnto vs from ano∣ther place, where he was said to be before. Vers. 3. For behold, the Lord commeth out of his place, and will come downe, and tread vpon the high places of the earth. A staying in the setting out of the maiestie of God full of terror, and feare.A Staying in describing and setting out of the maiestie of God, whom he citeth as a witnes of his doctrine, to the end that this presence may the more stirre vp both the Iewes and also the Israe∣lites to heare, and to repent, whiles they vnderstand that God him∣selfe
is a witnes of these threatnings against them, and also of their wickednes.The figure Hy∣potypôsis what it is, see Amos cap. 8. vers. 12 And here by the figure Hypotypôsis this comming forth of God out of his temple (whether you will haue it to be heauen, as Psal. 11. it is taken, or the temple of Ierusalem, as I said before) for both sences agree with this place) is most liuely represented, as if in a maner it were seene to be done with the eye, to terrifie wicked men, and to awaken the hypocrites. And moreouer both his go∣ing and comming is described full of feare and Maiestie, as name∣ly who marcheth warlike vpon the high places of the earth, as be∣ing higher and aboue all those places, and carrying with him no∣thing that is lowe and base. Vers. 4. And the mountaines shall melt vnder him (so shall the val∣leyes cleaue) as waxe before the fire, and as the waters that are powred downeward. A continuing in the amplify∣ing of the ma∣iestie of God his witnes.BY the effects, and those altogether miraculous hee amplifieth yet still, and confirmeth the same Maiestie of God his witnes: all things yeeld and fall away vnder God, the mountaines tremble, the hilles melt, the valleyes are clouen, his sight is as fire, at the heat whereof all things waxe feeble, and drippe away as it were with sweating. Who then wil not tremble at the sight of so great a God, and witnes, and will not be afraide of his iudgement, and feare his testimonie or witnes against him? Conferre this place with that of the Psal. 18. ver. 7.8. Then the earth trembled and quaked:Other places in like maner de∣scribing the sarefull and mightie maie∣stie of God. the foun∣dations also of the mountaines moued and shooke because hee was an∣grie. Smoke went out at his nostrels, and a consuming sire out of his mouth: coles were kindled thereat. And Psal. 68. ver. 2. As the smoke vanisheth, so shalt thou driue them away: and as waxe melteth before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God. Againe Psal. 97. ver. 5. The mountaines melted like waxe at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of the Lord of the whole earth. Vers. 5. For the wickednes of Iaacob is all this, and for the sinnes of the house of Israel: what is the wickednes of Iaacob? Is not Sa∣maria? And which are the high places of Iudah, is not Ieru∣salem? A narration of the things re∣uealedly God vnto Micheas.A Narration or plaine telling of the things by God reuealed vn∣to Micheas, the which he first declareth vnto the Israelites: and
afterwards vnto the Iewes, as he also was willed to deliuer them in this order, and as these things were shewed vnto him before ver. 1. But in this Prophesie of Micheas, first, the causes of the anger of GOD against them are set downe: then the anger of GOD it selfe, or the threatnings of GOD, and his iudgements. Now in this verse are conteined the causes of the iust anger of God, and the threatnings in the verse following. But all the causes are not here reckoned vp (for there shall be others also added hereafter) but the chiefe cause, which is impietie or vngodlines towards God, and the corrupting of his worship, yea and moreouer the abolish∣ing or dooing of it cleane away, and the changing of it into mere idolatrie, the which to haue been in both these nations, to wit, the Israelites, and the Iewes, this one verse alone doth sufficiently proue and shew. Two parts of this verse.In this verse there are two things to be obserued or noted. The fault common vnto them both is vngodlines, to wit, for that they were Idolators and profane or wicked persons,1. The fault com∣mon vnto them both. and open contem∣ners or despisers of God himselfe, as namely who either worship∣ped another God then the true God, such as were the Israelites, who set vp the Calues in Dan and Bersabe, in the stead of the true Iehouah: or else did not worship the true God lawfully or rightly, as did the Iewes, who in the high places sacrificed vnto God, a∣gainst his commandement. For it is all one with God, either not to worship him at all, or else to worship him otherwise then hee hath commanded. For God holdeth for idolatrie, whatsoeuer is done and offered vnto him after the onely commandements and doctrines of men. For what outward shew soeuer they may seeme to carrie of holines and religion and humblenes of minde, and in not sparing the bodie, as Paul Colos. 2. ver. 23. speaketh, yet Christ sheweth Mat. 15. ver. 9. That in vaine they worship him, teaching for doctrines mens precepts. Further, both these impieties or vngodli∣nesses, namely, to worship a false God, or to worship the true God falsely, is noted by the name a word of most vile rebelliō (Peschang) as 1. Sam. cap. 15. ver. 23. For rebellion is as the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression is wickednes and idolatrie.2. The maner of speaking con∣teining The maner of speaking containeth both an amplification, and also a most sharpe reprehension. An amplification, for that not e∣uery citie whatsoeuer of both these kingdomes is here declared and pronounced guiltie of this wickednes,1. A amplifica∣tion. but the very chiefe cities of them both, as Samaria in the kingdome of Israel, Ierusalem her∣selfe
in the kingdome of Iudah: the which cities notwithstanding by their example and godlines ought to shine as lights vnto the o∣ther cities, and not to bee ring-leaders vnto them vnto sinne. The reprehension is contained in the interrogation or asking of a que∣stion,2. A reprehension. and in the answer vnto the same. For he sheweth, that he cal∣led both men and God to witnes, because of their notorious vn∣godlines: and he doth in such sort set downe the same, that he doth aske them, that is, hee stirreth vp, and pricketh their consciences, that these men should not dare to denie the thing that was known vnto euery man. Vers. 6. Therefore I will make Samaria as an heape of the field, and for the planting of a vineyard, and I will cause the stones thereof to tumble downe into the valley, and I will discouer the foundations thereof. A threatning of the anger of God against the Israelites.AFter the shewing of the causes of the anger of God, he descri∣beth the anger it selfe of God against them: and first of all a∣gainst the Israelites, whose head was Samaria. For vnto it hee threatneth destruction, or ouerthrowing of it vtterlie. For both the citie it selfe shal be pulled downe into heapes of stone and rub∣bidge, and these heapes of stone also shall be tumbled downe into the valley vnderneath it (for Samaria was seated on the toppe of an hill) that there should not any signe or senfie of a cittie remaine. Finally, the very foundations thereof shall be discouered, and ouer∣throwne, least it might afterward be reedified or builded vp againe. In a word, it shall be made a place fit for the planting of vines, that is to say, it shal be vtterly cleared of houses, and rid and made voyd of palaces Isai. 15. Vers. 7. And all the grauen images thereof shall bee broken, and all the giftes thereof shall be burnt with fire, and all the idols there∣of will I destroy: for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall returne to the wages of an harlot. 1. An amplifica∣tion of the pu∣nishment.AN Amplification with the answering of an obiection that might be made. The amplification of the punishment standeth herein, that not onely priuate and profane or common things shall thus perish, but also those things, which among them are counted for holy, and also testimonies and giftes of the fauour of God. So
then God will destroy both things publike, and also things priuat: both their vnholy things, and also their holy thinges, because of their impietie or vngodlines, that they should not hope to haue a∣ny thing left vnto them, and free from that iust iudgement of God.The answering of an obiection. The answering of an obiection that might be made consisteth herein, that these selfe same things, which they supposed to be ho∣ly thinges, and gods, and rewards or giftes, and did thinke and call them witnesses of their thankefulnes vnto God, and tokens of the fauour of God towards them, and therefore deemed them to bee sure and safe stayes and defences vnto themselues: these things I say, are Idols, and not gods: but false Scarbugs of men, not defen∣ces against calamities or troubles (for so are Idols called) they are rewardes of harlots, and most filthy, and not the signe of any fa∣uour of God, or pledge and witnes of any thankefulnes of men. Wherefore all these things shall nothing at all helpe and defend them. Ose 9. Vers. 8. Therefore I wil mourne and houle: I wil goe without clothes, and naked: I will make lamentation like the Dragons, and mour∣ning as the Ostriches. An earnest mo∣uing of affectiōA Vehement or earnest mouing of affection. For the Prophet to strike into them who were to be destroyed, a feare of their destruction, doth paint out vnto them that his sorrowe, and the same most great by a certayne Hypotyposis,What the fi∣gure Hypotypo∣sis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12. or liuely describing of the same, that if it might be, or if any feeling of saluation were left in them, they might be moued and repent, that is, be conuerted vn∣to God. For these things are neither spoken with a fayned minde by the Prophet, nor excessiuely or beyond the trueth, as Poets are wont to doe: but of an earnest consideration of so great euill or mi∣serie, the which tarried for the Israelites, that is, men that were mar∣ked with the seale of the couenant of GOD, to wit, circumcision.The mourning of the Prophet described. But this his sorrow or mourning doth the Prophet describe two wayes. First barely, that is, simply: afterward by comparison. Simplie in such sorte,1. Simplie. that neuertheles he sheweth that by the deepe conceiuing of the iudgement of God to ensue against them, he day∣lie more and more lamenteth their case and estate. For hee vseth such a kinde of speaking, the which ariseth and increaseth by de∣grees, and sheweth the sorrow to be the greater. For hee sayth, I will mourne, both in minde and gesture: secondly, I will howle. Now
howling is a crying and complaint of most bitter mourning: last of all, I will goe without clothes, and naked, the which the Prophets did, to lay before the eyes of men the miserie at hand, the which in their owne persons they did represent Isai 20. 2. By comparison.Secondly, he setteth out this his mourning by comparison, by the which he declareth an exceeding and fearefull sorrow. For he will so mourne as the Dragons being solitarie, and voyd of all help, are wont to doe, whilest they seeke their young ones which are flowen away, and being in feare make a great noyse, as Aelianus writeth lib. 9. de Histor. Animal. So Iob willing to expresse his great sorrow and heauynes cap. 30. ver. 29. sayth: I am a brother to the Dragons, and a companion to the Ostriches. Vers. 9. For her plagues are grieuous: for it is come into Iudah: the enemie is come vnto the gate of my people, vnto Ierusalem. A rendring of a reason of this so great mour∣ning of the pro∣phet.A Rendring of a reason of so great and heauie sorrowe described before, and taken vpon him by the Prophet, lest he might seem in vaine and without cause in such sorte to haue afflicted or tormen∣ted and grieued himselfe, or be thought that he would astonish the Israelites with a needles feare. And this reason is taken from the cause. And affliction or trouble, is the cause of sorrow among men. Wherfore the cause of this great sorrow of the Prophet, is the great miserie and affliction, the which hangeth ouer the head of the Is∣raelites, howsoeuer it be not conceiued or felte of them despising the iudgements of God. Now the greatnes of this miserie of the Israelites doth the pro∣phet describe by the adioynts and consequents or things following after it,The descriptiō of their great miserie by the adioynts and consequents. as is the spreading it adroade vnto the neighbour nations, the most sorrowful fame and report therof, the great crying of men, their fearefull fleeing and running away, and such like other things, the which are reckoned vp in the verses following But here is an adioynt set downe of great miseries, the which consisteth herein, whilest the trouble and hurte of the neighbour people shall reach vnto other people neere vnto them, and certain peeces and sparkes of this affliction, as it were out of a dangerous fiering of houses ioyning together, doe flie vnto the people adioyning, and do either scorch them, or else burne them sometines also. That which shal come to passe in the same ouerthrow of the Israelites. For the force and fall thereof shall reach and breake out vnto the Iewes,
yea and moreouer vnto the very gates of Ierusalem, that is, the ho∣ly citie of God did this burning come. For albeit this flame did not burne the gates of this citie, yet it touched them, and burnt vn∣to them. Wherefore this miserie of the Israelites was to bee verie great. The calamitie and misery of the Israelites reacheth also vnto the Iewes, a kingdome se∣ueral and di∣stinct from it.And in the wordes, Iudah my people, and Ierusalem, there lyeth great vehemencie or force, and amplifyings, and that by degrees. For it appeareth that the flame of that Israelitish burning was great the which brake out euen vnto the kingdome of Iudah, that is, a kingdome altogether seuered and diuers from this kingdome of Is∣rael, albeit in the scituation of place, neere vnto it. For warres are wont to be made and stayed, and kept within the borders of those against whom they are taken in hand: and not to be spread out in∣to the boundes and borders of other nations and kingdomes, the which are not enemies: because that anger and iniurie doth for the most part pursue the autors and causers of the same, and not o∣thers. But in this case that commeth to passe which the Poet spea∣keth of. Mantua, vae miserae nimium vicina Cremonae: Poore mantua, too nigh (alacke) to wretched Cremone' Land. The Poet la∣menteth the case of Man∣tua, the which for that it was so neere vnto the citie Cre∣mona, was spoyled also by the souldiers of the Emperour.Further, this miserie and ouerthrow of the Israelites appeareth 01 therby also to be the greater, because it redoundeth vpon that peo∣ple in like maner, which is the people of God, that is, whom God vseth with a certain especiall care to protect or defend, and not to ioyne and mingle them with the ruine or fall of other peoples. Last of all this selfe same ouerthrow is seene to be most great, for that it ranged also euen vnto the gates of Ierusalem, that is, the holie citie, and alwayes preserued by God. And all these things came to passe when as Sennacherib, after that he had destroyed the king∣dome of the Israelites, besieged Ierusalem it selfe. For he was a king of Assyria, as was Salmanazar, who ouerthrew the kingdom of Israel. For as it is 2. King. 18. vers 9. In the fourth yeare of King Hezechiah (which was the seuenth yeare of Hosea sonne of Elah King of Israel) Shalmaneser King of Assyria came vp against Samaria, and besieged it. And as it is also in the 13. of the same chapter, In the fourteenth year of King Hezechiah Sennacherib king of Asshur came vp against al the strong cities of Iudah, and tooke them. And this voi∣age of Sennacherib into the kingdom of Iudah, was as a continuing and pursuing only of the victorie of the King of Assyria, and of the ouerthrow of the Israelites. So we see how God oftentimes doth
plague neighbour nations, as it were houses standing one vnto an∣other, for the wickednes & vngodlines of those that dwel neer vnto them. So great a commoditie it is to haue a good neighbour, either people, or priuate person, that is to say, a man fearing God. Vers. 10. Declare ye it not at Gath, neither weepe yee: for the house of Aphrah roule thy selfe in the dust. THe second adioynt or consequent, whereby the greatnes of the same ouerthrow of the Israelites is declared,The second ad∣ioynt declaring the miserie of the Iraelites. to wit, for that by this meanes they be vtterly mocked and laughed to scorne of their enemies, and prophane or wicked neighbours. And therefore the Prophet forbiddeth that it should be shewed or tolde vnto any pro∣fane people, were they neuer so neere vnto them, such as were the Philistines, which dwelled at Geth, or Gath. For from the west that parte of Palestina was neerest of all others vnto the Iewes and also vnto the Israelites. The like is 2. Sam. 1. ver. 20. concerning the death of Saul, the which is forbidden to bee tolde among their neighbours the Philistines, lest they should triumph against them in these wordes: Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the streetes of Ashkelon, lest the daughters of the Philistims reioyce, lest the daugh∣ters of the vncircumcised triumph. It appeareth therefore that it should be a great ouerthrow, whereof the enemies of the Israelites should be so glad and ioyful, and reprochful against the Israelites, as Psalm. 137. where the Edomites so triumph against their bre∣thren the Iewes, and stirre vp the rage and cruelty of the Babylo∣nians the more against them. For (or in) the house of Aphrah roule thy selfe in the dust. This is the figure Hypophora,What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. . ver. 21. or answering of an obiection, the which, like as the sentence before is added by the Prophet to moue affecti∣on, for the comforting and stirring vp of the Israelites. For when as he forbad the Israelites to mourn at Geth, or Gath, it seemed that he forbade them all mourning, and that so hee tooke from the Is∣raelites that which is wont to be a great easement and comfort vn∣to men in miseries. But he addeth, that he doth not forbid that they mourne not at all: nay that he biddeth them doe it, and that in as ample maner, as they are wont to doe, which are most hea∣uy, and oppressed or ouertaken with greatest sadnes and mourning. And therefore graunteth, that they wholly roule themselues in dust and ashes: but in a place remoued and far distant from those prophane or heathen nations and men, such a place as Aphrah is
where also by the name and significatiō of the word (which is dust) they are stirred vp to that fame rouling themselues in the dust, and most great mourning. Now this Aphrah is a place in the borders of Beniamin, and signifieth (dust) Iosh. 18. ver. 23. And this granting, nay, exhorting vnto so great lamentation made by the Prophet, sheweth the greatnes of this miserie, whe which he threatneth vnto them. So Paul 1. Thes. 4. ver. 13. when he sayth, I would not, brethren, haue you ignorant concerning them which are asleepe, that ye sorowe not euen as others, which haue no hope: forbiddeth not that they should mourne for the dead at all, but that they should not mourne after the maner of infidels. So then moderate mourning in miseries is granted vnto Christians Ecclesiast. 3. Act. 8. Vers. 11. Thou that dwellest atIn the fine place. Shaphir, goe together naked with shame: she that dwelleth atIn the places full of cattel. Zaanan shall not come foorth in the mourning ofPlaces adioy∣ning. Beth-ezel: The enemie shall receiue of youHis standing. for his standing. A Staying in the further opening of this matter, the which by an Hypotyposis, that is, a liuely setting out of things done afterward,Hypotyposis, what this fi∣gure is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. painteth foorth and sheweth the greatnesse of the punishment that was to insue vpon the Israelites, to the ende that they themselues may feele and conceiue the same, and repent at the last, if it may be, being moued with the grieuousnes of their owne case. For there is no other end of this narration or telling of things to come, which followeth, then that the people of God through the feare of their so great destruction, should turne themselues vnto God: and, that whē these things should afterwards come to passe, they might bee vn∣derstood for their cause to come to passe in the iust iudgement of God, because that they were foretold that they should fall out vpon the impenitent, or such as would not repent. This speech therefore is not a poeticall Hyperbole, or excessiue, and beyond the truth, but a sorowfull description of a most grieuous ruine, which troubleth the Prophet himselfe: but yet commanded by God to bee tolde in this sort, that the weight of the punishment may be shewed to bee the greater, and consequently to be to be auoyded. Moreouer, this whole oration following is full of Prosopopoeiaes,What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap. 6. ver. 1. or feining of per∣sons by the Prophet directed vnto the places themselues, & townes and cities: and full of descriptions of places, & predictions or fore∣tellings of things to come, and counsailes, that these men shall take
to helpe themselues withall: that these rebels might bee the better touched, and brought as it were into the view of the matter present before their eyes: and finally that their passing miserie might in a maner be layd plainly before them for to see and behold. Two things to be noted in this verse.But this verse hath two poynts to be noted. The matter it selfe, or the Hypotyposis, or liuely setting out of it painted forth by the fi∣gure Prosopopoeia, or feining of person: and the Antithesis, or con∣trarieties to be noted in the words of the Prophet full of great force & efficacie.1 The matter it selfe: to wit, the fearefull fleeing of the whole nation. As for the matter, it is the most fearfull fleeing and run∣ning away of that whole nation, sometime most braue and beauti∣full, and well tilled by the Israelites. For I suppose the things which the Prophet here speaketh to belong vnto the Israelites, and not vn∣to the Iewes. For their destruction, and not the Iewes, is here now properly described: yea, and whereas there is in this place mention made of Ierusalem, and of the citie Lachis, this is not rehearsed for it selfe, but onely to amplifie the ruine of the ouerthrow threatned vnto the Israelites. Therefore the places which are here called both Saphirical, that is to say, beautiful, pleasant, fine: and Zaanana, that is, pasture grounds, and full of cattell, I doe thinke the same to be to be referred vnto the kingdom of Israel, & not vnto the kingdom of Iudah, because that that the same kingdom of Israel was also most rich, fruitfull, and hauing store of all things, as was also the kingdom of Iudah. For it also was a part of the land promised by God vnto the children of Israel, and so consequently blessed, albeit that at the same time the Israelites had cast away the true worship of God. It appeareth by the diuision of the land described in the booke of Ioshua, and by cap. 4. of the first booke of Kings, that there were be∣longing vnto this kingdome of Israel, both most fruitfull places, and also fine and beautifull places. The Antithesis or contrarietie, the which is manifestly seene in this sentence of the Prophet,2. The Antithesis or matching of contraries one against ano∣ther, expresly to bee gathe∣red out of the words of this verse. is first in the word Saphir, the which signifieth fine, and beautifull, and faire: and in these words, naked with shame. So then the places, which before were fine and faire places, and a pleasant dwelling, the same shall now become naked, yea, and that with shame, because the fearfull tokens of the most iust wrath of God shal be extant and remaining against that coun∣trie. Againe, there is an Antithesis or setting of contraries one a∣gainst another in these words, goe, or flee, and the inhabitant of the place that is full of cattell shall not come forth to helpe thee, or to re∣ceiue thee, or ayde thee, that is no husbandman, or farmer, albeit
that he neuer so much haue, or receiue of thee that his standing, to wit, both his house which he dwelleth in in the fieldes: and the cattell themselues, which he feedeth. For the farmers, and tillers of farmes in the countrie haue them for the most part of the citie ow∣ners hired for a rent, or for a reward, vnles that they themselues bee rich, and the owners of them. But the Prophets meaning is, that those farmers, which shall hold these farmes of them, shal not meet them when they flee away, that they may refresh and helpe their Landlords. The reason is added, because that the husbandmen be∣ing so awhaped, and frighted, shall not doe it for feare, so that they shall not dare to goe out of their rockes, fields, and farmes. For, saith the Prophet, there shall be mourning, and it shall bee heard euery where, both in the places and houses, the which shall be adioyning, and neere vnto these farmes. Finally, both in the townes, and in the fields there shall be great feare, great trembling, great dismaying & abashment, so that not so much as the countrie seruants, who in their farmes haue their foode and dwelling of their masters, shall come out of those their farmes and houses to comfort and meete their masters, nor to bring them any helpe at all, when as they slee, and passe by that way. And this doubtles is a description of excee∣ding great miserie, & calamitie or distresse to be lamented, where∣as for feare the very lawes of nature and humanitie are altogether neglected and forslowed. Vers. 12. For the inhabitant of Maroth waited for good, but euill came from the Lord vnto the gate of Ierusalem. A yeelding a reason of this so great abash∣ment.THis is a rendring of a reason of this so great an abashment, the which shall be in the inhabitants of the pasture place, and full of cattell, that is to say, in the husbandmen. For albeit that it was shewed before that this should come to passe, because of the feare of the husbandmen: yet here is now declared how iust this feare is, and that it cannot bee accused, or found fault withall. Therefore sayth the Prophet, the inhabitant of the place abounding with cat∣tell, the which is here called the inhabitant of Maroth, or of the rough place, that is, of the rocks and mountaines, (for in the moun∣taines as well as in the valleyes there are wont to bee places for pa∣stures, and flocks, and heards of cattell) that same inhabitant I say, that is, the husbandmen shall mourne, and shall wonderfully bee tormented with in themselues, and shall be afrighted for the benefit
and commodities of victuals, and of the countrie by the enemies gotten from them, that is, taken away by force. And especially when as they shall see this euill or punishment to be from God, & to haue reached and come euen vnto the gates of Ierusalem, that is, of that holie citie. There is a like place to cause the people to be∣stirre themselues, & looke about them Mat. 24. ver. 15. when they shall see the abomination of desolation spoken of by Daniel the Pro∣phet, standing in the holie place. For then (sayth he) let him that rea∣deth consider it. We are taught by this example, that the afflictions or punishments which God sendeth vpon his Church,The iudgemēts of God vpon his Church ought especially to be regarded. are especial∣ly to bee considered of vs, and regarded. For they are most assured tokens of his wrath against the world, and most true prognostica∣tions of great miseries the which shall afterwards insue vnto therest of mortall men Ezech. 9. And therefore Peter sayth 1. Epist. cap. 4. ver. 17. If iudgement first begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of those that obey not the Gospell of God? Vers. 13. O thou inhabitant of Lachish, binde the charet to the beasts of price (or dromedaries) she is the beginning of the sinne to the daughter of Zion: for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee. THis is a descending or comming downe vnto particulars. For after that he hath generally shewed the laying waste and de∣struction of the whole land to come,A comming vnto particu∣lars. that he might declare the greatnes of this punishment and ouerthrowe, he now commeth downe vnto certaine places, and describeth what trembling and miserie shall be in them especially:What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap. 6. ver. 1. as in this verse by Prosopopoeia, or feining of a person, the Prophet speaketh vnto Lachish a citie of the kingdome of Iudah, the which he sheweth shall bee punished for the same impietie or vngodlines which was in Israel, that there∣by Israel himselfe may iudge, that is, that kingdome, that he must be punished for the like vngodlines. Two parts of this verse.Wherefore there are two things here to be noted. One, the spee∣die fleeing and feare of the citie Lachish, and of the citizens. The other,1. Their speedie fleeing. the cause of the same. The fleeing, and that not onely vpon horses, such as posts are wont to ride on, but also vpon Dromeda∣ries. And this is a kind of beast most quicke and swift,2. The cause thereof. farre excee∣ding the swiftnes of horses, as writers of histories doe affirme. For they are called Dromedaries of their swiftnes in running.  But
whereas it is sayd that this calamitie or miserie shall make the citie of Lachish it selfe afrayd, it appeareth to be great.Ierem. 34. ver. 7. Lachish and Azekah are called strong cities of Iudah. For Lachish was a strong citie in the kingdome of Iudah, but yet such a citie, the which Sennacherib afterwards wonne: as it is Isai. 36. ver. 2. and the citizens thereof, as wee see them here in this verse willed for to doe, ranne away most fearefully, whilest Salmanazar taketh Sama∣ria, and spoyleth, and wasteth it. The reason and cause of this their punishment and fleeing away with shame is, because this citie was partaker and partner in those impieties, the which were vsed in th kingdom of Israel, to wit, that she might offer vnto God a strange worship. For the citie Lachish sacrificed vnto God in the high pla∣ces. Neither is she sayd to be partaker onely of the same impieties, or vngodlines: but she was the author & ringleader vnto the king∣dome of Iudah, yea, and vnto Ierusalem it selfe, of receiuing those idolatries: whereby appeareth that she was the more iustly pu∣nished. Vers. 14. Therefore shalt thou giue presents vnto Moresheth Gath: the houses of Achzib shall be as a lye to the Kings of Israel. A digression with an am∣plification of the miserie of the citie La∣chish.A Digression, wherein is contained by the way an amplification of the miserie or punishment, the which shall happen vnto the citie Lachish. For it shall send presents vnto cities most farre off, that they would giue her entertainment when she fleeth, and let her haue place to flee vnto them, to wit, vnto Morestha or More∣sheth (the which citie is neere vnto the Philistims, and vnto their towne Gath or Geth) shall Lachish humbly send gifts, that it may be lawfull for her to flee thither: so great shall be the feare of the citizens of Lachish, and so wide their flight. But by the sentence following, the which is contained in this selfe same verse, the Pro∣phet seemeth to signifie, that this helpe sought after by them of Lachish, shall stand them in no stead, and be vnprofitable vnto them. For the Prophet addeth, The house of Achzib (the which is neere both vnto Morestha and Maraschah) shall deceiue euen the Kings of Israel themselues, vnto whom notwithstanding this house shall promise ayde, and shall receiue gifts of them, as Morestha did of thee, O Lachish. Whereby appeareth that there shall at that time be a great abashment of all peoples neere vnto the Israelites, when as none shall then dare to ayde and helpe either the Israelites them∣selues, or els one another for feare of the enemies. Whereof may
worthilie be now vnderstood and concluded, that this ouerthrowe of the Israelites shall be very great, the which God would haue sig∣nified vnto them by these so many narrations and foretellings of things to come. Why the Pro∣phet maketh mention of Achzib.Further, the Prophet doth very fitly make mention of the trea∣cherie and lying, wherewith the inhabitants of Achzib deceiued the Kings of Israel, to shew that this ayd of them of Lachish should be but vaine. Wherein also he pleasantly alludeth and hath resem∣blance vnto the name of Achzib: for Chasab, from whence it is deriued, signifieth a lye. Therefore these shall indeede receiue the wages, gifts and money giuen them by the Kings of Israel, yet shall they not keep their promise, nor send souldiers, nor promised aydes: but shall disappoynt them. Now if these of Achzib being both far∣ther off from the kingdome of Israel, then those of Moresheth from the citie Lachish: and being of more power to defend themselues against the Assyrians, then they of Moresheth: namely, when as they of Achzib are an whole house and familie possessing many townes, and a strong nation, and populous: and Moresheth (vnto which they of Lachish shall flee) is but one only towne of Iudah: finally, if they of Achzib being both requested, and receiuing gifts of the Kings of Israel, deceiued them notwithstanding, and were no ayde vnto them: what may they of Lachish hope for at the hands of those of Moresheth? Iust nothing. For they of Moresheth are not more constant or true of their word then those of Achzib: nor bol∣der then they, nor better, nor farther off from the danger of that de∣struction, nay, these cities are neere one to another, Morestha, Ma∣rescha, Achzib, Iosh. 15.44. Vers. 15. Yet will I bring an heire vnto thee, O inhabitant of Mare∣shab, he shall come vnto Adullam, the glorie of Israel. A particular shewing what shall fall out vnto Mare∣shah.ANother descending or comming downe vnto particulars, the which describeth what shall come to passe peculiarly vnto the towne Mareshah (the which was neere vnto Achzib, and More∣sheth) as the Prophet shewed before concerning Lachish. And this also appertaineth to the amplifying of the greatnes of the fall of the Israelites, the which shall reach vnto so many townes being farre off from them. How great therefore shall it be among the Is∣raelites themselues, vpon whom the greatest waight and burden of this destruction shall lie? In the meane season the Prophet tea∣cheth
what punishments the Lord will send vpon the Iewes also, because of their sinnes, that being admonished or warned by these predictions or foretellings, they might repent and amend their life. Two parts of this verse.But this verse hath two parts. One which threatneth a punish∣ment to come vpon them of Mareshah:1. The punish∣ment of Mare∣shah. the other the Epiphone∣ma, or exclamation of the Prophet in these words, O glorie of Isra∣el, or the glorie of Israel. The punishment of them of Marescha shall be this, That both they and their borders shall be possessed of those forraine enemies and peoples,2. The exclama∣tion of the Pro∣phet. the which by the Assyrians shall be brought as Inhabitants into the kingdome of Israel, and Samaria.  The which things doubtles came to passe after the ouerthrowing of that Kingdome by Salmanazar 2. King. 17. ver. 24. the wordes whereof are these, And the King of Asshur brought folke from Ba∣bel, and from Cuthah, and from Aua, and from Hamah, and from Se∣pharuaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria in stead of the chil∣dren of Israel: so they possessed Samaria, and dwelled in the cities there∣of. The Assyrians therefore at that time when as they tooke Sama∣ria, inuaded also the towne Marescha, albeit that it appertained vn∣to the kingdome of Iudah Iosh. 15.44. And they inuaded also the townes thereof, and the coastes and borders of that countrie euen vnto Adullam: And those coastes they afterward retained, and re∣plenished, or filled with new inhabitants by them brought thither, the which new inhabitants, the Prophet termeth possessors, or heires, that is, winners of Marescha, nay inuaders of other mens goodes, and not the lawfull owners, and such as held those places by good right. Whereupon they were afterwards turned out of those places by Iosias King of Iudah 2. King. 23. ver. 4.8. And these Assyrian new possessors shall come as farre as vnto Adullam, and so they shall also get a great part of the kingdome of Iudah, because that the shardes of the ruine and ouerthrow of Israell shall reach and leape out euen into the kingdome of Iudah. For Adullam is in the tribe of Iudah Iosh. 15.35. and a stonie and rough countrie. And this is the punishment and ouerthrow, the which from that burning and firing of the kingdome of Israel shall reach vnto the citie Ma∣rescha, and the borders thereof. 2. What the s∣gure Epiphone¦ma is, see Iona. cap. 2. ver 8.Now the Epiphonema or exclamation of the Prophet followeth, (O glorie of Israel) namely, or as if hee should say, how shalt thou lye cast downe, troden vnder feete, confounded, when as this cala∣mitie or punishment shall come vpon thee not repenting. This
therefore is a deepe sigh of the Prophet fet from the bottome of his heart, whereby hee witnesseth that hee is greatly sorie for the ruine of the Israelites, that he might moue them also. And this Epiphone∣ma or exclamation did Micheas adde, both because he did beholde in his minde the whole destruction of the Israelites, which was to come, as if it had been present before his eyes, and by and by at hand: and also because that here he would as it were out of a by∣path come into the way againe vnto the Israelites themselues (for whose sake especially these things were spoken) out of that same long digression, in the which he had shewed and declared the pu∣nishments of the townes and cities neere vnto the Israelites. There∣fore the Prophet doth both himselfe from his heart lament, appre∣hending or conceiuing so sorrowfull a destruction of the Israelites: and also by this exclamation stirreth them vp, that they should vn∣derstand, that all whatsoeuer was among them at any time magni∣ficent, or stately, glorious, to bee feared, and accounted of, should vtterly perish, and vanish away at that time. Wherefore he saith, O glorie of Israel, to wit, then lost, and vtterly ouerthrowne. Vers. 16. Make thee balde: and shaue thee for thy delicate chil∣dren: enlarge thy baldnes as the eagle, for they are gone into captiuitie from thee. The conclusion of the whole former threat∣ning.THe conclusion of the whole former threatning against the Isra∣elites, wherein by the figure Prosopopoeia, or feining of the per∣son, they are stirred vp vnto great mourning, that they may vnder∣stand, that their punishment shall be great also. So hardly surely can men (whenas they sleepe sweetely in their sinnes,What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap. 6. v. 1. and please themselues in them) bee awaked, and consider into how great miserie they doe cast themselues. Wherein the great mercie of God is seene euen toward those which willinglie runne headlong into their own destruction, who so often, and diligently warneth them, rouseth them vp, calleth them back againe, if so bee that they had eares and an heart to heare Rom. 2. Further, by the outward gesture and behauiour of those which are in great sorrow, here also is pain∣ted forth, and foretold the great sorrow and mourning of the Isra∣elites, which was to come. And this was in olde time the behauiour of them that mourned and lamented, Baldnes, that is, the making of their heads bald, the which they procured vnto themselues pul∣ling off their owne haire: Shauing, in token of guiltines and sor∣rowe.
So then the Israelites are called vnto such a kinde of mour∣ning and lamenting, because that this land shall loose her most tender and delicate sonnes. For they shall be carried away into cap∣tiuitie by the Assyrians. CAP. 2. Vers. 1. Woe vnto them that imagine iniquitie, and worke wickednes vpon their beds: When the morning is light they practise it, be∣cause their hand hathHebr. is in power. power. The second ser∣mon of Mi∣cheas.THe second Sermon of the Prophet, wherein in like maner hee thundreth, and pronounceth the threatnings of God, first, a∣gainst the Israelites, and afterwards against the Iewes. And against the Israelites from the beginning of this chapter vnto the tenth verse of the chapter following: but against the Iewes from the same tenth verse, and so forward. Further, he maketh another foun∣dation and ground of this sermon, then of the former. For in the former he shewed that the idolatrie of the Israelites was the cause of the wrath and vengeance of God against them: but here he tea∣cheth, that God is angrie with them, and threatneth them because of the neglecting or forslowing, nay the notorious breaking of their dutie towards their neighbours: so that the first chapter respect∣eth the first table of the lawe, and this the second. For the lawe containeth both those kindes of iustice or righteousnes, the which God requireth of vs, that is to say, both our dutie vnto God, and al∣so toward our neighbours Rom. 13. Moreouer this verse briefelie setteth forth the singular wicked∣nes of that age, the which, as I said before, was seene indifferently as wel in the Iewes, as in the Israelites,Two partes of this verse. and was rife and common e∣uery where among them: and it hath two parts.1. In the word (Woe) The first is contei∣ned in this word (Woe) whereby the great indignation or displea∣sure of God, and his most iust prepared vengeance against either a∣ny one singular or particular person,2. In the rest of the verse briefely descri∣bing the great wickednes of the Israelites by the effects, which are twaine. or else a whole companie is signified euery where: yea euen in the new Testament, as Matt. 23. ver. 14. Woe be vnto you Scribes and Pharises, hypocrites: for yee de∣uoure widowes houses, euen vnder a colour of long Prayers: Where∣fore ye shall receiue the greater damnation, and so forth in all the o∣ther Woes there mentioned. The second part is in the other wordes following in this verse, wherein this wickednes and vnrecouerable
lewdenes is summaerilie or briefely described. And it is described by the effects, the which can and are wont to be onely in those per∣sons, who are vtterly, and notoriously lewd and wicked. And these effects are two: the one, for that they which are such, not only in the day, but also in the night, and whilest others sleepe, nay, whilest they themselues are thought to lie to take their rest, they notwith∣standing in their rest thinke, deuise, and studie in their minde, how and by what meanes they may hinder and hurt their neighbour. The which the Prophet calleth, to imagine iniquitie, and worke wic∣kednes. For when they lye in their beddes, they doe not onely muse what course and way may be found out and deuised, whereby their neighbour may be hurt, as for example, to be spoyled of his goods: but also they doe debate and reason with themselues in those their night meditations and studies, how they may put in execution and practise against their neighbours, thinking nothing on it, that their by them deuised, lewd and wicked purpose o counsaile, in so much that these wretched catifes, and wholy borne in lewdnes abuse vn∣to the both inuenting and practising of deceite against their neigh∣bours, that selfe same very time the which God hath giuen vnto men for rest, peace, and quiet Gen. 1. Psal 104 Contrariwise, the godly vse both the day and the night to the considering and rehear∣sing of the benefites of God towards them, and the entring into a course with themselues how to help their neighbours. And there∣fore Dauid Psal. 1. ver. 2. saith of the godly blessed man, that his de∣lite is in the lawe of the Lord, and that in his lawe he doth meditate day and night. And Psal. 119. ver. 55. he affirmeth of himselfe, say∣ing: I haue remembred thy name, O Lord, in the night, and haue kept thy lawe. Againe ver. 62. At midnight will I rise to giue thankes vn∣to thee, because of thy righteous iudgements. This therefore is one no∣table effect of the notorious and desperat lewdnes of men. The other effect is, That forthwith earlie in the morning, and so soone as it is once day, they put in executiō those their deuises and deceites, the which in the night time they thought vpon against their neighbours, for they haue a both hand and minde most swift, readie and powerfull in such kinde of actions and wickednes, as namely being most exercised in them. Doubtles it is a signe of no∣torious lewdnes, when as a man, so soone as the day beginneth to peepe, ariseth, and goeth forth presently to practise that his wicked∣nes, the which he hath deuised in the night, that he may finde those vnreadie, and thinking vpon no such matter, vpon the hurting of
whom he studied in the darknes of the night. So Isai 5. vers. 11. that same drinking early in the morning is alledged for a signe of great drunkennes by the Prophet, Woe (saith he) vnto them that rise vp early to follow drunkennesse, and to them that continue vntill night, till the wine doe inflame them. To be short, their hand in such matters is vnto power, that is, powerful, strong, and ready, to wit as being exercised and acquainted with such matters. And therfore they do by these means shew how ready they are, and made vnto such wic∣kednes. Vers. 2. And they couet fields, and take them by violence, and hou∣ses, and take them away: so they oppresse a man and his house, e∣uen man and his heritage. The former matter made more plaine by two examples, declaringAN explanation, and making more plaine of the former matter. For that which he had said generally before, he doth now make plaine, and lay open by setting downe of certaine examples. And the same are two, the which doe declare partly their passing coue∣tousnes, and partly their cruelty and fiercenes against their neigh∣bours and those of their owne stocke and kindred.1. Their couetous∣nes that can neuer be satis∣fied. Their coue∣tousnes, and the same vnfilable, that so soone as they haue once coueted within themselues other mens goods, yea and that of their poore neighbours, they shamelesly take them by violence, and carie them away boldely: neither is it a little portion of the goods of their poore neighbours that these so couet and take away: but their ground or eldes, and whole houses, that is to say, the selfe same things, which are the foundation and stay of the whole liuing of the poore, and all their nourishment and maintenance. They spoyled them therefore of their farmes both in the countrey and al∣so in the citie, that is to say, of their grounds, which brought them corne, of their vineyards, Oliue gardens, and the goods of their fa∣thers and grandfathers. Such an example there is of Achab towards poore Naboth 1 King. 21. And the Prophet Isai pronounceth a woe against such greedi-guttes cap. 5. ver. 8. saying: Woe vnto them that ioyne house to house, and lay fielde to field, till there bee no place, that ye may be placed by your selues in the midst of the earth. And these doings of both the Israelites, and also the Iewes either prin∣ces or priuate persons doe declare their vnrecouerable couetous∣nesse. 2. Their vnmer∣cifull cruelnes.As for their cruelty and vnmercifulnesse this verse sheweth,
that, for because these selfe same persons doe oppresse their neigh∣bours with their hand, and by violence: and not one or two alone: but the housholders with their whole families, that is, euery man with his portion, to wit, not being content to haue done wrong or violence to one or twaine: these barbarous and cruel persons de∣sire to ouer-runne by violence, and to destroy his whole kindred, whome they oppresse. And this appeareth to be a cruel parte, euen when it is done vnto bruite beasts, by that precept of God which forbiddeth to take, or eate the damme with her young ones Deut. 22. vers. 6. If thou finde a birds nest in the way, in any tree, or on the ground, whether they be young, or egges, and the damme sitting vpon the young or egges, thou shalt not take the damme with the young, but shalt in any wise let the damme goe, and take the young to thee, that thou mayest prosper and prolong thy dayes. Further, as here in this place the Prophet hath ioyned couetousnes and violence together as fellowes, and brother sinnes, so likewise doth Paul couple them 1. Thes. 4. vers. 6. when he willeth, That no man oppresse or defraude his brother in any matter. Vers. 3. Therefore thus sayth the Lord, Beholde, agaynst this fa∣milie haue I deuised a plague whereout ye shall not plucke your neckes, and ye shall not goe so proudly, for this time is euill. Foure things to be noted in this verse.A Threatning of a punishment from God for the former sinnes. And here are foure thinges to bee noted. First, who threat∣neth. And it is Iehouah himselfe, true, iust, and almighty, who a∣gaynst their euill cogitation or deuising matcheth his iust cogita∣tion or deuising.1. Who threat∣neth. They thinke vpon the euill of sinne: but God a∣gaynst them thinketh vpon the euill of punishment. So then look at what moment and minute of time we doe deuise vpon the com∣mitting of sinnes within our selues, GOD also doth deuise with himselfe vpon our punishment. Secondly, to whome this pu∣nishment is threatned,2. To whom this punishment is threatned. to wit, vnto the whole house of Iacob, and conesquently as well to the Iewes, as vnto the Israelites: albeit that he begin first with the Israelites, as being more manifestly guiltie, and wicked. Thirdly, what euil, or what punishment God threat∣neth vnto both peoples.3. What punish∣mēt god threat∣neth vnto them And he threatneth a most lamentable punishment, the which shall holde them as it were by the necke, halter, and strangle them, that is to say, whereby they shall perish miserably, and shamefully, howsoeuer they haue liued licentiously
and atrandon before, as wanton agaynst God, vnbridled, and with∣out any bandes. Againe, out of the which (although they struggle and striue and assay neuer so much) yet shall they not bee able to get out, deliuer and vnhamper themselues: because they shall be held vnder by the hand of God, the which is most strong. So that now, except they repent, all security and hope of escaping is taken away from them. Fourthly, there is here also contained an am∣plification of this punishment taken from the effect. And this is,4. An amplifica∣tion of this pu∣nishment takē from the effect that after this punishment they shall neuer goe, or doe so proudly as before, and so renowmed and glorious. For by this punishment the renowme, strength, name and glory of both these peoples shall be so cast downe and darkened, that neither people shall euer af∣terward be able to lift vp themselues vnto the olde dignitie, which they had vnder their kings. Therefore I take the worde (Romah) in good parte in this place. This to bee true, that which fell out vnto them, hath declared. For the kingdome of Israel vtterly pe∣rished: and the kingdome of Iudah was neuer afterward restored vnto his former glory & renowme, no not after their return from the captiuitie of Babylon, as may appeare Ezechiel 21. vers. 26, 27. of that which is threatned concerning the fall of Zedekiah, and his Kingdome, neuer to be restored to his former dignity in these wordes: Thus sayth the Lorde GOD, I will take away the Dia∣dem, and take off the Crowne: this shall be no more the same: I will exalte the humble and abase him that is high. I will ouerturne, o∣uerturne, ouerturne it, and it shall bee no more vntill he come whose right it is, and I will giue it him. The reason followeth in our Pro∣phet,A reason of this so great punishment. because all that time following shall be an euill time, and a time of affliction or trouble. For albeit that the affliction of the Israelites, and especially of the Iewes, were eased, and di∣minished or lessened by GOD, and their condition or estate chan∣ged: yet the print and token of this iudgement of GOD the which is nowe threatned agaynst both those peoples remayned and abode still alwayes, euen very grieuous, and are manifest also at this day. It shall therefore be an euill time. By these so ma∣ny true and earnest descriptions of the punishment to, come the purpose of GOD was to recal them vnto a better and more sound minde, were they neuer so great Hypocrites, and stubborne.
the portion giuen them sometimes by GOD the Lord in token of his fauour. Vers. 6. They that prophesied, prophesie ye not. They shall not prophe∣sie to them, neither shall they take shame. The figure Hy∣pophora, or an∣swering an ob∣iection. What this fi∣gure is, see A∣mos cap. 5. ver. 21.THis is the figure Hypophora, wherby he answereth an obiection or exception of that stubborne people, especially the Israelites, and by the selfe same the Prophet not onely signifieth, but also de∣clareth and liuely painteth out as it were in colours the impietie or vngodlinesse, and the more then bruitish contempt of God among them in this nation. This then was the exception of this people, and the same springing from notorious impudencie or shamelesnes & contumacie or stubbornnes against God, to wit, The Prophets shal not prophesie among vs, that is to say, wee will not suffer them to threaten these things vnto vs, yea, if any messenger of such feare & threatnings shall come vnto vs, we will send him packing, and will not suffer him to speake, to terrifie or feare our men. So Amos 7. ver. 12, 13. Amaziah sayth vnto Amos, O thou seer, goe, flee thou a∣way into the land of Iudah, and there eate thy bread, and prophesie there: but prophesie no more at Bethel: for it is the Kings chappel, and it is the Kings court. So Isai. 30. ver. 10. The people say vnto the Seers, See not: and to the Prophets, prophesie not to vs right things: but speake flattering things vnto vs, prophesie errors. This was passing wan∣tonnes against God, and blockishnes vnheard of, as if God there∣fore could be letted in his worke, because some stoppes and lets are layd in the way of his ministers, and for that they are forbidden to threaten those iudgements of God by the vngodly. The Prophet therefore answereth this disobedience two wayes.1. God his Pro∣phets shall pro∣phesie, whether they will or no, that forbid thē First, nay the Prophets of God shall preach and prophesie among you, in spite of your teeth, and in your hearing notwithstanding. Hereof there is example 1. King. cap. 22. ver. 8. in the Prophet Michaiah, who tel∣leth the trueth, notwithstanding the wicked King Achab hate him neuer so much, and cannot abide to heare him. And Amos 7. ver. 16. the Prophet ceaseth not to denounce God his iudgements a∣gainst Amaziah the priest, albeit he were forbidden by him to pro∣phesie in the land of Israel. Secondly, albeit these Prophets of God preach not,Though the Prophets being forbidden, pro∣phesie not, yet shall not the people therfore escape vnpu∣nished. or prophesie not vnto this people, shall this people ther∣fore feele no punishment? Therefore in my iudgement the second
part of this verse is an interrogation, or asking of a question thus: If the Prophets prophesie not (to wit, as being stopped and letted by one meanes or other) shall they therefore (namely the people) not take shame? And it is easily vnderstood, what the Prophet would haue vnderstood, to wit, This people shall not therefore bee free from the punishment to come, although they will not haue the Prophets of God to threaten the same vnto them. The reason whereof followeth in the next verse. Vers. 7. O thou that art named the house of Iaacob, is the spirit of the Lord shortned? are these his workes? Are not my words good to him that walketh vprightlie? A rendring of a reason of the former repre∣heasion.THis is the rendring of a reason of the former reprehension, ta∣ken from the nature of God, and the force and power of his spi∣rit, the which by no meanes can be let, changed, restrained, short∣ned, shifted off, or pent vp, but that it will effect or bring to passe those things which God willeth, and hath decreed, howsoeuer men seeke shifts and starting holes,Three partes of this verse. and goe about to mocke and dallie with God. And this verse hath three certaine pointes to be noted.1. The maner of speaking. The first is the maner of speaking. The second, the epithet or title the which is giuen vnto the Israelites, vnto whome the Prophet speaketh in this place. The third, the manifold reason,2. The title giuen to the Israelites for the which they are shewed to be reproued worthely, and this their co∣gitation or surmise and mocking of God declared to be altogether absurd or foolish, and blasphemous. For the first,3. Many reasons, why they are reprehended. the maner of spea∣king is an earnest interrogation or asking of a question, and the same repeared,  wherewith the dull consciences of these men are not onely pricked, and stirred vp: but also is prooued (albeit, they would denie that which is here set downe) that the same notwith∣standing is true, and acknowledged of all other people. Hereunto therefore appertaine the so often interrogations of this verse.  Now the title which is here giuen vnto the Israelites, doth the more con∣demne them, and make them vnexcusable, who thinke such things of God, and by this cunning goe about to limit the wordes of God, or to disanull them, to wit, looke by how much the more they doe glorie and boast of the true feare, and true knowledge of the true God, vnder this selfe same name of Iacob, with the which they doe ambitiouslie and proudely vaunt themselues aboue other men, and people of the world. For they call themselues the house of Iaacob,
and such also they will haue themselues accounted for to bee: yea they are so termed of other people. And by this name they doe shew that they are come of Iacob the seruant of God, and Patri∣arch, that they are his seede and familie blessed and chosen of God before or aboue others, & who therefore ought the more to knowe and reuerence God. But in this place there is a certaine secret An∣tithesis or contrarietie betweene To be called the house or familie of Iacob, and to be so in deede. They are called so both of themselues and also of others:3. Three reasons of this repre∣hension. but they are not so trueth. Further the rea∣sons of this reprehension, and of their foolish surmise of God, nay of their blasphemous suttletie (whilest to mocke the threatnings of God,1. The spirite of God is not bound though the ministers thereof be so serued. they doe forbid his Prophets to prophesie and to preach a∣mong them) are three. The first, that the spirit of God cannot ther∣fore be let or bound, albeit that men his ministers and preachers be letted and bound. And thus much doth Paul witnes 2. Tim. 2. ver. 9. where he saith: Wherein (to wit, in the gospell). I suffer trou∣ble, as an euill doer, euen vnto bonds: but the word of God is not bound. For the efficacie or force thereof doth not depend or hang vpon the power, or mouth of men the ministers, but God alwaies wholly hath the same in his owne power, and vncorrupted and vndimini∣shed. There it shall alwaies be effectuall or of force, as Isai. 55. ver. 11. God himselfe doth witnes, saying: So shall my word bee that go∣eth out of my mouth: it shall not returne vnto me voyde, but it shall ac∣complish that which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.2 Their workes are such, as god can neuer allow nor beare The second reason, because the workes, for the which God threatneth these things vnto them, are not the workes of Iehouah, that is, such workes, the which God can at any time allow or beare with all, but workes cleane contrarie vnto the iustice or righteous∣nes of God, and therefore such, as which (albeit all his Prophets should for euer hold their tongues) God will punish, and be auen∣ged on. There in this place the workes of Iehouah are by the fi∣gure Metalepsis called such workes, the which are acceptable vnto God:What the fi∣gure Meta∣lepsis is, see O∣seas cap. 4. v. 18 and the which doe agree with his commandements. The third reason, is taken from the wonted and vsual maner of the wor∣king of God, the which is manifest vnto all men, and cannot be de∣nied, to wit,3. God is neuer sharpe vnto the godlie. that God is neuer wont to be sharp and bitter vnto the godly: for as much therefore as hee now sheweth himselfe to bee such a one vnto the Israelites, it is a token that they are vtterly vn∣godly, and consequently worthie to bee punished: albeit that a∣mong them his Prophets be silent and say nothing. Wherefore by
the workes of God, and the feeling of them towards such as are in deede godly, and fearing him, the Prophet sheweth that these men shall not therefore be cleared, nor found iust, albeit the Prophets holde their peace. For if they were godly, the workes of God al∣so towards them should be ioyfull, and full of peace, not of iudge∣ment. And euen hereby he answereth a secret complaint of theirs, as if they were punished of God beyond their deseruing. Vers. 8. But hee that was yesterday my people, is risen vp on the o∣ther side, as against an enemie: they spoyle the bewtifull gar∣ment from them that passe by peaceably, as though they returned from the warre. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer reasons of the iudgement of God against them.AN amplification of the former reasons of the iudgement of God against the Israelites by the reckoning vp of the sinnes, which they committed. And first of all there are here recited two, namely couetousnes and crueltie, and both of them publike, and common∣ly reigning among them without punishment. Their crueltie, for that they rise vp and set vpon all men, as if they were enemies,1. Crueltie. loo∣king for, thinking on, yea or deseruing no such thing at their hands, as were those, which liued peaceablie and quietly with them. This saying of Micheas seemeth to taxe or reproue a publike licentious∣nes or ouer great libertie in ranging against all men, the which at that time was vnpunished among the Israelites. For in that age especiallie wherein Micheas prophesied the Israelites were accu∣stomed vnto ciuill warres among themselues. Further he seemeth to call againe to remembrance that example of crueltie, the which the Israelites lately had shewed against the Iewes their brethren and neighbours, when as they spoyled and carried away of them two hundreth thousand persons, that is, of men, women, and chil∣dren, one with another, without al pittie or mercy. Read 2. Chr. 28. ver. 8. Of this crueltie and sleaing and spoyling one of another, Isai seemeth to speake cap. 9. ver. 20.21. when he saith: Euery one shall eate the flesh of his owne arme: Manasseh Ephraim, and Ephraim Manasseh, and they both shall be against Iudah. Therefore it is not without an Emphasis or carrying a vehemencie and force with it, when as Micheas saith (yesterday) that is to say lately, and as yet in most fresh memorie you shewed your selues cruell and rash against all men, yea euen your brethren. For these things were done vn∣der Achaz King of Iudah, and Phasea King of Israel, vnder whome
also this our Micheas liued.2. Couetousnes. Their outragious couetousnes is also described, in that they spoyled all men, euen those which among their neighbours were their fellowes: finallie they robbed all their countrie men indifferently, so vnbridled was then their lewdnes and robberie. So commonly they vse to doe in Scotland and Aphri∣ca. But whereas he saith, Ye haue taken away the beautifull garment ouer against the garment: He signifieth that they tooke away from all men their best cloathing, as if it had been from their enemies, for these words to take away the cloake (the which among those peo∣ple was a most pretious and beautifull kinde of garment) ouer a∣gainst the garment, is as much to say, as to take away the cloake or some such other vpper garment, the which as the more costly, wee vse to weare vpmost or ouer the rest. For that is said to bee ouer a∣gainst the garment, the which is put ouer other apparrel as the more handsome and cleanlie. Vers. 9. The Women of my people haue ye cast out from their plea∣sant houses: and from their children haue ye taken away my glory continually. An example of their crueltie and couetous∣nes.HEre is rehearsed a notable example both of this their crueltie, and also couetousnes: for that in the time of quiet and peace they notwithstanding handled and vsed with all crueltie euen wo∣men themselues and children, who otherwise are wont to be priui∣ledged and goe free in the time of warres and battaile. As for the women (a fearefull and vnwarlie kinde of people) they thrust them out of their houses by force, or else carried them away from them violently. The which seemeth to be referred vnto the selfe same cru∣el part of theirs, the which is 2. Chr. 28. ver. 8. of the great multitude of those of Iudah, led away captiue, reported in that place thus: And the children of Israel tooke prisoners of their brethren, two hundreth thousand of Women, sonnes and daughters, and carried away much spoyle of them, and brought the spoyle to Samaria. But these houses of theirs hee calleth the houses of delites, or pleasant houses, in the which those women were from their childehood most tenderlie brought vp, and therefore this trouble was so much the more hea∣uie and grieuous vnto them. For the woman kinde it is mostlie to keepe the house and to bee at home, and looke what houses they haue once and from their childhood been vsed vnto, they are great∣ly delited withall: and therefore are they wont to be drawne from
them with groat sorow & heauines. So thē these words (Their plea∣sant houses, or the houses of delites) are set downe greatly to moue af∣fection. Further, these selfe same Israelites do vncourteouslie & co∣ueteously spoyle or bereaue the children whilest they are yet most young and tender of their garments and clothing, the which (be∣cause in that age they are wont to bee giuen them somewhat trim and costly) they are called in this place (Hadari) that is, pretious ornaments. And the Prophet noteth out little children, being as yet most tender, to the end that this their couetousnes may seeme to be the more cruell. Last of all he addeth (for euer or continually) that is, making no end of robbing and spoyling. The which also doth greatlie amplifie or increase their sinnes and wickednes. Con∣ferre with this place that of the 12. Psal. ver. 5. Now for the oppressi∣on of the needie, and for the sighes of the poore, I will vp saith the Lord, and set at libertie him, whom the wicked hath snared. And Psal. 146. ver. 9, The Lord keepeth the strangers: he relieueth the fatherles and widdow: but he ouerthroweth the way of the wicked. Vers. 10. Arise and depart, for this is not your rest: because it is polluted, it shall destroy you with a suddaine destruction. The conclusion.THe conclusion. Therefore these shall be punished, and that wor∣thely, by God: and shall of God be driuen into exile or banish∣ment by force, being spoyled of all their goodes, and led away from their owne natiue countrey, like as they spoyle others, and draw them away from their countrie and houses. But here in this verse there is conteined a secret Hypophora,What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver 21. or answering of an ob∣iection. For when as the land wherein the Israelites dwelt, was gi∣uen vnto them by God himselfe peculiarly for a possession, as the godly doe acknowledge Psal. 44. ver. 3. They inherited not the land by their owne sword, neither did their owne arme saue them: but thy right hand, and thine arme, and the light of thy countenance, because thou didst fauour them: these tooke exception and obiected, That therefore they and their successors should be and dwel in it for euer. God therefore answereth. Not so, for you haue polluted or defiled that land. Therefore it also shall spue you out, and that most vio∣lently, and so the captiuitie or banishment of your whole nation shall be most sorrowfull, and vniuersall. So God threatneth the Is∣raelites Leuit. 18. ver. 25. saying: And the land is defiled, therefore I will visite the wickednes thereof vpon it, and the land shall vomit out
her inhabitants. Therefore certaine countries, and certaine cities are giuen vs by God to be inhabited,Why God gi∣ueth vs lands and countries to inhabit or dwell in. that in them we should serue God holilie, not that we should with our sinnes defile those lands. Wherefore Psal 107. ver. 34. Dauid teacheth vs, That God turneth a fruitefull land into barrenes for the wickednes of them that dwell therein. And ver. 39.40. that for the same cause Men are dimini∣shed, and brought lowe by oppression, euill, and sorrow: he powreth con∣tempt vpon Princes, and causeth them to erre in desert places out of the way. Vers. 11. If a man walke in the spirit, and would lie falselie, saying: I will prophesie vnto thee of wine, and of strong drinke, hee shall e∣uen be the Prophet of this people. Vnto what contempt of God and his doctrine the Is∣raelites were come.NNow at the last God sheweth into what contempt at the length, or despising of his Maiestie and true doctrine these fel∣lowes are fallen, namely, that now they would haue no true Pro∣phets: but would heare onely false and lying Prophets, and such as should feede men with winde, that is to say, mock them with vaine and feined promises. Of such speaketh Ieremie cap. 22. ver. 22. The winde shall feede all thy Pastors. And cap. 5. ver. 13. And the Prophets shall bee as winde and the worde is not in them: thus shall it come vnto them.Two things to be noted in this verse. And Hosea cap. 12. ver. 1. Ephraim is fed with the winde, and followeth after the East winde. So then there are two things to bee noted in this verse. The one, the phrase or kinde of speaking,1. The phrase. What the fi∣gure Mime∣sis is, see Oseas cap 4. ver. 18. the which describeth or setteth forth this disobedience of the Israelites. And it is a Mimesis, or imitating and following of the wordes of the false Prophets. For he expresseth the wordes of the false Prophets, that hee may the more easelie lay the whole matter before their eyes, and shew it to be true. The wordes were, I will preach (said these false Prophets) or Prophesie vnto thee for wine, and for Sicera, that is, for euery sweete drinke, and strong, such as will make drunke, the which shall be vnto thee and growe this yeare. For I thinke that in these wordes is not so much signified the price or reward (the which notwithstanding these Prophets required, as namely being in deede hirelings) as the thing it selfe to bee no∣ted, whose increase they promised vnto the Israelites as from the mouth of God, that they might turne them away from the threat∣nings of the true Prophets, and from the feare of the iudgements of God. Example 1. King. 22. ver. 12. in all the false Prophets which agree with Zidkiiah against Michaiah, and prophesie vnto the
King, saying: Goe vp to Ramoth Gilead, and prosper: for the Lorde shall deliuer it into the Kings hand. And ver. 24. When Zidkiiah smi∣teth Michaiah, and asketh him, when went the spirite of the Lorde (which he neuer had) from me to speake vnto thee? So Ierem 28. ver. 2. Hananiah the false Propher lyeth, and saith: Thus speaketh the Lord of hostes, the God of Israel, saying, I haue broken the yoke of the King of Babel. And therefore against such in the chapter following ver 8. Ieremie saith thus vnto the people: Thus saith the Lorde of hostes, the God of Israel, let not your Prophets and your south sayers that be among you, deceiue you, neither giue eare vnto your dreames, which you dreame. For they prophesie you a lye in my name: I haue not sent them, saith the Lord. And ver. 21. setting downe particular ex∣amples: Thus saith the Lord of hostes the God of Israel, of Ahab the sonne of Kolaiah, and of Zedekiah, the sonne of Maaseiah, which prophesie lyes vnto you in my name, Beholde, I will deliuer them into the hand of Nebuchad-nezzar King of Babel, and he shall slaie them before your eyes. Therefore concerning the Prophesies of such as these, it shall fall out as Paul writeth 1. Thess. 5. ver. 3. When they shall say peace and safetie, then shall come vpon them suddaine destruction, as the trauaile vpon a woman with childe, and they shall not escape. Wherefore the Prophet to shew this humor of the false prophets in preaching lyes for gaine vseth the letter Lamed, and not the worde (gnal) that as I said, he might signifie that these when afflictions or troubles were at hand, setting themselues against them promised that all should be well, but falsely notwithstanding. 2. A description of the false prophets by two titles.The second thing that is here to be noted, containeth a descrip∣tion or setting out of these false Prophets by their epithets or titles, the which are here twaine: for they are said To walke in the spirite or winde, that is to say, to seeke after and boast of vaine things. For the word spirit or winde in this place,1. That they walke in the winde. and often else where doth signi∣fie emptie promises, smokie boastings, & vaine, as it doth Oseas 8. ver. 7. For they haue sowne the winde, and shall reape the whirlewinde. And Prouerb. 11. ver. 29. He that troubleth his own house, shall inhe∣rit the winde. So then these false Prophets are but things puffed vp with winde, cloudes without water, as Iude saith in his epistle ver. 12. speaking swelling vanitie, as Peter saith Epist. 2. cap. 2. ver. 18. In a word, great boasters, but vaine. Also they are said to lye falsely.2. That they lye falsely. For they are found to promise false things, that is to say, not igno∣rantly, as it often falleth out beyond our hope, but wittinglie and knowing of it, and therefore to lye, that is, of set purpose
to deceiue men, whereby their offence is shewed to bee the more shamefull, and the lesse excuseable. After the same manner, and with the same colours are false prophets painted out by Peter in his second epistle cap. 2. and by Iude in his epistle. And therefore they are most mad, and enemies vnto their owne saluation, which wish for such teachers, follow them, or preferre them before the true prophets of God. The which thing notwithstanding the spirit of God hath foretold shal fal out vnto vs vnder the gospel. 2. Tim. 3. Vers. 12. I will surely gather thee wholly, O Iaacob: I will surely ga∣ther the remnant of Israel: I will put them together as the sheepe of Bozzah, euen as the flocke in the midst of their folde: the cities shall be full of brute of the men. What follow∣eth their con∣tempt of the truth and loue of lying.A Consequence, or shewing what followeth after these great sinnes. For the Prophet sheweth, what followeth worthylie of so notorious and shameles publike contempt or despising of the trueth and louing of lying, to wit, vtter destruction of the whole nation, and the same also most miserable. So Paul 2. Thes. 2. vers. 11, 12. teacheth what should ensue vpon those that receiued not the loue of the trueth, that they might be saued, saying: Therefore God shall send them strong delusion, that they should beleeue lies, that al might be damned, which beleeued not the trueth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnes.The destructiō of the whole nation of Israel First then in this verse is set forth the fall and de∣struction of this whole nation of the Israelites, the which is distin∣guished or seuered out from the Iewes, because that God will ga∣ther together all Iacob out of euery quarter of theirs, and will as∣semble together the Israelites either lying hidde and scattered for feare of their enemies, or continuing and abiding yet by compa∣nies, and commonly in their townes and cities. For the Prophet vseth such wordes as doe containe all the kindes of gathering of a thing together, to wit, (Asaph, and Kabats) God then will ga∣ther them together, not to saue them, but to slay them, as sheepe of Bozra, that is, fat, and fitte, and appointed for the slaughter. For Bozra was a pasture countrey, and a rich, from whence most fatte sheepe and meete for meate, were set to the shambles, and were killed. And hereunto alludeth the Prophet Isai cap. 34. vers 6. when he sayth, The sworde of the Lord is filled with blood: it is made fat with the fat and with the blood of the lambes and the goates, with the fat of the kidneies of the rammes: for the Lord hath a sacrifice
in Bozrah; and a great slaughter in the land of Edom. So thē the Lord will gather the children of Israel together vnto the slaughter: both all, and together, yea and euen those which hoped that they should be left and saued, at least wife had escaped many dangers. For GOD will not spare euen these, neither shall they therefore escape. To bee short, they shall bee gathered together by God as a flocke of sheepe to be slaine, and that same multitude shall bee great, the which in those places shall bee gathered together, and as a great flocke, they that are gathered together and captiues, shall in the folde by reason of the multitude be in a tumult and vprore. There∣fore these so many threatnings the ouerthrowe of this whole kingdome of Israel be it neuer so grent is described. Vers. 13. The breaker vp shall come vp before them: they shall breake out and passe by the gate, and goe out by it, and their King shall be before them, and the Lord shall be vpon their heads. The great mi∣serie of the ru∣ine & destru∣ction of this people.NOw in this verse the great miserie and most heauy plight of the ouerthrow and destruction of the same people is liuely de∣scribed, as it were by a certaine laying of it open vnto the eye to be seene: namely, that both they with so many their miseries to come might be moured and repent: and we also which reade these things by this description or table of the iudgement of God against the rebels and vngodly and wicked men, might be afraide on our own behalfe, and therefore liue holilie and iustly:The descriptiō of their miserie containeth soure things. but the description of this miserie seemoth to containe these foure things. First, the as∣sault & breaking in of their enemies vpon thē. For their enemies are said that they shall be breakers vp:1 The breaking in of their ene∣mies. for they shal not vse the Israelites whom they shall take, gently and courteously, but sharpely, they shall handle them hardly and cruelly, and shall leade them away, as those sometimes leade a way vnto their quarries and mine pits such as were condemned to digge mettals. For the enemies as they goe shall breake vp all things before the Israelites, to shew the fu∣riousnes of their mindes, and their anger against them, the which is a most miserable thing vnto them that are nowe captiues,2 They shall goe before thē, and leade them through the midst of the ruines of their cities. and bringeth great trembling and feare. Secondly, these enemies are sayd that they shall march or goe before the Israelites, and lead them through the middest of the ruine of their cities, to wit, in de∣spight and contempt, and to increase and adde sorrow vnto them afflicted or troubled already. Therfore both the enemies thēselues
shall passe through the gates of the cities, cast downe and broken by them, and also shall leade the captiue Israelites in spite of their teeth by the rubbish of them, miserable and lamentable to behold. This may be the first sense or meaning: or also that the multitude of the captiue Israelites may be shewed,Another mea∣ning of this place. the Prophet sayd that it shall come to passe, that the gates of their cities shall bee bro∣ken downe because it would be too tedious or troublesome and long to leade them through the gates by couples, and two by two: Therefore that they may go gathered together, and by heapes and companies, the gates shall be throwne downe, and these poore mi∣serable Israelites shall follow their enemies going before them, as the flocke or heard followeth Polyphemus and their hangman. Thirdly,3. The king of the Israelites shall be among them their King also is said that he shall bee among them cap∣tiue, and after the manner and shew of a triumph (the which by the enemies shall be made of them) to be shewed first of all, and to be led loden with chaynes and irons among the other captiues. The which sight and shewe of captiuitie is no doubt most pitiful, to wit, when as not onely the people, but also the king himselfe, and the princes are seene to be in the same miserie, yea and that formost,4 God himselfe shall goe before them, as Cap∣taine of their enemies band. and put vnto vile shame and reproch. Fourthly, it is ad∣ded, God himselfe shall goe before, as the Captaine of the enemies band, as Abd. cap. 1. namely, that both the Israelites and also other men may vnderstand, that these things came to passe worthily for their sinnes, and that they are the vengeance of God iustly angry against them, from the which they cannot now deliuer themselues, when as God fauoureth their enemies, and in his anger hath forsa∣ken them. These questionles are fearefull things, and to be trem∣bled at, the which ought to breede in our mindes a wonderfull and fearefull conceiuing of the iudgements of God: and so consequent∣ly to call vs backe by times, from all kinde of wickednes, least wee fall into the same euils or punishments. That which the Christian captiues at this day haue experience of vnder the Turkes, as for ex∣ample the Hungarians. CAP. 3. Vers. 1. And I said, Heare, I pray you, O heads of Iaacob, and yee Princes of the house of Israel:The third Ser∣mon to the prin¦ces especially of the kingdome of Israel. should not ye know iudgement? THe third sermon, the which now appertayneth peculiarly vn∣to the Rulers and Princes of the people, and especially of the
people of Israel: like as from the first chapter ver. 6. vnto the 10. verse of this chapter, he denounceth threatnings vnto the kingdom of Israel: and from the tenth verse which followeth, vnto the king∣dome of Iudah. Although it appeare out of other Prophets that the same vices raigned also among the Iewes, as Dauid Psal. 14.4. complaining that all things generally were out of frame in all e∣states, sayth: Doe not all the workers of iniquitie knowe that they eate vp my people, as they eate breade? they call not vpon the Lord. Now Micheas in order after that he hath generally described the sinnes of the whole people, nowe sheweth peculiarly the notorious wic∣kednes of the Princes, vnto whom therefore he doth also threaten the greater and more heauy iudgements of God. For princes by their vertue and godlines ought to shine as lights vnto the people. And therefore Ieremie cap. 5. vers. 5. when hee hath found things farre amisse among the vulgar and simple people, thinking to finde the case better among the great ones saith: I will gette mee vnto the great men and will speake vnto them: for they haue knowen the way of the Lord, and the iudgement of their God: but these haue altoge∣ther broken the yoke, and burst the bands. Wherefore the higher that these be aboue the rest, the more foule are their vices, and giue vnto others an example and boldnes to sin. So that such men need an especiall reprehension, and the same more sharp then the rest of the people. But in this place there are reckoned vp two sortes of men, the which are aboue others, to wit, the politicke magistrates, and the Prophets as they were then called. And first of all hee setteth vpon the magistrates: and afterwards these prophets. 1 What is spokē.Now in this verse there may be noted three things. First what is spoken: Secondly, who speaketh it: Thirdly, to whom he spea∣keth it. Concerning that which is spoken,2. Who speaketh. it is sayd to be the due∣tie of the Nobles among the people of the magistrates of the Rulers and Princes, and that aboue and before the rest, To know iustice,3. To whom he speaketh. or righteousnes, and indeede to performe and execute the same. Thereof they are called Mischphatim, Iudges. For Mischphat,  iudgement, is not onely a bare knowledge and vnderstanding of that which is iust and right, the which is without practise: but the vse and exercise also of this knowledge, when as the Magistrates themselues liue iustly, and minister iustice sincerely. For so doe I take the name of knowledge in this place, as 1. Ioh. 2. vers. 3. Eph 4. vers. 21. To haue knowen God, To haue learned Christ, where, with the knowledge of the trueth, and of fayth, the practise also, and the
same sincere or sound is ioyned.  Hee that pronounceth or spea∣keth this, is God himselfe, and especially speaking vnto and rouzing vp these Princes of the kingdome of Israel, as if they were dease, or soothes giuing little eare, that these great Peeres might diligently heare the thing, the which concerneth them, and is of so great weight. Further these things are spoken both to the heads of Ia∣cob, and vnto the Princes of the house of Israel.  Vnder the name of heads and Princes the prophet generally comprehendeth all which haue rule ouer the people either in peace, or in warre, or in the publike deliberations or counsel-takings of the whole com∣mon wealth: such as they are, which are called the generall states of the commonwealth, or the counsel of the publike state: or whe∣ther they haue to deale, beare office and rule in the handling of the iudgements, and courtes of suites and controuersies which arise a∣mong priuate persons. For vnto all these it appertayneth to know what is lawe and right: and also in vse and practise to shewe the same, both in themselues, and likewise in the controuersies of o∣thers, and in their life, and iudgements and sentences. Vers. 2. But they hate the good, and loue the euill: they plucke off their skinnes from them: and their flesh from their bones. A shewing of the contrary vices to be in these Rulers, vnto those vertues, which in the verse be∣fore were re∣quired of themAN Antithesis, or shewing of the contrary to bee in these Prin∣ces and Rulers, vnto that, which in the verse before going was required of them. For against the true office of good Magistrates and Rulers of the people, such as he described before, he opposeth or matcheth the manners, life, and publike and manifest deedes of these, whom he now speaketh vnto, that is to say, their haynous sins, the which are cōtrary altogether vnto that duey set down be∣fore. For if it be considered what they are in themselues, they do not onely hate that which is good, that is to say, those things which are holy and iust: but also loue with all their heart that which is euil, that is to say, whatsoeuer is both impious or vngodly against God: and also vniust against their neighbours or men. And this is the description or setting out of these men, whereby they are shewed to be vtterly strangers from the same both knowledge, and also life, the which as Citizens, as men, as Israelites they ought to leade and haue. But if they be weighed according vnto the per∣son layd vpon them by God, that is to say, as they are Magistrates and Rulers of the people, they are in this behalfe worse also then o∣thers.
For they doe not onely vtterly neglect, or take no care nor keepe of the people at all committed vnto them, and are giuen to the feeding of themselues alone Ezech. 33.34. but also they mise∣rably deuoure that selfe same people, that is to say, the sheep wher∣with they are put in trust, and they doe not only fleece them, but al∣so flay them, and deuoure, and snatch vnto themselues the flesh of them so flayen, plucked off from their bones. Wherin is liuely pain∣ted foorth both the vnfilable couetousnes of these Magistrates, and also their very tyrannous crueltie. Vers. 3. And they eate also the flesh of my people, and flay off their skin from them, and they breake their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as flesh within the caldron. An amplifica∣tion of the vi∣ces before de∣scribed.AN amplification of the vices described before in all the heads of this people. And this amplification is made both of the qualitie of the people, the which is so cruelly spoyled by them, and also of the cruell maner, after which they are spoyled. As for the people whom these doe handle and spoyle after this sort, it is the people of God himselfe, his inheritance, his owne peculiar portion. So Peter calleth the faithfull Epist. 1. cap. 2. ver. 9. But ye are a chosen genera∣tion, a royall Priesthood, an holie nation, a peculiar people. And Paul. Tit. 2. ver. 14. sayth, that Christ gaue himselfe for vs, that he might re∣deeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to be a peculiar people vnto himselfe. So to come more directly to this people by the crueltie & couetousnesse of these bad rulers thus abused God himselfe sayth of them Exod. 19. ver. 5.6. Ye shal be my chief treasure aboue al people, though all the earth be mine: ye shall be vnto me also a kingdome of priests, and an holie nation. Thus then was committed vnto the charge and trust of these heads and gouernours not a companie of men of base regard and accompt, as other people were ouer whom God setteth Kings or Princes. Wherefore these men committed a double sacriledge: first, in that they robbe and spoyle a people by God committed vnto them to keepe: and secondly, because they spoyle that people, which is God his owne peculiar people. And the maner of this spoyling, the which by them is vsed, is most cruell and barbarous. For they teare away the skinne, and the flesh, and the bones of the people, as butchers and slaughter men doe, and when they cut them, they teare them asunder with a noyse and ratling, & slay them with violence and force, as the most cruell butchers, and
Cookes are wont to doe. So then they breake the bones of this peo∣ple, and chop them in pieces, as is vsed to be done when as flesh is put into the caldron to be sodden, and eaten afterward. And these things were done of these heads and princes, when as in the courts of lawe,After what maner the ru∣lers are sayd to haue commit∣ted the former cruelties. and seates of iudgements, they oppressed the poore vnder pretence or colour of lawe, spoyled them of their goods, set iustice to sale, and did other like things most wickedly, which Amos set∣teth downe cap. 5. ver. 11. and cap. 8. Isai. 1. Ierem. 5. Vers. 4. Then shall they crie vnto the Lord, but he will not heare them: he will euen hide his face from them at that time, because they haue done wickedly in their workes. The threat∣ning of a pu∣nishment for these sinnes.A Threatning of the punishment, the which shall worthily follow their so great sinnes. And it is in a word, That they also because of these their wickednesses shall be forsaken of God in their most afflicted or troubled estate, albeit they call and crie vnto God neuer so much. For such a crying is like vnto the teares of Esau, as namely, being caused of the only feeling of punishment, not of any faith, or loue vnto God: not springing of any earnest motion of penitencie, or affection of repentance: and therefore it is not heard of God. So speaketh the writer to the Hebrewes of the counterfeit teares of E∣sau proceeding not from true repentance, but from griefe that he was preuented of the blessing cap. 12. ver. 17. For ye know how that afterward also, when he would haue inherited the blessing he was re∣iected: for he found no place to repentance, though he sought the bles∣sing with teares. And so Iames teacheth why we often are not heard in our prayers cap. 4 ver. 3. Ye aske (sayth he) and receiue not, because ye aske amisse, that ye might consume it on your lusts. Moreouer, this is a punishment of all others the most grieuous, namely, to be forsa∣ken of God, and that in the most hard time of our affliction. For so are we shewen to be both cast off of God, and hatefull vnto him be∣cause of our wickednesse: and therefore to perish for euer both in soule and bodie. So Ierem. 11. ver. 11. the like is threatned in these words: Therefore thus sayth the Lord, behold, I will bring a plague vpon them, which they shall not be able to escape: and though they crye vnto me, I will not heare them. And Zach. 7. ver. 13. Therefore it is come to passe, that as he cryed, and they would not heare, so they cryed, and I would not heare, sayth the Lord of hostes. And therefore Dauid Psalm. 55. ver. 1. prayeth vnto God agaynst this, saying: Heare my
prayer, O God, and hide not thy selfe from my supplication. Vers. 5. Thus sayth the Lord, concerning the Prophets that deceiue my people, and bite them with their teeth, and crie peace, but if a man put not into their mouthes, they prepare warre against him. THe second sort of those which excel, or are in authoritie among the people, to wit, those which either are in deede Prophets, or els at least wise in name, as these, whom in this place he reprehen∣deth, would seeme to be. Moreouer,Three parts of this verse. this verse hath three things to be noted. First, who speaketh: God Iehouah, that these threatnings might haue their authoritie and credit against the neuer so colou∣rable,1 Who speaketh. and stubborne thwarting and exception of these men,2. To whom he speaketh. vnto whom they are denounced or threatned. Secondly, to whom he speaketh: namely, vnto the false Prophets, whom he described be∣fore cap. 2. ver. 11. and in this place calleth lyars, and authors of the error of the people. Thirdly, why God reproueth them, to wit,3. Why God re∣proueth them. be∣cause they altogether abused his word, and so holie a vocation or calling, as they falsely and rashly tooke vpon themselues, namely, the calling of a Prophet. There is then a double cause of the repre∣hension: one, for that they deceiue, and cause men to erre: an o∣ther, for that these men, whom they so deceiue, are the people of God, whom God commaunded, and will haue to bee instructed truely out of his word, and not lyingly out of the dreames of men. Further, the course that these false Prophets take in their dealing & preaching is here also by an Hypotyposis,What the fi∣gure Hypoty∣posis is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. or liuely description pain∣ted forth, as if it were in a maner to bee seene with the eye, wherein their meere couetousnes, and mockerie of the word of God, is most impudent and shameles. Which two vices Peter also hath noted in false Prophets 2. Epist. cap. 2. ver. 3, 13, 14. of whom he sayth: And through couetousnes shall they with feined words make merchandise of you, and shall receiue the wages of vnrighteousnes, as they count it plea∣sure to liue deliciously for a season: they haue hearts exercised with couetousnes. And as for the couetousnes which here he reprehen∣deth in these false Prophets, it appeareth herein, for that they threa∣ten boldly terrible cursings, and destructions to come vnto men that offer, and giue them nothing. So then they prophesie for re∣wards, as hereafter ver. 11. and Ierem. 5. And concerning their ma∣nifest mockerie of the word of God, and of so holie a calling, the same is in this, that when as they are well fed of any man, they pro∣mise
vnto him, as it were out of the mouth of God, peace, & all most happie things. The maners, gurmandise, and begging, and coue∣tousnesse of Monks and Friars, especiallie the begging ones, as they are called, could not possiblie be described and set out more truely and better, according vnto that old saying. O Monachi, vestri stomachi, sunt amphora Bacchi: Vos estis, Deus est testis, certissima pestis. In rude like meeter thus: O monkish asses, your bellies which passes, are iollie wine glasses: Ye are, God sayth so, without any no, a most certaine wo. Vers. 6. Therefore night shall be vnto you for a vision, and darknes shall be vnto you for a diuination, and the sunne shall goe downe o∣uer the Prophets, and the day shall be darke ouer them. A threatning of punishment vnto these false prophets.A Threatning of punishment, the which altogether agreeth with the wickednes described before, that is to say, the abuse of the office of a Prophet. And this is, that it shall doubtles come to passe, that they shall manifestly be found to be voyd and without the gift of prophesie, and trifelers, and lying mates, who haue seene and heard nothing from God, and therefore neither can, nor could pro∣phesie. Further, this punishment is described with many Meta∣phors, and similitudes of things the which are taken from things bodily,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. and which may be seene vnto things without bodie, and in∣uisible, or which cannot be seene, because that prophesie is euery where in the holie Scripture called a vision. So then this darknes, dimnes, night, the which shall come vpon these Prophets, doe sig∣nifie and betoken both a wanting of God his inspiration, and also the passing ignorāce of these men, which call themselues Prophets, in matters appertaining vnto God, the which ignorance is called both night, and also thicke darknes. For God did not furnish them with his Spirit, nor will furnish them to prophesie, and this shall all men indifferently know. Wherefore they shall detest and abhorre them as lyars and deceiuers, and finde them to be most ignorant. Vers. 7. Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the South sayers con∣founded, yea they shall all couer their lips: for they haue no answer from God. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer punishmētAN amplification of the punishment threatned before, the which is taken from things adioyned with it, or wayting vpon it, to
wit, their shame and reproch. For it shall come to passe that their subtletie and deceiuing shall be so manifestly found out, that they themselues also shall wonderfully be ashamed of it. Therefore they shall couer their beards, that they may not be thought to bee Pro∣phets any longer, for sorowe and heauinesse Leuit. 13. to wit, the which they shall conceiue and feele in their minde, for that they are knowne and found out to be such. Vers. 8. Yet notwithstanding I am full of power by the spirit of the Lord, and of iudgement, and of strength to declare vnto Iaacob his transgression, and to Israel his sinne. The figure Hy∣pophora what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.THis is the figure Hypophora. For he answereth an obiection, the which might bee made out of the former verse: namely, if our Prophets shall haue no answer nor vision from God, and shall bee ashamed, shalt not thou also be so: or what is the certaintie and as∣surance of thy prophesie aboue theirs? Micheas therefore answe∣reth by way of Antithesis, or setting downe in himselfe the contra∣rie vertues vnto their former vices, opposing or matching himselfe and his calling against them vtterly, and against their office of Pro∣phets.Two things to be noted in this matching toge∣ther of contra∣ries. Wherefore there are two things to be noted in this compa∣ring and matching together of contraries: one, which noteth out their persons: the other, the which appertaineth vnto the office of a Prophet, the which was attributed vnto them both. Their persons are noted out in this word (I) the which hath an Emphasis,1. Concerning their persons. or vehe∣mencie and force in it, and is opposed or set against the fifth verse but a little before, and the word Prophets, which deceiue,2. Concerning their office. &c. For the Prophet Micheas when he sayth in this verse, Yet notwithstanding I, &c. doth separate himself from these false Prophets: and that wor∣thilie, as he proueth by the diuers calling of them both:  the which for this cause he describeth in the other part of this verse.  And this is for that he is called of God, and sent to denounce that which he threatneth, vnto both the houses of Iacob: and that not obscurelie or darklie, and lyingly, but manifestly and plainly, as appeareth by the effects themselues, that is to say, the gifts of God towards him. The which things in this place are sayd and rehearsed by Micheas not for vaine glorie and boasting, but for the sake of his ministerie, and for to defend the trueth of God. So Paul, to confirme the Gos∣pell of Christ which he preached, speaketh many things christian∣lie of himselfe, and of his dignitie & vnderstanding 2. Cor. 11. ver. 5
Verely I suppose that I was not inferiour vnto the very chiefe Apostles, &c. Ephe. 3. ver. 4. Whereby when ye reade, ye may know mine vnder∣standing in the mysterie of Christ, &c. Philip. 3. ver. 4. Though I might also haue confidence in the flesh: if any other man thinketh that he hath whereof he might trust in the flesh, much more I, &c. But first of al Mi∣cheas sheweth that he was sent,Micheas pro∣ueth his calling and hath that which he doth, and teacheth,1. In that he was sent. by the spirit of God, and not of himselfe, as Isai 59. ver. 21. also cap. 61. And Luk. 4. ver. 18. Christ himselfe alleageth the testi∣monie of the Prophet Isai to prooue the lawfulnes of his calling, where he sayth: The spirit of the Lord is vpon me, because that he hath anoynted me, that I should preach the Gospell to the poore: he hath sent me, that I should heale the broken hearted that I should preach deliue∣rance to the captiues, and recouering of sight to the blind, that I should set at libertie them that are bruised, &c.2. By the effects of the same, to wit, the gifts of God towards him. Secondly, he confirmeth it by the effects; that is, the manifest gifts of GOD towards him. So Paul 2. Cor. 10. But we will not reioyce of things which are not within our measure, but according to the measure of the line, wherof God hath distributed vnto vs a measure to attaine euen vnto you. And cap. 12. ver. 12. The signes of an Apostle were wrought among you with all pa∣tience, with signes and wonders, and great workes. Now these effects of the calling of our Prophet are generally the fulfilling therof, that is, That Micheas hath gifts necessarie for that charge. And particu∣larly, vnderstanding, or iudgement, and constancie, and both these from the spirit of God. Wherby is gathered, that in respect of iudge∣ment or vnderstanding; the true Prophets of God did speake farre more certainlie, distinctly, plainly, and cleerely, then the false Pro∣phets did speake. In respect of their constancie, they had not the people so fauourable vnto them, as the false Prophets had. For these false Prophets soothed the people in their sinnes, and therefore were acceptable vnto them: but the true Prophets did earnestly & sharply rebuke vices, & therefore they were counted troublesome, and hated. For it is an old saying and true, Flatterie getteth friends, but trueth hatred And Paul 2. Tim. 4. ver. 3. teacheth, That the time will come, when they will not suffer wholesome doctrine: but hauing their eares itching, shall after their owne lusts get them an heape of teachers and shall turne their eares from the trueth, and shall be giuen vnto fables. Wherefore Galat. 4. ver. 16. he asketh them, saying▪ Am I therefore become your enemie because I tell you the trueth? Sothen the true Prophets had need of constancie. Further, in this selfe same verse there appeareth a manifest ex∣ample
of this iudgement,An example of that iudgemēt which the pro∣phet sayth was giuen him by God. the which Micheas sayth to haue been gi∣uen him by God, whildst that he doth not call the iniquitie of Iacob, that is, of the Iewes, and that of the Israelites, al by one name: but sayth that in these there is only sinne, in the other also wickednesse, that is, greater sinne. For the fault of the Iewes sinning against God, was greater then the Israelites: because that there remained a grea∣ter light among the Iewes, and that the benefits of God were more in number towards them, then towards the Israelites. Therefore this so perfect and true distinction or difference of sinnes in both people, argueth or sheweth that the discretion, knowledge, and vn∣derstanding which by God was giuē vnto Micheas, was very great, and consequently that he came vnto this office taught and instruc∣ted by the Spirit of God. No which like thing appeareth in the salse Prophets, but they confound and huddle all things together, either they make things small which are great, or contrriwise make things great which are small. Vers. 9. Heare this I pray you, ye heads of the house of Iaacob, and Princes of the house of Israel: they abhorre iudgement, and per∣uert allequitie. A confirmatiō of the former sentence.A Confirmation of the former sentence by a proofe and example of the same▪ He sayd that he was called of God, to declare vnto both people their sinnes: now he performeth the same. So Paul tel∣leth the Corinthians Epist. 2. cap. 13. ver. 3. That they shall haue ex∣perience and triall of Christ that speaketh in him. And Epist. 1. cap. 4. ver. 21. asketh them, What will ye? shall I come vnto you with a rod, or in loue, and in the spirit of meekenes? Therefore in this place Mi∣cheas directeth his words vnto them both, whom he maketh guil∣tie of the same crimes. And those are, that they doe not onely with themselues lothe and detest (albeit they bee the heads and gouer∣nours of all the people) iudgement, that is, the thing which is done, or ought to be done iustly, and holily: but also doe peruert or let it, if any goe about to follow, establish, or commend the things which are holy and right. So we see that the Princes, and heads of the peo∣ple turned away from the true worship of God many otherwise godly Kings, as Asa, Ioas, and others more. For they seeme especi∣ally to haue been authors of Idolatrie. And therefore the Prophet Isaias also inueigheth especially against them cap. 1. But Micheas setteth vpon the heads themselues, and not only vpon the common
sort and people, to shew that he doth his duetie without accepting of persons, that he is the seruant of God, and not of men, as those false Prophets were: finally that he is indued with that true cōstan∣cie, of the which he spake in the verse before. Vers. 10. They builde vp Zion with blood, and Ierusalem with ini∣quitie. An amplifica∣tion of the sinne of the Rulers.AN amplification of the crime whereby the selfe same thing is proued; the which verse 8. he sayd to be in the Iewes, to wit, that there is in them wickednes, and not onely sinnes, as in the Is∣raelites. And therefore he sheweth the grieuousnes of the sinne, the which was peculiarly committed by the heads of the kingdom and people of Iudah. Further he accuseth them for that they buil∣ded with blood, and that ouen Sion or Ierusalem it selfe, that is, the citie of God, the which alwayes in euery part of it ought to be holy. Wherein Micheas condemneth these gouernours of the peo∣ple both of cruelty, and also of couetousnes: and the same sacrile∣gious, in that they vsed both these sinnes vnto the dishonour of the citie of God, and of that place (where the diuine, that is, the pure Temple was builded) that is to say, vnto the manifest reproch of God himselfe. See in euery respect the like complaint of God a∣gainst this people Nah. 3. vers. 1. in these words: O bloodie citie, it is full of lies, and robberie: the praye departeth not. Also Ezech 24. vers. 9. Woe to the bloodie citie, for I will make the burning great. So Habac. 2. vers. 12. Woe vnto him that buildeth a towne with blood, and crecteth a citie by iniquitie. And in this word (buildeth) he answe∣reth a secret vaine excuse of theirs: for they defended themselues vnder this pretence or colour, that this which was found fault with∣all, turned vnto the ornament and garnishing of the Citie of God. And therefore that their enterprize was rather to bee praysed then accused. The Prophet answereth, that God will haue no such orna∣ments of his citie, nor any such building. For God delighteth not in any iniustice and cruelty Psalm. 5. and they which doe so, and spoyle others vnder a pretence or colour of religion, they make God a fellow and partner of their robberies. See Isai 66. vers. 2, 3. Mar. 7. ver. 11, &c.
Vers. 11. The heads thereof iudge for rewards, and the Priests thereof teach for hire, and the Prophets thereof prophesie for mo∣nie: yet will they leane vpon the Lord and say, Is not the Lord a∣mong vs? No euil can come vpon vs. A particular setting downe of the sinnes of euery order of gouernours a∣mong them.A Laying out of the matter more plainely. For he now sheweth particularly, how these heads, or euery order of these heads deale vngodly and wickedly, and vse themselues euery man in his charge. Wherein hee distinctly describeth or setteth out, and increaseth the proper wickednes of euery one of them by contra∣ries. Further, he maketh three kindes or orders of these Heads or Gouernours, namely, Iudges, Priests, and Prophets. It is the part of Iudges to abstaine from giftes, that they may giue iudgement,1. Iudges. and minister law holily, and not be corrupted. So Iethro, when he sheweth vnto Moses what Iudges hee should make for his helpe and ease in the burden and charge of the common wealth of Israel, among other poynts requireth especially, that they be such as hate couetousnes. Exod. 18. vers. 21. Moreouer (sayth he) prouide thou among all the people, men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truely, hating couetousnes, and appoint such ouer them, to bee rulers ouer thousands, rulers ouer hundreds, rulers ouer fifties, rulers ouer tennes. But these Iudges of whom Micheas speaketh, receiue gifts, and ac∣cordingly as any thing is giuen them, iudge in fauour of this man, or that man: the which is a great sacriledge or notorious offence against God. And vnder the name of Iudges, all politicke Magistrates are generally comprehended. There followeth the order of Heads or rulers of the people, or of Church-gouernours, as I may so call them. And these are of two sortes, to wit, ordina∣ry, as in times past the Priests, and Leuites, now Pastors and Do∣ctors in the Church of God: and extraordinary, as in times past the Prophets, the which are now either none at all, or very tare and seldome. The Priests, or ordinary gouernours of the Church did teach for rewarde, the which is not onely most filthy,2 Priests. but also sa∣crilegious. For accordingly as euery man gaue them a rewarde for their seruice, so did they set downe and determine euery man his sinnes to be great or small, and did not follow the determinati∣on of the law of God without respect of persons. For such the Priests ought to be, not swaruing one whit from the trueth and e∣quitie of the law of God, as it is Malach. 2. vers. 6. The lawe of trueth
was in his mouth, and there was no iniquitie found in his lips (speaking of the Priests office) he walked with me in peace and equitie, and did turne away many from iniquitie.3. Prophets. The extraordinary gouernors of the Church, as the Prophets: euen they also prophesied for mo∣ney. And therefore their couertousnes and sacriledge is more ma∣nifestly described then that of the former. For there was some co∣lour of the Priests and Magistrates in these words, (rewards, giftes, or hire:) but in the worde money, and in Prophets there is none at all, nay there is an open mart & merchandise of the word of God, such as Peter epist. 2. ver. 3. and 15. findeth fault withall in the false tea∣chers of his time, of whom he sayth, Through couetousnes shall they with fayned words make merchandise of you, and forsaking the right way, haue gone astray, following the way of Balaam, the sonne of Bosor, which loued the wages of vnrighteousnesse. And the saying of Christ Mat. 10. is to be applyed vnto this place, Yee haue receiued freely, giue freely. And yet for all this is not the due and reasonable wa∣ges of the Pastors & teachers in the Church condemned, as Christ himselfe teacheth in the same place Mat. 10. Paul 1. Cor. 9. Finally, to the ende he may paynt out the filthy couetousnes and vngodli∣nes of these false Prophets the more cleerely (who at that time as the Monkes at this day, greatly deceiued the people) the Prophet by the figure Mimesis,What the fi∣gure Mime∣sis is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18. or imitation, setteth down their wicked words, when as they had receiued money for their diuination or prophesy∣ing. For they prophesied that it should come to passe, that GOD would be with them, which gaue them money. Vers. 12. Therefore shall Zion for your sake bee plowed as a fielde, and Ierusalem shallbe an heape, and the mountaine of the house, as the hie places of the forrest. A threatning of a most grie∣uous punishmētTHe threatning of a most grieuous punishment against the Iewes for their former sinnes. For not onely the houses of pri∣uate persons, but also the whole citie it selfe: and that not euery citie whatsoeuer, but that very same Sion and Ierusalem (which vers. 10. before, they said they did build) and not onely in that ci∣tie those partes and quarters, in which prophane houses, that is, the houses of men are: but that selfe same parte also wherein is buil∣ded the temple of God it selfe, that is, the holy house of God shall be vtterly ouerthrowen and destroyed, so that in the ende it shall wholly be brought into rubbish, and into woody, and desert places
and fit onely for wilde beasts. All and singular which things doe declare that there was a great iudgement of God prepared against the Iewes. See Ierem. 26. vers 18. where mention is made of this verse in these wordes: Michai the Morashite prophesied in the dayes of Hezekiah king of Iudah, and spake to all the people of Iudah, saying: Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Zion shall be plowed like a field, and Ierusalem shall be an heape, and the mountaine of the house shallbe as the high places of the forrest. CAP. 4. Vers. 1. But in the last daies it shall come to passe, that the mountaine of the house of the Lord shall be prepared in the toppe of the moun∣taines, and it shall bee exalted aboue the hilles, and people shall flowe vnto it. AFter the denouncing of threatnings the Prophet addeth promi∣ses, after the manner vsuall vnto al Prophets.Promises vnto the elect. But these promises appertayned, and do appertaine onely vnto the godly and the elect or chosen: and not generally vnto euery one the which in the con∣gregatiō of the Church did professe themselues to be Christians, or then the people of God. For in Isaac only is the seede of the Church called, neither are all they which are the seed of Abraham, the Sons of Abraham, as it is Rom. 9. vers. 7. and partakers of these promises of God. For those only, which are indeed godly, doe earnestly re∣pent at the threatnings of God. Now this promise was set down to lift vp or comfort the mindes of those godly ones. And it is most cleere and notable: for it contayneth a renuing and restoring both of the Temple, and also the true worship of God far more excellent then it was in the former time: lest that therfore because they heard before that it should be destroyed, they might thinke that it should vtterly be ouerthrowen & for euer. Nay it shal be restored, & that more gloriously then it was Agg. 1. & 2. For vnto this second tem∣ple shal the Gentiles which dwell most farre off, come. All which things no doubt are to be vnderstoode of the kingdome and Tem∣ple of Christ, that is, of the Church and worship the which hath bin restored by the preaching of the Gospel 1. Pet. 2. And hereof it is spoken Hebr. 10. ver. 16. in these words: This is the Testament that I will make vnto them, After those dayes, sayth the Lord, I will put my lawes in their heart, and in their mindes I will write them.
Three parts of this verse.This verse hath three parts. The first poynteth out the time, wherein these things shall be done, to wit, after that both people shall haue been punished in such sort as was foretold,1. The time, wherein these things shall come to passe. and the Tem∣ple of God pulled downe. That which first noteth the times of the captiuitie of Babylon. Secondly, those times, wherein this Temple of Ierusalem was destroyed by Titus the sonne of Vespasian the Emperour. For after that ouerthrow of the Temple especially, the glorie of Christ, and the power of the doctrine of the Gospell shi∣ned forth, and the Gentiles were commonly called, yea, and came also vnto Christ, and vnto the knowledge of the true God, of the which manifestation and openly shewing of Christ as wel vnto the Gentiles as vnto the Iewes, Paul 1. Tim. 3. ver. 16. writeth: And without controuersie, great is the mysterie of godlines, which is, God is manifested in the flesh, iustified in the spirit, seene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and receiued vp in glorie. And Colos. 1.2. The promise it selfe of the re∣storing & buil∣ding againe of the Temple, & worship of God The second part of this verse containeth the promise it selfe, not only of the restoring of the Temple & worship of God, but of the building of it vp againe farre more gloriously then it was before. The which thing Micheas setteth forth and describeth Me∣taphorically vnder the exalting or setting vp on high of the moun∣taine Sion, on the which the Temple was builded: he doth I say set out these things vnder these Metaphors, vnto those men, to wit, as being such who were wont to looke vnto that earthly Temple, and vnto that mountaine Sion. So then this mountaine Sion shall in dignitie excell other mountaines, and consequently shall be higher aboue them. And therefore Dauid Psal. 68. ver. 16. speaketh of it thus: As for this mountaine, God delighteth to dwell in it: yea, the Lord will dwell in it for euer Isai. 2.3. The effects of the dignitie of the Temple. The third part of this verse now sheweth the effects of this dignitie, that is to say, proueth it by the effects, of the which one is rehearsed in this place, to wit, for that the Gentiles (the which hated it before) shall then by heapes flow vnto it,1. The Gentiles shall by heapes come vnto it. and shal runne vnto it, being moued with godlines of mind, and reuerence towards that Temple. Therefore this Temple shall now bee reuerenced and haunted of more, then that first Temple was. Wherefore it shall be of greater dignitie then that former. And this is to be vnderstood of the spirituall Temple of God, that is, of the Gospell of Christ, and of his Church gathered together by the Gospell.
Vers. 2. Yea many nations shall come and say, Come, and let vs goe vp vnto the mountaine of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Iaa∣cob, and he will teach vs his wayes, and wee will walke in his paths: for the law shall goe foorth of Sion, and the word of the Lord from Ierusalem. An amplifica∣tion of this cō∣ming of the Gentiles vnto the Temple of God.AN amplification of this flowing and comming together of the Gentiles, who before were turned away from the true worship of God, and now desirous to learne it. And it is taken both from the cheerefulnes of their minde, and also from the multitude of them. For many nations, which before were idolatrous, shall come vnto the true knowledge of God, and his spirituall Temple, and not on∣ly one or twaine. Againe, they shall come also with great cheere∣fulnes of minde, not constrained, nor against their wils, but of their owne accord being moued by the spirit of God, and true godlines, they shall come vnto God by the restoring of the Gospell, that is, of the second Temple. But here by the way,The nature of true faith and godlines. the nature of true faith and godlines is to bee noted, which doth not onely worship some cer∣taine God, but the true God, to wit, the God of Iaacob: and hath at∣tained vnto the not onely knowledge of his will, but also perfor∣meth obedience vnto the same. For true godlines is not contented to be taught, that is, with the bare knowledge of the heauenly truth, but also walketh in that doctrine which it hath learned out of the word of God, that is to say, he that is in deed a godly man, reformeth his whole life according vnto the will of God, and walketh in the wayes prescribed by his word euen vnto the end of his life, Psal. 1. A reason why the godly must come vnto the Temple of God▪ For the law shall goe forth of Sion, &c. This is a rendring of a rea∣son, why all those which are desirous to bee taught and learned in the true feare of God, must especially, nay necessarily come vnto that Temple, to wit, because that out of that place onely commeth the true doctrine of godlines, and the word of God, and is in place of the world els besides. For at that time vnto the Iewes only were as it were in trust committed the Oracles of God, and the true doc∣trine of faith, and of euerlasting saluation was among them alone. So speaketh the Psalmist Psal. 76. ver. 1. God is knowne in Iudah, his name is great in Israel. And Psal. 147. ver. 19, 20. He sheweth his word vnto Iaacob, his statutes and his iudgements vnto Israel. He hath not dealt so with euery nation, neither haue they knowne his iudgements. So Paul Rom. 3. ver. 2. saith, that the prefermēt of the Iewes is much
euery way, for chiefly because vnto them were committed the oracles of God. Whereby appeareth that true faith, and the right and law∣full worship of God must of vs be fet and drawne only from the a∣lone word of God written, Isai. 2. And here also is reckoned vp the second effect of this Temple,2. The second ef∣fect of the spiri∣tual Temple is, that it onely containeth true faith. that the preaching of the Gospell, and the same only shall containe true godlines. Vers. 3. And he shall iudge among many people, and rebuke mightie nations a farre off, and they shall breake their swords into mat∣tocks, and their speares into siethes: nation shall not lift vp a sword against nation, neither shall they learne to fight any more. 3. The third effect of the dignitie of this Temple.THe third effect, by the which the dignitie of this restored Tem∣ple, that is, of the Gospell, is shewed to be most great, for that by this doctrine of the Gospell of God, he shall iudge and rebuke ma∣ny nations, how strong and stout so euer they be. These words ther∣fore of (iudging and rebuking) doe betoken those iudgements, the which God did exercise: first, in the consciences of the Gentiles, re∣prouing them of their idolatrie and vngodlines: secondly also of the manifest or open punishments, that in the end being tamed and mastered, they might bee brought vnto God. So the word iudge∣ment is taken Ioh. 3. ver. 19. And this is the iudgement, that light is come into the world, and men loued darknes rather then light, because their deedes were euill. And the Gentiles themselues at the first did not shewe themselues so meeke and readie to be taught, but after∣ward, when as they were with diuers punishmēts and miseries iust∣ly punished of God for their vngodlines, as Christ himselfe teach∣eth Matth. 4. ver. 16. The people which sate in darknes saw great light, and to them which sate in the region and shadow of death, light is risen vp. And Paul sheweth Rom. 1.18. how great tokens of his wrath God powred out vpon the heathen for their disobedience vnto his trueth, saying: For the wrath of God is reueiled from heauen against all vngodlines and vnrighteousnes of men, which with hold the trueth in vnrighteousnes. And the selfe same appeareth throughout the whole Apocalips. But this effect is not to indure onely for a time, but continually, and for a long season. For God by little and little hath called, and will call vnto the knowledge of his trueth at the last, one while this nation, another while that nation, which he hath afflicted or punished. And they shall breake their mattocks into speares.) The fourth ef∣fect
ioyned with the former, to wit, a most great peace of the world at that time embracing Christ, the which shall insue and be,4 Great peace a∣mong the godly but yet betweene those only which shall beleeue in Christ. For they shall be so tyed one to another in mutuall charitie and loue, that no man shal hurt his brother, no nation embracing Christ shal make warre vpon another nation embracing the same Christ. Nay, as Isaias sayth, those which before were most cruel, and most enemies with∣in themselues, shall be made friends, and shal be so gentle, friendly, and meeke as sheepe. So great a force is there doubtles of true god∣lines, that it will bring al men vnto mutuall concord, or agreement one with another, Philip. 2. Eph. 4. Isai. 2. and 11. ver. 6.7. The woolfe also shall dwell with the lambe, and the leopard shall lye with the kid, and the calfe, and the lyon, and the fat beast together, and a little childe shall leade them, and the cowe and the beare shall feede: their yong ones shall lyetogether: and the lyon shall eate straw like a bullocke. So the Scots and English men: againe, English men and French men are made friends together, who before were most deadly enemies. Vers. 4. But they shall sit euery man vnder his vine, and vnder his figge tree, and none shall make them afrayd: for the mouth of the Lord of hostes hath spoken it. The making more plaine of the matter be∣fore.A Laying open of the matter more plainlie▪ For he sheweth by an amplification, both what maner of peace, and how great the same shall be in the Church of God, nay in the whole world, when as the doctrine of the Gospell shall be receiued of the Gentiles. And this verse hath two parts to bee noted. One,Two parts of the this verse. a description of this peace: another, the confirmation of the same against those which are either altogether vnbeleeuers,1. A description of this peace. or els such as doe make some doubt of so great a promise of God, and quiet of the Church to come. The description of this peace promiseth first home agree∣ment, and securitie or safetie among the godly.2. A confirmatiō of the same. For at home, that is, euery godly man in his owne countrie shall bee most safe among his owne people: both vnder his owne vine,1 Peace at home. and vnder his owne figge tree he shall liue at home quietly, to wit, no man offering him any wrong. So is it reported of the great peace in Iudah and Israel all the dayes of Salomon 1. King. 4. ver. 25. And Iudah and Israel dwelt without feare, euery man vnder his vine & vnder his figge tree, from Dan euen to Beer-sheba, all the dayes of Salomon. Leu. 26. Isai. 11. Secondly, it promiseth peace also from forreine enemies.Peace from a∣broade. For no
stranger shall put the Church of God in feare. So Psal. 144. ver. 14. it is a part of the prayer of the faithfull, the which by the conclusion and shutting vp of that Psalme it may appeare that God sometime granteth vnto them: That there be none inuasion, nor going out, nor crying in our streetes. And then they conclude: Blessed are the people that be so, yea blessed are the people whose God is the Lord. So it fell out vnder Constantine the great. Apoc. 8.1. So Act. 9. ver. 31. it is said, The Churches of God had peace. But albeit these calme dayes and quiet times last not long with our enemies abroad, yet that peace of minde, the which a true faith in Christ bringeth, can neuer be ta∣ken from them, of the which Paul speaketh Rom. 5. ver. 1. Then be∣ing iustified by faith, we haue peace towards God through our Lord Ie∣sus Christ: And ver. 11. We also reioyce in God through our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, by whom we haue now receiued the attonement. And in this peace properly consisteth the kingdome of God. Furthermore, the confirmation of this promise followeth, taken from the nature or person of the promiser: and he is God, who can not lye, but is alwayes true of his word, and his mouth is alwayes true Tit. 1. It is added, that the which promiseth, is the God of hosts, that is, almightie, whom nothing is able to any effect to resist, but that his will is fulfilled. For he doth whatsoeuer he will Psalm. 115. Neither is there any thing impossible with him. Vers. 5. For all people will walke euerie one in the name of his God, and we will walke in the name of the Lord our God, for euer and euer. A confirmatiō of the former promise taken from the com∣paring of the true God, and other gods to∣gether.A Confirmation of the same promise, the which is taken from the comparing of the true God with other goddes of this peo∣ple, and other people. For it is most meet, that if other people doe trust euery man vnto his God: that you Israelites and true Iewes doe trust also in your God: not for a time onely, but for euer, and in those things also, the which yee doe not yet see with your eyes, but the which are yet to come, and promised by him. So then Mi∣cheas compareth these two things together, other people with this people: the maiestie and power of other gods with the maiestie of the God of Israel, that is, the true God. For the maiestie and pow∣er of those gods, in whom other people doe trust and stay, is none at all: but the power of the true God is most great, and vnconque∣rable, whom nothing is able to withstand Psal. 95. ver. 3.4. For the Lord is a great God, and a great King aboue all goddes, in whose hands
are the deepe places of the earth, and the heights of the mountaines are his, &c. And Psal. 135. ver. 15. concerning the gods of the heathen: The idols of the heathen are siluer and golde, euen the worke of mens hands. But touching the great and fearefull maiestie of the true God Psal. 29. ver. 8. he saith, The voyce of the Lord maketh the wil∣dernes to tremble, the Lord maketh the wildernes of Kadesh to trem∣ble, &c. Other people feele not either any fauours at all, or else no continuall fauours of their gods towards them (for they are but the sleights and fetches of Sathan, whatsoeuer happie things for a time the heathen doe often finde at the hands of their gods and i∣dols) but that God whose people ye are, is your God, whom you alwaies haue found to bee true. Therefore you ought to trust in him, and to rest in his promises, and that continually, and for e∣uer. The compari∣son contameth also an exhor∣tation.Moreouer, this comparison is in such sort set forth, that by the very phrase and maner of speaking it conteineth also an exhortati∣on vnto the same godly, to worship that same true God, and by faith to walke in his precepts and promises. For this our such know∣ledge of God, and meditating or thinking vpon his power ought not to be content with the only bare theorie, or speculation of the thing it selfe: but in the same is the practise of godlines set before vs, that therefore we might serue God the more willingly. Vers. 6. At the same day saith the Lord, will I gather her that hal∣teth, and I will gather her that is cast out, and her that I haue af∣flicted. A making of that more plaine, the which was spo∣ken ver. 4. Three things prouing the restoring of the church to be easie.AN explanation, or making of the matter more plaine, the which by the reckoning vp of the partes, sheweth that which ver. 4. was said before, to wit that the estate of the church should be hap∣pie, and that it should be restored at the comming of Christ, and by the preaching of the gospell. But here are three things reckoned vp, the which how far past recouerie soeuer the state of the church might seeme to be in affliction or trouble, doe shew notwithstan∣ding that the renuing of it, & the restoring of it vnto the old estate, shall be easie. The first is, that looke what things were in it before maymed, out of ioynt, weake, torne and lame,1. All imperfecti∣ons shall be cu∣red. the same shall bee restored, gathered together, be healed, and shall not perish, nay they shall abide and remaine found and strong. And therefore they pray Isai. 35. vers. 3. Strengthen the weake hands, and comfort
the feeble knees. And cap. 66. vers. 20. And they shall bring all your brethren for an offring vnto the Lord out of all nations, vpon horses, and in chariots, and in horse litters, and vpon mules and swift beastes, to Ierusalem mine holy mountaine, saith the Lord, &c. This hath Christ performed, first bodily, then spiritually, healing all, whosoeuerby fayth came vnto him Mat. 8 vers. 16.17: where it plainly appea∣reth that he healed all that came vnto him, in these words. When the eeuen was come, they brought vnto him many that were possessed with deuils, and he cast out the spirits with his word, and healed all that were sicke, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias the pro∣phet: He tooke our infirmities and bare our sicknesses. And cap. 9. vers. 35. we read how by preaching he cured their soules, and by working of miracles healed their bodies: for thus he writeth: And Iesus went about all cities and townes, teaching in their sinagogues, and preaching the gospell of the kingdome, and healing euerie sickenesse and euery disease among the people. The second thing is, that he shall gather together into one,1 The scattered shall be gathe∣red into one. those that are cast out, and his that are scattered abroade, from whence afterward shall arise a greatnati∣on, and not one, but many nations. So is it said Psalm. 107. ver. 2.3. Let them which haue been redeemed of the Lord shew how he hath de∣liuered them from the hand of the oppressor, and gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South. So then there shall not onely some few remaine, which shall bee healed, but also they shall make a most strong bodie of a people. The which came to passe, both when they returned from Babylon Esd. 2. and also when as the Gentiles came vnto the church of God through the preaching of the gospell, the which may also be gathered out of the reuelation of S. Iohn cap. 7. vers. 9, where he saith: After these things I beheld, and lo, a great multitude which no man could number of all nations and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne, and before the lamb, clothed with long white robes, and palmes in their hands. Vers. 7. And I will make her that halted a remnant; and her that was cast far off a mightie nation: and the Lord shall reigne ouer them in mount Zion, from hence forth euen for euer. 3. God shall reigne as a King in the middest of his Church.THe third point is conteined in this seuenth verse, to wit, that the Lord himselfe will reigne in the mids both of them, and also in mount Sion, the which without all doubt did represent the true
church of God. In which third poynt the stedfastnes, glory, and full happines and restoring of the church is contained. For what can be more happy, and safe, then when as God not onely dwel∣leth in the midst of vs, but also raigneth, and as a King hath care of vs? And this cheerefell fauour of God towards his, and the assured perswasion thereof was it which more reioyced the heart of Dauid, then all other earthly blessings could do the worldlings, insomuch that Psal. 4. vers. 7 he sayth: Thou hast giuen mee more ioy of heart, then they haue had, whē their wheat & their wine did abound. Concer∣ning this restoring and protecting of the church, reade Zach. 2. Fur∣ther, that the godly might hope and beleeue, that these things al∣though they be wonderfull, and almost incredible or vnbeleeueable in so great ruines of the church, that they shall notwithstanding most assuredly come to passe, there is added a necessarie preface or forespeech, That these are the promises of the eternall GOD and his saying: not the wordes of Idols, nor of men, and to the ende that the greatnesse of this happinesse of the church might bee estee∣med of vs accordingly, and draw vs into an admiration or wonde∣ring thereat, it is sayd, that it shall be perpetual, that is, for euer, and beyond. For God will not only gather together and defend those that are his here vpon earth, but also in the euerlasting and heauen∣ly life, the which is a most singular benefite, so that, as Paul writeth vnto Timothie 1. cap 4 vers. 8. godlines hath the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. Vers. 8. And thou, O towre of the flocke, the strong holde of the daughter Zion, vnto thee shall it come, euen the first dominion, and kingdome shall come to the daughter Ierusalem. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefite.AN amplification of the benefit going next immediately before. For God himselfe shall not onely then raigne in the Church, when as he shall restore the same, but the Church her self also toge∣ther with him, shall obtaine a kingdome and gouernement, and that such as it had before, wonderfull and to bee marueiled at of the gentiles: the church herselfe I say,Two parts of this Verse. and Ierusalem the daughter of her, the which was before in such sorte destroyed, and wasted by the enemies. But in this verse there are two things to be obserued or noted: the one, the thing it selfe which is promised: The other,1. The promise it selfe. the phrase or maner of speaking, whereby it is promised.2 The maner of promising the same. Concer∣ning the matter it selfe, it is a promise of the former estate and king∣dome of the church to be restored. Wherein God doth not onely
promise vnto her a kingdome, but also such a one as it had before, to wit, vnder Dauid and Salomon. For Saul is not here to bee rec∣koned among the kings, when as he was not giuen of God, but set vp, and asked by the people. So then it shal be a notable kingdom, most large, flourishing, rich, peaceable, fearefull vnto the nations, nay such also as shall subdue the nations, and bring them vnder her subiection. The Church long sithence hath enioyed these things, and doth also at this day enioy them through Christ, and by the preaching of the Gospel Psal. 2. And Luk. 1. vers. 32, 33. the Angel doth foretell of this flourishing estate of Christ his spirituall kingdome, saying: He shall be great, and shall be called the sonne of the most high and the Lord God shall giue vnto him the throne of his father Dauid, and he shall raigne ouer the house of Iacob for euer, and of his kingdome shall be none ende. And this is signified also by the submission and reuerence of the 24. Elders Reuelat. 4. vers. 10. The foure and twenty Elders feldown before him that sate on the throne, and worshipped him that liueth for euermore, and cast their crownes before the throne, &c. And this so happie an estate is not promised vnto euery company of men,The true church marked out from other assemblies of men by sundry titles. but only vnto the true Church of GOD. Therfore it is here by the Prophet diligently distinguished or mar∣ked out from other congregations of men by sundry epithets or ti∣tles, to wit, it is called The towre of the flocke, because that in Ieru∣salē 02 the same towre was then chiefly to be seen aboue others, being scituated neere vnto the market and gate of the sheepe, and the poole of the sheepe,1 The towre of the flocke. (whereof mention is made Iohn 5. vers. 2.) and the scituation of the whole citie it self was on a high place. Therfore both of the scituation of the place and also of this part the whole citie of Ierusalem is called a towre, and therefore the true Church of God is signified thereby, whereof Ierusalem was at that time the house, and a figure of the Church of the Gospel which should bee afterward. So Esai 29 Ierusalem of the forme of the citie, is called Ariel, that is, a Lyon. Also the Church is called here The mount of the daughter Sion, because that the same hill of the which hee now speaketh,2 The mount or strong hold of the daughter Sion. was the highest place of the whole citie knowen vn∣to euery man, and compassed and closed about with a wall for the defence and strengthening of the citie 2. Chron. 27. vers. 3. and 33. vers. 4. Nehem. 3.26. Last of all, the Church is here called the daughter of Ierusalem, and not the daughter of euery citie whatso∣euer. Thus therfore is the glory of the Church described,3. The daughter of Ierusalem. that on∣ly the godly and faythful alone may vnderstand, that this kingdom
appertayneth vnto Christ, and by Christ vnto them. And thus much concerning the thing it selfe. Concerning the phrase or manner of speaking, it appeareth thus, first, that it is a Prosopopoeia, or fayning f a person,What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap. 6. v. 1. wherein the Church of God is spoken vnto by name, that, as I haue sayd, that company, vnto whom these things are promised, might cer∣tainly be noted out from others: and that the Church her selfe might be stirred vp with the consideration of so great a benefite. Secondly, it appeareth also that in this place there is an antithesis, or matching together of contraries betweene these wordes, The first kingdome, and The towre of the flocke, The mount, The daughter of Ierusalem. For these three latter, The towre, The mount, The daughter, seeme to haue nothing answerable vnto that royall mag∣nificēce or sumptuousnes, nor to promise any thing the which may giue any hope of obtayning so great and notable a kingdome. Yet notwithstanding the Church shall raigne, howsoeuer her matters may seeme past all hope by meanes of affliction or trouble. There∣fore these words are of set purpose vsed by the Prophet, to meete with or answere the diuers cogitations or thoughts of men, yea e∣uen of the godly, who onely should see, and did behold the ruines and weakenes of the destroyed citie: and did not thinke vpon the omnipotencie or almighty power of GOD that maketh the pro∣mise, nor vpon his loue toward his church. Vers. 9. Now why doest thou crie out with lamentation? is there no King in thee? is thy counseller perished? for sorrowe hath taken thee, as a woman in trauaile. The answering of an obiection.THe answering of an obiection, wherewith hee asswageth the sorrow and lamentation of the godly, such as both then they felt by the conceiuing of the iudgements of God threatned against them: and also afterwards had experience of being in the miserie it selfe Psal. 74. Psal. 102. And first of all by the figure Hypotyposis he paynteth forth the thing it selfe, that is to say,What the fi∣gure Hypotypo∣sis is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. their most iust sor∣row, & the most weighty causes of the same sorrow. Thē in the verse following he setteth down a cōfort. As for the sorrow, or lamentatio of the Church, it was an howling: not only a crie, a most sorrow∣full crying out for the burden of the most grieuous miserie, and not onely a lamenting. And because these thinges are set forth by the
Prophet, as if he himselfe were present in the matter, therefore hee addeth (Now): albeit they themselues did not yet indeed feele the same sorrow. Finally, this sorrow was as the sorrow of a woman in trauell, that is, exceeding great. And this similitude is in other places else where vsed in the holy Scriptures to like purpose: for hereunto is the state of the poore citie of Ierusalem most hardly be∣sieged by Senneherib, resembled Isai 37. vers. 3. when as the mes∣sengers of Hezechiah say vnto the Prophet, This is a day of tribu∣lation, and of rebuke and blasphemie, for the children are come vnto the birth, and there is no strength to bring forth. And cap. 26. vers. 17. Like as a woman with childe, that draweth neere to the trauel, is in sor∣row, and cryeth in her paines, so haue we beene in thy sight, O Lord. Agayne Iohn 16. vers. 21. A woman, when shee trauelleth hath sor∣row, because her houre is come: but as soone as shee is deliuered of the childe, she remembreth no more the anguish for ioy that a man is borne into the worlde. And these things the prophet speaketh in a fellow feeling of their troubles, and not by way of insultation or triumph and reioycing agaynst them, or mocking them in these mise∣ries. The causes of the great sor∣rowe of the church.As for the causes of so great sorrow, and so great outcrying, they are many, as in this verse, for that then, that is, when as the church is in such sorte afflicted by God, and the Iewes afflicted also, there was no King of theirs, nor any Counseller, or Prince, the which had any care of them. And so God by Ezechiel threat∣neth to take away their kings cap. 21. vers. 26. saying: Thus saith the Lord God, I will take away the diademe, and take off the crowne: this shall be no more the same: I will exalt the humble and abase him that is high. For the safetie and presence of the King is a great hope time there were no kings left and remayning vnto the Iewes Isai 5. For the Iewes liued vnder the dominion or rule of others, that is, of the Babylonians (by whome they were taken captiues) albeit that the Lord for their defence and comfort aduanced Da∣niel vnto the gouernement of the kingdome of Babylon: but yet he himselfe was a subiect vnto the Kings of Babylon, and as a sub∣iect obeyd them.
Vers. 10. Sorrowe and mourne, O daughter Sion, as a woman in trauaile: for now shalt thou goe foorth of the citie, and dwell in the fielde, and shalt goe into Babel, but there shalt thou be de∣liuered: there the Lord shall redeeme thee from the hande of thine enemies. A granting ioy¦ned with a cō∣fort.A Granting, whereunto is ioyned a comfort. And the granting is, that the church may indeed lamentably mourn & sorrow, as he that most may mourn, and is in most heauy sorrowes, such as is a woman in trauaile. For the Prophet confesseth that they haue most iust causes of so great sorrow, the which in this place he reckoneth vp others, then in the verse before, to wit, for that the Church shall then be caried away from her countrie, & when she shal be carried away, must liue also in the fields vnder the open aire, not in towns: finally, that she must be carried into countries most far off, namely, euen as far as into Babylō Psa. 137. Al which things are most lamē∣table, especially if we consider that the promised land was not onely the natiue soyle and countrey vnto the Iewes: but also a signe and figure of the heauenly and eternall life. It is a godly point to be tou∣ched with the feeling of pu∣nishments sent by God.Further, when as the Prophet granteth the church, that shee may mourne in her affliction or trouble, hee sheweth that it is the part of men, nay, that it is godly, to be touched, and that earnestly with the feeling of the miseries sent of God: and that for a man to harden himselfe agaynst them, is not man-like, and vngodly. And therefore Iob in his sixt chapt. and 12. vers. asketh If his strength be the strength of stones? or his flesh of brasse? that hee should not bee moued with the feeling of his miseries. And this was the afflicti∣on or trouble of the Church. A comfort for the church.Now followeth the consolation or comfort of the same. For she shall be deliuered out of that miserie, nay, she shall be deliue∣red out of the hand of her enemies, euen there and in that place, that is, in Babylon, where shee seemed to bee vtterly lost, and deade Ezech. 37. So then the Church shall be raysed, and is raysed as it were out of a sepulchre or graue, when as she is by God deli∣uered out of the hands of her enemies. The which thing falleth out very often, yea and hath done often in this ourage, as we our selues haue seene.
Vers. 11. Now also many nations are gathered against thee, saying, Sion shall be condemned, and our eye shall looke vpon Sion. A confirmatiō of the former comfort.A Confirmation of the former comfort by way of answering such obiections as might bee made to the contrarie. For he putteth away those difficulties and doubts which did arise in the mindes of the godly, because of the great number of their enemies, and the same most strong, who seemed likely to hinder this deliuerance, & withstood them also when they were now deliuered Esd. 4. Nehe. 4. He granteth therefore that nations, and the same many in number, shall bring as great let, and hinderance, as in them lyeth: but the which God shall remoue and take away. So then they shall be ga∣thered together, to keep the Church of God alwayes vnder oppres∣sion. They shall wish with all their hearts, that Sion may remaine polluted, that is, prophane, desolate, reprochfull, wasted: and that they may see this with their eyes, and may inioy this pleasure for the name of God contemned or despised, and that they may reioyce for the Church thus miserably vexed. Vers. 12. But they know not the thoughts of the Lord: they vnder∣stand not his counsell: for he shall gather them as the sheaues in the barne. An answer a∣gainst the at∣tempts of the enemies of the Church.AN answere against those attempts or indeuours, and wishes of the nations which are enemies vnto the Church: for these are enemies of the Church. And the effect of this answere is, that God, albeit he sometime vsed those nations to correct and chastise his Church, yet had not any such intent or purpose in his minde, either vtterly to destroy his Church, in such sort as they wish: or to keepe it alwayes oppressed or vnder the crosse. Wherefore the minde, and the end of these prophane or wicked nations farre differeth from the purpose of GOD, whilest they afflict or punish the Church of God. For they desire vtterly to destroy the people of God: but God his meaning and purpose is, only to chastise and correct them. Thus these men the enemies of the Church vnderstand not at all the coū∣sell of God. So God by the Prophet Isai reproueth the intention of the King of the Assyrians contrarie vnto his purpose in punishing his people cap. 10. ver. 7.8. where he sayth of him and his doings thus: But he thinketh not so, neither doth his heart esteeme it so: but he
imagineth to destroy and to cut off not a few nations. For he sayth, Are not my Princes altogether Kings? So in Zachariah cap. 1. ver. 15. he is greatly offended with the heathen for their immoderat crueltie in vexing his Church, saying: I am greatly angrie against the careles heathen: for I was angrie but a little, and they helped forward the af∣fliction. Neither shall that come to passe which the enemies goe a∣bout, but which God hath decreed: neither shall they goe any fur∣ther, or can they, in vexing of the Church of God, then the will of God will suffer. Nay further God retorteth or turneth backe the indeuours of these men vpon themselues. For God for this purpose gathereth together into one the enemies of his Church, that when as he hath gathered them together as it were in one bundle and sheafe, he may together and at once destroy and vtterly roote them out, as it is here plainly set downe. And Psal. 76. ver. 10. it is shewed how the rage and crueltie of the enemies turneth vnto the praise of God, who restraineth the same, as best pleaseth him: Surely (sayth Dauid) the rage of man (speaking against the crueltie of Sannehe∣rib in the siege of Ierusalem) shall turne to thy praise, the remnant of the rage shalt thou restraine. God therefore shall deliuer his Church. Vers. 13. Arise, and thresh, O daughter Zion: for I will make thine horne yron, and I will make thine hooues brasse, and thou shalt breake in pieces many people: and I will consecrate their riches vnto the Lord, and their substance vnto the ruler of the whole world. A confirma∣tion of the for∣mer sentence.A Confirmation of the former sentence touching the destroying of the enemies of the Church, and that by the Church her selfe. And he confirmeth it by the power, the which God himselfe will giue vnto the Church. This power doth GOD describe by diuers Metaphors, that it may appeare to be the greater,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. as of an oxe trea∣ding out the corne, whose horne is of yron, and his hooues brasse. Conferre this place with others of like sense, as Psal. 68. ver. 22.23. where is spokē of the mightie deliuerance of the Church: The Lord hath sayd, I will bring my people againe from Bashan: I will bring them againe from the depths of the sea: that thy foote may be dipped in bloud, and the tongue of thy dogges in the bloud of the enemies, euen in it. And Psal. 149. ver. 6.7. thus we reade of the power that God shall giue vnto his Church: Let the Saints bee ioyfull with glorie, let them sing
For here by the figure Synecdoche vnder one kinde of contu∣melie or despitefull vsage (which is to strike the cheeke with a rod) all other kindes are comprehended.What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap 5. ver, 21. And this is a notorious and shamefull kinde of despite to bee boxed about the eares, or striken on the cheeke. Hereof Iob complaineth cap. 16. ver. 10. saying: They haue opened their mouthes vpon me, & smitten me on the cheeke in reproch. And this reproch Dauid acknowledgeth God to haue payed his enemies home withall Psalm. 3. ver. 7. saying: Thou hast smitten all mine enemies vpon the cheeke bone. And thus despitefully was the Prophet Michaiah vsed by the false Prophet Zidkijah be∣fore two Kings, 1. King. 22. ver. 24. This was fulfilled in King Sede∣chias, and other princes of the Iewes, who were despitefully vsed by the Babylonians 2. King. cap. 25. ver. 7. where it is said of them, That they slew the sonnes of Zedekiah before his eyes, and put out the eyes of Zedekiah, and bound him in chaines, and carried him to Babel. This also came afterward to passe iust according vnto the letter in our Sauiour Christ the true Captaine of his Church Matth. 26. ver. 67. of whose vile vsage it is there written thus: Then spate they in his face, and buffetted him: and other smote him with roddes. In a word, there is in these words expressed exceeding great miserie and trou∣ble of the Church. Vers. 2. And thou Beth-leem Ephrathah art little to bee among the thousands of Iudah, yet out of thee shall he come foorth vnto me, that shall be the ruler in Israel: whose goings forth haue been from the beginning, and from euerlasting. A Comfort, or an answer, lest the miserie and punishment descri∣bed in the verse before,A comfort for the godly. might seeme to remoue and take away the deliuerance of the Church: for it shall not be able to doe it. For there shall arise vp a Captain and deliuerer vnto Israel, out of a most small towne (if ye consider it as it was in the time of the Prophet) to wit, out of Beth-lehem, which shall deliuer the Church out of these miseries, namely, that same euerlasting vnconquerable Cap∣taine of his Church, appoynted of God vnto this purpose from e∣uerlasting, he, I say, shall arise and bee borne out of that towne. Wherefore here also are two things to bee considered. The one, what God promiseth:1 What God promiseth. the other, in what phrase and maner of spea∣king. He promiseth that there shall come a Captaine vnto his Church,2. In what ma∣ner of speaking. and such a one as hath bin appoynted vnto the same long
sithence, my one that is from euerlasting, who shall deliuer the same. And he addeth the place also from whence he shall come, to wit Beth-leem Ephratah, that is, which is in the tribe of Iudah. Neither ought the sight and condition of the place, as it then was, to terrifie or dismay them. It was in deed a small towne at that time, among the Captaines, tribes, and other townes and cities of Iudah: neuertheles notwithstanding out of it shall that same Cap∣taine which shall be the deliuerer of the people, be borne Mat. 2. ver. 4.5 6. Where the chiefe Priests and Scribes of the people assem∣bled by Herod, and demaunded of the place of the birth of Christ, make answer, that it should be in Beth-leem. And for proofe thereof doe cite this place of our Prophet. For so doe the counsels of God dif∣fer from the counsels of men, and God choseth those things which are abiect or base and of small accountes among men. For as hee teacheth vs by his Prophet Esai, cap. 55. ver. 8. His thoughts are not our thoughtes, neither are our waies his waies. Christ the foundation of all the promises of God toward his church.Furthermore in this place is set forth the foundation and ground of all the promises of God towards his church, to wit Christ. For in him, as Paul witnesseth 2. Cor. 1. vers. 20. All the promises of God are yea, and are in him Amen, vnto the glory of God through vs: who hath deliuered his church, by whose Spirit they were strengthened, who both before these times, and also afterwards deliuered the same, as in times past the Iudges and Kings: and after the captiui∣tie of Babylon Zorobabell, Iesuah, the Machabees. Finally this selfe same is from euerlasting, both in that he is equall vnto his fa∣ther, and also in that he is appoynted the mediator and head of his church. And thus much of the matter or thing it selfe. 2 What the fi∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see Amos cap. 8. vers. 4.As for the phrase, or maner and kind of speaking, it is an Apo∣strophe, or turning of speech, wherewith by way of contrarietie GOD in the person of the Bethleemites doth especiallie stir vp, and comfort those that are his, matching that contemned village against the great troupes and bands of strong and mightie enemies mentioned before, and their deliuerance through the meanes of that eternall Sauiour, and consequently in their persons ministring comfort and hope of like help vnto his poore afflicted Church in all ages. And therefore I reade and translate this sentence by the aduersatiue coniunction (But) after this maner, But thou Beth-leem Ephrathah art little, &c.
Ver. 3. Therefore will he giue them vp, vntill the time that she which shall beare, shall trauaile: then the remnant of their brethren shall returne vnto the children of Israell. What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.THis place also is an hypophora, or answering an obiection, lest the godly Iewes should in the meane season faint and bee dismayed in mind, vntill that same promised Captaine doo come forth out of Beth-leem, because that in the meane while they shall suffer and feele great miseries. For the prophet granteth that this shall come to passe: but out of which they shall be also deliuered by God, so that those which haue liued in that captinity and misery of Babilon shal returne vnto their own, and shal either themselues, or their posterity remaine aliue. And the confuting or ouerthrow∣ing of this obiection was necessarie, because that euen the godly were greatly troubled, whilest they felt those bitter miseries, when the citie Sion was destroyed. Wherefore a most assured remedie, to wit, this redoubled promise was to be opposed or set against this their doubting and combat. Two parts of this verse.Further this verse hath both a recitall of that most hard affliction, the which the Iewes suffered afterwards at the hands of the Baby∣lonians, and also a promise of comfort.1 The affliction of the Iewes. The affliction is described in these wordes, that the Iewes are to be giuen and deliuered vp in∣to the hands of the Babylonians,2. A promise of their deliue∣rance. vntill they shall haue suffered vn∣der them most grieuous troubles, yea and such as women great with childe doe suffer, whilest they are in trauaile. For so is the whole time of their captiuitie called, The sorrow of a woman in tra∣uaile. So in the 12. of the Reuelation of Saint Iohn ver. 2. the affli∣cted estate of the Church is resembled vnto a woman with childe,  and crying in trauaile, and being in paines readie to be deliuered. The comfort is added in these words: The remnant of the bre∣thren of this captaine which is promised, shall returne vnto the Sonnes of Israel. Now the brethren of this promised Captaine are the Iewes themselues, of whome is Christ according vnto the flesh Rom. 1. ver. 3. Where Christ is said to haue been made of the seede of Dauid according to the flesh. And cap. 9. ver. 5. it is written, That of the Iewes are the fathers, and of whome concerning the flesh Christ came, &c. These therefore, not all of them in deed, but a remnant, that is, those whome God shall cause to be left, shall returne vnto the sonnes of Israel, that is, vnto their owne people, and into their
countrey, the which was done by Zorobabel, and afterwards vnder the captaines Esdras and Nehemias. Ver. 4. And he shall stand, & feed in the strength of the Lord, and in the maiestie of the name of the Lord his God, and they shall dwell still: for now shall he be magnified vnto the ends of the world. A confirmatiō of the former comfort by three effects taken from Christ the au∣thor of the same.THe first confirmation of the former comfort, taken from the power and from the person of this Captaine, who is the author thereof. And this power and strength of this promised Captaine, is described three waies, or by three effectes. The first, That he shal stand, that is, shall haue a firme or sure and vnremoueable kingdom and gouernement, and euerlasting authoritie, not momentarie or such as shall continue but for a verie little while, the which shall perish by and by, or may bee ouerthrowen.1. His kingdome shall be vn∣moueable. So then the deliue∣rance of the church shall be firme and sure. The second effect is, That he shall feed, and gouerne and defend his people or church. And that not onely by the strength of man:2. He shall feede and defend his people. but also being indued with the strength and power of the true God himselfe, by whom Christ in that he was man, was anointed, that he should feed then, and might feed also now at this day his church most mightily: for Christ shal not feed his church after the common and vsual maner but notably aboue and beyond the prophets, and in the excellen∣cie of the name and power of God, the which shall shine foorth in the workes and doctrine of Christ, more then in the ministerie of any Prophet. And therefore is it said of him Iohn 3. ver. 13. That no man ascendeth vp to heauen but he that hath descended from heauen, the Sonne of man, which is in heauen. And ver. 31. He that is come from on hie, is aboue all: he that is of the earth, is of the earth, and speak∣eth of the earth: he that is come from heauen is aboue all. So Mar. 1. ver. 22, it is recorded, That they were astonied at his doctrine. For he taught them, as one that had authoritie, and not as the Scribes. And Heb. 12. vers. 25: See that ye despise not him that speaketh: for if they escaped not which refused him, that spake on earth: much more shall we not escape, if we turne away from him, that speaketh from heauen. And by the word feeding is vnderstood both the gouernment and also the defence of the church, and not onely the instruction or doctrine the which Christ shall deliuer. Moreouer those which vnder Christ do lawfully beare rule in the church, they also haue the same spirit of God, wherewith they are led: but graunted vnto them by Christ
himselfe, and not in the same measure which Christ had it: for (as it is Iohn. 1. vers. 16.) Of his fulnesse all we haue receiued, and grace for grace. The third effect is, The most great fame and name of this Captaine, is here described; the which, because of his sundry works, the which shall be done in his name altogether by the power of God,His name shall be spred abroad vnto the ends of the world. shall be spred abroad vnto the ends of the world. And there∣fore Act. 1. vers. 8. Christ at his going vp into heauen telleth his disciples, saying: Ye shall receiue power of the holy ghost, when he shall come on you: and ye shall be witnesses vnto me both in Ierusalem, and in all Iudea, and in Samaria, and vnto the vttermost partes of the earth. Whereby appeareth that these effects are properly to be referred vnto the preaching of the gospell, and the fruites of the same. Vers. 5. And he shall be our peace, when Asshur shall come into our land: When he shall tread in our palaces, then shall we rayse a∣gainst him seuen shepherdes, and eight principall men. ANother confirmation of the former comfort, the which is taken from the remouing or keeping vnder of the enemies,An other con∣firmation of the former comfort. by the which the Church was troubled before. In the which selfesame there is secretly made an answer vnto an obiection and doubt of the church demanding, whether then also, that is, after that this Captaine shall come, shee should haue peace, in as much as there should neuer be Assyrians wanting, that is, most wicked and noy∣some enemies vnto the Church. The Prophet maketh answer, that the Church shall then haue peace, and that the Assyrians, that is, these enemies shall be vnder the power of this Captaine, whom be∣ing quiet hee shall quietly gouerne and keepe vnder: but those which shall rebell and resist, hee shall bring downe and correct by force, and by the sword, that they shall not be able to hurt. So hath been shewed before cap. 4. And so Act. 9. ver. 31. Luke maketh mention, That the churches had rest through all Iudea, and Galile, and Samaria. And Paul Rom. 16. ver. 20. comforteth the faithfull with this, That the God of peace shall short lie treade downe Sathan vnder their feete. And 2. Cor. 10. ver. 4. hee sheweth That the wea∣pons of their warfare are not carnall, but mightie through God, to cast downe holdes. This verse hath a promise of peace, and the most milde and gen∣tle gouerning of those (who when as they were before the enemies of Christ,1. A promise of peace. yet notwithstanding they shal afterward yeeld ouer thē∣selues
vnto him to be gouerned quietly.)2. The mild go∣uerning of those which some∣times were the enemies of Christ. Therefore after the Assi∣rians shall haue spoyled the holy land, yet shall they neuertheles be subiect vnto God, and Christ his captaine, the keeper and Sauiour of that land and of his church. And he shall gouerne them, setting ouer them seuen or eight, that is, a very few rulers: namely so easie shall they shew themselues to be taught by the Spirit of God, and so obedient, and those rulers shall also bee taken from out of the people and common sort of men, such as are for the most part and haue been the preachers of the gospell, by whom God hath ouer∣come and conuerted vnto him those which were before his most cruell enemies, to wit, by the preaching of the gospell. Thus then shall these at the first in deede bee his enemies, but then conuerted vnto Christ, they shall, I say, be so gentle, that is, so easie and ready to obey: and so fearing God, that they shall not despise the base flock of those (by whome through the guidance of Christ, they shall bee trulie fed and gouerned) nor disdaine them for their Pa∣stors and Shepheards. See Isai. cap. 11. Vers. 6. And they shall destroy Asshur with the sword, and the land of Nimrod with their swordes: thus shall he deliuer vs from. As∣shur, when he commeth into our land, and when he shall trade with∣in our borders. The Rebels shal be conque∣red by force.BVt the rebels, the which shall continue resisting and striuing a∣gainst Christ (the which are here signified vnder the name of Assyrians and Nimrodians) Christ shall master by force, and sub∣due them by the sword: partly in deede by the spirituall sword, by the Pastors and true teachers, whom he shall then raise vp: partlie by the godly and christian Princes, whom hee shall arme against such enemies of his church, that they may keepe away their force from the church. So God hath giuen vnto his Church Constanti∣nus the great, and Theodosius the elder, Martianus, and other god∣ly Princes. Vers. 7. And the remnant of Iaacob shall be among many people, as a dewe from the Lord, and as the showres vpon the grasse, that waiteth not for man, nor hopeth in the Sonnes of Adam. A third confir∣mation of the former com∣fort, taken from the power and authoritie of the church. THe third confirmation of the same comfort and promise, taken from the power and authoritie of the Church. For not onely
Christ, but also the Church hath authoritie and gouernement. But Christ of himselfe as God, hath it. But the Church as receiuing it from Christ. And by the authoritie of this rule and power, the Church shall both defend those that are obedient vnto her, and shall breake in peeces those that resist against her. For the Pa∣stors haue, as Paul saith, both the spirit of mildenes, and also a rod, the which they can vse. And therefore he asketh the Corinthians 1. Cor. 4 ver. 21. What will ye? shall I come vnto you with a rod, or in loue, and in the spirit of meekenes. And 2. Cor. 10. ver. 4. cited before ver. 5. Also Mat. 16. ver. 19. where Christ saith vnto Peter, I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the kingdome of Heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt binde vpon earth, shall be bound in heauen: and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heauen. Wherefore the Prophet now in this place reciteth both effects of this power, the which by Christ is giuen to his Church. And in this verse, that which shall ap∣peare in those that shew themselues willing to be taught: & in the verse following, the other effect, which is to be seene in the rebels. This verse hath three things to bee noted. First, to whom this power is promised,3. Things to be noted. to wit, to the remnant onely of Iacob, and not vnto that whole people, which boast themselues to be the seede of Iacob.1 To whom this power is promi∣sed. For not whosoeuer are of the seede of Iacob, the same are the Sonnes of Iacob Rom. 9. ver. 6.7. But they which imbrace the faith of Iacob, and those are they which are in deede godly and faithfull, the which both in this place and euery where in the holy Scriptures are fignified vnder the name of a Remnant, least the hy∣pocrites might suppose the promises, and this power to appertaine vnto them. Secondly, there is to be noted what he promiseth in this place,2. What is pro∣mised. namely, a most sweete effect of the power of the church to∣wardes those that are godly in deede in euery nation. The which consisteth herein, that the Church, or God by the spirituall worde doth in all places nourish them, feede them, giue them strength to increase, comfort them: Finally, performeth the selfe same vses to∣wards them, the which the rayne or small dewe, and glistering in the fieldes bringeth either vnto the grasse, when it first peepeth out of the ground, or when as it is alreadie growne forth. The like simi∣litude is else where vsed in the Scriptures, as Psal. 72. ver. 6. He shall come downe like the rayne vpon the mowen grasse, and as the showres that water the earth. So Psalm 65. ver 9. Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou makest it very rich: the Riuer of God is full of wa∣ter: thou preparest them corne: for so thou appointest it. Thou wate∣rest
aboundant lie the furrowes thereof: thou causest the rayne to de∣scend into the valleyes thereof: thou makest it soft with showres, and blessest the bud thereof. And this doth the Church performe vnto the godly, by the disposing and preaching of the word of God, whereof it is the keeper and pillar, as Paul speaketh 1. Tim. 3.15. and in respect that it hath the externall or outward ministerie thereof, to wit by ordeining of true and faithll Pastors. These things if thou doe saith Paul, thou shalt saue thy selfe and others. 1. Tim. 4. ver. 16. And Rom. 1.16. The gospell is the power of God vnto saluati∣on. Otherwise the power and vertue it selfe, which inwardly dooth nourish vs, comfort vs, and giueth increase, is properly from God, and is the Spirit of God, and commeth not from the church as Paul teacheth 1. Cor. 3. ver. 7. saying: So then, neither is he that planteth any thing, neither hee that watreth, but God that giueth the increase. And the Prophet amplifieth this effect of the power of the church toward the godly from the kinde of rayne whereunto he compa∣reth it: For this power of the church is like not vnto euery raine: but vnto that which alone without the labour of men, that are vine dressers, gardeners, and husbandmen, without their trauaile and diligence I say nourisheth, bringeth foorth, and strengtheneth the grasse & herbes that spring out of the earth. The which doubt∣les is a most powerfull and plentifull vertue of rayne. So dooth the Church feede the godly with the word of GOD alone, not mingling therewith, or vsing any doctrine of men. Otherwise as touching the seruice and ministerie of men that preach the gospell, the same doubtles is necessarie in the church of God, and at no hand to be taken away: neither is it in this place condemned. For how shall they heare except there bee those that preach, saith Paul, how shall they preach, except there bee some ministerie or∣deined? But in this place is shewed that the word of God alone is sufficient throughly to nourish the godly, to shut out any other kinde of doctrine whatsoeuer, such as are the traditions of men: and not to take away the meanes of expounding the same worde of God, such as are the faithfull Pastors: For things con∣tained one vnder another are not contrarie. Thirdly,3. Among whom the Church shall haue and shew this pow∣er. it is to bee noted, among whome the Church shall haue and shew this power, to wit among the nations, that is, people strangers before from true faith, and the heauenly doctrine: nay moreouer resisting and striuing against it, yea and that among many nations, that is,
diuers or many, that is, strong and more honorable then others. Truely the Gospell when as it was preached did winne and bring vnto Christ both many nations, and the same also most mighty, as for example, the kingdomes of the Romanes, and Persians. Vers. 8. And the remnant of Iaacob shall be among the Gentiles in the midst of many people, as the Lyon among the beasts of the forrest, and as the Lyons whelpe among the flockes of sheepe, who when he goeth thorow, treadeth downe and teareth in peeces, and none can deliuer. The second ef∣fect of the po∣wer giuen by Christ vnto his church.THe second effect of the same power, the which by Christ is gi∣uen to his church, to wit, against the Rebels. And that is such, that the Church as a ramping lion shal crush them, & as easily teare them in peeces and consume them, as hee is wont to doe a flocke of sheepe. So Paul 2. Cor. 10. vers. 4. speaking of the power and force of the word of God, sayth, For the weapons of our warfare, are not carnall, but mighty through God, to cast downe holds. And Christ sayth vnto Peter, and in his person vnto all other his true mini∣sters Matth. 16. vers. 18. I will giue vnto thee the keyes of the King∣dome of heauen, and whatsoeuer thou shalt binde vpon earth, shall bee bound in heauen: and whatsoeuer thou shalt loose on earth shall bee loo∣sed in heauen. For either Christ, or the Church throweth downe his enemies by the power of his word: and that in such sorte, that he taking away, none can deliuer them, and saue them out of his hands, as Dauid complayneth of the cruelty of his enemies, compa∣ring them vnto a roaring Lyon, from whom none can deliuer, if God should not stand on his side, and therefore he craueth ear∣nestly his ayde Psal. 7. ver. 1, 2. saying: O Lord my God in thee I put my trust: saue me from all that persecute me, and deliuer mee, lest hee deuour my soule like a Lyon, and teare it in peeces, while there is none to helpe. Vers 9. Thine hand shall be lift vp vpon thine aduersaries, and all thine enemies shall be cut off. The conclusion by the figure Epiphonema, which what it is, see Ionas cap. 2. ver. 9.THe conclusion by the figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, that it shall come to passe, that in the ende the church shall get the vpper hand against her enemies. The which also maketh plaine
by an Antithesis, or matching together of contraries: and by the kind it selfe of the ruine or ouerthrow of the enemies of the church. The antithesis is, where he saith, Thy hand shalbe lift vp, & Thine ene∣mies shall be cut off, and so consequently cast down. The kind of de∣struction is exceeding great, for they shall be cut off, that is, they shall perish and vtterly be destroyed and rooted out: and shall not onely be afflicted, or haue their estate in part diminished: but vtterly ouerthrowen. And to the end this conclusion may be the stronger, and take the deeper roote in their mindes, and that hee may comfort them the more, it is confirmed by the person of the promiser. For it is God which promiseth, and in deede the Ieho∣uah, not any feyned God, nor any mortall man, such as were also euen the Prophets themselues. Vers. 10. And it shall come to passe in that day, sayth the Lord, that I will cut off thine horses out of the midst of thee, and I will de∣stroy thy chariots. The maner & time of the for∣mer comfort & promise.A Laying open of the matter more plainely: for hee sheweth the maner, and the time wherein the former comfort and promise shall come to passe vnto his church. The which also is a confirma∣tion of it, that the godly and faythfull may bee most assured of it, whatsoeuer fall out vnto them in the meane season, and albeit that their condition and estate may seeme to be very bad. And first the time is expressed: and afterward the maner. And the manner is also manifold. For there are three reckoned vp in this place in or∣der, to wit, the casting downe and spoyling of the aydes, whereon the church seemeth to stay: the putting away of Idolatrie which raigned in it before: the ouerthrow and destruction of the enemies of the church. But this verse hath three things to be noted. First,Three parts of this verse. a description of the time,1. A descriptiō of the time of the fulfilling of the former deliue∣rance. wherein the fulfilling of the former deli∣uerance and lifting vp of the Iewes or of the church shall bee. And it shall be in that day, that is, in that time: For a day in this place doth not signifie the space of 24. houres, but a long time, yet a certaine time, and a time set by God. And indeede after that the Lord God shall haue taken away from his church both the aydes of men, and also shall haue rooted out of her false doctrine and vn∣godlines, that is, shall haue wasted the countrey of the Iewes by the Babylonians, and shall haue carried them away captiues into Babylon. For then at the last God shall cut off, and shall ouer∣throw
the enemies of his church. So then that time may easily both now be obserued or noted: and also in times past might haue been noted by the falling out of things foretolde here in this place. 2. This promise shalbe fulfilled, how incredible or contrary soe∣uer it seeme to be.The second thing here to be noted is, that albeit in this place a thing neuer so much incredible or not to be beleeued, and in shew seeming to be contrary, be promised: yet neuerthelesse it is pro∣mised that it shal most assuredly come to passe. For it is God which promiseth and foretelleth these things. This is sayd and spoken, that is, a determined sentence of Iehouah, and such as is irreuoca∣ble, or cannot be called backe. And yet this seemeth vtterly an absurde thing, or contrary to reason, and impossible, that then at last God should restore his Church, when as he shall haue taken a∣way from it all helpes and aydes. But God hath a reason of his coun∣sell and doing, the which we will anon declare. 3. The taking a∣way of the aids of men.The third thing to be noted is, the taking away of the aydes of men, the which the Iewes, that is, the Church seemed for to haue, the which when as they are sundry and manifold, they are onely in parte rehearsed in this verse, to wit, the aydes of warre, as are horses and chariots, wherewith the Iewes did fight agaynst their e∣nemies: and such other thinges necessary vnto warre, the which God will take away from the Iewes before he deliuer them. And why, I pray you, will GOD doe this? To wit, that they may vnderstande, that this their deliuerance is indeede the worke of GOD, and to come from GOD alone, not from themselues, not from mans, or any earthly aydes, and that therefore they may acknowledge the prayse thereof to be onely to be giuen vnto God, and wholly vnto God. Agayne, because that whilest these ordi∣nary aydes are before their eyes, men (such is the corruption and vanity of the nature of man) doe rather settle and stay themselues vpon these, then vpon God, as it is in the Psal. 20. vers. 7. Some trust in chariots, and some in horses. To the end therfore that we should accustome our selues to lift vp our eyes vnto God himselfe, these aides of men must be taken away from vs,A lesson for the church of God at all times. and that for our safegard. Further, that which is here sayd of the Iewes, that they shall then at the last be deliuered, when as they shall be destitute or voyde of all aydes, ppertaineth vnto the church of God at all times, whom God vseth for the most part then at lenghth to helpe, when as it see∣meth vtterly to be lost and past all hope of helpe, that by this means he may the better declare both his power, and also his mercy and goodnes towards those that are his.
Vers. 11. And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and ouerthrow all thy strong holdes. An amplifica∣tion of the ta∣king away of their aydes.AN amplification of this maner, or of the taking away of their aydes. For God doth not onely take away from those that are his their horses and chariots, that is, their aydes of warre, euen then when as he will deliuer them: but also their cities and muni∣tions, that is, their home aydes, and places of refuge. Then there∣fore the face and shew of the church seemeth to be most miserable, when as it hath no aydes nor helpes of man, neither at home, nor abroade, neither in peace, nor in warre. And this also proueth the more the deliuerance of the church to be indeed the worke of God, not of men. Finally, it teacheth vs, that wee should not despayre, no not in cases most desperate, or where all hope is past. For then was Moses sent, when as the people of GOD might haue beene deemed to haue been vtterly oppd and vndone: and when as the brickes, and their burd were doubled Exod. 1. and 2. So Isai 54. we may reade that then God promiseth most certaine deliuerance of his church, and the restoring of her vnto greatest beauty and glory, when as it seemed to be brought most lowe, and to be most deformed and miserable ver. 11, 12. O thou afflicted and tossed with tempest, that hast no comfort, beholde, I will lay thy stones with the carbuncle, and lay thy foundation with Saphires. And I will make thy windowes of emeraudes, and thy gates shining stones, and all thy borders of pleasant stones, &c. Vers. 12. And I will cut off thine inchanters out of thine hand: and thou shalt haue no more sooth-sayers. The secōd ma∣ner or way of God his fulfil∣ling his promise in deliuering those that are his.THe second maner or way whereby God will execute that his promise concerning the deliuerance of those that are his, to wit, he will take away from them all true lettes of his helpe and ayde, as is all kind of idolatrie, like as it is here described by diuers sortes of the same: and he will also remoue our other sinnes, the which keepe backe the benefites of God from vs, or else doe make a wall and closure of partition between God and vs Isai 59. For there is no doubt, but that in this place by the figure Synecdoche,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5, ver. 21. vnder the reciting of one sort of sinnes (the which are committed against the first table) he comprehendeth all other vices and sinnes also, the
which close and shut vp the way of God his bounteousness towards vs. Therefore here in this place he reckoneth vp idolatrie in espe∣ciall, and that the same most filthie idolatrie, the which doth vtterly denye God to be the gouernour and ruler of this world. And this is belonging vnto them, which seeke counsell for the doing of things from the Planets, foothsayings, and other altogether diuellish arts, who herein this place are called Inchanters, and Soothsayers, and Planetaries or Mathematicians, against whom God speaketh Deu. 18. ver. 10.11. saying, Let none be found among you, that maketh his sonne or his daughter to goe through the fire, or that vseth witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a marker of the flying of foules, or a sorcerer, or a charmer, or that counselleth with spirits, or a soothsayer, or that as∣keth counsell at the dead. And 1. Sam. 15. ver. 23. the Prophet Samuel sheweth how detestable these sinnes are, when he sayth, For rebel∣lion is as the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression is wickednesse and i∣dolatrie. Vers. 13. Thine idols also will I cut off, and thine images out of the midst of thee: and thou shalt no more worship the worke of thine hands. A second kind of idolatrie.A Second kind of idolatrie, and the same both most manifest, and also most filthie and shamefull, when as men doe worship the worke of their owne hands, as Idols by them grauen, painted, stan∣ding vpright, lying along, and by what name soeuer they be called, or after what maner soeuer they be made. For the kinde it selfe is wholly condemned by God, and is altogether blasphemous. Vers. 14. And I will plucke vp thy groues out of the midst of thee: so will I destroy thine enemies. A third kind of idolatrie.A Third kind of idolatrie, not indeed so vile and filthie as the o∣ther, but yet idolatrie notwithstanding: to wit, when as men albeit they haue a purpose, and indeuour to worship the true God, yet notwithstanding doe they it after another maner, then he hath appoynted. The which thing also is akinde of idolatrie, and wil-worship: for God will not be worshipped as we please, but only as he himselfe prescribeth. And therefore is Saul sharply reproued by Samuel in that contrarie vnto God his commandement, he spared the fattest of the cattell of the Amalekites vnder the pretence and
colour of sauing them to doe sacrifice vnto God withall, but hee heareth from God by the mouth of Samuel 1. Sam. cap. 15. ver. 22.23. Hath the Lord as great pleasure in burnt offrings and sacrifices, as when the voyce of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better then sacrifice, and to hearken is better then the fat of rammes. For rebellion is as the sinne of witchcraft, and transgression is wickednes and idola∣trie. And Paul Coloss. 2. ver. 23. condemneth all such kinde of su∣perstitions and deuises of men, what shewe of wisedome soeuer o∣therwise they may seeme to carrie.Those that worshipped the true GOD in wooddes and grouse, are con∣dēned because they worship∣ped him in pla∣ces which hee had in his word forbidden. Such was the worship of the true God in groues and woods, that is, out of the place appoynted by God himselfe, to wit, out of that onlie Temple of Salomon chosen by himselfe, Psal. 132. Deut. 16. Whereof it commeth to passe that euery where in the Scripture those Kings are condemned, which pulled not vp & destroyed those groues, albeit that otherwise they haue their due praise and commendation for godlines, as Asa, and others 1. King. 15. ver. 13.14. where Asa is commended for putting downe Maachah his mother from her estate, because she had made an idoll in a groue, and the vprightnes of his heart to God∣ward all his dayes: yet is it notwithstanding to his reproof in the same place set downe, That the high places were not taken away. The third way of God his ful∣filling of his promise. And I will destroy thine enemies.) The third way, by the which God will fulfill his promise, namely, That God will vtterly destroy the enemies of his Church, and plucke them as it were vp by the rootes, that they shall neuer grow againe. For after God shall haue remoued and takē away from her those lets and stayes of his grace and fauour towards her, then will he settle himselfe vnto her deli∣uerance, and will earnestly set vpon her enemies, and destroy them. But in this place there is noted such a kind of destructiō, the which is called Aphanismos, or a blotting out and vtter racing and defa∣cing, whereas no remnant or senfie of a thing remaineth, as it is more plainly declared Psal. 101. ver. 8. where Dauid sayth: Betimes will I destroy all the wicked of the land, that I may cut off al the workers of iniquitie from the citie of the Lord. The which is a most sharpe reuenge of the wrath of God. Ver. 15. And I will execute a vengeance in my wrath and indigna∣tion vpon the heathen, which they haue not heard. An amplifica∣tion of this third way of God his fulfil∣ling his promiseAN amplification of this third way, taken from the great earnest∣nes
Church. The which thing also confirmeth those threatnings of God against the enemies of his Church, and doth more plainly te∣stifie or witnesse their ouerthrow to come. God therefore shall de∣stroy the enemies of his Church, and he shall doe this with great earnestnes and feruent zeale, and loue of minde, the which he bea∣reth towards those that are his, as he himselfe witnesseth Zach. 8. ver. 2. where he sayth, I was ielous for Zion with great ielousie, and I was ielous for her with great wrath. This earnestnes of God fighting for his Church against the enemies thereof, is called wrath, indigna∣tion, or rage of minde, attributing vnto God the passions and affec∣tions of men, not that (to speake properly) there is in God any per∣turbation or distempered motion and anger, because that he is by nature vnchangeable, as with whom, as Iames speaketh cap. 1. ver. 17. there is no variablenes, neither shadowing by turning: but that it may be shewed how greatly he loueth those that are his, and how especially he doth defend them. And the Prophet addeth why he will punish the enemies of his Church so seuerely or sharply, name∣ly, because they haue not obeyed that same doctrine, the which the Church offered vnto them. For they receiued not the dewe & hea∣uenly rayne, wherewith God would feede and nourish them by his Church. Wherefore I referre these words (not to heare, or they haue not heard) vnto the doctrine of saluation, and of the Gospell, the which the enemies of God and of the Church either doe not at all receiue: or receiuing it, take it for a matter to laugh at, and despise it. Of which fault many people in the world are guiltie at this day. CAP. 6. Vers. 1. Hearken ye now what the Lord sayth, Arise thou, and con∣tend before the mountaines, and let the hilles heare thy voyce. Another most vehement or earnest Sermon against the Is∣raelites.IN this Chapter is contained a most earnest Sermon and protesta∣tion of Micheas against the Israelites, whereby he maketh them altogether vnexcuseable before God. And God his purpose was in admonishing or giuing them warning so often by one Prophet, & not only by diuers, that hereby he might witnesse and shew vnto them earnestly that their sinnes did displease him, and were most grieuous: and that by this meanes, as I haue sayd, he might shake off from them all excuse, and sluggishnes and dulnes. For this so often repeated reprehension might haue rouzed vp euen the most
sleepie among thē. So Paul stirreth vp his Ephesians Ephe. cap. 5.14 in these words: Wherefore (he sayth) awake thou that sleepest, and stand vp from the dead, and Christ shall giue thee light. So Isai awa∣keth vp the Church cap. 26. ver. 19. Awake, and sing, ye that dwell in dust, &c. And cap. 60. ver. 1. Arise, O Ierusalem: be bright, for thy light is come, and the glorie of the Lord is risen vpon thee. So finallie it grieued not the Apostles to rehearse the same things often, as Paul writeth Philip. 3. ver. 1. It grieueth me not (sayth he) to write the same things vnto you and for you it is a sure thing. So Peter sayth E∣pist. 2. cap. 1. ver. 12. Wherefore I will not bee negligent to put you al∣waies in remembrances of these things, though that ye haue knowledge, and be stablished in the present trueth. This also appeareth by the cō∣paring of the 2. chap. of the 2. epistle of S. Peter with the epistle of S. Iude: so sloware we doubtles in the acknowledging of our sinnes, or to repent also. Now this verse, with that which followeth, con∣taine a preface of the protestation to insue, the which is added, that they may now vnderstand that there is a matter of great weight & earnestnes in handling concerning them, and therefore that the Is∣raelites should giue diligent eare vnto it. So Psal. 81. ver. 1. the Pro∣phet stirreth vp the godly to pray God with all diligence, saying, Sing ioyfully vnto God our strength: Sing loude vnto the God of Iaa∣cob. So Isai cap. 1. ver. 2. he calleth the heauen and earth to hearken, saying: Heare, O heauens, and hearken, O earth. So Exodus 20. Deut. 32. This verse hath two parts. The one,1. What he is to speake. what the Prophet ought now to vtter or speake. The other, vnto whom. And as concerning the first, the Prophet shall indeed not only vtter or speake the word of God, but also after such a maner and forme,2. Vnto whom. that all men may vn∣derstand that God standeth vpon very good ground,  and hath iust cause in accusing and condemning the Israelites. For God, or the Prophet in the person of God purposeth to contend or pleade with the Israelites as it were at euen hand, and in iudgement, that both they may answere, if they can: and also, if they haue ought to ob∣iect, bring God into question and iudgement, and accuse him. And no doubt this is a most equall, and indifferent way of dealing, which plainly prooueth men guiltie of vngodlines, and maketh them vnexcusable. Now the Prophet is commanded to speake vnto the mountaines,2. Why the crea∣tures voyd of reason are cal∣led to be wit∣nesses of this controuersie be∣tween God and the Israelites. little hilles, and strong foundations of the earth, the which selfe same
things and creatures are exhorted for to heare. And hee speaketh vnto them as witnesses, nay as Iudges of this controuersie of GOD with the Israelites: so knowne doubtles was the righteousnes and equitie of the cause of GOD vnto euery one, and vnto the whole world, that not onely men indued with reason, but also the vnrea∣sonable creatures might be witnesses and iudges of the same. Fur∣thermore, these men of Israel are by this meanes accused of won∣derfull dulnes and blockishnes, as if they knewe not those things, the which the bruit and dead elements do know notwithstanding: or that they may be accused of vniustice, who in iudging keepe not that equitie and trueth in condemning themselues, and iustifying of God, the which bruit beasts doe obserue and keepe. And there∣fore that it were more meete and better to pleade these things be∣fore the mountaines and hilles, then before men. And these words, mountaines, hilles, and strong foundations of the earth, are al one Psal. 18. Moreouer this whole preface, to the end it might more deeply pearce and pricke the minds of the Israelites the hearers, is set forth vnder a Prosopopoeia of God speaking vnto both the Prophet,What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap. 6. ver. 1. and the mountaines, and also the people. Vers. 2. Heare ye, O mountaines, the Lords quarell, and ye mightie foundations of the earth: for the Lord hath a quarell against his people, and he will pleade with Israel. THe second part of the preface, wherein is shewed against whom God contendeth or pleadeth.The second part of the pre∣face, shewing against whom God pleadeth. He sayd before that he pleaded before the mountaines as Iudges: and now he declareth against whom he laweth, to wit, not against all persons whatsoeuer, but a∣gainst that his owne people Israel, that is by him adopted or cho∣sen aboue and before the rest, of his only and especiall grace and fa∣uour, whom in this place he proueth guiltie of notorious ingrati∣tude or vnthankfulnes. The kind also of the controuersie and qua∣rell is here shewed, to wit, such a one as is openly made in words, that all men may heare it, and vnderstand it. For so doth the word (iakach) signifie. And these words (Heare, O ye mountaines) are re∣peated againe, that all men might be the more stirred vp, because that God dealeth in earnest: and not that the bruit or senseles crea∣tures be not readie also to yeeld obedience vnto God, euery one in his kind, as at large appeareth Psal. 147.
Vers. 3. O my people, what haue I done vnto thee? or wherein haue Igrieued thee? testifie against me. Vers. 4. Surely I brought thee vp out of the land of Egypt, and re∣deemed thee out of the house of seruants, and I haue sent before thee, Moses, Aaron, and Miriam. A Making plaine of the matter insuing. For God sheweth and de∣clareth the cause that he wil pleade before the mountaines, and before all the world, namely, that hee will condemne that same his people Israel of brutish vnthankfulnes.1. A most milde Prosopopoeia, what this fi∣gure is, see Ose∣as cap. 6. ver. 1. And this verse with that which followeth hath two things to be noted. First, the phrase or kinde of speaking, the which is a most milde Prosopopoeia, or fei∣ning of a person, that God with this his lenitie or mildenes, might wound them the more: or else allure and draw on those that were obedient: yea and there is further a matching together of contra∣ries to be noted, in that God calleth this so vnthankfull people, his owne people, that is, his owne purchased inheritance, that euen hereby the people may appeare the more vnthankefull. 2. The state of the controuersie.Also in the second place here ought to bee noted the state or ground and principall point of this quarrell and controuersie of God with this people. The state is, whether the Israelites did sinne vngodly and vnexcusablie against God,The Intention. so that they are altogether to be condemned. The intention or charging them with the fault is, but they haue sinned: they haue offended God vnexcusablie.The Depulsion. The depulsion, or deniall of this charge: they haue not offended.The proofe of the intension or charge. The proofe of the charge: He that offendeth him, of whom he hath receiued great and continuall benefites, hee sinneth vnexcusablie, and is altogether to be condemned:The benefits of God toward the Israelites. but the Israelites haue in such wise offended God, therefore they haue sinned vnexcusablie a∣gainst God, and are to be condemned. And he proueth the Isra∣elites to haue delt so with God.1. Their deliue∣rance out of E∣gypt. The which that he may the more certainely obtaine and shew, he first reciteth the benefites of God towards the Israelites, and the same both exceeding great, and also continued or perpetuall,2. Out of the house of bon∣dage. of which sort there are three reckoned vp in this place. The deliuerance of this people out of Egypt, and that at the same time, when as Egypt was most cruell vnto them, and a House of bondage. Finally, for that vnto the same people,3. He gaue his prophets to be their Rulers. for that vnto the same people, whom he deliuered from that place, and hell, he gaue his Prophets to bee Rulers, Moses, Aaron, Marie. Psal. 77.
Vers. 5. O my people, remember now what Balack King of Moah had deuised, and what Balaam the sonnne of Beor answered him, from Shittim vnto Gilgal, that ye may knowe the righteousnes of the Lord. AN amplification of the benefites of God both exceeding great and also continued toward the Israelites,An amplifica∣tion of the be∣nefites of God towards them. by the reckoning vp of the fourth and fift benefite the which is done in this place. The fourth benefite was, that God not only defended them against the open violence,4. He defendeth them against the craftie de∣uises of their e∣nemies. and manifest weapons and warres of the Egypti∣ans: but also against the subtill and craftie deuises of other ene∣mies, whereof we reade Num. 23. and the which are here mentio∣ned. For Balac hired for a reward Balaam a notable Soothsayer or Prophet among the profane or heathen men at that time, to curse and banne the Israelites, and to prouoke God against them. The which was a most crafty deuise, to wit, to stirre vp God against them rather then men: and to procure and bring against them the wrath of God, rather then earthly weapons. Which counsell and deuise of Balac God withstoode, and turned it into a blessing vn∣to the Israelites.5. He continueth his benefits to∣wards them from time to time. The fift benefite is, for that the course and order of these benefites of God towards the Israelites in the wildernes was perpetuall and continued from time to time. The which time is described by the place, and by the things that fell out in it. For from Sittim vnto Gilgal there doe passe 40. yeares, in the which the Isra∣elites liued in the wildernes. Balaam commeth to Sittim against the Israelites: in Gilgal is the couenant of God renued with the Israe∣lites Ios. 5. Confer this place with Psalm. 78. Psalm. 91. ver. 10.11. and 106. So then all that time of their being in the wildernes the course of God his benefites was perpetuall and continuall towards them. Vers. 6. Wherewith shall I come before the Lorde, and bowe my selfe before the high God? Shall I come before him with burnt offe∣rings, and with calues of an yeare olde? The figure Di∣alogismus or communing and reasoning with our selues is, when as we as it were dis∣pute and de∣bate with our selues, what is to be done, or not to be done, as in this place the people eui∣dently doe.THe figure Dialogismus or a cōmuning & reasoning of the peo∣ple within themselues, by the which the maner of the stubborne and hypocriticall people are expressed. For here now in this place neither doth God nor the Prophet speake in his owne person: but
this people, which was cōdemned before, is brought in cōmuning and reasoning in great hypocrisie, what is the way to appease God towards them, to alter and change their life, and finally to auoyde and escape this iudgement. Neither doth the people aske this, as if they meant to do it, but as to finde fault with God himselfe, whom they cannot now pacifie, albeit they should neuer so much offer all things. But after the maner of hypocrites they stay onely in exter∣nall or outward ceremonies, and in them doe imagin and place the whole way and meanes of their reconciliation or growing into fauour with God. Vnto whome afterwardes ver. 8. the Prophet answereth in the name of God, and sheweth their hypocrisie, and vaine care. Three outward waies of wor∣shipping God.But this verse hath three kinds of worshipping of God, yet exter∣nally or outwardly only, the which this people sheweth himselfe readie to offer vnto God: but of fayth, of true repentance, of Christ not one word. Against such outward hypocriticall dissembling God complayneth Isai 29. vers. 13.14. saying, Because this people come neere me with their mouth, and honour me with their lips, but haue remoued their hart farre from me, and their feare toward me was taught by the precepts of men, therefore behold, I wil againe doe a mar∣uailous worke in this people, euen a maruailous worke, and a wonder: for the wisedome of their wise men shall perish, and the vnderstanding of their prudent men shall be hid. Which former verse is cited by our Sauiour Christ against the hypocrisie of the Scribes and Pharises Matth. 15. ver. 8. The first kinde of their outward worshipping of God is, Bowing. The second is, Burnt offerings.1. Bowing. The third, especial∣ly of a Calfe and the same of an yeare olde,2. Burnt offerings for the sentence increa∣seth, and ariseth as it were by degrees, that they might seeme, that they would spare nothing of theirs, nor any cost,3. A Calfe of an yeare olde. so that they might finde God reasonable, who would admit or receiue some thing, wherewith he might be pacified and appeased. But woe be vnto the hypocrisie of men, the which bearing a shew that it would faine worship God and pacifie him, vngodly and manifestly accu∣seth him of crueltie, as these men doe. Vers. 7. Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rammes, or with tenne thousand riuers of oyle? shall I giue my first borne for my transgression, euen the fruite of my bodie,The hypocrites amplifie their desire to win the fauour of God. for the sin of my soule? AN amplification made by these hypocrites, of their earnest de∣sire and will in reconciling or winning of God to be fauoura∣ble
and friendly vnto them. If, say these hypocrites, those former things which we offer, doe not satisfie or content God, as pro∣ceeding from too much sparing and niggardnes, and being too lit∣tle, behold greater matters, to wit, A thousand rammes for sacri∣fice: yea tenne thousand tunnes and riuers of oyle. Further, if these be not inough, behold we now offer our very first borne, and out sonnes vnto the slaughter, if so be that God will suffer himselfe to be pleased with these, and not rage against vs so vnmercifully. See how hypocrifie seeketh out all other things, saue the true remedies of reconciliation or winning the fauour of God. For hypocrits i∣magine and deuise vpon such things, which onely carie a great pompe, shew, and glorie, and are outward, they are voyde of faith, and they neither haue nor promise any earnest feeling of their sins, or alteration and changing of their liuing. Vers. 8. He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requireth of thee: surely to doe iustly, and to loue mercie, and to humble thy selfe, to walke with thy God. The answere of the prophet vn∣to the former demaundes of the hypocrites.THe answer of the Prophet, wherewith he shifteth off those vaine remedies of hypocrites, and setteth downe a true remedie, and such a one as is ordeined by God himselfe, whereunto hee calleth them backe, as Dauid doth Psalm. 50. and Psal. 51. ver. 17. Where hee sheweth what are the true sacrifices, wherewith God is well pleased, saying: The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit: a contrite and a broken heart, O God, thou wilt not despise. And his answer in some is, that they walke before God according to the lawe by him∣selfe prescribed or appointed. The which he sheweth to be the one∣ly remedie to pacifie God, not deuised of his owne head, but decla∣red vnto men by God himselfe. And this containeth true repen∣tance of minde, the which cannot come but from faith. 1. The cō¦mēdatiō 2. De∣scriptiō 3. Kinds of this re∣me∣die.This verse hath three things to be considered, to wit, a com∣mendation of this remedie, a description of the same, and sundry kindes of it. For the first, this remedie hath his cōmendation from the autor thereof, God himselfe. For God hath shewed it vnto thee.  It is described by the forme, for it is wholly contayned in the law of God,  in the which God himselfe hath set downe and de∣liuered vnto mortall men, what things are good: that is, both holy and religious, and also what things are iust, and to be giuen vnto our neighbour. For it is not without an emphasis, vehemencie or
force that the Prophet sayth here in this place, O man, God hath shewed thee. For the maiestie of God is manifestly opposed or set agaynst the condition of man. And it is a meere sacriledge of men, or a robbing of God of his honour, when as men reiect or cast away the things which God speaking plainely from heauen hath taught, and doe follow their owne deuises, or had rather haue and doe preferre other things before them, as being more true then they. Wherefore that forme, after which the lawe of God teacheth that we ought to liue, is a most true remedie of changing of our life, and of appeasing and pacifiyng of God. And the Prophet addeth a reason, whereby men may be brought hereunto, to wit, if they bee humbled before God, and become subiect vnto him, namely, laying aside all pride of minde, and that same carnall wisdome, wherewith they swell, and by meanes whereof all hypocrites doe please themselues in their vices, and wicked life.  Lastly, the kinds also of this remedie are here expressed also, that all excuse may be taken away from them.The law of God abridged by the Prophet vn¦to two points. For when as the law of God hath many heads and branches, and precepts or commaundements, the Pro∣phet bringeth all vnto two poynts, lest they might complaine, that the same were too hard, or darke,1 Iudgement. or manifolde and doubtful. Now these poynts are Iudgement and Mercy: and God comman∣deth them both, that we should both do them, and loue them,2. Mercy. that is, performe both these poynts not vnwillingly, but of sayth, and with a willing minde. Vnder the name of Iudgement he compre∣hendeth whatsoeuer we men doe owe vnto men by bargaine, pro∣mise, couenant, or by the law written. Hee calleth clemencie or Mercie, whatsoeuer men doe owe vnto men by the generall duety of humanitie or manhood, in respect that they are men, and fayth∣full Galat. 6. Rom. 13. vers. 8. as Paul willeth saying: Owe nothing to any man, but to loue one another: for he that loueth another, hath fulfilled the law. By Mercy, I say, he vnderstandeth whatsoeuer we do owe one to another euen without any especiall or peculiar couenant, bar∣gayne, and contract. And these indeede are workes of the second table, the which notwithstanding are testimonies of our true faith, and of the first table. So doth Paul Rom 13. vers 9. fseaking of the fulfilling of the lawe by loue reckon vp the workes and pre∣cepts of the second table onely, saying: For this, Thou shalt not committe adultery, Thou shalt not Kill, Thou shalt not steale, Thou shalt not beare false witnesse, Thou shalt not couet: and if there bee
any other commandement, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, euen in this, Thou shalt loue thy neighbour as thy selfe. This place of our Prophet is cited by Christ Mat. 9.13. where he saith to the Scribes & Pharisies, Go ye and learn what this is, I will haue mercy and not sa∣crifice. For it is like vnto the place of Oseas 6. There is a like place Psalm. 50. ver. 12, 13, 14. If I bee hungry, I will not tell thee: for the worlde is mine, and all that therein is. Will I eate the flesh of bulles? or drinke the blood of goates? Offer vnto GOD prayse, and paye thy vowes vnto the most high. And Psal. 51. vers. 17. The sacrifices of God are a contrite heart: a contrite and broken heart, O God, thou will not despise. Agayne Psal. 40. vers. 6. Sacrifice and offering thou didst not desire: (for mine eares hast thou prepared) burnt offering and sinne offering hast thou not required. Vers. 9. The Lords voyce cryeth vnto the citie, (and the man of wisdome shall see thy name) Heare the rod and who hath ap∣poynted it. The applicatiō of the answere of the Prophet.THe application of the former answere vnto the people of Isra∣el, whereby Micheas teacheth, that they are worthylie punished of God, for that they haue not kept the commandements of God appoynted in his law. Therefore the whole oration and speech following doth consist in denouncing or threatning of the iudge∣ments of GOD, and in fitting them vnto the former doctrine, that by this meanes we might vnderstand, how we ought to play the Philosophers, or to gather vnto our selues wisdome out of the threatnings of God against vs and other men. For we must not re∣ferre them vnto the disposition of the starres, destinies, and times appoynted vnto all other matters, neither are they by them to bee measured, but by the contempt or despising of the law of God. Fur∣ther, this speech and denunciation or threatening following hath this verse as a preface before it, whereby they might the more di∣ligently giue eare vnto the threatnings of GOD following, and vnto the causes of the same. Foure things to be noted.This verse contayneth foure things to be noted. The first, who speaketh, namely Iehouah, or the Lord, albeit hee vsed the mouth and ministerie of Micheas.1. Who speaketh. Whereof is that saying, He that despi∣seth you, despiseth me. Mat. 12. The second, to whom he speaketh, to wit,2. Vnto whom he speaketh. vnto the city indefinitely, not naming any particular or especial person, that is, vnto euery citie or town of the kingdom of Israel. For
so in this place I take the word (Citie) generally, not for Ierusalem alone, whom the Prophet doth not here speake vnto: nor for Sa∣maria, the which was the head of that kingdome of Israel: but for all the townes and cities of that body. So also doe I take it hereafter vers. 12. The rich men of which citie, that is, of which ci∣ties, &c. The third poynt, what he speaketh. He promiseth a rod,3. What he spea∣keth. and afflictions, or troubles, and God doth assuredly prepare, and or∣dayne, and decree it for them. For by the worde rod, are signified afflictions or troubles Psal. 2. and 89. ver. 32. Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquitie with strokes. And by the word promiseth or appoynteth,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Ames cap. 4. ver. 12. is metaphorically signified the assured and ready decree of God, except they repent. So then the Israelites are commanded to heare, that is, to giue diligent eare, both what is threatned vnto them, and also who threatneth, that at length they may be moued, and feare.4. The certainty of this threat∣ning. The fourth thing to bee noted is, the certainty of this threatning, the which is confirmed by a Parenthesis from the testimonie of the wise and godly, who in the same doe manifestly see and acknowledge the maiestie and name of God, nay God himselfe truely speaking and iustly being angry,What a Paren thesis is, see O∣seas cap. 8. v. 2. and threatning these things. For this doe these wordes put in be∣tween signifie, (And wisdome, that is, the wise, seeth and acknoledg∣eth thy name.) So Psal. 107. vers. 43. Luk. 7. ver. 35. the godly are sayd to iudge otherwise then the vngodly. This is added, that both the obstinate and froward men may be made vnexcusable, who de∣spise these iudgements of God, as if they heard the voyce of men, and not the voyce of God himselfe, when as they despise his Pro∣phets declaring these things euen at this day. Vers. 10. Are yet the treasure of wickednes in the house of the wicked, and the scant measure, that is abominable? The cause of the iudgemēts of God.AN explanation or making more playne of the former matters. For he sheweth the cause of the iudgements of God, whereby the application of the former answere vnto the maners of the Isra∣elites is vnderstoode. And like as in the eight verse he in the first place did set downe iudgement to be contained in the law of God, that is, faithfulnes and vpright dealing in promises and bargaines: so he now first sheweth, that the same iudgement was vtterly bro∣ken by them, as namely being such who beguiled their neighbours
the which we are to vse in bargaining, and wherewith in traffike faithfull dealing is vpholden. Wherefore in this place vnder one kinde of most shamefull and wicked deceit (wherein our neigh∣bour doth not only suffer losse but also publike faithfulnes and au∣thoritie is broken, wherby weights, balances, and such like measures are made) vnder one kind, I say, most manifest and knowne, then all other sorts of deceit whatsoeuer, the which are vsed in bargai∣ning and dealing, is vnderstood, and condemned. For thus we reade in Deut. cap. 25. ver. 13.14.15. concerning these matters: Thou shalt not haue in thy bagge two maner of weights (he meaneth of one kind, as a little pound, and a great pound, &c.) a great and a small, neither shalt thou haue in thine house diuers measures, a great and a small: But thou shalt haue a right and a iust weight: a perfect and a iust measure shalt thou haue, that thy dayes may be lengthened in the land which the Lord thy God giueth thee. Further, he doth both presse them with an interrogation or asking of a question, that they should not dare to denie that which their conscience did witnesse to be true, and to be done of them wickedly: and also sheweth that this is often done by them, because that by such deceit they had gotten vnto them∣selues treasures in their houses, & heaped vp together great riches. Vers. 11. Shall I iustifie the wicked balances, and the bagge of deceit∣full weights? An earnest charging of thē with that set downe before.HE vrgeth that which hee set downe before, both by the same former of interrogation or asking a question: and also conti∣nuing still in the selfe same wicked crime of theirs in false dealing, the which he comdemned in them. And by the way of matching together of contraries, hee opposeth or setteth against their dea∣lings the nature of God, which speaketh in this place. For when as in their bargainings they deale with craft and subtiltie, God doubt∣les cannot hold them for iust. For he iudgeth according vnto truth, and without the accepting or regarding of the person of any man. Vers. 12. For the rich men thereof are ful of crueltie, and the inha∣bitants thereof haue spoken lyes, and their tongue is deceitfull in their mouth. The second branch of the law of God.THe second member or part of the law of God, the which vers. 8. before, was placed in the exercising of mercy toward their bre∣thren:
the which in like maner, God proueth to be shamefully and in euery respect broken by them. And because that this kinde of mercie is due especially from the rich vnto the poore and needie, therefore God directeth or bendeth his speech against them also. For these he sheweth in euery citie, to haue been deceitfull, oppres∣sors, and lyars. This verse therefore hath three kinde of vices,Three vices contrarie vnto mercie. the which are contrarie vnto that same mercie which is commaunded by God. The one, robberie or pillage, when as by violence a thing is taken from him, the which oweth not the same,1. Robberie or pillage. whether it bee done by open violence, as theeues doe in the woods: or whether it be done by secrets or priuie violence, as when one that is of more might getteth or taketh away any thing from a poore bodie for feare of his power and authoritie. The other is lying,2 Lying. wherewith they beguile the simple sort, as for example, when as in buying and selling they praise their wares, in bargaining they promise one thing, and performe, or would haue another thing to be brought to passe & done. The third is Deceit, wherewith euen without words,3. Deceit. with wonderfull fetches and crafts they get into their hands the goods of their neighbours, and that not one or two of them doth this: but the inhabitants, that is, all of them, and in euerie citie and towne. Yea, and moreouer they doe these things in such sort, that they shew themselues most skilfull, and their crafts-masters in these sleights and suttleties. And therefore their tongue is sayd to be full of deceit, to be readie and nimble vnto such wickednes, and that it is in their mouth. So Dauid speaketh of the wicked Psal 52. ver. 2. Thy tongue imagineth mischiefe, and is like a sharpe rasor that cutteth deceitfully. And Psal. 57. ver. 4. My soule is among lyons: I lye among the children of men, that are set on fire: whose teeth are as speares and errowes, and their tongues a sharpe sword. Vers. 13. Therefore also will I make thee sicke in smitting thee, and in making thee desolate because of thy sinnes. Two parts of this verse.THe threatning of a punishment because of the former sinnes, the which is declared afterwards. And this verse hath two things to be noted. First a reason, the which is set downe in these wordes:1. The reason of the punishmēt. Therefore will I also make thee sicke. For I take the particle (van) for Therfore. Againe, it is threatned them because of their sinnes, that is, not for one sinne only, but for infinite sinnes.2. The bunishmēt it selfe, being wo fold. The second thing containeth the punishment it selfe the which is threatned, whereof
there are here rehearsed two kinds.1. Sicknes of body. The first is sicknes of the bodie. So doth God by Moses threatē the Israelites for their disobedience vnto his commandements Leuit. 26. ver. 16. Then will I also doe this vnto you, I will appoynt ouer you fearefulnes, a consumption, and the burning ague to consume the eyes, and to make the heart heauie, and you shall sowe your seede in vaine: for your enemies shall eate it. The second is desolation,2. Laying waste of their coun∣trie. or spoyle, and laying waste of their countrie. The like is threatned among the other plagues to bee sent among them for their sinnes Deut. 28. Vers. 14. Thou shalt eate, and not be satisfied, and thy casting downe shall be in the midst of thee, and thou shalt take hold, but shalt not deliuer: and that which thou deliuerest, will I giue vp to the sword. An amplifica∣tion adding a three-fold pu∣nishment vnto the former.AN amplification, whereby he addeth another kinde of punish∣ment vnto the former. And this punishment is three-fold. First, Famin. Secondly, the losse of their euen most pretious goods: and their contempt, or being despised in the midst of their land, coun∣trie, and citie, to wit, after they shal haue thus been vexed both with famin,1. Famin. and spoyled also of all their goods. The famin is here descri∣bed or layd forth to be wonderfull,2. Spoyle of their goods. not such a famin as commeth of the barrennes of the fields, but such as falleth out by reason of the want of strength of the meates that are eaten in great plentie and aboundance notwithstanding,3. Contempt. as namely whose staffe, and that strength, which God hath put into the bread to nourish vs, is taken away, so that it cannot now sustaine or feede vs. Such a famin Da∣uid recordeth to haue by God beene sent vpon the land Psalm. 105. ver. 16. in these words: Moreouer he called a famin vpon the land, and vtterly brake the staffe of bread. Reade Deut. 28. Vers. 15. Thou shalt sowe, but not reape: thou shalt treade the oliues, but thou shalt not anoynt thee with the oyle, and make sweete wine, but shalt not drinke wine. A Third kind of punishment.A Third kind of punishment, and the same also contained in the law of God Deut. 28. To wit, when as all our labours are vtterly in vaine, not of themselues I confesse, but are vnprofitable vnto vs which haue laboured, as namely when as others, and those our ene∣mies, haue them vnto themselues, and we receiue not the fruites of
them. And the feeling of this punishment is the more grieuous, be∣cause that it doth wonderfully vexe vs, and cause vs to fret, when as we seeing and knowing of it, others doe inioy our labours, yea our continual and long labours, and that in spite of our teeth, and whe∣ther we wil or no. Which kind of punishment falleth out vnto those on whom God is auenged, and punisheth for the contempt or de∣spising of his name. Further, there are three examples of this pu∣nishment set downe, to wit, in the Haruest, Oliue, and Vine,Corne. Oliue. Vine. the which are tilled with most great labour, and the fruits whereof are most desired, and verie necessarie for the life of men that till the fields, and yet notwithstanding shall these be disappointed and be∣guiled of them. Vers. 16. For the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the maner of the house of Achab, and ye walke in their counsels, that I should make thee waste, and the inhabitants thereof an hissing: therefore ye shal beare the reproch of my people. A reason of the former punish∣ment.THe rendring of a reason of the former so grieous punishment, for that the Israelites were notorious, and stubborne Idolaters. And this place sheweth that these threatnings doe properly apper∣taine vnto the Israelites, and not vnto the Iewes. For they, and not these diligently followed and embraced the impietie or vngodli∣nes of Ambri, or Omri, and Achab, as namely being their Kings. And the Prophet rehearseth these twaine by name, and their de∣crees, or publike edicts, and statutes: also their crafts or counsels in spreading abroad & establishing of idolatrie: because that among all the rest of the Kings of Israel idolaters, these twaine were most shamefull and ranke idolaters, for of Omri the father it is recorded 1. King. 16. ver. 25. That he did euill in the eyes of the Lord, and did worse then all that were before him. And in the same chapter ver. 30. it is written of Achab his sonne, that he was yet worse then his fa∣ther. Kings then do in such maner rage against true godlines, either openly, to wit, by force and violence, or els making edicts and sta∣tutes against it: or priuilie honoring those which are idolaters and vngodly, and preferring them before those that are godly in deed. Both which things Ambri and also Achab did. A confirmatiō of the former threatning. Wherefore I will make thee waste.) A confirmation of the former threatning, by repeating of the summe thereof in this place, & the equitie whereof now appeareth, by this comparing of the idolatrie
of the Israelites and the punishments ordained against them, toge∣ther: the which is done in this vrse. In summe, the Israelites the in∣habitants of this countrie and of the cities therein, shall feele and beare the reproch of the people of GOD, that is, such a reproch as God hath peculiarly decreed aginst his rebellious people, for that, when as they sayd themselues to be the seede of Abraham and Ia∣cob, and consequently boasted that they appertained vnto the in∣heritance of God, they liued and were notwithstanding so obsti∣natly stubborne and rebels against GOD, in the which sinne and vice they continued and remained. CAP. 7. Vers. 1. Woe is me, for I am as the summer gatherings, and as the grapes of the vintage: there is no cluster to eate: my soule desired the first ripe fruits. A cōfirmation of the former accusation.A Confirmatiō of the former accusation set forth by God against the Israelites, the which is now made by the testimonie or wit∣nes of the godly which were among them, the which, that it might carie the more emphasis or force, the Prophet hath expressed in his owne person. Wherefore now is described the corruption of al or∣ders and degrees of men, and the same most knowne and publike. But this verse hath two things to be noted: One, the phrase or ma∣ner of speaking which the Prophet vseth:Two parts of this verse. the other, the thing it selfe which the Prophet writeth of himselfe.1. The phrase. The phrase or kinde of speaking both here, and in the verses following is altogether pa∣theticall or full of affection,2. The thing it selfe. whereby the indignation or griefe of the people is painted forth to be the greater: and it is also Prosopo∣poeiticall, and Metaphoricall,1. What these fi∣gures are, see Oeas cap 6. ver. 1. and A∣mos cap. 4. ver. 12. that is, full of feining of persons & Me∣taphors, to the ende that both all the readers and also the hearers may be the more stirred vp to heare this testimonie or witnes. Now the thing it selfe the which in this place is set forth, is the person of the Prophet representing he whole companie of the true faithful, burning with exceeding great desire to finde some one good and godly man among the Israelites:  but he findeth none at all, albeit that here he diligently examine and search all the orders or degrees of this people. These few therefore excepted (who are vnderstood with the Prophet to speake and complaine with God himselfe of the publike wickednesse of the whole people) al the rest were most
filthie, wicked, and consequently most worthie of that same hard iudgement of God. And first of all the Prophet metaphoricallie expresseth his desire to finde out some one good man in these wordes: My soule hath desired some fruites in this people, albeit ne∣uer so vntimely, and bitter as yet, and little or smal. Then he addeth. None are found. For, saith he, I am such a one, and in such sort con∣uersant and abiding among this people, as if a man were remai∣ning in a corne field after haruest: or in a vineyard after the vintage. At which time no eares, or no clusters are found and remaine fit to eate. Vnder this metaphor therefore is signified, not onely the rarenes or scarsenes of godly and good men in this people, but as I may so terme it the nullitie or nonenes. So that same made Dioge∣nes lighting a candle at noone day in the middes of the market place at Athens, and when as it was full, and crouded with people, seeketh notwithstanding for a man. So doth God at Sodom, but for ten good men onely, whom he findeth not. So Dauid Psalm. 12. complaineth of his age. Vers. 2. The good man is perished out of the earth, and there is none righteous among men: they all lye in waite for bloud: euery man hunteth his brother with a net. An answere vnto the for∣mer desire of the prophet.THis is an answere, where withall the desire of the prophet (the which was described in the verse before) is answered, and the corruption, wickednes, and publike and miserable lewdnes of this people is confirmed. And first of all generally in this place, and afterward in particular, that is, in euery degree of this people.1. The generall condemnation. And there are two things here to be noted: first, the generall condem∣nation: afterward the cause of this condemnation.2 The cause of the same. The generall condemnation is conteined in these words: The iust man is perish∣ed out of the land of these men, there is none that is righteous among them. So then in this place the selfe same partie is called good and iust or bounteous. For these onely are right or good in hart,  the which are bounteous or liberal vnto their brethren Mat. 5. Iohn. 4. for this bounteousnes is a true badg or signe of our godlines towards God, and loue towards our neighbour, wherin consisteth true and whole righteousnesse. Wherefore the prophet sayth that such are vtterly perished and decayed among the Israelites, so Psal. 12. The cause of this so generall condemnation against the Israelites is,  for that publikely, commonly, and euerie where all of them are both cruell
and blouddy, and also craftie and deceiuers of their neighboures, and euerie one of his brother. Thus he maketh them guiltie of a double sinne, to wit both of crueltie, and also of deceit towardes their brethren: that is, against those which euerie one of them ought to hold most deare. And this reason is also metaphoricall. Vers. 3. To make good for the euill of their hands, the Prince asked, and the Iudge iudgeth for a reward: Therefore the great man he speaketh out the corruption of his soule: so they wrap it vp. The applicati∣on of this gene∣rall condemna∣tion vnto eue∣ry degree of the Israelites.THe application of this generall condemnation vnto euerie de∣gree of the Israelites: and first of all vnto the princes of the peo∣ple, the Iudges, and such as were among them accounted to be of greater dignitie and countenance, whome hee here calleth Great men.1 Generallie they were euill. And first of all the prophet generally pronounceth of these three sortes of men, that they were lewd and wicked as it were to striues, who should in lewdnesse exceede other, and that euerie one of them did exercize his hand lustily and well,2. He reciteth their peculiar vices. thatis, stoutly and strōgly in the doing of euery euil, that is in cruelty, & deceit against their brethren. Secondly he rehearseth & reckoneth vp the peculiar vices of euery order or degree of these mē named before.1. Of the princes, rulers and Iudges. And first the vices of the princes or heads of the people & Iudges. Secondly of those who seemed to excel the people & common sort in digni∣tie. And concerning these princes & Iudges the prophet saith,2. Of others that excelled the common sort. that they are manifestly and notoriously couetous and extortioners in their offices. For without all shame they begge money for doing of their office,1. The princes and Iudges are couetous and extortioners. the which they ought to doe freely, that is, for the giuing of Iudgement, to wit, to pronounce a good cause, a good cause: and a bad cause, abad cause: otherwise they would say and pronounce, that to be a bad cause, which is a good cause: and con∣trariwise, that to be a good cause which is a bad cause. Finally they sel the law, the which is a most cruel sacriledge or detestable sin. So then these both chiefest, & also inferior Iudges are here described to be most manifestly couetous and most shamels beggers. But by the way there is added or set downe an honest pretense or excuse wherewith they did couer this their sacriledge, to wit, for that they called those things the which they tooke for their selling of Iustice, a reward or recompence, as it were the hire and wages for their work and laboure. It is I grant a thing very meete, that Iudges and Ru∣lers, and all others that doe seruice in the common wealth, should
haue honest and reasonable wages allowed them out of the com∣mon Treasurie, or else according vnto the appoyntment of lawes should demaund it of priuate persons: but not for this cause that they should pronounce that which is law: not that they should say that cause to be the better and the iust cause, which otherwise is an vniust cause. The which fault is here condemned in these per∣sons. And these things did both the chiefe and also the inferior Iudges and magistrates of the people of Israel. 2. The great men as bad as they.Now those which were no magistrates, and yet were of some countenance, authoritie, name and power among the people, that is, Great men, they were neuer a deale better then the magistrates, nay after their shameles example they themselues also were sham∣les. For they dare to tell and boast of their deceitfull counsels, and to open and make knowē their practise which they haue vsed in op∣pressing and wronging of their neighboures. To be short, openly to bragge of their lewdnes which they practise, and yet they goe scotfree with it. So Dauid reporteth of the shameles boldnes of the great ones of his time Psal. 73. ver. 8. They are licentious (sayth he) and speake wickedly of their oppression: they talke presumptuously. Whereof it cometh to passe that the counsels of these Great men are wicked, wrapped vp together to doe all kind of iniurie and wrong vnto their neighboures, which are poore. For the similitude of cordes twisted, together sheweth that the counsels and doings of the men of whom he here speaketh, are strong deceites, intang∣led, sundry, manifold deuises and fetches, hard to be vnfolded; and preuailed against. All which things do shew that the bridle was let loose vnto all lewdnes among the Israelites, and that their wic∣kednes was outragious. Vers. 4. The best of them is as a bryer, and the most righteous of them is sharper then a thorne hedge: The day of thy watchmen, and of thy visitation commeth: then shall be their confusion. The conclusion of this part, shewing the whole state of the rulers and great men to be most corrupt.THe conclusion of this part, whereby the order or state of the rulers or magistrates, and of those which were of some power among the people is shewed to bee most corrupt, and far out of square, to wit, that he which among them is counted the best, and the most vpright and iust, is notwithstanding as a sharp holly tree, or thorne tree, that is, is such a one with whom no man can or will haue to doe without great hurt or losse. Therefore the most prayse
worthy among them doth the prophet notwithstanding proue by the testimony or witnes of all men to be corrupt, craftie, couetous. Wherfore hereby may be coniectured or gessed, what maner ones the rest in this people were. Such doth the Psalmist speake of Psal. 58. and Psal. 53. ver. 21. Who albeit they outwardly gaue neuer so fayre a shew of curtesie and mildnesse, yet were they in deed most sharp and cruell: The words of his mouth (sayth he) were softer then butter, yet warre was in his heart: his words were more gentle then oyle, yet they were swords. The punish∣ment of the ru∣lers and great men.Now followeth the punishment also against those Magistrates and great men, whom hee calleth one with another, Watchmen of the people. For I rather referre this word vnto those magistrates, of whom he spake before: then vnto the Prophets, of whom as yet he hath spoken nothing, vnlesse peraduenture a man would compre∣hend them vnder the name of Great men. The Magistrates then are the watchmen of the people, vnto whom now the iudgement of God is threatned because of their former sinnes. And this iudge∣ment is called a day, that is, a short time and a certaine, decreed by God assuredly to come to passe. A visitation, that is, a great afflic∣tion or punishment, and that from God being wroth against them, into whose hands to fall it is a feareful thing Heb. 10.31. And their confusion, that is to say, such affliction and miserie, that all their dig∣nitie shall vtterly perish, a great plague and punishment shall fall vpon these Iudges. Vers. 5. Trust ye not in a friend, neither put ye confidence in a coun∣seller: keepe the doores of thy mouth from her that lyeth in thy bo∣some. ANother application of the former accusation of the Israelites made by the Prophet,Another appli∣cation of the former accusa∣tion of the Is∣raelites vnto priuat persons of all degrees and sexes. to wit, vnto priuat persons of euery sexe and degree, in al which there is described a certaine notorious wic∣kednes, the which doth violate or breake euen all the sence or fee∣ling and affection of humanitie and nature. To be short by these examples, the which are now set downe, the crueltie, treacherie, and lewdnes of this people appeareth to be exceeding great. And there are in sundrie kindes of persons set forth sundry examples of these vices.1. Friends. The first is in those, which are priuatly ioyned together in friendship and league, as are friends. The second, in those which are honored of vs as more wise and wittie then our selues,2. Counsellers. and vsed of
vs for counsaile in our affaires. Who in deed ought to deale vp∣rightlie and vnfeinedly with vs in regarde of the trust and good ac∣counts which we doe make of them.3. Wiues. The third is euen in our own wiues, the which by vs are nourished in our bosoms. But men lye in waite one for another, deceiue & beguile one another. And of a wife so vnnatural see an example in the wife of Sampson Iudg 14. v. 17. Where with great importunitie and teares, hauing learned out his riddle, she bewrayeth the same vnto the children of her people. Vers. 6. For the Sonne reuileth the Father: The Daughter riseth vp against her Mother: The Daughter in lawe, against her Mo∣ther in lawe: And a mans enimies are the men of his owne house. The fourth ex∣ample of those which ought to loue.THe fourth example of those who by the instinct or teaching of nature, and by the motion of naturall affection, are wont to loue vs, as the sonne, daughter, daughter in law: and finall, those of our house and familie. These also are fierce, deceitfull, & cruell against those whom they ought to loue, as their Father, Mother, Mother in law, and the householder, or good man of the house. This also doth Christ applie vnto the times of the gospell Matth. 10. But as things which come to passe and fall out through the fault of men that re∣bell against the gospell, and not through the fault of the doctrine of the gospell. Vers. 7. Therefore I will looke vnto the Lord: I will waite for God my Sauiour: my God will heare me. THis is an Epiphonema, or acclamation, wherewith the Prophet doth stay and comfort himselfe and the rest of the godly,The figure E∣piphonema, what it is, see Ionas, cap. 2. ver. 9. in so great and vnbridled a companie of wicked men. So doth Dauid Psal. 55. ver. 16. But I will call vnto God, and the Lord will saue mee, and ver. 23. And thou, O God, shalt bring them downe vnto the pit of corruption: the bloudie and deceitfull men shall not liue halfe their dayes. To wit, he crieth out, & teacheth, that both he & also other godly men must lift vp their eyes vnto God, and that they must de∣pend or stay vpon him, and hope for deliuerance and saluation. So Dauid ariseth vp vnto God, being in the middest of the companies of wicked men, yea, euen when they raged and were fierce against him Psal. 12. And this verse hath three things,Three parts of this verse. the which by the ho∣ly ghost, are be gotten and wrought by order in the hearts of the
godly whilest they doe fortifie or strengthen themselues against so many encombrances.1 The godly looke vnto God. The first is, that they do looke vnto God, and doe call to remembrance his promises made vnto his church, that is, vnto themselues the godly. Therefore they cast their care vpon God Psal. 37. For this is that which the Prophet sayde, that they looked or watched vnto God, that he might allude or haue re∣semblance vnto those same euil Rulers and watchmen of the Israe∣lites ver. 4.2. They wayte for the fulfilling of his promises. The second is, they wayte and looke for the fulfilling of those promises of God, howsoeuer the rest of the world bee chaste∣ned, and doe perish through their owne fault 1. Cor. 11. vers. 32. But when we are iudged, wee are chastened of the Lorde, because wee should not be condemned with the world. So Psalm. 73. vers. 17. the Prophet sheweth that albeit at the first hee could not conceiue of the great prosperitie which the wicked often enioy in this worlde farre aboue the godly, yet when he entred into the Lorde his San∣ctuary, it was shewed him what should be their end, and that their prosperitie should bee turned into aduersitie, as contrariwise that the sorrowes of the godly should ende in ioy and gladnes. And Psal. 34. ver. 4. he acknowledgeth that God, when he sought vnto him, heard him and deliuered him: I sought the Lord (sayth Dauid) and he heard me: yea he deliuered me out of all my feare. Therefore the godly doe call God in whom they trust, the God of their salua∣tion, that is, him who shall deliuer, and defend them at the last. The third thing is, they conceiue most assured trust in mind against all tentations by meanes of those promises of God towards them.3. They conceiue out of those pro¦mises an assu∣red hope of be∣ing heard. For they know that they are heard, and shall bee heard of God in such afflictions as they foresee shall fall vpon the vngodly: be∣cause God calleth himselfe their God peculiarly, and is so indeede. These three things doe throughly not onely recreate, but also con∣sume the godly, and doe stay and hold them vp euen in the most iust destruction of all the worlde besides. Vers 8. Reioyce not agaynst me, O mine enemie: though I fall, I shall rise: when I shall sit in darkenes, the Lord shall be a light vnto me. A confirmatiō of the former hoe. What the fi∣gure Apostro∣the is, see Ams cap 8. vers. 4.A Confirmation of the former hope, which the godly haue in God, the which is drawen from the nature of GOD, and his most sure and especiall promises, but it is propounded or set forth by the Prophet, by an Apostrophe, or turning of speech vnto the
enemies of the church, that they may the rather knowe this com∣fort of the church to bee most certaine, and that they should not think that the church and the godly either to haue perished, or shal perish, if at any time they be chastised by GOD.Three partes of this verse. And this verse hath three things to be noted. First, the kinde of speaking, which is an Apostrophe or turning of speech, whereby the godly,1. The kinde of speaking. or the church speaking to their enemies in the singular number, doth in∣sult or triumph ouer them through that their assured trust of minde in God, and hope of their saluation and deliuerance, as Dauid Psal. 3. vers. 7. in the midst of his troubles turneth his speech vnto God, crauing his defence against all his enemies, saying: O Lord, arise: helpe me, my God: for thou hast smitten all mine enemies vpon the cheeke bone: Thou hast broken the teeth of the wicked. And there∣fore in the assurance of God his assistance against them Psalm. 27. vers. 3. he sayth, Though an host pitched agaynst me, mine heart should not be afrayde: Though warre be raysed against me, I will trust in this. Now the foundation of this so assured and vnconquerable hope of the godly is fayth, as it is 1. Iohn 5. vers. 4. This is the victory that ouercommeth the worlde, euen our fayth, the which is grounded vpon such promises as are contayned Psalm 91.93. and such other like. Further, this whole place with that which followeth is full of figures of a sentence, as Prosopopoeiaes, Dialogismes,Anthropopa∣theia is the at∣tributing vnto God the parts, properties, pas∣sions and affe∣ctions of men. Anthropopa∣theiaes, and such like, the which doe partly garnish the things here set forth, partly more liuely represent them as it were vnto our eies and view, and doe moue men to obey, and rest in the word of God and in his promises. 2. Whom the god¦ly speake vnto.The second thing to be noted in this verse is, whom the godly doe speake vnto, to wit, their enemies, whom the Prophet doth represent vnder the name and person of a knappish and ill ton∣gued woman, that their doggish madnes against the church may be vnderstood and painted forth. The third point is the thing it selfe, or the comfort, the which the godly set forth.3. The comfort here set forth. They will therefore that their enemies be not glad, nor reioyce in minde as of their fall and ruine. For they answere: nay, the same shall not be, or come to passe. But because exception might by and by be ta∣ken: yes, thou O church of God shalt be afflicted or unished by God himselfe (the which thing both the Prophet dw should come to passe, and also the godly do well enough  nd that because of their sinnes it shall come to passe) the  godly
answere vnto this also, namely, that it is true indeede, that they shall be chastised, but yet they shall not therefore be destroyed, or the church of God be cast away. For God doth chastise and cor∣rect those that are his with the rod of a father, and of a man onely, and not with an yron rod, as he vseth to doe the reprobate or off∣casts. So then this third part of this verse doth consist of an Hypo∣phora, or answering of an obiection,What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. wherein the Church dooth grant that she shall indeede be chastised, but she denieth that shee shall be rooted out, the which thing her enemies hoped for, and thereof reioyced. And therefore the Lord by his prophet Zachary cap. 1. vers. 15. sheweth himselfe to bee very angry with them for that they were excessiue in punishing of Ierusalem more then hee would they should haue done. For saith he in that place: I am great∣ly angry against the careles heathen: for I was angry but a little, and they helped forward the affliction. The Church then sometimes fal∣leth by meanes of afflictions, but afterward through the grace and fauour of God she riseth vp agayne Ierem. 7. The church sitteth in darkenes when as she is afflicted, but yet is she not wholly depriued of the light of God, but doth euen then in parte feele the same. In a word, the Church of God cannot perish Psal. 72. Vers. 9. I will beare the wrath of the Lord because I haue sinned against him, vntill he pleade my cause, and execute iudgement for me: then will he bring me forth to the light, and I shall see his righteousnes. Another cōfort of the church.ANother comfort of the Church. For it is so farre off that the Church can perish by and through afflictions, that she beareth the same with ioyfull and contented minde, and patiently. That the church cannot perish hath bin shewed in the verse before: now in this verse is declared, that she beareth the iudgements of God patiently, and with a quiet minde. Therefore whereas she sayth, I will beare the wrath, that is, those iudgements of God the which thou, ô mine enemie, threatnest shall come to passe vnto mee, it is to be vnderstoode of that sufferance of minde, the which quietly submitteth or yeeldeth it selfe vnto God,Three reasons of the Church her patience. a patterne of which pa∣tience appeareth in Iob cap. 2. But the church yeeldeth a threefolde reason of that her so quiet and contented patience.1. Shee hath sin∣ned against God. First, for that it is meete and right that she should bee so punished. For shee hath sinned against God. For this is the first reason and preparation of
a minde submitting it slfe vnto the iudgements of God, namely, earnestly and truely to acknowledge his sinnes, and to be displea∣sed with it selfe for the same. For this sence or feeling of sin cau∣seth, that we murmure not against God, but that wee beare his wrath with a quiet minde.2. The punishmēt shall not be per¦petuall. The second reason of this comfort and patience of the Church is, because this punishment shall not bee perpetuall, but onely vntill such time as God shew himselfe a plea∣der and Iudge betweene his church and the enemies thereof. For then will he acquite his church in regard of her enemies, and will condemne the enemies of the same. So speaketh Dauid of GOD his iudging of his cause against his enemies, and the enemies of his church Psal. 7. vers. 7, 8. Awake for me according to the iudgement, that thou hast appoynted. So shall the congregation of the people com∣passe thee about: for their sakes therefore returne on high. The Lord shall iudge the people: iudge thou me, O Lord, according to my righte∣ousnes, & according to mine innocencie that is in me. This the church calleth her iudgement, that is, the gayning & winning of her cause and the time of her deliuerance, when as God himselfe shall pro∣nounce or giue sentence of the cause of his church, & her enemies. The third reason of the patience of the church s,3. God shall bring forth the righ∣teousnes of his church into the sight of al men. that GOD shall bring forth that same righteousnes of his church into the light and eyes of all men, that she may be acquired & iustified of euery body. This is a most singular comfort of the godly, and a true foun∣dation of patience, for that God at the last, and in the end, notwith∣standing those that be his be neuer so much afflicted by the vn∣godly, will shew and declare that they were iust and guiltles in re∣garde of their enemies that afflict them. Then therefore shall the Church see and perceiue her owne righteousnes, not in respect of GOD, but in respect of her enemies and of men that vexed and afflicted her. Vers. 10. Then she that is mine enemie shall looke vpon it, and shame shall couer her, which sayd vnto me, where is the Lord thy God? Mine eyes shall behold her: now shall she be troden downe as the mire in the streetes. An amplificati¦on of the for∣mer patience and comfort of the church.AN amplification of the former patience and comfort the which is felt by the Church by meanes of her iustification, to wit, be∣cause in the end the very enemies of God themselues shal acknow∣ledge and confesse the same righteousnes of the Church. This shall
come to passe both in the last iudgemēt: & also it doth com to passe, as often as God by the preaching of his word doth make it known vnto the world, that the doctrine of his church is the truelight of the Gospel and heauenly godlines. And now out of this confession and acknowledging of this righteousnes wherewith the Church was endued, and the which is made by the enemies, followeth the shame & reproch of the sayd enemies: and that especially in those scoffes and taunts, wherewith they sharply and bitterly laughed to scorne the hope which the Church did repose or put in GGD, de∣manding of the poore afflicted church, Where is thy God? And af∣ter this sort doe the wicked gibe and floute the godly Psal. 42. and 43. Finally,The great shame and re∣proch of the e∣nemies of the Church. how great this shame and reproch of the enemies of the church shal be, is declared by a double effect, namely, both for that the church her selfe shall see with her eyes, and also euen in this world that same exceeding confusion of her enemies: and the enemies themselues shall be despised of all men, and be troden vnder foote of euery one, as the mire in the streetes. These things no doubt come to passe, when as God openeth the light of his truth vnto the world. Then the enemies of the church are most abiect and contemned, as we see in these our dayes, when as poperie is banished and cast away, in this yeare of the Lord 1582. Vers. 11. This is the day that thy walles shall bee built: this day shall driue farre away the decree. An other con∣firmation of the comfort & hope of the Church.ANother confirmation of the comfort and hope of the church, the which is taken from GOD himselfe promising the same. For here now is GOD brought in by the Prophet, promising help vnto those that are his, and pronouncing their deliuerance from miserie. So then these wordes, The day to builde, and the verses following vnto the 18. verse are the wordes of God speaking, and shewing him selfe vnto his Church trusting in him, and most ful∣ly comforting her. First, GOD himselfe promiseth and decla∣reth that it shall come to passe that the Church shall bee builded vp agayne, and that assuredly, and within a short time. For the peo∣ple was in the captiuitie of Babylon but onely seuentie yeares, Ierem. 25.
Vers. 12. In this day also they shall come vnto thee from Asshur, and from the strong cities, and from the strong holdes euen vnto the ri∣uer, and from sea to sea, and from mountaine to mountaine. They shal come vnto the church from all places and countries.SEcondly, he promiseth that it shall come to passe, that they shall come vnto her from all places euen by publike commandement, and that from out of Assyria, Euphrates, Egypt, & other countries. The which thing came to passe both vnder Cyrus and Darius, whē as the Temple of God was renued and restored by publike decree: and also as often as before Christ was borne and made man, God did helpe his Church, as vnder the Machabees: and lastly vnder the Gospell of Christ, when as all nations came running vnto the true Church of God, the which were prophane, or wicked before, and also enemies vnto the name of God. Furthermore and now al∣so when as the Gospell is preached vnto the world. Vers. 13. Notwithstanding, the land shall be desolate, because of them that dwell therein, and for the fruits of their inuentions. THis is the figure Occupatio,The figure Oc∣cupatio what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 3. or preuenting an obiectiō, the which the Lord addeth, least that the godly because of the affliction of this people the which was very shortly to insue, might despayre of the former promises. Therfore that both they might be strēgthened, & also that he might moderate their ioy, God did put in this mentiō of the laying waste of the land, which was to come. And this verse hath two things. First,1. The laying waste of this land. a threatning of the laying waste of the na∣tion, and of this land, that is, of the Church, the which laying waste was for to come. Secondly, the cause of this punishment, which were the sinnes of this people, and the most bitter fruites,2. The cause of the same. the which this vineyard brought vnto God the husbandman, or her vine dres∣ser in stead of good fruit Isai. 5. And this cause was set downe, that the godly should not murmur against God, but that they should vnderstand that they were iustly punished by him. Vers. 14. Feede thy people with thy rod, the flocke of thine heritage, (which dwell solitarie in the wood) as in the midst of Carmel: let them feede in Bashan and Gilead, as in old time. A comfort a∣gain the for∣mer affliction.A Comfort against the threatning of the former affliction or pu∣nishment, to the end the godly may be the more strengthened
in the former promises of God.Two parts of this verse. And this verse or comfort contai∣neth two parts: the one, wherein God commandeth the heads or rulers of the Church to seede their people in or with their rod,1. A commande∣ment to feede their people. that is, according vnto the authoritie and dignitie the which was left vnto them by God in the midst of their affliction and poore estate notwithstanding. The kingdome, I confesse, ceased among the Iewes in those afflictions, and also a long while afterward, accor∣dingly as the Lord threatned them by Ezech. cap. 21. ver. 26. saying: I will take away the diademe, and take off the crowne: this shall be no more the same: I will exalt the humble, and abase him that is hie: but yet all policie, or gouernment, power and dignitie, did not therfore cease in that people For they had Rulers or Gouernours of their nation, and the Synedrion or Consistorie of Elders, or chiefe men. Therefore according vnto that authoritie and power which was left vnto them God commandeth the Rulers, that they nourish, go∣uerne and preserue the people of the Church: and not that they cast them away and vtterly forsake them. And why I pray you doth he this? To wit, for because how forsaken soeuer, solitarie, afflicted, and small this people were, God neuerthelesse would preserue thē: and out of the selfe same people afterward gather vnto himselfe a most great Church, as shall anon be shewed ver. 15 and 16. Fur∣ther, God exhorting the Pastors and Rulers of this people to looke vnto it, defend, and feede it, calleth this people, their people flocke & heritage, not in contempt or reproch: but that by this name and re∣lation they may vnderstand, that this which they are commanded for to doe, cannot by them be ouerpassed and forslowed without a great offence. For this is belonging vnto their dutie. For God hath committed this people vnto them for to feede. Hereupon is there a mutuall band, by reason of these words, betweene the Rulers and the people giuen vnto them by God. This is one part of the com∣fort set forth by God in this verse. 2. A promise con∣cerning the de∣liuerance and restoring of this people.The second part of this verse is a promise of the full deliuerance and restoring of this people into their owne seates and home, as before, how greatly soeuer the land were layd waste before, & the nation carried vnto another countrie. For this land and this nation shall be restored. This people shall feede as before, and shall pos∣sesse Basan, and Galaad, and their other countries.
Vers. 15. According to the dayes of thy comming out of the land of Egypt, will I shewe vnto him meruailous things. A confirmatiō of the latter promise of the full restoring of this people.A Confirmation of the latter promise of the full restoring of this people, that is, of the Church of God. For by a similitude he sheweth after what maner, and how great it shall be: nay how mi∣raculous. For it shall be such, as was that wherby this people at the first was deliuered out of Egypt, and that miraculouslie. And truly the deliuerance of this people out of the captiuitie of Babylon was altogether miraculous also, so that this comparison in resembling it vnto that of Egypt is truely made also, of the maner whereof the Lord speaketh by his Prophet Isai cap. 27. ver. 12.13. thus: In that day shall the Lord thresh from the chanell of the riuer vnto the riuer of Egypt, and ye shall be gathered one by one, O children of Israel. In that day also shall the great trumpe be blowne, and they shall come that pe∣rished in the land of Asshur: and they that were chased into the land of Egypt, and they shall worship the Lord in the holie mount at Ierusa∣lem. Vers. 16. The nations shall see, and be confounded for all their power: they shall lay their hand vpon their mouth: their eares shall bee deafe. An amplifica∣tion of this de∣liuerance.AN amplification of this deliuerance, taken from the meruailous astonishment and wondring of men that were Infidels, because of the same: in so much that they shall be ashamed, for that they doe not serue God, but others: and they shall not moue their mouth nor their cares for wondering: so miraculous doubtles and won∣derfull a worke of God vnto the wicked and vngodly is the deliue∣rance of his Church, as may appeare Psal. 126. ver. 2. where the very heathen themselues doe confesse and acknowledge the mightie power of God shining so cleerely forth in that most wonderfull de∣liuerance of his people. For thus doe the godly deliuered in that place testifie: Then sayd they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them.
Vers. 17. They shall licke the dust like a serpent: they shall moue out of their holes like wormes, or serpents: they shall be afrayd of the Lord our God, and shall feare because of thee. Another am∣plification of this wonderfull deliuerance.ANother amplification of the sayd miracle or wondrous deliue∣rance, and of the astonishment and feare of the heathen, because of this worke of God, to wit, taken from the most humble submis∣sion, feare and trembling, which shall then bee of those nations be∣fore the Church it selfe. Therefore whatsoeuer the Church shall then command, they will doe it, not daring to doe anything, or to stirre against it. So then not onely the astonished mind of the infi∣dels is in this place described, but also this miracle of God in deliue∣ring those that are his, is amplified by their gesture and feare of minde, and also by the similitude taken from the feare of serpents. Of the like humbling and submitting of themselues vnto Salomon, the true figure of Christ and his Church, is spoken Psal. 72. ver. 9. where it is sayd: They that dwell in the wildernesse, shall kneele before him, and his enemies shall licke the dust. The great feare of the heathen at the deliuerance of God his churchFurther, that which is here sayd and alleaged of serpents, pain∣teth out a wonderfull trembling and feare of the vnfaithful and vn∣beleeuing nations before the Church. For serpents stirre not out of their dennes but in great feare, and because of their feare of men they come forth of them. So Exod. 11. ver. 6.7.8. it came to passe in the deliuerance of the children of Israel, all Egypt was afrayd, and the nations neere vnto it. Vers. 18. Who is a God like vnto thee, that taketh away iniquitie, and passeth by the transgression of the remnant of his heritage? He retaineth not his wrath for euer, because mercie pleaseth him. THe figure Epiphonema,The figure E∣piphonema, see what it is Io∣nas ca. 2. ver. 9. or an acclamation, wherein the Prophet either in his owne person, or in the person of all the godly, through the admiration or wondering at the former promises of God towards his Church, doth generally describe the bounteous∣nes and goodnes of God toward the same, such as it at al times ap∣peareth for to bee.1. The kinde of speaking. And also he confirmeth the same promises last rehearsed, by the nature of God. But both the phrase or kinde of speaking,2. The matter it selfe. and also the matter it self which is contained in this verse,
is diligently to be noted.1. What the fi∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see Amos cap. 8. vers. 4. For the kind of speaking is both an Apo∣strophe, or turning of speech vnto God, and also an interrogation, or asking of a question, with both which maner of speaking men are more stirred vp, and also the matter it selfe the which is set forth, is shewed to be the more certaine, yea and moreouer to be the more confessed and acknowledged of all men. The matter it selfe,  the which with so great admiration of the godly, and praise of God is here concerning God brought for the confirmation of the former graces of God, is a description of the infinit or endles and perpetu∣all mercie and bountie of God toward his Church. So Psalm. 113.106.147. And so Psalm. 30. ver. 5. the Prophet commendeth the goodnes and bountie of God, when he sayth: He indureth but a while in his anger: but in his fauour is life: weeping may abide at euening, but ioy commeth in the morning.A definition of the mercie of God. Further this mercie of God is defined, or it is here declared what this mercie of God is, that is, the free pardoning of the sinnes and offences of the Church, for of what sort soeuer those be, whether they bee greater or smaller sins, God taketh them al away, and ouerpasseth them, that is, freely par∣doneth them, albeit notwithstanding he knoweth them to be in vs: but he looketh vpon vs and beholdeth vs both by Christ, and in Christ his onely begotten sonne, in whom and through whom hee seeth not our sinnes, though otherwise they be still in vs, but coue∣red, and for his sake not layd to our charge. The maner of God his pardo∣doning the sins of his church.Now whereas it is added, Not retaining his wrath for euer, he sheweth hereby that the sinnes of the Church are in such sort par∣doned, that God notwithstanding would not therfore haue vs bold to sinne. For he also chastiseth those which are his, when they sinne, but lightly, and not long.The cause of the same. The cause also of this pardoning and mercie is expressed, to wit, the most louing and bountifull nature of God. For God is delighted with gentlenes and mercie towards all his creatures, and especially towards his elect and chosen. So then, this promise of the mercie of God, of which the Prophet here speaketh doth not appertaine, and is directed vnto all men, but vn∣to the remnant of the heritage of God, that is, vnto the Church only, least that the hypocrites might deceiue themselues, and account themselues in that number.
Vers. 19. He will turne againe, and haue compassion vpon vs: He will subdue our iniquities, and cast all their sinnes into the bottome of the Sea. An amplifica∣tion of the lo∣uing nature of God taken from sundrie effects of the same.AN amplification of the most louing and courteous nature of God described before, taken from the effectes the which are here reckoned vp diuerse, and most ful of comfort, and being no∣table testimonies or witnesses of the most singular mercie of God towards those that are his. The first of them is in this place recited,1. God will re∣turne vnto those that are his. That God wil returne vnto those that are his. By which selfe same is shewed, that God was for a time absent from that his heri∣tage, & Church, to wit, according vnto the sence or feeling of the iudgement of man, during the time that he afflicted or punished the same. And therefore Psal. 80. ver. 2. the Prophet praieth that God would stirre vp his strength for the safegard of the rem∣nantes of his Church, thereby giuing vs to vnderstand, that in the sence and feeling of the Godly he seemed to haue beene, as it were a sleepe, and to haue forgotten them, whilest he deferred to helpe them, therefore he prayeth, Before Ephraim and Beniamin, and Manasseh stirre vp thy strenght, and come to helpe vs. Where∣fore in that which went before, there is no such mercie and fa∣uour of God promised toward his Church, the which should re∣moue and take away all his iudgements (for it is profitable euen for the Church, that she should be chastized of God Psal. 119) but such gentlenesse, whereby the godly, euen whilest they are corrected by him, remaine notwithstanding the sonnes of God, and acceptable and wel thougth of of him through Christ: Finally hauing obtained mercy for their sinnes, they come vnto life euer∣lasting. For such afflictions or troubles of the Church are not a punishment satisfying for their sinnes:2 He will haue compassion on his Church. but onely a medicine and bridle, holding hardly in the wanton assaultes thereof. The second effect of this mercy of God is, That he will be mo∣ued with compassion towards vs. For the bowels of God are mo∣ued for his Church. This therefore is a singular affection of God towards vs.3. He will tread downe our ini∣quities. The third is, Hee shall tread downe our iniquities, as we are wont to do those things, the which we now will haue to be made no reckoning of to be taken for things nought set by, & forsaken.
The fourth, He will cast all our sinnes into the bottome of the Sea, that they may not any more any where appeare, or that he should not any more remember them. So God by his Prophet Esaie doth in like maner most comfortablie promise his Church cap. 1. ver. 18. saying, Though your sinnes were as Crimsin, they shal be made as white as Snowe: though they were red like Scarlet, they shall be as Wooll, And by this place appeareth, that faith applyeth vnto eue∣rie faithfull person those promises of saluation generally set foorth, through Christ. So doth Paul Rom. 8. Galat. 2. ver. 20. in these wordes: Thus I liue yet, not I now, but Christ liueth in me: and in that I now liue in the flesh, I liue by the faith in the sonne of God, who hath loued me, and giuen him selfe for me. Vers. 20. Thou wilt performe thy trueth to Iacob, and mercy to Abraham, as thou hast sworne to our fathers in old time. The conclusion of this place & Chapter.THe conclusion of this whole place and chapter, the which al∣so containeth a reason and cause of this bounteousnes of God taken from his expresse, nay repeated word.  So then God will performe these things vnto those that are his, namely because he hath so expresly promised, & that not once only, but oftentimes. Moreouer he doth not promise these things in a bare promise a∣lone,  and in wordes (the which notwithstanding is alwaies most true) Tit. 1. ver. 2. but also plainely setting downe an oth. So Zacharas in his song Luc. 1. ver. 73. sheweth that God in regard of his couenant and oth made vnto the fathers, performed the re∣demtion & deliuerance of his people. Lastly,  he hath not now first promised this selfe same thing concerning the deliuerance of his Church, but long sithens, and from the daies of olde, that this should not be thought to be a new and strange doctrine, and vnheard of, but olde and confirmed now in many ages. Where∣fore the Prophet in this place maketh mention of Iacob, Abra∣ham, & the other fathers,Gods promise caled vnto whome long sithens the promises concerning Christ, and so consequently of the perpetuitie or con∣tinuance of the Church, haue been either made or repeated and rehearsed againe.Mercie. And they are called the Mercie or benefite of God, if both the cause of them, and also the matter it selfe, which they comprehend, be considered. For the free goodnes of God
is the cause of them, and that selfe same thing which these pro∣mises conteine,Trueth. is a singular benefite of God towardes the godly. They are also termed the Trueth of God, if the certantie of these promises be looked vnto. For they are most true, and altogether and in euery respect to be in deed and trueth in their due time fulfilled. For God which cannot deceiue, hath promised them with an oth. So the Author to the Hebrewes cap. 6. ver. 18. Saith, that God willing more abundantly to shew vnto the heires of promise the stablenes of his counsell, bound himselfe by an oth, that by two im∣mutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lye, we might haue strong consolation, which haue our refuge to holde fast the hope, which is set before vs. FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus vpon the Prophet Nahum. The Argument. FOr as much as the kindome of the Assi∣rians endured and continued from the yeare of the destruction of the Cittie of Samaria atchieued by Sennacherib about the first yeare of Nabuchadnezzar, (by whom the Assirians were vtterly depri∣ued of their Empire, and brought into the forme of a prouince) by the space al∣most of 108. yeares, to wit,The time of the Prophet Nahum. from the sixt yeare of the reigne of Ezechias king of Iuda, vnto the fourth yeare of king Ioacim, this Prophet Nahum without all doubt was, and liued in this meane time. But vnto many this seemeth to be more likely to be true, namely that he prophesied about the beginning of the reigne of Iosias king of Iuda, God now being appeased and pacified with the Iewes, as appeareth cap. 2. ver. 2. Others referre this prophesie vnto the beginning of the raigne of Ioacim, yet before the fourth yeare of his raigne, as seemeth may be gathered by the 3. cap. ver. 8. that is to saye, before the beginning of the raigne of the Babilonians or Chaldees, to wit, when as yet the Monarchie or Empire of the Assirians florished and stood vnder Asarhadon or his successor,Iosephus. of whose beginning of his reigne mention is made 2. Kings cap. 19. ver. 37. Esdr. 4. ver. 2. And nothing lesse might be feared then the ouerthrow of the same. Ioseph lib. 9. Antiq. Iudaic. cap. 12. writeth, that Na∣chum set foorth this prophesie and foretelling of the ouerthrow of the Assirian kingdome by the commaundement of God, anon after that Teglath Phalasar king of Assyria had carried away cap∣tiue the ten tribes of Israell. At which time surely the state of
that Empire of Assyria was most mightie, and it seemed vncre∣dible, or not to be beleeued, that this so great a kingdome should be ouerthrowen. And these things fell out vnder Ezechias king of Iudah 2. kings cap. 17. at which time Nahum prophesied a lit∣tle after the death, namely of Oseas and Micheas, whom he suc∣ceeded, and that next of all. Which iudgement I like, moued with the reason of the 15. ver. in this first chapter. Before this time I graunt, and about the very beginnings of the raigne of Ieroboam the sonne of Ioas king of Israell, the Lord would haue destruction threatned vnto Niniue by the prophet Ionas: but because the Niniuites repented,Ionas threat∣neth destrusti∣tion vnto Ni∣niue. God refrained from the destroying of that citie. Further in this Prophet the destruction is threatned not onely of that one Citie, the which Ionas did before (although it were the head Citie of the whole Empire of the Assyrians,) but also of the whole kingdome of the Assyrians, the which after∣wardes was in deed performed by the Chaldees, as appeareth by the 23. cap. of Esaie, ver. 13. Behold the land of the Chaldeans: this was no people: Asshur founded it by the inhabitants of the wildernes: They set vp the towers thereof, they raised the palaces thereof, and he brought it to ruine. Three cheefe causes of the de¦structiō of the Assyrians.Now the cause or reason, why this Empire should by God bee vtterly destroyed was manifold, but especially threefold. First, the conspiracie and hatred of the Assyrians against the people of God. Secondly,  their robbing and spoyling of all nations practised by the sayd Assyrians.  Thirdly, the spreading abroad of outragious i∣dolatrie, and chiefly of Magicke by the Assyrians into all people and nations of the world afterward,  The principal poynts of this prophesie. and taking beginning from them. And first of all God sheweth and describeth his surpassing might and power.  Secondly, he taketh away from the Assyrians all hope and aydes of shifting off,  and setting naught by this iudg∣ment of God agaynst them.  Thirdly, by the fearefull description of the enemies which he will send vpon them, and by the example of other cities as mighty as they, the Prophet declareth that the exe∣cution of these his threatnings shall be easie vnto God. Vers. 1. The burden of Niniueh. The booke of vision of Na∣hum the Elkeshite. 1. The summe of the Prophets charge.THis most shorte verse comprehendeth three things. First, the summe of his charge. For hee declareth against Niniueh the
most grieuous threatnings of God. Secondly,2. The name of the Prophet. the name and no∣ting out of the Prophet by his countrey Helkos. Thirdly, the cer∣tainety of this prophesie, or of his calling, in that it is a vision from God. And vnder the name of Niniueh,3. The certainty of his prophesie What the fi∣gure Metony∣mia is, see Ose∣as cap. 4. ver. 1. What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amot cap. 5, ver. 21. according to the rule of the figure Metonymia, I doe not onely vnderstand the citizens them∣selues, but also I doe comprehend the whole kingdome and coun∣trey of Assyria (how farre soeuer at that time it did stretch) by the figure Synecdoche, of the which kingdome the citie Niniueh was the head and chiefe seate. For the threatnings and iudgements which are here denounced or declared, doe containe also the de∣struction of the whole Empire of the Assyrians, as well as of this Citie. Vers. 2. God is iealous, and the Lord reuengeth: the Lorde reuen∣geth: euen the Lord of anger, the Lord will take vengeance on his aduersaryes, and hee reserueth wrath for his enemies. Hee extolleth the iustice and the power of God.THe Prophet being to threaten vnto a most great and mighty Monarchie or Empire at that time, destructiō, the which should be performed by God, doth first preach of both the iustice and al∣so the power of God the which he doth highly and with great ma∣iestie extoll and set vp aboue all humane power. And first of all of his Iustice, for that when as God is most holy, he cannot but most greatly and iustly be moued with the sinnes of men, conspiring a∣gaynst him, and the lawes which he hath giuen vnto mankinde, (whom so conspiring he calleth here his aduersaries and enemies) he cannot but be angry with such wicked persons, and in the ende most seuerely, or sharpely punish them, but he reserueth or keepeth the effects of that his anger towards them vnto a fit time and sea∣son, albeit he seemed altogether to haue forgotten their haynous offences. Wherefore this thrise repeated mention of reuenge and vengeance, and the hotenes and force of his anger (wherewith Na∣hum sayth that God was takē) is not an vnaduised or mad hastines, but an exceeding great hatred of God against the vngodlines of al men, albeit that he beare long with it notwithstanding, to wit, that men should repent Roman. 2. or bee made vnexcuseable.
Vers. 5. The mountaines tremble for him, and the hilles melt, and the earth is burnt at his sight, yea, the world, & all that dwell there∣in. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer effects.AN amplification of this effect. For God doth not onely mowe downe the flowres, and the blossomes, and the ornaments of the mountaines: but also moueth and shaketh the mountaines themselues, that they both tremble and totter in their places, and are caried into other places, and finally are melted, and doe perish vtterly, howsoeuer they may seeme with most strong rootes to be grounded in the earth, and to be altogether vnmoueable. But why should not God doe these things, who in the name of Christ hath giuen vnto his elect, and faythfull men the power to bring this thing to passe? For Mat. 17. ver. 20. Christ sayth vnto his dis∣ciples, Verily I say vnto you, If yee haue fayth as much as is a graine of mustard seede, yee shall say vnto this mountaine, Remoue hence to yonder place, and it shall remoue: and nothing shall bee vnpossible vnto you. And of this great power of God we haue also Psalm. 29. vers. 5.6. The voyce of the Lord breaketh the Cedars: yea, the Lord brea∣keth the Cedars of Lebanon. Hee maketh them also to leape like a calfe: Lebanon also and Shirion like a young Vnicorne. Further, there is an example of this thing recited Exod. 19. vers. 18. of the trembling, smoking, and shaking of mount Sinai at the giuing of the lawe, the which is also repeated afterward agayne Psal. 68. vers. 8. and Psal. 114. vers. 4. There are also many such like things re∣ported by Plin. lib. 2. Nat. Hist. and by other Hystoriographers, and writers of naturall matters. Moreouer, the other parts of the earth, nay the whole world inhabited is brought forth also for a wit∣nes of this surpassing power of God. For when as God pleaseth, the earth it selfe burneth, nay flameth, the which both fell out in the destruction of Sodome, and also at other times: and hath in like manner been often seene in the mountaine Aetna, and Vesu∣uius, and Plin. lib. 2. Nat. Hist. cap. 106. reciteth other examples of this thing. Thus God hath power ouer all elements, yea heauen it selfe, as Peter teacheth 2. epist. cap. 3. ver. 10. where he sayth, But the day of the Lord will come as a theefe in the night, in the which the heauens shall passe away with a noyse, and the elements shall melt with heate, and the earth, with the workes that are therein, shall bee burnt vp. Because he is the creator of the whole world, and all the partes
and elements therof. Of which things there are examples in Christ, commaundnig both the windes, and the waters Mat. 8. ver. 27. Where after his miraculous calming of the rage of the sea & of the windes, the men marueiled, saying, what man is this, that both the windes and sea obey him? Ver. 6. Who can stand before his wrath? or Who can abide in the fiercenes of his wrath? his wrath is powred out like fire, and the rockes are broken by him. The conclusion.THe conclusion. Therfore nothing can stand against the so mighty power of God, being angry with the Assyrians. No∣thing can abide before him in his wrath. Finally, nothing can euer lift it selfe vp, when as he presseth downe. Wherfore those forces of the Assyrians fearfull vnto the world, and at the which it is asto∣nied, shall not let, but that they, and their Empire shall be ouer∣throwen by God, and fall. So Dauid speaketh of God his power to bring his enemies to nothing Psal. 68. ver. 2. As the smoke vanish∣eth, so shalt thou driue them away: and as wax melteth before the fire, so shall the wicked perish at the presence of God. And Psal. 130. ver. 3. he crieth out, If thou, O Lord, straitly markest iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand? 1 The conclusion confirmed by a Similitude.Moreouer this conclusion is confirmed by a similitude. For the anger of God is most like vnto fire and a flame, the which beeing kindled, forthwith is scattered abroad on euery side, breaketh forth and raungeth, so that many times but one little sparke of it consu∣meth and burneth an whole wood, as Iames speaketh cap. 3. ver. 5. Behold how great a thing a little fire kindleth. Lastly, God is called a consuming fire, Deut. 4. ver. 24.2 By the effects. Againe, this selfe-same is proo∣ued by the effects. For the rocks themselues (which are the hardest kinds of thinges) do leape and melt and cleaue a sunder, when God is angry, and so commaundeth. Example in the death of Christ, Mat. 27. ver▪ 51. And at other times also, and ages, in the which the selfe-same thing hath come to passe, that is to say, the rocks haue bin clouen by God, and by his lightning. Ver. 7. The Lord is good, and as a strong hold in the day of trouble, and he knoweth them that trust in him. A comfort of the godlyA Comfort of the godly, that is, of the people of GOD, for the strengthening & vpholding of whom only, God would haue
this prophesy of the ouerthrowing of the Assirians (as who namely afflicted or troubled the Israelites) to be preached & extant or re∣maining. To the end therefore that the godly should not be terri∣fied or dismaied with such and so feareful a description of the pow∣er of God, Nahum doth comfort them, and sheweth that God will deale otherwise for those that are his, which do serue and worship him; then he threatneth that he will be vnto his enemies, that is the Assirians. For God defendeth those that are his, with the self-same his surpassing might & power, wherewith he breaketh his enemies in peeces.The Angels that terrifie the vngodly war∣ders of the se∣pulchre, com∣fort the godly women, that come to seeke Christ. So the Angels being heauenly souldiers do make afraid the vngodly, keeping and watching the sepulchre of Christ, but do comfort the godly women, and do speake courteously vnto them. Mat. 28. ver. 4.5. For the souldiers for feare were astonied & became as dead men, at the sight of the Angell. But he answered and sayd to the women, feare ye not, &c. God then, which will be so terrible or fearefull vnto the Assirians, and his enemies, he the self-same will be gentle, fauourable, good, vnto his people, and the men that do feare him, and will acknowledge them for his, & will marke them out in the middest of the miseries and afflictions of the vngodly, that they fall not together with them.Xenophon. Xenophon in his bookes of the education or bringing vp of Cyrus writeth, how that when Ba∣bylon was taken by Cyrus, commaundment was giuen, that the Syrians and Iewes (which were the people of God) should be spa∣red, and that the Chaldees should be slaine. God therfore is good toward those which by a true faith trust in him, that is, he is merci∣full vnto them and saueth them: he is an ayd vnto them, and at hand in time of trouble to succour and help them. Finally, he doth ac∣knowledge them, that is, he doth seuer them and marke them from those whom he destroyeth. So he preserued and kept Lot safe and sound out of the middest of the destruction of Sodom, Gen. 19. ver. 29. But yet when God destroyed the citties of the plaine, God thought vpon Abraham, and sent Lot out from the middest of the destruction, when he ouerthrew the citties, wherin Lot dwelled. Ver. 8. But passing ouer as with a floud, he will vtterly destroy the place therof and darknes shall pursue his enemies. The figure Hy∣pophora. See what it is, A∣mos cap. . Ver. 21.HYpophora, or the answering of an obiectiō, or els it is a threat∣ning, and the same a very sharp one against all the enemies of God, least, because that God sheweth him-selfe mercifull & gen∣tle
vnto those which are his, these his aduersaries might suppose that they should escape the iudgments of the true God, whom they prouoke and offend. For they shal not escape them, nay they shall vtterly be consumed of God being angry, and the iudgments of God shal be vnto them as a floud and ouerflowing of waters, the which shall ouerwhelme them, as it was done in the floud in the time of Noah. And God shall vtterly destroy these Assirians, and Niniueh, yea and that in her own place, that is, in the very self-same place, in the which this so wealthy a cittie was builded. For it was in such sort destroied that there remained no token nor senfie of it by the space of many yeares afterwards, as in the time of Plinius, as appeareth by his sixt booke. Histor. Natur. cap. 13. There was also (sayth he) the citty Ninus (or Niuiue) built by the riuer Tygris, loo∣king to the going downe of the sunne, the which was some-times a most famous citty. Yet notwithstanding it appeareth that it was after∣ward renued, and also accounted a large citty, by the 14 booke of Ammianus Marcellinus, and by his 18. booke. Lastly darknesse, feare, and trembling, and such thinges as are wont to follow those that are appoynted vnto destruction, shall pursue the enemies of God. So speaketh Dauid Psal. 11. ver. 6. Vpon the wicked he shall raine snares, fire and brimstone, and stormie tempest: this is the portion of their cup. Againe Psal. 35. ver. 6. Let their way be darke and slip∣pery, and let the Angell of the Lord persecute them. Ver. 9. What do ye imagin against the Lord? he will make an vtter de∣struction: affliction shall not rise vp the second time. A reason why they are so sharply threat∣ned.THis is the rendring of a reason, why God threatneth so great & so bitter iudgments vnto the assirians, & will execute the same; to wit, because that of purposed & set malice, they haue imagined, assaied, and indeed haue gone about to ouerthrow the true God, & his glory, & people.The time when the Assyriant imagined these things. And these things did the Assyrians then espe∣cially imagin, when as they caried the children of Israel from their owne home, vnto theirs, and other countries, that they might re∣plenish that land, in the which the true God was worshipped be∣fore, with idolatrous nations, with the which thing God was gree∣vously offended. 2. King. 17. ver. 24. where we reade thus cōcerning the placing of idolatrous people, in the roomes of the transported Israelites: And the king of Asshur brought folke from Babel & from Cuthah, and from Aua, and from Hamath, and from Sepharuaim,
and placed them in the citties of Samaria in stead of the children of Is∣rael: so they possessed Samaria, and dwelt in the citties thereof. And at the beginning of their dwelling there, they feared not the Lord: ther∣fore the Lord sent Lyons among them, which slew them. Secondly, whē as Sennacherib besieging Ierusalem by Rhapsaces his captaine notoriously blasphemed God, and went about to make his glory contemptible or to be despised of the Iewes themselues. Of this matter we haue Isai. 36. and cap. 37. ver. 14. it is declared how grieuously the good and godly king Ezechias did take their blas∣phemies & reproches, when he had receiued that most despightful letter. For when he had red it he went vp into the house of the Lord, & spread it before the Lord and prayed, &c. Such reprochfull dealings of god his enemies against the church, God seeth and heareth, and in his time will be auenged on them for it, as he witnesseth in the like misusages of the Moabites and Ammonites Zephaniah 2. ver. 8.9. against his people: I haue heard (saith the Lord) the reproch of Moab, and the rebukes of the children of Ammon, wherby they vp∣braided my people, and magnified them-selues against their borders. Therfore, as I liue, saith the Lord of hostes the God of Israel, surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Gomorah, e∣uen the breeding of nettles and salt-pits, and a perpetuall desolation, &c. Thus then these Assirians imagined euill against God. These self-same threatnings of God shall reach vnto al his stubborne ene∣mies, and haters. So then they shall be destroied, in so much that they shall be rooted out vtterly, and shall not in a certaine measure be punished by God only, that they may repent, after which man∣ner the godly are wont to be afflicted. So saith God also of the vtter destruction of the Assirians Isay cap. 10. ver. 23.Affliction shall not rise vp the second time in what sense it is spoken. For the Lord God of hostes shall make the consumtion, euen determined in the middest of the land. Affliction therfore shall not returne vnto them twise, because that they shal vtterly perish in that same first destruction, the which the Lord shall send vpon them. Ver. 10. For he shall come as vnto thornes folden one in an other, & as vnto drunkards in their drunkennesse: they shall be deuoured as stubble fully dried. The conclusion made plaine by three Simili∣tudes.THe conclusion, the which is made plaine and also confirmed by three similitudes. The conclusion consisteth in this, that God for the former cause pronounceth that he will take punish∣ment
vpon the Assyrians, and that in such sort as hee hath threat∣ned before ver. 8. and. 9. namely, as by the which punishment both they, and also their Empire shall vtterly be destroyed and perish. For God sayth, The Assyrians shall be deuoured. And to the end that all men should beleeue the more assuredly that this shall come to passe, it is confirmed and layd open by three similitudes. To this ef∣fect is that also of Sophon. cap. 2. ver. 13.14. And he will stretch out his hand against the North, and destroy Asshur, and will make Nini∣ueh desolate, and waste like a wildernesse. And flockes shall lye in the midst of her, and all the beasts of the nations: and the Pellicane, & the Owle shall abide in the vpper postes of it: the voyce of birds shall sing in the windowes, and desolation shall be vpon the posts: for the cedars are vncouered. Likewise that of Isai. 33. ver. 12. And the people shall be as the burning of lime: and as the thornes cut vp▪ shall they be burnt in the fire. 1. Of thornes fol∣ded one within another.The first similitude is taken from thornes folded one in another, that is, gathered together in a bundle, and bound vp, the which are then most easilie burnt all vp, although there bee a great heape of them: for they doe one burne another of them. Dauid also vseth this similitude of thornes Psalm. 58. ver. 9.2. Taken from Drunkards. The second similitude is taken from Drunkards, who so long as they lye ouercome with wine, they are easilie slaine. So easilie shall the Assyrians be: for they shall be killed by their enemies, like as men vnarmed, and fast on sleepe. The third similitude is drawne from most drie stubble,3. Taken from drie stubble. the which without any trouble is set on fire and burned. So shal the Assyrians bee, how well fenced soeuer, or warlike they suppose themselues to be. Finally, nothing can withstand God, but that he will take punishment and vengeance on his enemies. Vers. 11. There commeth one out of thee that imagineth euill against the Lord, euen a wicked counseller. Why the Assy∣rians shall be thus punished.A Rendring of a reason, the which containeth the same cause, the which we haue seene before vers. 9. to wit, that from out among the Assyrians haue come the counsels of ouerthrowing the wor∣ship of God, of the vtter destroying of his people, to be short, of the blotting cleane out of the memory or remembrance of God. Ther∣fore out of the people, and Kings of Assyria came those, which did imagine and attempt or enterprise euery the most wicked and the most vile things against God, that is, against the worship of God,
the glorie of God, and the people of God. For here that serueth, He which toucheth you,God, in himself cannot be hurt, but he is sayd so to be in his mē∣bers. toucheth the apple of mine eye, Zach. 2. ver. 8. Wherefore he doth hurt or wrong vnto God himselfe, which doth hurt or wrong vnto his people. And therefore by his Prophet Da∣uid he willeth them Psal. 105. ver. 15. saying, Touch not mine anoyn∣ted, and doe my Prophets no harme. Otherwise God himselfe of him∣selfe, is (as they say) without all daunger of gunne shot, howsoeuer wicked men with all their might and maine doe shake and flourish that their dart and speare against heauen it selfe. But such counsell giuers, and counsellers also, who either themselues doe deuise or i∣magine such wicked counsell of the glorie of God, and taking a∣way of his true worship, or els giue it vnto others, are called the counsailors of Belial, that is, wicked counsailors, to wit, as being such, who can deuise nothing els but that which is wicked: and yet for all that shall neuer arise, nor profit. Further, this cause is here againe repeated, that this wickednesse and counsell may be vnder∣stood to bee most hainous and lewd, albeit that the Idolaters doe thinke it either to bee no sinne, or els an acceptable sacrifice vnto God, to wit, when as they doe slay the godly, and the true seruants and worshippers of God. And so Christ prophesieth that it should come to passe, as he forewarneth his Disciples Ioh. 16. ver. 2. saying: The time shall come, that whosoeuer killeth you, will thinke that he doth God seruice.Otherwise thus Vers. 12. Thus sayth the Lord,If they had kept peace, they shuld also haue been manie, or so cropped, that he should haue passed by: though I had afflicted thee, I would haue afflicted thee no more. The figure Hy∣pophora, see what it is A∣mos cap. 5. ver. 21. The obiection. God handleth his owne people as hardlie as he doth his ene∣mies, and ther∣fore there is no trueth in his promises, or threatnings. though they be quiet, and also manie, yet thus shall they be cut off when he shall passe by: though I haue afflicted thee, I will afflict thee no more. THis is an Hypophora, or preuenting of an obiection, whereby God answereth a secret obiection of quarrellous persons: and by the same answer are his former threatnings against the Assyriās confirmed. Touching the obiection, it might arise in their mindes after this maner, That God handled his owne people neuer a whit more mildly then his enemies, and these Assyrians. For when as the condition and estate of the people of Israel was most miserable and afflicted, as who had not once only, but twise been almost vt∣terly destroyed by God: First, whē as those three tribes of the king∣domes of Israel, which were beyond Iordan, were carried away in∣to captiuitie by Teglathphalasar king of the Assyrians 2 King. 15. ver. 29. Secondly, when as the tribes which were left of the same
kingdome, were by Salmanasar king of the sayd Assyrians carried into Media 2. King. 17. ve. 3.6. when as, I say, these troubles and mi∣series fell out vnto the people of Israel (which was the seede of A∣braham, that same peculiar people of God) and that from God, by what meanes (aske the men that are hypocrites, vngodly, and pro∣phane or wicked) may God bee sayd to intreate his sonnes more gently then his enemies? And so consequently they indifferently scorned and mocked these threatnings of God against the Assy∣rians, and also his promises towards his elect, to bee short, the vn∣godly despised the whole word of God, and sayd that it was vaine, and had no trueth in it. God answereth, that these things fell out vnto the Israelites for the selfe same cause,The answer of God vnto the former obiectiō of the vngodlie and hypocrites. for the which he would destroy the Assyrians, to wit, because the Israelites would neuer o∣bey God, nor keepe the peace and couenant made with him: but through those their most wicked counsels were at enimitie with God. And therefore imagined to haue blotted out the glorie of God, and finallie deuised most lewd things against Iehouah, like as the Assyrians doe. Wherefore for this cause the Israelites were de∣stroyed, much lesse therefore shall the Assyrians scape scotfree. For if these things be done in the greene tree, what shall be done in the drie? Otherwise God would haue handled the Israelites most gent∣lie, if they would haue done their duetie, and haue stood to their couenants with God, & haue kept peace with him. For they should haue remained many, and a great multitude, and should not haue been broken, and lessened, and almost destroyed, as they then were, and now are. But this haue the Israelites deserued because of their euill counsailes against the Lord, and therefore hath it thus fallen out vnto them. Wherefore much more shall the same come to passe vnto the Assyrians, They should haue been cropped, and skoured only: but not cut off, destroyed, flayed, as they now are. Wherfore I keepe the signification of the preterperfect tence in all this first part of this verse. He addeth, I would indeed haue afflicted them: yet but once, and only to heale them; not twise: or I would not haue strooken them againe, and afresh, as I haue done, as it were to destroy them, that is, of a purpose to destroy them. Thus doubtles sayth God, should the Israelites haue kept peace with me, and not enmitie and hatred, Psal. 60. ver. 4.5.
Vers. 13. For now will I breake his yoke from thee, and will burst thy bands in sunder. A Comfort.A comfort. For God promiseth that it shall come to passe, that he will for all this deliuer out of the hands of the Assyrians, the selfe same Israelites, whom he hath so grieuously afflicted. And that in a word,A difference betweene the afflictions of the godlie and the vngodlie. that there may appeare a manifest difference betweene the afflictions of the godly men, and those that be vngodly, and the iudgements of God against them both. For the godly, how hard∣lie soeuer they be striken, and pressed downe by God, yet neuerthe∣lesse they are deliuered in the ende, and are healed by him: but the vngodly are vtterly cut off, and plucked vp by the rootes. The first part of this difference is here described: the latter in the verse fol∣lowing. Therefore, sayth the Lord, I will breake the yoke of the As∣syrians, wherewith they oppressed and kept vnder the Israelites, as if they had been beasts, handling them most cruellie and sharplie. Such a bondage and yoke shall not alwaies lye vpon thy necke, O Israel. So is it in the Psal. 125. ver. 3.4. The rod of the wicked shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, left the righteous put forth their hand vnto wickednes. And Zach. 10. ver. 10. God promiseth his poore cap∣tiue people after this maner: I will bring them againe also out of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Asshur: and I will bring them into the land of Gilead, and Lebanon, and place shall not bee found for them. When this was fulfilled. I will breake thy bands in sunder, that thou mayst rid, and deliuer thy selfe from the gouernment of these wild beasts. That which came to passe, when as the Monarchie, or Empire of the Assyrians was ouerthrowne by the Chaldees. For the Israelites carried away by the Assyrians, were more courteously handled by the Chaldees: and their case and condition vnder them was more tollerable. Nay moreouer, they afterward obtained libertie of Cyrus King of the Persians to returne home also into their owne countrie, if they would. For so we reade Esdr. 1. ver. 3. Who is he among you of all his people (sayth King Cyrus) with whom his God is? let him go vp to Ie∣rusalem, which is in Iudah, and build the house of the Lord God of Is∣rael: he is the God, which is in Ierusalem. And this selfe same is men∣tioned 2. Chron. 36. ver. 22.23.
Vers. 14. And the Lord hath giuen a commaundement concer∣ning thee, that no more of thy name be sowen: out of the house of thy Gods will I cut off the grauen, and the molten image: I will make it thy graue for thee, for thou art vile. A confirmation of the former promise.A Confirmation of the former promise of God concerning the deliuerance of Israell out of the hand and power of the Assyrians, vnto whom they were then in miserable bondage. For the Assyrians shalbe vtterly destroyed, & their Empire shalbe rooted out,The afflictions of the vngodly. so that there shall not remaine so much as the name of a nation, or a braunch of it. In the which selfe same is declared the cōdition of the vngodly, when as they are afflicted by God: & it is shewed to be far diuerse from the cōdition of the Godly when as they are afflicted, who are neuer vtterly destroyed by God. So then this verse appertaineth vnto the Niniuites of Assyrians,Three things threatned vn∣to the Assyri∣ans. whom the Prophet speaketh vnto. And God threatneth three things vnto them, the which by this preface of the Prophet are vnderstood, that they shall most certainly come to passe. The Lord hath commaunded against thee, that is to say, he threatneth & hath decreed these things against thee, who is both most true, and also most mightie. And therefore as the Prophet Esaye speaketh Cap 14. ver. 27. Because the Lord of hostes hath determi∣ned it, who shall disanull it? And his hand is stretched out, and who shall turne it away?1. The whole peo∣ple of Niniueh shall vtterly be destroyed. But first of all Nahum pronounceth that there shall be a destruction and ouerthrowing of the whole people of Niniueh, so that not so much as the name of these Citizens shall remaine, nor any of their seed be lefte, or to be continued and spred abroade. 2 All their Gods shall be de∣stroyed.Then secondlie, he threatneth that all their Gods also shall be destroeyd, the which is a most greeuous punishment in the iudgement of Idolators. The third thing is, He foretelleth that it shall come to passe, that before these things fall out vnto them, they shall become vile among other Nations,3. They shal wax vile amng o∣ther nations, where they smetime were famous. among whom both the Niniuites and also the Assyrians were famous and renowned before. So doth GOD by his Prophet Esaie cap 10 ver. 12 &c. threaten to bring downe the pride of the king of Assyria, and to turne their glorie into shame, saying: But when the Lord hath accomplished all his worke vpon mount Sion and Ierusalem, I will visit the fruite of the proud heart of the King of Asshur, and his glorious and proud lookes, &c. Therefore shall the Lord God of hostes send a∣mong
his fat men leannes, and vnder his glorie he shall kindle a bur∣ning like the burning of fire. The like is in Ieremie cap. 49 ver. 34 &c. Concerning the Medes and Persians vnto whom the Lord threatneth like shame and cōfusion. But as touching the Assyrians, the dignitie & honor of that kingdome especially began to waxe vile after that ouerthrowe, which Senacharib king of the Assy∣rians receiued in Iudea, when as he besieged Ierusalem, whereof God prophesieth by Esaie cap. 14. ver. 25. in these words: I will breake to peeces Asshur in my land, and vpon my mountaines will I tread him vnder foote, so that his yoake shall departe from them, and his burden shall be taken from of their shoulder. And cap. 37. ver. 37 is expressed his departure with shame from Ierusalem, af∣ter that the Angel of the Lord had slaine so many thousands in his Campe, in one night: So Saneherib King of Asshur departed, and went away and dwelt at Niniueh. For the strength of the Assy∣rians began to be deminished, their power to be despised, yea their Royall authoritie to be contemned, and ciuell warres arose among the Kings sonnes, the which afterwardes were the vt∣ter ouerthrow of that nation, & laied them open as a praye vnto the Kings of Babilon,Xenophon. as Xenophon also teacheth in his bookes of the education or bringing vp of Cyrus. Vers. 15. Behold vpon the mountaines the feete of him that decla∣reth, and publisheth peace: O Iudah, keepe thy solemne feastes, performe thy vowes: For the wicked shall no more passe through thee: He is vtterly cut off. What the figure Epipho∣nema is, see Io∣nas, cap. 2. ver. 9.THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, whereby both the former deliuerance is confirmed vnto the Israelites, and Iu∣dah also, that is, the brethren of the Israelites are for this cause ex∣horted to reioyce. For as yet the kindgdom of Iudah was safe and vntouched. But they are stirred vp to reioyce at this so happie a condition which should be of Israell, as of their brother: and at the fall of the Assyrians, as their common enimies, as a thing most assured & certaine. For no man is in vaine or to no purpose ex∣horted by God to giue thanks, sing praises, and to reioyce, but for that the same thing shall altogether come to passe,What the si∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver 4. for the which these things are commāded of God to be done. This therefore is a mostapt & fit Apostrophe or turning of speech vnto the Iewes, that they also may reioyce at the destruction of their common aduer∣saries.
For the Assyrians were enimies vnto the Iewes also, that is, vnto the kingdom of Iudah, as appeareth in the historie of Eze∣chiah the king 2. Kings. Yet out of this place cannot be gathered that Nahum prophesied vnder Ezechias king of Iudah, at that time after that Ierusalem was deliuered from besieging, that is, after that it was deliuered out of the hands of Senacherib king of the Assyrians. For here he foretelleth things to come, the which notwithstanding (after the manner of other prophets) he setteth foorth as if they were all readie fulfilled, for the greater certantie of the thing to come. This place is like vnto that of Esaie cap. 52. ver. 7. How beautifull vpon the mountaines are the feete of him,Three kinds of ioyes. that declareth, and publisheth peace: that declareth good tidings, and pub∣lisheth saluation, saying vnto Sion, thy God reigneth. 1. Tidings of peace.But here in this place of our prophet Nahum are reckoned vp three sorts of ioyes. First an happie and ioyfull tidings, and neere at hand concerning peace that was to insue vnto the land of Iudah, because the enimies of that kingdom, to wit the Assyrians, are de∣stroyed. For the feete of the men and messengers signifiyng and bringing the same,2. The keeping of their solemne feastes. did euen now appeare in the mountaines neer vnto them, so that the Iewes should by and by heare the same. The Second, the most free holding and keeping of their feastes, the which was an holie and solemne, and most great and lawfull ioye of the Iewes. The third, the paying of their vowes, that is, the acknowledging and confessing of extraordinarie benefites of God, the which was done by the performing of vowes,3. The paying of vowes. and by the offring of Sacrifices of thanks giuing. The reason of this ioye is, because that there is now ordeined sure and certaine peace for the Iewes by God: for as I haue said, he hath cleane taken away their enimies the Assyrians, so that they shal now no more come into the landes of the Iewes. CAP. 2. Vers. 1. The destroyer is come before the face, keepe the munition: looke to the way: make thy loynes strong: increase thy strength mightily, An other Ser∣mon, contay∣ning the vtter destruction of the Assyrians.AN other Sermon of Nachum ayming vnto the same marke, whereat the former also did, namely, to threaten vtter de∣struction vnto the Citie of Niniueh, and vnto the Assyrians: But in this the execution of the same iudgement of God is so liuely de∣scribed, and by particulars layd before the eyes and view of men
by the figure Hypotyposis,What the fi∣gure Hypotypo∣sis is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. that the thing it selfe may seeme now not to be tolde, but to be done. And this God doth to this ende, first, that this threatning of punishment may bee beleeued to bee true, when as all the circumstances thereof, how farre off soeuer it may seeme to be,  are notwithstanding here set downe: the which in a false matter cannot be done.  Secondly, that when as this fall of Niniue shall come to passe, men, as well the vngodly as the godly may vnderstand by the things which are here reported, that the same is the fulfilling of the iudgement of God (the which Na∣chum had foretolde long before) and that this came not to passe at all aduentures, or by chance and fortune. Lastly, that by this de∣scription both the Godly, and also the Assyrians may vnderstand, that the ouerthrowing of this so mighty a Monarchie or Empire, is most easie, and now already fore thought vpon by God, as who hath euen now in a readines, and at hand, all the instruments and furniture to doe it withall. For as much then as the forces of the kingdome of the Assyrians were so great, and the same fearfull vn∣to all men in that age, when as according vnto man it seemed a thing easie vnto none, that so mighty an Empire, so large and wide, vpholden with so great wealth, should notwithstanding bee cast downe by the power of men: God by such an hypotyposis or liuely description as is set downe in this whole chapter sheweth, that this is not onely easie and ready vnto him, but also layeth downe the meanes and way (which was to come) of performing and executing the same, both to comfort the godly and his people, which were afflicted by them: and also to terrifie or make afraide the vngodly, and the Assyrians, vnto whom nothing can bee safe, God being wroth and angry with them. Two partes of this verse. 1. A destroter shal come vnto the Assyrians.This verse hath two partes: in the former hee sheweth the As∣syrians, that there shall come those which shall destroy them: he calleth them destroyers, or scatterers. Others notwithstanding translate the word Mephits, a club. The club is come vp against thee, O Niniue, that by this kinde of armour might be signified, what maner of enemies they are, and from what countreyes they should come, namely, Chaldees. For Herodotus in Polymn. or libr. 7. wri∣teth that the Chaldees in warres vsed this kinde of weapon, as also shieldes and speares. Doubtles the Prophet Isai writeth that the Empire of the Assyrians was chiefly destroyed by the Chaldees, cap 23. vers 13. Beholde (saith he) the land of the Chaldeans: this was no people: Asshur founded it by the inhabitants of the wildernes:
they set vp the towres thereof: they raysed the palaces thereof, and he brought it to ruine. And of these Chaldean enemies I take this whole chapter to intreate. For whereas Herodotus in his Clio,The error of Herodotus. or first booke saith, that the besieging of Niniueh was first attempted by Phraortes the king of the Medes, but was continued by his sonne Cyaxaris, and Niniueh taken, and that finally the Empire of the Assyrians was destroyed by the same Cyaxares, I auouch and say, that the Medes are there taken for the Chaldees. For we must ra∣ther beleeue Isai the Prophet of God cap. 23. then Herodotus. And it is an vsuall thing with the Greeke writers, commonly vnder the name of the Medes to vnderstand the Chaldees and Babylonians: wherefore the Chaldees & the Babilonians the enemies of the As∣syrians, & which shal be their destroiers, shal come vp against Nini∣ueh. Now howe this was brought to passe by Arbaces King of the Chaldees, throgh the connsel of Belesus, bringing first the Persians, Arabiās & Bactrians into his society & cōfederacy, & withdrawing them from the rule & dominion of the Assyrians, Diodorus Siculus teacheth, lib. 3. Biblioth. cap. 7. For we haue no records now remay∣ning which are more anciēt then those histories. So thē the first part of this verse sheweth, that the Chaldees shal come against Niniueh. 2. Encourageth the Assyrians vnto their own desence and the defence of their citie Niniueh.The second, exhorteth and encourageth the Assyrians to de∣fend themselues in their citie Niniueh: but in mockage. For the Assyrians shall not thereby escape. So Malach. 1. vers. 4. You shall build and I will destroy, sayth God. But by this meanes is declared that the Assyrians shall not be negligent or slothful in defending of themselues. Finally, the same Diodorus Siculus cap. 7. lib. 3. writeth, that Sardanapalus king of the Assyrians fought thrise a∣gaynst Arbaces going about to take the Empire from him and from the Assyrians. Therefore the Niniuites (when as these de∣stroyers shall come vp to besiege them) shall diligently keepe their towres (which they had many,Niniueh had in it a thousād & fiftie towres and to the number of one thousand and fifty, as the same Diodorus reporteth lib. 3, cap. 1. to∣warde the end) shall fortifie their citie with a trench, walles, bul∣warke: shall looke to the wayes of their enemies, to wit, that if there be on that side any entrances, or breaches vnto the citie, or to pull down the walles, they may repayre and make them vp againe, stop the passage vnto their enemies, and that the Niniuites may gather their forces vnto them on euery side: Lastly, they shall en∣courage one another of themselues, and euery man shall make him∣self ready to defend and fight for his countrey, and shall bring with
a manly courage, shall make strong his loynes. And by this phrase or kinde of speaking, according vnto the vse of the hebrew tongue, the force and strength of the body is wont to bee signified. And therefore by the trembling of the loynes, weakenes and faintnes of the body on the contrary is noted, as where Dauid sayth Psal. 69. vers. 23. Let their eyes be blinded that they see not: and make their loynes alwayes to tremble. Vers. 2. For the Lord hath turned away the glory of Iaacob (or, The Lord shall cause the excellencie of Iaacob to returne) as the glo∣ry of Israel, (or, and as it were excellencie vnto the Israelites:) for the emptiers haue emptied them out, and marred their vine branches. Why the Assy∣rians shall not bee able to de∣fend thēselues.THis is the rendring of a reason, why the forces of so mighty an Empire (as that of the Assyrians was at that time) shall neuer∣thelesse not be able to defend themselues, I answere: because God shall take vengeance on them, and that for the sake of the Iewes and Israelites, whom they most miserably and most cruelly affli∣cted. Therefore God shall cause the excellencie of Iaacob to returne: and as it were excellencie vnto the Israelites, and shall not be angry with them any more, but shall shew his fauour toward both those peoples, the seede of Abraham. Wherefore he shall bring to passe that they which before seemed vtterly to be offeasts, captiues, mise∣rable, and were so: shall now be made manifest, shall be deliuered from that bondage, in the which they were, and shall bee taken and acknowledged for excellent people, and people acceptable vn∣to God. For this is the excellcēie both of Iacob, that is of the king∣dome of Iudah; and also of Israel, that is, of the kingdome of Israel, namely, to haue God mercifull, fauourable and louing vnto them. For then appeared the dignitie, greatnes, strength, authoritie, and commendation of that nation aboue others, euen then when they were captiue, the which also in a manner had the gouernment of the Empire of the Chaldees (vnder which the Iewes were captiues, as Daniel among the Babylonians, Nehemias among the Persians) So then God will cause, that this his fauour shall appeare towards this people, and that the excellencie and preciousnesse of this peo∣ple shall returne vnto them, as namely being now pacified and appeased with them. This selfe same thing doth Isaias teach cap. 10. ver. 12, 22, 25. It shall come to passe that when as the Lorde shall
haue made an ende of his worke in Sion, he will visite the proud heart of the Assyrians. Further, the prophet speaking of the kingdome of Iudah, sayd fully, The excellencie of Iacob, but when as he speaketh of Israel, that is, of the other kingdome of that nation, he sayd, di∣minishingly, as if it were the excellencie, because that the chiefe fauour of God appeared toward the Iewes, and he cherished them most especially, because they had retayned and kept still his wor∣ship, and law, and sacrifices, the which the Israelites had despised, and cast a side. Therefore God ouerthrew both the Assyrians, and also the Babylonians afterward, rather for the Iewes sake, then for the Israelites. Now the cause of this anger of God against the Assyrians is,The cause of this anger of God against the Assyrians. because they spoyled, or emptied both the Iewes and also the Is∣raelites, so far as in them lay, vtterly corrupted and cutte off their branches and issue that was to come, that there should no hope be left of stocke or nation of them hereafter to be restored. And this cruelty is set downe also for one of the causes, why God destroy∣ed Babylon Isai 47. ve. 6. I was wroth with my people: I haue pollu∣ted mine inheritance, and giuen them into thine hande: thou diddest shew them no mercie, but thou diddest lay thy very heauy yoke vpon the ancient. As for these Assyrians, they went about vtterly to destroy the whole seede of Abraham without any mercie or compassion. Vers. 3. The shield of his mighty men is made red: the valiant men are in scarlet: the chariots shall be as in the fire and flames in the day of his preparation, and theOr, the ashe trees. firre trees shall tremble. A description of the enemies of the Assyriās. 1. Their shields red.A Description of the enemies, whome before the Prophet na∣med scatterers or destroyers of Niniueh. And first of all their apparell and altogether warlike furniture is set forth. Their shield shall be coloured with red, as namely, paynted with vermilion, or some such other colour. And that the Chaldees in warres vsed shieldes and speares wee haue shewed before out of Herodotus. The Lacedemonians also when they went vnto warres, being va∣liant souldiers indeede, were delighted with red colour, as were o∣ther nations also: that their wounds which they receiued in bat∣tell might by this meanes be the more easily couered. So also did the Chaldees vse this colour in battell, as appeareth by this place. And not onely their shieldes,2. Their apparell also was red. but also the apparell and garments of the men themselues, and especially of their captaines in warre was
And by (Men) I vnderstand the Captaines of their armies, their standard and ensigne bearers, who had rules of their bands, or part of them. All these the Prophet sheweth vsed and were de∣lighted with this colour also, to wit, the red colour For reason both had and also hath her colour, the which she vseth peculiarly both in warre and also in peace.3. Yron chariots. And among armour, are hooked or yron chariots also to be numbred, which they of olde time vsed in battels long agoe, and both before the dayes of Homer, and also in his age Iosh. 17. vers. 16.2. Sam. 10.18. Horner also in his Iliads euery where, whence is that saying also of Virgil lib. 1. Aeneid: Instabat curru cristatus Achilles. By Stanyhurst thus: In coach runs helmed Achilles. In english by Phaerthus: Here they of Troy be chased afore Achilles wilde in chare. And these charrets of the Chaldees shall be feareful, both for their swift∣nes, and also for their brightnesse, and terror, which they shall strike into them. For they shall feare men like vnto burning torches, and shall dazell the sight of the eyes, that no Assyrian shall be able to a∣bide the brightnes and glistering of this kind of armour, when as they shall come vnto the battell, and fight, and the armies of the Chaldees shall be set in aray, and armed, and ready to giue the on∣set in battell. Thus then it appeareth that the Chaldees then ex∣celled in this kind of furniture aboue other peoples, namely in the swiftnes of hooked or yron charets, & in diligēce in arming them, and in skilfulnes in turning and driuing them. Finally when as the Ashes shal tremble, that is to say, the Ashen speares shal be shaken and tossed by them,4. Their Ashen speares. the Assyrians shal take such a feare, that they shal not dare to stand against them. Therefore there is no credit to be giuē to Diodorus Siculus, who cap. 7. lib. 3. saith, that the Chal∣dees were thrise ouercome in sight by the Assyrians, when as they came in armes to besiege Niniueh. For here it appeareth that the Assyrians were foorthwith afrayd of the army of the Chaldees, & that they durst not often to go against them. Beroschim. What the fi∣gure Metony∣mia is, See O∣seas cap 4. ver. 1.Moreouer I translate the word (Beroschim) Ashtrees, and not Firre trees. Then by the figure Metonymia, I take Ashetrees for Ashen weapons, that is, for speares and pikes, the which Herodotus lib. 7. writeth that the Chaldees and the Babylonians vsed in bat∣taile and in fight. For that place of Herodotus sheweth what the word (Ashtrees) here meaneth. And the Ashe, as Plinius saith, is
an high tree and a tall, of a white wood, somewhat soft, and sha∣king, strong, and without knots, of which stuffe at this day notable speares and pikes are made, whereof also Homer saith that Achilles his pike was made. Therefore when as those Ashen speares or pikes shall be shaken in battaile by the Chaldees, the Assyrians shall flee, like as no nation at this day can easily abide and stand against the Heluetian armie of pike men: but all men giue place vnto it. Ver. 4. The chariots shal rage in the streetes: They shall runne to and fro in the high wayes: they shall seeme like lamps: they shall shoote like the lightning. An amplificati∣on of the former feare.AN amplificatiō of the former feare, which those chariots of the Chaldees shall strike into the Assyrians. Whereof is to be ga∣thered, therefore the Assyrians shall easily be ouercome by their e∣nemies, how mighty and warlike soeuer they seeme now for to be. For then they shal not be able to beare the assault and force of their enemies weapons. In a word, it is true that the Chaldees were more skilfull then other nations in this kinde of warlike furniture here mentioned by our prophet. And then is euery nation most chief∣ly feared, when as he fighteth with those weapons, wherein he ex∣celleth aboue others, as the French in horsemanship, the Heluetian in footemanship, the English with the bowe, the Scot in skirmish∣ing. These warlike chariots therefore of the Chaldees shall be feare∣full, and they shall make an exceeding great slaughter both by meanes of the cunning and skilfulnesse the which the Chaldees haue, to rule them: & also by reason of the manner of their making, so that whereas other chariots are vnprofitable, there these not∣withstanding do very great seruice. The Chaldees shall make a great slaughter with their cha∣riots.These chariots of the Chaldees shall rage in the streetes, so great a slaughter doubtles shall the Chaldean enemies make with them, when as they are once entered into the citty. For C. Caesar lib. 1. de Bello Alexand. about the end writeth that the most valiant souldiars are troubled with these kinde of chariots. They shall run two and fro by the high wayes, namely they shall be so cunningly ru∣led and feately made, that these chariots may be driuen & turned by the Chaldees sitting vpon them, euen in those places, which are wont to be straight and narrow. They shall be like burning lamps, and the sayd chariots shal shine, being so scoured, so yroned, to wit they shall be all ouer so bright
and shining. And this so glistering a shew doth dazell the eyes of those that looke against them, that men can scarse be able to a∣bide it: or else the eyes are so dimmed that they can not see to a∣uoyd the strokes. So Anniball in the fight at Cannae turneth the Sunne vpon the eyes of the Romanes. Finally, they shall strike the eyes like lightnings, and with their sparkling and light they shall glister, and they shall dimme the light and hinder the sight of the Assyrian enemies. To be short: the feare of the Assyrians shall be great by meanes of them. Ver. 5. He shall remember his strong men: they shall stumble as they go: they shall make hast to the walles thereof, and the defence shall be prepared. A partition. A Partition. The Prophet before spake of the enemies of the As∣syrians, what manner of men they should be:  Now he descri∣beth what manner of ones the Assyrians themselues shall be.  Wherein he answereth a secret obiection that might be made, as thus namely, shall I pray you at that time the Assyrians, and espe∣cially the Niniuites be sleepy, sluggish, hauing no care of their daungers, whom, O Nachum, thou writest shall be brought vnto such feare, that they may so easily be ouercome? The Prophet an∣swereth, no: but they shall diligently prouide for their daunger. Yet shall they not therefore escape: nay they shall be ouercome of the Chaldees. For that which is in the Psal. 76. ver. 6. At thy re∣buke, O God of Iacob, both the chariot and horse are cast asleepe: appeareth in all those, whom God in his iust iudgement will pu∣nish, to wit, that howsoeuer they take paines in defending of them selues, bestur them, and seeme to be wise and couragious: yet when as they come to the point, & vnto the fight they are vāquished: yea and that so easily, as if they had bin in a dead sleepe, and could not then find their handes, albeit they were most excellent warriours. Therefore the king of Niniuch shall remember, or reckon vp his strong men, & his warriours: he shal muster them: he shall gather an armie: he shall moreouer fortifie himselfe. But what of all this? yet shall he not escape. For these strong and valiant men mustered by the king of the Assyrians, shall stumble and fall downe, as they go: because that God shall take from them strength and heart, that they shal not then be able to stay vp them selues for feare and trembling. They shall make hast vnto the walles to man them, & to defend the bull∣warke,
that the citie be not taken: they shall prepare stuffe and li∣ning or couering for the walles against the slings, or battering in∣struments, or fires of the enemies, that the walles be not cast down, battered, or set on fire. Caesar libr. 2. Bell. Ciuil. speaking of Massilia,Caesar. witnesseth, that they of old time in the defence of their walles vsed these kinds of couerings of their walles, which they called quilting or matting of them. For with these they letted the darts, and such instruments as they cast stones withall, from battering of their walles, and kept them from firing,A. Gellius. the which A. Gellius lib. 15. Noct. Attie. cap. 1. writeth to haue been done by Scylla at the besieging of Athens. But all these things notwithstanding cannot deliuer the Assyrians out of the hands of the Chaldees. Vers. 6. The gates of the riuers shall be opened, and the palace shall melt. A reason, why the Assyrians shall not escape from the Chal∣dees.THis is a reason, because the Niniuites shall be taken at that side of the citie the which they iudge to be most strong, to wit, both where the palace or kings court is builded, and the riuer Tigris run∣neth into the citie. For those gates and closures, by the which the streame runneth into the citie, shall be broken vp, and opened with the violence of the ouerflowing waters: & the palace it selfe neere adioyning vnto those gates and sluces of the riuer shal be throwne downe, and shal be broken, as namely being shaken with the force of the sayd waters. So then at that place especially shall the Chal∣dees breake into the citie. So when as God fighteth against vs,God fighting against vs, all things are weake: he figh∣ting for vs, all things are strong. no∣thing can bee safe: and he fighting for vs, nothing can be weake. For as it is Rom. 8. ver. 31. If God be on our side, who can be against vs? Further, the things which are here written, doe agree with Diodo∣rus Siculus, who libr. 3. Biblioth. cap. 7. writeth thus: When as the siege of Niniueh had continued two yeares, the third yeare, the ri∣uer growing and increasing beyond measure by the meanes of cō∣tinuall showres, ouerflowed that side of the citie, brake downe the walles by the space of twentie furlongs. Concerning the palace set on fire by the King of the Assyrians himselfe, reade the same Author.
Vers. 7. And she that sate quiet at home. And Huzzab the Queene shall be led away captiue, and her maydes shall leade her as with the voyce of doues, smiting vpon their breasts. The first am∣plification of the miserie of the Assyrians taken from the persons of those that shall sus∣taiue the same.THe first amplification of the trouble and miserie, the which, the citie Niuiueh being taken, shall fall out vnto the Assyrians. And this amplification is taken from the persons, the which by reason of their sexe, or kind, are in miscrie it self more miserable then others: such as are women, and those especially which are honorable and noble, as is the Queene for example. This verse therefore is a vehe∣ment mouing of affection, that the very Assyrians themselues may be moued with the consideration of the miserie, which was to fall vpon them, and may vnderstand that they shall not escape, in as much as they cannot deliuer their Queene out of the hands of the Chaldees, for whom the Kings and the Subiects are wont to fight most egerly. Finally, that God may comfort his, whom the Assy∣rians handled so hardly, and vnmercifully, this selfe same is rehear∣sed by the Prophet. So in the Reuelation cap. 18. ver. 6. the godlie are willed to reward the whore of Babylon, euen as she hath rewarded them, and to giue her double according to her works, and in the cup that she hath filled vnto them, to fill her the double. The figure Pe∣riphrasis or cir∣cumlocution, is, when as we speake that in more words, the which might be vtte∣red in one, or in fewer, as, the Redeemer of mankind, for Christ. And here (as hee translateth it) she that sate quiet at home, for, the Queene.Further, the Queene the wife of the King of Niniueh is here de∣scribed by the figure Periphrasis, or circumlocution, to the end that by the comparison & condition of her captiuitie that was to come, her calamitie or miserie may seeme to be the greater, and more mi∣serable. Therefore she that before stood quiet at home, to wit, the Queene, and other honorable and noble women the wiues of the great men and rulers, shall beled away captiue. For these are wont to keepe themselues within the bounds of their palaces, that they may be the more daintie and fayre: they feele no heate, they are not bitten with cold: but they liue at home, compassed and enclosed about with a traine and flocke of maydes, as it is Psalm. 45. These notwithstanding shall be led away into captiuitie, yea and that, captiue captiuitie, that is, most hard captiuitie. So much the more lamentable and miserable shall their case be: for they poore soules were not acquainted with these troubles. Their companie & traine also which they shall haue with them, is here added, whereby the grieuousnes of the punishment, and of this captiuitie is the better
described. For their maydens shall leade them with mourning like doues, that is, with secret sobs, and sighings, and with mour∣ning kept in. For the maydens shall not dare to shriech out, crye, and with great howling lament that so miserable condition and plight of their Ladies and Mistresses. The which thing notwith∣standing women are wont to doe in their great sorowes. For they let loose the raines vnto their teares, cryings, and complaints, ex∣cept they bee restrained for feare. Finally, the same maydes shall wayle, and smite their breasts, namely, in token of their most great and hidden sorowes, the which they shall not dare to breake forth. And this striking of the breast is commonly a companion of these mournings and sorowes, especially among heathen and prophane persons. Vers. 8. But Niniueh is of old like a poole of water: yet they shall flee away. Stand, stand, shall they crye: but none shall looke backe. Another am∣plification of the same mise∣rie of the Ni∣niuites.ANother amplification of the same ouerthrow of the Niniuites, taken from the greatnes of the citie, the which shall then fall downe, and vtterly vanish away. Niniueh therefore was sometimes as a poole of water, abounding in all things, wherein men, like as fish doe in the water, might liue daintilie, easilie, and idlie. For I thinke the same comparing of Niniueh with a poole of water, to appertaine hereunto, namely, that it may bee vnderstood that there was in that citie both plentie of all things needfull to liue withall, and also great easines to get a liuing. Wherefore Niniueh was a most large citie, nay, larger by a great deale then Babylon, as Stra∣bo writeth, lib. 16. Geograph. Herodotus also lib. 1. reporteth that the soyle it selfe, or countrie of Assyria, wherein Niniueh was built, was most rich in Corne, had great store of Millet, and Sisam graine: might compare with other countries of the world also in plentie of figges, wine, oyle. So then there was a most fit place to dwell in,Niniueh a most daintie place to liue in. & seate to liue in. Whereupon the territorie and countrie of Assyria is called most rich and fruitfull by Isaias cap. 10. ver. 18. where GOD threatneth, that he will consume the glorie of his forrest, and of his fruitfull fields both soule and flesh. And indede this citie stoode a great while, as appeareth Genes. 10. whereupon it was full of men also: but this dignitie, commodiousnes, and greatnesse of this citie shall perish: and shall not let, but that these iudgements of GOD shall come to passe and be fulfilled. The reason is, none shall then
defend the citie egerlie and stoutly, no not the citizens themselues. For they shall all flee away trembling and in feare, albeit there be some present, which shall encourage them to stand against their e∣nemies, yet shall they not looke backe: but shall flee away with great trembling. There shall then be some, which shall heart them on to defend their citie, and to abide the assault of their enemies, & shall say vnto them, stand, stand: but all in vaine. For the citizens shall not thereby take any courage, nor be caused to stay: but shal runne away as fast as they can fling. Vers. 9. Spoyle ye the siluer, spoyle ye the gold: for there is none ende of the store, and glorie of all the pleasant vessels. What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap 6. ver.THis is a Prosopopoeia of God encouraging the enemies of the Assyrians vnto the pray. But it is added, that it should bee the third amplification of the miserable estate of the citie Niniueh, when as it shall be taken.1. The third am∣plification of the miserie of the Assyrians. For the Chaldees shall steale and take vn∣to themselues euery the most pretious things out of it, albeit that there were in it an infinit masse of goods a long time stolen & hor∣ded vp together from all places by the Assyrians. And by this kind of speaking is shewed, that God is the author of this destruction of Niniueh: and that not only the Chaldees would haue it so. Finally that is confirmed, which I haue sayd, namely, that no forces of the Assyrians, no wealth of theirs, no power could let, but that they must feele and vndergo these iudgements & punishments of God, because of their crueltie against the people of God. For God will encourage their enemies both vnto the fight, & also vnto the pray, and will make them vnconquerable. There is a like place Isai. 10. ver. 6. when as God sendeth the Assyrians to vanquish the Iewes: I will send him (sayth God, speaking of the Assyrian) to a dissembling nation, and I will giue him a charge against the people of my wrath, to take the spoyle, and to take the pray, and to tread them vnder feete like the mire in the streete. Yet are not the Chaldees hereby excused, that they should not bee condemned of couetousnes in that same spoyling of the Niniuites.Though God be the author of the spoyling of the Nini∣uites, yet are not the Chal∣dees, which spoyled them, excused. For they behaued themselues after this maner, not of any mind to obey God, but to rob and steale: neither did they carrie away those riches of the Niniuites of faith in God, but of a greedines of minde, which was insatiable, or could not be filled: albeit by the priuileges of warre, those which doe ouercome haue much libertie ouer those whom they doe thus ouercome, and
may doe very many things vnto them. Two things to be noted.Further this verse hath two things to be noted. First the kinde of speaking, the which for the more earnest encouragement sake containeth a repetition of the same word of spoyling,1. The kinde of speaking. Spoyle ye, Spoyle ye, saith the Lord. Secondly the thing it selfe, which is com∣manded, & sheweth that the spoyling of Niniueh, which was to insue, should bee most miserable, and exceeding great.2. The thing it selfe. For both the gold and siluer of the Niniuites shall be taken away: and also that endlesse furniture of theirs, and heape of riches, and other things, by succession of so many ages gathered and horded vp together. For the Assyrians neuer made any ende of heaping vp of goodes, so couetuous, and such robbers of the world were they. Last of all, the Chaldcans shall pull away and take vnto themselues what so euer daintie and pretious thing shall bee hid vp in all the vessels, chestes, and whole houshould of the Niniuites. For these things also were the praye or spoile of the Assyrians: hereafter 13. And all these things do shew and describe the ransacking and spoyling of this Citie, be it neuer so wide or large, that it shall be maruailous great. Vers. 10. She is emptie, and voyde, and waste, and the heart mel∣teth, and the knees smile together: and sorrow is in all loynes,The author translateth all these verbs by the future tense. The conclusion shewing the e∣state and con∣dition to come, of the citie and Citizens. Two parts of this verse. and the faces of them all gather blacknes. The conclusion, which sheweth the state and condition of the Citie Niniueh it selfe, and also of the Citizens, what it shalbe in the end. Therefore I translate all these verbes by the future tence, and not by the present tence. For the Prophet speaketh of a thing, which shall come to passe afterward. Wherefore there are two parts of this verse. The one speaketh of the Citie, and the o∣ther of the Citizens. As for the Citie of Niniueh it selfe, the same shal be emptied and vtterly made voide and spoiled by the Chal∣dees, and other enimies, by whom it shal be taken.1. Of the citie Whereupon it shalbe left naked, and emptie of goods, riches, gold, siluer,2. Of the Citi∣zens. and houshold. The which was necessarilie to follow of the threatning and meaning of the former verse. As for the Citizens themselues and the Souldiers, the which when it is besieged,  shall take it to defend, they shall tremble, they shall haue no strength,  they shall be perceiued to be a fraide, and shall bewray and shew outward tokens of their great feare and trembling, in their eyes, in their
whole face and countenance, in their knees. For there, that is, in these parts especially, most assured testimonies or witnesses of our feare are to be seene. The heart therefore of the fighters for Niniueh shall melt and vanish away, so that they shall vtterly be out of hope that it may be preserued by them. And the signes and tokens of this their despaire (for Niniueh was taken, not so much through fault or want of munitions, as betrayed, that is, not defended, through a suddain feare, where with they were striken that should haue defended it.) The tokens, I say of this feare shall be, their knees smiting together. Such a signe of feare was in Bel∣shazzar at the sight of the writing hand vpon the wall, Dan. 5. ver. 6. Then the kings countenance was chaunged, and his thoughts troubled him, so that the ioynts of his loynes were loosed, and his knees smote one against another. Againe an other signe of their feare shal be a sorrow or paine in their loynes: For they which are afraid, haue a chil & cold trembling ouer their whole bodie, and haires, because that in this feare the natural heate conueigheth and be∣taketh it selfe out of the whole bodie vnto the heart, leauing the other parts cold. Heereof are wont to growe gripinges & paines of the colick in such trēbling & troubling of the humors: hence also springeth paynes of the loynes and loosenesse of the bellie, because that whilest we are in feare, cold doth possesse the rest of the bodie. Last of al the countenance, & the face gathereth black∣nes, & many times feare, to wit, the vaines being destitute or voyd of their bloud, and heate (the which fleeth into the inner partes.) So Ioel 2. ver. 6 it is saide: Before his face shall the people tremble, all faces shall gather darkenes. Vers. 11. Where is the dwelling of the Lyons, and the pasture of the Lyons whelpes? Where the Lion and the Lyonesse wal∣ked, and the Lyons whelpe, and none made them afraid. A triumphing ouer the Assy∣rians, confir∣ming the for∣mer threat∣ning of the Iudgements of God. Demaund of the Prophet.THis is an insultation or triumphing ouer the Assyrians, and Niniueh, whereby the former threatning of the Iudgement of God, and of the destruction of Niniueh is confirmed. For the Prophet being most assured, and throughly perswaded of the ouerthrowing of that Citie, doth demaund as if the matter were al readie now fulfilled, where therefore is that nest of the Lyons? that is, where the kingdome of the Assyrians now remaineth and appeareth? So the people and nations ouercome by him, insult
and triumph ouer the King of Babylon Isai 14. vers. 10. saying:The answere supplyed. Art thou become weake also as we? Art thou become like vnto vs? The answere is now to bee set downe and vnderstoode, to wit, this, It is now no where, this nest or rather denne of these wilde beasts, which spoyled the whole worlde, is perished, is destroyed. Two things to be noted.But there are two things here to be noted: one, that he calleth Niniueh, that same citie of the king, or the head citie of the Em∣pire of the Assyrians, an house, and a denne, and pasture of lyons:1. That Niniueh is called a house a pasture, a denne. yea and that an house or a dwelling (the which the Latines in re∣proch call a denne, as Sextus Pompeius writeth) because vnto that citie as vnto their head and chiefe citie the Kings of Assyria came, and betooke themselues, and there dwelled safely, as wilde beasts in their bowres and dwellings. The which selfe same thing the prophet in this same verse maketh more playne, when he addeth, Whither the Lyon came, or where the Lyon walked, that is, betooke himselfe, as vnto his proper palace, and that No man making him afraid. For Niniueh was a most safe seate and dwelling vnto the Kings. So the harbours of theeues and cruel oppressors are called dennes, and couerts of wilde beasts Psal 10. ver. 9. He lyeth inwaite secretly, euen as a Lyon in his denne: hee lyeth in wayte to spoyle the poore: he doth spoyle the poore when he draweth him into his net. The selfe same city Niniueh is here called the pasture of the sayd Kings, and of the whole familie of the king: because that there both the Kings, and also the sonnes of the Kings of Assyria were sumptu∣ously and dayntily brought vp, with their whole housholde and trayne, as namely, in the head citie of the kingdome. For vnder the name of pastures in this place is signified sumptuous & most dainty cheere and liuing, as it is also Psal. 23. These things are first here to be noted. Afterward and secondly it is here to be marked, that he calleth the Kings Lyons,2. The Kings cal∣led lyons. Their children lyons whelps. and the Kings sonnes and daughters Lions whelpes, and young Lyons. So by Daniel the foure Empires are compared vnto wilde beasts. Whereby the nature and fiercenes of the Kings which ruled the Assyrian Empire is gathered. For they were in such sorte brought vp, and that from their youth, who were to raigne and rule, that they were like vnto Lyons, that is, they did breede stately and high mindes: but rauenous, cruel, and fierce towardes all men, such as is the nature of Lions, and of Turkes. Further, that which in this place the Prophet hath sayd of the Kings of Assyria: the same writeth Plato in his Politic. of ma∣ny
magistrates, and rulers of his time in these wordes translated in∣to Latine by Iames Serranus my friend, a man singularly learned. Socrat.Plato. Whom speake you of? Hosp. Of certaine wonderfull and strange men. Socrat. Why so? Hosp. For when as I nowe well be∣thinke me of the matter, the kinde of these seemeth to be of diuers shapes and formes: For many men are become like vnto lions and Centaurs, & such other like: & many are like vnto Satyres, & weak beastes, and of sundry shapes. And these things hath Plato sayde very truely, the which we also at this day by experience doe find to be true in many princes. Vers. 12. The Lyon did teare in peeces enough for his whelpes, and woried for his lyonesse, and filled his holes with praye, and his dennes with spoyle. A making more plaine of that which hath been said before.A Laying open of that which was sayde before, more plainely, wherein the Prophet sheweth, why he called the Kings of the Assyrians Lyons, and what maner of liuing their life was, to wit, ful of cruelty and violence. Nemrod, by whom this Empire is suppo∣sed to haue been first founded, is called a mighty hunter, Gen. 10. ve. 9. because that he was both cruell vnto other men, and also gotte booties and prayes from other nations. For after this sort hee first framed and ordered his rule bearing: the which course and manner of liuing and rule bearing it is likely that his successours followed afterwards. Finally, when as there was no feare of the true GOD among those nations, what else was that same Empire of the Assy∣rians, albeit that it stretched neuer so farre and wide, but a great the euery? For sayth Augustine, what else are great Empires with∣out iustice, but great the eueries? Whereupon that same Alexan∣der the great,Lucanus. is by Lucanus called the Great theefe of the worlde. And surely a people can hardly arise vp, and get dominion ouer o∣thers without great force, iniurie, violence, and robbery, the which must be done vnto other nations. For it must needes be, that such a dominion must increase by the falles and ruines of other nations, as first, of those which are neere and adioyning vnto it, and after∣ward of others farther off. Such therefore were the Kings of the Assyrians also. Wherefore they are worthylie called Lyons: and their sonnes Lyons whelpes: their houses, Caues and dennes of Lyons: lastly, their goods by them heaped together, booties and spoyles. And with the same punishment, wherewith the Assyrian kings are punished, shal those kings & princes also at this day be pu∣nished
by God, which in maners and nature are like vnto the Assy∣rians, and rauenous and cruel lyons. So Iudg. 1. vers. 6. Adoni-be∣zek a cruel and bloody king, hath the thumbes of his handes and feete cut off, like as he serued many others before. So Isai 33. vers. 1. they are threatned to be repayed with the lawe of reqnitall, who haue been spoylers and wicked doers vnto others, in these wordes: Woe to thee that spoylest, and wast not spoyled: and doest wickedly, and they did not wickedly against thee: when thou shalt cease to spoyle, thou shalt be spoyled: when thou shalt make an ende of doing wickedly, they shall doe wickedly against thee. And these are most excellent myr∣rours and looking glasses of God his iudgements for other men to view and beholde, if they learne not to forgette their cruelty and robberie. Vers. 13. Beholde, I come vnto thee, sayth the Lord of hostes, and I will burne her chariots in the smoke, and the sworde shall de∣uoure thy young lyons, and I wil cut off thy spoyle from the earth, and the voyce of thy messengers shall no more be heard. The conclusion of this sermon.THe shutting vp of this whole former threatning, the which is contayned in all this chapter. And by this conclusion is con∣firmed, both how great, and what maner of destruction there shall be of this kingdome, and herewithall is in like manner declared, wherefore it shall come to passe. So this verse hath three parts.Three parts of this verse. The first, which containeth a confirmation of this whole se∣cond sermon and threatning made by the Prophet,1. A confirmatiō of this whole Sermon. the which confirmation is taken both from the person of God that speaketh, and also from the speedines of the comming to passe of the matter. And he which threatneth these things vnto the Niniuites, is GOD, and that euen he which is bath Iehouah, that is, the true God: & also the Lord of hostes, that is, most almighty, so that nothing is able to withstand his decree and will. And these things shall come to passe most speedily: For Beholde me, sayth God, prepared against thee, or, Behold I come agaynst thee: as if I were euen then comming at the doores, and drawing forth these my iudgements, to wit, least the vngodly might thinke themselues to haue escaped, because of these iudgements prolonged, and not foorthwith put in execu∣tion. 2. The maner of their destructi∣on.The second parte describeth briefly what manner of destru∣ction and ouerthrow there shall be both of this Citie, and also of
this kingdome and power. The chariots of the Assyrians, and all their munition & furniture for warre shall be burnt with the smoke of fire, that is, with a most bitter and softe fire, that they may be the more grieued, and the more tormented in it. Their young lyons, that is to say, as well the kings stocke, as also the Nobles of the Assyrians, namely their whole families shall the sworde consume and waste. Therfore the sonnes of the king and of his nobles shal be slaine and killed with the sworde by the enemies, lest any after∣wards might thinke of the recouering of their kingdome againe. So likewise doth God threaten him by his Prophet Isai cap 31. ver. 1. Then shall Asshur fall by the sworde, not of man, neither shall the sworde of man deuour him, and he shall flee from the sworde, and his young men shall faynt. And he shall goe for feare to his towre, and his Princes shall be afaide of the standard, sayth the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Ierusalem. The voyce of the messengers of Niniueh shall no more be heard, to wit, of his Ambassadors, and presidents, whom the kings of Assy∣ria did send into the prouinces to gouerne them, and to execute the commandements of their Kings. This is as much as if GOD should say, the dignitie of the Empire shall bee taken away from thee, thou shalt now obey thy selfe, and no longer haue rule ouer others. And thus much contayneth the second part of this verse. 3. The cause of this punishmētThe third parte doth most briefly containe the cause of this punishment, namely, because all this whole Empire, all these ri∣ches of the Assyrians are nothing but a pray, spoyle, and robberie, and are not goods lawfully gotten. And this pray God wil haue to be cut away and taken from the theefe, and the theefe himselfe to bee punished, as appeareth Isai cap. 33. vers. 1. which place hath been cited but immediately before in the exposition of the twelfth verse, towardes the ende. And this is the third parte of this verse. CAP. 3. Vers. 1. O bloody citie, it is all full of lies, and robberie: the praye departeth not. The last sermō of Nahum con∣firming the for¦mer iudgments of God, and shewing causes of the same.THe last or third sermon of the Prophet, wherein both the for∣mer threatnings of God agaynst the Assyrians are confirmed, and also the causes are shewed of so sharpe iudgement of God a∣gaynst
them. And in this sermon also doth Nachum vse the fi∣gures Hypotyposis and Prosopopoeria,What these fi∣gures are, see Amos cap 8. ver. 12. & O∣seas cap. 6. ver. 1. to represent the thing to come vnto the eyes and sight of the godly Israelites: and that therefore they should the more assuredly beleeue that these things should come to passe, how mighty and vnconquerable soeuer the strength of the Assyrians and their Empire might seeme at that time for to be. But this verse hath two partes. First, the threatning of an hor∣rible or very fearefull punishment against the Niniuites.Two parts of this verse. And the same is sufficiently signified cuē by this one particle (woe) in hebrue (Gol) in Latine (Vae) in Greeke (ouai) as may appeare almost by infinite places of the holy Scriptures.1. The threat∣ning ef a fear∣full punishmēt. For whatsoeuer in the pu∣nishment of men is wont to be seene horrible, to be feared, hard, sharpe, and heauy, with the like is all contayned and noted in this one worde (Woe.) The second parte of this verse declareth two causes why the Niniuites are thus punished:2. Two causes of this punishmēt there shall other causes follow after∣wardes. The causes are, the Cruelty of the Niniuites, and their Co∣uetousnes. Their cruelty, and the same most barbarous, is noted in these wordes, The citie of bloods, or the bloodie citie. For by this meanes is shewed, that not onely one or twaine,1. Cruelty. but all the Nini∣uites indifferently and one with another were delighted and inu∣red with blood, slaughter, & murthers, & that this course of liuing and dealing was continued a long season among them without any punishment. The which is a thing common & vsual among proud nations and conquerours of the world, such as were the Niniuites, and afterwards the Romanes, to reioyce in blood. To be short, great Empires were neuer founded at the first, nor established afterward without great cruelty and shedding of blood of other peoples. 2. Couetousnes.Moreouer, the notorious couetousnes also of this people is de∣clared in these wordes, It is wholly made and full of that which is torne away, or robbery, and lying: nay they neuer cease from stealing, albeit that they be most wealthy and full of riches and goods. For the Assyrians had stolen all from other nations: wherefore, the As∣syrians when as they ouercame other nations, did not onely robbe them: but also by their presidents of prouinces, by their tributes laide vpon them, and by such other occasions daylie spoyled and flawed them, whom they had once ouercomen. The which thing was practized also afterwards by the Romanes. Further, Lying hel∣peth forward their Couetousnes: for they which haue a purpose to spoyle one vnder some honest pretence, and not by open violence,
deale by suttleties and deceits. Now, that which is torne away, and robberie, are two kindes of taking away of other mens goods. Vn∣derstand by that which is torne away, when as some part onely is ta∣ken away, because the whole could not bee gotten. Robberie is, when as the whole goods of another is stolen away, and haled in∣to our hands by vniust meanes. Vers. 2. The noyse of a whippe, and the noyse of the mouing of the wheeles, and the beating of the horses, and the leaping of the cha∣riots. A confirmatiō of the punish∣ment threat∣ned before.THe confirmation of the punishment threatned before, taken from the maner after which the Assyrians shall be punished. For it shall be done by the Chaldees, the which shall breake in vpon the Niniuites with their chariots & horsemen, the which the Niniuites shall not withstand. And this force and power of the chariots and horsemen of the Chaldees is liuely by the figure Hypotyposis repre∣sented,What the fi∣gure Hypoty∣posis is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. as it were vnto the view & sight, That the Assyrians because of their wealth and strength of warre should not think these things to bee vaine, or the godly doubt of the issue and falling out of the matter, whom God would comfort in this place, by threatning the destruction of the enemies which afflicted or troubled them. Ther∣fore both their whippes, wherewith they shall rule their horses of their chariots, shall make a noyse, and feare the Assyrians, and the wheeles of their chariots shal be moued with such a force and vio∣lence, that nothing can stand against them. The horses themselues shall stampe with their feete, the which is a token of couragious and warlike horses: and lastly, The chariots drawne by the horses shall leape, and breake all things. And these things are in such sort set forth, as if the enemies were euen now at the gates, and hard at the heeles of the Assyrians. Vers. 3. The horseman lifteth vp both the bright sword, and the glit∣tering speare, and a multitude is slaine, and the dead bodies are many: there is none end of their corpses: they stumble vpon their corpses. An amplifica∣tion of the ma∣ner of their pu∣nishment.AN amplification of the sayd maner of their punishment, and a more plaine declaration of the same. For he spake before of their chariots of warre, & of their horses: now he intreateth of their
horsemen, and of their furniture, the which also he will paint out before their eyes fearefull, and such as the Assyrians and Niniuites shall not be able to abide. All which things make, and are spoken for the confirmation of this punishment. The horseman, namely, not he which fighteth out of the chariot, but from his horse,The horsemen. shall bring forth, or shall cause his horse to goe vp into euery place, neuer so high and rough: he shall so skilfully turne him: and shall driue him being taught and made vnto all poynts of warre with horse, & vnto the fight: as of good Riders their horses are wont to be taught and made before hand vnto all turnings and feares. That which Homer teacheth also in his Iliad. lib. 7. And such shall the horsemen, that is, the souldiers that fight on horsebacke be. Their furni∣ture.Their furniture also shall be terrible or fearfull. For their swords shall shine like fire, they shall be so bright, and readie vnto slaugh∣ter: their speares with their yron poynts shall glister like the light∣ning in the ayre. Last of al, the multitude of the slaine Niniuites shal be so great, that there shall be no number of them: and those which shall goe in the streetes, shall euery where stumble vpon them. The which are the signes and tokens of an exceeding great slaughter, and receiued ouerthrow, such namely as shall fall out vnto the Ni∣niuites. Therefore they shall not abide their enemies: but the As∣syrians shalbe ouercome, how vnuanquishable soeuer they be now thought for to be. Vers. 4. Because of the multitude of the fornications of the harlot that is beautifull, and is a mistris of witchcraft, and selleth the people through her whoredom, and the nations through her witch∣crafts. A rendring of a reason of their so great punishment.A Rendring of a reason. For he yeeldeth a reason of so great pu∣nishment which should come vpon them, to wit, for that the Niniuites infinite wayes committed fornication, and vsed witch∣crafts, and furthermore infected other nations of the world with these most filthie vices, and made them afterwards subiect vnto them, and made merchandise of them at their pleasure. But here seeme two other causes to bee brought then were before, namely idolatrie and witchcraft, of both which vices the Assyrians were Schoolemasters vnto other nations of the world. For I take fornica∣tions in this place for idolatrie. Epiphanius writeth,Epiphanius. that idolatrie began in the world in the dayes of Thare the father of Abraham, &
first among the Assyrians, and from thence came vnto other na∣tions. Whereupon in this place Niniueh is called the mistris of these vices, especially of Sorceries, that is, of witchcraft. For albeit Plin. libr. 3. Nat. Histor. in the preface doe write, that so detestable an in∣uention began first in Persia, and nameth Zoroastres the author thereof: yet he in the same place doth confesse that the Medes and the Assyrians were the more ancient writers of the same art, whose workes are lost: but Zoroastres his remained. This selfe same thing doth Cicero confirme lib. 1. de Diuinat. which fetcheth it, and the authoritie of it from the Assyrians, as the first inuentors of it. Lastly it is apparant by Isai cap. 2. ver. 6. and cap. 47. ver. 13. that the East people, among whom doubtles are the Assyrians, were the finders out of al forbidden Diuination, that is, Astrologicall, Magicall, and all such other Diuinations. And these are two notorious crimes, with the which the true knowledge and worship of God was vtter∣ly abolished and done away, namely, idolatrie and witchcraft: the which vices the Assyrians spred abrode into other nations, & there∣fore are become guilty of the corrupting of the whole world. More∣ouer, they bought and solde, and made merchandise of all nations and families, bewitching them with these corruptions, and bring∣ing them in subiection vnto them. For this buying and selling, or making merchandise of them, is not only to bee referred vnto the deceits, wherewith the Monarches, or Emperours for their profite and gaine did deceiue, sell vnto others, and beguile the inferiour na∣tions: but also vnto the gaine which the Kings of Assyria got by such idolatrie & witchcraft, the which they taught vnto other peo∣ples. For so, and vnder this pretence and colour they stretched out their Empire, and defended the same, as if they taught the true re∣ligion vnto other nations. For thus are men easilie deceiued, as it is 2. Pet. 2. ver. 3. who there reporteth of false prophets and teachers, that they shall through couetousnes with fained words make merchan∣dise of men. So did the Romane Empire encrease, the which was an example and prouocation vnto other people of all superstitions. Vers. 5. Behold, I come vpon thee, sayth the Lord of hosts, and will dis∣couer thy skirts vpon thy face, and will shewe the nations thy filthi∣nes, and the kingdomes thy shame. The conclusion.THe conclusion. It shall therefore come to passe, that God for this cause will grieuously punish the Niniuites, the which punish∣ments
he doth seuerally set downe here, and in the verses follow∣ing. And God confirmeth the euent or falling out of these punish∣ments by his owne maiestie and power, when as he calleth himself the Lord of hosts, as before cap. 2. ver. 13. First of al then in this verse is threatned vnto the Niniuites shame and reproch, namely, for that their spoyled and naked citie, and bereaued of al her goods & Em∣pire, shall be set forth to bee laughed to scorne of other nations, as they also themselues haue robbed other people, and made them to become a laughing stocke. So doth God threaten, Isai. 33. ver. 1. al∣leaged before in the exposition of the 12. verse of the second chap∣ter. And so Isai. 21. ver. 2. sayth, A grieuous vision was shewed vnto me, The transgressor against a transgressor, and the destroyer against a destroyer. Further, the gesture, condition, and maner of this filthi∣nes and shame of the Niniuites which was to come, is described as significantly, and with as great Emphasis or force as may bee, the which like description is to be found euery where also in other Pro∣phets, as Ezech. 16. Isai. 47. Vers. 6. And I will cast filth vpon thee, and make thee vile, and will set thee as a gasing stocke. The former re∣proch ampli∣fied by the greatnes of the same.THis selfe same reproch of the Niniuites to come is amplified by the greatnes. For it shall be so great, and so well knowne vnto the world, that she shall bee a looking glasse and an example vnto other people, of the iudgements of God against couetous persons, idolaters, cruell men, and witches or Southsayers. Moreouer, euery punishment, either vpon any one man, or vpon a companie of mē, or some nation, is so much the more grieuous and hard to be borne, when as it is an example: that is, taken or executed in such sort, that the same is a publike example vnto others: for this is a most great shame. Further, God shall bring vpon the Assyrians, and especially the Niniuites all kinde of reproch and shame: for he shal cast vpon them al kind of lothsome and filthie things. And whatsoeuer thing among men is wont to be counted most shamefull, foule, and re∣prochfull, all that same shall fall out vnto the Niniuites: and that from euery where, and on euery side. To this purpose tend these speeches, I will throw vpon thee filthie things, & wil bring shame vpon thee, that the Niniuites and these sorcerous fellowes should not thinke that there should be any kind of reproch, which should not be brought vpon them.
Vers. 7. And it shall come to passe, that all they that looke vpon thee, shall flee from thee, and say, Niniueh is destroyed, who wi haue pittie vpon her? Where shall I seeke comforters for thee? An amplifi∣cation of the greatnes of this punishmēt takn from the effect of the same.THe same greatnes of the punishment and reproch of the Ni∣niuites is againe amplified by the effect, or feare which it shall strike into all that do behold it. In conclusion it shall be so great, that there shall want comforters to comfort the Niniuites, be∣cause of the greatnes of this punishment which they shall suffer, and the bitternesse of their sorrow. Finally, no man shall sorrow with them, as if the affliction and miserie of the Niniues should exceed all feeling and degree of man his mourning and sorrow. For men do sorrow with other men sorrowing in those matters, the which we may conceiue in the feeling and estimation of men. But whereas the sorow is so great, and so bitter and so fearefull, that no man would wish or think it could come to passe vnto any man,Iob his comfor∣ters. except it be such a one as God doth vtterly hate and will haue to perish, then they doe cease from sorowing with, and comforting such a person. So they which came to comfort Iob, when as they did behold with their eyes the greatnes of his pu∣nishment and affliction, they left off to comfort him, and to sor∣row with him. For they held their peace, nay rather they began to accuse Iob, and to finde fault with him, and blame him, as a man forsaken of God. For such shal be their slaughter and ouerthrow, that it may plainely appeare to be an extraordinarie Plague of God: and therefore all men shall confesse that they are not to be comforted, and that no man ought to sorrow with them, as name∣ly being such, as with whom God is vnappeasablie angry, that is to saye,The horror or loathing that men shall con∣ceiue at the sight of the mi∣series of the Niniuttes, de∣scribed by two effects. whom God doth not punish as other men, to wit, whom he will haue left to liue, but whom he hath decreed vtterly to de∣stroye and roote out. Therefore all men shall rather detest the Niniuites then comfort them: other men and people shall ra∣ther hate them then pittie them. In a word, the punishment layd vpon the Niniuites by God shall rather strike into those that be∣hold it a loathing, then a compassion towards them, because that it shall be a iudgement of men hated of God, and consequently most wicked.1. All that see them, shall flee from them. And in this place, this lothing of them is described, by these two effects, the which are taken and noted from the com¦mon manner of men. First whosoeuer shall see the Niniues, or
their Citie so spoyled, shall flee from them, and shunne them as men accursed, that is vowed vnto Hell, and destruction, and by keeping companie with whom, others may feare, least they pull vpon them selues ruine and destruction. Therefore all men shall get them farre off from that Citie, and from the Citizens thereof thus afflicted, or punished. The second token of this hor∣ror or lothing of them is, That no man shall sorow with them, or sick▪ comforters for them: as being such who are punished by God aboue the common and vsuall manner: and consequently for whose punishment men ought not to be sorie, as who haue deser∣ued such destruction: & whose sorow is not to be deminihed or eased, as who were iudged of all men to be most worthie of this sorrow because of their notorious offences. Vers. 8. Art thou better then No,Or which is the nource or mother citie? which was full of people? that lay in the Riuers, and had the waters round about it: whose ditch was the Sea, and her wall was from the Sea. A Confirmation of the former punishments by the example of No, amost great Citie. And this verse is as it were an Hypo∣phora,A confirmation of the former punishments. The figure Hy∣pophora what it is, see Amos cap. . ver. 21. or answering of an obiection, wherewith answer is made, either vnto the Niniuites themselues, or vnto others shifting of the former iudgements of God, because of the greatnesse and power of Niniueh. Nay sayth the Prophet, they shall come to passe, and this is proued by an example of things already donne, whereby God sheweth that he is able to ouerthrowe all Cities, and be they neuer so mightie: therefore he is also able to destroy Niniueh.Two parts of this verse. Moreouer there are in this verse two things to be mar∣ked: To wit the kinde of speaking, and the matter it selfe. The kinde of speaking is full of Emphasis, or vehemencie and force.1. The kinde of speaking. What the fi∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 4. For the Prophet vseth interrogations or asking of questions, and by Apostrophe turneth his speech vnto the Niniuites, that he might stirre them vp the more to consider the example layde before them: & that he might the more shake off from them their vaine trust: So the infedels or vnbeleeuers and hypocrites must be sharply and roundly dealt withall. For otherwise they take their rest without feare and are lused a sleepe in their sinnes. 2. The matter it∣selfe.The matter or thing it self, the which is set before the Niniuites as an example to behold, is the destruction or ouerthrow of the citie No whose forces, munitions, & power are first described, and after∣ward
the most miserable and lamentable destruction of the same. And it is set forth as a fresh and famous example at that time. But this (No) was a citie of Egypt, and not the same with Noph, the which also it selfe was a citie of Egypt as appeareth Ezech. 30. ver. 13. Thus saith the Lord God, I will also destroye the idols, and I will cause their idols to cease out of Noph. There is mention made of this No Ierem. 46. ver. 25. Thus saith the Lord God of hostes, the God of Israel, I will visit the common people of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt with their gods, and their kings, euen Pharaoh, and all that trust in him. And Ezech. cap. 30. ver. 15. God saith, I will powre my wrath vpon Sin, which is the strength of Egypt: and I will destroye the multi∣tude of No. This No was more populous or full of people then the other cities of Egypt, and it seemeth also to haue been the chiefe, and metropolitane or head citie of all Egypt. For Ierem. 46. Parh∣ho is called the nurse of No. And in this place No it selfe is called the mother or nurse of other cities of Egypt, the which titles for the most part, belong vnto the mother citie or the chiefe or head ci∣tie. It was seated by the sea, or by the waters: and as here appea∣reth, was flowed with the sea, or waters round about. Some will haue this city to be it which afterward was called Alexanderia, of Alexander the great which renued it. It was a most wealthy city by reason of the commodiousnes of the place, as it is also here de∣scribed, and truely Plinius lib. 5. Natur. histor. cap. 10. writeth of Alexandria, that it had aboue thirty thousand gorgeous or prince∣like houses in it. But the same Plinius lib. 6. cap. 29. maketh menti∣on among the cities of Egypt of a city called Noa, which seemeth rather to be our city No, then Alexandria, & the name doth rather agree with that of Plinie, and for that it is written to haue bin de∣fended by the Ethiopians, vnto whom this Noa, that is, our city No was neere. peraduenture it was that same city Thebes with an hendreth gates, of which Homer speaketh. The iudgement of this author concerning the time of the de∣struction of this city No.But now concerning the time wherein this city No was in such sort destroyed, as is here written, it is a question. I for my part by comparing the 20. cap. of Isai. with the 9. verse of this chapter do iudge it may be gathered that No was destroied by the Assyrians, before that their king Sennacherib made that noble voyage into the Iewes, whereof we reade Isai. 36. Nay moreouer before he reigned, yet notwithstanding after that the ten tribes of Israel were caried away captiue by Salmanazarking of the Assyrians. For be∣tweene Salmanazar & Sennacherib kinges of Assyria I place Sar∣gon
in the middle, of whom is mention Isai. cap. 20. by whose au∣thority and appointment, but vnder the conduct or leading of Tar∣tan a noble man of his, the Philistines were first ouercome and af∣terward the Egyptians, to wit, three yeares after, and the city No then taken. For they which thinke that the Empire of the Assyrians did not reach vnto Egypt are deceiued, as appeareth by the 7. of I∣sai. ver. 18.19. where God saith: And in that day shall the Lord hisse for the fly that is at the vttermost part of the flouds of Egypt,But the Assyri∣ans conqueing the Egyptians is more p aily expressed Isat 20. & for the bee which is in the land of Asshur, and they shall come, and light all in the desolate valleys. and in the holes of the rockes, and vpon all thorny places, and vpon all bushy places. The multitude of the citizens o No, with their munition and situatian of their city to what end men∣tioned.Further here are rehearsed the multitude of the citizens, and the munition and situation of this city, whereby it might seeme vnable to be wonne: to beate downe the pride and security or carelesnes of the Niniuites. It was a populous city or very full of people, & the mother, or head city of the rest: it was situate betweene the par∣tings or mouthes of the riuer Nilus. Some hold that it was situate at the mouth or entry of Canopus one of the streames that falleth in∣to the riuer Nilus neere vnto the lake Mareotis, & the Iland Pharus. Some thinke it was seated in an other place by the Ilād Meroe. Last of al, it was on euery side compassed & fortified with the sea, or with the waters. Whereupon (if it be taken for the city Alexandria, the which was restored for No), it was hard to be comen vnto, hauing entrance only by three chanells of the sea, as writeth Plinius lib 5. Natur. histor. cap. 10. and out of him afterwardes Solinus Poly. histor. cap. 35. Ver. 9. Ethiopia and Egypt were her strength, and there was none end: Put and Lubim were her helpers. An amplifica∣tion of the strength of the city No.AN amplification of the strength of the city No, by the inhabi∣tants and other powers which did ayd and helpe it, that the Niniuites should not thinke themselues safe against GOD by meanes of their owne forces, & also the aides of their confederates. So then when as No was besieged, all Egypt it selfe did help it: so likewise did the Ethiopians neere vnto it, and the people of Lybia, and the Nigrites, or Cyrenians, the Ammonites, that is, the dwel∣lers on the sandes. What this people are, must be learned out of Genes. cap. 10. that we may be the shorter.
Ver. 10. Yet was shee caried away, & went into captiuity: her young children also were dashed in peeces at the head of all the streets, & they cast lottes for her noble men, and all her mighty men were bound in chaines. The dstuction of this mus city No,  whose lametae o∣uerthrow there are heare e downe foure to∣kens.THe destruction of the sayd City No, and the same most mise∣rable, that the Niniuites may be terrified or feared with this iudgement of God, & vnderstād that nothing can withstand God, nor that any forces, nor princes, nor great and mighty men may be excepted from these punishments. Moreouer there are in this verse set downe foure tokens of extreme misery. The first is captiuity or carying away of all the people from their owne homes vnto straunge countries. It is an hard thing to be a captiue: but much more hard is it to be caried away,1 Captiuity. and being robbed and spoyled of all our goodes to be led into vnknowen landes, to be a slaue there, the which is wont to be the condition and case of a people caried thus away by enemies from their owne country. The second thing is,2 The dashing in peeces of their children. The dashing in peeces of their children at the heads of all their lanes and streetes. This no doubt was a token of notorious cruelty shewed by the enemies against the inhabitants of the city No, and a signe of exceeding great misery, and wasted strength of so great and mighty a city, when as the fathers were constrained to behold and suffer their children in such sort to be torne in peeces, to be so dashed with stones, to be so cruelly slaine and murthered, and to suffer and let them lie so, as if they had no care of them. The third point is,3. They cast lottes for the noble men. the most honorable personages of this city No, were vsed of the enemies like slaues, to wit, whē as they deuided them among them selues by lots. Neither did their dignity, nor degree, nor power, nor wealth priuiledge or keepe free the nobles & great men of No from this punishment. The fourth token is, Their great men also were bound with chaines,4 The great and mighty men were bound in chaines. as well as the common sort & basest of the people. These thinges ought to terrifie or feare both the Ni∣niuites, which vsed a cruell gouernment, and our selues also, when as we obey not God: and all princes which are cruell vnto their people: that all men may feare and know that God will be a reuen∣ger and punisher of their sinnes.
Vers. 11. Also thou shalt be drunken: thou shalt hide thy selfe, and shalt seeke helpe because of the enemies. The applicatiō of the former example vnto the Niniuites by three effects.THe applycation of the former example vnto the Niniuites, from whom also he taketh all hope of escaping or of help. And in this verse he threatneth alike punishment vnto the Niniuites as fell out vnto the citizens of No, and that by a three folde conse∣quent or effect, the which he rehearseth, first,1. Niniue shall be drunken. Thou also shalt bee drunken, O Niniueh, sayth the Prophet: wherein is diligently to be noted, that the Prophet doth not pronounce or shewe that Nini∣uch shall onely drinke or lightly sippe at this cuppe of affliction, & punishment, but that it shall come to passe that she shall be drunk with that cup, that is, she shall drinke of it vnto her destruction, and so consequently shall be grieuously afflicted. So all the wic∣ked are sayd that they shall drinke of that same cup Psal. 75. vers. 8. In the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixt and he powreth out of the same: surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out, and drinke the dregges thereof. And of this cup shall they drink will they, nill they, and in spite of their teeth, albeit they neuer so much refuse to doe the same. For thus is Ieremie from the Lord willed to say vnto all the Princes of the heathen concerning this matter, cap. 25. vers. 27, 28. Therefore say thou vnto them, Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, the God of Israel, Drinke, and be drunken, and spew, and fall, and rise no more because of the sworde, which I wil send among you. But if they refuse to take the cup at thine hande to drinke, then tell them: Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, ye shall certain∣ly drinke. Thus then shall Niniueh be handled by God, as No of Egypt was before. And it is also earnestly to be marked here, that the Prophet turneth his speech vnto Niniueh, that this threatning may seeme to be the more forcible, and may the more presse, feare, and strike the Niniuites.2 They shall hide themselues. The second consequent or effect of this punishment is, that Niniueh, that is, the citizens of Niniueh shall hide them for feare and trembling. For they shall seeke vnto thē∣selues couerts, whereinto they may runne because of the crueltie of the Chaldees, as the woods, rockes, rough and vnpleasant places, so great doubtles shall be their feare and flight. The third,3. They shall seek helpe, They shal seeke helpe also, and gather together and craue power from euery place, because that they see their enemies, namely, the Chaldees, to be in strength too mighty for them: and for that they doe stand
wonderfully in feare of them, whom notwithstanding the Assyri∣ans despised before. Thus doth GOD fill their hearts with feare whom he will haue to bee ouercomen, and furnisheth their hearts with constancie and boldes whom he hath decreed shall be con∣querours and get the vpper hand. So Dauid Psalm. 59. comforteth himselfe with the assurance of God his help against the power and strength of Saul his enemie vers. 9. He is strong: but I (sayth Dauid) will wayte vpon thee: for God is my defence. And on the other side Psal. 78. vers. 9. he sheweth that the Ephraemites being armed, and well prepared to the battel, were strooken with a feare, and ranne away: The children of Ephraim being armed, and shooting with the bowe, turned backe in the day of battell. Vers. 12. All thy strong cities shall bee like fig-trees with the first ripe figges: for if they be shaken, they shall fall into the month of the eater. NOw he taketh away from the Niniuites all hope of escaping. Wherefore there follow sundry Hypophoraes or preuenting of obiections,What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. wherwith the Prophet answereth diuers their obiecti∣ons, trusting in them selues and in their owne aydes and helpes. And first of all in this place that same vaine trust which they con∣ceiued of the munitions and sortresses adioyned vnto their citie. For they shall all be vnprofitable vnto them, and of themselues most weake. For they shall be as subiect vnto falling, and as easi∣ly throwen downe, as the first figges when they be shaken, fall downe from the tree. And they fall most easily, and are most pleasant to eate. So vnder the similitude of a basket of first ripe figges very good and pleasant to bee eaten, GOD signifieth vnto Ieremie cap. 24. the returne of some of the people of the Iewes from the captiuity. Plinius lib 16. Natur. Histor. cap. 26. calleth them soone ripe. And Columella lib. de arbor. cap. 21. writeth that this fruit must be taken before the rayne come. Finally, the figge tree of all other trees for the most parte doth easily loose his fruit, as the writers of naturall things doe teach. So then the munitions of the Niniuites shal be like vnto these falling figges, namely, such as at the first shogging or shaking by the enemies shall be throwen downe and wasted. Wherefore in vaine shall helpe be sought for in them.
Vers. 13. Beholde, thy people within thee are women: the gates of thy land shall be opened vnto thine enemies, and the fire shall deuour thy barres. A Staying in the same matter. For the Prophet taketh awaye from the Niniuites other groundes and foundations of their vaine trust also, that they may throughly resolue with them∣selues, that these iudgements of GOD shall fall out vnto them because of their haynous sinnes rehearsed before. This verse therefore also is an Hypophora, or the answering of an obiection.The couragi∣ousnes & nū∣ber of the Ni∣niuites shal no∣thing preuaile them. And first of all he sheweth that the hope which the Niniuites had to defend themselues by reason of the disposition and number of their people, is foolish and false. For albeit the Niniuites before time did seeme to be of a warlike courage, whilest they bring so many nations of the world vnder their subiection: yet at that time when they must grapple hande to hande with the Chaldees, they shall be quailed, faint hearted, and fearefull like women, yea euen in the middest of the citie Niniueh, that is, when as they shall bee shutte within the walles, and in their fortes and fortresses: yet at that time those that otherwise are by nature somewhat fearefull, doe in some sorte by reason of their munitions plucke vp a good heart, and take a good courage vnto them. When as therefore they are to fight for their countrey, yea when as these Nini∣uites shall bee in the midst of their owne most strong and defen∣ced citie, albeit they be neuer so many in number, yet shall they waxe faint hearted, and tremble like women, so that for feare they shall not be able in armes to defend themselues. Their holds & forts shall not helpe them.Afterward the Prophet taketh away from them another helpe, the which they hoped they had in those munitions, towers, and holdes, the which the Niniuites had builded vp in the borders of their countrey, to wit, in the territories of Niniueh. For it is likely that they were prouident to foresee the danger that did growe by fortaine inuasions, as being warriours, and well exercised and ac∣quainted with such matters, when as they knewe by what meanes they themselues had taken & wonne other lands vnwarded, and of∣ten times had inuaded or broken in vpon their neighbours think∣ing on no such matter, vnder a colour of selling wares vnto them, as Xenophon teacheth in his bookes of the education or bringing vp of Cyrus. Therefore they had placed most strong holdes at
the entrances of their countrey against all falling out of danger that might ensue, the which fortes and aydes the Prophet calleth Gates and barres of the territorie of the Niniuites. So the most straite and strong entrances of the Caspian sea are called the Caspi∣an gates, by the which they might come into Assyria out of Media, and from the North partes, the which gates God sayth shall bee o∣pened and vnlocked, to the ende that Niniueh should not trust in those her fortes a farre off in her borders without the citie. For of the fortes and holdes about the citie hee hath spoken in the verse before. Vers. 14. Drawe thee waters for the siege: fortifie thy strong holdes: goe into the clay, and temper the morter: make strong bricke. Sarcasmos is a figure whereby we doe giue a sharp & bitter taunt in great disdaine & re∣proch, as the Iewes did vnto Christ when as they bid him come down frō the crosse, & as here the Pro∣phet doth in this place, sig∣nifiyng that all their labour shal nothing a∣uaile them. What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap 5. ver. 21.THe figure Sarcasmos, or a most bitter and biting taunt and mocke, whereby the Prophet laugheth to scorne the muniti∣ons of the Niniuites, & their diligence and prouidence in defending themselues. For he granteth that it shall come to passe, that they shall seeke out and prepare all things which are necessary for the holding out of a long siege: nay the Prophet exhorteth them that they will doe it very diligently: but he sheweth afterward that al these things shall be vaine and vnprofitable vnto them. And be∣cause that there is neede of water both for drinke, also to seethe meate, and likewise for other vses vnto men that are besieged, therefore mention is made of them: as also of other munitions, the which are made of bricke or of stone. Therfore albeit the Nini∣uites prepare and make ready all these things, yet shall they bee destroyed notwithstanding. Further, vnder these doth the Pro∣phet by the figure Synecdoche comprehend the rest, which are necessarie for men besieged. And by the selfe same worde (Waters) he teacheth, that albeit they be most continent, and in∣dure to liue most hardly all the whole time of the siege, and bee content to drinke nothing but water: yet shall they notescape, or breake vp the siege. And by all these thinges appeareth that nothing is safe vnto vs, nay in a word, that the wisedome and dili∣gence of men, be it neuer so prouident and forecasting, shall no∣thing auayle them, whereas GOD doth curse theyr enterprises Psalm. 127.
Vers. 15. There shall the fire deuoure thee: the Sword shall cut thee off: it shall eate thee vp like the locustes, though thou be multipli∣ed like the locustes, and multiplied like the grashopper. A reason of the former bitter taunting.A Reason of the former bitter taunting, and of the laughing to scorne of this so great diligence of the Niniuites, to wit, for that all these things shall be vnprofitable vnto them: nay euen in the middest of the plentie of these things necessarie for men besieged, God shall ouerthrow and destroy them. For (there) shal God destroye them, that is to say, in that same verie place, into the which they shall carrie all these things, namely, in the midst of Niniueh, where they shall haue all these things prepared, and in a readines. For there shall the fire deuoure them, to wit, that fire the which God himselfe shall send vpon them.By fire in this place may be vnderstood ei∣ther of diseases or else wildfire. And vnder the name of fire are vnderstood, either diseases, wherewith the besie∣ged Nininites were taken in the middes of the Citie: or else fires indeed throwen and cast by the enimies into the holdes & Citie, wherewithall they burned vp both the holdes themselues, and also those that did fight in them, and in the towers and Castles for the defence of the Citie. That which is wont to bee done and come to passe in the besieging of townes and Cities. These fiers are cal∣led Greeke fiers, or wilde fiers, and artificiall fiers by our men, the which fires will catch most sure holde, and whose vse is verie great in the winning of Cities. So then the munitions and turrets built vp, or repayred by the Niniuites shall not keepe them in saftie. There shall the sword of their enimies consume them. For the enimies shal winne those holdes. Finally, the number of those enimies that shall fight against the Citie of Ninueh and take it, that they shall be like vnto locusts and grashoppers, the which shall by and by deuoure and eate vp all the leaues of the Trees, and grasse and hearbes of the field, Ioel. 1. So shall these Chalde∣an enimies consume and destroye that same great multitude of Niniuites fighting for their Citie. Albeit that the same Citie shal at that time haue gotten vnto her self neuer so great a cōpanie, & shal haue gathered together her Citizens, or prepared and assem∣bled forrein Souldiers, and shall haue mustred a mightie armie.
Vers. 16. Thou hast multiplied thy merchantes aboue the starres of heauen: the locust spoyleth and flyeth away. What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see A∣mos. cap. 5. ver. 12. HYpophora, or the answering of an obiection, whereby the Prophet ouerthroweth and scorneth other groundes also of the vaine confidence or trust of these Niniuites. And these are, The multitude of the merchāts which then the Niniuites had got∣ten into the Citie to defend them selues withall. Now whether this be to be vnderstood either of monie, the which they had got∣ten together euerie where at the hands of merchants, or whe∣ther it be to be vnderstood of other people: (for money is the sinewes or strength of warres,) or of the hired souldiers or na∣tions the which the Niniuites had gotten to helpe them, it is all one. All the aydes sought out and gotten by them, be it money, or armies to helpe them, or people that were in league with thē, shal perish, and stand them in no stead: nay that which more is, like vnto locusts or grashoppers, they shal spoyle the Niniuites them selues, that is to say, the aydes & confederates by them procured, shall rifle them, and afterwards shall flie and runne away from them.The Idumeans. So the Idumeans at the siege of Ierusalem being hyred by the Iewes, when as Vespasian fought against them, did spoyle them, and rob them of their money, and by and by gat them away and helped them nothing at all, as Iosepus writeth in his bookes of the warres of the Iewes. See Apocal. 18. ver. 7.15. where the multitude of Merchants that before were great friends vnto it, doth behold and laugh at the kingdom of Antichrist and of Rome falling, and going to decay. For nothing can profit nor doe vs good, if God be wrath and angry with vs, and our aydes and helps, as appeareth Agg. 1, For as Paul sayth Rom. 8, ver. 31. If God be with vs and on our side, who can be against vs? And conse∣quently if he be against vs, who can be with vs, or do vs any good? Vers. 17. Or thy crow∣ned. Thy Princes are as the Grashoppers, and thy Captaines as the great grashoppers, which remaine in the hedges in the cold day: but when the Sunne ariseth, they flee away, and their place is not knowen where they are. The Lord ta∣keth away the hope the which they did put in the number and strength of their Captaines and princes.ANother hypophora, or aunswering of an obiection, the which taketh from the Niniuits the hope, which they had conceiued
in their minde of the strength and number of their Captaines, and Princes. For God would especialliē haue all things taken away, that the faithfull might assuredly perswade themselues, that nothing should let or hinder, but that the enimies of his Church and of his name should most sharpelie, and most easelie be ouerthrowen. And the like we haue to hope of the kingdome of the Turke, that in the ende and at the last it shall be destoyed by God, the which in all poynts in a manner may very notably be compared vnto the Assyrian kingdome, whether his blas∣phemie against God or his power be considered. Thus then Cap∣taines and valiant Princes are great helpes and aydes in euery common welth and people, and arguments to make vs hope wel. Wherefore the Niniuites when as they had before time stout and valiant Captaines of warre and Princes, and that sundrie and di∣uers, they hoped well. But the Prophet answereth that they all at that times shall be like vnto locustes that flie away, the which in the time of cold do come together in great numbers in the hedg∣ges: but when the Sunne ariseth, they vanish away by and by & are not to be seene, so that there appeareth not one of them: neither can their place be knowen. Wherefore by this cōparison is easely vnderstood, that the confidence or trust of the Niniuites in this behalfe is vaine, and that they shall not be defended by their Princes. The Prophet comprehendeth all the gouer∣nours of the Assyrians both high and lowe.But now because there is not only one kinde, or one degree, or a like and equal dignitie of those, which beare rule either at home or abroade, that is in warre, but some are inferior then other∣some, some higher then other some. The prophet seemeth to haue comprehended all the kindes of those that beare rule, whether they haue anthoritie and office in any high degree at home or a broade, or whether they be inferiors, or vnder officers. The high∣er degrees of gouerment seeme to be cōtained vnder the name of Diademe, as is the King, the Viceroy, the Lieuetenent of the pro∣uince, the King his chiefe ambassador, or generall in the armie, or Campe. The inferior Gouernours, are comprehended vnder the name (Thaphsarim.) He therefore compareth them vnto the locustes the which wander and runne vp and downe in the fieldes, and these inferior ones vnto the grashopper the which dwelleth in holes, and lieth still hid in them, whom the French∣mencall Grillus. So the higher gouernours & rulers of the Armie of the Assyrians shal wander vp and downe, and flie away scatte∣red,
because they shall not dare to shew their heads vnto the Chal∣deans their enemies. And the inferiour Captaines in the same Campe shall lye hid like grashoppers, and keepe themselues within their holes. See what Sedechias and the princes of the Iewes did, when Ierusalem was taken Ierem. 39. ver. 4. 2. King cap. 25. where you shall finde that the King with the chiefe of his Nobles & Cap∣taines, and warriours fled away through the breach of a wall in the kings garden by night, but it nothing auailed them. For they were pursued after by the Chaldees and takē, and a great many of them very vilely and shamefully vsed and intreated. Vers. 18. Thy shepherds doe sleepe, O King of Asshur: thy strong men lye downe: thy people is scattered vpon the mountaines, and no man gathereth them. What the fi∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see Amos cap 8. vers. 4.AN Apostrophe, or turning of speech vnto the King of Assyria himselfe, whom the Prophet sheweth shall be forsaken of his owne Captaines and Princes, to the end their feare and dastardli∣nes in forsaking the rest of the common people may bee the better confirmed and knowne. For if there be any whom in the perill and danger of warre all men would haue to bee saued, this is onelie the King in especiall, who when as he is forsaken of the Captaines of the Armie, much more shall the rest also be forsaken. Vaine there∣fore is the hope which the Niniuites shall conceiue of these Cap∣taines. And hereby also is confirmed the threatning of the destruc∣tion of this Niniueh: nay, of the ouerthrow of the whole kingdome of Assyria, for that they which haue the rule & authoritie to defend it, shall not execute their office and charge: they shall then sleepe, when it behoued them most especially to be awake. Finally, they shall lye either in their beds, or els drowned in their delights and pleasures, when as they were to thinke vpon the defending of the kingdome.Sardanapalus. This doe the historians report of Sardanapalus, whom they make the last king of the Assyrians, namely that he was at that time in the midst of his banquets, and flockes of his harlots, ouerta∣ken and drunken with wine, when as Niniueh was besieged of the enemies. Reade Dan. 5. ver. 30. what fell out vnto Balthafar King of the Babylonians,Two parts of this verse. whose like negligence, sluggishnes, and careles∣nes is there described. 1. The negligence of the gouer∣nours. Further, this verse hath two parts. The first containeth the negli∣gence of the Rulers, Presidents, and great men of the kingdome of
Assyria.2. The feare and flying of the people. The second sheweth the feare and fleeing away of the whole people into the mountaines. The ouermuch sluggish and shamefull negligence of the gouernours of the kingdome appea∣reth in this, That they are sayd that they shall at that time sleepe,  & be in their beds, at what time they ought especially to be waking, to wit, at the comming of the Chaldees, nay, at their breaking into the kingdome, and besieging of Nimuch the head citie thereof. For vnto such great Peeres and Nobles the defence and garding of e∣uerie kingdome doth especiallie appertaine, who are of greater au∣thoritie and power in the same, and vnto whome chiefly belongeth the hope of the kingdome. Who if they bee slouthfull and negli∣gent in defending of the same: much more sluggish will the other subiects bee in defending thereof, vnto whose benefite and duetie this matter doth lesse appertaine. But here commeth that to passe, the which God hath foresayd should come to passe, when as he wil haue any kingdome to runne presently into ruine and decay, name∣ly, that the Protectors or Defenders and Princes thereof shall be as it were women, that is, most fearefull and cowards, and giuen vnto pleasures, or careles and sluggish, at such time as they ought most especially to be occupied in warres, & to be in armes in the Camp, Isai. 2. As for the people and other subiects, when these princes are sleeping euen in the danger of the life of their King,  they doubtles will runne away for feare. And to the end that he may shewe the carelesnes of these Princes to bee the more filthie, that is, the more shamefull, and their negligence the more vnhonorable, he doth as it were poynt out with the finger, and declare the place, vnto the which this people shall flye, namely,They shall flye vnto the moun∣taines. The people shall flye into the mountaines, the which are both neere vnto the citie it selfe, and al∣so vnto the borders of the kingdome. These mountaines which he noteth are the Caspian mountaines, into the which the Assyrians being ouercome did flye, and lye hid, as before ver. 11. Againe,They shall flye in great a∣boundance. This people shall be scattered or abound, the which shal flee, and the which is thy people, that is, the which is to be defended by you, & by thee being King, and by whom thou diddest hope that thou thy selfe shouldest haue been defended. They shal not be then a small com∣panie, but many, who if they were gathered together, would make a good armie, and would hold some part of the Empire: or at least wise saue themselues and the King Whereby the negligence of these princes appeareth to be the greater, who saued not so manie subiects that remained and were left: or did not muster them, and
gather them together to fight,Darius. as Darius the last king of the Per∣sians did, who thrise gathered together the remnants of his armie, and fought against Alexander the great.No man ga∣thereth them together. Thirdly, there is added, There is no man which gathereth together these remnants, albeit that many, and a great number of them be left aliue, & a very great ma∣nie haue escaped the slaughter. So then all things at that time shal be as it were desperate, and as it were betrayed by their princes, so that thereby may appeare, that the hope is vaine which is put in them. Let vs then follow the counsel of the Psalmist, who Psal. 146 ver. 3.4.5. teacheth vs, saying: Put not your trust in princes, nor in the sonne of man, for there is no helpe in him. His breath departeth, and he returneth to his earth: then his thoughts perish. Blessed is he that hath the God of Iaacob for his helpe, whose hope is in the Lord his God. Vers. 19. There is no healing of thy wound: thy plague is grieuous: all that heare the bruite of thee, shall clap their hands ouer thee: for vpon whom hath not thy malice passed continually? THe figure Epiphonema,Epiphonema, what this fi∣gure is, see Io∣nas ca 2. ver. 9. or acclamation, whereby the Prophet doth both confirme all the former threatnings against the Assy∣rians, and proueth the Assyrians to be miserable, and describeth the miserable cōdition of the Assyrians, and finally repeateth the cause of their so great miseries.Three parts of this verse. And therefore this verse hath three parts, besides the phrase or kind of speaking it selfe, the which is most ve∣hement and full of force and efficacie, to terrifie or fray the Assy∣rians, and to comfort the faithfull as touching the punishment of the wicked which was to insue.1. That these threatnings of God shall ass∣redly come to passe. And first of all he teacheth, that these threatnings of God shall be ratified or certaine, whereas it is sayd: There is no healing, or gathering together of thy wound, and breach, that is to say, there is none which can binde vp those thy wounds, and turne the wrath of God away from thee: there is no comforter vnto thee in thy miseries, as before vers. 7. Finally, there is no remedie left for thee, or set forth, wherewithall thou maist pa∣cifie and comfort thy selfe, and ease thy miserie & distressed estate. And euen in this very poynt their case seemeth now to be most mi∣serable.2. Their case shal be most mise∣rable and hrd to beare. Yet is the same moreouer hereby described to be most pi∣tifull because this plague, the which cannot now bee asswaged or healed, is sayd furthermore to be full of paine, or grieuous. It shall therefore be very hard to be borne, and continually shooting and pricking, as are such wounds and sores as are to be lanced or cut, the
which are full of matter and corruption, and doe euery foote stirre vp paine and griefes. Lastly,  3. none shall take pitie and compassion on the Assyrians thus afflicted,None shall pi∣tie them but rather laugh at their trou∣bles. but rather whosoeuer shall heare of the same and report of them thus wasted, captiues, slaine and mur∣thered, shall clap their hands, and mocke them, and shal say, that these things haue fallen out vnto them worthilie. For this clapping of hands is also a signe of ioy and gladnes, the which all men shall conceiue, which shall heare of her ouerthrow. Doubtles this is the highest degree of miscrie, namely, in the midst of afflictions to haue none that will bee grieued and sorie with thee, to comfort thee, to take part of thy burthen vpon himselfe, but to behold all men tri∣umphing ouer thee, heaping afflictions vnto thee that art afflicted, and reioycing moreouer of thy miserie. So do the godlie complaine Psal 88. ver. 18. Thou hast put away from me my louers and friends, and mine acquaintance hid themselues. So was Christ afflicted or punished for vs and our sinnes, that he could finde none to comfort him, no not then when he did hang vpon the crosse, but had al men his enemies, and mocking, and reuiling him, Matth. 27. ver. 39.40.41.42.43.44. where wee finde that those that passed by, that the Priests, the Scribes, the Elders, the Pharises, the theeues that suffe∣red with him, did mocke, scorne, and reuile him. Woe therefore be vnto our sinnes: for our affliction is made most light and easie, when as we haue those that will sorowe and mourne with vs. And this is the part and dutie of a Christian, in the sorowe and heauines of others, accordingly as Paul willeth Rom. 12. ver. 15. saying, Re∣ioyce with them that reioyce, and weepe with them that weepe. This comfort did I my selfe finde at Orthesium the fiue and twentith day of the moneth of December in the yeare of the last time 1583. at the which very day and time I being a stranger,Comfort that this author a stranger found in a strange countrie. and in a forreine countrie lost my most well beloued little daughter named Anne. Her being but onely foure yeares olde God called out of this earth into heauen, vnto whom euen then beleeuing in Christ, and reli∣giously according vnto the capacitie of those yeares calling vpon God, he will giue a crowne of immortalitie, as vnto all those also which are adopted or chosen through Christ, as Paul speaketh 2. Tim. 4. ver. 8. For henceforth (saith Paul) is laid vp for me the crown of righteousnes, which the Lord the righteous iudge shall giue me at that day: and not to me only, but vnto all them also that loue his appea∣ring. But in that my heauines there came vnto me so many godlie men of Orthesium to comfort me, that they did meruailously as∣swage
and lessen the same vnto me. Now this Orthesium of Bearne (called sometime Bearne,Orthesium as it is in the Chronicle of Antoninus) is a famous towne or citie, where at the first there was a Schoole erected or founded by Ioane the Queene of Nauarre of blessed memorie.A Schoole scū∣ded there by the Queene of Nauarre, and afterward by her sonne Hen∣rie the second made an Vni∣uersitie. The cause of this so heauie iudgement of God against the Assyrians. Afterward the same Schoole the selfe same yeare in which I wrote these things, was ad∣uanced vnto the dignitie of an Vniuersitie by Henrie the second the most courteous and godly, and indeed Christian King of Nauarre, the sonne of the sayd Ioane. Furthermore, the cause of so great a iudgement of God against the Assyrians is repeated, namely, their crueltie, couetousnesse and fiercenes against all men, and people, and countries of the world. Therefore there was no corner of the earth into the which the cru∣elnes of these lyons and theeues had not ranged. Wherefore all men doe worthilie reioyce at the ruine and fall of the Assyrians. For in the end these cruel princes, kings, and peoples must perish and be destroyed, as it is Psal. 9. ver. 17. The wicked shall turne into hell, and all nations that forget God. The which both the Empire of the Turke, and also the faction or crue of Antichrist shall feele and find in the end to be most true. Amen. FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus vpon the Prophet Joel. CAP. 1. Vers. 1. The word of the Lord, that came to Ioel the sonne of Pethuel. Diuers opiniōs of the time, wherein Ioel prophesied.THe opinion of men is diuers, at what time Ioel prophesied. Some thinke that he li∣ued vnder Ozias, or Azarias King of the Iewes, and vnder Ieroboam the second of that name, King of the Israelites. The Iewes hold that he prophesied vnder Ma∣nasses: I for my part, without the preiudice of others, will set downe my opinion also as it were my shot towards this recko∣ning. For after that I haue accounted all things, and diligently con∣sidered the calamities or punishments, the which are threatned by this Prophet, I doe thinke that he liued vnder Ammon King of the Iewes: but prophesied vnder Iosias a little before that same most sore and grieuous famin (the which was foretold also by Ieremiah cap. 14.) fell out in Iudea, vnto whom he prophesieth, and there ra∣ged, and was very great and extreme.A generall rule to be obserued for the finding out of the time of the prophe∣sying of some Prophets. For this I set downe for a ge∣nerall rule, that those Prophets, which make no mention at al of the kingdome of Israel (as is this our Prophet) liued and prophesied af∣ter that kingdom was vtterly destroyed and ouerthrowne. Where∣fore in my iudgement this prophesie cannot be referred vnto those first or former times, the which went before the destruction of the kingdome of Israel. So then Ioel liued, or at least wise prophesied after Ionas, Amos, Isias, Oseas, in the time of Ieremie, and vnder King Iosias.
The contents of this Prophesie.This prophesie containeth the foretelling and rehearsing of two punishments, the which self same are to be found also in Ieremie, namely of a great famin in this chapter, & the feareful comming of the Babyloniās, in the chapters following, in respect of both which plagues the Prophet exhorteth and stirreth vp the Iewes vnto a publike and solemne repentance, the which also be describeth: and it is very likely that it was vsed and holden among the people vn∣der the godly king Iosias. Wherefore this booke, as the writings of the other Prophets, containeth both the threatnings of God, be∣cause of the sinnes of the people, and also his free promises in Christ towards his elect.A peculiar and especiall poynt to be noted in this Prophet. And this is in our prophet a peculiar and espe∣ciall poynt, that looke what thinges and discomodities or aduersi∣ties and falling out of matters, prophane or heathen and wicked men do refer vnto either fortune, or vnto the course of nature, or vn∣to the mouing of the planets, or vnto the extraordinary meanes of the seasons of the yeare, and vnto the disposition of the heauens & of the starres, we are taught to refer the same vnto the most or∣derly and iust prouidence of God, and out of them to marke both his anger, and also his good will towards vs. But this verse hath two thinges to be noted.2 Parts of this verse. The one a confir∣mation of his whole prophesie and discourse to insue, taken from God the author of the same. For this is the word not of man but of God himself,1 A confirmati∣on of this pro∣phesie. although it were deliuered & vttered by man. The o∣ther thing is the name & stock of this Prophet, whose seruice & mi∣nistery God vseth, the which his stock was thē famous & knowne, but now is somewhat obscure or darke vnto vs, because of the an∣tiquity and oldnes of thinges.2 The name and stock of the pro∣phet. This prophet then is Ioel, and that not euery Ioel (for it may be that at the same time there were many famous & knowen men of that name) but he which was the sonne of Pethuel, & so consequently most knowne among others of the same name. For I thinke the name of the Father added here in this place, & elswhere by the Prophets, to shew that they (for as much as they were of an honest and knowen family or house) were voyd of all suspicion, as if after the example of the false Prophets, they did preach for couetousnes and gaine: or did any thing of flattery & for vaineglory sake: or tooke vpon them to deale publikely: but God in such sort mouing and commaunding them.
Ver. 2. Here ye this O Elders, and hearken ye all inhabitants of the land, whether such a thing hath bin in your daies, or yet in the daies of your fathers. The proposition by way of am∣plification. Insect a, are a kind of small vermin deui∣ded in the body betweene the head and the taile hauing no flesh, bloud, sinnues, &c. as are flies, gnats, bees, antes, waspes, hor∣nets, and such like.THe Proposition or priucipall poynt by way of amplification. And this amplification was needefull because of mockers and scorners of God. For when as the Prophet was to speake of locusts, palmer wormes, grashoppers & caterpillers (which are filly creatures, and of the kinde which they call insecta) and of their power against men, and the kingdome of Iudah, he should by & by moue laugh∣ter vnto these scoffers, in that he should thunder and so greatly, go about to fray men so exceedingly with so smal and light matters. He doth therefore by the effects describe the matter it selfe, both as in part it was euery where felt already, and was more to be per∣ceiued yet hereafter, & sheweth that it is a most grieuous & feare∣full iudgement of God, the which they otherwise peraduenture would haue contemned or despised. So Exod. it appeareth that God by locusts ouercame the Egyptians. And this plague a∣mong the rest is reckoned vp Psal. 105. ver. 34 in these wordes, He spake and the grashoppers came, and caterpillers innumerable. So 1. Kinng 8. ver. 37 such kind of creatures & beasts are reckoned vp among the most bitter scourges & whippes of God. And elswhere they are called the great army or host of God. For nothing is light or weake the which God armeth against vs. 1 Who are stir∣red vp to heare.This verse hath two things to be noted. For we must marke both whom he stirreth vp to heare, and why he stirreth them vp. And first of all he stirreth vp those, who among that people are Elders in age,2 Why they are stirred vp. and might haue noted and marked both more and greater iudgements of God by reason of the length of their yeares. Se∣condly, al the rest of the inhabitants of the land of Iudah,  as namely all vnto which this speech is directed. And all these doth God wil to heare these things which follow, not only with the eares of their body: but also earnestly to applie their minde thereunto, to weigh and thinke vpon them with themselues, and diligently to hearken vnto them:  But why the Prophet thus dilignetly warneth them to heare, both the regard of the mttaer, and also the greatnes of the daunger (wherein they either already are, or presently are like to be) doth perswade. For, as it is here sayd, in that kinde, there yet had neuer bin any daunger, or hurt like or equall vnto it, either in
the memory or remembrance of those which were aliue, or else in the times of their elders. For where as it is sayd of the grashop∣pers which God in his anger sent vpon Pharao and his land, that they were such, as neither their fathers, nor their fathers fathers had euer seene vpon the earth vnto that day, that maketh nothing against this which is here spoken. For there he speaketh not of the multi∣tude of those kinde of creatures but of the greatnes of them, that there should neuer after be the like of them, that is, so big, & great in the quantity of their bodies, as those then in Egypt seemed and were. Exod. 10. ver. 6.14. Ver. 3. Tell you your children of it, and let your children shew to their children, and their children to an other generation. A Confirmation of the greatnes of the daunger, and of the extra∣ordinary matter which was to come.A confirmation of the greatnes of the daunger. And it is taken from the commaundement of God, who will haue it told vnto posterity vn∣to the third and fourth generation for the praise and glory of his power and Iustice towardes men, and for the fearing of his church hereafter, that they should not in such sort offend God, as they had offended him, who were punished after these so fearefull wayes & manners. For God will haue the notable and extraordinary testi∣monies or witnesses, especially both of his Iustice, and also of his mercy to be remembred and kept among men. And therefore it is said Psal. 22. ver. 31. They shall come and shall declare his righte∣ousnes vnto a people that shall be borne, because he hath done it. And Psal. 135. ver. 13. Thy name, O Lord, endureth for euer: O Lord thy remembrance is from generation to generation. And yet are not the daily and ordinary examples of them both, that is, of his iustice and also of his mercy therefore of vs to be forgotten, or neglected and not cared for, or to be passed ouer with blinde eyes. Vers. 4. That which is left of the palmer worme, hath the grashop∣per eaten, and the residue of the grashopper hath the canker worme eaten, and the residue of the canker worme hath the ca∣terpiller eaten. A Making plaine of that which was set downe before. For now in bare and simple speech he layeth forth the matter it selfe, the which is to be heard, and not any more in figuratiue speaking, as
he did in the former verses. Hee sayth therefore,See before ver. 2. that in the iust iudgement of GOD there was a most grieuous famine brought into all the lande of Iudah by these foure kindes of creatures cal∣led Insecta, or diuided, the which in this place are recited, name∣ly, the Palmer worme, the Grashopper, or Locust, the Canker worme, or the Melolontha (which is also of the greater sorte of Locusts) and the caterpiller. All these sortes and kindes of Inse∣cta doe croppe the fields, eate the grasse, and deuour the corne, hurt the haruest, and the graine, waste the fruites, and all leaues of trees. Whereupon Plinius lib. 17. Natur. Histor. cap. 28. and other wri∣ters of naturall things doe reporte that medicines and remedies haue been inuented agaynst these beasts, and wasters, and spoylers of corne and trees. Yea moreouer, the same Plinius lib. 11. cap. 29. doth write, being otherwise a prophane or heathen man, that the multitude & great numbers of these insecta, & especially locusts, is a signe of the anger and wrath of God: but he wrote these things truely, being compelled thereunto through the force of the trueth, and generall confession of all men. Now to declare and set down how these are bred, and seuered one from another, appertayneth vnto those that write of naturall matters: but concerning these here spoken of, I doe iudge that they were made at that time by God after an extraordinary maner, both in respect of the number of them, and also of this their such power and so great deuouring & eating vp of things. Neither was this famine caused and brought forth in foure diuers and continual yeares (namely, in the first yeare by the palmer worme, in the se∣cond yeare by the locust, and so forth) but I thinke that all these were together, and came in one and the same yeare, and caused the famine. And first, the palmer worme hurte the corne and the trees: then the locust or grashopper: thirdly came the canker worme, and fourthly the caterpiller. For all these Insecta doe vse to breed in one and the same yeare, partely by too much showers, and partly by the ouer great heate of the sunne. And there are di∣uers diseases of trees and fruits as it were natural: and besides these, others extraordinary, as blasting with cold, blasting with heate and drought, and wasting or spoyling by such vermine as these, as Pli∣nius teacheth lib. 17. cap. 24.25. And which things ought to call vs backe vnto the feeling of our sinnes, when as we are punished with these discommodities.
Vers. 5. Awake ye drunkards, and weepe, and howle all yee drinkers of wine, because of the new wine: for it shall be pulled from your mouth. An amplifica∣tion of the an∣ger of God. What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap. 6. v. 1.AN amplification of this anger of GOD, and of this famine, by the particular rehersall and reckoning vp of those things which these creatures did hurte. And first of all heere is in this place re∣hearsed and recited wine, the which that yeare was vtterly lost: but the description of this punishment or plague is in such sorte sette forth, that by a Prosopopoeia vnto the drunkards or wine bibbers, this miserie is augmented or increased. This verse hath two things to bee noted. The first is, this pro∣sopopoeia. The second,Two parts of this verse. the making more plaine of the thing that is lost.1 The Prosopo∣poeia. The Prosopopoeia, or feyning of persons is made both to rouze vp the drunkards, that is, those that doe ouerloade themselues with wine: and generally also vnto all persons, which are delighted or in loue with wine more then they ought to be,2. The laying opē of the thing lost albeit they become not drunken therewithall. For both these are stirred vp because of the losse of the wine the which was hoped to haue been gathered,  (the vines being deuoured by these vermine called insecta, as gras∣hoppers, caterpillers, locusts, and such like) they are stirred vp, I say, onely to a wake (for they which are drunkards, or giuen to wine, are wont to be drouzie, and in a manner heauy and senceles, as it were alwayes sleepie by reason of the wine continually fuming vp into their brayne) but they are also stirred vp to mourn, nay with alowd voyce to howle: because of the great punishment brought vpon them, and their lust or pleasure in drinking, and the same punish∣ment indeede most exceeding great. And these are stirred vp a∣boue the rest, and aboue those that are sober, because that of them∣selues they both are asleepe at the iudgements of God, euen when they are very sharpe: and also because that this way God doth wit∣nes, that he when as he sendeth such scarcenes of wine, doth punish the drunkennes of men, and euery abuse of wine. The thing it selfe which is lost, is new wine, the which was ho∣ped for agaynst that yeare, and therefore is called muste. But it is vtterly lost, and cut from their mouth, as the Prophet speaketh, al∣beit that these good fellowes seeke it neuer so diligently and ear∣nestly in all countreyes, and be ready to buy it dearely, and most greatly wish to haue and it bee but a little sippe as it were. This
barrennesse then of the vines is doubtles a most iust punishment of drunkennesse, and of the abuse of wine. Vers. 6. Yea a nation commeth vpon my land, mighty, and with∣out number, whose teeth are like the teeth of alyon, and he hath the iawes of a great lyon. A reason why this scarcitie should be.THe yeelding of a reason. For he sheweth by what meanes this either hath in parte already come to passe (if we will haue Ionas to haue prophesied the famine being now already begun) because that it continued many yeares: or else why it should come to passe, if we be of opinion that he foretolde vnto them a famin the which was immediately to insue. Lest therfore this threatning might seem vaine vnto them, especially by reason of the multitude of the vines, wherewith all Iudea did abound, he sheweth how great the num∣ber of these forenamed beasts wasting the vines shall be, and how great plenty there shall be of them,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Ams cap. 4. ver. 12. and that by a Metaphor taken from some mighty people or armie of men gathered together. The multitude therefore of these creatures, albeit in themselues they be neuer so small, shall be so great, that they may in number match a nation, yea and that a mighty nation, whose teeth are like the teeth of a lyon, and consequently wost strong, and deuouring and eating vp all things. For a Lyon is a beast most rauenous, and also most strong, who with his teeth breaketh and teareth inpeeces the bones that are euen most hard. And therefore the good king Hezechiah in the feeling of his fraile flesh, thinking his visitation wherewith GOD in hs sicknes did for the time exercise him, to be very hard and extreame compareth it vnto a Lyon breaking his bones, Isai cap. 38. ver. 13. saying: I reckoned to the morning, but he brake all my bones, like a lyon: from day to night wilt thou mak an end of mee. Vers. 7. He maketh my vine waste, and pilleth off the barke of my figge tree: he maketh it bare, and casteth it downe: the branches thereof are made white. A second hurt by the forena∣med creatures.A Second kinde of harme and losse caused by these beasts, name∣ly, the vtter eating vp of the vines themselues, that there should be no hope left of gathering in of wines against the yeares to come. A third kinde, the spoyling of the figge trees,The third hurt the breeding of
wormes in them, the pilling of the barke, and blasting of them. The which diseases and faultes are wont especially to bee in figge trees and figges. For the figge is of that sort of trees the which easily looseth her fruits: and yet besides it hath these peculiar dis∣eases Plinius lib. 17. Nat. hist. cap. 24. Of wormes that are in figges, some doe breede of them, others the worme Cerastes ingendreth, yet they all do turne into the Cerastes. Againe, it is proper vnto bla∣sting, when as graffed and young plants die, especially figges and vines. Finally, the same Plinius sayth: There are for the same cause (when as showers or heate doe abound, or are altogether wanting) Cankers breeding, an harmefull creature, and they eate vp the leaues, and some the flowers, and leaue the tree which they haue eaten in an ill fauoured sight to beholde and looke vpon. Thus much hath he, which I iudged not vnfit for the laying open of the meaning of this place: albeit, as I haue sayd, I doe easily grant that in this multitude there was some thing extraordinary. Vers. 8. Mourne like a virgin girded with sackcloth for the hus∣band of her youth. THe figure Epiphonema,Epiphonema, what this fi∣gure is, see Io∣nas. ca 2. ver. 9. or acclamation, wherewith the whole lande of Iudea the which was to be scourged with this rodde of GOD, is moued by the Prophet vnto most grieuous mourning: and so consequently vnto an earnest feeling of the iudgments of God, & vnto an earnest repentance of their former life. But here are two things to be noted, whereby no doubt the greatnes of the sor∣row, and of this iudgment of God is declared.Two parts of this verse. The first is, the kind of mourning,1. The kinde of mourning. It is a crying out, and not onely a simple lamenting or mourning, whereunto the prophet exhorteth men. Secondly, a similitude taken from a wife lately married, but being now be∣reft of her husband.2. A similitude. For this sorowe is most grieuous. So are the Iewes also willed to mourne, that is mos grieuously, because of the iudgement of God, which did hang oer their heads. The like similitudes are vsed in other places of the scripture, and made more plaine to expresse the greatnes of heauines and sorrow. As Psal. 35. vers. 14. of one that mourneth for his mother: I humbled my selfe mourning as one that bewayleth his mother. So Dauid 2. Sam. cap. 1. vers. 26. in most pitiful manner bewaileth the death of Ionathan, saying, Woe is me for thee, my brother Ionathan: very kind hast thou been vnto me: thy loue to me was wonderfull, passing the loue of wo∣men:
how are the mighty ouerthrowen, and the weapons of warre de∣stroyed? Vers. 9. The meate offering and the drinke offering is cut off from the house of the Lorde: the Priestes the Lordes Ministers mourne. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer misery, ta∣ken frō a most lamentable ef∣fect.AN amplification of the former misery taken from a most la∣mentable effect. For this scarcenes and penurie or want of thinges shall reach not onely vnto the life of men, but also vnto the worship of God, and vnto his Temple. For by this meanes the offrings and sacrifices commanded by God to be offred, shall cease to be made in the Temple, because that both corne, or flowre, and oyle, and wine, and other such things, whereof offerings and sa∣crifices were wont in the seruice of GOD to be made, shall fayle, of the which reade Leuit. 2. and 7. and euery where in the booke of Numbers, as cap. 6.18.25. Wherefore this sorrow shall come not onely vnto priuate persons, but also vnto the Priest themselues, and the ministers of the Lord. For they shall not bee able to keepe and exercise the outward seruice of God, and to fulfill and discharge that their holy ministerie because of the want of things necessary and belonging thereunto. The which no doubt was a most rare thing to come to passe, in that people especially, and in so great a blessing or fruitfulnes of that land, by howe much the greater and more fearefull this iudgement of God appeareth to haue been, albe∣it the Lord brought it vpon them by these sillie creatures only: It hath therefore a great efficacie or force to set the weight of this anger of God before their eyes, where the Prophet sayth: The meat offring, and the drink offring, that is, the whole outward wor∣ship and seruice of God, and not onely some one part thereof cea∣seth.What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap 5. ver. 21. For so I vnderstand it by the figure Synecdoche, a part being put for the whole. For albeit the sacrifices or beasts remayned, yet could not they be offered without their meat offring, and their drinke offering. Further, whereas he addeth: The Priests the Mi∣nisters of the Lord Iehouah, that is, whome the Lord hath apoynted Stewards vnto his owne selfe, and not vnto men, they also shall feele this iudgement of God in the worship and seruice of God.
Vers. 10. The field is wasted: the land mourneth: for the corne is de∣stroyed: the new wine is dried vp, and the oyle is decayed. A reason of the former verse and sentence, why the meate offrings and drinke offrings should cease.THis is the rendring of a reason, and the same most plaine, of the former verse and sentence, to wit, why the meate offrings and drinke offrings shall cease to be made in the temple of God: name∣lie, because all those things shall faile, out of the which both those meate offrings, and also those drinke offrings were to be offered by the commandement of God. For the meate offrings were com∣manded to be made of sine meale, that is, of the most pure & cleane flowre of corne: and the drinke offrings of oyle and wine. But both all the corne was withered away (for the fieldes were spoyled both with ouer much wet, and also ouer much parching of the Sunne, and such other extraordinarie wayes) and also the wine & the oyle. In the which third,The fourth cō∣moditie, name∣ly oyle, hurt by the forenamed creatures. to wit, oyle, is the fourth kind of things contai∣ned, wherein euidently appeared the harme caused by these beasts called Insecta, to wit, Grashoppers, Locusts, Caterpillers, and the like. So then the Caterpillers, and those other sillie creatures had eaten vp the corne, or the fields: the wine, or the vines: the figges and the oliues. Whereupon is added to moue affection, and to stirre vp men be they neuer so dull and senseles, The land it selfe mour∣neth, that is, the soyle it selfe, and dead or senseles element of the earth, because of this so manifest anger and fearfull punishment of God. Wherefore much more ought men themselues, for whose sinnes these things come to passe, to mourne, to bee moued, and touched. Vers. 11. Be ye ashamed, O husbandmen: howle, O ye vinedressers for the wheate, and for the barley, because the haruest of the field it perished. What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see O∣seas cap 6. ver. 1.THe application or exhortation by a Prosopopoeia, and compari∣son vnto men themselues indued with reason, and whom these euils doe touch more neerely. The which is not rashly or vnadui∣sedly done by the Prophet: but vpon iust causes, as also whereas he seemeth afterward to repeate the selfe same thing in other words, or rather often to inculcate or beate it into their heads,Causes why Ioel vseth of∣ten to repeate one thing. the which he had sayd before of the Vine, the figge tree, the drinke offring, the meate offring, as hereafter ver. 12.13. First, for that we are so dul
by nature,1 Because of their dulnes. that we hard and scarce giue any heede vnto the iudge∣ments of God be they neuer so fearful. Secondly, for that the things which are here by Ioel reckoned vp for manifest and extraordinary testimonies or witnesses of the wrath of God,2. Because men referre his iudgements vnto naturall causes. men are wont to re∣ferre the same vnto naturall causes, and not vnto the threatnings of God. Thirdly, for that such was the loue of Ioel towards this peo∣ple (which was the people of God, and the Church) he could not sufficiently witnesse his care for them, and content himselfe, vntill he might see them to bee touched with an earnest feeling of the iudgements of God, and so consequently to repent.3. That they might be tou∣ched with an earnest feeling of the iudge∣ments of God. Two parts of this verse. These are the causes why he was not contented to haue sayd once, That the fields were wasted, &c. but he repeateth the selfe same things with great vehemencie, earnestnes, and amplifying of the matter to feare the hypocrites and to call back the godly from their wickednesse. And the Prosopopoeia is here euident, with the which men are wont, and may also greatly be pressed and prouoked. For they are roused vp, and spoken vnto as it were by name. The comparison is gathered hereby: If the earth it selfe mourne because of her barrennes,1. A Prosopopoeia. much more ought you to mourne, who are both men, that is,2. A comparison. indued with reason: and Husbandmen and Vinedressers, whose hope, labour, feedes, trauaile, victuall and meate is vtterly perished. Therefore this admonition, and exhortation appertaineth vnto husbandmen, and vinedressers, and other labourers about corne and fruites. For both the wheate and also the barley is perished: in the which lat∣ter the fift kind of hurt & harme is expressed, to wit, in the losse of their barley being eaten vp by those little vermin. Vers. 12. The Ʋine is dried vp, and the figge tree is decayed: the pomegranate tree, and the palme tree, and the apple tree, euen all the trees of the field are withered: surely the ioy is withered away from the sonnes of men. Other kinds of things, which shall be eaten vp by these small beasts.OTher kinds of things are reckoned vp, in the which there should bee hurt and harme sustained by meanes of these small crea∣tures, and famin, and great scarcitie brought in, to the ende they should vnderstand that this no doubt is an extraordinarie iudge∣ment of God, and the same also most hard, when as they are vtterly voyd of al things of al kind of meat, of all sorts of fruits. Wherfore in this place besides the former kindes there are reckoned vp three other, The Pomegranate tree, or the Pomegranate, the Palme tree, &
the common apple tree. Finally, all trees generally, with the fruite whereof men are delighted, & the which they vse to eate: al things which by God are giuen vnto men for pleasures sake. These things therefore are shewed by the Prophet either to haue withered, and to haue been vnfruitfull, and spoyled of their fruit, or that they shall so be, that the greatnes of this famin may be vnderstood. See Iere. 14. for the like description of a most grieuous famin. Moreouer, the vine and the figge tree are here againe repeated, because that these kinds of plants, like as the Pomegranate, the common apple, the palme tree, are trees giuen vnto men for pleasure and ioy: al which the Prophet would in this place comprehend at once and together. Whereupon wee gather by this place, and by the verses before, as 7.9. and hereafter 16. that concerning the things which God in this world hath giuen vnto man to vse, that the same doe appertaine, or in olde time did appertaine partly vnto the worship of God, of which sort are those whereof drinke offrings and meate offrings were made: partly vnto the necessarie foode of men, without the which this life cannot bee sustained at all, as are corne and graine: and partly vnto the pleasure and ioy of men: as wine, and oyle, and figges, Psal. 23. And Psal. 104. ver. 15. the Prophet acknowledgeth the bounteousnes of God, who bestoweth vpon men not onely things necessarie, but also such as serue for ioy and pleasure, as wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oyle to make the face to shine: so ouer liberall forsooth is God towards men, and so excee∣ding franke and bounteous: for all which thankes are of vs to bee giuen and rendred vnto God, who hath created them, as all other meates to be (as Paul teacheth 1. Tim. 4. ver. 3.) receiued with giuing thankes of them which beleeue, and know the trueth. Vers. 13. Gird your selues, and lament, ye priests: howle ye ministers of the altar: come and lye all night in sackcloth, ye ministers of my God: for the meate offring, and the drinke offring is taken a∣way from the house of your God. A putting thē in minde of their dutie.AN admonition or putting of them in minde of their dutie. That which was altogether needfull to be added. For this is as it were the medicine of the wound and sore layd vpon them, and a most ex∣cellent remedie for the disease specified before. And it is an earnest conuersion or turning vnto God. The which is here described or set forth by outward signes: and vnto the which the Prophet ex∣horteth
all sorts of men (vnto whom those iudgements are fore∣told). And first of all the Priests themselues, then olde men, after∣wards the rest of the inhabitants of that countrie. The Priests first,The Priests. because that in regard of their office they ought to shine foorth as lights vnto others, vnto this same earnest repentance of mind, both priuatly, & also publikely, as who namely are the ministers of God peculiarly chosen of God himselfe to moue and stirre vp the rest in doing their dutie towards God. Secondly, because God peculiarly did punish them also whilest he tooke away those his sacrifices frō them, and whilest the meate offrings and drinke offrings ceased to be offered by them, the which were wont to be done in the Temple of God. The repētance whereunto the Prophet exhor∣teth, is publike, and described by the outward signes thereof.Further, this repentance, as I haue sayd, and turning vnto God, is described by the outward signes thereof, the which men that are in deede and truely penitent or sorie, are wont to vse publikely and after a solemne maner: and are here seuerally expressed. Where∣fore this is a publike and solemne repentance, and not only priuate: it is extraordinarie, not ordinarie. In it therefore first the priests themselues must repent, as the guides and ring-leaders vnto the rest. Their repentance is described, namely,The outward signes of the re∣pentance of the Priests. that they first of al make hast and speede to shewe vnto others the signes and tokens of a minde trulie penitent or repenting. Let them therefore lament, & let them not onely lament, but also let them howle at the earnest feeling of their sinne. Let them come into the Temple of GOD, where they doe this, and that openly, and the whole congregation seeing thē, & being witnes of the same. Let them lye in the Temple all night, and that in sackcloth, haire, ashes, and teares, the which in times past were outward signes of publike repētance in the church. Moreouer, when he addeth, (The ministers of my God) the Prophet doth both note their peculiar office: and also witnesse his good will toward them, as those namely whom he loueth, as peculiarly the seruants of God, yea and that his God. Vers. 14. Sanctifie you a fast: call a solemne assemblie: gather the Elders, and all the inhabitants of the land into the house of the Lord your God, and crye vnto the Lord. The dutie of the Priests con∣cerning the Church in this matter of pub∣like repentance.THe dutie of the Priests so far forth as it cōcerneth themselues, hath been shewed before: now is declared what their dutie is concerning the residue of the Church, and the other partes and
tokens that remain of publik and extraordinarie repentance are described. Now this was the dutie of the Priestes concerning others, to exhort & stirre them vp vnto repentance, and therefore that they should sāctifie a fast, that is, that they should pronounce some day to be holy, and appoynted vnto God extraordinarilie, in the which the people should fast extraordinarily & publikely, and in the same day they should ordeine and commaund those things to be obserued or kept, the which the Iewes were com∣manded by God to keepe on the Holy-daye, that is, on the Sab∣both daye. By this and the like places appeareth that the appoyn∣ting of a fast appertayneth not onely vnto the godly magi∣strate, no though it be the chiefe magistrate: but also vnto the pastours of the Church: for they ought to be called vnto councell in this matter, because it is an ecclesiastical or Church matter, & the which ought to be established and appoynted according vnto the word of God. Wherefore those magistrates take too much vpon them, who themselues of their owne authoritie do appoynt publik fasts without the knowledge of their pastors, nay do not so much as call them and aske their aduise at all. Secondly, it is the office of the pastors of the Church to call the congregation extraordinarily called. First to gather to gather the elders or old men, afterward the rest into the temple or holy place, & not into the Tauerne, or Ale house: that the old men may be an example of godlines vnto others, and that the rest may follow them. The companie of the Church being called and ga∣thered together, To crie vnto God for themselues, and for the rest of the people, is the dutie of the same Ministers of God, or Pastors of the Church, as it here appeareth. Vers. 15. Alas for the daye for the daye of the Lord is at hand, and it commeth as a destruction from the almightie.Epiphonema. See what this figure is, Ionas cap. 2 ver. 9 Two partes of this verse. THe figure Epiphonema or acclamation, whereby Ioel sheweth the necessitie of proclayming this publick and extraordinarie repentance by the greatnes of the iudgement of God that hunge ouer their heads.1. The Phraise. Wherefore this verse hath two things to be no∣ted. The one is the Phrase or manner of speaking full of mouing affection,2 The causes of this repentāce, which are twaine. & of the good wil of the Prophet towardes the Church of God, the which he would haue to be rouzed from their sinnes. The second, is the causes the which are alleaged of his repen∣pentance.
And these are two, both of them painteth foorth the great∣nesse of the former threatnings.It is the day of the Lord. The first of these causes is, for that this daye of threatnings and punishment, is the daye of God, and consequently to be feared, and horrible, or to be trembled at. For this God is the true Iehouah, and almightie, whom no∣thing can withstand, or preuaile against. Wherefore this punish∣ment is the more to bee feared, because it is from almightie God. For as it is Hebr. 10. ver. 31, It is a fearefull thing to fall into the hands of the lyuing God. And as Peter writeth 1. Epistle cap. 4. ver. 17. If iudgement begin at the house of God, what shall be the end of them, which obey not tho Gospell of God? The second cause or rea∣son is,2. The same day is neere at hande. because the same daye is neere and euen by and by at hand, and hanging ouer the head of the Church. We must there∣fore presently, and setting aside all delayes stop this anger and fire of God with the waters of repentance, and teares. By this place appeareth, that at that time this iudgement of God was not yet fully executed, but that there was a greater famine foretold by Ioell, the which was yet now behinde. Vers. 16. Is not the meate cut off before our eyes? and ioy and glad∣nesse from the house of our God? A confirmation of the said iudgements of God by effects of two sorts.A Confirmation of the greatnes of the said Iudgement of God by those effects, the which they did euen then see with their eyes and, feele, & yet notwithstanding they were to feele greater. And thee effects were of two sortes, to wit, they concerne both men, and also God himselfe. For to this poynt is reduced and brought whatsoeuer Ioell hath threatned before.1. Concerning men. As concerning men, the iudgements of God touch them most grieuously, be∣cause all their foode was then alreadie cut off from them.2. Cōcerning God. They concerne GOD, because that all those holie feastings, the which were wont to be made at their sacrifices of thanks giuing, were taken away from out of the Temple of their God. For now the things were wanting wherewith all they were to be made, namely fine floure, wine, wherewith they did offer oyle, and such other things necessarie in these holy feastes by the com∣mandement of God. But to the end that he may the more sharp∣ly moue and touch them, he sayth, are not these things cut off from the house of our God? God sayth he, is so angry with vs, because of our sinnes, that he hath taken away from vs euen those things,
the which he commanded by vs to be offered vnto him of the fruites, that we should reioyce with him. The which no doubt is a great sharpenesse or bitternes of punishment. Vers. 17 The seed is rotten vnder their clods: the garners are de∣stroyed: the barnes are broken downe, for the corne is withered. THis 17. verse may easely be vnderstood and expounded by the former which haue been opened alreadie in this Chapter. Ver. 18 How did the beastes mourne? the heards of the Cattell pine away, because they haue no pasture, and the flocks are de∣stroyed. An amplifia∣tion of the se∣ueritie or sharpeies of God his iudge∣ment against them. What the fi∣gure Synec∣doche is, see A∣mos cap. 5. v. 2.AN amplification of this sharpenes of the iudgement of God against them, for that not onely they which haue sinned, doe beare and feele the same: but also all sortes and kindes of their Cattell, the which afterwardes are comprehended vnder the name of Oxen and Sheepe, by the figure Synecdoche, as which namely are more necessarie for the foode and vse of men, then the other beasts. The reason of the mourning of these beasts is, be∣cause they haue no pasture, for through the ouer great barrennes of that yeare, and because of the extreame drought or heate of the Sunne after those continuall showres, the grasse also was wi∣thered away in the fields, medowes, mountaines, and other pas∣ture places, so that there lacked meate as well for beasts, as for men, and therefore they were comprized vnder the same plague and punishment,The brute beastes puni∣shed for the sinnes of men. albeit themselues had not sinned: but they were punished for the sinnes of men, vnto whom by God they are made subiect, Which creatures after their manner doe grone with the children of God, and trauaile in paine (as Paul speaketh R. 8. ver. 20. &c.) Wayting when the sonnes of God shall be reueiled. Be∣cause the creat ure also shall be deliuered from the bondage of cor∣ruption into the glorious liberty of the sonnes of God. Because the crea∣ture is subiect vnto vanitie, not of it owne will, but by reason of him that hath subbued it (namely God) vnder hope. Wherefore they al∣so did mourne, the which is spoken by an Anthropopatheia, or at∣tributing vnto beasts the affections of men,Anthropopa∣theia what it is, see Mic. cap. 7. ver 8. albeit after a sort by their outward sound or noyse and bellowing they also do wit∣nesse and bewray their want, and their affections among vs. Vn∣der
the name (Behemah) If any man in this place will vnder∣stand the wilde beasts also, I will not be against it: that by this word the wilde beasts may be noted: and by the name of Oxen and Sheepe, the home and tame beasts. Questionlesse it is true, that the wild beasts them selues at that time wanted not their mourning. For they also did lack foode, the which are fed with herbs, as the Hartes. Vers. 19. O Lord, to thee will I crie: for the fire hath deuoured the pastures of the wildernes, and the flame hath burnt vp all the Trees of the field. The conclusion cōfirming that this publik re∣pentance is to be proclaymed.THe conclusion, whereby he confirmeth that the same pub∣like and solemne repentance is to be proclaymed, that men may turne vnto God, earnestly cal vpō God, & pacifie & appease him. He concludeth therefore that God is to be called vpon both of men and also of beasts, because that both men and beasts are striken by the hand of God. As for men, that God is to be called vpon of them, that he will ease and take away this his rod from them, he sheweth by his owne example: and that he is to be cal∣led vpon of the beasts, he declareth in the verse following. Wherefore here is plainly shewed the end of all punishmentes and plagues which GOD doth send vpon men, to wit, that men should be called back vnto God, from whom they had departed,The end of God his punishmēts sent vpon men. and fallen away: should call vpon him, whom they had now for∣gotten: crie vnto him, as vnto the gouernor of this world: that frō him alone they should look for the easement of al their euils. The reason therefore of this extraordinarie crying vnto God, is, the laying wast of the ground, the barrennesse of the yeare, the iudgements of GOD in the pastures and Trees, the which also appeared and were in the desartes and tilled fieldes, and did mini∣ster and finde food vnto men and beasts. Ver. 20. The beastes of the field crie also vnto thee: for the riuers of waters are dried vp, and the fire hath deuoured the pastures of the wildernes. The bruite beasts after their manner cry vnto. God.AFter the same manner, that men: in like sort also saith the pro∣phet by an Anthropopatheia, or attributing vnto beastes the affections of men, must the brute beastes cry vnto God, as also Psal.
145. ver. 15. the Psalmist saith, The eyes of all wait vpon thee, & thou giuest them their meate in due season: to the end that by this compa∣rison of them with brute beastes the dulnes and as it were the sens∣lesnes of obstinate or wilfull persons may be vnderstood. For they after their manner, cry vnto God, and call vpon him, when as they are pressed or bitten with hunger: how much more therefore ought men indued with reason do the like, being in the same state and penury. Further, the same cause is here againe repeated, the which was set downe before ver. 18.19. and hath already binne there by me expounded. Hereby also appeareth that the beastes themselues are nourished by God. And therefore Mat. 6. ver. 26. Christ to pull out of the hearts of his disciples heathenish distrustfulnes, sen∣deth them vnto the foules of the aire, whom they see without their toile and laboure to be fed by God, saying: Beholde the foules of the heauen: For they sow not, neither reape, nor carry into the barnes: yet your heauenly father feedeth them. Are ye not much better then they? CAP. 2. Ver. 1. Blowe the trumpet in Zion, and shoute in mine holy moun∣taine: let all the inhabitants of the land tremble: for the day of the Lord is come: for it is at hand. An other pro∣phesi threate∣ning a more heauy iudge∣ment then the former.AN other prophesie of the same Ioell, wherein he threatneth vn∣to the Iewes from God a more heauy iudgement then the for∣mer, namely from the Chaldees, whom God at the length would send vpon them, like as it was also foretolde vnto the king Iosias, vnder whom Ioel liued, and often times also by Ieremy, before whom our Prophet was, hath the self-same binne repeated vnto the kinges of Iudah of his time 2. King. cap. 23. ver. 26.27. And Ier. 6. ver. 22.23.24.25. Thus saith the Lord, Behold, a people commeth from the north country, and a great nation shall arise from the sides of the earth. With bow and shield shall they be weaponed: they are cruell and will haue no compassion: their voyce roareth like the sea, and they ride vpon horses well appoynted, like men of warre against thee O daughter Zion. We haue heard their fame, and our handes wax fee∣ble: sorow is come vpon vs, as the sorrow of a woman in trauaile. Go not forth into the field, nor walke by the way: for the sword of the enemy & feare is on euery side. With this agreeth that which is Isay. 5. ver. 26. and that which is heareafter ver. 17. whereby is shewed that this
place doth not appertaine vnto the Locusts (of which he spake before cap. 1.) But that this wholie is concerning an vncircumcised nation, the which the prophet in this chapter threatneth shal come vpon them. Whereof it commeth to passe that the Prophet doth now much more earnestly stirre vp the Iewes vnto repentance, thē he did before: for as much as he threatneth greater punrshments vnto them. Wherein Ioel in this chapter also, as wel as in the former witnesseth his good will in preseruing this people and church of God. 1 An exhortatiō.But this verse hath two things to be noted, first an exhortation made by Ioel, secondly a most weighty cause of the same. The ex∣hortation sheweth both whom he exhorteth,2 The cause of the same. & whereunto he ex∣horteth, & vnto what place. He exhorteth the Iewes, yea and that all of them, and not only one or twaine,1 Who are ex∣horted. Whereunto. Vnto what place. because that all of them were guilty before God, of infinite sinnes, as is shewed 2. King cap. 23. ver. 26.27.  where God threatneth to cast off Iudah out of his sight, because of all the prouocations,  wherewith Manasseh had prouoked him,  like as he had put away the Israelites for their offen∣ces before.1 All the Iewes. It is true in deed that this commaundement of gathe∣ring the people together is properly directed vnto the priests, and magistrates: (whose especiall office it is to do the same), yet whē as this assembly is commaunded to be proclaimed for publike repen∣tance sake, not only the priestes & magistrates, but also the whole people are exhorted and stirred vp thereunto. But, as I haue sayd they are called together vnto the shewing of a publike repentance, the which in this place Ioel briefly describeth both by the inward, and also by the outward forme or manner of the same. The out∣ward manner is declared by the sound and noyse of a trumpet, that is, by the great and earnest signifying of the same by the Leuites, the proclaimers thereof. For after this maner the people was called together by the sound of a trumpet both in the proclaiming of the publike extraordinary assemblies: and also in the ordinary. So the meeting of the people together is summoned for the keeping of the feast of blowing the trumpets Num. 29. ver 1. So when they are called together to warre against the Midianites, Phine has the priest goeth with them, with the trumpets to blow in his hand, Num. 31. ver. 6. And vnto this order hath the prophet Dauid resem∣blance, when as exhorting to praise God for his benefites Psal. 81. ver. 3. he saith. Blow the trumpet in the new moone, euen in the time appoynted, at our feast day. Nehem. 8. Ezra the Priest gathereth the
people together to the hearing of the law.2 To serue God. But our Prophet in this place calleth them together to worship God, to call vpon God & to reverence God, vnto the temple of God, and mount Sion, not into the tauernes, not into the bouling allies, not into the alehouses, as men are wont to abuse these daies (when as there is a publike meeting for the seruice of God) and to come together about bad exercises. 3 To the temple of God.Now the cause of this so earnest an exhortation vnto repētance, & the same publike, is, because The day of the Lord is come & is now euen at hand,2 The cause of this exhortatiō. that is to say, that day in the which God wil punish the sinnes of this people, doth euen now hang ouer their neckes, & will not be long or it come, as hypocrites do imagin. And looke how much the moreneere the daunger is, so much the more heed∣full, and wary, and ready ought we to be to turne it away from vs. Vers. 2. A day of darkenes and of blacknes, a day of cloudes and ob∣scuritie, as the morning spread vpon the mountaines, so is there a great people, and a mighty: there was none like it from the be∣ginning, neither shall be any more after it, vnto the yeares of many generations. What manner of day & how fearefull this day of the Lords.A Laying open of the matter more plainely. For hee sheweth what maner of day, and how fearefull this day of the Lord is, to the ende he may shake off from them all sluggishnes and dulnesse be they neuer so drouzie, and neuer so great hypocrites. And first of all the bitternesse of that day is set forth by the Prophet vnder sun∣dry similitudes, the which are taken from things most horrible and fearefull, that he may the more easily strike into them a feare of the iudgement of God being yet absent and to come, & to expresse the nature thereof. For this day is sayd to be like such a day, wherein for light there appeareth darkenesse: for the pleasant brightnes of the sunne, blacknes is euery where spread ouer all: for the fairenes and cleeenes of the day, there is a blacke cloude, and that such a one, as is wont from the morning, and very early to arise vpon the mountaines, with the which the whole day appeareth vnto men cloudie,The Chaldes, which should come against the Iewes, de∣scribed and set out after sun∣dry maners. and lowring, and without light. These things therefore doe paint forth this day to be a most sorrowfull and heauie day, and expresse the most wofull plight and shew of this iudgment of God. Secondly, the thing it selfe is euidently declared. For hee sheweth the coming of a most cruell and mighty people wih shall bee
their enemie.1. By comparing them with o∣ther people. And first of all hee doth by way of comparison de∣scribe this people to be a most great and strong people, such a one as there hath been no other before: neither shall be in many yeares afterward. And this people whom hee meaneth was the people of the Chaldees, vnto whom afterward the Lord translated or con∣ueighed the Monarchie, or Empire. For that Empire in Daniel is compared vnto golde, and it was most mighty both in number of men, and also in strength of armie. Vers. 3. A sire deuoureth before him, and behind him a flame bur∣neth vp: the land is as the garden of Eden before him, and be∣hinde him a desolate wildernesse, so that nothing shall escape him. 2. By the effects vnlooked for.SEcondly, he describeth the sayd enemies and Chaldees by the ef∣fects, and those vnlooked for, but yet such as shall bee vnto the Iewes most sorrowfull, and ineuitable or vnescapeable, because that the Iewes shall not be able to withstand so great strength. For God doth in such sort arme those whome he will haue to be the mi∣nisters of his iustice, that they shall not bee able to be ouercomen: but will leaue and scatter abroad their feare in euery place where they shall come. Wherefore in this place also there is a similitude taken from fire, the which like as it burneth vp all things which come in the way of it, so also shall the people of the Chaldees, like vnto a fire and flame, that is, like a burning and most flaming fire, deuoure and consume the enemies which shall stand against them, yea and that in such sorte, that the countrey the which before was most flourishing (as the land of Iudah then was) shal afterward be∣come most desolate or waste, when as they shall haue entred and ranged in it: and to be short, none of them shal escape their hands, so diligent shall they be in searching out their enemies. Further, in this place euery flourishing countrey is vnderstood by the name of (Eden) as it is also often in the holy scripture else where, as Gen. 13. vers. 10. where the countrey which Lot chooseth after his de∣parture from Abraham, is said to be like vnto Eden, or the garden of the Lord.
Vers. 4. The beholding of him is like the sight of horses, and like the horsemen, so shall they runne. 3. By their vali∣antnes and stoutnes.THirdly, hee describeth the Chaldees by their valiantnes and stoutnes, the which shall appeare both in their countenance, & also in their swiftnes. For their look shal not be as the looke of men, but of horses, that is, they shal be men that are to be trembled at, & to be feared. For here he speaketh of great horses, or of war horses, which with their eyes and looke doe strike a terrour and feare into men, & breath forth war. Their swiftnes shal be in this, that these the selfe same enemies shal runne, as most excellent and swift horsemen are wont to doe, such as they shall be. And truely those countries of the Assyrians, Medes, & Chaldees did abound with valiant hors∣men, as they now also doe abound vnder the name of Persians. The particle or word (like) in the latter parte of this verse, where it is said, like horsmen, so shall they runne, doth not lessen, but make plaine the signification of the word horsemen. As in that place of Iohn, We haue seene the glory of him, like or as the glory of the onely begotten of the father. Vers. 5. Like the noyse of chariots in the toppes of the mountains shall they leape, like the noyse of a flame of fire that deuoureth the stubble, and as a mighty people prepared to the battell. The swiftnes of the Chaldees described and confirmed by the effects.THe same swiftnes of the Chaldees is described and confirmed by the effects. For that nothing shall let or stay them, neither mountains nor any riuers, nor munitions, nor holdes made against them. Wherefore they shall to the great terror or feare of their e∣nemies ouercome all these things, so that albeit they be but horse∣men onely, they shall notwithstanding seeme so terrible and feare∣full, as are chariots and armed wagons, the which should be seen in the mountaines. In a word, this people shall be stout indeede, valiant, and made, borne, and most prepared vnto warre and bat∣tell: wherefore this word (like, or as) is added, that nothing should be supposed to be feyned here, but their true swiftnesse to bee sette forth.
Vers. 6. Before his face shall the people tremble: all faces shall ga∣ther blacknes. A confirmatiō of the valiant∣nes and stout∣nes of the ene∣mies.A Confirmation of the same valiantnes and stoutnes of the ene∣mies, the which God will send vpon the Iewes, taken from the feare wherein all people shall stand of these men and enemies. For there shall be no people which shall not feare them, and tremble at their comming: yea and that so greatly, that by reason of the same ouer great feare and a bashment they shall all gather blackenes, which shall see and beholde these so terrible enemies. For men are wont to waxe blacke through feare and abashment, because that when they feare, their naturall heate doth fayle, and therefore their members are voyde of blood and heat, as those that write of naturall causes doe teach. So in the Psalm. 68. ver. 13. by blacknes, such as slaues and scullions doe gather by lying among the pottes, and smokie and sootie chimnie corners, is signified the great and exceeding feare, trembling, miserie, trouble and affliction the which the children of God are often in, and from the which in the mercy and goodnes of GOD they are when it pleaseth him, deliuered. Wherefore to comfort them, the Prophet there sayth: Though ye haue lyen among pottes, yet shall ye be as the wings of a doue that is co∣uered with siluer, and whose feathers are like yellow golde. Vers. 7. They shall runne like strong men, and goe vp to the wall like men of warre, and euery man shall goe forward in his waies, and they shall not stay in their pathes. 4. By the strēgth of their bodie, and skilfulnes in feats of war.FOurthly, he describeth these Chaldees by the strength of their bodie, and skilfulnes in the knowledge of warre: in both which respects our enemies are wont to bee fearefull vnto vs. As concer∣ning the strength of their bodie, they shall be like Gyants, nimble, and ready. For the most strongest souldiers are wont also to bee swift and nimble in running, because that in them their sinewes are very strong, as Achilles is euery where by Homer called podas okus, that is, swift of foote. For where this strength of sinewes is, there al∣so is swiftnes: as for their knowledge in warre the same in them shall bee very singular. For in their pace and marching euery one shall keepe his order, and in the fight and battel shal straightly ob∣serue
the lawes and rules of militarie discipline, or training vp to warre. Vers. 8. Neither shall one thrust another, but euery one shall walk in his path: and when they shall fall vpon the sworde they shall not be wounded. Euery one shal keepe his place and order.ONe shall not thrust another, euery one shall stand in that place and order wherein he shall be placed by his Generall or Cap∣tayne. Now both silence and also keeping of order in battell is a great vertue of Souldiers, and furtherance vnto the victorie, and the same doth shew a great skilfulnes of poyntes of warre in such an armie, as Xenophon teacheth in his bookes of the education or bringing vp of Cyrus. 5. By their vn∣feareful mind, or courage.Fiftly, he describeth them by their vnfearefull minde or cou∣rage: for they shall runne vpon the drawen swordes bent against them, as namely, not fearing death: the which is a poynt and signe of gret boldenes in a souldier, and enemie. And they shall venture vpon the weapons set agaynst them, as if they were such as could not be hurt and vnwoundable. Vers. 9. They shall runne too and fro in the citie: They shall runne vpon the wall: they shall climbe vp vpon the houses, and enter in at the windowes like the theefe. 6. By their desire of victory.SIxtly, He feareth the Iewes, and describeth the Chaldees by the greedinesse or desire of victorie, wherewithall these men shall be enflamed. For this desire and greedines of victorie is wont also to be considered in a good Souldier. For it maketh him bolde, venturous, manly, and diligent and eager in pursuing and searching out his enemies. And this also without al doubt striketh a feare into the enemies, when as they see, or heare that they haue or must haue to doe with such kinde of enemies. So then they shall runne too and fro in the citie which they haue taken, to catch and slay their enemies: they shall climbe vp by the walles: they shall en∣ter in at the windowes like theeues to kill and steale: they shall o∣mit or leaue nothing vndone for the getting of the full victorie. So Alexander the Great was excellent in the sealing of walles in townes and cities. So Dauid Psal. 18.
Vers. 10. The earth shall tremble before him, the heauens shall shake, the Sunne and the Moone shall be dark, and the Starres shall with∣draw their shining. The conclusion.THe conclusion, whereby appeareth what is the scope or drift of this whole former description. For otherwise it might seeme o∣uer large and long, and curious: to wit, when as he being the Pro∣phet of God, and a man that was no warriour, hath neuerthelesse prosecuted or handled these things so by piece meale, and in euerie particular. But this was the minde, and this was the drift of the Pro∣phet by the appoyntment of God, that the Iewes by these so manie wayes and miseries layd before them, might be put in feare, and be∣ing put in feare, might truely and from the bottome of their heart repent, call vpon God, and abstaine from their sinnes, for the which these so sharpe and heauie iudgements of God are threatned vnto them, and might in the ende conuert, and turne themselues vnto God. Briefly he sheweth that these enemies of the Iewes shall bee such, that they shall make all things afrayd of them, be they lowe, or be they high in this world: yea, that the whole world shall trem∣ble at the sight of them. Now the terror and exceeding great feare which they shall strike into them, is shewed in these words, shall tremble, shall shake, shall loose their brightnes. For this shaking, trem∣bling and starting, hath alwayes ioyned with it exceeding great fearefulnes and perplexitie, or anguish of minde, and the changing of the old countenance and cheerefulnes, as it were the loosing of the former lightsomnes and brightnes. And vnto all things doth Ioel threaten that this feare shal come, both to the smallest & least, which here are noted in the word (earth) and also vnto the grea∣test and highest,What is ment by the earth, the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres. the which in this place are comprehended vnder these words, the Sunne, the Moone, the Starres. And such were the Chaldees vnto the Iewes at that time. And such afterward were the Turkes and Saracens vnto the christian Churches, which they haue destroyed, and doe destroy. And such finally are all those whom the Lord also stirreth vp at this day against his Church.
Vers. 11. And the Lord shall vtter his voyce before his hoste: for his hoste is very great: for he is strong that doth his word: for the day of the Lord is great, and very terrible, and who can abide it. A reason why the Chaldees shalbe so migh∣tie.THe rendring of a reason, whereby he teacheth why the Chal∣dees shall be so mightie at that time, and that against the Iewes the people of God: to wit, because that God shall vse their mini∣sterie or seruice to execute his iudgements vpon the Iewes. There∣fore he shall so strengthen them, make them stout, valiant, warlike: finally God himselfe shall make himselfe their captaine: where∣fore nothing shall stand against them. Wherein also there is a cer∣taine Hypophora,What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. or answering of an obiection, least the Prophet might seeme to haue reported things increadible, or not to be belee∣ued concerning them, and such as cannot fall out vnto any kinde of men, or armie. Yes they shall be such: for they shall be made such by God.Three reasons why the Chal∣dees shall be so strong. Wherefore here are three reasons alleaged. The first, be∣cause these are the tents of God, and not of men. Therefore they shall be valiant and strong. For God is wont to furnish and fortifie his hostes and armies with all things necessarie vnto the victorie & terrour of their enemies,1. Because these are the tents of God, and not of men. as strength and swiftnes, and such like. For God himselfe shall commande these tents to bee gathered in his name, Isai. 7. And the armies of the Chaldees are not called the tents of God in respect of the Chaldees themselues, but in respect of God, who vsed them not knowing of it for the executing and bringing to passe of that his worke.2. Because they must doe the worke of the Lord. The second reason is, because these shall then doe the work and commandement of God. There∣fore they must be strong, that in that worke they may be letted by no man. For as he is accursed which doth the worke of the Lord faintly Ierem. 48. ver. 10. so God doth giue an heart, and power, or strength vnto those whom he vseth as his ministers or seruants vn∣to that his worke. The third reason is, because this shall be the day of the Lord,3. Because it shal be the gat day of the Ld and that a great day, not a common day, but a terrible or fearfull day. For God being angrie, shall fearfully execute his ex∣traordinarie iudgements vpon his Church. Therfore there must thē ose effects appeare, the which must shewe those extraordinarie iudgements of God: againe, those men must needs be stirred vp to execu them, & that such men, who indeed are indued with extra∣ordina power & strength. Otherwise this terrour or feare of the
day of the Lord should be none at all, or should not be seene. Final∣lie he concludeth: Therefore the Iewes must tremble at that day of the Lord, vnles indeed they will be stockes, blockes, vngodly, des∣perate, and vtterly perish without all hope. Vers. 12. Therefore also now the Lord sayth, Turne you vnto me with all your heart, and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mour∣ning. The second part of this ser∣mon, contai∣ning the only remedy against the former threatned hea∣uie iudgements of God.THe second part of this Sermon, in the which he bringeth forth a remedie against those heauie iudgements of God threatned by him, and the same the onely remedie, out of the mouth of GOD himself, vnto the embracing, and earnestly following of the which he doth first exhort them. And this remedie is an earnest repen∣tance of the minde, the which must be done, not priuilie, but open∣lie, not by one or two onely, but by the whole people: finally, not sleightly or lightly, but after a solemne & most exquisite & diligent maner. Wherefore the Prophet prescribeth, and describeth this re∣pentance, & the forme or maner thereof, to take away al excuse frō them neglecting or forslowing to execute the same, as who name∣ly knew both what was to be done, and also after what maner, that they might haue God fauourable and mercifull vnto them. Three parts of this verse.But this verse hath three parts. The first containeth the person of him that speaketh. And this is God himselfe, to the end namely that this medicine here set forth,1. The person of him that spea∣keth. may appeare to bee the more cer∣taine, the more true, and the more wholsome: and consequentlie may be heard of vs more heedfully with the greater faith, and may bee vsed with the more cheerfull courage and indeuour.2. The circum∣stance of the time. The se∣cond part sheweth the circumstance of the time: that euen yet now there remaineth hope of obtaining pardon, if they will turne vnto God. And truely all that whole time the which commeth between the threatnings of God denounced or vttered, and the execution of the same, is granted vnto vs by God to repent, if wee bee wise, how greatly soeuer we haue sinned before. For all that time as yet is ac∣ceptable, that is, wherein we, if we repent, may bee accepted or re∣ceiued of God. For God then, of his great mercie, wayteth and tarrieth yet for vs, so that if we turne and repent, that may be veri∣fied of vs, the which God by his Prophet Isai, in another respect, speaketh of Christ, cap. 49. ver. 8. In an acceptable time haue I heard thee: and in a day of saluation haue I helped thee: and I will preserue
thee. And Paul Rom. 2. ver. 4. teacheth, that the bounteousnes, pa∣tience, and long suffering of God ought to moue vs vnto repentance. And 2. Cor. cap. 6. ver. 2. he alleageth the former place of the Pro∣phet Isai to stirre them vp vnto godlines and holines of life, and to embrace the grace of God euen then when as it was offered, say∣ing: Behold now the accepted time: behold now the day of saluation. The third part containeth the medicine it selfe,3. The medicine if selfe. most necessarie for vs in turning away all the threatnings of God from vs: and that is earnest repentance of minde, the which is here briefly described or set forth partly by the inward, and partly by the outward forme of the same.The inward forme of repen∣tance. By the inward, when as it is called a turning vnto God with the whole heart. For the force and pith of true repentance is in the altering or changing of our minde, that is, in the sincere & true turning from our sinnes vnto God, and not in the fained, not in the counterfeit,The outward forme of repen∣tance is of di∣uers sorts in regard of 1. our selues. 2 of others. not in the halfe or part turning. The outward forme of true repentance is manifold, or of many sorts. For some things in it are required of vs in regard of our selues: and other some in regard of others, especially in a publike, solemne, and extraordinarie repē∣tance, such as is in this place proclaimed. And in regard of out selues it is required, namely, that being well prepared, yea euen ac∣cording vnto the outward forme, we doe turne vnto God, and ear∣nestly repent. There is required of vs moreouer, fasting, weeping, & mourning, that is, abstaining from our ordinarie meates, yea euen moderate, with inward sighing and sadnes, the which may bewray and shewe forth it selfe with mourning and outward teares, that by the outward forme the inward repentance may be vnderstood to be trulie in vs. So Isai cap. 22. ver. 12. testifieth, that in the day of af∣fliction the which his Church should taste of for their sinnes, the Lord looked that by these outward signes they should witnes their inward heauines, saying: In that day did the Lord God of hostes call vnto weeping and mourning, and to baldnes and girding with sack∣cloth. And trulie when as God did pursue the Iewes not only with famin, but also with the sword of their enemies, they were both to fast,No comfort besides Christ in our afflicti∣ons, who is to be sought vnto by true faith. and also to call vpon God, which is the chiefest refuge that mē haue to betake themselues vnto in such lamentable cases. And therefore Isai 51. ver. 19. the Prophet saith, These two things are come vnto thee: who will lament thee? desolation and destruction, and fa∣min, and the sword: by whom shall I comfort thee.
Vers. 13 And rent your heart, and not your clothes: and turne vnto the Lord your God: for he is gratious and mercifull, slow to anger, and of great kindnesse, and repenteth him of the euill. A making more plaine of the inward re∣pentance.A Laying open of the former matter more plainly which shew∣eth the chiefest part of repentance, and teacheth the same to be inward that is, to be placed in the inward feeling and lothing of a man his sinnes: and not in a certaine outward renting of clothes: such as was indeed wont to be vsed of the Iewes in great mourning: but feynedlie and hypocriticallie many times: and when as they did signifie that they did greatlie detest or loth any thing So Iob expresseth his sorrow cap. 1. ver. 2. where it is said, that he arose and rent his garments, and shaued his head, and fell downe vpon the ground and worshipped. And Mat. 26. ver. 65. The high priest renteth his clothes pretending in hypocrisie great sorrow, for that Christ (as he blasphemously charged him,) had blasphe∣med. Two Partes of this verse.This verse hath two partes. First a description of this inward repentance, by way of contraries matching it with the false. For in the false the heart is not inwardly rent before God,1. A description of inward re∣pentance. but the garments are torne outwardlie, onelie before men But in the inward repentance, the heart especially is humbled vnto God, and broken before him, that is, is pressed, troubled, and afflicted of our selues, with great sorow, the which we conceiue for the sinnes, the which we haue committed. So Paul 2. Cor. cap. 7. ver. 11. attributeth vnto true and inward repentance these effects, Care, indignation, punishment. And Dauid Psal 51. ver. 3. sayth: I know mine iniquities, and my sinne is euer before me.2. The foundati∣on or ground of true repētance. The second part of this verse, sheweth the foundation or ground of true re∣pentance, that is, both of our feeling, or sorow: and also of our true turning vnto God. And this is true fayth, whereby we do ac∣knowledge God to be our father in Christ. Otherwise we should be lost through despaire, neither would we euer returne vnto God, when as we feele our sinnes to be so grieuous against him: But (like vnto runne away seruants, which looke for no hope of pardon at the hands of their maisters,) we would quite and cleane and euery day depart alwaies further from him, and would neuer turne or flee vnto him. This appeareth by the true patterns and examples of repentance, as of Dauid, who that he might earnest∣lie
repent, doth set before himselfe the mercie of God, that is, his fatherlie mind toward him, Psal 51. and of Peter also, who re∣membring the saying of Christ, wept bitterlie Mat. 26. ver. 75. For then the feeling of the good will of Christ did strike the heart of Peter. Lastlie the parable of the prodigall sonne Lu. 15. ver. 18.21. So then fayth, which layeth hold vpon, and setteth before vs this mercie of God in Christ towards vs, doth also bring vs vnto God, whom we haue offended. For it teacheth, what, and after what manner of sort the minde of God is toward vs pecu∣liarlie, by the meanes of his couenant: and consequentlie assureth vs that God will be fauorable vnto vs, that is, easie and readie to pardon our sinnes. For through Christ he is mercifull, long suffe∣ring, rich in kindnesse towards those that are his, whom according vnto his couenant he hath adopted or chosen for his sonnes. Fi∣nallie, who also doth often call backe againe the sentence of his iudgement,God sometimes calleth his sen∣tence backe a∣gaine towards those that are his, and when. when as it hath been giuen against those that are his, namelie, because it was not giuen as of his decree, and vnspeake∣able purpose, but onely of a minde to threaten them, that by this meanes he might make them afrayde. So to the Niniuites, so to King Ezechias death is threatned. Furthermore, the word repenting is sayde of God by an An∣thropopatheia,Repentance how it is attri∣buted vnto God. or attributing vnto God the affections of men, that is, not in respect of God, as if he did alter or chaung his mind and sentence: but onely in respect of vs, who feeling diuers effects of the prouidence of God,What Atuhro popatheia is, see Mich. cap. 7. ver. 8. doe thinke that God hath altered his sentence, and consequently that he doth repent. Vers. 14 Who knoweth, if he will returne and repent, and leaue a blessing behinde him, euen a meate offring and a drinke offe∣ring to the Lord your God. AN instance, for he vrgeth the same his foundation, and the same his exhortation, grounding it vpon the nature of God, who wholie & all together is so bounteous and merciful (not to∣wardes al men, but towards his elect or chosen onlie) and readie to forgiue. This God his kindnesse in doing good to his people though they through their rebellion, and daylie vexing and grieuing him deserued no such thing, the Prophet Isai recoun∣teth cap. 63. ver. 11.12.13. after this manner: Then hee remembred the old time of Moyses, & his people, saying, where is he that brought
them vp out of the sea, with the shepeard of his sheepe? Where is hee that put his holy spirit within him? He led them by the right hand of Moses with his owne glorious arme, diuiding the water before them, to make himselfe an euerlasting name. He led them through the deepe, as an horse in the wildernesse, that they should not stumble. But there are two things in this verse to be obserued. First,1 The manner of speech. the manner of speaking. Secondly, the thing it selfe which is here pro∣pounded or set foorth.2. The thing it selfe. The kind of speaking is in shew of a man doubting: but in deede and truth it is the speech of one earnestly affirming and auouching. For after this manner by way of interro∣gation or asking a question,1. A shew of doub∣ting. the Hebrues are wont to vtter those things, which they do affirme. For this phrase or kinde of speaking is not here to be taken in such sort, as that is 2. Sam. 12. ver. 22. And he sayd, while the childe was yet aliue, I fasted, and wept: for I said, who can tell whether God will haue mercy on me, that the childe may liue? The thing it selfe which is here set forth,2. God is most bounteous vnto those which are his. is in a word, that God is most bounteous and mercifull vnto those which are his. Therefore if they repent and seeke him, it will come to passe, that they shal finde him, that he will turne vnto them, that he will spare them, and minister or giue vnto them such thinges as are necessary for his worshippe and seruice euen in that same threatned barren∣nes & scarsity. The which doubtlesse shall be a signe & token that God is now pacified and appeased with them. For euen after that same spoyle made by the Locustes, he will leaue a most large testi∣mony or witnesse of his blessing towardes them, to wit, thinges ne∣cessary for his seruice & worship at the least wise: & consequently wil shew himselfe to be recōciled or made friendes with them. And all these thinges appertaine vnto the exhortation. The other parts of this Sermon doe partely describe the forme of that repentance which he requireth at their handes, and partely set forth vnto them most assured comfortes and promises of God. Concerning the re∣pentance which is required, it is publike, solemne, and extraordi∣nary the which the verses following do declare. Ver. 15. Blowe the trumpet in Zion, sanctifie a fast, call a solemne assembly. ANd first of all they shew the place: then the fast adioyned vnto it: afterward the assembly: last of all the publike praiers.1. The place. 2. The fast. 3. The assem∣bly. In this verse are contained the place, the fast, the assembly. The place is
Siō, that is Ierusalem. For by the mountaine, or one part the whole city is vnderstood by the figure Synecdoche.What the figure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. But here mention is made of Sion, because the first warning of the fast, and the proclai∣ming of that solemne and publike repentance ought to be made in the temple, and by the councell of the priestes which had the rule of holy things, and that with a trumpet, after a solemne manner, that afterwardes it might be proclaimed in the other cities of Iu∣dah. Yet was it not needfull, that whosoeuer would then fast, and vse that publike repentance, should come to Sion, but euery one might do that abiding in his owne city, after the publike fast pro∣claimed, and euery one fasted that day, in the which that action was proclaimed, and commaunded to be done. For Leuit. 23. ver. 31. it appeareth that the feast of reconciliation (and so consequently o∣ther the like) was to be held the tenth day of the seauenth moneth not only at Ierusalem, but also throughout all their dwellings. But at Ierusalem the Iewes are commaunded to come and be ioyned together, into the Temple: but at other places, into their Syna∣gogues in the day of the fast, and of the solemne and publike repen∣tance: & not into the alehouses and tauernes, and into their shops to vse merchandise and feastinges at that time, as now adayes they doe euery where when a publike fast is warned. And in this place a fast is commaunded to be proclaimed,An holy fast. and that an holy fast, the which must be referred vnto the preparing of the mindes of the parties, that they may serue God the more earnestly. For there are many kindes of fastes, & many endes off eastes. One kinde may be constrained,Many kindes of fastes. as in a time of famin: an other may be a medicinall fast appoynted by phisitiōs for health sake: an other by meanes that all appetite and desire of meate is done in vs: & lastly, an other is a reli∣gious fast, the which is made, that we may the more cheerfully giue and applie our selues vnto prayer, may the more acknowledge our selues to be guilty before God, & cast down and humble our selues. The which last end, for as much as it is an holy end, for the same also publike abstinence from moderate and ordinary meat is cōmaunded: or else is priuately for a time willingly and of our own accord taken vpon vs: and then is it indeed a sanctified fast: and not if it be held to be a meritorious or deseruing worke of ours. The which is flat blasphemie. Moreouer here also is mention made of the assembly of the people, the which in the verse following is more at large declared and expounded.
Vers. 16. Gather the people: sanctifie the congregation, gather the elders: assemble the children, and those that sucke the breasts: Let the bridegroome goe forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride chamber. A Laying out of this matter and maner of fasting yet more play∣ner. For he sheweth what,He sheweth what maner of assembly ought to be at this publike fast. Therefore hee especially rehear∣seth those sortes of men, which at that time ought and are wont to be gathered together in the Temple, and in the Synagogues vnto extraordinarie prayers, and to heare the word of God. Two parts of this verse.But here are two things to be noted in this verse. The one, the kinde of speaking which the Prophet vseth, the which is as it were loose and without ioynts,1. The phrase or kind of spea∣king. or not knit together with copula∣tiue coniunctions, and often repeating the same commandement of gathering them together, that by the selfe same phrase or speech of the Prophet men might be the more vrged, and vnderstand that it is highly needefull for them to come together to pray vnto, and intreate God, and to fast together. The second parte contayneth the persons which were at that time to assemble and come toge∣ther, not all, I confesse, but the chiefe.2. The persons that are to as∣semble together. And first and formost all the people, that is, whether Kings, or subiects: whether masters, or seruants, whether rich, or poore, they are commanded to be ioy∣ned together. Afterwards the old men by name,Old men. that they by their example may shine before others, and because that by reason of the multitude of their sinnes, they are the more guilty before GOD. For the longer that they haue liued, the more also haue they offen∣ded God. Lastly, that all excuse may be taken away from others, which are lustier and stronger of body, if they fast not, or be not pre∣sent, olde men are expresly cited and bidden both to come toge∣ther with the rest of the people, and also to fast.The young in∣fants. In the third place the litile young infants, who as yet doe sucke the breastes of their mothers and nurses, both because that they euen now as little and as young as they bee, are notwithstanding guilty before GOD, (for as Paul speaketh Eph. 2. ver. 3. We are all the children of wrath, as will as others) because of originall sinne: And because also they are a part of the familie or houshold of their fathers, who haue sin∣ned in actuall sinnes. Their children are their goods, wherefore their owners or fathers being guiltie of punishment, they also are
guilty of punishment, as Paul also teacheth Rom. 8. ver. 2. that for man his sake, God hath made the creatures of the worlde subiect also vnto vanitie, &c. And this selfe same thing falleth out and com∣meth to passe in the case of treason committed against man, much more then in treason against God, that the children also doe beare the punishment of their parents. Furthermore, because of the sinne of man, the whole world is subiect vnto sinne, and lyeth in wickednes 1. Iohn 5. In the fourth place, the bridegroome and the bride are exhorted vnto this re∣pentance, who albeit they bee discharged of other burdens (as from warre) in the yeare wherein they are first and newly married,The Bride∣groome and the Bride. yet notwithstanding are they here also commanded the selfe same day, and also the day following, wherein they were married to come forth of their bridechamber, that is, their mariage chamber, and to be present with the rest, to pray vnto GOD, and to humble themselues because of their sinnes. Vers. 17. Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weepe be∣tweene the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy peo∣ple O Lord, and giue not thine heritage vnto reproch, that the heathen should rule ouer them. Wherefore should they say a∣mong the people, where is their God? AFter that he hath declared these three thinges, to wit, the place, the fast, & the publike assēbly, now the Prophet sheweth what maner of prayers the prayers of this assemblie of men,Three parts of this verse. of that day and publike fast ought to be vnto almighty God, a forme whereof is here set downe.1. The place of these prayers. But in this place there are three thinges decla∣red: namely, in what place in the Temple these prayers ought to be made.2. By whom they are to be made. Secondly, by whom they ought to be made. And third∣ly, what maner of prayers they ought to be. For the first, they must be made between the porch where the people was,3. What maner of prayers they ought to be. and did stay, and the altar of burnt offeringes. For the people did not enter or com into any of the three distinct or seuered parts of the Tēple, to wit, neither into the porch of the Priests, where was the brasen altar of Sacrifices:  neither into the holy place where was the Candlesticke, and the table of Shew bread: neither into the holy of Holiest, where was the Arke of GOD: in none of these three parts, I say, might the people enter, no not the king himselfe. Now the Altar of Sacrifices, and of burnt offerings was
where the slayne beasts were sacrificed. Here therefore were the publike prayers made, that they might be heard of all the people, to wit, betweene the porch of the people, and that same first porch of the Priests, where the altar was. For the second, these publike prayers were to bee made by the Priests, as namely the publike ministers of GOD in the Temple. For this belongeth vnto them by the right of their office peculiarly committed vnto them by God: like as it doth also at this day ap∣pertaine vnto the ministers of the word of GOD, or the pastors of the Church. Furthermore, albeit in this place the priests are ex∣presly named who were to conceiue the praiers, because this whole congregation is described in such sorte as it ought to be at Ierusa∣lem) yet might other Leuites also, which were not Priests, in other cities and Synagogues of Iudah conceiue prayers for the people in the solemne dayes of fast. For the selfe same simple Leuites, that is, such as were Leuites onely, and not Priests, not onely might, but also in regard of their office ought publikely to expound the word of God it selfe, vnto the which the prayers are adioyned, as certain hangbies, or additions and partes of the same. Wherefore it is not the part of euery one to speak publikely in the Church, and to pray, and minister the sacraments, but it belongeth vnto the Church offi∣cers. For 1. Cor. 14. ver. 34. Paul will haue women to keepe silence in the Churches. And 1. Tim. 2. ver. 1. He willeth that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giuing of thanks be made for all men. 3. The priests must pray in an earnest fee∣ling of their owne sins, and also of the sins of the people.Thirdly, it is here also shewed, what manner of prayers these both publike and also extraordinarie prayers ought to be, namely, first, that the Priests in an earnest feeling both of their owne sinnes, and also of the sinnes of the people should crie and call vnto God being now manifestly angry with his Church. Secondly, that in summe and effect they pray in such sort, that they aske mercie and pardon of their sinnes at the true God, for his onely meere grace, couenant, and glorie sake. The word Spare, or be fauourable,2. They must pray for pardon & mercie. A double foun∣dation of their prayer. shew∣eth that pardon must be begged of God, for the people. The foun∣dation whereupon being grounded, the Priests & the people ought to be in hope of this pardon, is twofold. First, the glory of GOD, the which shal vtterly be contemned or despised, and scorned at a∣mong the heathen, and vnbeleeuing people.1. The glory of God. If they may once see this people of his, (the which is his peculiar people and heritage) to be ouer throwen. For the heathen wil accuse the true God of weak∣nes, and of lying, as if he were such a one as is not able to defend
those that are his. And this is the ground of Moses his prayer vnto God also Exod. 32. vers. 12. to spare his people that had grieuously offended by worshipping the golden calfe, lest the Egyptians should speake and say, He hath brought them out maliciously for to slay them in the mountaines, and to consume them from the earth. The second foundation of these prayers,2. The couenant or onely meere grace of God. is the couenant or meere and onely grace of GOD, whereby he chose the Iewes for his owne peculiar people in regard of his couenant made with Abraham. Wherefore he promised that he would also be their defender and patron. Therefore God in our prayers is to bee prayed vnto for this selfe same thing, namely, that hee will defend those that are his. Vers. 18. Then will the Lord be iealous ouer his land, and spare his people. A comfort for the truely pe∣nitent, of the which there is a double groūd.THere followeth a comfort, wherewith not euery one indeede in this people, but only those which shall turne and repent truely among them, are lifted vp, or comforted, and vnto them are sette forth the helpe of God, and most large and excellent promises. But of this comfort there is also a double foundation or assurance, lest they might thinke it to be vaine or false.1. The nature of God. The first, to wit, the nature of God himself, or a generall reason, the which is taken from the propertie, and as it were the office of God him selfe. The se∣cond, the expresse promise,2. The promise of God. band, and couenant of God. And both these foundations doth the Prophet shew and set forth in this, and the verse following.1. The generall nature of God. And first of all in this place, that which is ta∣ken from the generall reason or consideration of the nature and of∣fice of God. For this is the generall nature of God, to be indeed generally mercifull, one that loueth his owne work, bounteous vn∣to all. For as it is Mat. 5. vers. 45. Hee maketh his sunne to arise on the euill, and the good, and sendeth rayne on the iust, and vniust. And as it is Psal. 145. vers. 9. The Lord is good to all and his mercies are o∣uer all his workes: but especially he is doing good vnto his church, fauourable vnto it, and burning with emulation or ielousie towards it. And therefore Psal. 145. vers. 18. when the Psalmist had sayde, The Lord is neere to all that call vpon him, he addeth, yea to all th call vpon him in trueth. And Zach. 8. ver. 2. the Lord sayth, I was iealous for Zion with great iealousie, and I was iealous for her wth great wrath. For the church is the peculiar inheritance of GOD,
his purchased people, whom God will defend, cherish, and gently intreate of dutie, and by reason of the mutuall debt, band, and rela∣tion the which is betweene the Lord or owner, and the thing or goods of the Lord and owners. So 2. Tit. ver. 14. Christ is sayd to haue purged vs to be a peculiar people vnto himselfe. And 1. Pet cap. 2 ver. 9. The faithfull are called a chosen generation, a royall priesthood, an holie nation, a peculiar people. And God will neuer forsake his in∣heritance, as Dauid teacheth Psal. 94. ver. 14. saying, Surely the Lord will not faile his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance. Where∣fore this is a great, and an assured foundation of the comforting of the Church (which is the people, the land, and inheritance of God) to wit, the generall affection or loue of God towards all his works, and his especiall and peculiar affection towards those of his whom he hath chosen, for whom he is iealous, & vnto whom he is alwaies fauourable, gentle, and mercifull vnto their sinnes. Vers. 19. Yea, the Lord will answer, and say vnto his people, Behold, I will send you corne, and wine, and oyle, and you shall be satisfied therewith: and I will no more make you a reproch among the hea∣then. 2. The second foundation of the former cō∣fort, to wit, the peculiar pro∣mise of God.THe second foundation of this comfort, to wit, the peculiar and especiall promise of God (yea after that he had threatned those his former iudgements) concerning his gentlenes and mercie to∣wards the Church repenting, and toward this his people, the which promise of God Ioel had receiued, that he should deliuer and de∣clare the same, as the answer of God vnto this people asking par∣don for their fault, to the ende they might knowe, that their repen∣tance was not vnprofitable before God, and that the exhortation of the Prophet made thereunto in the beginning of this chapter, was not in vaine neither. Two parts of this verse.But this verse containeth two parts. One hath this answer of God, & the second foūdation of the promise set forth by Ioel. The other containeth a particular and peculiar laying open of this promise more at large. And this is such,1. The answer of God. that like as the people was put in feare with a double kinde of punishment, namely of famin,2. A particular laying out of the poynts of this answer more plainly. in the first chapter, & of the sword of the enemie, in this chapter: so there is now promised a double helpe from God, and a double comfort: one, by which that famin shall be taken away. For God shall giue or restore vnto them corne, wine, oyle, the which in the chapter be∣fore
he threatned that he would take away from them because of their sinnes. The second part of this comfort set forth and deliue∣red by God in the verse following, To wit: Vers. 20. But I wil remoue farre off from you the Northren armie, & I will driue him into a land barren and desolate, with his face to∣ward the East sea, and his end to the vtmost sea, and his stinke shal come vp, and his corruption shall ascend, because he hath exalted himselfe to doe this. GOd shall deliuer them from that enemie, the which he threat∣ned before that he would send against them, that they bee not a reproch vnto the heathen, or among the prophane or wicked hea∣then. But here God promiseth two things, when as he sayth, that he will deliuer his Church.1. God will scat∣ter the enemies of his Church into the foure quarters of the world. First, that it shall come to passe, that he will scatter into the foure quarters of the world all that same host of the Chaldees, that is, the armies of the enemies of his Church, to wit, that they shall not be able to be gathered together againe now against the same. So then this armie, which was gathered together out of the Northren countries (for both the Assyrians and also the Chaldees were situated vnto the Iewes Northrenly, or toward the North) shall be scattered or driuen away, namely, one part of them vnto the South, or into a drie land: for the drie countrie is South vnto the Iewes. The other part of them, or the first band of them shall be driuen into the East. The latter into the West. These things came to passe, not only when as God ouerthrew the Monarchie or Empire of the Babylonians, that is of the Chaldees by the Persians, but also when as the power of the Babylonians to take Syria, and consequently to inuade Iewrie,In that place of the Kings there is no mention made of the Sy∣rians but of the Assyrians. was scattered by King Necao, 2. King. cap. 23. ver. 29. Concerning the ouerthrow of the Chaldees by the Medes or Persians (for they are often taken the one for the other) thus the Lord threatneth by his Prophet Isai cap. 13. ver. 17. Behold, I will stirre vp the Medes against them, which shall not regard siluer, nor be desirous of gold. And Babel the glorie of Kingdomes, the beautie and pride of the Chaldeans, shall be as the destruction of God in Sodom, and Gomorah. The place of Isai cap. 31. ver. 8. prophesieth of the destruction of the kingdome of the Assyrians in these words: Then shall Asshur fall by the sword, not of man, neither shall the sword of man deuoure him, and he shall flee from the sword, and his yong men shall faint. But cap. 48. ver. 20. the Iewes are willed to get them out
of Babel, and to flee from the Chaldeans, whereby is signified the ouerthrow of that citie by the Persians, from the which the people of God are willed to flee, lest by tarrying they should be partakers of their plagues. 2. These enemies shall be lothed and abhorred of all men.Secondly, God threatneth that it shall come to passe, that when as he shall after this maner scatter the enemies of his Church, those selfe same enemies shall be an horror and a curse vnto all men: for their bodies shall lye vnburied, and therefore their stinke shall come vp, and they shall now smell lothsomely vnto all men, who before were so greatly feared of al men. The reason is, because namely they haue exalted or magnified themselues to doe this, that is, they haue laboured (and with all the might they could possiblie) haue inde∣uoured vtterly to destroy the Church of God. For so I doe expound this sentence: God would make a determined or limited correctiō and chastising of his people onely: but these enemies went about vtterly to roote them out. Wherefore the Lord by his Prophet Isai cap. 47. ver. 6. signifieth his wrath against the Babylonians for this their vnmercifulnes and excessiue crueltie towards his people, saying: I was wroth with my people: I haue polluted mine inheritance, and giuen them into thine hand: thou diddest shewe them no mercie, but thou diddest lay thy very heauie yoke vpon the ancient. Vers. 21. Feare not, O land, but be glad, and reioyce: for the Lord will doe great things. A confirmatiō of the former promises of God.A Confirmation of the former promises of God by the gladnesse, or signe of wonder, whereunto the Church repenting is exhor∣ted by God himselfe. And to the end that this helpe and comfort promised by God, may bee vnderstood to be most plentifull, both those, whom God at that time shall comfort, are rehearsed: & those things also are reckoned vp, the which God will giue for the com∣forting of his Church in such maner: and these are partly earthie,Two parts of this verse. and partly spirituall. The earthie are first declared, and those espe∣cially,1. An exhortatiō vnto ioy. the which did asswage & ease the miserie at that time threat∣ned by the Prophet. 2. The cause of this exhortatiō. What the fi∣gure Metony∣mia is, see O∣seas cap. 4. ve. But this verse hath two parts. The first containeth an exhorta∣tion vnto wonderfull great ioy. The second, the cause of the same exhortation. Now the land it selfe is exhorted to reioyce, vnder which word we doe first of all by the figure Metonymia vnderstand the dwellers in the land, and that all in generall, that is, the migh∣tie,
and the poore: the males, and the females: the masters and the seruants: these of riper yeares and bigger growth, and the little infants. For as before vers. 16. all were exhorted vnto sorowe and mourning: so likewise are all now stirred vp vnto ioy and gladnes. Secondly, by this selfe same word land, is signified the element of the earth it selfe. For the same it selfe shall then be made partaker of this blessing of God, as it is made now of the curse because of the sinnes of the people. So before cap. 1. ver. 10. the earth is sayd to mourne. And it is exhorted vnto all kind of gladnes, feare & dread being banished before, the which doubtles might be a let or hinde∣rance thereunto. So be the words of this verse: first, Feare not, then, be glad and reioyce. For here both inward and also outward ioy is described by the Prophet by the words of being glad, and reioy∣cing. Now the cause of this stirring vp and exhortation vnto ioy is the most assured promise of God concerning the deliuerance, helping and comforting of the earth, that is of the Church, the which was to insue: and the same not any common or small, but most excel∣lent, great, and indeed miraculous or wonderfull, vnlooked for, and extraordinarie ioy and gladnes. For God will studie withall his in∣deuour to doe it, that is, to lift it vp and aduance it, as the enemies, of whom mention was made before, with all their indeuour labou∣red to oppresse and destroy it. Wherefore here, and in the verse be∣fore there is a manifest Antithesis, or matching together of con∣traries, betweene the indeuour of God, and of the enemies of his Church: his in comforting: theirs in ouerthrowing of the Church. Vers. 22. Be not afrayd, ye beasts of the field: for the pastures of the wildernesse are greene: for the tree beareth her fruit: the figge tree and the vine doe giue their force. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer exhortatiō vnto ioy.AN amplification of the former exhortation vnto gladnesse, whereby not onely men themselues: but also beasts are stirred vp vnto ioy, because of God being pacified, and because of his blessings vpon his land, and vpon the Church. So Psal. 147. the Pro∣phet proueth all creatures to praise the Lord, because of his great mercie and goodnes towards the same. After the same maner be∣fore cap. 1. ver. 18.20. the beasts of all sorts are sayd to mourne be∣cause of the wrath of God. There is here added a cause of this ioy, or exhortation vnto ioy, contrarie vnto that for the which they did
mourne. For then all kinde of fruites, either naturall (as are herbes, which do grow in the deserts, & mountaines, and pasture grounds) or els such as are sowen and planted, as are wine, oyle, figges, shall abound, and be enough, fit and sufficient for the nourishing both of beasts and also men. Hereby appeareth that the fruitfulnes of the earth, and of plants, nay, that all fruits of the earth, doe come of the only blessing and good will of God towards men, and not from the starres, or fortune, Psal. 107. Matth. 5. Vers. 23. Be glad then, ye children of Zion, and reioyce in the Lord your God: for he hath giuen you the rayne of righteousnes, and he will cause to come downe for you the rayne, euen the first rayne and the latter rayne in the first moneth. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer exhorta∣tion vnto the church.AN amplification of the former exhortation or comfort vnto the Church it selfe, the which is now her self spoken vnto by name, and exhorted expresly to be glad and reioyce, because of the bles∣sings of God to come towards her. And first of all the earthly bles∣sings are set downe vnto the 28. verse: and afterward the spirituall blessings. But this verse containeth three things. One, a description of the Church in these words, ye children or sonnes of Zion, that is,Three parts of this verse. O ye the issue and ofspring of the Church,1. A description of the church. and of that people and place, whom God hath peculiarly chosen vnto himselfe, and taken by couenant for his owne people and inheritance. The second, a de∣claratiō of that ioy, the which the Prophet requireth of the Church,2. What maner of ioy their ioy must be. to wit, that it be holie, not prophane or worldly: spirituall, not car∣nall: true, not fained: profitable, not hurtfull. So then he will haue that the godly reioyce in Iehouah, that is, in the true God: and that in their God, that is, in this respect and for this cause, for that hee is their God, he is their father, he is their patrone or defender pecu∣liarly. Ioy then, as also sadnes, is two-fold, that is to say, godly, and worldly, as appeareth concerning sorowe expresly 2. Cor. cap. 7. ver. 10. For godly sorowe causeth repentance vnto saluation, not to be repented of: but the wordly sorowe causeth death.3. The cause of this ioy. The third sheweth the cause of this ioy, to wit, God pacified towards his, and so conse∣quently now exceeding louing and bounteous. Of which thing this is a witnesse: first, the earthly blessing, the which God will be∣stowe on his Church, cleane contrarie vnto that iudgement, the which was a signe of God being angrie with her. For then was threatned that there should be a barrennes of all things necessarie
to liue withall, and consequentlie a famin: but now is promised great fruitfulnes, and that men shall sowe. Therefore God shall giue raine of righteousnes, that is, both seasonable or the mor∣ning or first raine, as Iames speaketh of the husband man pati∣entlie wayting vntill he receiue the former, and the latter rayne cap. 5. ver. 7. and also the latter or iust raine, that is in such mea∣sure and moderation as shall be needfull, neither too much, nor too hastie. For vnseasonable and ouermuch raine maketh thinges sowen and corne, rotten cap. 1. ver. 17 & corrupteth or spilleth it. The like blessing God promiseth vnto the louers and such as are obedient vnto his lawe Deut 11. ver. 14. I also will giue rayne vnto your laend in due time, the first rayne, and the latter, that thou maist gather in thy wheat, and thy wine, and thine oyle. And because God is the giuer of these things, his people are commaunded to craue them at his hands Zach. 10. ver. 1. Aske you of the Lord (saith the Prophet) rayne in the time of the latter rayne: so shall the Lorde make white cloudes, and giue you showers of raine, and to euerie one grasse in the fielde. Vers. 24. And the barnes shall be full of wheate: and the presses shall abound with wine and oyle. The first ampli¦fication of the former benefit taken from the extraordinarie manner of per∣forming the same.THe first amplification of the former blessing, and promised abundance of things necessarie to liue withall. And it is ta∣ken from the extraordinarie maner, after which it shall be done, and that in euery kinde of fruite. For then the garners or barnes shall not onelie haue great store of wheat, of drie fruites of all sortes, but also shall be filled full. Their wine presses, and other presses (which are the instruments to make other liquid or moist commodities withall) shall euen flow and runne by the streetes, so great plentie certainlie shall there then be of all fruites both drie and also moist. And this is also a blessing which God pro∣miseth to blesse the obedient vnto his voyce with all Deut. 30. ver. 9. for thus speaketh Moyses in that place: And the Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in euery worke of thine hand, in thy fruite of thy bodie, and in the fruite of thy cattell, and in the fruite of the land for thy welth: for the Lord will turne againe, and reioyce ouer thee to doe thee good, as he reioysed ouer thy fathers. See Deut. 28. more at large to this purpose.
Vers. 25 And I will render you the yeares which the grashopper hath eaten, the canker worme, and the caterpiller, and the pal∣mer worme, my great host, which I sent among you. The second am¦plifiction of the former blessing by comparing the plentie now with with the scar∣citie before.THe second amplification of the former earthlie blessing by comparing the extraordinarie famin and barrennes described before cap. 1, with the plentie and store which now is promised. For this store & plentie, shal restore whatsoeuer that barrennes shal haue taken away. Compare this verse with the first Chapter before. ver. 4.6.7. Wherefore this plentie shall be so much the more ioyfull and great, because it shall leaue no signe nor senfie of the former miserie. On the contrarie Gen. 41. there is a barren∣nes foretold of seuen yeares to come, the which should deuoure the plentie of the seuen yeares, which went before: that we may know and vnderstand that both plentie and scarsitie of all things are of and from God. Vers. 26. So ye shall eate, and be satisfied, and prayse the name of the Lord your God, that hath delt maruailouslie with you: and my people shall neuer be ashamed. The third am∣plification, ta∣ken from the vse, which God giueth of these benefites.THe third amplification, taken from the vse of so great benefits the which God will adioyne and graunt vnto them. For both earthlie giftes are the gift of God, and also the abilitie and pow∣er to vse them: This may appeare by the contrarie, when God giueth giftes, and not power to vse them, of the which Solomon complaineth Eccles. 6. ver. 1.2. There is an euill, which I saw vnder the Sunne, and it is much among men: A man to whom God hath giuen riches and treasures and honor, and he wanteth nothing for his soule of all that it desireth: but God giueth him not power to eate thereof: but a straunge man shall eate it vp: this is vanitie, and this is an euill sicknesse. The contrarie blessing God promiseth vnto his Church Isay 62. ver. 8.9. The Lord hath sworne by his right hand, and by his strong arme, surelie I will no more giue thy corne to be meate for thine enimies, and surelie the sonnes of the straungers shall not drinke thy wine, for the which thou hast laboured: but they that haue gathered it shall eate it, and prayse the Lord, and the gatherers thereof shall drinke it in the courtes of my Sanctuarie. So then, I say
not onelie all power and abilitie to vse and inioye the blessings of God, is the gift of God: but also such power as is here in this place described. Thus the lewes shall eate the fruites of the earth, and shall be satisfied, or filled with them: and they shall not be hunger staruen as they were before. Further the scope or end of the vse of these giftes of God is added,The end of the vse of all God his gifts to∣ward vs. that men in so great plentie and store of things (the which is a thing which easelie cōmeth to passe) should not forget God: or that they should not abuse or mispend the giftes of God: or attribute the cause of them vnto any other, to whom they should stand beholding for them, then onelie vnto the grace of God. For commonlie men doe attribute the cause of them either vnto the diligence and painefulnes of the husbandmen, or of them selues, or vnto the disposition of the Starres, and the tempe∣rature of the heauen and of the aire, or vnto the fatnes of the doung laide vpon the ground. For after this manner doe profane men, or wordlinges vse to speake. The scope then or end both of this so great plentie of the giftes of God, and of the vse of them (which is of God graunted vnto vs) is, that we should blesse the name of God therefore: giue him thanks with our whole heart: and confesse and acknowledge him to be in deed our father. So Paul 1. Tim. 4. v. 3. teacheth, that all the creatures of God are good, & ought not to be refused, but are to be receiued with thanks giuing of them whih beleeue and know the trueth. Lastlie the Prophet tea∣cheth that out of the same plentie they are to gather a testimonie or witnes of the grace and fauour of God towards them. For it should be so great, that all men should then easelie perceiue and know that God did in deed miraculously giue and bestow the same. Vers. 27. Ye shall also know, that I am in the middest of Israell, and that I am the Lord your God, and none other, and my people shall neuer be a shamed. The fourth am¦plification of this blessing.THe fourth amplification of the saide earthly blessing by the most holie and reuerend signification thereof. For the same shal plainlie shew and witnes vnto the Iewes the singular fauour of God towardes them, that is, towardes his Church. Therefore he sayth, by this blessing ye shall know that God is louing vnto you and beareth you good will. And this is a great comfort,
when as those earthlie blessings are in such sort giuen vnto vs of God, that they may plainlie appeare to be signes and tokens of his loue towardes vs: otherwise, by this kinde of things it can hardlie be iudged or discerned betweene the loue and hatred of God: also between the good or the elect, and betweene the euill or Reprobate. For as it is in Mat. cap. 5. ver. 45. God maketh his Sunne to arise on the euill, and the good: and sendeth raine on the iust, and the vniust. And Solomon Eccles. 9. ver. 1. teacheth, that the iust, and the wise, and their workes are in the hand of God: and no man knoweth either loue or hatred of all that is before them. Three effects of God his fauour towardes his Church.But this peculiar or espcial fauour of God toward his Church is described by three effects of the same, to wit, that God will be in the middest of them. Now God is saide to be in the middest of them whom he defendeth from all miuries or wrongs,1. He will be in the middest of it. and gouerneth by his spirit, and rameth them vnto his obedience. Secondlie, that the true God, yea and that he alone shall then be acknow∣ledged of the Church to be their God. And this is then done, both when as all idolatrie is driuen and banished out of the Church,2. That the true God onelie is acknowledged by her. and when as his right and lawfull worship is giuen vnto God according vnto his word, and retained and kept in the Church. 3. That she shall not be ashamed.Thirdlie, that this people shall not be ashamed. And of this the Church hath proofe and experience, when as God casteth down, and ouerthroweth her enimes, and deliuereth her being afflicted or in trouble, and maketh her to be a conquerour before the world, that all men may know that she ruleth ouer her enimies, and is cherished and maintained by God. So God promiseth for his Church Isaie cap. 60, ver. 12. of whose enimies he sayth. For the Nation and the kingdome, which will not serue thee, shall perish: And those Nations shalbe vtterlie destroyed. And ver. 16. he pro∣miseth her abundance of many rich blessings, saying: Thou shalt also suck the milke of the Gentiles: and shalt suck the breasts of kings: and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Sauiour, and thy Redee∣mer: the mightie one of Jacob. And these are the earthlie blessings the which God bestoweth vpon those that are his. Vers. 28. And afterwarde will I powre out my spirit vpon all flesh: and your sonnes and your daughters shall prophesie: your old men shall dreame dreames, and your yong men shall see visions. The second part of the cō∣fort of the Church contei∣ning Spirituall promises.THe second part of the comfort of the Church, the which con∣teineth the Spirituall promises of God, and the same also most
plentifull, like as the first part did set foorth most singular earth∣lie blessings. And where as the Spirituall promises are deliuered in the second or latter place, this is don in regard of our imbecili∣tie or weakenes, namelie, because that by these earthlie things we are to be led as it were by the hand to the tasting and vnderstan∣ding of the spirituall. So in the Lord his prayer the petition for our dailie bread goeth before it, which is of the forgiuenes of sinnes. Furthermore the circumstance of time was by the Pro∣phet obserued in this place, as appeareth. For first God gaue and imparted vnto the Iewes those earthlie blessings, before he be∣stowed on them these spirituall graces of the which he here in∣treateth. Moreouer this so large and rich a promise is propoun∣ded or deliuered vnto the Church with great garnishing or elo∣quence and fine setting out of the same, both because we are wont coldely and slenderly to regarde and esteeme this kind of the graces of God, (and therefore we are earnestly to bee spurred vp to the consideration of the price and value of them) and also for that, if those earthly giftes be described or set forth vnto vs with so great amplifiyng & laying out of the same, how much more ought these spirituall benefites to be commended vnto vs?Three parts of this verse. This verse hath three things to be noted, namely, the time wher∣in these things are promised that they shall be:1. The time. secondly, the thing it selfe which is promised:2 The thing pro∣mised. and thirdly, the persons vnto whom it is promised. As for the time, there is a certaine time assigned, yet no time neere at hand,3. The persons to whom it is pro∣mised. or short time, for the Iewes must first be deliuered out of the captiuitie of Babylon, the Babylonians themselues must be ouerthrowen, and the marueilous workes of God (such as were in the times of the Machabees) appeare in the preseruing,1. The time. feeding, and defending of his church. Wherefor there is in this place noted a long time, and far to come, and many ages distant from the time of this prophet, to wit, the time of the comming of Christ, and be∣stowing these giftes vpon his church, as Peter doth expound it Act. 2. ver. 16, 17. where he citeth this very place of our Prophet to con∣firme the myraculous and extraordinary graces of God his spirit in the feast of Pentecost powred out vpon them. And so doth Paul al∣so take the same Ephes. 4. ver. 7. where he speaketh of the diuersitie of giftes by God bestowed vpon the ministers of his church for the good of the same saying: When he ascended vp on high, hee led captiuitie captiue, and gaue giftes vnto men. This place of Ioel a∣greeth
with that of Isai cap. 44. vers. 3. I will powre vpon the thirstie, and floods vpon the drie ground: I wil powre my spirite vpon thy seede, and my blessing vpon thy buddes. And with that of Zach. 13. vers. 1. In that day there shall bee a fountaine opened to the house of Dauid, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, for sinne and for vn∣cleannes. So euery where in the prophets long times and greatly distant one from another, are ioyned together, as Isai 7. vers. 8 14. because that all the whole space the which passed from the time of the prophets vntill the incarnation of Christ, is compared onely vnto the first parte of a day. Nay moreouer, in the verses follow∣ing is declared by the Prophet what shall bee the estate of the Church, and of the whole world vntil the consummation and en∣ding thereof. Wherefore these wordes, And it shall afterward come to passe, doe containe that same whole time, the which passed vntill the comming and death of Christ, and the visible sending of the holie Ghost, of the which there is mention Act. 2. And thus much concerning the time. 2. The thing pro∣mised.The matter or thing it selfe which is promised, is a spirituall grace, and the same most abundant and plentifull towards al kind of men, the which shall bee members of the church. God therefore is sayd that he shall not onely giue, but also powre out most large∣ly. For albeit before the comming of Christ God gaue vnto the fathers his holy spirite, as for example, vnto the Prophets, and other the godly: yet was that grace as a smal part and certaine little drop, as a little portion of fayth, and knowledge of saluation of Christ, and of the secret of God, in comparison of that which both the A∣postles and also others receiued on that day of Pentecost, or Whit∣sontide: and also in comparison of that which the Church nowe hath and receiueth through the benefit of Christ. For he that is lesse in the kingdome of God, and vnder the preaching of the Gospel, is greater euen then Iohn Baptist himselfe, much more therefore then the former Prophets Mat. 11. ver 11. So then this powring out and this so great light of the knowledge of God, and of fayth im∣parted and bestowed vpon the godly, is to be vnderstood in a cer∣taine respect, namely, by the comparing together of the spirituall giftes of God, and of the same knowledge made of God vnto the church before the comming of Christ. And therefore Eph. 3. vers. 4, 5. Paul speaking of these two times of knowledge sayth, that the vnderstanding of the mysterie of Christ in other ages was not opened
tiles conuerted vnto Christ: and that here also is taken away diffe∣rence of vncircumcision, and of circumcision, because without all doubt he speaketh of the Kingdome of Christ, where there is now no such difference. For as Paul witnesseth Galat. 6. ver. 15. In Christ Iesus neither circumcision auaileth any thing, nor vncircumci∣sion, but a new creature. Vers. 30. And I will shew wonders in the heauens, and in the earth: blood and fire, and pillars of smoke. A continuing of the comfort of the godly, by setting downe an historie of such things as should fall out euen vnto the end of the world. It was very re∣quisite, that the Church should be in∣structed in the state of the world to come.A Continuing of the comfort by the order and historie of things to come, the which is in this place briefely made vntill the last day of the Lord commeth. And there is shewed what the Church of God, and euery one of the godly ought to doe in the meane sea∣son, vpon what foundation to rest, and where to seeke their deliue∣rance and saluation, to the end that this historie should not rather trouble them, then comfort them. Wherefore this verse with that which followeth, containeth, but most briefely, what shall bee the state of this world, after those giftes giuen vnto men by God. For in as much as the Church must needes haue her being in this world, she was also to be put in minde of the state of this world which was to come, that she should not therefore be dismayed, when as there should be, and were to come, so many and great alterations and changes of thinges, so fearefull miseries, ouethrowings of king∣domes, ciuill warres of nations within themselues. And this place is plainely expounded by Christ Mat. 24. ver. 6. when as he sheweth his disciples also, what should bee the state and condition of the world before the end thereof, saying: Ye shall heare of warres, and rumors of warres: see that ye be not troubled: for all these things must come to passe: but the end is not yet. For nation shall rise against nati∣on, and realme against realme, and there shall be pectilence, and famin, and earthquakes in diuers places. And ver. 29. And immediatlie after the tribulations of those dayes, shall the Sunne be darkened, and the Moone shall not giue her light, and the Starres shall fall from Heauen and the powers of heauen shall be shaken. So Zach. 14. ver. 13. But in that day a great tumult of the Lord shal be among them, and euery one shall take the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall rise vp against the hand of his neighbour. See further concerning these matters Reuelat. cap. 6. cap. 7. &c. Briefelie in this place of Ioel there is M∣taphoricallie described an historie of things to come after Chr
his being shewed vnto the world, the which is horrible and feare∣full I confesse, yet most iust, because of the Gospell of Christ despi∣sed and refused by the world, and also because of the persecuting of the same with sundrie persecutions by the Kings of this world. Further, this whole description is Metaphorical,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. by the recitall of those things, the which are wont to make men most afrayd, that the iudgements of God may be vnderstood to bee the greater agaynst the world, for as much as the world persecuteth, or despiseth Christ. Therefore there shall be feare in euery place, whither so euer men doe turne their eyes, either in heauen, or in earth. For so doth the world deserue, when as it casteth aside the trueth of God. Then al∣so the outward sight, and as it were the face of things, the which shall then be done and seene, shall appeare most fearfull, dreadfull, and afraying all men. For it shall be such, as if men euery where & in all places did behold and see bloud, fire, and darknes set and cast before their eyes. And by this kind of speaking, no man doubteth soule discomfitures, cruell plagues, and wonders, that is, signes and tokens altogether fearefull, and testifying or witnessing the wrath and anger of God, to be signified and vnderstood. Vers. 31. The Sunne shall be turned into darknes, and the Moone in∣to bloud, before the great and terrible day of the Lord come. The miserie of those daies am∣plified in re∣gardAN amplification of the said miserie taken both from the persons themselues, the which shall then be afflicted or troubled & pu∣nished, and also from the length of time. The persons which shall be afflicted, are in this place no doubt signified that they shall be of great place and authoritie.1. Of the persons afflicted. For the Prophet noteth them vnder the name of the Sunne & the Moone, as Gen. 37. ver. 9. by the Sunne and the Moone and the eleuen Starres in the dreame of Ioseph, were vnderstood his father and mother and eleuen brethren. Ther∣fore like as the Sunne and the Moone are in comparison of the o∣ther Starres in heauen: so are these great personages in respect of other men on the land and earth, who notwithstanding shall them∣selues also be most hardly afflicted. Thus perished and ran to ruine the Romane Empire for despising the name of God, and persecu∣ting the Gospell of Christ: Thus also at this day doe most flourish∣ing kingdomes, and Kings and Common wealths perish for the same cause.
2. Of the length and continuāce of time.The length of time also is added, These things shall endure and continue in the world, both before, and also vntill that same gre and fearfull day of the Lord shall come, that is, that same last day of the world, where Christ shall appeare in iudgement, as Christ tel∣leth his Disciples Matth. 24. ver. 34. saying, Verely I say vnto you, thi generation shall not passe, till all these things be done. For the Church of God hath oftentimes Halcyon dayes in this world, that is, rest and quiet for a season, but neuer true and continuall peace, no not for a∣nie long time neither: which thing is signified Apoc. 8. ver. 1. when Iohn sayth, that at the opening of the seuenth seale, there was silence in heauen about halfe an houre. And cap. 12. ver. 1. by the vision of the woman clothed with the Sunne, and the Moone vnder her feet, &c. And Micheas cap. 4. ver. 4. hauing before spoken of the kingdome of Christ, and felicitie of his Church, sheweth that the same shall not bee without her rest and peace sometime, when he sayth, that they shall sit euery man vnder his vine, and vnder his figge tree, and none shall make them afrayd. Vers. 32. But whosoeuer shall call vpon the name of the Lord shall be saued: for in mount Zion and in Ierusalem shall be deliuerance▪  the Lord hath sayd, and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call. An adomonitiō for the godlie.AN admonition. For the Prophet admonisheth or warneth what is to bee done of euery godly man in so great confusion of he world, and hurly burly of things, that he be not swallowed vp, or perish with the world, but may bee deliuered, and himselfe escape safe out of so great shipwrackes, to wit, that he truly call vpon the name of God according vnto true faith, and according vnto the commandement of God. So Christ hauing preached of the same afflictions, teacheth that this onely remedie is then left vnto those that are his, namely, that by true faith, patience, and with feruent & earnest calling vpon the name of God, they do adioyne themselues vnto the hearing of the true doctrine of the Gospell, as the Eagl doe vnto the dead carkasse, Matth. 24. ver. 28. And cap. 10. ver. . she sheweth, That he which indureth to the end, shall be saued. A Luk. 21. ver. 19. he sayth vnto his Disciples, By your patience pss your soules.The reason why they shall be deliuered. The reason is added, because euery one, that is, whi out of any nation shall call vpon the true God, to wit, by true fa (for otherwise he cannot truly be called vpon) the same shall
saued by God, and shall escape safe out of so many shipwrackes, whether he be a Iew, or of the Gentiles. So doth Paul expound this place Rom. 10. ver. 13.14. For this promise, whereof he speaketh now, is generall, and appertaineth generally vnto all nations, and not vnto the Iewes alone: but vnto all the true remnants of the Church, out of what nation soeuer the Lord shall call them vnto himselfe, and vnto the true knowledge of him, as the Prophet him∣selfe doth expound it, and Peter also Act. 10. ver. 35. when he saith: In euery nation he that feareth him, and worketh righteousnes, is ac∣cepted with him. So then, there is here both a remedie set forth vn∣to the godly, and also a cause of this remedie. Two things yet to be noted.Further, there are yet two things added in this verse. One, the foundation of this cause: the other, the place wherein this true cal∣ling vpon God is: and consequently the saluation of men.1. The foundatiō of the former cause. The foundation of this cause is the free promise of God. For God will in such sort doe this, because he hath freely so promised: and cal∣leth those, whom he desireth to saue.2. The place where this in∣uocation must be. For here the Prophet spea∣keth of an effectuall calling of God, whereby men are truely con∣uerted vnto God through faith, the which faith it self also is meere∣ly free, as is also the promise of God, of the sauing of some certaine men, Rom. 11. ver. 5. Euen so then at this present time there is a rem∣nant through the election of grace.1. The free pro∣mise of God. So then the meere or only mercie and grace of God towards men, is the foundation of this saluation and hope of the godly. 2. The place Zion and Ierusalem, that is, the true church of God.The place is added, in the which God is truely called vpon, and consequently where there is true saluation and escaping, not so much indeed of the bodie, or out of the dangers and afflictions of this life, as of the soule, and from euerlasting damnation, the which  most fearfull death and punishment, and most especially of all men to be dreaded, as Christ teacheth Matth. 10. ver. 28. where he sayth, Feare ye not them which kill the bodie, but are not able to kill the sle: but rather feare him which is able to destroy both bodie and soule in hell. Now this place is Sion, & Ierusalem, that is to say, the Church of God, the which is gouerned and grounded vpon his word. For in this place Sion and Ierusalem are set against the kingdome of Israel, and the infidell kingdoms, the which, how honorable, weal∣thie, and great soeuer they shall then be, yet if they shall not haue the pure word of God, there shall be in them no saluation for men: but saluation only shall be in the citie of God, & in Sion, the which  the pillar and keeper of his trueth. There then shall be the salua∣tion
of men, yea and that only, where there shall be true inuocatiō, or calling vpon the name of God. Wherefore the word Sion, doth not restraine this promise of God vnto the Iewes only dwelling in that earhly Sion (for then should not this grace of God be general, as it is notithstanding) but vnder this name Sion, is signified the Church of God at all times, and into what parts and quarters of the world soeuer it shall then bee scattered. For there is saluation of soules, because that there is true faith, and the true Christ, and con∣sequently there is the true God, and grace and forgiuenes of sinnes. CAP. 3. Vers. 1. For behold, in those dayes and in that time, when I shall bring againe the captiuitie of Iudah and Ierusalem. A confirmatiō of the former promise, taken from the remo∣uing of the lets or enemies of the Church.A Confirmatiō of the former promise of the safetie of the Church of God to come, euen in the midst of those troubles, and hurlie burlies of the world, the which were described in the chapter be∣fore. And it is taken from the remouing away of the lets or enemies of the Church, whom God will ouerthrow, be they in number ne∣uer so great, and neuer so much to be feared. Wherefore nothing shall let God, from performing that his promised deliuerance and safetie vnto his Church. So Amos 9.15. So Mich. 7. ver. 8. And such repetitions as these, and such comforts are very necessary and need∣full for the godlie, least they faint by reason of the continuance of the euils and troubles, or bee feared with the multitude of the ene∣mies, & so be brought into despayre. In a word, through this whole chapter is promised the ouerthrow of the enemies of the Church, and of such as doe afflict or trouble it. The time, in the which God shall performe these things.But this verse containeth the noting out of the time, wherein these things shall be done by God, namely, when as God shall bring againe the captiuitie of Iudah, that is to say, when as he shall gather together his scattered Church. For this promise is generall, and comprehendeth the whole time, in the which there shall be or ∣maine any Church in this world. For albeit God sometime haue gathered his Church more noblie and with greater renowme o of her miserable scattering into other countries, as after the capti∣uitie of Babylon, vnder the Machabees: & especially by the preach∣ing of the Gospell after the comming of Christ: yea, and no in
these last times doth gather it together, of his great mercy restoring vnto vs and renuing the light of the Gospell: yet is it notwithstan∣ding most true, that God is alwayes present with his Church, and doth keepe it, and breake the power of the enemies thereof, that they destroy it not vtterly. Wherefore how often soeuer God will restore it, then also doe those most assured iudgements of God a∣gainst the enemies of his Church, which are here threatned, ap∣peare, and are executed by him. Vers. 2. I will also gather all nations, and will bring them downe into the valley of Iehoshaphat, and will plead with them there for my people, and for mine heritage Israel, whom they haue scattered a∣mong the nations, and parted my land. 1. The place. 2. The persons. 3. The cause.THis verse comprehendeth three things, the which without all doubt do declare the destruction to come to the enemies of the Church. The first containeth the place. The second, whom God will punish. The third, for what cause.1. The valley of Iehoshaphat. The place is sayd that it shal be the valley of Iehoshaphat, to wit, by the figure Metalepsis (which what it is see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18.) that looke what, and what maner of benefite of God the people of the Iewes did once feele in that valley when God gaue that mightie ouerthrow vnto his enemies the Moabites and Ammonites 2. Chro. 20. the like shall the church alwayes feele, when as it is deliuered by God, namely, that he will in a moment destroy all the enemies thereof, although they haue neuer so much conspired together, bee neuer so diuers or many in number. See Psal. 83. Now they which shall be gathered together,2. The vnbelee∣uing people & nations what∣soeuer. iudged and punished by God, are the Gentiles, that is, men & peo∣ple which remaine infidels and vnbeleeuers. For as for those which shall turne vnto the true God, and shal receiue Christ by faith, they shall not be destroyed by God, nor be inwrapped in this iudgemēt. Therefore the vnfaithfull onely shall bee gathered, and that all of them, that is, out of euery nation, and people, which haue afflicted the Church of God. Lastly, the cause is added, namely,3. Because they haue scattered the people of God among the heathen, and haue diuided their land. for that they haue both scattered the people of God among the Gentiles: & also moreouer haue diuided their land among themselues, & haue rob∣bed and spoyled it: yet both this people, and also this their land was the people and inheritance of God himselfe only. Wherefore those infidels shall iustly bee punished by God, in regard of a double sa∣ledge or theeuerie to Godward, namely, because they robbed
and spoyled both the people of GOD, and also the lande of God. Vers. 3. And they haue cast lots for my people, and haue giuen the child for the harlot, and sold the girle for wine, that they might drinke. An amplifica∣tion of the de∣spite and iniu∣rie offered by the heathen vnto the people of God:AN amplification of this villanie or despite and wrong done by these heathen or infidels, not vnto men, but vnto God himselfe, which amplification is taken from this notorious despite of theirs. For these Gentiles breaking both that priuiledge and authoritie which God had peculiarly ouer this people: and also the generall lawes and teaching of nature and humanitie, handled and vsed the Church of God most shamefully, nay most cruelly. For they did not only make that whole nation captiues, and diuided them amōg themselues by lot, as couetous Souldiers are wont to doe their pray and bootie, and as they did with the garments of Christ Matth. 27. but also they intreated the godly so despitefully and villanously, that they sold the boyes and the girles as the drosse of the world, for a most small and low price, the which afterward they conuer∣ted or turned vnto lewd and wicked vses, as namely into whore∣dome and drunkennes.The Sardians. So in times past the captiue Sardians in re∣proch were called Saleable, or (as we may terme them) dog-cheap slaues, who because of their cheapenes, and great numbers of them were sold for a farthing a piece, or for a matter of nothing. And truly in such sort commonly doe the vngodly handle the godlie, when as they fall into their hands, that they esteeme not so much of them, as they doe of other slaues of other infidell and vnbeleeuing nations: nay, many times they make not so good reckoning of them, as they doe of most vile and filthie dogges. But because of such crueltie of men against men, God is most grieuously angrie Amos cap. 1. and 2. So one day will God destroy the Turks, because of the like crueltie against Christians. Vers. 4. Yea, and what haue you to doe with me, O Tyrus and Zid, and all the costes of Palestina? will ye render me a recompence and if ye recompence me, swiftly and speedily will I render your r∣compence vpon your head. An application of the former despite vnto 3. seueral peoples.AN application of the former iniurie and despite done agay God, and the people of God. First vnto the Tyrians: after
vnto the Sidonians, and lastly vnto them of Palestina, or the Phi∣listims. All these God accuseth of a three fold crime,1 Iniustice. 2 Sacrilege. 3 Cruelty. and the same most hainous, that is to say, of iniustice, sacriledge, and barbarous cruelty. Of iniustice in this verse.1. Iniustice. For they thus afflicted or plagued the church vpon no cause, in as much as they were no way prouo∣ked by her, but made vniust warre against the church of God, being moued thereunto through the hatred of God only. Therefore saith the Lord, there is no iust cause of this punishment by you layd vpō my church. There hath no occasion bin giuen you. Therefore you can pretend or allege no recompence, that is, no requittance of any wrong done vnto you before, for the cause of your cruelty against my church. Therefore you are in this point altogether vniust and wrongfull dealers. But I when as I shall punish you, shall be iust euen therefore, or in so doing. For I shall iustly pay home vpon your owne heads the price of this your wickednes. For I shal giue vnto you a reward of your so great iniustice. Ver. 5. For ye haue taken my siluer, and my gold, and haue caried into your temples my goodly and pleasant thinges. SEcondly he accuseth them of sacriledge,2 Sacrilege. or the euery against God, to wit, for that they haue taken from him, that is, from the true God, an holy thing, or such goodes as were appoynted for his seruice, and haue conuerted or bestowed them vpon the wor∣shippe and temples of their idols, wickedly profaning or vnhalow∣ing diuine and holy thinges, or such as were ordained vnto holy v∣ses. So doth Balthasar with the vessels of the temple Dan. 5. Which thing is a notorious sacriledge or robbery against God. Ver. 6. The children also of Iudah, and the children of Ierusalem haue you solde vnto the Grecians, that you might send them farre from their border. THirdly he accuseth them of barbarous cruelty, namely,3 Cruelty. that they were not content to carry away captiue the children of Iu∣dah, and of Ierusalem, that is such men and people as both were neighbours vnto them, and also peculiarly dedicated or appointed vnto God, and to sell them as if they had bin brute beastes: but also through singular cruelty they did seatter them into the farthest countries, that possibly they could, as namely selling them vnto
Grecians and Barbarians, and men dwelling beyond the sea, to that end that the Iewes should by no meanes be able to redeeme or ransome themselues afterward, and to returne vnto their natiue soyle, or country where they were borne, by reason of the distance of places, and straungenes & cruelty of the men, vnto whom they were in bondage. So then their purpose was to keepe them bond slaues for euer, so far as lay in these Sidonians, Syrians, and Phili∣stims. So Amos 1. ver. 6. the Philistims are accused for that they sold the captiue Iewes vnto people that were greatest enemies vn∣to them. Furthermore by these wordes the sonnes or children of Iu∣dah and Ierusalem, I doubt not but that the treachery or vnfaithful∣nes of the Tirians, the old and ancient confederates of the Iewes is reprehended, as who namely had so most cruelly broken the olde leagues betweene their kinges and the kinges of the Iewes, as aun∣cient as from the times of Salomon and Hiram, as may appeare 1. King. 5. and had forgotten the same. Ver. 7. Behold, I will raise them out of the place, where ye haue sold them and will render your reward vpon your owne head. A confirmation of the former promise the which is two∣fold.A Confirmation of the former promise and comfort, the which was set foorth vnto the Iewes or church of God. This confir∣mation is twofold. The one is taken from the restoring of the Iewes themselues: the other from the ouerthrow of the enemies of the church. The renuing and restoring of the Iewes, or scattered church,1 Taken from the restoring of the Iewes. is conteined in this verse: the ouerthrowe of the enemies in the verse following. God then promiseth that it shall come to passe, that he himselfe will gather his church, albeit that the same by them be neuer so much scattered: yea & that out of what place soeuer, into the which they haue strowed and scattered them. So Psal. 107. ver. 3. Dauid willeth those whom God hath gathered together from the landes of the East & of the West, and of the North, and of the south, to praise the Lord. Wherefore there are two things here to be noted: one, the person of him that gathereth them toge∣ther. And that is God himselfe, the Lord almighty and true. I, saith he, will raise them vp and bring them againe. The second thing is, that he saith, out of what place soeuer ye haue sold the Iewes. For nothing can withstand the grace & power of God, that he should not fulfill his promises towarde his church. Let this therefore al∣wayes comfort the godly in what place soeuer they shall be.
Ver. 8. And I will sell your sonnes and your daughters into the hand of the children of Iudah, and they shall sell them vnto the Sabians, to a people far off: for the Lord hath spoken it. 2 From the mise∣rable ouer∣throw of their enemies.THe ouerthrow of the enemies of the church, and the same most lamentable. For they in the iust iudgement of God shall fall into the selfe same miseries, the which they haue deuised and pro∣cured for the church. So then God requiteth vnto his enemies the selfe same mischeefe the which they haue cruelly inuented against the church: and rendreth vnto them like for like, as he smote the Philistines in the hinder partes, and put them vnto a perpetuall shame, Psal. 78. ver. 66. who had shamefully vsed God his people, and sinned fouly against him in beastly idolatry. For the same in the end reboundeth vpon their owne partes, the which they had framed against the godly, and men fearing the Lord. So Dauid speaketh of the vngodly, Psal. 7. ver. 15.16. He hath made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the pit that he made. His mischeefe shall returne vpon his owne head, & his cruelty shall fall vpon his owne pate. And this is a most iust punishment of these wicked men, & enemies of God, that they themselues feele and suffer the harme & misery the which they do forge and goe about for others. The which in this place God threatneth, shall fall out vnto the enemies of his church.The punishmēt here threatned containeth three things. Therefore this punishment threatned by God con∣taineth three things. First, that it shall come to passe that their sonnes and daughters also shall be sold for captiues into bondage, as they namely solde the sonnes and daughters of Iudah. The se∣cond,1. Their sonnes and daughters shall be sold. that they shall be solde, and caried away into captiuity by the Iewes themselues, as they sold them, and held and kept them captiues. The third,2. They shall be sold by the Iewes. that they also themselues shall be sold by the same Iewes vnto the Sabeans, and people far off, that they may serue a perpetuall and most miserable bondage beyond all hope of be∣ing redeemed & ransomed afterwardes,3 They shall be sold vnto nati∣ons far off. like as they sold the Iewes vnto the Grecians and nations far off into perpetual and miserable bondage. And this is a iust requitance of punishment. Vers. 9. Publish this among the Gentiles: prepare warre: wake vp the mightie men: Let all the men of warre drawe neere and come vp. A confirmation of this ouer∣throw of the enimies of the Church.HE confirmeth this ouerthrow of al the enimies of the Church by the issue or falling out of the matter which was to come.
For the former punishment seemeth properlie to appertayne vn∣to the Tyrians, Sidonians, and Philistims onelie: but this which now followeth, cōcerneth all the enimies of the Church of what nation, stock, sexe, & condition soeuer they be. Which thing be∣cause it is vncredible vnto the enimies themselues, or such a thing as they cannot beleeue, when as they are so manie in number & so mighty, yea this self same poynt seemeth oftētimes hard & cum∣bersome vnto the Church her selfe, which cōpareth her strength with the strength of her enemies: therefore doth God now in such sort represent & describe or set foorth this his iudgement against all these so manie & so mightie people & his enimies, that none may now hence foorth doubt of it for to come. For vnder a verie necessary & needful Hypotyposis or most liuely laying of the mat∣ter as it were open vnto the view of the eyes,What the figure hypoty∣posis is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. there is set foorth, how great the preparation of God shal be in this war, & ouercō∣ming of his enimies: how great shall be his strength & power: what manner of host or armie: how great his might: both that he may preuent or answer a doubt, which might be made by his church, & also to shake off the careles cōsidence or foolehardines of his enimies. Wherefore this whole place is a needful Hypotyposis. Two Parts of this verse.But this verse conteineth two things. The first the denouncing or threatning of warre,1 A proclamati∣on of warre. & the same most iust warre against those enimies of his Church. For it is commaunded to be published, or to be denounced or shewed by the Prophets, as it were by Heralts vnto these Nations which haue afflicted the Church. For in such sort ought lawful warres to be made, that they be first proclaimed vnto the enimie, & that it may be shewed that he dealeth with a bad conscience, if being spoken vnto, hee render not right, and that which is answerable vnto law. The warre is commaunded to be sanctified, that is, that there be a iust cause thereof decla∣red: yea and declared that it shall be a warre, that is a most cruell warre, & most lamentable, and ful of bloud. The word (Sanctifie) therefore doth declare the lawfulnes of the warre. For no warres are at any time to be taken in hand, if they be not iust and lawful. And all lawful warres are holie, & the battels of God, and not of men. So Abigail acknowledgeth the warres of Dauid to be iust, and that he fighteth the Lords battels 1. Sam. 25. ver. 28. So 2. Chro. 20. ver. 15. Iahaziel the Leuite enspired by the Spirit of God comforteth Iehoshaphat and the people against the huge host of the Moabites and Ammonites, and sayth: Feare you not, neither
afrayde of his great multitude: for the battell is not yours, but the Lords. The word (warre or battell) sheweth the sharpenes of this warre, and bloudie fightes. 2 What manner of men the Souldiars shall bee.The second part of this verse containeth, what kinde of men shall warre in the tents for God, and shall come together against the enimies of the Church, namelie stout and mightie men and good warriours, yea and that all of them, and not onelie one or twain shall warre vnto God, or for God. Vers. 10. Breake your plowe shares into swordes, and your siethes into speares: Let the weake say, I am strong. A description of this prepa∣ration vnto battell.NOw the great preparation of this warre is described, the which might both strengthen the Church: and also terrifie or feare the enimies. For all things shall doe God seruice in this warre. Their plow shares and siethes shall be turned into swords and speares most willinglie by them all against the enimes of God. But where the peace of God reigneth, the contrarie is done: For then all weapons are turned into siethes & plow shares. Isa. 2. Mich. 4. Finallie there shall none be willing to haue himselfe excused, or priuiledged from this warre. For the weake shall then be strong and valiant for the fighting of this battel. And there∣fore he shall come into the Tents of God. For God shall make them all strong and lustie at that time, as he did the Israelites, when he brought them out of Egypt, of whom Dauid sayth Psal. 105. vers. 37. He brought them foorth also with siluer and gold, and there was none feeble among their tribes. Vers. 11. Assemble your selues, and come all ye heathen, and gather your selues together round about:Or cause there thy mightie men, O Lord to come downe. there shall the Lord cast downe thy mightie men. IN the third place is brieflie, but yet liuelie described the readi∣nes, obedience, and order of the Souldiares in this host of God.1 Readines. 2 Obedience. Their readines, in that when as the Lord shall saie (gather your selues together) they shal by & by and foorthwith be gathered to∣gether. Their obedience also is declared: in that they shall come round about or from all places, and not from one place onelie: but looke how many, and from whence soeuer shall by God be bidden and called vntoth is warre, they shall giue in their names by and by, and come into the tentes of God, to fight against his
enimies. Lastlie their order is signified by the word it selfe of ga∣thering together,3 Order. By the exposi∣tiō of this verse it seemeth that the Author translated it thus: Assemble your selues and come al ye Nations: and they shall gather them selues together round about: there shall the mightie men of the Lord come downe. and for that the mightie men of God shall come downe, that is, they shal march euerie man in his order, as becom∣meth good & skilfull Souldiers. Now these mightie men are sayd by some to be the good Angels of God, the which doe fight for the Church of God: but of others they are sayde to be the selfe same, who a little before were called mightie men, and men of warre. I had rather vnderstand it of the good Angels, albeit I shut not out men. For both Angels and men are the ministers of God, to punish the wicked. Of the Angels Iude in his Epistle speaketh, when he sayth ver 14. Behold the Lord shall come with thousands of his Saints, to giue iudgement against all men, &c. And Psal. 68. ver. 17. The chariots of God are twentie thousand thousand Angels, & the Lord is among them, as in the Sanctuarie of Sinai. Ver. 12. Let the heathen be wakened, and come vp to the valley of Iehosaphat: for there will I sit to iudge all the heathen, round about. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer promise of the deliuerāce of the Church, conteyning the manner, place, and time of the same.HYpophora, or the answering of an obiection, whereby GOD meeteth with a great doubt, the which might hereby rise in the mindes of the Godlie: because that at that time when as these things were threatned and vttered by Ioel, the whole world was quiet: nay conspyred vnto the destruction of the Church: to be short there appeared nothing in any Nation, the which might rayse vp, or cause this hope of the sturring of Nations against the enimies of the Church. God therefore answereth, that they shall notwithstanding be raysed vp, and that assuredlie: but then at the length, when as God will in deed exercise these iudgements against them, and when as the measure of their iniquitie, and of their crueltie and malice against the Church shalbe filled vp. Therefore this verse conteineth a confirmation of the former promise, that is, of the deliuerance to come of the godlie from their enimies, and the maner, place, and time of the fulfilling of the same. The manner is, that God will raise vp the Nations out of their seates, albeit they be now quiet: and they shall obey God calling them.1 The manner. For they shal come vp & that armed & gatherd to gether against the enimies of the Church. The place is the valley of Iehoshaphat, whereof hath been spoken before in this Chap∣ter ver. 2. the time is,2 The place. when as God wil in deed iudge those his em∣mies, and defer,3 The time. or put off their punishment no longer, as then he
did, namelie in the time of Ioel: but afterward God will sit on his throne as a iudge to condemne them. In this consideration, that the Lord will one daye iudge the cause of his against their e∣nimies, Dauid doth both cōfort himself & also prayeth vnto God often in the Palmes to performe the same, as Psal. 7. ver. 7.8, So shall the congregation of the people compasse thee about: for their sakes therefore returne on hie. And Psalm. 10. ver. 12. Arise O Lord God, lyft vp thine hand: forget not the poore, &c. Let this therefore comfort the true Church of God at this day also, especiallie that in Flaunders, which is most miserablie afflicted. Vers. 13. Put in your siethes, for the haruest is ripe: come, get yee downe, for the wine presse is full: yea the wine presses ran ouer, for their wickednes is great. A Making of the former matter more plaine. For he sheweth both how and after what manner,Two partes of this verse. or with what signe GOD wilrayse vp those Nations: and also whie he doth defer it or put∣teth it off for a time. The signe is set foorth metaphorically,1 With what signe God will rayse vp the Nations. taking a similitude from the sieth of the mowers, as it is also Apoca. 14. vers. 15.16. where the Angel crying alowd to him that sate on the cloude, sayth: Thrust in thy sickle, and reape: for the time is come to reape: for the haruest of the earth is ripe.2 Why he defr∣reth. And he that sate on the Cloude, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was rea∣ped. God then sendeth his sieth, and giueth a signe, the which being giuen, all the Nations of the world are stirred vp to exe∣cute the iudgementes of God. This signe is perceiued of vs by the euent or falling out of the matter afterward, and after the deed done, as they call it: that is, after that we see nations thus gathered together. Confer this place with that of Mat. cap. 13. ver. 39. where a like similitude is vsed. The cause why God deferreth, it is his merciful iustice, for he wai∣teth patiently for sinners for a time, that either they should repēt: or els fil vp the measure of their sins: & cōsequently that the most righteous iudgement of God may then appeare, that is, worthelie bestirred vp against such, & so stubborne sinners: for the obstinate or stifnecked vngodlie ones appeare like vnto the haruest that is to be cut down, & their wickednes in the end is so great, that like vnto a most full wine presse it doth run ouer into the streets, that is, may be seene openlie, and must of necessitie be punished.
So Gen. 15. ver. 16. God sheweth vnto Abraham that the wicked∣nes of the Amorites was not yet full. GOD therefore doth iustly deferre or put off, and delay his iudgements. Vers. 14. O multitude, O multitude: come into the valley of thres∣shing: for the day of the Lorde is neere in the valley of thres∣shing. A confirmatiō of the former iudgement a∣gaynst the ene∣mies of the church.ANother cōfirmation of the former iudgment threatned against the enemies of the church ver. 9. taken from their great ouer∣throw, that is, from the effect, the which in the end shall appeare fearefull. For there shall lie heapes of them that are slaine, that is, their dead bodies shall lie euery where, so great a slaughter, mur∣ther, and ouerthrow doubtles shall there bee of them. And these things shall be done in the valley of cutting off or of thresshing, the which is now so called, of the effect: like as before it was called the valley of Iehosaphat,Where the val ley of Iehosha∣phatis. of the iudgement which God will vse there. But this is no one certaine place in the land of Iudah: but euery countrey, where God doth thus ouerthrow and cast down his ene∣mies, when he hath cut them off or thresshed them, is thus called the valley of cutting off or of threshing. Finally, whersoeuer the day of the Lord, that is, the time of his iudgement against the wicked approcheth, there by and by is prepared this valley of cutting off, or of thresshing, and of Iehosaphat, where God doth punish and cutte off the wicked with a foule slaughter and ouerthrow. Vers. 15. The sunne and moone shall be darkened, and the starres shall withdraw their light. The first am∣plification of thie feareful o∣uerthrow.THe first amplification of this euent and fearfull ouerthrow, by the adioynts. For then the sunne and the moone shall loose their brightnes: also the starres shall withdraw their light, that is, all the powers of the world, the kings, all highnesses against GOD, shall be throwen downe, and the state of this world shall bee hor∣rible, and full of feare and terror.What is ment by the sunne, moone, & stars loosiug their light, and brightnes. This afterwards came to passe in the world oftentimes, and shall also come to passe vnto the ende of the world. For both when God punished the Iewes for the cru∣cifiyng of Christ: and the worlde for the Idolatries of the former time vnder the Emperours of Rome, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian: and also the contempt or despising of his name afterward in the
East, Thracia, and Grecia, by the Saracens, Turkes, and Mahome∣tists; doubtles many Kings and Princes perished: and the sunnes of the worlde, and the moones, and many starres lost their light, that is, Kings and Queenes and great States perished. See before cap. 2. ver. 13. Vers. 16. The Lord also shall roare out of Zion, and vtter his voice from Ierusalem: and the heauens and the earth shall shake, but the Lord will bee the hope of his people, and the strength of the children of Israel. Another am∣plificatiō of the former destru∣ction.ANother amplification of the sayd destruction and ouerthrowe of the enemies of the church, taken also from the adioynts, but diuers from the verse before going, namely, from the wrath of God against those his enemies, and the same most hot and fierce, such as is that of a Lyon roaring for his pray. For then shall that voyce of God being angry, and pursuing them, strike an exceeding great feare into the vngodly. So is God his comming against his ene∣mies full of feare and terrour described Psal. 18. ver. 8, 9, 13. Smoke went out at his nostrels, & a consuming fire out of his mouth: coles were kindled thereat. He bowed the heauens also, and came downe, and darkenes was vnder his feete. The Lord also thundred in the heauen, and the highest gaue his voyce, haylestones and coles of fire. So is Ie∣remie willed to describe God to the terrifiyng of all the inhabitants of the earth cap. 25. vers. 30. Therefore Prophesie thou against them (saith God) all those words, and say vnto them: The Lord shall roare from aboue, and thrust out his voyce from his holy habitation: he shal roare vpon his habitation and crie aloude, as they that presse the grapes against all the inhabitants of the earth. And there shall be so great trembling of all things hereupon, that both the heauen and the earth it selfe shall bee moued. But the Lord Iehouah will be there∣fuge, and strength vnto his people. A comfort for the churah.This is a comfort vnto the Church, the which is opposed or set against the former threatnings against the enemies thereof, that the godly may vnderstand, that they in the so great destruction and miserie of the vngodly shall bee safe and sound notwithstanding, nay vntouched, when as God shall in such sorte thunder and ligh∣ten from heauen: and when as the heauen and earth it selfe shall tremble.
The reason is added, because then God shall be the hope or re∣fuge,The reason of the same com∣fort. and strength of his church, the which he calleth both his peo∣ple and also the sonnes of Israel. The sonnes of Israel are all the godly, because of their fayth common vnto them with Israel. They are also the people of God, because of the peculiar couenant of God made with them. Hereby appeareth howe exceeding great the force and power of the fayth of the godly is, as which name∣ly being grounded vpon the promises of God by Christ, is not sha∣ken, no not in the midst of the terror or feare of the whole world. For this faith is our victory against the world, and the diuel, and hel, Mat. 16. and 1. Iohn. 5. Vers. 17 So shall know that I am the Lord your GOD dwel∣ling in Zion mine holy Mountayne: then shall Ierusalem bee holy, and there shall no straungers goe thorowe her any more. THe conclusion, that God will be the protector or defendor of those that are his:The conclusion and therefore that he will dwel among them, or in the middle of them: and that he will then purge or cleanse his church, and establish it, euen against all the vngodly, and stran∣gers. Finally, by so manifest signes and tokens, that all the godly may easily acknowledge it. This is the summe of this pillar and most great & sure foundation of our saluation, the which is groun∣ded and standeth wholly vpon the meere and only grace of GOD. And there are two things here to be noted, the one a manifolde te∣stimony or witnes of God toward those that are his.Two things to be noted. The other, the acknowledging and obseruation of the same,1. A manifold te∣stimony of God toward his. the which must be done of vs, that we may be thankfull vnto God. For it is a shame to shut our eyes at the manifest testimonies of the mercie of God toward vs,2. The acknow∣ledging of the same by the godly. and that which the sense it selfe of our bodie, and experi∣ence may teach vs, nay doth teach vs, yet neither to obserue not note the same in our minde vnto the glory of God, and setting forth of his mercy toward vs: but (after the manner of those that play winking) to passe ouer the same with blind eyes, or seeing them, not to haue any care or keepe of them. The which doubtles is a noto∣rious vnthankfulnes and treachery of men toward God. This vn∣thankfulnes doth Dauid cast in the teeth of the Israelites Psal. 16.
ver. 7, 8, &c. saying: Our fathers vnderstoode not thy wonders in E∣gypt, neither remembred they the multitude of thy mercies, but re∣belled at the sea, euen at the red sea. Neuertheles he saued them for his names sake, that he might make his power to be knowen, &c. A fourefold te∣stimonie of God toward those that are his.Now the testimonie or witnes of God his especiall fauour to∣ward those that are his is here reckoned vp to be fourefolde. The first, that he which is the most high, and only, and true, and eter∣nall, and almighty God, or Iehouah, is peculiarly their GOD, and not onely in such sorte as he is the God of other men also.1. God is the God of his church after a peculiar and especiall maner. This do the faithfull acknowledge Psal. 105. v. 7. when as they say, He is the Lord our God: his iudgements are through all the earth. And more plainely yet doth Dauid expresse the same Psalm. 147. ver. 19.20. in these words: He sheweth his word vnto Iaacob, his statutes and his iudgements vnto Israel. He hath not dealt so with euerie nation, nei∣ther haue they knowen his iudgements. The second testimonie is, that the same God dwelleth in the midst of them, the which dwelling in regarde of that time he cal∣leth,2. God dwelleth in the midst of his church. To dwell in Sion his holy mountaine. For so is the church allego∣rically or mystically and figuratiuely defined, namely, that it is said to be that same holy mountaine in the which God dwelleth Psal. 24. Psal. 68. ver. 16. As for this mountain, God delighteth to dwel in it: yea, the Lord will dwell in it for euer. And GGD dwelleth in his church after a peculiar and especiall maner, because of those Sacra∣ments of his presence, the which he hath giuen peculiarly vnto it: as is the preaching of the pure and heauenly doctrine, the admini∣stration of the sacraments, and the manifest powring out of diuine graces vpon it. This is the second signe of the fauour of God to∣wards those which are his. The third,3. God doth san∣tifie his church. that he maketh the same his church holy, and doth daylie sanctifie it, to wit, through forgiuenes of sinnes, and regeneration or newe birth, the which doth daylie mortifie or kill in vs the kingdome of sinne. The fourth testimo∣nie is, that strangers, that is, those that are without, or Infidels,4. He doth defend it against the violence of strā¦gers, or Infidels. and his enemies tread it not vnder their feete at their pleasure, but hee keepeth, or driueth them away from it, whilest he doth defend it a∣gaynst their force and violence.
Vers. 18 And in that day shall the mountaines drop downe newe wine, and the hilles shall flow with milke, and all the riuers of Iudah shall runne with waters, and a fountaine shall come foorth of the house of the Lorde, and shall water the valley of Shittim. An amplifica∣tion of this com¦fort by the ef∣fects thereof.AN amplification of this comfort & fauour taken frō the maruei∣lous and wonderful effects of the same both toward the church, and also toward the enemies thereof. Toward the church, for that it shall then abound with all kinde of good things, when as GOD shall manifestly shew himselfe vnto it, and doth shew himselfe. But these good things and giftes of all sortes by reason of the infancie of that people at that time, and of things wherwithal they were ac∣quainted, are set forth vnder the name of things, or earthly blessings, as of Must, or new wine, Milke, water springing forth of the house of God, dayly watering it as a valley planted and ful of most choice & dainty Cedars Psal. 92. Yet God then gaue vnto his true church, and now also giueth and bestoweth vpon it not onely earthly bles∣sings, but much rather spirituall giftes and graces. Vert. 19. Egypt shall be waste, and Edom shal be a desolate wilder∣nesse, for the iniuries of the children of Iudah, because they haue shed innocent blood in their land. 2. Toward the e∣nemies of the church.NOw Ioel declareth those effects which shal be shewed against the disobedient and stubborne enemies of the Church, to wit, they shall vtterly be rooted out, and perish. For so much do these wordes signifie, shal be waste, and a desolate wildernesse. And here vnder the name of Egypt, and of the Idumeans are described not e∣uery kinde of enemies whatsoeuer, but most obstinate and cruell enemies. For these two nations were alwayes most deadly ene∣mies vnto the Iewes, & in a maner irreconcileable, or such as could neuer be made friends with them: yea and moreouer most cruell towards the same Iewes. For as it is Psalm. 137. ver. 7. the Edo∣mites at the taking of Ierusalem by the Babylonians stirre vp the e∣nemies to vse all kinde of cruelty towardes both the poore Iewes, and also against their citie, for vengeance whereof they there mae this prayer vnto God: Remember the children of Edom, O L
in the day of Ierusalem, which sayd, rase it, rase it to the foundation thereof. And as for Egypt, that is sayd to haue bin an iron fornace vnto the Iewes. Therefore besides their obstinacy and stubborn∣nes of mind against God, their cruelty also is here added. For they the self-same do shead, and haue shed the bloud of the godly, yea and that their giltles bloud: that is to say, they haue cruelly murthe∣red the godly deseruing no such thinge at their hand: yea euen in the very land of the children of Israel, that is in their owne natiue foile or country where they were borne. That which increaseth the barbarousnes of the enemies of the Church. Ver. 20. But Iudah shall dwell for euer, and Ierusalem from genera∣tion to generation. A second am∣plification of the fauour of God toward his Church.A Second amplification of the same comfort, or especiall fauour of God toward those that are his, to wit taken from the conti∣nuance or rather the perpetuity or euerlastingnes of the same. For this fauour of God shall not only be most singular and most health∣full vnto them: but it shall be also perpetuall, or euerlasting, because it shall neuer be taken away from them. The which thing doubt∣les is also true of the spirituall ioy of the godly in this world: but in deede most true of that euerlasting life in the world to come. For the godly shal feele and also do feele both these ioyes to be perpe∣tuall vnto them. Therefore like as the fauour of God is perpetu∣all toward his church: so also shall the church it selfe be perpetuall: not in this world, I graunt, but in the world to come or in heauen. Indeed the church of God in this world, is often inuisible, or can not be seene, but yet doth it not therefore cease to be a church. But in heauen it shall not onely be a church: but alwayes visible, and al∣wayes blessed and florishing with God and the man Iesus Christ our Lord being her head. Ver. 21. For I will clense their bloud, that I haue not clensed, and the Lord will dwell in Sion. The third am∣plification by way of compa∣rison, and set∣ting downe the cause of so great benefites of God toward his church.A Third amplification with the setting downe of the cause of so great benefites of God toward those that are his. The ampli∣fication is here made by way of comparing of thinges together. For that the giftes of God afterward shall be greater, & more plen∣tifull toward his church, then they had bin before, or in times of
olde.What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap 5. ver. 21. That which is here by the figure Synecdoche expressed vn∣der one kinde of ceremonies in steed of the rest. I will clense, saith the Lord, their bloud in her, the which notwithstandding I did not clense in her. Thus then the grace of God afterward shall be more excellent toward his church, then it was before, as namely the which shal take away al kinde of vncleanes, yea euen that which he did not clense before. But this is referred vnto the ceremonies of the law, the which at that time were in vse among the people of the Iewes, by the which euery bloud was not clensed. For albeit the bloud of termes, of beastes, of murthers vnawares, were clensed, vnder the law by certaine rites and ceremonies: yet was not the bloud which was willingly shed in the murther of men, clensed by any ceremony. Gen. 9. Therefore that which in the church of God vnder the law could not be washed away by the washinges and sacraments then ordained, the same afterward shall wholly be washed away and clensed, the grace of God beinge enlarged, by the comming of Christ, as the autor to the Hebr. writeth cap. 7. ver. 19. saying, The law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope, made perfect, whereby we drawe neere vnto God. And cap. 9. ver. 13.14. He sheweth the bloud of Christ to be of much more value aboue the sacrifices of the law to purge our con∣sciences from dead workes to serue the liuing God.A very profita∣ble note. And this here spoken, is not referred vnto God, as if that then vnder the lawe, of a certaine weakenesse or want of power he were not able to purge or clense those thinges, the which he saith that he will clense afterward: neither yet doth it properly appertaine vnto the for∣giuenes of sinnes the which euen at that time by God was per∣formed vnto the godly. For as vnto vs, so likewise vnto those fa∣thers euen before the comming of Christ God forgaue all their sinnes, yet through him notwithstanding, as he pardoneth all vn∣to vs for the self-same Christ. 1. Ioh. 1. ver. 9. Apocal. 13. ver. 8. But this comparison pertaineth only vnto the sacraments of the fathers,Whereunto this comparison pertaineth. and our Sacraments, and vnto the rites or ceremonies vn∣der which that benefit of God was then shewed vnto them, and is nowe represented vnto vs. For vnto vs now through Baptisme, and the Lordes supper, the benefites of God, and the forgiuenes of our sinnes, yea euen all of them, are more clearely and fully sea∣led, then in the old time vnder the law. The cause of these so great benefites of God toward his church,Now the cause of this so great, and enlarged a benefit of God toward vs, is the dwelling and presence of God in his church. And
this dwelling is properly to be referred vnto Christ, and vnto his incarnation or taking of flesh vpon him, by the which hee dwel∣led among vs, and liued visibly or to be seene in the middes of his church, namely being God then manifest in the flesh, as Iohn in his gospell speaketh hereof cap. 1. ver. 14. saying, The word was made flesh, and dwelt among vs, (and we saw the glory thereof, as the glory of the only begotten sonne of the Father,) full of grace & trueth. Accordingly whereunto writeth Paul. 1. Tim. 3. ver. 16. And without controuersie, great is the mystery of godlynes, which is, God is manifested in the flesh, iustified in the spirit, seene of Angels, preached vnto the Gentiles, beleeued on in the world, and receiued vp in glory. Thus therefore I do expound this last verse of our Prophet Ioel of the comming of the Sonne of God, and our Lord Iesus Christ into the flesh, and of the benefites through him bestowed vpon the Church. Praise be vnto God.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus vpon the Prophet Sophonias. CAP. 1. The Argument. THis Prophet containeth partlie threat∣nings, and partlie comforts. Threatnings of God touching the destruction of the citie of Ierusalem very shortly to insue, & touching the most grieuous punishments of the nation of the Iewes, both for their incredible and notorious impietie or vn∣godlines towards God, and also their in∣iustice towards mē. Yet because the Lord gaue some spare time notwithstanding in the meane space, there∣fore the Prophet exhorteth the Iewes vnto earnest repentance,Sophonie ex∣horteth vnto earnest repen∣tance. and that they should mitigate or asswage the wrath of God by chang∣ing of their life. This selfe same Prophet also doth comfort the Church, in that by reuelation made vnto him from God, he promi∣seth that God will not vtterly cast it away and destroy it, but will leaue some seede of it, because he had decreed also to enlarge it, & to scatter and spred it abrode vnto the Gentiles. And consequently that both in Christ, and for Christ his sake it should afterwards be restored, and sanctified, and that indeed after a more excellent ma∣ner then euer it was before. In the end he promiseth in the person of God, that the enemies of the Church shall be taken away, and at the last be vtterly destroyed. This booke hath three Sermons, the which are comprised in so many (that is to say) three chapters.Three Sermons of this Prophet. The Prophet Sophonie liued and prophesied vnder the King Iosias, to wit,The life and prophesying of the Prophet Sophonie. more then thirtie yeares before the destruction of the  foretold by him, when as the state of the kingdome of Iudah ∣med
as yet to bee flourishing enough, and mightie, and so conse∣quently much rather to be a tolerable estate, and the quiet and dig∣nitie of the citie Ierusalem to be in safetie, and without danger▪ Yet notwithstanding long before him did Isaias also prophesie that it should bee destroyed, as appeareth 2. King. cap. 20. ver. 16.17.18. in these words: And Isaiah sayd vnto Hezekiah, heare the word of the Lord. Behold, the dayes come, that all that is in thine house, and what∣souer thy fathers haue layd vp in store vnto this day, shall be carried into Babel: nothing shall be left, sayth the Lord. And of thy sonnes, that shall proceed out of thee, and which thou shalt beget, shall they take away, and they shall be Eunuches in the palace of the King of Babel. Some wil haue this Prophet to haue prophesied with Isaias: others, that he prophesied three yeres before Ieremie. For that Ieremie be∣gan to prophesie in the 13. yeare of the reigne of Iosias, and Sopho∣nias in the 10. Therefore he is to be conferred with the Prophet Ie∣remie vnto the 20. chapter. Now where he prophesied, is not ex∣pressed, whether in the citie it selfe, as Ieremie did, or whether abi∣ding in some other place: yet notwithstanding in the land of Iudah did he both liue, and also prophesie. Vers. 1. The word of the Lord which came vnto Zephaniah the sonne of Cushi, the sonne of Gedaliah, the sonne of Amariah, the sonne of Hizkiah, in the dayes of Iosiah the sonne of Amon King of Iudah. The first Ser∣mon. Three causes of the destruction of Ierusalem.THe first Sermon of the destruction of the citie Ierusalem, & the wonderfull spoyling and laying waste of the same, which was to insue, whereof there are here reckoned vp three causes. First, the outragious and horrible idolatrie of the Iewes. Secondly, the con∣tempt or despising of the true God, and of his threatnings, yea,  and the same very manifest. Thirdly,  all kind of iniustice towards their neighbours, the which might bee done either by deceit,  or els by violence or force. Three parts of this verse.This verse containeth three things. First, a commendation of the doctrine following, and a declaration of the calling of Sophonias. Secondly, the stocke, kinred, and noble and renowmed house and familie of this Prophet, both for godlines,1. Commendatiō of doctrine. and also for seruice in the Common wealth,2. The stocke of the Prophet. the which was now knowne vnto all men by singular duties towards the Common wealth. For as God had A∣mo Shepheard to his Prophet: so also had he this and other Pro∣phets,
which came of great and noble houses. The third thing is the time wherein he prophesied,3. The time of his prophesie. namely, vnder Iosias King of Iu∣dah, whē as the state of the Iewes was not only tolerable, as I haue sayd, but also as yet flourishing, and when as godlines it selfe & the worship of God seemed to be restored, least that wee our selues be∣ing lulled a sleepe with the happines of things present, should ei∣ther forget our sinnes past, or els imagin God to be contented with a sleight and outward godlines, performed as it were for fashion sake only, such as was then vsed among this people, as is to be seene 2. King. cap. 23. ver. 25.26. where albeit Iosias haue his singular cō∣mendation for his rare godlines and forwardnes in religion, yet it is sayd, That the Lord notwithstanding turned not from the fiercenes of his great wrath, wherewith he was angrie with Iudah, because of all the prouocations, wherewith Manasseh had prouoked him. And Iere∣mie cap. 17. ver. 1. complayning of the disorderednes of the people, sayth, That the sinne of Iudah is written with a pen of yron, and with the poynt of a diamond, and grauen vpon the table of their heart, and vpon the hornes of their altars. So the Prophet Hosea reporteth of the people of his time, saying, cap. 5. ver. 4. They will not giue their minde to turne vnto their God: for the spirit of fornication is in the midst of them, and they haue not knowne the Lord. And 2. Chron. cap. 34. ver. 24.25. Huldah the Prophetisse returneth answere vnto the messengers of Iosiah in the name of the Lord in these words: Thus sayth the Lord, Behold, I will bring euill vpon this place, and vpon the inhabitants thereof, euen all the curses that are written in the booke which they haue read before the king of Iudah: because they haue for∣saken me, and burnt incense vnto other gods, to anger me with all the workes of their hands, therefore shall my wrath fall vpon this place, and shall not be quenched.Sophonias pro∣phesied before the death of Iosias. To conclude, Sophonias prophesied before the death of Iosias, namely, after the purging of the Temple, & the holding of that famous Passeouer, the which fell out after the 18. yeare of the reigne of Iosias, 2. Chron. 34. ver. 8. Vers. 2. I will surely destroy all things from off the land, sayth the Lord. The summe of this Sermon.THe summe of the Sermon following, to wit, that God doth ear∣nestly threaten destruction vnto the whole land of the Iewes, that is, vnto all both men, and also other things, the which are in it. God therefore would haue first of all euen the very dullest
this people to be roused vp with this thunderbold as it were, and to awaken at his threatnings. Vers. 3. I will destroy man and beast: I will destroy the foules of the heauen, and the fishes of the sea, and ruines shall be to the wic∣ked, and I will cut off man from of the land, sayth the Lord. A making more plaine of the former verse.A Making more plaine, or rather a garnishing of the verse before, whereby the Prophet by his members and parts expoundeth & layeth open the former sentence, namely, that the iudgement of God shall be so horrible or fearful against this people, that through the same iudgement both men, and beasts, and also the foules them selues shall perish. Nay, moreouer the wicked ones themselues, which securely or carelesly despise God, and which seeme that they cannot be touched by God, shal fall into his nets and hands, so that they also, howsoeuer before they were thought to bee firme and stable, are neuerthelesse to fall and bee drawne into the same de∣struction. Vers. 4. I will also stretch out mine hand vpon Iudah, and vpon al the inhabitants of Ierusalem, and I will cut off the remnant of Baal from this place, and the name of the Chemarims with the priests. The particular applying of the former threat∣nings.THe applying of the threatnings generally set downe before vn∣to the Iewes, according vnto the meaning of God. For the Pro∣phet denounceth or threatneth the former iudgements and mena∣cings of God not onely vnto them all in generall, but also particu∣larly vnto the citizens and inhabitants of Ierusalem it selfe, that is, of the mother or chiefe citie. The cause is added, to wit, their out∣ragious idolatrie, the which they had not a little set vp in the holie citie it selfe,The cause of these threat∣ned iudgemēts. the which was especially dedicated and reserued vnto God: for as much as in it, after the example of prophane or heathen men, and such as were notorious idolaters, they had both their Baa∣lims, that is, dead men and forged Idols: and also their Chamarims, that is, the Chaplaines & Keepers, and Priests or Sacrificers of these Idols at Ierusalem. Finally, for that they readily & most exactly or perfectly retained all those things, the which wicked and heathen men had ordained for the worship of their Idols, for that I say the citizens of Ierusalem obserued all these things, the which other places of the Scriptures doe make more plaine, being as it were an
exposition vnto this verse. For concerning these Chemarims and their office wee reade 2. King cap. 23. ver. 5. That Iosiah put downe the Chemarims, whom the Kings of Iudah had founded to burne in∣cense in the hie places, and in the cities of Iudah, and about Ierusalem, and also them that burnt incense vnto Baal, to the Sunne and to the Moone, and to the Planets, and to all the host of heauen. And for this purpose maketh that of Ieremie cap. 2. ver. 20▪ where he casteth thē in the teeth, that like an harlot, they ranne about to commit spirituall fornication and whoredome vpon all hie hilles, and vnder all greene trees. And in the same chapter ver. 28. more plainly, when he sayth: Where are the gods that thou hast made thee? let them arise, if they can helpe thee in the time of thy trouble? for according vnto the num∣ber of thy cities, are thy gods, O Iudah. See Ezech. 9. Vers. 5. And them that worship the host of heauen vpon the house tops, and them that worship, and sweare by the Lord, and sweare by Malcham. The second kind of most wicked idola∣trie.THe second kinde of most wicked, and most open idolatrie, but yet most ancient, and long since condemned, the which was most vsuall among the Iewes notwithstanding, by imitating or fol∣lowing of prophane or heathen nations, to wit, the seruing & wor∣shipping of the Starres, and heauenly bodies, as appeareth by the place of the Kings alleaged in the former verse, and also Ieremie 44. ver. 17. where the people answer the Prophet, saying: We will do whatsoeuer thing goeth out of our owne mouth, as to burne incense vnto the Queene of heauen, and to powre out drinke offrings vnto her, as we haue done, both we and our fathers, our Kings, and our Princes in the cities of Iudah, and in the streetes of Ierusalem: for then had we plen∣tie of victuals, and were well, and felt none euill.A third kind of idolatrie. A third kind of ido∣latrie, but more colourable is set downe in the ende of this verse, whereby as if they worshipped the maiestie and power of the true God they did sweare by him: but they ioyned other gods with him also, by whose power and Godhead and name also they did com∣monly sweare. The which honour notwithstanding is to be reser∣ued vnto the alone true God, Exod. 20.
Ver. 6. And them that are turned backe from the Lord, and those that haue not sought the Lord, nor inquired for him. A briefnes and shortnes of speech, whereby he declareth in one word, as it were in a certaine conclusion,Briefenes, the great vngodlines of the Iewes, namelie that they had in such sort departed from GOD, and from his worship, that they did not so much as once thinke vpon repentance, that is, vpon restoring, and calling back of the same againe. Vers. 7. Be still at the presence of the Lord God: for the daie of the Lord is at hand: for the Lord hath prepared a sacrifice, and hath sanctified his guests. Destruction threatned vnto the Iewes and also vnto Ieru∣salem it selfe.LEast the Prophet might seeme to threaten these things onelie to feare them withal, and not in earnest, he sheweth that God hath fullie decreed to destroye the Iewes, and also Ierusalem it selfe, and that they in deed and truth shall shortlie feele the same, namelie after the end of 30. yeares. And here is partlie an Apostrophe or turning of speech of the Prophet speaking vnto the godlie, and forbidding them to aske,Apostrophe, what it is, see Amoscap 4. ver. 4. Metaphora what it is, see Amos cap 4. ver. 12. or to doubt any further of that matter, the which should immediatlie be in deed extant and in practise: and partlie a Metaphor taken from holy feasts & banquets, the which sheweth that there shall be a great slaughter of the Iewes, and so consequentlie a daintie banquet of all kinde of men and flesh to be prepared by God for the foules, and for the doggs (whom in this place he calleth his bidden, and guests) that with this stinging kind of speaking, and such as layeth out the matter vnto the view of the eyes, euen those which are most sluggish, and men that are most giuen vnto vices, and doe sleepe in the same, might the more earnestlie be rouzed vp, and the godlie also be prouoked vnto earnest repentance. Vers. 8. And it shall be in the daie of the Lords sacrifice, that I will visit the princes, and the kings children, and all such as are clo∣thed with straunge apparrell. A Garnishing of the matter, the which conteyneth the order and description of this feast, of the which he made mention
before.The first sort of Ghests The Kings. The Kings children. The princes. The Courtiers & braue Gal∣lants. For first of all he rehearseth the most daintie and costlie kind of flesh, the which he wil giue & set before the foules, name∣ly of the kings thēselues, of the kings childrē, of the princes, of the Courtiers and nice gallantes which ouerflowed in welth and too much riotousnes, & were not contented with honest and godlie apparel, & such as was their own Countrie apparell: but brought in forein defilementes, and straunge and sumptuous apparel into the manners and vsage of the Iewes. Vers. 9. In the same daie also will I visit all those that daunce vpon the threshold so proudlie, which filtheir masters houses by cru∣eltie and deceit. The second sort of Ghests and the same of Seruants of two sortesIN the second place the Lord will giue the flesh of Seruauntes also vnto the foules, to wit, least any kinde or sort of men should thinke themselues free from this iudegment of God, because that all had defiled them selues with wickednes. And he describeth two sortes of Seruauntes, the one, of those which with dauncing and skipping (as players or iesters doe delight their maisters,  namely being ministers of their maisters beastlie lust & slought∣fulnes: the other of those which diligentlie applie themselues with all lewdnes and deceite to fill the couetousnes of their maisters,  and to obey their vniust commandementes. Both these sortes of Seruantes and officers, Princes in this our time do not want, vnto whom for this cause these iudgements of God do also appertaine. Ver. 10. And in that daie, saith the Lord, there shall be a noyse, and cry from the fish gate, and an howling from the second gate, and a great destruction from the hilles. Hypotyposis. What this Fi∣gure is see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12.THe figure Hypotyposis, or a liuelie setting out of the matter, whereby he describeth the greatnes of the punishment by the representation or shewing of the cry & howling which shal then be. For he declareth that not onelie no part of the Citie shall be free from great cryes and howlings, by reason of the greatnes of the miseries the which they shall feele: but also that the neere places shall not be voyd of this calamitie or punishment. For al∣beit they be without the Citie, yet because they are full of Hilles (as it is Psa. 125. ver. 2. As the mountaines are about Ierusalem, ) these howlings (as the sound is wont to be giuen back ag
from the hilles and mountaines) shall from these hilles be doub∣led, and scattered abrode more widelie and fearefullie by meanes of the beating back & breaking of the aire▪ And he reckoneth vp two chiefe and most famous quarters of the Citie Ierusalem,Two chiefe quarters of the Citie. namelie the Fish gate, whereby a great parte of vitailes was brought into the Citie: and also the second gate commonlie so called, for it was famous through the exercizes of the schooles, and was most frequented or full of people, as being about that parte of the Citie where the Temple of the Lord was. And least that these so vnlooked for or suddaine & wonderfull euils might seeme to be but fables or tales, and to be threatned in vaine, So∣phonias affirmeth these punishmēts to be the Oracle or saying of God himselfe. Vers. 11. Howle ye inhabitants of the low place: for the companie of the marchants is destroyed: all they that beare siluer are cut off. An amplifica∣tion.AN amplification, whereby is shewed that the Iewes shall not onelie feele those most grieuous punishments, and they espe∣ciallie which dwelled in the more populous and open places of the Citie: but also those which in the low and hollow places, and as it were more safer, seemed to be hidden and couered as it were with darkenes. And because that in the same quarter of the Citie Ierusalem dwelt the marchants, & such as serued them, Nehem. cap. 3. ver. 8. Therefore these especiallie are called vnto howling, because not one or two of them, but all: and not scatteringly, but commonlie and by heapes, and companies: and not onelie are to be punished and spoyled in part, but also vtterlie to be destroyed and rooted out. Vers. 12 And at that time will I search Ierusalem with lights, and visit the men that are frosen in their dregs, and saye in their hearts, the Lord will neither doe good, nor euill. THis is the figure Hypophora, or answering of an obiection,What the fi∣gure Hypophora is, see Amos cap. 6. ver. 21. least GOD might seem too seuere or sharpe vnto his people, who will chastize them so hardlie. For vnder an elegant or fine Metaphor is shewed, how obstinatlie and carelesly wicked, and stubborne against God that people was: obstinate or stubborne,
because that they were vtterlie hardned, & as it were frosē in their dregs and those sinnes,What the Fi∣gure Metaph∣ora is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. without any more feeling now of any conscience at all. Careles also was the same people, because that what soeuer the Prophets threatned, & laid before them the word of God concerning his menaces & promises, al this did the Iewes despise, and scorne, and wickedlie spoyled and robbed God of his prouidence. The which thing albeit that it seemed of them to be done secretlie and verie couertlie, yet shall the Lord vncouer it, and searching most diligentlie shall in the end laye open all their secret sinnes, yea those things which are most hidden. And this doth the Prophet set foorth vnder a familiar example and Metaphor of Searchers, the more to rouze vp and awaken their hypocrisie and drowsines. Vers. 13. Therefore their goods shall be spoyled, and their hou∣ses wast: they shall also build houses, but not inhabit them: and they shall plant vineyards, but not drinke the Wine thereof. Their goods, houses, and o∣ther substance shall nothing a uaile them.A graunting and yeelding vnto them, which carieth a shew of preuēting an obiectiō, that the Lord may take from them all vaine hope of trust: albeit that there be here also both a descrip∣tion, and also an amplification of the miserie to come. God there∣fore graunteth vnto them both riches, and houses, and other commodities of lyfe, all which men are wont to oppose or st against the threatnings of God, as if therefore they were safelie shrowded with them, as with a shield against these threatnings. Therefore he teacheth that all these things shall nothing auaile them: nay they shall bee their enimies. And so he sheweth that the labour and paines taking of men in hoording vp of riches, in building of houses, and gathering together of other commo∣dities of this lyfe, shall be all in vaine, when as God is angrie with vs. For all these things shall be taken from them. And in this doubtles is conteined an amplification of the miserie of the Iewes and of the greatnes of the iudgement of God against them. This agreeth with the rule of Deuteronomie cap. 28. ver. 30. Thou shalt betroth a wife, and an other shall lye with her, thou shalt build an house, and shalt not dwell therein thou shalt plant a vineyard, and shalt not eate the fruite. And with Leuit cap. 26. To conclude: this verse is notable for the knitting of the members and partes of it together with manie copulatiue coniunctions and matchings to∣gether
of contraries, as building, and not inhabiting; planting a vineyarde and not drinking, &c. Vers. 14. The great day of the Lord is neere: it is neere and hasteth greatly, euen the voyce of the day of the Lorde: the strong man shall crie there bitterly. A description of the day of the Lord.THis is a garnishing and fetting out of that same iudgement of God the which he threatned before, to take away from hypo∣crites, and all others, both their ouermuch securitie or sluggishnes, and also their contempt or despising of the word of God. Wherein appeareth how great both the loue of God hath beene, and also is vnto men perishing through their owne fault: and also how great the stubbornnes of men in such sorte perishing hath been, and dai∣lie is. Therefore,  first of all he describeth the iudgement it selfe of God, when as he calleth it The day of the Lord, yea the great day, that is a certaine and set time appoynted by God, wherein he will doe, and shew vpon them wonderfull strange, and great things. Secondly he amplifieth the fame by the circumstance of time.2. An amplifica∣tion of this day by the circum∣stance of time. For this day of the Lord is not onely neere, but euery foote speeding and hastening more and more, in so much that the voyce of it is e∣uen now heard, that it may take holde on the Iewes. Thirdly, he de∣scribeth it by the effects.3 By the effects. The feeling of it shall bee most bitter and sorrowfull, and the miserie, which it shall bring shall be most sharp, insomuch that those which suppose themselues to bee strong and stout to beare and suffer any thing, shall then crie out, and bee im∣patient through ouer much paine. And here it hath a great force and waight, for that the sentence is as it were vnioynted and not knit together with copulatiue coniunctions, as it is also in the verse following. For so it doth the more vrge and presse them, and hea∣peth vp together as it were an huge weight and masse of euils, to the end that men that are rebellious against God, and hypocrites may be terrified and put in feare. Vers. 15. That day is a day of wrath, a day of trouble and heaui∣nes, a day of destruction and desolation, a day of obscuritie and darkenes, a day of cloudes and blacknes. The figure Sy∣nathroismos, which is an heaping vp together of words of diuers signification, as is euident by the many sun∣dry words hea∣ped together in this verse.THis is the figure Synathroismos, or heaping vp together of di∣uers things, whereby the fearefulnes of this iudgement of God is
fourthly amplified or increased, by reckoning vp of sundry both effects, and also adioynts of the same. The effects are, heauines, af∣fliction, desolation. The adioynts are, tumult, obscuritie, darkenes, a cloude: all which this day shall bring foorth, because this is a day not onely of anger, but of burning anger, that is, this day is a day of the burning wrath of the Lord. Now this burning anger, is a more vehement and hote anger. And this heaping together of wordes and the doubling and repeating of the word day, maketh vnto the meaning and drift of the Prophet. For by these so many wordes heaped vp together God would terrifie or afray them, & so conse∣quently earnestly rouze them vp, and awaken them. Finally, that which is brought of glumnes and darkenes, is a similitude taken from those dayes, in the which by reason of the sadnes and lowring of the aire and heauen, we also are wont to be sad and heauy. For euery word here set downe is made plaine most easily by his con∣trary. As for example, a day of wrath, and not of loue: a day of sorrow, and not of gladnes: a day of trouble, and not a day of peace and quiet, &c. Vers. 16. A day of the trumpet and alarme agaynst the strong Ci∣ties, and agaynst the hie towers. The putting them in feare with the sound of the trumpets of their enemiesIN the fift place the Prophet reckoneth vp another adioynt, the which is wont to strike very great feare into men, (least hee might seeme to haue omitted, or let passe any thing) to wit, the sounding of the trumpet of their enemies. For men are wont to be amazed with that so fearefull a sound. For in this place the Pro∣phet speaketh not of the trumpets of the Iewes, wherewith they were wont to be hearted on, and encouraged vnto battell, but of the trumpets of the enemies wherewith they shall be put in feare. He further amplifieth or increaseth this feare, for that these terrible trumpets of their enemies shall be heard euen in the midst of the cities of the Iewes, yea in their most fenced cities, and castles, when they shall be taken. Wherefore hereby is signified the victorie of the enemies, and the feare and trembling of the Iewes. To be short, al their hope is taken away from the Iewes, and the trust which they reposed or put in those their munitions against their enemies, for that the hope, and confidence or trust of the Iewes in them should be vtterly vayne, and stand them in no stead.
Vers. 17. And I will bring distresse vpon men, that they shal walke like blinde men, because they haue sinned agaynst the Lord, and their blood shall bee powred out as dust, and their fleshe as the doung. THis verse is an Hypophora, or answering of an obiection, as is also the verse following. For in the ende, except they repent,What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. the Lord will haue all hope, yea and thinking to escape this his iudgement to be taken cleane from them: nay moreouer he doth so depresse or throwe them downe, that by a double similitude, to wit, the one taken from dust & the other from doung, he doth here threatē that nothing can be more despised thē these, nothing more vile, nothing finally more base then they.A threefold an¦swer of the pro∣phet vnto their obiection. And the answere of the Prophet in this verse vnto the vaine boasting of obstinate or stub∣borne men, and such as despise the iudgements of GGD, is three folde. First, that God himselfe who can be resisted or withstood by no force, wil be the autor of this their affliction or trouble. Second∣ly,1. God shall be a∣gainst them. that these rebellious persons shall wander vp and downe hither and thither, like vnto blinde men, and such as are voyde of all coun∣sell,2 They shall bee voyd of all coun¦sel. so that in this their distressed estate they shall not know what counsel to take for themselues. Thirdly, that the cause of their pu∣nishment is such, that God ought not to ouerpasse it, namely,3 God cannot o∣uer passe the cause of their punishment. for that these men haue sinned obstinately against the liuing. God him∣selfe, and which is the reuenger of all wickednes. Wherefore al∣beit they boast of their stocke, that is, of the blood and seed or flesh of Abraham, for that they are the blood of Abraham: and for this cause doe daintily and tenderly with great carefulnes make much of their flesh, yet shall their blood be powred and sprinkled on the ground like vnto the dust of none accoum: and their flesh shall be cast forthe, as most filthy and stinking doung. Vers. 18. Neither their siluer nor their golde shall bee able to deli∣uer them in the day of the Lords wrath, but the whole land shal be deueured by the fire of his iealousie: for he shall make euen a speedie riddance of all them that dwell in the land. He taketh a∣way the help, which they thoght to haue by their riches.FVrthermore, because they reposed ayde in those their riches and great wealth (for money is the sinewes and strength of warre to hire souldiers) this selfesame also doth the Prophet take away
from them, both by comparing the strength of man, and earthly helpe with the power of God, yea and of GOD being angry, and powring out his whole force agaynst a man: and also by laying before their view the fearefull punishment and ouerthrowe which was to come, the which like vnto a fire should consume and waste not onely that one citie, but also the very whole countrey of the Iewes, together with the inhabitants themselues. CAP. 2. Vers. 1. Gather your selues, euen gather you, O nation not worthy to be beloued, An exhortatiō vnto earnest re¦pentance.AN exhortation vnto earnest repentance and amendment of their former life, to the end they may escape al the former euils. For those whom God chideth, except the fault be in themselues, he meaneth to saue. August. Let men change their deedes, and I, sayth the Lord, will change my threatnings. And this exhortati∣on is often repeated in this chapter, to the end that those which re∣mayned obstinate and stubborne, might bee made vnexcuseable. And first of all it is repeated in this verse for the vehement affecti∣on or desire both of God, and also of the Prophet to saue the Iewes. And for this cause is the word (Gatherye) repeated. And the cause is added,Why the Iewes ought to think earnestly on re∣pentance. why the Iewes ought now to think earnestly on this admo∣nition vnto repentance, for that they are in such a case, that as they now are, and after the maner that they now liue and behaue them∣selues, they doe vtterly displease God, and are not to be loued, that is to say, such as God cannot loue. Neither doth one or two of them liue thus wickedly: but the whole nation generally. By how much the mercy of God appeareth to be the greater, who is very carefull to saue those whom hee nowe might worthily destroy. Further, there is here expressed and set downe the first part of true repen∣tance, to wit, the examining of a man his owne selfe, and the rip∣ping vp of his former life, to condemne and amend the same. So Iohn the Baptist also beginneth with this part Mat. 3. v. 6, 7. where he sayth: And they were baptized of him in Iordan, confessing their sinnes, &c.
Vers. 2. Before the decree come forth, and ye be as chaffe that pas∣seth in a day, and before the fierce wrath of the Lorde come vpon you, and before the daie of the Lordes anger come vpon you. He vrgeth thē vnto repentāce taking occasion vpon the cir∣cumstance of time.HE vrgeth them by the circumstance of time, by the which hee sheweth that their repentance shall yet now bee in season, the which afterward, yea and that in short time, shal be altogether too late, vnprofitable, and vnseasonable, or out of time. For that same decreed day shall come most speedily, like vnto chaffe and stubble tossed with the winde, the which both quickly, and on a sodaine flieth away as hath been sayd before cap. 1. vers. 14. For the Pro∣phet vseth a similitude taken from chaffe and stubble, because that in the verse going before he had vsed a verb of the same significatiō, namely deriued of stubble.Raschasch. Therfore while as there is yet time giuen vnto repentance, we must make haste vnto it. For it is then too late when as the Lord now hath put his hand vnto the execution of his iudgments, and his threatnings are now no longer menaces and threatnings onely, but a decreed and already passed sentence vp∣on vs. And to the end that God of his loue, which he beareth to∣ward vs, may the rather moue and stirre men vp by his prophet, he vseth also not an idle heaping vp, and repetition of wordes, but to the end the horror or fearfulnes of that time, wherein God cor∣tecteth, may be expressed and sot downe, he sheweth by this sen∣tence as it were loose and not knitte together with copulatiue con∣iunctions, and by the repeating of these words (before it come) the which kind of speech doth the more generally and certainly moue vs, that there is an appoynted and set time to repentance in due season. Vers. 3. Seeke ye the Lord all the meeke of the earth, which haue wrought his iudgement: seeke righteousnes, seeke lowlines, if so bee that yee may bee hidde in the day of the Lordes wrath. A repetition of the same in ef∣fect, the which was said in the first verse of this chapter.SEcondly, for the great affection and loue which he hath to saue them, especially the faythfull (for these also by reason of their sins were worthily wrapped and intangled in the same iudgement of God with others) he repeateth the same thing which he had sayd
in the first verse of this chapter. Wherefore the word (seeke yee) is so often repeated. He therefore by a note of separation marketh out the true godly from the contemners or despisers of God. For this exhortation vnto repentance was to take place, and haue ef∣fect onely in the godly, albeit notwithstanding it bee offered vnto al the Iewes in differently.God spareth the world for the small num∣ber sake of the godly. And doubtles vnlesse there remayned some small seede of the godly vpon earth, God would forthwith o∣uerthrow and destroy the whole world with due punishments, but for their sake God deferreth it, that he may giue vnto them a time to repent, the which they do greedily take. But those which are the true godly the Prophet describeth or setteth out two manner of wayes, first, when as he calleth them humble or meeke, as Christ also speaketh of himselfe Matthew 11. vers. 29.1. Meeke & low∣lie. when hee sayth, Learne of mee that I am humble and meeke. Secondly, when as he sayth that they doe the iudgement of God,2. That doe the iudgement of God. that is, that they looke vnto the lawe and rule appoynted by GOD to liue godly and ho∣lily, and ayme at the same: albeit that they cannot fulfill it. For if they did so liue, they should not be punished by God. Moreouer, here is also shewed whereupon wee ought to stay and rest, when as we wil haue God to be appeased with vs, namely, vpon his iustice and meekenesse,Iustice. or mercy and gentlenesse. Iu∣stice or righteousnesse therefore in this place is called not the same whereby God punisheth the sinnes of men: but whereby, when as hee promiseth that hee will bee fauourable and mercifull vnto those that call vpon him, hee is faythfull and true, and a kee∣per of his promise.Meekenes. Meekenesse also in this place is not called hu∣militie or lowlines, as in the first part of this selfe same verse: but clemencie or gentlenesse, the which either taketh away and par∣doneth the due punishment: or else doth diminish and lessen the the same.The hardnes of sauing the god∣lie. Lastly, the Prophet sheweth the hardnes of the matter, if the godly enter into consideration of themselues, when as hee sayth (if so be that, or if peraduenture) not that it is vnto GOD a thing either vncertaine or else hard to pardon and forgiue: but for that if they consider their owo sinnes, they themselues also deserue destruction, and that they should be comprehended together with the wicked and vngodly.
Ver. 4. For Azzah shall be farsaken, and Ashkelon desolate: they shall driue out Ashdod at the noone day, and Ekron shall be rooted vp. The Iewes are put in feare by the examples of others. The PhilistinesTHirdly he doth terrify, or make the Iewes afraid by sundry ex∣amples, that at the leastwise they may learne to be wise by the example of others, and to feare the iudgments of God. There∣fore first of all he alleageth vnto them the example of the Philis∣tines, a people bordering vpon them toward the West, whom God will destroy for their wickednes, albeit they seemed neuer so migh∣ty, and wealthy, and strong a people. And these things doth God rehearse both for that he would recall those which were his vnto better thrift by al meanes possible: and also because that same ouerthrow of the Philistines should go before that of the Iewes, as it also fell out Ierem. 47. that the Iewes as it were by this token or signe might vnderstand also that the iudgements threatned vnto them, did presently hang ouer their owne heades. And therefore that they should then at leastwise repent, that is, they should both besory for their sinnes, and also conuert or turne vnto God.What the fi∣gure hypotypo∣sis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12. And that he may the rather moue them, he doth by a certaine Hypoty∣posis or liuely description seuerally in this place reckon vp the cities of the Philistines, which were to be destroyed, and by a notable al∣lusion & resemblance vnto the names of euery one of them, shew∣eth what should particularly come to passe, and fall out vnto them. And of Ashdod he saith especially, that it shall come to passe that they of Ashdod shall be caried away, and driuen out of their seates, and led away by their enemies at noone day, that is, in the sight of all men, and when as the iourney shall be most hard and painfull, by reason of the heat and parching of the Sunne. Ver. 5. Wo to the inhabitants of the sea cost: the nation of the Che∣rethims, the word of the Lord is against you: O Canaan, the land of the Philistims, I will euen destroy thee without an inhabitant. Destructon threatned vnto the whole land of the Philis∣tines.A Garnishing and setting out of the matter, or else a conclusion, wherein he threatneth vnto the whole nation of the Philis∣tines or Palestines the iudgement of God, and the same most gree∣uous, least because but foure, albeit the chiefe cities of theirs, were reckoned vp, the rest of the Philistines might suppose that they should be free from these plagues, and punishments: Therefore
the Prophet doth in this place comprehende all Palestina, the which also he describeth by the situation of the same, to wit, be∣cause it was a land by the sea coast: and also by the peoples or pro∣uinces of that nation, the which were neere vnto the Iewes, such as were the Cherethims, Ios. 13. ver. 3. and as were those Cananites, which had departed and comen into their iurisdiction. But these at that time were by the Philistines taken away from the people of Israel (vnto whom they did by the promise of God appertaine and belong. Gen. 10. ver. 14.) The greatnesse and certainty of God his iudgment.Further the greatnes and certainty of this iudgement of God a∣gainst all these is added also, and expressed. And the greatnes is expressed both by this exclamation (Wo) the which is a threatning of great misery and punishment to come: and also for that all these Philistines are said that they shall in such sort be rooted out,1 The greatnes that none shall afterward inhabit that land as his certaine and setled seat, and where he either hath or wil haue his appointed house and family. The certainty of this iudgement is shewed by this one thing,2 The certainty. because that for vehemency and more force sake it is here expresly repeated, that this threatning is the word of the Lord: albe∣it notwithstanding there could be no doubt of it when as the Pro∣phet of God (of whose calling assured triall had bin made before) did speake it. Two reasons of the so long stay∣ing in the de∣scription of the destruction of the Philistines.Now why the Prophet doth make stay so long in the describing or setting out of this ruine and ouerthrow of the Philistines, there is a double reason: the one, that when it shall come to passe it may be obserued or marked the better to be the iudgement of God. And so consqeuently the same might the more easily be noted by the Iewes,  the which were commaunded to giue heede vnto it. The second,  that the godly also, or the church of God (the which before time had so often by them bin afflicted or troubled) might be cheered vp also with this comfort, namely, that God in the end will be the reuenger of those that are his, and the punisher of the e∣nemies of his church. Ver. 6. And the sea coast shal be dwellings & cottages for shepheards and sheepefoldes. An explanatiō of the former verse.A Making more plaine of the former sentence, whereby the won∣derfull desolation or laying wast of the land of the Philistines at that time most florishing and populous or full of people, is de∣scribed,
Now therefore is shewed what the Prophet meant, when he sayd that no man should afterward dwell there any more: to wit, that none should abide and remaine there, as in his fixed or setled home and seate: but if any be found there, they shall be as va∣grant or wandring shepheards, the which for a time haue cottages, foldes, and closures there, only to feede and keepe in their sheepe. Therefore vnder the name of sheepefoldes and closures (the which haue no firmnes, or soundnes in them) a wast & vntilled country is described. These things, if at any time, are at this day most espe∣cially to be seene in that land of the Philistines: & long since haue they bin fulfilled by the Chaldees. Ver. 7. And that coast shalbe for the remnant of the house of Iu∣dah, to feede thereupon: in the houses of Ashkelon shall they lodge toward night: for the Lord their God shall visit them, and turne away their captiuity. A comfort for the Church of God.A Comfort, but by way of digression, or going aside from the matter, that God might cheere vp and comfort his church. For he sheweth by the way, & briefly, vnto whom in the end this land of the Philistines shall come, after that it hath by him in such sort beene destroyed because of the sinnes thereof. For it shal come vnto the church, and vnto the Iewes, the which shall be left aliue out of that destruction, the which the Lord threatned vnto them before. So then the Lord promiseth both that there shall some Iewes be left aliue, that is, some godly, and that they also shall possesse the gates and land of their enemies. Wherein appeareth the infinite or endles goodnes of God toward his church.1. The freedom of the Church of God in those places. But first of all the Prophet describeth or setteth foorth, how free and out of daunger the possession of the church of this place and land shall be, namely, that the church of God in those places shall freely feede her flocks, nay that it shall both in the euening, and also in the night rest there in safty, and without daunger. Secondly,2 Why this shall fall out vnto the church? he sheweth why that shall fall out vnto the church, to wit, through the only goodnesse and mercy of God towardes it, because God shall visit her, & haue mercy vpon her. Lastly he addeth or setteth downe,3 When this shall bee? when this shall be: After that the Lord shall haue visited his church againe, and shal haue brought back & deliuered the captiues. All which things first of all and litterally or according to the letter,1. Literally. albeit they be to be referred vnto the time of the returne of the Iewes from out of
the captiuitie of Babylon: yet in as much as all those things then were types and figures of our deliuerance also by Christ, and of the setling of the spirituall kingdome of Christ in the world by the preaching of the Gospell afterward,2. Spiritually. these things also are mysti∣callie, and spiritually to bee vnderstood of the kingdome of the Gospell. The Iewes therefore in this place doe signifie the true Church of Christ. The Philistines betoken both those which are the true Philistines, and also all the Gentiles. By the word feeding, no doubt is signified the preaching of the Gospell: and by the word visiting, the comming of Christ, and the preaching of his doctrine. Therefore after the death of Christ, and the preaching of the Gos∣pell, these things also were especially fulfilled, like as literally they were fulfilled after the returne from Babylon. Vers. 8. I haue heard the reproch of Moah, and the rebukes of the children of Ammon, whereby they vpbrayded my people, and mag∣nified them selues against their borders. The second ex∣ample of the iudgements of God vpon the Meabites and Ammonites.THe second example of the iudgements of God set before the Iewes, to wit, of the Moabites and Ammonites, and this for two causes. First, that by this example the Iewes may vnderstand, that God is the reuenger of his owne maiestie and Godhead, and of his commandement in all nations, and therefore among those will he especially reuenge that people, the which doe confesse themselues to be the people of God, that is, chosen peculiarly to worship God, such as were the Iewes, the which were called the seede of Abra∣ham, and we also at this day are. Secondly, that by this example al∣so of the iudgement of God against the enemies of the Iewes,God doth not cast away his Church, when as he doth sharply punish the same. that is, of his Church, God might comfort those that are his, and teach, that they are not cast off by him, no not at that time, whē as he doth chastise them for their sinnes, although he doe it hardly and sharp∣ly, like as there is such a punishment threatned vnto them. The cause of this punishmēt of the Moabites is two-fold.But in describing or setting forth of the punishment of the Moa∣bites, first God rehearseth the cause for the which he punisheth them: both that the rest of the enemies of the Church may feare the like vnto themselues, when as they doe the like: and also that it may appeare vnto all men that God is a iust God. And the cause of this iudgement of God against the Moabites is two-fold, to wit, their reproch and violence against the people of God.1. Their reproch against the Iewes. The reproch is shewed by the Ammonites and Moabites done vnto the Iewes
both in deede, and also in words. Therefore the Prophet nameth it reproch, in regard of the deedes, and rebukes or despite,Cherpah. Gidduph. in respect of the words, if the vse of the Hebrew tongue be considered.  Force or violence is sufficiently vnderstood to bee done vnto the Iewes by the Moabites and Ammonites,Then force or viclēce against them. in that they magnified or inlarged their borders, taking away the countries, and remouing the bounds, which God had promised, and set vnto that his people. And it ma∣keth vnto the declaring and laying out of the hainousnes of the in∣uirie, and of the iniquitie, that they are significantly called the sonnes of Moab and Ammon, because that by the only calling to minde of their originall of their kindred or stock, they did know that they were ioyned vnto the Iewes by the friendship of bloud, and not on∣ly for that they were neere vnto them in regard of their countrie & dwelling. Lastly God sayth, I haue heard, least that same long pa∣tience and sufferance of God might be thought to bee the casting off of his people, or least, whilest the vngodly doe thus waxe fierce and play the wantons, they might suppose that God did not see them. Vers. 9. Therefore, as I liue, sayth the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, surely Moah shall be as Sodom, and the children of Ammon as Go∣morah, euen the breeding of nettles and salt pits, & a perpetual de∣solation: the residue of my folke shall spoyle them, and the remnant of my people shall possesse them. The greatnes of the punish∣ment of the Moabites and Ammonites: a comfot of the godlie: The state of the countrie of the Moabites in the end.IN the second place is described the greatnes of the punishment of the Moabites and Ammonites, whereunto by the way is a dioy∣ned a comfort of the people of God, and what in the end shall bee the estate of that countrie. The greatnes of the punishment, for that they shall be ouerthrowne, both vtterly, and also for euer. Vt∣terly, the which the Prophet sheweth by the example of Sodom and Gomorah, & also by the rehearsall of nettles that should grow there, and of the wonderfull laying of it waste: finally, by the men∣tion of a salt pit, the which thing signifieth, that no profite shall be gathered of that foyle at that time, but that then the barrennes of that land shall be most miserable. For saltnes destroyeth all fruits, yea euen the grasse it selfe. The trueth of this prophesie, and the ful∣filling of the same, if at any time els, appeareth especially at this day in those countries. But to the ende that the flourishing wealth and mightie estate of the Moabites & Ammonites at that time, should
not make either themselues, or others hearing these things secure or careles against the iudgements of God, or perswade them, that these things could not come to passe, God rehearseth both his infi∣nite power, when as he calleth himselfe the God of hostes: and also the equitie of this his vengeance to be takē vpon him for the Iewes sake. For God is the defender and keeper of Israel. And that these things may be beleeued the rather to be true, he addeth an oth al∣so, (As I liue).The comfort of the Church. As for the cōfort of the Church, it is herein, for that the Iewes (those I meane, which shall continue in the feare of God, and not all of them) are sayd that they shall take the spoyle of the goods of the Moabites and Ammonites, and shall inioy their pos∣sessions. Which thing appertaineth both vnto the returne from out of the captiuitie of Babylon, & also vnto the times which followed after that returne euen vnto the comming of Christ: and vnto the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, by the which they came vnto the inheritance of God, and spirituall riches of the Church (as the rest of the Gentiles did) namely, when as those nations were conuerted vnto the true God, I meane, the God of Israel, as appeareth by the eleuenth verse. Vers. 10. This shall they haue for their pride, because they haue re∣proched and magnified themselues against the Lord of hostes people. What the fi∣gure Epipho∣nema is, see Io∣nas cap. 2. ver. 9.THis is the figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, whereby is repea∣ted not only the cause of so seuere or sharpe iudgement of God against the Moabites and Ammonites, that men might remember it, but also the vengeance of God against them is shewed to bee most iust by the mutuall comparing and valewing together of the fact of these nations, and of the punishment by God layd vpon thē for the same. For the Prophet weigheth them both together as it were in a ballance. Therfore like as the wickednes of the Moabites and Ammonites was not only manifold, but also most shamefull: so also ought their punishment to be great, and such as the punish∣ment for many and most grieuous sinnes vseth for to be. Their wic∣kednes is shewed to bee manifold, and not one onely, because that their both despite, and also force and violence, and the same pub∣like, was extant toward the Iewes. For they haue reproched them, sayth the Prophet, that is to say, they haue commonly in great blas∣phemie cast despitefull speeches vpon the Iewes, and haue inuaded
or broken in vpon their borders with force & armes. And these sinnes were most shamefull, because they committed these things against the people, yea and peculiar inheritance of the Lord of hostes himselfe, that these iniuries and despites done vnto the peo∣ple of the Iewes, that is, the Church of God, might light & rebound rather vpon God himselfe then vpon men Finally, the Moabites & Ammonites brought and cōmitted these incōmodities or harmes vpon them, of great pride and contempt or despising of the prero∣gatiue of the people of God, and did it not of ignorance, or being prouoked and hauing cause giuen them by the Iewes thereunto. Wherefore it appeareth vnto al men, how great the equitie of God is in punishing both of his enemies, and also of the enemies of his Church. Vers. 11. The Lord will be terrible vnto them: for he will consume all the gods of the earth, and euery man shall worship him from his place, euen all the Iles of the heathen. That the fore∣threatned iudgements shall assuredly come to passe.THis is the conclusion, whereby the Prophet confirmeth that these threatned iudgements shall bee and come to passe vnto them, and that by the infinite power of God himselfe decreeing & pronouncing these things, the which is intermedled and put in in this place, lest the Moabites might suppose that they could escape them by matching contrarie strengths against them. And he ex∣presseth this power of God three wayes. First, when as he calleth God terrible, that is, fearefull, whose strength no man is able to a∣bide. Secondly, when as he sayth, that God will consume, or make leane (for so the word doth properly signifie) euen those which vpō earth are counted gods, yea & that all of them. And to make leane,Razah. is to take from them all seruice and worship. For the sacrifices which are offered vnto Idols, are sayd to be their meate, the which being taken away, such gods as these must needes become leane and rugged, as hauing their meate withdrawne from them. By this Metaphor therefore he sheweth that all honour and worship shall be taken from them. In the third place when as he sayth,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. That e∣uery people, nay, that all Ilands of the Gentiles, and that all nations shall worship the true God in their owne countries, that is, that this God of the Iewes is in all places to bee worshipped, and that his knowledge shall be spread brode into all lands. The which no doubt is to be referred vnto the preaching of the Gospel, and vnto
the spreading out of the kingdome of Christ vnto the Gentiles. And therefore this place sheweth how the verse before, and also the 7. verse is to be vnderstood of the Gentiles, which in the ende should come into the dominion and iurisdiction of the Iewes, that is, of the Church of God. Vers. 12. Ye Morians also shall be slaine by my sword with them. The third ex∣ample of the iudgements of God vpon the Arabians or Morians and Ethiopians.A Passage vnto the third example of the iudgements of God, the which the Lord shall shew vpon the Arabians (whom some do here translate Morians, or Ethiopians) a people not farre distant, & remoued from the Southerne coasts of the Iewes. And this exam∣ple is propounded or set forth by speaking vnto the Arabians them∣selues, to the end that they themselues also might be stirred vp, and vnderstand, that they, how fierce & stout soeuer they be, must not∣withstanding appeare before the tribunall or iudgement seate of God. This place and historie agreeth with that of the 49. chapter of Ieremie ver. 28. and so following, where Kedar (the which as Stephanus noteth, and as it is Psal. 120. ver. 5. is the palace or chiefe citie of Arabia the happie, or fruitfull) is by the Prophet reckoned vp among those nations, whom Nabuchadnezzar shall destroy, & not only ouercome. Now the Prophet sheweth two things: First, against whom. Secondly, when these things shall come to passe. Those therefore vnto whom this iudgement of God is threatned, are the Arabians. But when shall these things come to passe? To wit, after that God shall haue wounded through, and ouerthrowne the Ammonites and Moabites by the Arabians themselues, whom first Nabuchadnezzar shall haue in his host as hired souldiers: and whose seruice he vsed afterwards to the ouercomming of other nations neere vnto Arabia. Vers. 13. And he will stretch out his hand against the North, and destroy Asshur, and will make Niniueh desolate, and waste like a wildernes. The fourth ex∣ample of God his iudgements.THe fourth example of the iudgement of God, wherewith both the enimies of the Church o God are terrified or put in feare, and also the Church it selfe recemeth comfort. They are put in feare, because that the Lord shall execute his iudgements against that same verie citie which at that time was the Empresse
of the world, to wit, Niniueh it selfe, and against a Nation that was most mightie, and not onelie against these small peoples (which were rehearsed before.) And here doubtles the Church of God is comforted, because that she vnderstandeth that by this meanes the enimies of God are oue throwen: and by these same examples also, as by most profitable admonitions or warnings she learneth to feare God, and to stand in awe of his threatnings. Moreouer, the Prophet maketh staie in describing or setting out of this iudgement of God, because this thing seemed vtterlie vn∣possible because of the power of the Citie Niniueh: and also for that this Nation of the Assyrians being pricked forward there∣unto by others, did most greatlie aboue other Nations molest or trouble the people of God. First of all therefore it is say de that the Nation it selfe shall be punished, and the punishment it selfe to come vpon them, is brieflie expressed. The Nation, were the Assyrians,Assyria. Niniueh at that time florishing in wealth and the head of all the kingdomes of the East, and of all those Countries,Niniueh. was their mother or chiefe Citie Neither is it any let or hinde∣rance here vnto that these Assyrians are people of the North far distant from the Iewes, (which are situate in the South, and whose God this God is which threatneth these things.) For the hand of the Lord is mightie, and is stretched out as well against the North as against the South. For this true God is both the Lord and also the creator of all people. And the summe of the punish∣ment here comprehended, sheweth that the same punishment shall be most grieuous. For Niniueh it selfe which is the chiefe Citie of the Assyrians, shall after this sort be made desolate and wast, and not onelie some small villages or townes of the Assyri∣ans, and shall become like a barren and wilde wildernes. Fur∣ther more the Empire of the Assyrians was vtterlie ouer throw∣en & translated vnto the Chaldees,The Empire of the Assyrians destroyed by Nabuchad∣nezzar. and Niniueh wholie destroy∣ed by Nabucadnezar, which followed after the times of king Io∣sias, as appeareth by this place and by other Prophets, and espe∣ciallie by the third Chapter of Daniel. Hereby it is euident that the Prophet Nahum prophesied concerning Niniueh not long before these times.
Vers. 14. And flockes shal lye in them iddest of her, and all the beasts of the Nations, and the Pelican, and the Owle, shall abide in the vpper postes of it: the voyce of birds shall sing in the win∣dowes, and desolation shall be vpon the postes: for the Cedars are vncouered. A most lamen∣table descrip∣tion of the de∣struction of Niniueh.THis is a making more plain of the verse going before, and a description of that destruction, the which the Prophet in the former verse threatned vnto Niniueh the Citie of the Assyrians, in the which there is a setting out of a most miserable and cru∣el laying wast of a Citie. Neither yet is there any thing in this place feined hyperbolicallie, or aboue the truth, but all things did fall out and are euen at this day extant in such sort, as they haue here bin foretold. But so much the more lamentable and great destruction fell out vnto this Citie, by how much it was accounted the more famous and inuincible among men, that all men may vnderstand that no power of any Nation whatsoeuer, no rule of anie Citie neuer so gorgeous, and Ladie of all thinges, can let God from executing his iust iudgements vpon it. And the Prophet painteth out vnto vs, and vnto the Church that same miserable desolation of Niniueh, by the reckoning vp of sundrie circumstances and things, the which are wont to fall out one lie vnto the wildernes, and most vaste desertes. Therefore he sayth wilde beasts, and vnluckie, such as are some here rehersed, as al∣so Isaie 13. and 14. and not gentle and tame, shall afterward dwel∣in that place and Citie. And not onelie one or two, but by com∣panies: & not of one kind onelie, but of all kindes and of all sortes what soeuer are found among all other people, shall repaire and runne together vnto that place. And they shal not sit also in some one part of the Citie the which of old time was little vsed & oc∣cupied, but they shal make their nestes in the very middest of the Citie, which once was most populous or full of people, as in the Pome granattrees & most curiouslie dressed Orchards & gardens of the Niniuites, nay in their verie Cedred & most daintie hou∣ses: so great assuredlie shal the desolation and destruction of that citie then be. Finallie the self same beasts shal not be there for the space of an houre only but shal dwel there without feare, & lodg there a long season, and the voyces of them singing shalbe heard in the windowes of those sumptuous houses, because they shall
there without all feare: and those cruel beasts shal rest them∣selues there. So great solitarines shall there be of those houses, & destruction of the postes. For none shall goe into those houses, none shall come forth of them, none at all shall inhabite them: but there shall be great solitarines euery where as I haue sayd: no man shall driue away from thence these birds although they be vnluc∣kie and dismal. Vers. 15. This is the reioycing citie, that dwelt carelesse, that said in her heart, I am, and there is none besides mee: how is shee made waste, and the lodging of the beasts! euery one that pas∣seth by her, shall hisse, and wag his hand. The figure Sar∣casmos, what it is, see Nahum cap. 3. ver. 14.THe figure Sarcasmos, or a most bitter taunting, wherwith God laugheth to scorne the vaine confidence or trust, bosting, and despights of this most proud and iniurious citie agaynst other na∣tions, and sheweth that she is chastised by himselfe, especially doth he laugh to scorne those reproches the which she without any stay or rule of her selfe had spued out against God and his church. Ther∣fore by way of matching together of contraries he setteth against her miserable estate the proud voyces of this nation, and braggings of her selfe: to wit, that all men may vnderstand that pride alone and vaine confidence especially is the cause of the ruine and ouer∣throw of most wealthy & peopled nations.Three proud tricks of the Niniuites. So then the Prophet reckoneth vp three proud tricks of the Niniuites. First, their vaine confidence and securitie or carelesnesse, This is the reioycing citie,1. Their vaine confidence. &c. The second, the intollerable pride of her mind, which would haue her selfe alone to be called and taken for the citie aboue and among all people and other cities of the earth,2. Their intolle∣rable pride. as if shee were the pillar of the whole world, she sayd, I am. Thirdly the despising of other nations, there is not any besides me. And on the contrary side,3. The miserable estate of this citie. he miserable estate is by and by set downe: first, for that this proud citie cannot be able hereafter to be so much as a lodging for men, but onely a denne of wilde beastes. Secondly, for that not onely whole nations shall despise her,  but also particular men shal euery one of them laugh her to scorne. For they shall both hisse at her,  and point at her with their finger, as sustayning and enduring iust punishment for her pride and haughtinesse. Thirdly,  for that not onely the neighbours and such as are neere vnto her, but also who∣soeuer
shall passe by that way, and shall see her rubbish and ruines or destruction, in contempt shall beholde that her vanishing and brittle glory, and hisse at it, as a thing (the which in trueth was of no value in her) and shall poynt at it, that is, shall laugh it to scorne. CAP. 3. Vers. 1. Woe to her that is filthy and polluted, to the robbing Citie. The third and last sermon of this Prophet.THe third and last sermon of this Prophet, wherin like as in the former, both threatnings of God and also promises are con∣tayned. The promises are most excellent, and most large touching the kingdom of Christ to be spread abroad throughout al nations. But the Prophet beginneth with threatnings, because that God wil first haue men to be amended in their life and conuersation, before they heare or feele his benefites. These threatnings also are in this place conceiued against the Iewes, & this is the third threatning of the iudgement of God made against thē, euen by this one Prophet. For they remayned both stubborne and stiffenecked in their sinnes: whom the Lord notwithstanding would not haue to perish, if they had had any heart or minde at all. Wherein appeareth how great the patience and goodnes of God is in bearing with those that are his,The order of the Prophet in deliuering the threatnings of God. and in calling them vnto earnest repentance. And after this course doth the prophet proceede in laying downe of these threat∣nings, that first hee reckoneth vp the causes of GOD his punish∣ments, and afterwards the punishments themselues which were to ensue. Touching the causes, they were most waighty, to wit, both their vngodlines toward God, and also their iniustice toward men: albeit that the Prophet beginne with their iniustice, because the same may more easily be discouered, and whose effects are better knowen vnto men themselues. Furthermore these causes and so great sinnes are first shewen to haue bin in the whole people them∣selues. Secondly, in their rulers, both of the common-wealth; and also of the Church. And this is the order of this place. This first verse and that following lay downe the corruption the which was most knowen, and most great in the whole people:
and therefore vnder the name Citie, doth the Prophet Sophonias speake vnto the whole citie. He beginneth with a great and feare∣full Woe,Woe. to make them attentiue or to giue eare vnto the sermon following, and to shew that he will speake of the wrath of God a∣gainst them. And thus he briefly comprehendeth the summe of the whole sermon ensuing. As for this first verse the same sheweth the great iniustice of the whole citie against men.The great in∣iustice of the whole citie. For first of all shee is sayd to be filthy and polluted vtterly and in euery respect with all sinnes and vices, and is so called in the great indignation of the Pro∣phet. Secondly, one kinde of these sinnes,Couetousnes. and such as was most common among them at that time, is reckoned vp, namely, Coue∣tousnes: for they beguiled their brethren of their goods by all meanes, both by violence, and also by deceit.Ianah. For the worde which the Prophet vseth, betokeneth both these kindes of decei∣uing. Vers. 2. She heard not the voyce: she received not correction: shee trusted not in the Lord: she drew not neere to her God. Their vngodli∣nes.NOw followeth the vngodlines of the Iewes or of men toward God, the which is first set downe in generall, and afterward by partes, such as it then especially appeared for to be. Generally for that they giue not eare vnto the voyce of God, that is, they obey not God, the which is indeed impietie or vngodlynes. Of which thing these partes of impiety are witnesses. First their rebellion,Witneses here of. & disorderousnes, when as they doe not receiue the discipline,1. Their rebelliō, & disorderous∣nes. iudg∣ments, and rule of God appoynted in his lawe for their saluation, and amendment. Secondly, their distrust. For they doe not trust in the wordes and promises of God, but doe either vtterly despise them, or laugh them to scorne. Thirdly, their obstinacie,2. Their distrust. or stub∣bornnes, or impenitencie, or vnrepentance in their sinnes.3. Their impeni∣tencie. For they doe not returne nor draw neere vnto God, yea and that their own God, who doth so louingly call them vnto him. And there is in this verse a great vehemencie or force of speech, the which in a kinde of speaking being as it were loose and not tyed together with copulatiue coniunctions, doth reckon vp so many vices, as it were by the way of a certaine amplification.
Vers. 3. Her princes within her are as roaring lyons: her iudges are as woolues in the euening, which leaue not the bones till the morrow. The princes & rulers thēseluesFRom the whole people the Prophet commeth now in order vn∣to the Princes themselues of the Iewish nation, because that in these there ought to bee greater shamefastnes both by reason of their dignitie: and also greater feare of God, for as much as they are chosen to gouerne others, and to keepe them in the feare of God. Rulers, 1. of the church 2 of the com∣monwealth.There are two sorts of Princes or rulers of the people: for some are Rulers of the common-wealth: and othersome are Rulers of the Church. First of all therefore he setteth vpon the Rulers of the com∣mon-wealth, of the which also he maketh two degrees, one of the higher and chiefer Iudges,Rulers of the commōwealth, 1. Princes or chiefe Iudges. 2. Inferiour Iudges. whom he calleth Princes: the other, of inferior Iudges, whom hee simply nameth Iudges. And both of these he accuseth both of violence, and also of manifest and most notorious couetousnes Of force or violence, for that they take away all things by might after the manner of lyons, that is, of most cruel wilde beasts: Of vnsatiable or vnfilable couetousnes, for that by and by they deuoure all things, lusting and longing for them with a most greedie desire, and such as can neuer bee satisfied, and for that they are bribe takers, swallowing vp all thinges like vnto euening and hunger-starued woolues, which leaue not the bones so much as vntill the morrow. And these so grieuous and hay∣nous sinnes,The former vi∣ces amplified by the Prophet. and contrary vnto the office of Iudges (who are ordai∣ned by God for the preseruation of Iustice among men, that is, to keepe away both violence and also wrong) doth the Prophet▪ am∣plifie or enlarge, when as he sayth that these things are committed of these Princes and Iudges, to wit, in the midst of the citie: & not in some Shire of the land: all men knowing of it, not in the dark∣nes: in the open light, not in a corner. The second sort of Rulers, to wit, the priests, and their vices, of the which in this place hee reckoneth vp foure. Vers. 4. Her Prophets are light and wicked persons: her Priests haue polluted the Sanctuarie: they haue wrested the law. THe secōd kind of Rulers of the people, namely the Priests, whō themselues also the Prophet maketh guilty of great crimes, and such as are vtterly agaynst their office. And here are foure things
reckoned vp, which are most grieuous, especially in Priests, vnto whom was committed by God himselfe the iudgement of things most doubtfull, the looking vnto, or the ministery of the Sacrifices and Temple, and finally, the interpretation or expounding of the law of GOD. But on the contrary part they are here condemned,1. Lightnes. first, of most manifest, and most knowen futilitie or lightnes, who did and answered all things rashly and vnaduisedly. Secondly,2 Treacherie. of treacherie, which keepe not their promises and fayth giuen. Third∣ly, for that they pollute both the Temple of God it selfe,3. Polluting of the Temple. the which is holy, and also all other things. Fourthly, for that with their false gloses and expositions they doe wrest the law of GOD, turne it from the true meaning and offer violence vnto it.4 Wresting of the law. All which thinges doe bewray in them manifest impietie, or vngodlines, for the which both the name of God is blasphemed, and in the ende his worship and seruice also despised. Vers. 5. The iust Lord is in the midst thereof: he will doe none ini∣quitie: euery morning doth he bring his iudgement to light, hee fayleth not: but the wicked will not learne to be ashamed. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer vices by setting against them the con∣trary vertues in God.AN Antithesis, or matching of the contrary vertues in GOD a∣gaynst the former vices in the Priests & other Rulers, the which amplifieh the causes of the iudgement of God rehearsed before. For against the former vngodlines of all estates, the which is mani∣fest, bee matcheth the manifest iustice of God, the which cannot, especially in his owne people, and in the midst of that citie (the which he hath chosen vnto himselfe, as wherein he dwelleth and liueth, to be holy, and consecrated vnto himself) suffer these sinnes, and leaue them vnpunished, east by winking at them, himselfe might seeme to be a companion of wicked persons, and to be de∣lighted with iniquitie as well as they. Wherefore he setteth downe three things, first, the iustice of GOD, when as hee sayth,1. The iustice of God. The iust Lorde. Secondly, the worke and making manifest of the same iu∣stice, the which shall bee done both foorthwith,2. The worke of the same. and also e∣uidently, when as hee sayth, Hee shall bring foorth iudgement into light, and that he will doe it quickly and speedily, Morning, mor∣ning, that is, euery morning. Thirdly,3. The stubborn∣nes of the wic∣ked. the obstinacie or stub∣bornnesse of the wicked in the meane season. Further, by the waye of confession or yeelding so much vnto them, hee con∣fesseth that GOD is and dwelleth among them, to wit, because
of the Temple, and the rest of the worship and seruice of God, the which by God was deliuered onelie vnto the Iewes (which thing they had as a defence for all their sinnes, and a readie ex∣ception against all the threatnings of the Prophets. But the Pro∣phet turneth backe the selfe same thing vpon their owne heades, when as he teacheth, that God himselfe which dwelleth among them, cannot shew himselfe vnto them to be a partaker of their vyces: nay that he will be a reuenger of the sinnes, which they committed. Vers. 6 I haue cut off the Nations: their Towres are desolate: I haue made their streetes waste, that none shall passe by: their Ci∣ties are destroyed without man, and without inhabitants. A diligent de∣scription of the stubbornees and wickednes of the Iewes.A garnishing of the matter, that is to saie, a diligent description or setting out of the obstinate or stubborne minde of the Iewes & of their desperate or vnrecouerable malice and wicked∣nes, that how great the patience and sufferance of God was to∣ward them, & how great his equitie & iustice in punishing of thē might appeare to be.1. The Iewes were warned by sundrie ex∣amples of other nations. And the Prophet doth set foorth this after two sortes: First, for that the Lord hath warned them before by sundrie examples of other Nations, which thing is conteyned in this verse: So then the Lord doth witnes that he punished not onelie one Nation, but manie, for the like sinnes which the Iewes cōmitted, they themselues beholding the same, that, had they not been past grace, they might haue looked at so manie examples. Secondly,2. The said nati∣ons were not punished light∣lie. he punished those same Nations not with a light iudg∣ment (the which might either be nought set by, or not easely no∣ted of men) but with a most grieuous iudgmēt, the which ought to terrifie or make a frayde the Iewes. And therfore they were to giue heed vnto it. For God both had ouerthrowne and will also ouerthrow the inner parts & things of those countries by that his iudgement, to wit, both the streetes themselues and villages, townes and cities, and all other places where men are wont to dwell, in such sort among the Nations knowen vnto the Iewes & chastized by God, that no man now dwelt in those Countries & places, so wel kept and dressed before, the which then were de∣solate and waste. And these iudgements of God appeared, when as the Assyrians first, and afterward also the Babylonians inua∣ded and ouerthrew the Nations neere vnto the Iewes.
Vers. 7 I said, surelie thou wilt feare me: thou wilt receiue in∣structions: so their dwelling should not be destroyed howsoeuer I visited them, but they rose earlie and corrupted all their workes. The earnest desire of God to haue the Iewes repent.ANother place of the former garnishing and setting out of the iudgemēts of God, namelie the vehement & earnest desire of God him selfe, to haue the Iewes repent, & so to escape their de∣structiō except they were vtterlie voyde of al hope and thinking vpon better thrift & amendment. And this desire is set forth by attributing vnto God the affections of men, to the end the fa∣therlie meaning of GOD touching the Iewes and his milde af∣fection and loue towards them, might be the better expressed. But the Iewes contemned or despised al that same care and most gentle affectiō of God toward them: nay moreouer they disap∣poynted God himself of his hope of them, like vnto vnthankefull & vtterlie disobedient Children. So then here are two things set downe by waie of matching together of contraries, first the minde, meaning, and affection of GOD towardes the Iewes:1 The minde of God toward the Iewes. secondlie, on the contrarie part, the stubbornes of the Iewes a∣gainst God. As for the minde and meaning of God toward the Iewes, the same was twofold, first,2 Their stubborn against God. that they by repenting might escape this scourge, being warned by the ouerthrow and ruine of other nations. And repētance in this place is described by two partes thereof, to wit, by the feare of GOD,  or calling backe of their lyfe vnto God, and by the feeling or vnderstanding of their punishment or fault, which he calleth the receiuing of discipline, or instruction, and it is the way, and necessarie preparation vnto the earnest feare of God. Secondlie,  the minde and meaning of God was, that if the Iewes would not wholy scape the iudgemēts of God, at leastwise they shuld not in such sort prouoke God, that he should not onelie be content with those light punishments, wherewith he had corrected them before: but must adde also thereunto the ouerthrow and destruction of the citie it selfe, the place, and Countrie wherein they dwelled, vnto the shewing of the which punishment vpon them, they draue God in the end. And this was the great patience and goodnes of God toward them. Now on the contrarie parte the minde of the Iewes was most stubborne and lewde: for they did not onelie corrupt their
workes, that is, dealt wickedly: but they corrupted all their works, that is to say, they openly shewed themselues vnto all men to be lewd and wicked. And that with no small indeuour, but with a most earnest and continuall desire, in so much that they rose early and made hast to commit those vices, as if the whole pleasure and drift of their life were set thereupon. Ver. 8. Therefore waite ye vpon me saith the Lord, vntill the day that I rise vp to the pray: for I am determined to gather the nations, & that I will assemble the kingdoms, to power vpon them mine indig∣nation, euen all my fierce wrath: For all the earth shall be deuou∣red with the fire of my iealousy. THis is the figure Hypophora,The figure Hy∣pophora what it is see Amos. cap. 5. ver. 21. or answering of an obiection, least for the deferring of the iudgements of God, either the Iewes or others might thinke these threatnings to be vaine and nought∣worth, as if it were certaine idle feare-bugges or scar-rowes. He an∣swereth therefore that they must yet patiently waite for that day, in the which the Lord wil execute those his threatned iudgements. Wherefore to shewe them to be true, the Prophet teacheth two thinges.  First, that the selfe-same thing the which hee hath both said already, and also answereth now, is not his owne, but the say∣ing of God himselfe.  Secondly, that the thing it selfe, and the so wo∣full misery, and that against so many nations, whom he threatned before, shall first come to passe. Nowe this calamitie or misery is signified by the name of a pray, & of God rising, also of fierce wrath and indignation, wherewith  arth shall be deuoured, least they might suppose God to haue threatned more things, & more hea∣uy and sharpe then he was able to performe, and bringe to passe. And that not only one nation but many shall be punished by God, these wordes doe declare, I will gather the nations, I will assemble the kingdomes, &c. Ver. 9. Surely then will I turne to the people apure language, that they may call vpon the name of the Lord, to serue himOr with one shoulder. with one consent. THis is a comfort wherewith after the threatninge of so many miseries,A comfort for God his people. the Lord doth cheere vp the heartes and mindes of those that are his, that they should not faint. The summe of the
comfort is, that for all these miseries the church shall not yet pe∣rish, or cease to be a church, wherein the name of God is both truly and also purely called vpon: nay that it shall then at the length be amplified or inlarged, that it may appertaine and be spred abroade not only vnto one nation of the worlde as it did before: but vnto all people indifferently:3. Things to be noted in this worke of God. And in the reporting of this so wonderfull a worke of God the prophet teacheth three things. First, by whom this so wonderfull a worke shall be done, namely by God himselfe. Secondly, after what manner it shall be done, to wit,1. By whom. by turning & changing the persons themselues wholely, that they may both in heart conceiue and thinke of God aright,2 After what manner. and also in lippes speake of God aright. For both these waies are men vnpure by nature. For he saith that he will chaunge the lippes or language of the nations, signifying thereby, by the figure Synecdoche,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. the conuersion of the whole man, as he also doth vnder the name of lippes Isay 6. ver. 5. where the Prophet saith, Wo is me, for I am vndone, because I am a man of polluted lippes, and I dwell in the middes of a people of polluted lippes &c. Thirdly, what shall be done, namely the nations,3 What shall be done. yea & that all nations, and not one only as in times past the Iewes alone, but all the olde difference betweene circumcision and vncircum∣cision being taken away, shall call vpon the name of the Lord, by the part vnderstanding the whole worshippe and seruice of God, by the figure Synecdoche. And therefore to make this the more plaine he addeth, They shall serue Iehouah, that is the true God, and not their idols any more: nay they shall cast them away into holes and dennes, and shall detest and curse them, yea and all of them shall do this with one shoulder, that is, they shall do it with one consent in one faith and charity, as Luke speaketh of the disciples and other the godly, Act. 1. ver. 14. That they continued with one accord in prayer and supplication, &c. and cap. 2. ver. 46. That they continued dayly with one accord in the temple, &c. For the word shoulder fi∣guratiue or metaphoricall, signifieth a consent in faith and cha∣rity, and one common endeuour, as God speaketh of his people Ierem. 32. ver. 39. when he saith, I will giue them one heart, and one way, that they may feare me for euer for the wealth of them, and of their children after them. But the accomplishment and fulfilling of this prophesie was by the preaching of the gospell after the passion or suffering of Christ.
Vers. 10. From beyond the riuers of Ethiopia, the daughter of my dis∣persed, praying vnto me, shall bring me an offring. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefit by the farnes of the place, from whence they shall be called vnto the Church.AN amplification of the former benefit by the rehearsing or rec∣koning vp of the place farre off, and of those which shall then be called vnto the Church. For euen from that same Ethiopia, the which is beyond the riuer, namely, beyond Nilus (for in this place I thinke that Ethiopia, and not Arabia to be signified) shall sacrifi∣ces be brought vnto God by those people, which shall be there: & so also by others which shall euery where be scattered ouer the face of the earth, and so consequently the Ethiopians, like as other peo∣ple of the world shall serue God. Wherefore I referre the word (dis∣persed) vnto all nations of what place soeuer professing the true God: and not vnto the Iewes alone scattered through the world. And there is mention made by the Prophet of the daughter of the dispersed affectionatly, namely, both to describe the earnestnes of the nations in seruing God, and that this so godlie and ioyfull a spectacle, or sight of women worshipping and seruing of God, and of virgins especially, might stirre vp and moue affections. Vers. 11. In that day shalt thou not bee ashamed for all thy workes wherein thou hast transgressed against me: for then will I take a∣way out of the midst of thee them that reioyce of thy pride, & thou shalt no more be proud of mine holie mountaine. THis is a staying still about the same matter, in the which is re∣ported the greatnes of the benefites of God toward his Church to come after such a sort and maner, the which is wholly contrarie vnto the shame, miserie, and infamie or reproch of the Iewes de∣scribed before,Two notable benefits of God toward his Church. to the end that by this matching together of contra∣ries, the grace and mercie of God toward those that are his, may appeare to bee the more singular and excellent. And here are two notable benefites rehearsed, and described by the adioynts, that is to say,1 Forgiuenes of sinnes. partly by the consequents or things following after, & partly by the antecedents, or things going before. First, remission or for∣giuenes of sinnes:2. Holines of life, or regeneratiō. afterward holines of life, or regeneration which should afterward insue. And first forgiuenes of sinnes, by this that God himselfe promiseth that it shall come to passe,1. Forgiuenes of snnes. that the things which the Church hath committed shamefully against her selfe, yet
shall they not bring any shame vpon her, no not before God him∣selfe, because her sinnes shall be forgiuen her. So then the benefite of forgiuenes of sinnes is described by the consequent: for shame or blushing is the reward of sinne.What these fi∣gures are see A¦mos nap. 5 ver. 21. and cap. 4. ver. 12. And vnder this name both Sy∣necdochically, and also Metaphorically, is the horror or fearfulnes, & also the shamefulnes of sinne described. Furthermore, the great∣nes of this benefite appeareth by this, for that God promiseth that he will wipe away not only one or two sinnes, but all sinnes, & not only those which the Church hath committed of ignorāce, but al∣so those which she hath committed through rebellion & froward∣nes or stubbornnes of minde: for so much doth the word import,Pashang. the which the Prophet vseth. So great certes is the benefit of God toward his Church by and for Christ, so great is his loue, and so fa∣uourable and mercifull is he. For in Christ, as Paul writeth Ephes. 1. ver. 3.4. hath God blessed vs with all spirituall blessing in heauenly things, as he hath chosen vs in him, before the foundation of the world, &c. And as it is Colos. 1. ver. 22. In the bodie of his flesh through death hath he now reconciled vs, &c. Now, as for regeneration of life, the same also is described in this place both by things going before, and also by things following.2. Regeneration. By things antecedent or going before, when he sayth, I will take pride out of the midst of thee; that is, from the very bottome of thine heart, and those which stirre thee vp thereunto, will I roote out. By the consequents or things following, when he sayth, Thou shalt not adde to bee proude, or, Thou shalt not bee proud any more, that is, thou shalt not sinne of contempt, or despite of my word, and sooth or flatter thy selfe through pretence or colour of my Temple. So then, the first word pride sheweth the cause of sinnes, namely,Pride. loftines of minde, which maketh vs to despise God. And the latter sentence containeth the effects of this pride. Wherefore both of them are a∣way from the truely regenerate or new borne, if not wholly, yet at the least wise it is daily mortified in them, to wit, both the pride of minde it selfe against God, and also the effects of this pride. Vers. 12. Then will I leaue in the midst of thee an humble and poore people: and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. A commenda∣tion of the be∣nefit of God toward the church to come.This verse tendeth to the same ende that the former, to wit, that the Prophet might shew and commend the benefit of God to∣ward
that companie of the elect of God, which is the Church, should bee longed for, sought after, and desired of all men. And the Prophet setteth downe two things.1. What maner of companie the Church of God shall be. First, what maner of assemblie or com∣panie that same flocke of God shall be. Secondly, he sheweth that the same shall be most safe & out of danger. Concerning this com∣panie to bee gathered together in the Church of God,2. They shall be in securitie or safetie. if they be e∣steemed according vnto the iudgement of men, they shall be hum∣ble and poore, because that the riches of the Church bee heauenly and not earthly. So Christ calleth his Church Luk. 12. ver. 32. when he sayth, Feare not little flocke: for it is your fathers pleasure to giue you the kingdome. And so is the word (poore) taken Isai 11. vers. 4. But with righteousnes shall be iudge the poore, and with equitie shall be reproue for the meeke of the earth: &c. But if it be considered accor∣ding vnto the iudgement of God, the selfe same flock is the church, the riches and peculiar people and inheritance of God himselfe. For so writeth Paul to Titus cap. 2. ver. the last saue one: Christ gaue himselfe for vs, that he might redeeme vs from all iniquitie, and purge vs to be a peculiar people vs himselfe, zealous of good workes. More∣ouer, this companie shall be godly, because it shall flee vnto God himselfe in most assured hope, which it shall put in him. And it shal bee most safe and without danger, although it be little, because it doth trust in the Lord, Luk. 12.32. And therefore Iere. 46. ver. 27.28. doth GOD most comfortablie vse this sweete speech vnto his Church, saying: Feare not thou, O my seruant Iaacob, and be not thou afrayd, O Israel: for behold, I will deliuer thee from a farre countrie, and thy seed from the land of their captiuitie, and Iaacob shall returne, and be in rest and prosperitie, and none shall make him afrayd. Feare thou not, O Iaacob my seruant, sayth the Lord, for I am with thee, and I will vtterly destroy all the nations, whither I haue driuen thee: but I will not vtterly destroy thee, but correct thee by iudgement, and not vt∣terly cut thee off. Vers. 13. The remnant of Israel shall doe none iniquitie, nor speake lyes: neither shall a deceitfull tongue be found in their mouth: for they shall be fed, and lye downe, and none shall make them afrayd. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefite by making more plaine of the same.AN amplification of the former benefite, by the making more plaine of the same, and that by the way of answering an obie∣ction. For least the condition of the Church might seeme to be the worser, because that it was little, and afflicted, & poore, he sheweth
with how great other benefites God will recompence that losse of multitude, to wit, with a double gift of holines and safetie.God recompenceth the smal∣nes, pouertie, and affliction of his Church with other greater spiri∣tual benefits, as among the rest with holi∣nes and safetie. Of holi∣nes, because that those remnants, in whom alone the Church shall consist, shall doe none iniquitie. Of safetie, because that euery one shall dwel and rest in safetie in his owne place. And both these be∣nefits of God ought to be vnderstood by way of comparison, in re∣gard of the condition and estate of the old Church, the which re∣moued so often, and was carried from her owne seates and home: but simply and absolutely, when as we shall be in heauen: for then shall we be safe in our place. But this holines doth the Prophet de∣scribe by the contrarie, namely, sinne or iniquitie, and first general∣lie: afterwards by certaine particulars of that generall. The gene∣rall is (iniquitie): the particulars or kinds of the same are lying and deceit especially, the which appeareth in the tongue, vnder which two the other vices are comprehended by the figure Synecdoche.What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. Psal. 15. Iam. 3. ver. 2. If any man sinne not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the bodie. Finally, he alleageth the cause of this safetie, because none, sayth he, shall make her afrayd any more: for God shall keepe her, and fence her about on euery side. Vers. 14. Reioyce, O daughter Zion: be ye ioyfull, O Israel: be glad and reioyce with all thine heart, O daughter Ierusalem. A confirmatiō of the former promises by a signe of ioy and gladnes. Three things to be noted.A Confirmation of the former promises taken from a signe or to∣ken, that is to say, from ioy, yea and the same both generall, and also very great, vnto the which God doth exhort the Church, as if she did now presently in deede and trueth inioy it, the which after∣ward it shall obtaine and haue most assuredly. And here are three things to be noted. First, the maner of speaking it selfe being loose and vnioynted, or not knit together with copulatiue coniunctions,1. The maner of speaking. the which maketh also vnto the rousing vp of the drousie: and the repeating of diuers words signifying diuers kinds of ioy, that none should be omitted, but that godlie men should be stirred vp vnto all kinds of ioyes, as of a thing most to bee wished for, and assured vnto them. The second thing to be noted is,2. Who are ex∣horted to re∣ioyce. who are exhorted to reioyce. And that is indeed the Church, but the whole Church, vn∣der the name of Israel, Sion, Ierusalem: and that vnder a most sweet and gentle speech, when as it is exhorted expresly by the name of daughter. For this is to moue and stirre vp affection, and not to re∣straine the speech, or ioy of the Church vnto may dens only. The
third thing is the great ioy to bee noted,3 The exceeding great ioy. whereunto the Prophet doth exhort vs, as the which the Church shall signifie and declare not only with the heart or voyce, but also by gesture, and mouing of the bodie, that we may iudge her to reioyce withall her heart. For this doth the word Gnalaz set in the last place signifie,Gnalaz. the which the faithfull interpreters of this place haue translated to triumph, or as it were to leape for ioy. Vers. 15. The Lord hath taken away thy iudgements: he hath cast out thine enemie: the King of Israel, euen the Lord is in the midst of thee: thou shalt see no more euill. Foure causes of the former ioy of the Church.A Yeelding of a reason. For he bringeth foure causes, why the church of God ought to reioyce after the same maner, as I haue sayd before, all which hang vpon the meere and onely free good will of God towards it: and not vpon the workes of the Church. And the cause which is here first rehearsed, is the foundation and ground of the rest,1. Forgiuenes of her sinnes. to wit, forgiuenes or doing away of her sinnes, yea and that of all her sinnes, the which, if it went not before, God would bestow no other benefites vpon vs. And this forgiuenes is the free pardoning of the iudgements, or iust vengeance of God a∣gainst vs, to wit, by reason of the pardoning of all our sinnes for and by Christ, in whom God hath chosen vs before the foundations of the world, that we should be holy and blameles before him in loue, &c. Eph. 1.4. This benefite therefore of forgiuenes is described by the ef∣fects, or consequent, when as the Prophet saith, He hath taken away thy iudgements.2. Deliuerance from all her e∣nemies. The second benefite and gift of God toward his Church, is the deliuerance of her from all forraine enemies, whom God sayth, that he hath dispatched or emptied, or cast out. Where∣fore whether the inward quiet, that is, of conscience: or the out∣ward, from the feare of our enemies, be considered, the Church of God is altogether without danger and happie or blessed. For as it is in Luk. cap. 1. ver. 74. We are deliuered by Christ out of the hands of all our enemies,3. The presence of God in the midst of his Church. that we should serue God without feare, all the dayes of our life, in holines and righteousnes before him. The third benefit is, the presence of God himselfe in the midst of it, who doth both go∣uerne and defend it. For albeit that the Lord be euery where, yet is he not in such sort euery where,4. The perpetui∣tie continu∣ance of these benefits. as he is in the Church. The fourth gift in this place rehearsed, is the perpetuitie or cōtinuance of these benefits: because that the Church shall not any more see, or feele
anie euill, or any miserie: for God shall defend her. All these things cannot be vnderstood except through Christ, of his hea∣uenlie kingdome, and of the state and saftie of the Church vn∣der him, the which doe here, that is to saie, on this earth fall out vnto vs but in part: but fullie and throughlie when as we shall be receiued in heauen So then let vs suppose & thinke the promises of God towardes those that are his to be especiallie heauenlie: and therefore let vs set our minde on lyfe euerlasting, and there looke to inioye them most fullie. Vers. 16. In that daie it shall be saide to Ierusalem, feare thou not O Zion, let not thine hands be faint. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefites taken from the publike gratu∣lation of all men vnto the Church.AN amplification of the former benefites taken from the pub∣like gratulation, or thankeful reioycing of all men, the which shall then be donne vnto the Church. Wherefore these selfe same things also doe confirme that promise. And this gratulation, or thankefull reioysing hath also an exhortation of all men, the which shall be made vnto the Church. For all men shall see the Church to be of a quiet minde: and shall encourage her to go for∣ward and to serue God boldlie and without feare: and that her hands waxe not slow, to wit, in setting foorth the worke of the Lord: but that they constantlie perseuere or continue in the iour∣ney and holie purpose alreadie begunne and taken in hand, both in worshipping God, and laying open of his doctrine.Whereunto the rest and quiet of the Church is to be imployed. Thus then the quiet and rest of the Church is not to be applyed vnto delici∣ousnes: but to be imployed vnto holie workes, namelie vnto the inlarging of the kingdome of God by the preaching of his word, and the examples of an holie lyfe. Ves. 17. The Lord thy God in the middest of thee is mightie: he will saue, he will reioyce ouer thee with ioye: he will quiet him selfe in his loue: he will reioyce ouer thee with ioye. An other am∣plificatiō of the state of the Church by the reckoning vp of sundrie bene∣fites of God to∣ward the same.AN other amplification of the state of the Church which was to come, and to be gathered together in Christ, taken from the reckoning vp of the sundrie giftes of God toward the same. And in this verse he describeth or promiseth foure especial bene∣fites, the which abeit they were bestowed vpon the old Church also by God through the same Christ, yet were they giuen nei∣ther
in so great measure, as they are vnto the Church raysed vp by the preaching of the Gospell: nor yet so cleerlie or euidentlie, as vnto vs; but far more darklie: namelie by the shadowes and sacramētes of earthelie things, as it were spreading of a vaile ouer them:1. God wil alwies be in the mid∣dest of his Church. the first gift reckoned vp in this place is first also by nature, and going before the rest. And it is, that Iehouah, that is, that e∣uerlasting and true God (who doth witnes himselfe to be the God, father, and defender of his Church peculiarlie) will not now be absent and awaye from it, but will be perpetuallie or alwaies abiding in the middest of it: So then God promiseth his presence vnto his Church peculiarlie, and the same spirituall, that is, which shall be felt by the power of his spirit: and not any carnall or fleshlie and bodilie presence.2 He will defend it from spiritu∣all and earthly daungers. The second benefite is a conse∣quent or such a one as followeth the former, to wit, that God will be the Sauiour of the sayde Church both from spirituall euils, & euils of the minde, (such as sinnes are:) & also from earthlie daungers, and daungers of the bodie (such as are afflictions.) The which thing that he may be vnderstood to bee able to per∣forme (albeit his Church haue neuer so great & deadly enimies) God in this place is called strong,3 The ioye and gladnes of God ouer and to∣ward his Church. or mightie: the third benefite is the ioy or gladnes of God ouer the church, the which is tickled vp in the verie inner parts of the heart, & the which God doth open∣ly testifie or witnes by sundrie effectes and sundrie gifts of his. To this purpose seeme vnto me the wordes of triumphing or shoo∣ting for ioye, and also the words of ioy and gladnes ought to bee referred, that the one might signifie the inward, and the other the outward and open ioye of God, and his glad minde toward his Church by a figuratiue kinde of speaking.4. The continu∣ance of God his loue to-his Church. The fourth, wher∣in is an heape and increase of all gifts, is the continuance of this good will of God towardes his Church. For God will quiet him∣selfe in that loue, as the husband in his loue toward his wife, the which he loueth both alone, and also entirelie. All these thinges fall out vnto the Church by and for Christ alone, our GOD, through whom the godlie are reconciled or made frindes with his father, and iustified before him. Vers. 18. After a certaine time will I gather the afflicted that were of thee, and them that bare the reproch for it. The answer∣ing of an ob∣iection.THe aunswering of an obiection, whereunto is added a most assured confirmation of the former promises. The obiection
is that men, which are ouer quicke and hastie should not thinke these foretellings of the Prophet to be vaine, because the church is not forthwith gathered together, or holpen, the which at that time was afflicted or in trouble, that is to say, because those promises are not fulfilled out of hand. The Prophet therefore answereth, that they are indeed to be fulfilled, but in their due and set time, and the same appoynted by God. For the word Mogned, is the fulnes of time, as Paul speaketh Galat. 4. ver. 4. of the time of the incarna∣tion of Christ, where he sayth: When the fulnes of time was come, God sent forth his sonne made of a woman, &c. Therefore that worke of God is to be wayted for of vs with patience. And in this selfe same answere there is a repetition and a confirmation of those promises. Likewise he addeth a reason, why God one day will gather them together, how afflicted and forsaken soeuer they seemed at that time for to be: and why he will in such sorte refresh them, who at that season were worne away with so great sadnes, or rather mour∣ning because of their sundry afflictions, and especially such as were hyd vpon them by the Babylonians (the which he threatned vnto them before): because saith he, they also are of thee, or are thine,The cause why God will one day gather to∣gether & help his church. O my spouse and Church, the which certes are in this sorte afflicted. Therefore all the godly are of the family or houshold of God albe∣it they be most afflicted, because they are a part and members of the church, also because the burthen and affliction, the which by the vngodly is layd vpon the church, doth turne vnto the reproch of God himself. God therfore will put away the affliction, and wil not suffer his church for euer, or continually to be molested or grieued. Vert. 19. Beholde, at that time I will bruise all that afflict thee, and I will saue her that halteth and gather her that was cast out, and I wil get them praise and fame in al the lands of their shame. The conclusion.THe conclusion, with a great increase also vnto the former be∣nefites. Therefore in this and in the verse following the Lord at the last pronounceth, that he will be the deliuerer of his church,An accesse vn∣to the former benefites by three gifts more from God vnto his church. how great soeuer the lets may seeme to be that are layd in the way to stop this worke. The accesse or increase vnto the former benefits is in a certaine threefold gifte, the which he offereth vnto the sayde church besides the benefits before rehearsed. First, he promiseth that he will not only represse or keepe backe all her enemies (who hardly afflicted and vtterly threw her downe before) but also that1. He will vtterly destroy all her enemies.
he will quite and cleane destroy them, and altogether roote the ou▪2. He wil remoue al hidrances of gathering his church to∣gether. The second is, that he will take away all lets of gathering to∣gether his church, yea euen those the which were sticking in the church her selfe, that they also shall not at any hande hinder any more, that she may not be gathered together. Therefore neither shall those which were halt, cease for this cause to come: nor those that are cast out, to be gathered together with the rest of the bo∣die. The third is,3 He will giue vnto them ho∣nor & renown. God also shall giue a name, and an honour, and fame vnto the company gahered together by him. Wherefore they shall not onely be a certain multitude of men: but honorable, yea and that among all nations: euen in the selfe same places in the which before they liued in reproch and shame. And all these things were then at length in that time fulfilled, wherein God in Christ by the preaching of the Gospel scattered his Church throughout the whole world, that is, gathered it together. Vers. 20. At that time will I bring you agayne, and then will I ga∣ther you: for I will giue you a name and a prayse among all peo∣ple of the earth, when I turne backe your captiuitie before your eyes, sayth the Lord. A repetition.THis is a repetition, to the end that the former benefites might be the more certaine and assured among all men. For here is a confirmation of them.Two things to be noted. And in this place there are two thinges to be noted. First, the phrase or kinde of speaking not knit together with any copulatiue coniunction (In that time) the which brin∣geth a waight & dignitie vnto this sentence,1. The kind of speaking. and causeth that these things, which he hath promised vnto his church, men might vnder∣stand the same to be the more fastly setled, and to sticke more sure∣ly in the memory of God.2. The saying of God himselfe. The second, the saying of God himself, lest because this thing is iudged past hope in the opinion of men, the promise might seeme to be vayne. For it shall bee done, and fulfilled, which God hath promised vnto his church, because that both God hath sayd that it shall come to passe: and also hath him selfe vpon iust cause decreed that it shall be done, who can ne be deceiued, nor letted. FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus vpon the Prophet Abdias. The Argument. THe Prophet in one Sermon threatneth de∣struction vnto the Idumeans, as if they be∣ing sufficiently conuicted or proued guil∣tie, needed not any longer accusation. The causes are, their pride and cruelty a∣gaynst the Israelites their brethren. Like vnto this is the prophesie of Ezechiel cap. 35. and Amos cap. 1. Psal. 137.The life and prophesie of Ab¦dias. This Pro∣phet seemeth to haue liued not onely after that the Egyptians, king Nachao being their captaine, had taken & destroyed Ierusalem with the helpe of the Idumeans, that is, after the death of Iosias King of the Iewes: but also after the first capti∣uitie of Babylon, the which fell into the 4. yeare of Ioacim king of Iudah, and into the first yeare of Nabuchadnezzar. For then did the Idumeans insult or triumph ouer the Iewes being most sorely affli∣cted or troubled, and reioyced at their destruction. For which cau∣s the Lord also by other Prophets threatneth to be reuenged on em, as Ierem. 49. vers. 14. where he vseth the very selfe same be∣ginning against them in a maner, as this our Prophet Abdias doth, saying: I haue heard a rumor from the Lord, and an ambassadour is sent vnto the heathen, saying, Gather you together, and come against er, and rise vp to the battel. And Ezech. 24. vers. 12, 1.The cause of the destruction of Edom. Thus sayth the Lord God, Because that Edom hath done euill by taking vengeance vpon the house of Iudah, and hath committed great offence, and re∣enged himselfe vpon them: therefore thus sayth the Lord God, I will lso stretch out mine hand vpon Edom, and destroy man and beast out  it, and I will make it desolate from Teman, and they of Dedan shall ll by the sword.
The briefnes of Danaeus vpon this Prophet, may be supplied out of the Com∣mentaries of Gualter, which are in English. Vers. 1. The vision of Obadiah. Thus sayth the Lord God against Edom: we haue heard a rumor from the Lord, and an ambassa∣dour is sent among the heathen: arise, and let vs rise vp agaynst her to battell. FIrst of all he auoucheth and ascertaineth his calling, the which he teacheth to be from God.He sheweth his calling to be from God. And he sheweth that his prophesie shall forthwith be fulfilled in deede and in trueth, for as much as the souldiers themselues mustered and gathered together by God, are now already set in battell aray, and ready to giue the onset vp∣on them. Vers. 2. Behold, I haue made thee small among the heathen: thou art vtterly despised. Vtter destru∣ction threatned vnto the Idu∣means.THe summe of the vengeance and punishment the which God threatneth vnto the Idumeans, namely, their vtter destru∣ction. Vers. 3. The pride of thine heart hath deceiued thee: thou that dwellest in the cliffes of the rockes, whose habitation is hie, that sayth in his heart, who shall bring me downe to the ground? Pride, the first cause of the o∣uerthrow of the Idumeans.THe first cause of this iudgement of God agaynst the Idumeans, is their pride, the which they conceiued of their vaine confi∣dence or bold trust, because of the scituation of their countrey, sea∣ted so strongly among the rockes and cliffes, that as they supposed it could neuer be surprised or taken. Vers. 4. Though thou exalt thy selfe as the Eagle, and make thy nest among the starres, thence will I bring thee downe sayth the Lord. An obiection of the Idumeans.THe answering of an obiection, which the Idumeans might make against these threatnings of the Prophet and say, wee are sure enough from danger, we dwell safely, and most strongly, and as it were among the starres and high in the ayre, farre from al feare of hurte, (for thus much or the like in effect is impled in this ob∣iection) The Lord answereth,The Lords an∣swere. Nothing shal let or hinder that God
should not execute his iudgements vpon them, albeit they dwell neuer so much in the rockes. Vers. 5. Came theeues to thee, or robbers by night? how wast thou brought to silence? would they not haue stollen till they had e∣nough? if the grape-gatherers came to thee, would they not leaue some grapes? Sarcasmos, what this fi∣gure is, see Na∣hum cap. 3. ver. 14.THe figure Sarcasmos, or a most sharpe and bitter taunt, which might onely or at the last bee vnderstood by the issue or falling out of the matter, and ouerthrow of this people, the which ensued afterward, the which for the better vnderstanding of the simple reader, I will make bolde with the adding of a fewe lines after this maner to make it some what more plaine, thus, And is this that gal∣lant & dainty land (supposing that we now saw it miserably spoiled & wasted by the enemie, as it fel out afterward for to be) nested in the stars, and seated aloft out of reach in the ayre? So strong, so rich, so wealthy! what? hath she fallen into the hands of theeues & rob∣bers, that she hath bin thus stripped and wasted? or haue the grape-gatherers been with her, that she is so rifled, and left thus naked and bare, and gathered or plucked so neerely, that there is not one clu∣ster left hanging on her? Thus much importeth this tart and biting frump or quip, where∣by the Prophet signifieth that they shall bee more pitifully and la∣mentably ransacked and spoyled, then if they had been rifled by theeues, or plucked by grape-gatherers, for that both the one and the other how hardly or narrowly soeuer they had gone to worke with them, yet would they haue left them some thing: but the gree∣dines and cruelty of those enemies, into whose power they shall be yeelded vp and come, shall be such that they will search al holes and corners, stripping them as it were vnto the very skinne, and tur∣ning them away naked, leauing them nothing, &c. Vers. 6. How are the things of Esau sought vp, and his treasures searched? An amplifica∣tion of the gree∣dines of the e∣nemies.AN amplification. For there shall be nothing so secret hidden, and well layd vp, and deare vnto them, the which shall not be taken away from the Idumeans by the enemies, which God shall send in vpon them.
Vers. 7. All the men of thy confederacie, haue driuen thee to the borders: the men that were at peace with thee, haue deceiued thee, and preuayled agaynst thee: they that eate thy bread, haue layd a wound vnder thee: there is none vnderstanding in him. Hypotyposis, see what this fi∣gure is, Amos cap. 8. ver. 12.THe figure Hypotyposis. For he describeth or setteth out very liue∣ly the greatnes of the miserie to come. First, for that they shal then, or at that time be betrayed by their owne friends. Vers. 8. Shall not I in that day, sayth the Lord, euen destroy the wise men out of Edom, and vnderstanding from the mount of Esau? Vers. 9. And thy strong men, O Teman, shall be afrayd, because euery one of the mount of Esau shall bee cut off by slaughter. No remedie a∣gainst their mi¦series.ANd they shall not finde any remedie among themselues a∣gaynst these so great miseries, albeit they doe vse eyther coun∣sell or strength. Vers. 10. For thy cruelty agaynst thy brother Iaacob, shame shall couer thee, and thou shalt bee cutte off for euer. Cruelty, ano∣ther cause of their destructiōAN other cause of this so great ruine or ouerthrow of the Idu∣means, namely, their cruelty against the Israelites their brethren now already declared and vttered indeede. Vers. 11. When thou stoodest on the other side, in the day that the strangers carried away his substance, and strangers entred into his gates, and cast lots vpon Ierusalem, euen thou wast as one of them. A descriptiō of the crueltie of the Idumeans against the Is∣raelites.A Description or setting out and amplifiyng of this cruelty of the Idumeans, taken from the circumstance of time. Vers. 12. But thou shouldst not haue beholden the day of thy brother, in the day that hee was made a stranger, neither shouldest thou haue reioyced ouer the children of Iudah, in the day of their de∣struction: thou shouldest not haue spoken proudly in the day of affli∣ction.
Ver. 13. Thou shouldst not haue entred into the gate of my people, in the day of their destruction, neither shouldest thou haue once looked on their affliction in the day of their destruction, nor haue layd handes on their substance in the day of their destruction. Ver. 14. Neither shouldst thou haue stand in the crosse wayes, to out off them that should escape, neither shouldst thou haue shut vp the remnant thereof in the day of affliction. Their cruelty amplified by setting downe the duty of a brother toward his brother af∣flicted.HE describeth and amplifieth their cruelty by way of matching together of contraries, or by the description and setting out of the duty of a brother, towards his brother afflicted or in misery, the which the Idumeans violated or brake in euery respect. Ver. 15. For the day of the Lord is neere vpon all the heathen: as thou hast done, it shall be done to thee: thy reward shall returne vp∣on thine head. The conclusion.THe conclusion, that it is meete and iust, that they which haue afflicted or troubled the Sonnes of God, should them-selues also be afflicted or punished, with the like punishment, and after the like manner. So writeth Paule vnto the Thessalonians epist. 2. cap. 1. ver. 6. saying: It is a righteous thing with God, to recompence tribulation to them that trouble you. And Deut. 32. ver. 41.42. God affirmeth that he will reward bloud with bloud vpon those which had murthered and slaine his people, in these words: If I whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold on iudgement, I will execute vengeance on mine enemies, and will rewarde them that hate me. I will make mine arrowes drunke with bloud, (and my sword shall eate flesh) for the bloud of the slaine, and of the captiues, when I begin to take vengeance of the enemy. Ye nations praise his people: for he will auenge the bloud of his seruants, and will execute vengeance vpon his aduersaries, and will be mercifull vnto his land, and to his people. Ver. 16. For as ye haue drunke vpon mine holy mountaine, so shall all the heathen drinke continually: yea they shall drinke and swal∣low vp, and they shall be as though they had not bin. HE amplifieth their wickednes by the figure Auxesis or increa∣sing,Auxesis. What this figure is see Oseas cap 7. ver 4. casting into the teeth of the Idumeans their profaning or vnhalowinge and defilinge of his sanctuary done by them vnto
shamefull and filthy vses: whereby he sheweth that his vengeance against the Idumeans is the more iust, notwithstanding that it be most sharp and greeuous. Ver. 17. But vpon mount Zion shall be deliuerance, and it shall be holy, and the house of Iaacob shall possesse their possessions, Ver. 18. And the house of Iaacob shall be a fire, and the house of Io∣seph a flame, and the house of Esau as stubble, and they shall kin∣dle in them, and deuoure them: and there shall be no remnant of the house of Esau: for the Lord hath spoken it. Ver. 19. And they shall possesse the south side of the mount of Esau: & the plaine of the Philistims, and they shall possesse the fieldes of E∣phraim, and the fieldes of Samaria, and Beniamin shall haue Gi∣lead. A comparing of the estate of the church with the destruction of the Idumeans their enemies.ON the contrary side he compareth with this destruction of the Idumeans the condition and estate that shal bee of the church, whom they had so hardly afflicted. And this he sheweth shall be both most happy in regard of it selfe, and also terrible or fearefull vnto the enemies themselues, whose borders and countries it shall in the ende through the preachinge of the Gospell inuade and pos∣sesse. Ver. 20. And the captiuity of this host of the children of Israel, which were among the Canaanites, shall possesse vnto Zarephath, and the captiuity of Ierusalem, which is in Shepharad, shall possesse the ca∣ties of the South. A confirmation of the godly.A Repetition of that which went before, whereby the Prophet confirmeth or strengthneth the doubtfull & wauering mindes of the godly, by reason of so great calamity or misery. Ver. 21. And they that shall saue, shall come vp to mount Zion, to iudge the mount of Esau, and the kingdome shall be the Lords. The happy e∣state of the I∣dumeansIN this verse is promised & described or set forth, the happy con∣dition and estate of the Idumeans themselues, by reason of this their subiection vnto God, & the kingdome or rule of the Church ouer them. FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus, vpon the Prophet Habacuck. CAP. 1. The argument. THe argument of this prophesie, albeit that it be like vnto the rest, so far forth as it containeth the threatnings & pro∣mises of God: the threatnings against wicked men,2 Things proper vnto this Pro∣phet. and his promises vnto the godly & faithfull, & such as feare God: yet hath it certaine peculiar & proper things vnto it selfe, & these two especi∣ally. First,1 A complaint against the pro∣uidence of God. a most bitter complaint of the Prophet himselfe, against the prouidēce of God, with the which al∣so the Prophet beginneth. Secondly, an especial forme of prayer, seruing as it were for a perpetual comfort,2. A prayer for them in capti∣uity. the which is set forth vn∣to the godly captiues, that they might cheere vp & comfort them∣selues in the midst of their miseries. This is the effect of this whole prophesie. So then the end of this Prophesie is most vnlike vnto his beginning. For the entrance or beginning sheweth a distēperature, & vnquietnes of minde in this Prophet: but the end declareth the pacified & quiet minde of the said Prophet, and resting in the iudg∣mēts of God as most iust decrees: so diuerscertes are the affections euen of godly men, & one while to be praysed, & another while to be dispraysed And it was behoofull and requisite, that there should such an example be extant and remaining, both that wee might haue at hand a ready and prepared answere vnto the blasphemous speeches of the vngodly against God, & their complaints of God, such as is here set downe, giuen by the spirit of God ver. 5. and also that these panges and intemperate fits of the mindes of the godly
might by these examples be bridled, the which do often come vp∣on them: and not vpon one man only. For with such a rage of minde rather then sorrow,Dauid. is Dauid himselfe also vexed and cum∣bred, as appeareth Psal. 73, and Ieremy cap 12. and likewise cap. 15. ver. 10. where he saith: Wo is me my mother, that thou hast borne me, a contentious man, and a man that striueth with the whole earth: I haue neither lent on vsury, nor men haue lent vnto me on vsury: yet euery one doth curse me. Furthermor concerning the time of the prophesying of this pro∣phet, he seemeth to haue prophesied after that now al the godly & holy men had fore-seene the most grieuous iudgments of GOD likely to insue vpon the Iewes, by reason of their haynous offences of all sortes, of the which Habacuc complaineth here in the first place.The time of the prophesying of Habacuck. So then Habacuc prophesieth about the beginning of the reigne of Sedechias, to wit, the Iewes then daring aduenture the doing of any notorious wickednes: and the Chaldeans or Baby∣lonians being now knowen: and after that the selfe same persons had caried away many of the Iewes together with Ioacim their King captiues into Babylon, who waxed old in that captiuitie. Wherefore he liuely describeth or setteth out the power, & valour and experience, and warlike courage and manhood of the Chal∣deans, who were yet now further for to be, like as they had already bin, the rod of God, least the Iewes might suppose themselues to be out of their daunger: or able for to match them. In a word, Habacuck prophesied before the taking of Ierusalem by Nabu∣cadnezar. Vers. 1. The burden, which Habacuck the Prophet did see. Three parts of this verse.THis verse conteineth three things, first the summe of the pro∣phesie insuing: and that is, a burthen, that is, a threatning of miseries and calamities.1 The summe of this prophesie. But here is not expressed by name vnto whom they are threatned: but by the things which folow it ease∣lie appeareth that this burden is caried and foretold by the Pro∣phet vnto the Iewes liuing wickedly: In the second place it shew∣eth the person it selfe of the Prophet.2 The person of the Prophet. This is, Habacuc, not he of whom mention is made in the bookes of the Apocrypha, namelie in the storie of Bell,3 A confirmation of this prophe∣sie. and the Dragon, the which is set downe Dan 14. ver. 32.33. and so foorth: but a Prophet of God, most knowen among the Iewes at that time. In the third place
is expressed a confirmation of this prophesie: namelie it is a visi∣on shewed or sent vnto this Prophet by God himselfe, like as Num 12. ver. 6. God sheweth that if a Prophet of the Lord be a∣mong them, hee will bee knowen vnto him by a vision, and will speake vnto him by a dreame. Vers. 2. O Lord how long shall I crye, and thou wilt not heare: euen crie out vnto the, for violence, and thou wilt not help. The Prophet beginneth with a complaint.THe exordium, entrance or beginning of the prophesie, with a complaynt, the which the Prophet conceiueth of the most defiled lyse of the Iewes among whom he liued, for that the same seemed by God to be left vnreuenged and vnpunished. And this be calleth (violence) that is to saie, open force,Chamas. whereby not one∣lie one tooke awaie from an other that which was his without punishment, but also deteined or withheld euerie part of righ∣teousnes in vnrighteousnes, as Paul speaketh, and denied both vnto God and man their right, against whom (as it is Rom. 1. ver 18.) The wrath of God is reueiled from heauen for all vngodli∣nes and vnrighteousnes of men, the which withhold the trueth in vnrighteousnes, who (as Paul speaketh ver. 31. of the same Chap.) thogh they know the law or righteousnes of God, how that they which cōmit such things, are worthie of death, yet not onlie do the same, but also fauour them that do thē. Thus do I take this word here in this place, like as it is also taken in manie other places, as where the Prophet complayneth Psal. 55. ver. 9. Destroye, O Lord, and de∣uide their tounges: for I haue seene crueltie, (chamas) and strife in the Citie. and Gen. 6 ver. 11. where it is saide, The earth also was corrupte before God: for the earth was filled with crueltie: (chamas) Further the Prophet witnesseth that he not onelie cried, but also cried out against it, that is, for it, to haue it punished by God, and yet for al this that God was not wakened vp, or tooke vengeance against so wicked a kinde of lyfe. See Psal. 94. Vers. 3. Why doest thou shew me iniquitie, and cause me to behold sorrow? for spoyling and violence are before me: and there are that rayse vp strife and contention. A reason of the former com∣plaint.THe rendring of a reason of the former complayning and rea∣soning of the Prophet with GOD, as the silence or for∣bearance
of God were now out of season and too long in so o∣uer much vnbrideled bold libertie and brasenfaced shamelesnes of men, yea euen of the Iewes, that is, of the seed of Abraham, to commit all euill and lewdnes. This verse hath two parts. The one which repeteth againe the same former complaint:Two parts of this verse. The other, which expresseth the cause thereof,1. A repeting of the former complaint. and sheweth what is vnderstood before by the word (violence.) Touching the com∣plaint, the same is here againe repeated, because that at the same time it was knowen vnto the most blinde, and as it were vnto euerie Cobler & Tincker,2 The cause of the same. how wickedlie the Iewes liued, among whom he and the other Prophets had their conuersation or a∣biding.  And therefore in regard of the notoriousnes of their sinnes Ierem. 9. ver. 9. it is written, shall J not visit them for these things sayth the Lord? or shall not my soule be auenged on such a Nation as this? Yet were they, as I haue foresayde, the people of God, an holie Nation, the seede of Abraham. Wherefore the matter was intolerable or not to be borne withall of anie godlie man, much lesse of God, the which the Prophets and all the god∣lie did see with their own eyes. This open raunging and raging of vices and sinne was foorthwith to be punished by God with sword and fire (whose name was for this cause blasphemed or euill spoken of euen among the infidels, as it is also in the Pro∣phet Isaias) and at no hand to be deferred or prolonged, and put off from daie to daie. Wherefore this debating and reasoning of the matter with God is repeated as a iust complaint for so ma∣nifest or plaine comtempt and despising of God. 2. Iniquitie Strife. Contention. Vexation. Violence. Spoyling.Now the cause hereof, as I haue saide is the lyfe of the Iewes, outragious and horrible for all kind of lewdnes: for here are recko∣ned vp sundry sorts of wickednesse, namely, iniquitie, strife, conten∣tion, vexation, violence, spoyling: of the which the three former I doe referre vnto those iniuries, the which priuate men priuatly did one vnto another: & the three latter vnto those iniuries, the which they publikely committed one against another: as for example, ei∣ther the officers and magistrates vnto the subiects, or a people and cities vnto cities. And all these things argued or proued, that all charitie and loue was extinct or quenched among them: and con∣sequently that all feare of God was done away. Strifes and conten∣tions doe shewe their vniust law quarrels, the which notwithstan∣ding neuer ceased among them. For there were alwayes some which raised and stirred them vp. Which thing also appeareth in
France euen at this day, where there are in number more suites and processes, then heads of men. Iniquitie, is deceit subtiltie and craft, wherewith one beguiled another in their traffike and bargainings. Ʋexation, is such grieuance, as the toll-gatherers and custome-masters, and such like deceitfull, way ward and cruell persons did openly vse vnto the common people, demanding tribute of them. Spoyling, is such losses & harmes and vndoings, as these pillers and pollers of the people did euery where exercise and bring in. Ʋio∣lence, is the force and open wrong the which one did vnto another openly without punishment. And these things doe shew that there was at that time a wonderfull disorderousnes of that state both publike and also priuate. Compare with this place the like com∣plaints against this selfe same people by Isai cap. 1. Ieremie cap. 2. and 5. Ezech. 16. Vers. 4. Therefore the law is dissolued, and iudgement doth neuer goe forth: for the wicked doe compasse about the righteous: therefore wrong iudgement proceedeth. The cause of so great wicked∣nes among the Iewes, to wit, the contempt of the law of God.A Laying out of the matter more plainly. For the sheweth the causes of so great, & such vnpunished wickednesse of the Iewes. One is, and the same the chiefe cause, namely, the contempt or de∣spising of the law or doctrine of God, the which had vtterly lost her authoritie among them. And therefore in this place it is said to bee dissolued, or weakened. For it agreeth with chap. 7. of Ieremie. Doutles when as it alone prescribeth the true way of liuing well, Psalm. 19 Deut. 6. he which despiseth or setteth nought by it, must needes liue vngodly and vniustly.Two euils fol∣low of the de∣spising of the law of God. And so in the end two euils fol∣low of the breaking, despising and throwning downe of the autho∣ritie of the doctrine of God: One, that iudgement neuer mightie.1. Iudgement ne∣uer goeth forth Therefore men neuer haue their right giuen vnto them, but in stead of iustice, oppression or wrong, and robberie is exercised euen of the Magistrates in the publike iudgements, much more by priuate persons, and in obscure and secret places. Hereof complaineth the Prophet Isai cap. 5. ver. 7. saying: Surely the vineyard of the Lord of hostes is the house of Israel, & the men of Iudah are his pleasant plāts: and he looked for iudgement, but behold oppression: for righteousnesse, but behold a crying. So the Prophet Hosea telleth them cap. 10. ver. 13. You haue plowed wickednes: ye haue reaped iniquitie: you haue ea∣ten
the fruite of lyes,2. The wicked doth compasse about the righ∣teous. &c. The other euill is, That the wicked doth compasse about the righteous, that is, watcheth him, lyeth in waite for him, wringeth, feareth, and inuadeth or setteth vpon him. Nei∣ther can or daeth the righteous man defend himselfe, or stirre out of his place to escape the power and violence of that wicked man Psal. 12. Whereof in the winding vp followeth this third thing, that wrong & crooked iudgement proceedeth or commeth forth,Crooked iudge∣ment. that is to say, appeareth, that the actions and doings of these men among themselues are full of deceit, crankes, windings, turnings, & crooked? of which kinde of men and their crooked dealings, the Psalmist speaking Psal. 125. ver. 5. sayth, That those that turne aside by their crooked wayes, them shall the Lord leade with the workers of iniquitie: but peace shall be vpon Israel. And the Lord by Ieremie cap. 6. ver. 28. complaineth of such maner of men, when he sayth, They all are rebellious traytors, walking craftilie: they are brasse and yron,The worde (iudgement) in this place how it is taken. they all are destroyers. For here in this place I take the word iudgement in this sense, and not in such meaning and signification, as I haue taken and expounded it before: but for the dutie of eue∣rie man, the which was foreslowed, nay, was turned awry with cun∣ning shifts and subtilties. And therefore it is called corrupt & croo∣ked. For so that wicked men may haue some shewe and colour in deceiuing, it is enough for them: by and by doe they be guile their neighbours. See whither in the ende the contempt or despising of the word of God doth carrie vs away, albeit that we diligently ob∣serue the lawes of men, and doe very well knowe and followe the rules and wayes of cases and controuersies, and of the Ciuill law. Vers. 5. Behold among the heathen, and regard, & wonder, and mar∣uaile: for I will worke a worke in your dayes: ye will not beleeue it, though it be told you. The answer of God vnto the former com∣plaint of the Prophet.THe answer of God vnto the former complaint of the Prophet the which containeth a threatning of most grieuous punish∣ments against such wickednesse of the Iewes. And these punish∣ments did God prepare for the Iewes not in Iudea, but among the Gentiles or heathen. And therefore doth God will both the Pro∣phet and also the Iewes to looke vnto the Gentiles or heathen, a∣mong whom, and by whom those scourges and rods were now in preparing. For God by them purposed to punish this wickednesse and vngodlines, whereof the Prophet complained. So Ierem. 4.
ver. 16. the Iewes are cōmanded to behold, and diligently to marke what God intended and went about against them among the hea∣then, Make ye mention (sayth he) of the heathen, and publish in Ieru∣salem, Behold the scoutes come from a farre countrie, and crye out a∣gainst the cities of Iudah. So Isai 10. the selfe same wicked Iewes are sent backe vnto the Assyrian. Two parts of this verse.But this verse hath two poynts to bee noted. The one is the phrase it selfe or kind of speaking, the which is full of vehemencie and pith, and mouing of affections,1. The kind and maner of spea∣king. to the end that these men albeit they were neuer so stubborne, and fast asleepe in their vices, might be the more moued and stirred vp. For God vseth a speech that is it and tied together with many copulatiue coniunctions, as, and see, and behold, and maruaile: also he striketh into them an attention or heedfulnes and feare, whereas it is sayd, Maruailing maruaile ye, or he astonished: I worke a worke in your dayes, the which shall not be beleeued when as it shall be told. These repetitions therefore do giue a great force and weight vnto this sentence and threatning, to the awakening and stirring vp of all hypocrites, sleeping, and careleslie snorting in their sinnes and vices. And so doth Paul Act. 13. ver. 41. generally applye this saying of Habacuck vnto all the wicked. 2. The thing it selfe foretold by the Prophet.The second poynt, which is here worthie the noting, containeth the matter it selfe, the which the Prophet foretelleth shall come to passe, namely, that same worke, the which the Lord was to doe in their age and time. Whereby appeareth that this prophesie went not long before those times, wherein those things which are here threatned, came to passe, and wee haue sayd alreadie. Further, this worke, is the rushing & breaking in of the Chaldeans into the land of Iewrie, and the destruction of Ierusalem. For these euen at that time did God ordaine and prepare to bee the executioners of the people of the Iewes, and the reuengers of the contemning or despi∣sing of his name. Concerning this matter, see Ierem. 5. Also Ierem. 13. ver. 20. and 21. the are willed to enter into the consideration of these things in these words: Lift vp your eyes, and behold them that come from the North: where is the flocke that was giuen thee, e∣uen thy beautifull flocke? what wilt thou say, when he shall visite thee? (for thou hast taught them to be captaines and as chiefe ouer thee) shall not sorowe take thee as a woman in trauaile? To this effect reade al∣so the 20. and 25. chapters of his prophesie. Furthermore, God did thus prepare the Chaldeans vnto this
Empire began to arise vp, and gathered strength and power:The Chaldeans growing in strength and power, might the more easilie execute God his iudgements against the Iewes. for so by this meanes it did the more easilie execute those iudgements of God against the Iewes. Those increasings therefore of the Empire of the Chaldeans (the which at that time began to waxe very great among other nations neere vnto them) were as a gathering toge∣ther and making readie of rods, the which God would vse to whip his people withall. And the Iewes are willed to marke this, & that very diligētly, because that within short time afterward they were to be punished, and sharply corrected by those Chaldeans. So in the times of our Elders, when as God raysed vp the Empire of the Turkes, all the Christians ought to set their eyes thereupon, as on whippes,The kingdome of Spaine likely to be a whip to correct the sins of the professors of the Gospell. the which God ordained for them. So if any idolatrous kingdome (such as is that of Spaine) in God his will and purpose do afterward gather great increase, let vs Christians and the faithfull take it, as if euen now there were by God ordayned correctors of our sinnes, and of the nought setting by the doctrine of the Gospell, and fearfull reuengers of the despised name of God. Wherefore let men that are Christians, at the least now at length begin to abstain from their sinnes, and with speede and earnestly turne vnto the true God, when as they see these things to be done, and to be in prepa∣ring by God in the word. Vers. 6. For loe, I raise vp the Chaldeans, that bitter and furious na∣tion, which shall goe vpon the breadth of the land to possesse the dwelling places that are not theirs. What that wonderfull worke is, the which God shal worke against the Iewes.A Making more plaine of that which went before. For he shew∣eth what that so wonderfull a worke is, the which God shall shortly worke against the wicked Iewes. And it is this: namely, God shall raise vp, and send in the Chaldeans most cruell and most mightie enemies, that the Iewes may be punished by them. And this agreeth with the threatnings of God, the which are extant and to be found Deut. 28. ver. 36.37. The Lord shall bring thee and thy king (which thou shalt set ouer thee) vnto a nation, which neither thou, nor thy fathers haue knowne, and there thou shalt serue others gods: euen wood and stone, And thou shalt be a wonder; a prouerbe, & a com∣mon talke among all people,A liuely de scription of the power and cru∣ltie of the Chaldeans. whither the Lord shall carrie thee. Further, there is added a liuely and effectuall description or setting out of the power and crueltie of the Chaldeans, that hypocrites should not thinke, that they can escape the iudgements of God: or that
they are impossible because of that strength of their owne, the which, such as it was, they had in some measure at that time in the kingdome of Iudah. Conferre this place with that of Ieremie cap. 6. ver. 22.23. &c. Thus sayth the Lord, Behold, a people commeth from the North countrie, and a great nation shall arise from the sides of the earth. With bow and shield shall they be weaponed: they are cruell, and will haue no compassion: their voyce roreth like the sea, and they ride vpon horses well appoynted, like men of warre against thee, O daughter Zion. Two things here to be no∣ted.This verse hath two things especially to bee noted. One, the name it selfe of the Enemies, whom God shall bring and raise vp a∣gainst the Iewes. And these are the Chaldeans.1. The name of the Enemies. Now who these were it is knowne by other places of the holie Scriptures, and also out of the prophane histories themselues, or Chronicles of the hea∣then. The second thing is, the description of this nation,2. The description of that nation. whereby the same appeareth to be very terrible or much to be feared. And first of all it is said to be a most bitter nation, namely,1 A most bitter nation. such a nation as is bitter ouer other nation, because of their hard rule and go∣uemment ouer them. For the rule of the Chaldeans ouer the Iewes which were vnder their subiection, was a Manlian gouernment, that is, most cruell & tyrannicall, as is the rule of masters ouer their slaues, or of the Spaniards ouer the West Indians, and not as of a fa∣ther ouer his children. It was a quick and hastie nation, that is,2. A quicke and hastie nation. dili∣gent in the executing of matters. And such must all nations be, the which of small beginnings and kingdomes doe gather vnto them∣selues great power, and beare rule ouer others, to wit, diligent and speedie in the dispatching of things. Such were the Romanes at the first, as Salust teacheth in his Catilinarie warres in these words: But the Romanes are diligent at home, and in warre speedie, readie, in∣couraging one another, going against their enemies.3. A nation ran∣ging farre a∣brode. The same nation of the Chaldeans was ranging farre abrode, and walking vpon the breadth of the land. For the Chaldeans made warre vpon sundrie nations, and waged battaile farre abrode, as appeareth Iere. cap. 25. Finally, they were desirous of other mens goods,4. Desirous of that is none of theirs. or of that which was not theirs, as namely, being couetous, and ambitious or proud, such as is the nation of the Spaniards, the which for praise & gaines sake is most desirous to enlarge their borders: the which thing also they haue effected or brought to passe. Now if the Ba∣bylonian Empire (the which notwithstanding in Daniel is compa∣red
vnto gold) were such a one and so cruell: what maner of ones may we suppose the other Monarchies or Empires for to haue bin, and what may wee thinke those great kingdomes, which worship not God, now also for to be? To wit, they are so many plagues, and spoylers of mankinde: such as is the one Empire of the Turkes at this day. Vers. 7. They are terrible and fearfull: their iudgement and their dignitie shall proceed of themselues. A Staying still in the same matter. For now he purseth the other parts of this description: whereby appeareth, what maner of persons the Chaldeans were, that is to say, how terrible, or greatlie to be feared.1. The cruell na∣ture of the Chaldeans. First of all therefore is described their cruell nature: se∣cōdly, their might & power. Their nature, for they are said to be ter∣rible, or to be feared, as namely, being such which did strike a feare of themselues into all others: againe, to be feared, as whō other peo∣ple and nations stood in awe and dread of.2. Their might and power. A nation, which will be her owne caruer, and minister law according vnto her owne plea∣sure, and exercise and execute iudgement,  as her selfe listeth, ouer the people vnder their subiection, and such as by them haue been subdued or ouercomen, to robbe and spoyle them, and carrie them away into other lands, according vnto their owne liking. Al which things the Iewes afterward in these Chaldeans had experience of: and in the time of our Ancetors the West Indians found out but of late, haue also tried the like, as their histories doe testifie and beare record. So then their crueltie is in this place described, and that ve∣rie liuely. Finally, the honor and dignitie of this nation (which then was obscure or base) shall grow v, and appeare. To conclude, all these things make to this end, that the Iewes should not thinke, be∣cause as yet the Empire & name of the Chaldeans, was vnknowne vnto them and weake, that therefore they were not such, by whom they could be chastised and corrected. For they shall in time grow vp, and become a most mightie people: nay, one of those foure chiefe and especiall Monarchies or Empires, which afterward were in the world. So God lifteth vp what people he will, or pleaseth him, that by them he may chastifie others, and chiefly his owne people.
Vers. 8. Their horses also are swifter then the Leopards, and are more fierce then the woolues in the euening: and their hors∣men are many: and their horsinen shall come from farre: they shall flie as the Eagle hasting to meate. The descriptiō of the power of the Chaldeans.THe description of the might and power of the Chaldeans fol∣loweth: for it is sayd, Their horsmē shalbe most swift & strong, as the Leopard. The Chaldeans therefore shall be most rauenous souldiers, the which for hope of praye & bootie, like vnto woolues in the euening, shall cast themselues into any dangers. Briefly, their horses, and their horsemen like vnto Eagles, hasting vnto their pray, shall flie into all places, so that nothing can escape them. Thus there is no helpe nor refuge against God punishing and cha∣stising vs. Vers. 9. They come all to spoyle: before their faces shall be an East winde, and they shall gather the captiuitie, as the sand. Why the Chal∣deans are com∣pared vnto wild beasts.THe applying or rather the explication or opening of the simi∣litude, why the Chaldeans are compared vnto wilde beast. Be∣cause that all this nation, to wit, of the Chaldeans shall come with purpose to rob and steale, and so consquently shall be most gree∣dy and rauenous, and most swift, wherein also is or lieth a conforma∣tion of the power of the Chaldeans. For those souldiers are wont to be most stout and valiant and eager, whom the hope of praye and bootie pricketh forward. For when as once they haue filled their budget, as it is in the prouerb, then afterward they waxe more fearefull. The purpose of our Autor here by is to shew, that like as this souldier hauing lost al his vi∣ctuals & goods gotten before with great toile becometh more eager vpon a new pray: so shall the Chal∣deans in hope of the spoyle & booty most gree dilie and fierce∣ly set vpon the Iewes. Horatius lib. 2.Epistolar. Epistola secunda. Luculli miles collecta viatica multis Aerumnis, lassus dum noctu stertit, ad assem Perdiderat: post hoc vehemens lupus & sibi, & hosti Iratus pariter, ieiunis dentibus acer Praesidium regale loco deiecit, vt aiunt, Summe munito, & multarum diuitererum. In homely meeter thus: The goods Lucullus souldier Collected had with toyle and payne, While weary snorting he doth lie
By night, he looseth all agayne. Thence forth becomming greedie woolfe, All angry with himselfe, and foe, with hungry teeth sharpe set on meate To get more pray he ginnes to goe. And eager bent with courage fell A kindly forte he throwes to ground, In place most strong, as men doe say, Which with great riches did abound. Such therefore shall the Chaldeans be. For they shall come vn∣to the praye and offering of force and violence for the same, that nothing shall be more bolde,The looke of the Chaldeans like vnto the East winde. stoute, and couragious then they. Wherefore they shall easily ouercome the Iewes. Further, this also is a cause of the former comparison, for that their faces or looke shall be as the East winde, the which namely dryeth vp all things, and causeth diseases and sicknes, bringeth barrennes, and parcheth and scorcheth the corne ready to be reaped Agg. 1. So shall the Chaldeans spoyle and consume al the goods of the Iewes: they shal waste and spend their wealth and riches the which long since they had gathered, and haue lying by them in a readines: and for feare and trembling shall bring diseases vpon the Iewes, that they shall not be able to stand against them. They shall cary away as many captiues as they can.Another effect, They shall gather the captiuitie as the sand, that is to say, they shall carrie away as many Captiues as they can. Nei∣ther shal they be satisfied with the gaine the which they shal make thereby. So the Sprniards, when as they had taken the Iland Hi∣spaniola ie the Indies within a few moneths they rid it cleane of the citizens and inhabitants,The cruelty of the Spaniards. who first possessed it, whilest they gather vnto themselues Captiues and slaues.The Turkes. So the Turkes at this day do carrie away from the Christian countryes neere vnto them, and o∣thers, innumerable booties and prayes, insomuch that in this our age out of one poore Hungarie they haue often carried away a∣bout a fifteen thousand captiues at a time, to wit, so cruel, couetous, and merciles are they, and like vnto these Chaldeans, whom God of his great mercy through Christ turne from the neckes of his Church. Amen.
Vers. 10. And they shall mocke the Kings: and the Princes shall bee as a scorne vnto them: they shall deride euery strong hold: for they shall gather dust, and take it. The figure Hy∣pophora, what it is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.THis is an Hypophora, or the answering of an obiection, the which might be made, least any force of men, or any munition and for∣tifying of places might seeme to bee able to let, or keepe backe the assault of the Chaldeans. For they shall mocke all Kings, and make no account of them: they shall quickly take the most strong pla∣ces, making rampires and casting trenches about it. In the which selfe same thing there lyeth a proofe both of their easie executing of things: and also of the hurlie burlie and trouble of the whole world, and likewise of the victorie which the Chaldeans should haue. See Ierem. cap. 25. Ezech. 25. Vers. 11. Then shall they take a courage, and transgresse, and doe wic∣kedly, imputing this their power vnto their God. An amplifica∣tiō of the great successe of the Chaldeans.AN amplification of the great happines and successe of the Chal∣deans. For they themselues shall be in such sort puffed vp there∣withal, that they will not now take themselues for any mortall mē, but for gods, depend vpon their owne selues, and with great vn∣thankfulnes towards God, and through the most shameful sinne of iodlatrie worship their owne strength, so farre doubtles shall they beled with a spirit of so strong giddines, and in such sort shall they forget their mans nature, as if they were gods, and not men. Vers. 12. Art not thou of olde, O Lord my God, mine holie one? we shall not dye: O Lord, thou hast ordained them for iudgement, and O God, thou hast established them for correction. A strong rea∣son for the com∣fort of the god∣lie.A Most strong reason for their comfort. For the Prophet from the euerlastingnes and constancie of God, the certaintie of his a∣doption, the holines of God, and his care for those that are his, in such great trouble of all things, doth promise that the helpe & ayde of God shall bee present both with himselfe, and also with all the godlie, and therewithall doth cheere and comfort himselfe. Final∣lie, in so great stirre and barboyle of the world, he teacheth that there shall be one condition or estate of the godlie, and another of
the vngodlie, in as much as the Chaldeans are ordained of God on∣ly for the chastising of the godly, and haue appointed vnto them by God a stinted measure and rate of punishing them, the which in this place he calleth iudgement. Vers. 13. Thou art of pure eyes, and canst not see euill: thou canst not behold wickednesse: wherefore doest thou looke vpon the transgres∣sors, and holdest thy tongue, when the wicked deuoureth the man that is more righteous then he? The asking of a question.THe asking of a question, wherein according vnto iudgement darkned with the cloudes of the flesh, that same iustice of God, whereby he hateth all wickednesse, seemeth to bee shuffled with his decree,A great com∣bat of the Pro∣phet. and falling out of the former vision. This was a great combat, the which the Prophet felt in his minde, when as he held it for a most certain and assured foundation and ground, That God did not fauour the vngodly, and yet he sawe these Chaldeans, vnto whom so great happines or good successe against all nations of the world, and especially against the people of God, was promised by God himselfe,The blasphe∣mous disputa∣tions of some Philosophers. The cōplaints of Pomperus. The answer of Cratippus. to be most cruell, and worse then other men. From hence haue sprung those blasphemous disputations of the Philoso∣phers, Whether the world were gouerned by God his prouidence: from hence these complants of Pompeius ouerthrowne by Caesar in the Pharsalian battaile, That God fauoured the vniust cause, as Plutarch reporteth in his life. But the answer of Cratippus was true, That the Common wealth of the Romanes had neede of these pu∣nishments, because of his wickednesse, and therefore that this alte∣ration & change of things fell out at Rome by God his prouidence. And that his decree of GOD, as a thing too high for vs to deale with, must bee left vnto God himselfe. And from hence also came those opinions of the Platnonists,The Platonists. That so straunge alterations and changes of things did fall out by reason of the matter, whereof hu∣mane things do consist, the which daily desireth new formes. From hence is the accusation of the gods Homer. lib. 1. Odyss. Vers. 14. And makest men as the fishers of the sea, and as the cree∣ping things, that haue no ruler ouer them? Vers. 15. They take vp all with the angle: they catch it in their net, and gather it in their yarne, whereof they reioyce and are glad. A cause why the Prophet is thus troubled within himself.THe rendring of a reason. For the Prophet sheweth the cause why he is so greatly moued within himselfe. And this was first,
for that so many and so innumerable nations,1. For that so ma∣ny nations shal be subiect vnto the King of Babylon. were so easilie layd o∣pen as a pray, and for a fishing vnto the people & King of the Chal∣deans, in such sort as he described before, namely, as if the mind and purpose of God were to glut him only, and to satisfie him alone, e∣uen with the losse and destruction of so many nations. The cause hereof is alleaged Iere. 27. ver. 5.6. in these words, I haue made the earth, the man, and the beast that are vpon the ground by my great power, and by my oustretched arme, and haue giuen it vnto whom it pleased me. But now I haue giuen all these lands into the hand of Ne∣buchadnezzar the king of Babel my seruant, and the beasts of the field haue I also giuen him to serue him. Vers. 16. Therefore they sacrifice vnto their net, and burne incense vnto their yarne, because by them their portion is fat, and their meate plenteous. 2. For his blas∣phemie & vn∣thankefulnes vnto God.SEcondly, for that this selfe same King of the Chaldeans, vnto whom God giueth so great things, shall be both blasphermous a∣gainst God himselfe, and also most vnthankful vnto him. For he shall ascribe or giue the praise of this his so great felicitie or happi∣nes vnto his owne selfe, as one that no doubt despiseth all soue∣raigtie and maiestie of God: and shall sacrifice vnto his owne net or arme, as whereby alone he shal get vnto himselfe so great a Mo∣narchie or Empire. This prophesie is more at large declared & layd open Dan. 4. ver. 26.27. where the proude King Nebuchadnezzar most blasphemously vaunteth himself against God, & giueth vnto himselfe the whole praise of his strength and power, and maiestie, and glorie, &c. The word be these: At the end of twelue moneths, he walked in the royall palace of Babel. And the King spake and sayd, is not this great Babel, that I haue built for the house of the kingdome by the might of my power, and for the honour of my maiestie? Vers. 17. Shall they therefore stretch out their net, and not spare con∣tinually to slay the nations? An interro ga∣tion of the pro∣phet comfor∣ting the godlie, and mocking the Chaldeans.AN interrogation or asking of a question, as it were a conclusiō, wherewith the Prophet doth both comfort the godly, and also mocketh the Chaldeans. He comforteth the godly, in that he shew∣eth that this barbarous crueltie of the Chaldeans. He comforteth the godly, in that he shew∣eth that this barbarous cruelties of the Chaldeans shall not be per∣petuall, or last for euer. He mocketh the Chaldeans, because he
threatneth that there shall at last bee an end of their crueltie and power. He doth indeed aske a question of the thing, the which not∣withstanding he doth not thinke shall be, but this kind of phrase or speaking carrieth a greater emphasis, vehemencie or force with it, then a direct or plaine and simple conclusion. CAP. 2. Vers. 1. I will stand vpon my watch, and set me vpon the towre, & will looke and see what he would say vnto me, and what I shall answer to him that rebuketh me. The second Ser∣mon of Haba∣cuck agreeing with the for∣mer in matter, but differing in time.THis Chapter containeth another Sermon of Habacuck, in re∣spect of argument or matter agreeing, I confesse, with the for∣mer, but the which notwithstanding seemeth both to haue been made, and also shewed by God a long time after the former, name∣ly, after that the Prophet fastening both his minde and also his eyes vpon the miserie described before, had prayed vnto God, and re∣quired some matter to comfort the godly with all. The which at the length was offered vnto him by God. For in regard of the great faithfulnes of God his prouidence, and care for those that are his, & for the state of this whole world, the Prophet hoped that there was by God prepared some comfort for the godly, albeit that he sawe before nothing but confusion, or things in his iudgement hudled vp together farre out of square and order. And this Sermon hath two parts,Two parts of this Sermon. namely, a reason of the vision shewed vnto the Prophet: and a reporting and declaration of the same,1. A reason of the vision shewed the Prophet. the which partly com∣forteth the godly, and partly sheweth the destruction of the Chal∣deans, and the causes of the same. 2. A declaration of the same. The first part of this Sermon shewing the re∣couerie of the Prophet from his former doubting, and his wayting for a more louing vision.As for this first verse, it is the first part of this Sermon, wherein the Prophet teacheth, by what meanes and when there was shewed vnto him by God a more louing vision. And first of all he telleth, that at the length he tooke heart, and recouered himselfe from out of so great an encombrance, and dispute, or complaining against God, the which condemning, he calleth a reprehension or reproof and rebuke made of himselfe, and with most assured confidence or trust hoped for the peculiar and especiall care of God concerning those that are his, and that he wayted a long time for another vision from God, whereby the former might be mitigated or eased.
Vers. 2. And the Lord answered me, and sayd, write the vision, and make it plaine vpon tables, that he may run that readeth it. Another vision shewed the pro∣phet, and com∣manded to bee written so plainly, that e∣uery one might reade it.AFterward, and in the second place he telleth that at length there was another vision shewed vnto him by God, wherin the Lord answereth all the former doubtings, and commanded expresly the same to be written, and drawne in great letters, and to be set foorth openly, that it might bee read of euery man, as he passed by, to wit, for the comfort of the godly, and for the defence of his iustice. Vers. 3. For the vision is yet for an appoynted time, but at the last it shall speake, and not lye: though it tarie, waite: for it shall surely come, and shall not stay. The second part of this Sermon, con∣taining a ge∣nerall comfort for the godlie.THe second part of this Sermon, wherein first is promised a ge∣nerall comfort of the godly, that they shall not want Prophets, whose prophesyings and comforts, shewing especially that the same Christ shall come, albeit they shall not forthwith and by and by bee fulfilled, yet shall they at the last haue an ende, and wished accomplishment: and so he teacheth that the godly are not to saint, nor to quaile, because of the delay or staying of the same. For as it is Hebr. 10. ver. 37. Yet a very little while, and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarie. Vers. 4. Behold, he that lifteth vp himfelfe, his minde is not vpright in him; but the iust shall liue by his faith. An admonitiō for the godlie.AN answering of an obiection, or an admonition or warning. For he warneth vs, that we deceiue not our selues because of the deferring of the fulfilling of God his prophesies. For they, which by faith shall not lay hold of those promises of God, will waxe the more proude, and because of this delay will carrie mindes both the more lifted vp against God himselfe, and also the more iniurious or wrongfull against men the seruants of GOD. Through which pride and vnstayednes and vnrulines of minde, they shall not only displease God, but also in the end shall run into destruction, because these is not in them that same vprightnes and stayednes, whereupon men ought to rest and leane before God, to wit, a minde and conscience. But those which feare GOD,
who through a true and sure faith shall waite for the promises of God, that especiallie of Christ to come, the foundation & ground of the rest, and shall relie vpon him as an hold and fort that can∣not be wonne, their life, estate, and saluation shall alwaies stand in a safe and sure place and shall be preserued, not onely that of the bodie, but much rather of the minde or soule: so that this (to liue) in this place must truly be vnderstood of the perpetuall and euer∣lasting life of the iust according vnto the meaning of the Prophet, and the holy Ghost himselfe so expounding it, Rom. 1. ver. 17. Hebr. 10. ver. 38. A particular comfort for the godlie. Vers. 5. Yea, in deed proud man is as he that transgresseth by wine: therefore shall he not iudure, because he hath enlarged his desire as the hell, and is as death, and cannot be satisfied, but ga∣threreth vnto him all nations, and heapeth vnto him all people. NOw followeth a speciall or particular comfort for the godly, the which appertaineth vnto the prophesie before going con∣cerning the happines and pride of the Chaldeans. For he applieth vnto them the sentence immediatly before, to wit, as touching the ouerthrowing and destruction of those which are of a loftie and proude minde, and that by way of comparison from the les∣ser vnto the greater, as thus: If those shall fall, which shall not be∣leeue the word of God, how much more shall they be rooted out, and shall not remaine, who being drowned in all lewdnes, as if they were drunken with wine, doe offend both against God and men through outragious pride, endles, crueltie against al men, vn∣satiable or vnfilable couetousnes, and desire of ruling ouer all persons? All which vices he shewed in the Chapter before to be in the Chaldeans. Vers. 6. Shall not all these take vp a parable against him, and a taunting prouerb against him, & say, Ho, he that increaseth that, which is not his? how long? and hee that ladeth himselfe with thicke clay? An amplifica∣tion of the iudgement of God against the Chaldeans.AN amplification of this iudgement of God against the Chal∣deans by the bitter taunt of the nations in subiection vnto them, and by their most tart and arp quip against them so af∣flicted or punished by God. For first of all, all men shall acknow∣ledge
their punishment to be iust, and in the very middest of their afflictions or punishments shall reprochfullie cast into their teeth their couetousnes, and their vaine carke and care in gathering to∣gether of gold that is the clay of the earth. See what is written concerning this matter of bringing downe the pride of these Ba∣bylonians, and laying their honor in the dust, Isai cap. 13. ver. 9, 10 11. Behold, the day of the Lord, commeth, cruell, with wrath, & fierce anger, to lay the land waste, and he shall destroy the sinners out of it. For the Starres of Heauen and the Planets thereof shall not giue their light: the Sunne shall be darkened in his going forth, and the Moone shall not cause her light to shine. And I will visite the wickednes vpon the world, and their iniquitie vpon the wicked, and I will cause the ar∣rogancie of the proude to cease, and will cast downe the pride of ty∣rants. Againe, cap. 14. ver. 9, 10, 11, 12. There is yet more liuelie described the ignominious and foule reprochfull fall of the King of Babylon, and how hee is derided and scorned in regard of the same, after this maner: Hell beneath is moued for thee, to meete thee at thy comming, raysing vp the dead for thee, euen all the Princes of the earth, and hath raysed from their thrones all the kings of the na∣tions. All they shall crie, and say vnto thee, art thou become weake al∣so, as we? Art thou become like vnto vs? Thy pompe is brought down to the graue, and the sound of thy viols: the worme is spred vnder thee, and the wormes couer thee. How art thou fallen from Heauen, O Lucifer, sonne of the morning? and cut downe to the ground, which diddest cast lots vpon the nations? &c. Vers. 7. Shall they not rise vp suddainelie, that shall bite thee? and awake, that shall stirre thee? and thou shalt be their praye? The Chaldeans that haue rob∣bed others, shall themselues bee spoiled by the Medes.AGaine the enemies, which shall rise vp against them, shall not but once, or lightlie vexe them, but continuallie, and most willingly and desirouslie. Last of all, these selfe same Chaldeans the theeues and robbers of the world, shall become a praye and bootie vnto others. The which the very maner of speaking of the Prophet by way of interrogation or asking of a question dooth shew, shall come to passe both out of hand, and also with an vn∣doubted issue. Now these enemies which hee here speaketh of, were the Medes, who destroyed and put downe the Empire of the Chaldeans, as Isai teacheth in these words cap. 13. ver. 17, 18, 19. &c. Behold, I will stirre vp the Medes against them, which shall
not regard siluer, nor be desirous of gold. With bowes also they de∣stroy the children, and shall haue no compassion on the fruite of the wombe, and their eyes shall not spare the children. And Babel the glo∣rie of the kingdomes, the bewtie and pride of the Chaldeans, shall bee as the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorah, &c. Vers. 8. Because thou hast spoyled many nations, all the remnant of the people shall spoyle thee, because of mens bloud, and for the wrong done in the land, in the citie, & vnto all that dwell therein. A reason why the Chaldeans should be so spoiled.THe rendring of a reason for the robbing and spoyling of the Chaldeans by others, wherein also is an answering of an obiec∣tion, least God might seem too bitter in punishing the Chaldeans so sharplie. For it is meet, that they, which haue robbed others, should become also a pray themselues: who themselues had been cruell, should also tast of the same violence. And those chiefelie, which haue vsed these sins against all mankinde, and not against one or two nations onelie, but against all nations: and especiallie against a citie dedicated vnto God, which thing the Chaldeans haue done. Vers. 9. Ho, hee that coueteth an euill couetousnes vnto his house, that he may set his nest on hie, to escape from the power of euill. An exhortati∣on to be admo∣nished by these iudgements of God.AN exhortation, whereby the Prophet ascendeth or goeth vp from the particular vnto the generall by way of a certaine di∣gression or going aside from the matter, that all men by these iudgements of God may learne to bee wise, and take heede vnto themselues. He therefore threatneth destruction vnto all those, the which seeke riches and power by euill and vniust meanes: the which two things he sheweth to be most vntrustie holdes of secu∣ritie and carelesnes, and a most deceitfull harbour in calamities or troubles, as which namely are accursed of God, howsoeuer the vaine world thinke otherwise, and doe trust in them. Vers. 10. Thou hast consulted shame to thine owne house, by de∣stroying many people, and hast sinned against thine owne soule. A continuing of the former exhortation.A Continuing of the said generall most profitable exhortation, whereby he partlie amplifieth the wickednes of these both co∣uetous,
and also cruell persons, partly taketh away all vaine hope in those their riches and trust in their might and power. For contrarie vnto the opinion and iudgement of them, they get not vnto themselues and their families honor and commendation by such welth and power, but shame and reproch. By destroying of others, they worke not securitie or saftie vnto themselues for time to come, but they commit the greater sinne, the which in the end shall make against themselues, and turne vnto their own destruction. Vers. 11. For the stone shall crie out of the wall, and the beame out of the timber shall answer it. A confirmatiō of the former threatning by the figure Hy∣perbole, which is a speech ex∣ceeding the truth, not vnto the mainte∣nance of a lye, but to make that to be be∣leeued, which seemeth almost incredible. An amplifica∣tion teaching that these threatnings concerne in ge∣nerall all guil∣tie persons in those crimes, whosoeuer.A Confirmation of the former threatning, by an Hyperbole, or excessiue kinde of speech beyond and aboue the truth. For he saith, howsoeuer those which haue susteined and receiued wrong, bee still, and hold their peace, yet doe the dum rafters and timber beames, and the riches vninstlie horded and heaped vp, complaine of so great iniurie or wrong done vnto them, and doe require and aske vengeance at the hands of God against these sinnes. Ver. 12. Woe vnto him that buildeth a towne with bloud, and erec∣teth a citie by iniquitie. AN amplification, whereby he teacheth, that the same iudge∣ment of God doth appertaine and is threatned vnto couetous and cruell men, not onlie such as are priuat persons, but also vnto whole common wealthes, & Princes in like maner, yea & more∣ouer vnto the Kings and Emperours themselues. Vers. 13. Behold, is it not of the Lord of hostes, that the people shall labour in the very fire? the people shall euen wearie themselues for very vanitie. What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21.THis is an Hypophora, or answering of an obiection, whereby he taketh away from them all hope of escaping, the which they conceiued as appeareth vers. 9. before. First for that this venge∣ance and punishment shall be from God, who is the rule ouer all things, and whose will nothings can let nor hinder, yea, and it shall be most assuredly, and speedilie. And therefore hee said, Behold
Furthermore, for that howsoeuer they doe flee vnto their idols, either forging new, or furbishing vp againe the old, yet shall they wearie themselues in vaine, and shall not for all this escape. Vers. 14. For the earth shall bee filled with the knowledge of the glorie of the Lord, as the waters couer the sea. A reason of the former the former iudgement.THe rendring of a reason, taken from the decree of God him∣selfe. For God will haue himselfe, and his glorie and power thus acknowledged of the world, in stead of this that he was be∣fore in such sort contemned or despised of it. And the Prophet looking especiallie into the destruction of the monarchie or Em∣pire of Babylon, the which hee had foretold in this selfe same chapter, teacheth that then the iudgements of God shall euery where be scattered and spread so far a broad, that they shall in such sort couer the whole earth, as the waters doe the chanell of the sea. And so in this place he returneth againe vnto the Chal∣deans, whom by meanes of the former digression or turning a∣side from the matter, he had left. Vers. 15. Woe vnto him that giueth his neighbour drinke: thou ioy∣nest thine heate, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayst see their priuities. An other cause of the destruc∣tion of the Chaldeans.REturning vnto the Chaldeans, he alleadgeth another cause of their destruction besides their couetousnes & cruelty, name∣ly their exercrable or accursed treachery, because that vnder a craf∣ty counterfeiting of friendship, and a pretence or colour of helpe, learning out the weakenesse of their conferderates, they inuadedor set vpon their goods & kingdomes. The which thing being then spoken of the nation of the Chaldeans, appertayneth vnto all men, yea priuate persons, which are trothles, and deceiuing o∣thers with counterfeiting of friendship. But this meanes did the Romanes afterwardes increase and inlarge their Empire. Vers. 16. Thou art filled with shame for glorie: drinke thou also, and be naked: the cup of the Lords right hand shall bee turned vnto thee,It is meete the Chaldeans be serued, as they haue serued o∣thers. and shamefull spuing shall be for thy glorie. BY the making of euery member of this verse to fit and answer
God against the Chaldeans, to wit, that it is meete that they bee handled by God after the same maner, and that they drink round∣lie of the same cup, the which they themselues had cruellie and treacherouslie mingled for others: that they be shamefullie made naked, as they haue made others naked. Finallie, that they feele at the last, ignominie or reproch greater, and more plentifull then that their cruell glorie, and that they drinke of this cup of reproch and shame, euen vntill they spue againe, or vnto the very dregges. Vers. 17. For the crueltie of Lebanon shall couer thee: so shall the spoyle of the beastes, which made them afraid, because of mens blood, and for the wrong done in the land, in the citie, and vnto al that dwell therein. THe fourth cause,The fourth cause of the de∣struction of the Chaldeans. What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5 ver. 21. and the same the chiefe cause of the destructi∣on of the Chaldeans, namely their crueltie against the people of God, and the spoyling of all Iewrie (the which by the figure Synecdoche is signified vnder the name of Libanon) as which namelie was an earnest, or pledge of the promise of God: and fi∣nallie, the sacking and ouerthrowing of the holy citie, done by them most cruellie, and mercileslie Isai. 47. Vers. 18. What profiteth the image? for the maker thereof hath made it an image, and a teacher of lyes, though hee that made it, trust therein, when he maketh dumme idols? The Idols shall not bee able to help the Chal∣deans, for these causes.THis is an answering of an obiection, least the Chaldeans might think to escape through the help of their idols and gods. For he teacheth that the idols shall neither be able to defend, nor help their worshippers, the which thing hee proueth by the nature of the thing it selfe, that is, of the idols, the which he describeth by these foure epithets or titles. First, because they are carued wood,1. Because they are carued wood. and so consequentlie the work of mens hands. Secondly, because they remaine cast or molten images. And therefore haue not by this workmanship of mā attained any diuine nature, or new force.2. Because they remaine mol∣ten images. Thirdly, for that they teach lyes and false things. And therefore Idolators are foulie deceiued, when as they imagine them to bee gods, and diuine powers. Fourthly, because such things are vaine, and in themselues dumme and dead.3 Because they teach lyes. And therefore they cannot doe anything, nor answer vnto the prayers of them that pray vnto
them Isa. 40. and 44. ver. 10. Who hath made a God, or molten an image, that is profitable for nothing? And cap. 46. Vers. 19. Woe vnto him that saith to the wood, awake, and to the dumbe stone, rise vp, it shall teach thee: behold, it is layde ouer with gold and siluer, and there is no breath in it. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer refutation of the Chalde∣ans.AN amplification of the former refutation or proouing of idols to bee vaine, taken both from the curse pronounced against those which worship idols: and also from the vnabilitie and vani∣tie of the idols themselues, the which he liuelie setteth forth mat∣ching together by the way of contraries the vowes and prayers of idolators, with the euent or issue and falling out of things it selfe, and the nature of Idols. For they are deafe and dumbe, and alto∣gether dead things, how so euer they be laide ouer with golde or siluer. Therefore they can heare no man, nor help any man. Vers. 20. But the Lord is in his holie temple: let all the earth keepe silence before him. A contrarietie betweene the true God and Idols.A Contrarietie betweene the true God, and idols. First, least the godly which relie and staye vpon God, should thinke them∣selues to bee no more secure, or without danger, then the Idola∣tors. Secondly, that the very profane or wicked themselues, and the heathen might knowe assuredly that the former iudgements should be or come to passe, because God doth denounce or threa∣ten them, vnto whome the whole world obeyeth, and submitteth it selfe with reuerence and silence. Finallie, whose maiestie and power did manifestlie shine forth in that his Temple, people, and worship and seruice. For vnder a thing at that time knowne very well vnto al nations, namely that diuine Temple, hee doth by the figure Synecdoche comprehend and set forth the endles maiestie of God, and the true proofe of his diuinitie. By which word hee comprehendeth both the adoption of the people of the Iewes, & also the worship of God seuered from the idolatries of other na∣tions: and moreouer all those infinite benefites which flowed from them both, whereby God manifestlie shewed himselfe vnto the whole world, that he was bth the true God, and also almigh∣tie, and that the sayd worship onely, and temple were acceptable vnto him.
CAP. 3. An excellent prayer for the vse of the Church, and e∣uerie one of the faithfull.THis chapter hath a notable and excellent prayer deliuered and vttered by the Prophet of God for the vse of the whole church, and euery one of the faithfull, wherewith they might both stay vp and comfort themselues in the midst of those afflictions or trou∣bles, meditating or thinking vpon the poynts contained in this prayer: and also begge saluation or deliuerance and helpe at the hands of God for his Church, staying vpon those foundations and groūds, which they ought. Finally, that the godly euen in the midst of the ruine and fall of the whole world, might confirme, and ex∣ercise their faith touching the promises of God,Three parts of this prayer. the spirit of God helping their infirmities, as it is Rom. 8. ver. 26. Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmities, &c. for he teacheth them to pray.1. He prayeth for helpe. The frame and disposition of this prayer hath three poynts. For first the Prophet prayeth for helpe at the hand of God. Secondly, he layeth downe the foundations or grounds of this his request and hope.2. The grounds of this prayer. Thirdly, he sheweth that he shall be heard of God. The stile or in∣ditement of this prayer was in meeter or verse, and not in prose.3. He hopeth to be heard. Schiggionoth. Vers. 1. A prayer of Habacuck for the ignorances. The drift of the whole chap∣ter contained in this verse.IN this verse the whole scope and drift of this chapter is shewed. For it containeth an humble prayer vnto God, and proceeding from a true faith, and vttered by Habacuck himselfe, and not by e∣uery one of the faithfull, albeit euery faithfull ought to know, after what maner God is to be prayed vnto. Finally, the musicall instru∣ment is added also, whereon this spirituall meditation or prayer was to be sung: which was an order and maner appoynted of God himselfe vnto the Church of that time, of which kind of instrument or tune, and the like, to sing Psalmes withall and vpon, you may see Psal. 7. ver. 1. and hereafter in this chapter ver. 19. in the end. Vers. 2. O Lord, I haue heard thy voyce, and was afrayd: O Lord, re∣uiue thy worke in the midst of the people, in the midst of the yeares make it knowne: in wrath remember mercie. The first part of this prayer containing the summe of the request of the Prophet, and also a cause of the same, for that,THe first part of this prayer, the which containeth both the summe of his request, to wit, that God in that same foreshewed
garboyle and trouble, & fearfull miserie of the whole world, would haue mercie and compassion on his faithfull: and he also setteth downe a reason, why this is meet to be done. First, because they are his worke. Secondly, because such is the nature of God, that he can neuer forget his mercie toward those that are his, no not then, whē as he is angrie with them.1. They are his worke. For in him, as Iames sayth, cap. 2. ver. 13. Mercie reioyceth against iudgement. And as the Psalmist witnesseth Psalm. 30. ver. 5. God indureth but a while in his anger: but in his fa∣uour is life:2. He cannot for∣get his mercie toward them. weeping may abide at euening, but ioy commeth in the mor∣ning. And Psal. 89. ver. 31.32.33. If they breake my statutes, & keepe not my commandements: then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquitie with strokes. Yet my louing kindnes will I not take from him, neither will I falsifie my trueth. Thirdly, for that the Church of God as yet is in her middle age,3. The Church is not yet come to her full age & growth. and as it were in her youth: and is not yet come vnto the end and terme of her life and continuance, of the which, and against the which the Church com∣plaineth and prayeth Psal. 102. ver. 23.24. in these words: He aba∣ted my strength in the way, and shortned my dayes. And I sayd, O my God, take me not away in the midst of my dayes: thy yeares indure from generation to generation. And the Prophet is moued now especial∣lie to pray for this, because that he is very greatly troubled, trem∣bleth, and feareth that there shall bee a destruction euen of the Church it selfe, by reason of the former vision which was shewed him. Vers. 3. God commeth from Teman, and the holy one from mount Pa∣ran, Selah. His glorie couereth the heauens, and the earth is full of his praise. Two grounds of this prayer. The power of God, and his loue to those that are his.THe second part of this praier, wherein he declareth two grounds of his praier, namely, the power of God, and his bounteousnes or good will toward those that are his ver. 13. So Psalm. 61. ver. 7. where the Prophet prayeth for to be setled firmly in his kingdome, vpon trust in God his mercie and faithfulnes in his promises: He shall dwell before God for euer: prepare mercie and faithfulnes, th they may preserue him. To this effect is a good part of the 89 Psalm spent in magnifying and extolling the bounteousnes, loue  goodnes of God towards his elect in Christ, that is, his Ch And as concerning the power of God, and the same infi endle, and farre aboue the strength of all things, he setteth down
the consideration and proofes thereof, for that the godlie could not otherwise be confirmed or strengthened against so great an heape of calamities or troubles and miseries at hand, but by the same ear∣nest beholding and looking vpon the endles power of God. Fur∣ther, he alleageth such proofes, which are not fained after the ma∣ner of Poets, but euen indeed haue alreadie fallen out for the ayde and vse of his Church, and such as in the Scripture are often rehear∣ed, as for example, Psal. 18. and 77. Such namely as was his power npublishing or giuing of the law, and when as he shewed himselfe in Mount Sinai, and when as he appeared in the wildernesse of Pa∣an, and in Mount Theman of Arabia. Vers. 4. And his brightnes was as the light: he had hornes comming out of his hands, and there was the hiding of his power. THe figure Hypotypôsis, whereby not onely the thing, that is,Hypotypôsis, what this fi∣gure is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. the maiestie of God is liuely layd open as it were to bee seene with e eyes, but also his power is proued to be endles, and to bee fea∣ed of all things. And this place is to bee conferred or compared  that of Exodus cap. 19. ver. 16. and the verses following with the Psal. 18.77. and Hebr. 12. ver. 18. and certaine other there fol∣lowing. First of all the maiestie and power of God is described by the brightnes,The maiestie and power of God described by his bright∣nes. the which could not bee beheld of the eyes of any man. And the beames shining out of this brightnes are called the rns of his hands, because that they did stretch out, and spread a∣brode themselues into sundrie parts, as Moses also is sayd to haue had hornes by reason of the brightnes of his countenance, the which was so great, that the children of Israel together with Aaron ere afrayd to come neere him, as it is Exod. 34. ver. 30. The hornes are sayd to come forth out of his hands, not out of his face, that if the maiestie and brightnes of the hands of God cannot be abidden of  we should vnderstand that much lesse could his face be of vs be holden. Finally, this selfe same so great brightnes is sayd to haue n, not the very essence of God, but only a vaile, sacrament, and dow of his power, like as when he shewed himselfe vnto Moses  33. ver. 22. he doth put a couer ouer him, and doth not let him  whole glorie, but a certaine darke shewe of the same. And Psal.  11. it is sayd, that he made darknes his secret place, and his pa∣  about him eue  of aters  loudes of the ayre.  104. ver. 2. pan likewise sayd of God, that he couereth him∣selfe
with light, as with a garment, and spreadeth the heauens like a curtaine. Conferre this place with that of 1. King. cap. 19. ver. 11. and certaine others there following, where is set forth the maner of God his shewing himselfe in some measure vnto the Prophet Elijah, by a strong winde, earthquake, fire, and a soft still voyce, that thereby we may easily conclude, that the thing it selfe, that is, the essence & power of God, is a thing incomprehensible, or which cannot bee comprehended and conceiued. For God dwelleth in the light that none can attaine vnto, as Paul speaketh 1. Tim. 6. ver. 16. Vers. 5. Before him went the pestilence, and burning coales went forth before his feete. The maiestie of God descri∣bed by certaine fearfull effects.HEre the Prophet sheweth the selfe same thing by certaine ef∣fects, which are to be feared of al mankind, the which notwith∣standing are but as it were the only prints of the feete of God, or as it were certaine apparitors or purseuants which stand before God. And these effects are workes of God being angrie, like vnto those which the Prophet described before. Two of them are reckoned vp in this place, namely, the pestilence, and sharpe and burning dis∣eases: also blasting of corne. So Numb. 14. ver. 12. God threatneth to smite them with the pestilence. And Deut. 28. with other strange diseases. Wherefore he seemeth to allude, or haue resemblance vnto those kinds of sicknesses, where with God destroyed both his owne people in the wildernesse: and also the Chanaanites, by little and little after the warres of Iosua. Vers. 6. He stood and measured the earth: he beheld, and dissolued the nations, and the euerlasting mountaines were broken, and the ancient hils did bowe: his wayes were euerlasting. Another testi∣monie of the power of God.ANother most knowne testimonie or witnesse of the endles po∣wer of GOD, yea, and that fauouring his Church, namely, the bringing of the people of God into the promised land. In the which God sheweth,  first, that the same was done by his decree, & by his sentence as it were of a Iudge.  Secondly, that the same was done by that authoritie and power, whereby he can giue all the lands and countries of this world vnto whom he will.  Further∣more, by that strength, where with euen by his only looke be feared the hearts of the Chanaanites, a giantlike nation, that they did
were melt and vanish away: and also strooke the mountaines, the which from the beginning of the world had stood vnmoueable. Lastly, with that wisedome, whereby the issues and falling out of al things are both very well knowne vnto him, and also most easie, because they are in his power. Vers. 7. For his iniquitie I saw the tents of Cushan, and the curtaines of the land of Midian did tremble. The former te∣stimonie am∣plified by the adioynes.HE amplifieth the former testimonie by the adioynts, the which now maketh very much for the comforting of the godly. For he sheweth that both the Arabians themselues, and also the Madia∣nites (which people doe liue in tents, curtaines, and shelters, and are fearfull vnto their borderers) were then so afrighted, that they durst no where to shewe their faces, and were not to be seene, as if they had bin brought to nothing: but ran away, and trembled for feare in the midst of their curtaines and tents. Vers. 8 Was the Lord angrie against the riuers? or was thine anger against the flouds? or was thy wrath against the sea, that thou didst ride vpon thine horses? thy chariots brought saluation. An answering of the scoffes of the wicked, and also a comfort for the godlie.AN interrogation or asking of a question, whereby he partly meeteth with and answereth their scoffes, which denied that the former things were done for the sake of the godlie: and partly he doth the more earnestly confirme or strengthen the godlie themselues in faith, and in looking for the help of God in the midst of afflictions or troubles. They therefore which tooke away from the godlie this hope, did impute or lay it vnto other causes, both that the sea was dried vp in the passage of the people: and also that the riuer Iordan was drie in like maner: construing this to be done, because God was especiallie angrie against these waters. The Pro∣phet denieth this to be true, but answereth that so great maiestie of God appeared for the saluation or deliuerance of his Church, for the preseruing whereof he stood in the battell against the enemies, riding as it were vpon hooked or yron chariots, and not trium∣phant chariots, and fighting from his chariot.
Vers. 9. Thy bowe was manifestly reuealed, and the othes of the tribes were a sure word, Selah. Thou didst cleaue the earth with riuers. An amplifica∣tion of God his deliuerance of his people taken from the ma∣ner of his hel∣ping of them, the which he also proueth by certaine ad∣ioynts.AN amplification taken from the maner of the helpe shewed them. For God most manifestly did cast his weapons against the enemies of his Church, so that men did nothing at all doubt, but that God did openly beare fauour vnto it. The selfe same thing also he proueth by the adioynts, of the which he reckoneth vp this first. That out of the earth and rock strooken by the power of God, there did gush forth water for drinke for the people. Reade hereof Numb. 20. 1. Cor. 10. Of all which benefites he addeth the founda∣tion or ground, lest the Iewes might ascribe so great fauour of God vnto their owne vertues,1. The giuing thē water out of the rocke. namely, the promise, or word of God con∣firmed vnto the tribes, that is, the whole seed of Abraham, by oth, he sheweth to haue been the true cause of this helpe of God. Vers. 10. The mountaines sawe thee, and they trembled: the streamt of the water passed by: the deepe made a noyse, and lift vp his hand on hie. 2. A double mi∣racle.THE second adioynt vnto this deliuerance of the people, the which is a most cleere testimonie or witnesse both of the infinit or endles power of God ouer all things, and also of his mercie and fauour toward his Church, to wit, a double miracle, the which is de∣scribed by an Anthropopatheia.What Anthro∣popatheia is, see Mich. cap. 7 ver. 8. The first miracle was the trem∣bling of the earth, that is, of the mountaines, or a great earthquake there, the which was at the giuing of the law, wherwith the moun∣taine Sinai himselfe was shaken. And this is reported Exod. 19.18. And mount Sinai was all on a smoke, because the Lord came downe vpon it in sire, & the smoke thereof ascended, as the smoke of a fornace, and all the mount trembled exceedingly. Hereof also speaketh Dauid Psal. 114. ver. 4.6. The mountaines leaped like rammes, and the hilles as lambes. Ye mountaines, why leaped ye like rammes, and ye hilles as lambes? The second miracle appeared in the waters, whilest both the red sea went backe, and was dried vp at the commandement of God: and also whilest the law being giuen in Mount Sinai, there were thundrings and lightnings, and most thicke cloudes, and the noyse of a trumpet was heard in the ayre. Of the going backe and
drying vp of the sea thus it is written Exod. 14. ver. 21. And Moses stretched forth his hand vpon the sea, and the Lord caused the sea to runne backe by a strong East winde all the night, and made the sea drie land: for the waters were deuided. Hereof the Psalmist speaketh thus Psal. 114. ver. 3. The sea sawe it, and fled: Iorden was turned back. And Psal. 77. ver. 16.17. The waters sawe thee, O God, the waters saw thee, and were afrayd: yea the depths trembled. The clowdes powred out water: the heauens gaue a sound: yea, thine arrowes went abrode. Of the thunder and lightning, the thicke clowde and sound of a trumpet thus we reade Exod. 19. ver. 16. And the third day, when it was morning, there was thunders, and lightnings, and a thicke clowde vpon the mount, and the sound of the trumpet exceeding lowd, so that all the people, that was in the campe, was afrayd. Vers. 11. The Sunne and the Moone stood still in their habitation: at the light of thine arrowes they went, and at the bright shining of thy speares. THe third adioynt farre more wonderfull then the former mira∣cles, as namely, that which appeared in heauen it selfe, to wit,3. The standing still of the Sun & the Moone. in the Sunne and in the Moone, who at the commandement of God stayed their course, as it is Iosue 10. vers. 12.13. Then spake Ioshua vnto the Lord, in the day, when the Lord gaue the Ammorites before the children of Israel, and he sayd in the sight of Israel, Sunne, stay thou in Gibeon, and thou Moone in the valley of Aialon. And the Sunne abode, and the Moone stood still, vntill the people auenged them∣selues vpon their enemies (is not this written in the booke of Iasher?) so the Sunne abode in the midst of the heauen, and hasted not to go downe for a whole day. Vnto this miracle the Prophet Habacuck ioyneth another like thereunto, to wit, for that the people went safely through the desert both by day and also by night, in the light and shining both of a fierie piller giuing light vnto them in the night time, and also of a clowde going before the Israelites in the day time. This is recorded Exod 13. ver. 21. after this maner: And the Lord went before them by day in a pillar of a clowde to leade them the way, and by night in a pillar of fire to giue them light, that they might goe both by day and by night.
Vers. 12. Thou trodest downe the land in anger, and diddest thresh the heathen in displeasure. The conclusion of the former discourse of the power of God for the good of his Church.THe conclusion of the whole former meditation and narration of the power of GOD stretched out for the fauour of his church, namely, that there is no countrie or nation which the Lord cannot thresh and tread downe in his anger. And therefore that the church hath a most excellent remedie and helpe of her saluation and deliuerance out of all euils in the same infinite or endles power of God. Vers. 13. Thou wentest forth for the saluation of thy people, euen for saluation with thine anointed: thou hast wounded the head of the house of the wicked, and discoueredst the foundations vnto the necke, Selah. Another ground of this prayer & hope of the Church.A Light passing ouer vnto another matter, by the which hee de∣clareth another foundation or ground of this prayer and hope of the church, namely the singular good will of God toward it, whose foundation also, and sundrie effects alreadie indeed tri∣ed and approued, he rehearseth. First therefore he affirmeth that God appeared to haue had a loue and a care of the saluation of his church, the ground of which care is Christ, that is to say, the a∣doption or choosing of the church in Christ. Wherefore in the word Anoynted, or Christ, that same singular and free election of God touching the Iewes, and also the cause thereof, namely Christ the mediator of his church, is contained. Finallie, hee rehearseth the effects witnessing that same singular good will of God to∣ward the church, among the which this is first reckoned vp, that hee hath both wounded the head it selfe, to with Pharao, and the first borne of the wicked, who afflicted or troubled it, and also rased it vp from the very foundation, that is, with his whole army and familie. Whereof see Exod. 11. and Psal. 74. ver. 13.14. where Dauid speaketh of this matter thus: Thou diddest diuide the Sea by thy power: thou brakest the heads of the dragons (that is, the ser∣uants of Pharao) in the waters. Thou brakest the head of Leuia∣than (that is, of Pharao) in peeces, and gauest him to be meate for the people in the wildernes. This self same, because it is a singular benefit the Prophet would haue to bee sung and noted by the musitians
with a diuers tune and note, the which he signifieth by this word (Selah). Vers. 14. Thou diddest strike through with his owne staues the heads of his villages: they came out as a whirle winde to scatter me: their reioycing was as to deuoure the poore secretlie. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefit & worke of God.AN amplification of the former benefit and worke of God, in that for the fauour of his church he destroyed not only the first borne of the Egyptian families in the cities and townes, but also in the countrie: because that the countrie men themselues also, as well as the rest in the cities, ranged and raged against the peo∣ple of God with deceit and violence, and did deuoure and eate them vp with great pleasure. Therefore looke with what staffe, and with what crueltie they themselues went about to destroy the people of God, after the same maner were they againe iustlie pu∣nished by God. Vers 15. Thou diddest walke in the Sea with thine horses vpon the heape of great waters. The conclusion of this worke of God and second part of this prayer.THe conclusion of this worke of God, and second part of this prayer, whereby hee teacheth that God for the fauour of his church euen through the middest of the waters of the sea (the which for this purpose hee gathered into an heape (Exod. 14. ver. 22.) made such a way, by the which both the horses, and all the cariages of the people passed safelie, and the Lord also himselfe as a most valiant rider fought for those that were his, against their enemies. Vers. 16. When I heard, my bellie trembled: my lips shooke at the voyce: rottennes entred into my bones, and I trembled in my selfe, that I might rest in the day of trouble: for when he commeth vp vnto the people he shall destroy them. The third part of this prayer, promising help and deliue∣rance vnto the Church.THe third part of this prayer, wherein the Prophet promiseth vnto himselfe, and vnto all other the true godlie, that hee shall be heard most assuredly, in so much that hee prophesieth, that at what time the Lord shall come vp to destroy the Chaldeans, euen then the whole church among the Chaldeans themselues, and in
such calamitie or miserie shal be sure and safe. Albeit that the same at that time shall not be without great feare and trembling, both for that it shall then see so wonderfull iudgements of God: and also for that she her selfe shall be in the middest of so great dan∣ger at that time.The comman∣dement of Cy∣rus for the sa∣fetie of the Iewes. This prophesie was fulfilled, when as Cyrus ha∣uing taken Babylon, gaue commandement, that no Iewes, or any that spake the Syrian tongue, should bee hurt, as Xenophon tea∣cheth. And this feare, wherewith the church shall bee then sha∣ken, and the which the Prophet had conceiued of the reuealing vnto him of so great miserie,What the fi∣gure Hyperbo∣le is, see Haba∣cc cap. 2. v. 11. is hereby the way of an Hyperbole or excessiue speech described or set out by sundry effects, the which men being strooken into an vnmeasurable or surpassing feare do feele, and in very deed and truth haue experience and triall of, to wit the naturall heate departing and leauing the members, that the godly may throughlie conceiue the iudgements of God, and when as the thing it selfe should come to passe, might the more easilie acknowledge it to haue beene foretold long time before. Vers. 17. For the figge tree shall not florish, neither shall fruite be in the vines: the labour of the oliue shall faile, and the fieldes shall yeeld no meate: the sheepe shall be cut off from the folde, and there shall be no bullock in the stalles. The great mi∣serie of the Chaldeans.BY coniuncts or things ioyned together hee describeth how great the calamitie or miserie of the Chaldeans and enemies of the Church, shall be: for he sheweth that they shall be destitute or voyde of all things necessarie for man to liue withall, be they either the fruites of the earth, or cattell. By how much the grea∣ter was the dulnes and blockishnes of Baltasar (Dan. 5.) who in so great dearth and scarsitie of victuals,Baltasar. doth make those his feastes and banckets full of all riot and excesse the very selfe same night, in the which Babylon was taken. Vers. 18. But I will reioyce in the Lord: I will ioye in the God of my saluation. The great hap∣pines of the Church.BY the way of contraries he teacheth how great on the contra∣rie side shall bee the felicitie or happines of the church hoping and relying vpon the true God, the which being defended and preserued by him, shall at that time haue nothing else but matter
of thankesgiuing, gladnes, and reioycing. But in God, that is, of his onely bountie and goodnes she confesseth that she shall be sa∣ued, and ouerwhelmed with that ioy, wherewith the church shall reioyce, not in her selfe, nor in so great slaughter and punishment of men properlie, but for the glorie of the true God. Vers. 19. The Lorde is my strength: hee will make my feete like hindes feete, and hee will make mee to walke vpon mine high pla∣ces. To the chiefe singer on Neginothai. Epiphonema, what this fi∣gure is, see Io∣nas. cap. 2. v. 9.THe figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, wherewith both this whole prayer is concluded or shut vp with the admiration or wondring at the goodnes and bounteousnes of God toward those that are his, and also that hope of preseruing the church trusting in God, is confirmed by sundrie arguments or reasons, the which are taken from the Epithets or titles here attributed vnto God. And the church vnaraying or spoyling her selfe of all trust in her owne strength, of all hope in the help of man, and of all other ayde, doth trust in the help of God alone, whom by faith she knoweth to bee hers, and most assuredlie, and by sundrie similitudes perswade her selfe, that whatsoeuer shall bee necessarie for the auoyding and e∣scaping of so great danger, as hath been described before, and wherein she shall be at that time, shall bee giuen vnto her by God. And therefore shee singeth of that help, as if it were now present, and commandeth a publike song to be sung vnto God by the ma∣ster of the musick and on such musicall instruments, as according vnto the course and order of that time were in vse in the church, by the appoyntment of God. FJNIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus vpon the Prophet Aggaeus. CAP. 1. The argument of this prophesy.WHen as the people of the Iewes was re∣turned out of the captiuitie of Babylon, they began in the seuenth moneth, in the yeare of that their first returne by the permission or sufferance of King Cyrus, to build or repayre the altar of God, in the selfe same place in the which it was before, as it is written Esdr. cap. 3. vers. 1, 2, 3. And when the seuenth moneth was come,The building of the altar. and the children of Israel were in their cities, the people assem∣bled themselues as one man to Ierusalem. Then stood vp Ieshua the sonne of Iozadak, and his brethren the Priestes, and Zerubbabel the sonne of Shealtiel, and his brethren, and builded the altar of the God of Israel, to offer burnt offerings thereon, as it is written in the law of Moses the man of God. And they set the altar vpon his ba∣ses, &c. And in the second yeare of the saide returne from Ba∣bylon in the second moneth the people with great ioy and glad∣nes layeth the foundations of the Temple,The laying of the foundati∣ons of the se∣cond Temple. which is called the second Temple, in the selfe same rubbish cleered, and on the same foundations whereas it was builded before, as is likewise to bee seene in the saide third chapter of Esdras ver. 8▪ 9. and so foorth. But when as there were many lettes laide in their way,The building hindred and stayed. (although king Cyrus expreslie gaue them leaue for this building) as it is Esdr. 4. at the length they stayed and left off from that worke by the edict or commandement of Artaxerxes, and Assuerus, as is set downe ver. 24. of the same fourth chapter, and the building of the Temple was hindred vntill the second yeare of King Darius. For this Darius being moued by the spir
of God, and more fauourable vnto the Iewes,Darius confir∣meth the de∣cree of King Cyrus for the building of the Temple. confirmed the edict or commandement of Cyrus for the building of the Temple, and would haue the same take place Esdr. 6. But when as the Iewes supposed that the selfe same thing would come to passe, as it did before vnder King Cyrus, they did the more slowlie settle and prepare themselues vnto the worke of the Temple. And there∣fore the Lord stirred vp Aggaeus the Prophet, who should partlie awaken them being so southfull with the threatnings, and part∣ly with promises,The second temple finished in the sixt yere of Darius. The end of this prophesie. and the same most excellent concerning the glorie of the second Temple, the which should be greater then the glorie of the first Temple Esdr. 5. With whose Sermons they being moued at the last by the Spirit of God, did set their hand earnestlie to this worke by the space of foure whole yeares, and at the length made an end of the temple in the sixt yeare of Darius. And the time from the first beginning of that second Temple vn∣to the full finishing of the same, was 46. yeares, as it is said 2. Iohn ver. 20. For there the Iewes say vnto Christ, Fortie and sixe yeares was this Temple a building, and wilt thou reare it vp in three dayes?  So then the end of this prophesie is, first, that wee prefer or set things appertaining vnto God before earthly things, and such as appertaine vnto vs: and especiallie that wee be most carefull for the building of the Church of God. Secondly, that we prefer the glorie of the second Temple (the which appeared,  and continu∣allie remaineth in Christ appearing and being conuersant in this temple in his time) before the excellencie of the first Temple,Threatnings. Promises of the second temple. Danaeus is wō∣derfull briefe vpon this Pro∣phet. Where∣fore for their further in∣structions I refer the godly Readers vnto the Commen∣taries of Gry∣naeus and Ma∣ster Pilkingtō, which are both in English. al∣though it were almost all of gold. For in Christ (as it is 2. Colos. ver. 3.) are hid al the treasures of wisdome and knowledge. And he is greater then Salomon, or Ionas, or any other the Prophets, as hee witnesseth of himselfe Math. 12. ver. 41.42. This prophesie doth consist of sundrie sermons or parts, of the which the first do containe threatnings of God, and the latter, pro∣mises touching the second temple, that is, Christ & his church. Vers. 1. In the second yeare of King Darius, in the sixt moneth, the first day of the moneth came the word of the Lord (by the mini∣sterie of the Prophet Haggai) vnto Zerubbabel the sonne of She∣altiel, a prince of Iudah, and to Iehoshua the sonne of Iehozadak the high Priest, saying. 1 The calling of the prophet.THe first Sermon. This whole first chapter is but one sermon, where the prophet first confirmeth his calling: then sheweth
the time, in the which he prophesied: & thirdly, vnto whō the ex∣hortations following doe appertaine and are directed especiallie,2 The time of his prophesie. to wit,3. Vnto whom it appertaineth. first vnto the Princes, and secondly vnto the rest of the people, whom God would haue to be the restorers of his worship. Vers. 2. Thus speaketh the Lord of hostes, saying, This people say, the time is not yet come, that the Lords house should be builded. The slacknes of the people re∣prehended in building the temple.THe Prophet going about to reprehend or rebuke and find fault with the slacknes of the people in building the Temple of God, doth first of all rehearse their vaine excuses, and causes of their slacknes, and that by their owne words. Vers. 3. Then came the word of the Lord by the ministerie of the Prophet Haggai, saying, HE refuteth or ouerthroweth their vaine excuses by an argu∣ment or reason taken from things compared together, as fol∣loweth: Vers. 4. Is it time for your selues to dwell in your sieled houses, and this house lye waste? Their excuses confuted by a reason from things compa∣red together.FOr it is an vnmeete thing that themselues, who are but fillie wretches should dwell gaylie and gorgiously, euery one in his owne house: and that the Temple of the Lord should lye and re∣maine desolate or waste: and consequently that God among them should be without his house. Vers. 5. Now therefore thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Consider your owne wayes in your hearts. An exhortatiō.AN exhortation, whereby he doth stirre them vp vnto the doing of their dutie. Vers. 6. Ye haue sowen much, and bring in little: ye eate, but ye haue not enough: ye drinke, but ye are not filled: ye clothe you, but ye  not warme: and he that earneth wages, putteth the wages into  broken bagge. He spurreth them forward by the conside∣ration of their losses and pu∣nishments sus∣tained for their slacknes in this worke.HE putteth a spurre vnto them, or pricketh them forward vnto the building of the Temple by the consideration of the cal∣
or miseries and losses, which went before, and were past, the which he sheweth to haue fallen out vnto them for their so great negligence, in euery part of their labours, and especially in the kind of their corne. Vers. 7. Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Consider your owne wayes in your hearts. Another ex∣hortation vnto the building of the temple.ANother exhortation vnto the same worke and building, taken from the blessing which should insue. Vers. 8. Go vp to the mountaine and bring wood, and build this house, and I will bee fauourable in it, and I will be glorified▪ sayth the Lord. BOth vpon the worke it selfe, which is the Temple: and also vpon them, if laying aside and putting away all slouthfulnes, they will worke diligently and earnestly. And here and in the verse before is described two parts of repentance. The first,Two parts of repentance. that we be sorie for the sinne committed. The second, that we doe better afterward. 1. Sorow for sinne Vers. 9. Ye looked for much, and loe it came to little: and when ye brought it home I did blow vpon it. And why,2. Newnes of life. sayth the Lord of hosts? Because of mine house that is waste, and ye run euery man to his owne house. Vers. 10. Therefore the heauen ouer you stayed it selfe from dewe, and the earth stayed her fruit. Vers. 11. And I called for a drought vpon the land, and vpon the mountaines, and vpon the corne, and vpon the wine, and vpon the oyle, vpon all that the ground bringeth forth: both vpon men, and vpon cattell, and vpon all the labour of the hands. A repetition of the former plagues.TO the end he may awaken and rouse vp the most deafe & drou∣sie, he doth againe repeate the calamities or plagues past, and those also which were present, in the which they were then exerci∣sed, or which then they presently felt, that the Prophet may the more deeply moue or touch them, as it were with the view and be∣holding of the thing it selfe.
Vers. 12. When Zerubbabel the sonne of Shealtiel, and Iehoshua the sonne of Iehozadak the hie Priest with all the remnant of the peo∣ple, heard the voyce of the Lord their God, and the words of the Prophet Haggai (as the Lord their God had sent him:) then the people did feare before the Lord. The fruit of the former exhor∣tation.HE sheweth what, and how great the fruit of the former exhor∣tation was, & how obedient vnto God the Princes themselues together with the rest of the people were. The which selfe same thing also he teacheth to haue proceeded from God, that is, from the Spirit of GOD, and by the same Spirit to bee wrought in them. Vers. 13. Then spake Haggai the Lords messenger in the Lords mes∣sage vnto the people, saying, I am with you, sayth the Lord. Vers. 14. And the Lord stirred vp the spirit of Zerubbabel, the sonne of Shealtiel, a Prince of Iudah, and the spirit of Iehoshua the sonne of Iehozadak the hie Priest, and the spirit of all the remnant of the people, and they came, and did the worke in the house of the Lord of hostes their God. God promiseth his helpe vnto the builders.THe answering of an obiection, that they should not quaile and waxe faint hearted by reason of the sundrie lets, the which should bee brought against this worke by the aduersaries: for the Lord doth promise his helpe and aide vnto the builders, Esdr. 5. and 6. where the very beginning of the worke commanded to be done first by the decree of Cyrus, afterward of Darius, was the most cer∣taine and assured worke of God. CAP. 2. The second ser∣mon of Hag∣gaus.THe second Sermon of the Prophet, the which gathereth into one the things which he had handled and delt withall before the people at sundrie times, namely, the 24. day of the 6. moneth, and the 21. day of the seuenth moneth. So then it hath two parts. The first part remoueth and putteth away all lets and pul-backes, and cutteth off from the Iewes all occasions of quenching their forwardnes in the building of this second Temple.
Vers. 1. In the foure and twentieth day of the sixt moneth, in the se∣cond yeare of King Darius. Vers. 2. In the seuenth moneth, in the one and twentieth day of the moneth, came the word of the Lord by the ministerie of the Pro∣phet Hggai, saying, Vers. 3 Speake now to Zerubbabel the sonne of Shealtiel Prince of Iudah, and to Iehoshua the sonne of Iehozadak the hie Priest, and to the residue of the people, saying, He confirmeth his calling afresh, &c.HEre also because this doctrine is of great weight, and almost in∣credible or not to bee beleeued, he doth confirme his calling: rehearseth the time of his prophesie, and those vnto whom the ex∣hortation following doth especially appertaine. Vers. 4. Who is left among you, that sawe this house in her first glo∣rie, and how doe you see it now? Is it not in your eyes, in comparison of it as nothing? The basenes of the second tem∣ple, one cause of their pretended slacknes in buil∣ding.THe Prophet intending to exhort them vnto the diligent buil∣ding vp of the Temple, meeteth with the chiefe cause of the cooling or abating of their care and forwardnes, the which did a∣rise of the basenes of this Temple which was to come, if it be com∣pared with the former. Vers 5. Yet now be of good courage, O Zerubbabel, sayth the Lord, and be of good comfort, O Iehoshua, sonne of Iehozadak the hie Priest: and be strong, all ye people of the land, sayth the Lord, and doe it: for I am with you, sayth the Lord of hosts, The former cause refuted by the promise of greater glo∣rie vnto it.GOd refuteth or ouerthroweth this cause, by the promise of grea∣ter glorie, which should be in the second Temple. But first of all he louingly exhorteth them to build, for that they should not loose their labour in a vaine matter. Vers. 6. According to the word that I couenanted with you, when ye came out of Egypt: so my spirit shall remaine among you, feare ye not. He promiseth his helpe vnto them.SEcondly, he promiseth helpe vnto them because of that his per∣petuall or continuall fauour toward them, the which he shewed,
and sufficiently witnessed vnto them long sithens by their miracu∣lous deliuerance out of Egypt: but this helpe doth he now againe repeate vnto them by an especiall promise, and expresse couenant. Finally,The passing dignitie of the second temple, witnessed by he describeth by an effect, which was by and by to insue, what maner of dignitie and excellencie there should be of this se∣cond Temple. Vers. 7. For thus sayth the Lord of hostes, yet a little while, and I will shake the heauens, and the earth, and the sea, and the drie land: 1. Both heauen and earth.THe which both the heauen it selfe, and also the earth shall wit∣nesse. Vers. 8. And I will moue all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glorie, sayth the Lord of hosts. 2. The acknow∣ledgement of al nations.ANd the which all nations shall acknowledge by offring of eue∣rie their most pretious things. And this ought most trulie to be referred vnto the kingdome of Christ, whereof this second Temple was a Sacrament or token. Vers 9. The siluer is mine, and the gold is mine, sayth the Lord of hostes. A confirmatiō of the former promise.GOd confirmeth the former promise by his authoritie and rule ouer all creatures. Vers. 10. The glorie of this last house shall be greater then the first, sayth the Lord of hostes: and in this place will I giue peace, sayth the Lord of hostes. The happie cō∣tinuance of the glorie of the se∣cond Temple.THe conclusion, whereunto is ioyned the happie and perpetuall enduring and continuance of this glorie of the second Temple, as a certaine increase vnto the greater commendation of this Tem∣ple, that is, of the kingdome of Christ. For in this respect, or thus farre forth is this Temple commended, and pleased God, as it was a figure and shadow of Christ to come.
Vers. 11. In the foure and twentieth day of the ninth moneth, in the second yeare of Darius, came the word of the Lord vnto the Pro∣phet Haggai, saying: The second part of this ser∣mon reprouing certaine grosse errors of this people.THE second part of this second Sermon, the which was made two moneths after, wherein he reproueth the grosse errors of this people, which builded the Temple, who supposed that them∣selues, and their workes were acceptable vnto God for the very piles, frame, and building of the stones, for the very rites and cere∣monies, the which were vsed in the Temple: and not rather for the inward godlines of minde, and holines of the heart. Vers. 12. Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Aske now the Priests con∣cerning the law, and say, Their error re∣futed by a si∣militude bo∣rowed from ho∣lie things.HE refuteth or ouerthroweth them by a similitude, the which be∣cause it is taken from holie things, and such as are expressed in the law of God, was especiallie to bee propounded, moued, or put vnto the Priests. Vers. 13. If one beare holie flesh in the skirt of his garment, and with his skirt doe touch the bread, or the pottage, or the wine, or oyle, or any meate, shall it be holie? And the Priests answered and sayd, no. Nothing with∣out life doth sanctifie a man.NO dead thing, or without life (such as were the rites, ceremo∣nies, and the Temple) doth sanctifie or make holie a man, or any other thing els: but contrariwise the polluted or defiled mind of a man polluteth or defileth all things. For as Paul writeth Tit. 1. ver. 15. Ʋnto the pure are all things pure: but vnto them that are de∣filed, and vnbeleeuing, is nothing pure, but euen their minds and con∣sciences are defiled. Vers. 14. Then sayd Haggai, If a polluted person touch any of these, shall it be vncleane? And the Priests answered and sayd, it shall be vncleane. An amplification of the similitude.
Vers. 15. Then answered Haggai, and sayd, so is this people, and so is this nation before me, sayth the Lord: and so are all the workes of their hands, and that which they offer here, is vncleane. The answering of an obiection.THe answering of an obiection, least that therefore they should leaue off from the worke of the Temple, because they are not sanctified or made holie by that same heape of stones, and outward frame and building of the Temple. Vers. 16. And now, I pray you, consider in your mindes: from this day, and afore, euen afore a stone was layd vpon a stone in the tem∣ple of the Lord: Vers. 17. Behold these things were, when one came to an heape of twentie measures, there were but ten: when one came to the wine presse for to draw out fiftie vessels out of the presse, there were but twentie. Vers. 18. I smote you with blasting, and with mildew, and with haile, in all the labours of your hands: yet you turned not to me, sayth the Lord. Vers. 19 Consider, I pray you, in your minds, from this day, and afore from the foure and twentieth day of the ninth moneth, euen from the day that the foundation of the Lords temple was layd: consi∣der it in your minds. He exhorteth them to goe lu∣stilie forward in the building of the temple.HE exhorteth them to goe diligently and lustilie forward in the worke of the Temple, and not to leaue of, or to be faint in heart, by an example, and comparing or laying together of the former calamities, or punishments, the which frō God were sent vpon thē, when they ceased from the worke: and also by the blessing here∣after to come, the which is promised vnto them continuing in the worke. Vers. 20. Is the seede yet in the barne? as yet the vine, and the figge tree, and the pomegranate, and the oliue tree hath not brought forth: from this day will I blesse you. HE setteth before the Iewes their seedes not yet cast or put out into the ground, that they may the more easilie vnderstand,
that this plentie of corne & blessing of God is promised vnto them because of the work of the temple begū,God promiseth henceforth to blesse them in the fruites of the earth, be∣cause of their forwardnes in building his temple. the which could not yet be surmised or imagined, that it should be in any such store, in regard of the time, or the seede, the which being as yet not cōmitted to the ground, there could be no proportion made of any such plentifull yeeld of the same, as God here through his blessing henceforth promiseth to increase them withall, both in respect of their corne, and also all other fruits of the earth. Vers. 21. And againe the word of the Lord came vnto Haggai in the foure and twentieth day of the moneth, saying, The third Ser∣mon of Aggaus containing the estate that should be of the Church gathe∣red of the Gen∣tiles and Iewes.THE third Sermon, made the selfe same yeare and day, in the which the former was made, wherein is contained a prophesie of the estate that should bee of the Gentiles and Iewes, that by the comparing of them both together, the Iewes, that is to say, all the godlie might vnderstand, that the condition of the Church should be alwayes happie, and that God would haue a perpetuall care of the same. And the Prophet by name speaketh vnto Zerubbabel their Prince, or Captaine, because that vnder his person the rest of the people of God is comprehended, and because that he was a fi∣gure of Christ. And of Christ his kingdom are these things especial∣lie and properly to bee vnderstood. For Christ his sake are all these blessings both earthly & also heauenly, bestowed vpon the church. Further, hereby appeareth, that Princes ought to haue an especiall care in restoring the worship and seruice of God. Vers. 22. Speake to Zerubbabel the Prince of Iudah, and say, I will shake the heauens and the earth. Christ at his death by diuers signes, and af∣ter diuers wies did shake both heauen and earth.CHrist dying that he might reigne, with diuers signes and wayes did shake heauen and earth, as it is to bee seene Mat. 27. ver. 45.51.52.53. in these words: Now from the sixt houre was there dark∣nes ouer all the land, vnto the ninth houre. And behold, the vaile of the temple was rent in twaine, from the top to the bottome, and the earth did quake, and the stones were clouen. And the graues did open them∣selues, and many bodies of the Saints, which slept, arose, and came out of the graues after his resurrection, and went into the holie citie, and ap∣peared vnto many.
Vers. 23. And I will ouerthrow the throne of Kingdomes, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdomes of the heathen, and I will o∣uerthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them, and the horse, and the riders shall come downe, euery one by the sword of his bro∣ther. The world sha∣ken with ciuill warres after the death of Christ.AFter the death of Christ also, when as the Gospell beginneth to be preached, the whole world in a maner is begun to bee sha∣ken with the ciuill warres of the Romanes. And Christ warneth his Disciples of these matters Matth. 24. ver. 6. in these words, saying: Ye shall heare of warres, and rumors of warres: see that ye be not trou∣bled: for all these things must come to passe: but the end is not yet. Al∣beit that this also may bee referred vnto those ouerthrowings and destructions of kingdomes, yea and also of the Monarchies or Em∣pires of the world, the which fell out after the returne of the people from Babylon, vntill the receiuing and allowing of the Gospell: such as were the Monarchies of the Persians and Macedonians. That which the prophane or heathen histories doe witnesse to haue been done also. Vers. 24. In that day, saith the Lord of hosts, wil I take thee, O Zerub∣babel my seruant, the sonne of Shealtiel, sayth the Lord, and will make thee as a signet: for I haue chosen thee, sayth the Lord of hostes. HOw deare the Church is vnto God, could not better, nor more honorablie be expressed then by this similitude of a signet or ring that a man weareth, to seale withall. And the same similitude vseth the Prophet Ieremie chap. 22. vers. 24. against Ieconias the sonne of Iehoiakim, signifying, that if he were neuer so deare vnto him, but alwayes in his sight, like vnto a signet on a mans finger, yet he should be destroyed. The words be these: As I liue, sayth the Lord, though Coniah (that is Ieconiah by taking away the first sillable) the sonne of Iehoiakim King of Iudah, were the signet of my right hand, yet would I pluck thee thence. FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus, vpon the Prophet Zacharias. CAP. 1. Two partes of this prophesie.THere are two especial and principal parts of this prophesie. The first, wherein the state of the people of the Iewes,1 A description of the state of the Church from Zachari∣as his prophesie vnto the reigne of the Antiochi and so consequently of the church of God, is de∣scribed or set forth, from the time of Za∣charias vnto the crueltie of the kings of Syria, and chiefelie vnto the reigne of the Antiochi ouer the Iewes. And this de∣scription lasteth from the first chapter of this book vnto the eleuenth.2 What thence forth should fall out to the Iewes vntill the ouerthrow of Ierusalem. The secōd part sheweth what should fall out vnto the Iewes from that time, vntill the destruction of Ierusalem. And this narration coninueth from the beginning of the eleuenth chapter vnto the end of the booke. Both these parts in this prophet like as in the rest, doth consist both of the threat∣nings, and also of the promises of God. Also the Iewes at that time were the true church of God and the type or figure of the church vnder the gospell of Christ, that is, of our church. And as some of those threatnings of God doe appertaine vnto the church it selfe, and some vnto the enemies thereof: so some of the promises of God doe belong especiallie vnto the Iewes: some also vnto the whole church of God, out of what nation, and at what time soe∣uer it be gathered.The scope and drift of this prophet. So then the scope and drift of this prophet see∣meth to bee, first, to exhort the people both vnto the building of the temple (the which the Iewes had then in hand, and so these two Prophets Aggaeus and Zacharias doe help the one the other,1 He exhorteth vnto the going forward with the building of the temple. Aggaeus Zacharias, and Zacharias confirmeth the prophesie of Aggaeus) and also vnto the repairing of the citie Ierusalem, the which he foretelleth shall afterward be builded againe, and main∣tained
through the fauour of God, and that in the same place, of the same measure and bignes, which once it had, and of the same spirituall dignitie. Secondly, he foresheweth (so farre as was suf∣ficient for the comfort of the good and godly) the fate, as I may so terme it, of this citie when it should be builded, and of the peo∣ple, as it was determined by God, and such things as should fall out particularlie.Zacharias and Aggaeus pro∣phesie both at ne time. He was therefore of the same time with Aggae∣us, and his fellow and companion, in stirring vp the people to the worshipping and seruing of God holilie and purelie, as appeareth Esdr. cap. 5. ver. 1. after this maner, Then Haggai a Prophet, and Zachariah a Prophet, the sonne of Iddo, prophesied vnto the Iewes that were in Iudah and Jerusalem, in the name of the God of Israel, e∣uen vnto them. As for the citie, of the reedifying or building vp a∣gaine whereof the Prophet Zacharias prophesieth, Nehemias af∣terward builded vp the same, almost fortie yeres after the decree of Cyrus touching the sending home of the people of the Iewes, as appeareth Nehem. cap. 3. Furthermore this booke consisteth of many prophesies, and is full of types and figures, whereby things to come were wont to be signified by the Prophets, to the end that men should giue the more diligent heed vnto those fore∣tellings and prophesies, and marke the more perfectlie and neere∣ly the moments or course of times, and the euents or issues and fallings out of things. Vers. 1. In the eight moneth of the second yeare of Darius, came the worde of the Lorde vnto Zechariah the sonne of Berechiah, the sonne of Iddo, the Prophet, saying, The office of Zacharias.THe description of the office of Zacharias, and the ordeining of him vnto the same: also his stock or kinred: and his fami∣lie or house: and the time wherein hee prophesied. His office is prophesying, and consequently an extraordinarie calling to de∣clare the will of God, and also the lawe of God giuen vnto men. And when as he simplie, calleth himselfe a Prophet, without any further addition, hee vnderstandeth and teacheth that hee is the prophet of God.His calling from God. The ordeining him vnto this office is by a law∣full calling, albeit extraordinarie. For hee sheweth that he is cal∣led by Iehouah, that is by the Lord himselfe, whose word or ap∣poyntment and commandement went before vnto Zacharias, concerning the deliuerie and vtterance of those things which
follow. For God alone calleth Prophets,His stocke or familie honest. and that also immediat∣lie. As for the originall, or stock, and familie of Zacharias, the same was honest, and at that time very well knowne vnto the Iewes. For hee was the sonne of Barachias the Nephew of Iddo: who whether they were priestes, or onely Leuites, or rather of some o∣ther tribe, as of Iudah for example, it is not here expressed. Yet notwithstanding some doe suppose him to haue been of the tribe of Leui, and of the race of the priestes,Supposed to be of the tribe of Leui, and fa∣milie of Aaron. The time of his prophesie added, and why? that is of the familie of the priestes. The time wherein hee began to execute his office is ad∣ded, both to procure credit vnto his prophesie, and also to declare the care of God toward his church, who at one and the same time raysed vp many Prophets for the greater comfort of those that are his, that is to say, this Prophet, and the Prophet Aggaeus. And this our prophet commeth after Aggaeus two moneths: at which ve∣ry time also God framed & prepared the minde of Darius in Per∣sia, to graunt and most willinglie giue the same leaue that Cyrus had done before, by a publike decree, to build the Temple. Vers. 2. The Lord hath been sore displeased with your fathers. The first Ser∣mon conteining the chiefe ground of the things at the commande∣ment of God to be deliuered by the prophet.THe first sermon, wherein is contained the proposition, or prin∣cipall poynt and ground of the things commanded by God, and which were to bee denounced or deliuered by the Prophet, that being taught by the former examples of their Elders, they might repent, and turne vnto God with true and earnest repen∣tance of heart, least that they also at the last should taste of those plagues, the which their Elders had felt before. First of all there∣fore the iudgements of God, and the same very fearefull against their Elders (to wit, because of their sinnes) are briefelie rehear∣sed, when as the Prophet saith, That God was not onely angrie with them, but also throughlie wroth and sore displeased against them. Vers. 3. Therefore say thou vnto them, thus saith the Lord of hostes, Turne ye vnto me, saith the Lord of hosts, and I will turne vnto you, saith the Lord of hosts. The end, why God would haue those for∣mer examples repeated vnto the Iewes.THus then God will haue these home examples laid downe and repeated vnto the Iewes, Thus shalt thy ay vnto them. And he sheweth the end, namely that they their lselues should repent, and not that they should heare those fore passed times onely, as a
storie of things done, and take some delite of minde by the reher∣sall of those olde matters: but that they should applie and refere those home examples vnto their vse, and make their benefit and profit of them vnto their saluation. And hee describeth or setteth out repentance by the true effect thereof, to wit, when as he cal∣leth it A turning vnto GOD.Who they be, that doe trulie repent. For they onelie doe truelie repent, who doe not alone hate the sinnes which they haue committed, and are sorrie for the same: but who also doe leaue that their wic∣ked life, and doe earnestlie turne vnto the obedience of God. Fi∣nallie, he addeth both in this place, and also often hereafter, The saying of the Lord of hosts, or thus saith the Lord of hostes, both to win authoritie vnto his sermons, and vnto this prophesie, from God the author thereof, and the same also most mightie, who will ful∣fill and bring to passe those things which he threatneth: and also to oppose or set this true God against the vaine idols of the nati∣ons neere vnto them, to the end the Iewes should not be moued with their felicitie or happines.The figure E∣pimone, which is an often re∣peating and re∣hersing of one and the same verse or sen∣tence, as it were the holding of the song, as they terme it, whereof in the Psalmes there are many ex∣amples, and al∣so Isai, 11. Where you shall finde in that short chapter this one sentence three times re∣peated: yet for all this his wrath is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still ver. 12.17.21. For him he calleth both Ieho∣uah, and also the God of hosts. Vers▪ 4. Be ye not as your fathers, vnto whom the former Prophets haue cried, saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, Turne you now from your euill waies, and from your wicked workes: but they would not he are, nor hearken vnto me, saith the Lord. THe figure Epimone, or returning to the repeating of the same thing which was spoken alreadie, whereby he doth liuelie ex∣presse by a certaine Hypotyposis that which he had briefelie saide before of their fathers in the second verse, to the end they might be the more moued, with the representing, and laying as it were before their eyes of the whole action it selfe with their fathers, and the most lamentable issue or falling out of the same. And home examples doe very grealie moue vs, wherefore the pro∣phets of God haue vsed this kinde of argument in other places al∣so, as Psal 95. where Dauid rehearseth vnto the Iewes the exam∣ples of their forefathers in tempting & prouing god in the wilder∣nes and God his sore displeasure against them for the same, that thereby they might learne to cast off all hard heartdnes and diso∣bedience for feare of sting of the like punishments. So often in the Prophet Ieremi is th the Lord in like maner as in this place, call vpon the Iewes by his Prophet to leaue o their old wicked
waies, and to returne vnto him, as Iere. 18. ver 11. Speake thou now therefore vnto the men of Iudah, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, saying. Thus saith the Lord, be hold I prepare a plague for you, and pur∣pose a thing against you: returne you therefore euery one from his e∣ill way, and make our waies, and your workes good. Againe cap. 25. ver. 5. Turne againe now euery one from his euill way, and from the wickednes of your inuentions, and yee shall dwell in the land, that the Lord hath giuen vnto you, and to your fathers for euer and euer. And cap. 35. ver. 15. Returne now euery man from his euill way, and a∣mend your workes, and goe not after other gods to serue them, and yee shall dwell in the land, which I haue giuen vnto you, and to your fa∣thers, but ye would not ene line your care, nor obey me. The faithfull especiallie are to marke those things that doe fall out in the people of God.Moreouer those things which fall out especiallie among the people of God, are in deed diligently to be considered of all men, but yet chiefelie of the godly and faithfull, because that in them the nature, and as I may terme it, the disposition of GOD is the more perceiued. Wherefore God would haue this example of the fathers to be againe, and that in such sort, beaten into the heads of the Iewes, being returned from captiuitie, to the ende hee might shew vnto them, both how he had delt with them before, and also what things followed afterward. And here in this place there is expressed and that very liuely, and vnto the quick, an exhortati∣on or admonition of GOD vnto them touching earnest repen∣tance. The Prophets therefore by the commandement of God exhorted their fathers (of whom they were wont very greatly to host) vnto repentance before. And the prophets of God exhor∣ted them not slight lie, or lightly, but stoutlie, and daylie. They spake vnto them (saith he) crying, and that by the appoyntment of God almightie commaunding them: nay moreouer they did pray and intreate them that they would urne this so great patience of God vnto their saluation.God doth after a sort pray and intreate vs by his seruants. For so also dooth Paul witnes that God after a sort doth pray vs by his seruants 2. Cor. 5. ve. 20. Now then r  ambassadours for Christ: as though GOD did beseech you through vs, we pray you in Christ his stead, that yee bee reconciled to God. So 2. Thess 3. ver. 12. Therefore them that are such, wee com∣mand and exhort by our Lorde Iesus Christ, that they worke with quietnes, and eate their owne bread. But what did the Iewes for all this faire speaking and intreatance? They did not obey God, no not dealing with them so gentlie and fatherlie. Nay some of them did not so much as with their outward eares of their body heare
the words of God, through the stubbornnes of their hearts: others which indeed lent and yeelded the eares of their bodie vnto the Prophets of God, yet did not set their minds vnto those words, nor thinke that the things which were threatned vnto them should come to passe, because they stoutly and lustily contemned or de∣spised the threatnings of God. Vers. 5. Your Fathers, where are they? and doe the Prophets liue for euer. An interroga∣tion.THis is an interrogation, or the asking of a question, vnto the which the answer is set downe in the verse following. And the Prophet asketh a question, to the ende he may vrge or presse them the more, and in a maner lay the thing it selfe before their eyes to be seene, that is, that he may teach that the threatnings and iudge∣ments of God pronounced or deliuered against their froward fa∣thers were not idle, nor vaine: but had in the end their issue, fulfil∣ling and effect in them. So then both the men, which do shew the commandements and wrath of God, and those also against whom the same are shewed, doe themselues indeed perish and dye: but the word of God indureth for euer, and alwayes hath his efficacie or working and effect. And so doth God testifie by his Prophet Isai cap. 55. where comparing his word vnto the falling of the rayne, he inferreth ver. 1.1. So shall my word be, that goeth out of my mouth: it shall not returne vnto me voyd, but it shall accomplish that which I wil, and it shall prosper in the thing, whereto I sent it. God therefore will not haue those his threatnings alwayes to sleepe, or to be only fore∣told by his Prophets: but in the ende the Prophets cease, and yet doth the word of God, as it was shewed or threatned, come to passe, and appeareth to bee true by the issue and falling out of the matter. Vers. 6. But did not my words and my statutes, which I cōmanded by my seruants the Prophets, take hold of your fathers? And they re∣turned and sayd, As the Lord of hosts hath determined to doe vn∣to vs, according vnto our owne wayes, and according to our works, so hath he dealt with vs. An answer vn∣to the former nterrogation.THis is an answer vnto the former interrogation, the which con∣taineth two things. One, the falling out of the matter. The other,
the confession of the fathers themselues in the end, and their giuing testimonie or witnesse both of the trueth of the word of God: and also of the iustice of God in punishing of them. And it was needfull that both these poynts should bee set downe, as the thing was, not only to moue the Iewes their sonnes, but also, that all men should here haue a most certaine rule of the efficacie or power and force of the word of God either fearing vs, or els comforting of vs.A certaine rule of the efficacie of the word of God. This therefore was the issue or falling out of the matter, namely, that both the words of God deliuered by the Prophets, and also his iudgement ordained and appoynted against the sinnes of men ap∣peared in the ende, euen in those verie selfe same persons, against whom it was threatned. Therefore it (tooke hold vpon them.) And the confession of their Fathers and Elders was most notable and excellent, both to admonish their posteritie of the vnremoueable trueth of the word of God, and also to shewe, that God is iust both in the threatning, and also in the executing of his iudgements. For they cōfessed, both that the things which God had foretold should come to passe, and also the things the which he had determined or thought, euen the same in the end did iustly fall out and come to passe vnto them. For they acknowledged that they were punished for their sinnes: but then at length did they acknowledge it after that they returned vnto God with earnest repentance of minde. So in the Lamentations of Ieremie cap 1. ver. 18. after that Ierusalem hath entred into the consideration of her sinnes, and been sorie for the same, she maketh this confession: The Lord is righteous: for I haue rebelled against his commandement: heare, I pray you, all people, and behold my sorowe. Againe, cap. 2. ver. 17. The Lord hath done that which he had purposed: he hath fulfilled his word that he had deter∣mined of olde time: he hath throwne downe, and not spared: he hath caused thine enemie to reioyce ouer thee, and set vp the horne of thine aduersaries. So Psal. 106. ver. 6. We haue sinned with our fathers: we haue committed iniquitie, and done wickedly. See to this purpose Dan. 9. And this is the end of the first Sermon of the Prophet. Vers. 7. Vpon the foure and twentieth day of the eleuenth moneth, which is the moneth Shebat, in the second yeare of Darius, came the word of the Lord vnto Zechariah the sonne of Berechiah, the sonne of Iddo the Prophet, saying, The second Sermon.THe second Sermon, the Author, Minister, and time whereof is described in this verse, and in the verse following: the maner, in
the 10. verse the end and drift of this Sermon generally: lastly, vers the 12. & so following is contained the peculiar application there∣of vnto the Church of God.The Author of this Sermon. The Minister thereof. The time when it was made. The Author therefore of this doctrine and Sermon is God properly, and the same also Iehouah. The Mi∣nister is the same, which also was of the former, namely, Zacharias himselfe. The time, two full and whole moneths after the first Ser∣mon, made of repentance. Therefore when as that first Sermon was receiued of the people godlie, and had brought forth his fruit, now doth the Lord also comfort them by his Prophet. Vers. 8. I sawe by night, and behold, a man riding vpon a red horse, & he stood among the myrrhe trees, that were in a bottome, & behind him were there red horses speckled and white. The maner of reuealing the things vnto the Prophet is two∣fold.THe maner, after which the Lord delt, and reuealed vnto Zacha∣rias the things the which he should say vnto the Iewes, is now declared. And it is two-fold, namely a vision, and a talke or speech betweene the Prophet and the Angell. The vision is here set down: the talke straite after in the verse following. Now the vision, and the time of the vision is here expressed.1. A vision. The vision, were many horsemen sitting vpon horses not of one colour, but of diuers co∣lours, shewed by God vnto the Prophet,2. A talke be∣tweene the Prophet and the Angell. of the which one of more dignitie then the rest did sit vpon a red horse, and stood in a shadie and dark place, to wit, among the myrrhe trees The time of the vi∣sion, The night, and not the day, because that the vnderstanding of this thing was as yet darke and hard.1 Why the horses are of diuers colours. This place is to be compared with that of the Reuelation cap. 6. But in this that the colour of all the horses is diuers, and not all one, hereby is shewed that there are diuers ends, for the which those horses are prepared of God: and when as the Riders on thē do signifie the Angels: thereby is decla∣red, that the Angels, which are sent of God, as messengers, & ouer∣seers, (whom the Greekes call Epoptai) as from a great King, are sent, I say, as it were the keepers of this world, partly for to execute his iudgements, such as are they which sit vpon the bay or firie co∣loured horses: and partly for the bestowing of his benefites, as are they which ride vpon the white horses.He that sitteth on the horse a∣lone. And that one, whom the o∣ther horse men doe speake vnto, and vnto whom alone they doe render an account of their charge, ver. 11. hereafter, who sitteth vpon the horse among the mirre trees, who ruleth, instructeth, and te∣cheth the Prophet, the same no doubt is our Lord Iesus Christ, vnto
whom, as both God, and also the head of the Church, all creatures do obeye. And he sitteth vpon a red horse, that is, a sad, darke,The colour of his horse, and the place wher∣in he standeth. and as yet no cleare colour. Hee keepeth himselfe among the mirre trees, that is, darke and shadie places, because that the state of the Church was as yet, both because of many that were not yet now returned from the captiuitie of Babylon, and also because of the troubles which were yet still hanging ouer their heads, because I say that in these respects the state of the church was yet sad, hea∣uie, darke, not yet shining and merrie, all cloudes of calamities or miseries being wiped away. Christ therefore that horseman and head of his church, suffering and sorrowing with his Church (for as it is Hebr 4. ver. 15. Wee haue not an high priest, that cannot bee touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all things temp∣ted in like sort, yet without sinne) hath taken vpon him both a fit co∣lour and place for the said matter, the which he would describe  set forth. Vers. 9. Then said I, O my Lord, what are these? And the Angel that talked with me, said vnto me, I wil shew thee what these be.2. The talke of the prophet with the An∣gel, teaching three things. THe talke of Zacharias, and the same most familiar with that Angell. Out of the which these three things are gathered. First, that the prophets of God spake by the Spirit of Christ, for 1. Pet. 1. ver. 11. Peter teacheth that the prophets of God searched when or at what time the spirit which testified before of Christ,1. That Gods Prophets spake by the Spirit of Christ. which was in them, should declare the suffrings that should come vn∣to Christ, and the glorie that should follow. Secondly, that Christ is he, who hath alwaies shewed vnto vs, that is, vnto his Church,2. Christ alone reuealeth the counsell of his father. the minde and counsell of his father, and that the same at the first was neuer opened by any other, or by any other meanes. Lastlie, how great minde, and how great care Christ hath for his spouse, that is, for his church, appeareth also by this talke,3. How great mind and care he hath of his church. looke for this purpose Mat. 17. And Reuelat. cap. 1. and the. 2. Vers. 10. And the man that stoode among the mirre trees, answe∣red, and said, these are they,The generall drift of this vi∣sion is to teach that God his prouidence hath a stroake in all things. whom the Lorde hath sent to goe through the world. THe scope and drift of this vision is twofold, the one generall, the other particular, ver. 12. The general is heere expressed,
namelie that it might be declared, that whatsoeuer things fall out and are done in this world, come to passe by the prouidence of God, and that all things, which any where are done, are seene of God. Therefore he hath his ouerseers, and messengers, the which doe search, view and goe through, not onely this or that part of the earth, but the whole earth, that by and by like messengers, they may bring and report vnto him, what things soeuer are done in any place of the earth. Neither is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight (as it is Hebr. 4. ver. 13.) but all things are na∣ked and open vnto his eyes, with whom we haue to doe. And these things by an Anthropopatheia are spokē of God,Anthropopa∣theia what it is, see Mich. cap. 7. ver. 8. attributing vnto him the properties and qualities of men, who of himselfe needeth no messengers, but (as it is Psal. 113. ver. 6.) abaseth himselfe to be∣hold things in the heauen and in the earth. Ver. 11. And they answered the Angell of the Lord, that stoode a∣mong the mirre trees, and said, we haue gone thorow the world: and behold, all the world sitteth still, and is at rest. The quiet state of the whole earth, the church onely excepted.HEre is described or set foorth what was the state of the whole world at that time, to wit, calme and quiet, and at rest, excep∣ting the church alone, the which in the middest of the peace of al the whole earth, and of all nations, is notwithstanding sundrie waies tossed with stormes and troubles. Wherefore this place is a preparation vnto the verse following, to the ende that the com∣plaint of the Church, or of the Angell the head of the Church may appeare to be the more iust. Vers. 12. Then the Angell of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of hosts,The complaint of the Angel hauing three things to be no∣ted. how long wilt thou be vnmercifull vnto Ierusalem, and to the cities of Iudah, with whom thou hast been displeased now these threescore and ten yeares? 1. Who complai∣neth.THe complaint of the Angell, that is, of Christ, by the which the things which before were spoken of the generall proui∣dence of God, and his care ouer this world, are now peculiarlie applied vnto the Church.2. For what he complaineth. And in this complaint there are three things to be noted. First, who complayneth. Secondly, for what he complaineth.3. Of what he complaineth. Thirdly▪ of what he complaineth. He complai∣neth which is the Angel, who is peculiarly called The Angel of Ie∣houah,
or of the Lord in this place,  not for that this Iehouah had no other Angels also, but because this Angel aboue the rest, and by a certaine excellencie was such a one. For this is Christ, who is cal∣led the Angel of the great counsel. This selfsame is he, which among the mirre trees did sit vpon the horse. And truely this agreeth vn∣to Christ very wel, who is our mediatour vnto God, and that alone to pray & intreat his father especially for his Church afflicted, for as much as she is his bodie, and filling vp. 1. Cor. 12. For this is the proper office of the mediatour, as we are taught Heb. 9. ver. 24. That Christ is entred into heauen,  to appeare now in the sight of God for vs. Now he prayeth and that most earnestly for his Church, that is, the Bridegroome for his bride, the Lord for his seruant, the father for his sonne, the owner for his inheritance, the which he worthily soroweth to be so wasted, and to perish. For Christ hath care for that companie of the world onely, the which is his church. Last of all he complaineth of this also,  that now the ap∣poynted and set time of the affliction of the church was runne out, as Psal. 102. ver. 13, the godly doe pray, Thou wilt arise, and haue mercie vpon Zion: for the time to haue mercie thereon, for the appoynted time is come. And this time that hee here speaketh of was 70. yeares, as appeareth Ierem. 25. and yet the wasting both of the citie, and also of the whole land of the Iewes did still con∣tinue in such sort, that the church of God did not as yet inioye rest and peace, as other people and nations of the world did. And so that great wrath of God against the cities of the Iewes seemed as yet not to bee quenched, and appeased, when as notwithstanding he appeared to be fauourable vnto other nations. Iosephus Scali∣ger.Furthermore, whereas Iosephus Scaliger libr. 6. Emendat. tempor. pag. 29. reckoneth these yeares of the captiuitie from the first yeare of Xerxes with his father Darius, vnto the fourth yeare of Darius Nothus, this his account is such that as yet I cannot agree vnto him in the same. The which notwithstanding bee it spoken with the good leaue or vnder the correction of that most singu∣larlie learned, and godly man, vnto whom all learning and learned men owe much and are greatly beholding. Vers. 13. And the Lord answered the Angell, that talked with me, with good words, and comfortable words. The applying of the former doctrine vnto the church.THe applying of the former doctrine of the prouidence of GOD vnto the Church. For this answer sheweth that God after a cer∣taine
especiall maner is carefull, & mindfull of the same: the which thing appeareth as well by his benefites ordained for the same his Church by God, as also by the punishment decreed against the e∣nemies thereof.Two things to be noted. And here are two things to be noted. The one, that the prayers of the Angell, that is, of the Mediator Iesus Christ ma∣king intercession and request for vs,1. The prayers of the Angel, are heard forth∣with of the fa∣ther. are forthwith heard of the fa∣ther. The second, what is the minding and thinking of God vpon vs in Christ, namely, good, that is, full of happines and comforts, not onely that we should inioy the same peace and rest, the which other nations doe, but also farre more excellent and better. There∣fore the things which God in Christ hath shewed vnto vs are called good words,2. God mindeth his Church all good in Christ. and comfortable, because that through him, we haue peace with God Psal. 85. And as Paul writeth Rom. 5. ver. 1.2. Be∣ing iustified by faith, we haue peace toward God through our Lord Ie∣sus Christ, by whom also we haue accesse through faith vnto this grace, wherein we stand, and reioyce vnder the hope of the glorie of God. Vers. 14. So the Angell that communed with me, sayd vnto me, Crie thou, and speake, Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, I am ielous ouer Ierusalem and Zion with a great zeale, What the good words spoken of before, are, to∣ward the church her own selfe.A Making more plaine of that which went before. For he now sheweth what are those good words of God. And first, they are the benefits of God prepared toward the Church her selfe, to wit, that God embraceth her, as he did before, with great affection and loue, and hath not ceased to loue her by reason of her former cala∣mities or miseries.1. God will haue his loue made manifest to his Church. First of all then God will haue that his exceeding affection or loue, toward those that are his, to be made manifest vn∣to them, not priuily, but openlie: not for fashion sake, but earnestly▪ not lightly, but with great crying and diligence or earnestnes, that they may knowe it to bee a weightie and great matter.2. God himselfe is the author of things at his commande∣ment vttered by men. Secondly, that we should be assured that these things are spoken in the per∣son and at the commandement of God himself, albeit they be men that speake these things, he addeth, Thus sayth Iehouah, or, the Lord. Finally, that his affection or loue toward Ierusalem, that is to say, the Church, he describeth to bee very great For hereunto it apper∣taineth that he calleth it zeale,3. God his loue toward his Church excee∣ding great. or ielousie, yea and that great zeale or ielousie: and for that he repeateth the same word againe, t which among the Hebrewes or Hebricians is a signification of  highest degree. Like as therefore the miseries of the Church
great, so also doth God comfort her with great protestation of his loue. Vers. 15. And am greatly angrie against the careles heathen: for I was angrie but a little, and they helped forward the affliction. 2. What the good words of God are toward his Church in re∣gard of others.IN the second place is shewed what are those good words of God towards his Church, namely, the ouerthrowing or destroying of the enemies of his Church. This second benefit therefore is promi∣sed vnto the godly and faithfull, and doth containe a comfort for them, not that the godlie are delighted with this destruction of mē simplie in it selfe, and in that it is a destruction of men: but in this consideration, namely, so farre foorth as they which are destroyed, are the enemies of God. And this destruction is described and con∣firmed by the cause going before, to wit, by the anger of God, and the same most exceeding great and vehemēt or sore against them. For the Prophet sayth, that God is hot in anger, yea, and that great and earnest anger against these heathen, which haue afflicted the Church of God.The anger of God is the cause of the de∣struction and punishment of men. Now the anger of God is both a most certaine messenger and cause also of the destruction and punishment that shall come vpon men, against whom God is angrie. The Prophet ddeth and calleth them quiet or careles heathen, both to answer a secret obiection of theirs, who complained that they alone were veed or grieued in the midst of the quiet of the whole world: and also to take away from those selfe same heathen their vaine confi∣dence or trust, who, because they were at that time quiet and at rest, did not at all feare that these threatnings should come to passe, and did sleepe and snort careleslie in this their peace: neuerthelesse, sayth the Lord notwithstanding, they shall be destroyed, and shall grieuously be afflicted or punished, like as Isai 14. the like is threat∣ned both to the King of Babel, and also vnto the Philistines, not∣withstanding their securitie, or fearing no dangers. Last of all, the Lord setteth down a reason of this his anger against those heathen, that it may appeare both to be iust, and also that all the godlie may the more certainly beleeue and bee perswaded, that they shall bee punished. And this reason is, because that all of them were verie cruell against the people of God,The reason why God is so angry with the heathen. and afflicted or punished them  a minde not to chastise them, but to destroy them. Therefore  heathen executed these iudgements vpon the Church of God  vnto the will of God. For God would haue his people to
be corrected and punished but a little, and moderatly, or with rea∣sonable correction, as God himselfe witnesseth of his chastising of his Church Ieremie 30. ver. 11. when he sayth: For I am with thee, to saue thee: though I vtterly destroy all the nations where I haue scat∣tered thee, yet will I not vtterly destroy thee, but I will correct thee by iudgement, and not vtterly cut thee off. But these heathen purposed and intended plainly and vtterly to destroy and roote them out, as God himselfe beareth record of the King of Assyria Isai 10. ver. 7. saying: But he thinketh not so, neither doth his heart esteeme it so: but he imagineth to destroy, and to cut off not a fewe nations. So likewise doth the King of Syria, and the King of Israel determin against the King of Iudah Isai 7. ver. 6. for there they say, Let vs goe vp against Iudah, and let vs waken them vp, and make a breach therein for vs, & set a King in the midst thereof, euen the sonne of Tabeal. And therfore Psal. 83. ver. 4. the Church complaineth vnto God against such cru∣eltie of her enemies, and sayth, They haue sayd, come and let vs cut them off from being a nation: and let the name of Israel be no were in remembrance. But howsoeuer the enemies lay their platforme, this promise of God towards those that are his remaineth vnremoue∣able▪ My mercie will I not take from them for euer. Psal. 89. Vers. 16. Therefore thus sayth the Lord, I will returne vnto Ierusa∣lem with tender mercie: mine house shall be builded in it, sayth the Lord of hosts, and a line shall be stretched vpon Ierusalem. THe third exposition and shewing what is ment by those good words,The third ex∣position, shew∣ing what is ment by good words. the which containeth two most large promises, the one of the building againe of the Temple of God, the other of the re∣payring of the citie Ierusalem. And God addeth a reason of al these, to wit, his only mercie, and the same also free, for the which he hath had regard vnto Sion, and will helpe his Church. For God his retur∣ning, is to shewe himselfe fauourable vnto vs. Vers. 17. Crye yet, and speake, thus sayth the Lord of host, my cities shall yet be broken with plentie: the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet chuse Ierusalem. The fourth ex∣position of the good words of God.THe fourth exposition of the good words of God, contini  like maner two promises. One, of the rest of the cities of  also not only to be builded, but to be most full of people,
of the plentie and store of good things of all sorts. The other, that these promises of God shall be ratified or established, and perpe∣tuall. They shall be established, because he that same God of hosts, and most mightie doth command this selfe same thing openly to be affirmed, and with great earnestnes and certaintie. They shall bee perpetuall, because God hath yet chosen Sion, and doth yet comfort her, least the election and fauour of God toward her, by reason of the former miseries might seeme to haue ceased, and to be broken off,Nicham, Ba∣char, verbes of the present tense signifying the cōtinuance of God his fa∣uour. as the feeling of the flesh wrongfully iudgeth in af∣fliction or trouble. For God vseth two words, the which doe plain∣e signifie that the course of God his fauour and good will shal be continued, because of the present tense or time. And the word (yet) sundrie times repeated pertaineth also hereunto. Vers. 18. Then lift I vp mine eyes, and sawe, and behold, foure hornes. Tremelius re∣ferreth these foure verses vnto the second chapter.THe foure verses following do belong vnto the former sentence, therefore they ought to be ioyned with it in this same chapter, and not to be seuered from it, as some doe. For they containe the answering of an obiection, whereby also the confirmation of the former promises (namely of the destroying of the enemies of the Church, ver. 15. and of the restoring of all the Church certainly, ver. 17.) is gathered. And they be the answering of an obiection, because that both the multitude, and also the strength of the ene∣mies of the Church might seeme to be such, and so great, that the former promises might be supposed to be but vaine. Yet God con∣firmeth that it shall come to passe, because that how great soeuer  these lets and hinderances may be iudged of men for to be, the Lord notwithstanding shall take them away. So then in the foure verses following one only vision, that is to say,The vision fol∣lowing hath two parts, con∣taining belonging vnto one and the same ende, is described, the which notwithstanding hath two parts. The first part thereof noteth out the enemies that should  vnto the Church. And the latter part their destruction.1. The enemies of the Church. Both these poynts in a vision, to the ende that such as were the faithfull might giue the more diligent heede vnto them both (for these vi∣sible formes and shewes are wont more to draw vs vnto them,2. Their destruc∣tion. and  take vs more heedfull) and also that they might the longer  and muse vpon them both, when as they did see them both  uerally propounded or set before them. As for this verse,
the same containeth a figuratiue vision of the enemies of the Church, namely, there appeare foure hornes vnto the Prophet. They are shewed vnto him by God,The afflictions of the Church come to passe by the will and prouidence of God. that all men may vnderstand, that in this that his Church both before, and now also is afflicted or troubled, the same commeth to passe by the will and prouidence of God. There are foure shewed, not that thereby should be decla∣red, that there are but foure kingdomes only that are enemies vnto the godlie, but rather that thereby might be noted the foure parts of the world, to wit, East, West, North, South, out of euery of the which parts there haue alwayes sprung vp sundrie enemies vnto the Church, and shall at all times spring vp, like as Psal. 107. ver. 2, 3 the people of God deliuered from their enemies among whom they were scattered in all those quarters, are by Dauid exhorted to praise God for their deliuerance: Let them (sayth he) which haue been redeemed of the Lord, shew how he hath deliuered them from the hand of the oppressor, and gathered them out of the lands, from the East, and from the West, from the North, and from the South. They are also called hornes,Why the ene∣mies of the church are cal∣led hornes. because of their strength in comparison of that small companie and strength of the Church, if the matter bee weighed, and esteemed in the iudgement of men. Vers. 19. And I sayd vnto the Angel that talked with me, what be these? And he answered me, These are the hornes which haue scat∣tered Iudah, Israel, and Ierusalem. The interpre∣tation of the former vision describingTHe exposition or interpretation of the former vision. Wherein is first described the carefulnes of the Prophet desirous to know the things layd before him by God, but very obscure or darke, and humbly requesting to haue them made plaine vnto him,1. The carefulnes of the prophet to vnderstand the vision. and not casting them away waywardly, and as being wearie of them. And this selfe same is to bee imitated or followed of vs, that we should by faith aske of God the things which wee are ignorant of in his word, as Iames in his Epistle cap. 1. ver. 5. doth teach vs, saying, If any of you lacke wisedome, let him aske of God, which giueth vnto all men liberallie, and reprocheth no man, and it shall be giuen him. Se∣condly, the louingnes of God in teaching vs familiarlie or friendlie,2 The louingnes of God in friendly teach∣ing vs. is to be noted, that we should not thinke such our prayers to be vn∣acceptable, or displeasing vnto God. So Dan. 10. ver. 11. there is a man sent vnto Daniel, who doth gently expound vnto him the vi∣sion, and in friendly and courteous speech sayth vnto him, O Diel,
a man greatly beloued, vnderstand the words, that I speake vnto thee, and stand in thy place: for vnto thee am I now sent. So againe cap. 11. ver. 2.3. and so following. Last of all, the interpretation of the visiō is also to be marked. For he doth not only shew whō whose hornes doe signifie, namely, the enemies of the Church, wheresoe∣uer the same be, either at Ierusalem, or in France, or in Israel: but al∣so how greatly they did rage. For they win owed, that is, scattered into sundrie parts of the world, and tore in sunder the bodie of the Church gathered together before in a certaine place, cruelly ren∣ting it, so that as it is ver. 21, none durst lift vp his head. Vers. 20. And the Lord shewed me foure Carpenters. The second part of the vi∣sion, sheweth that God hath those in a rea∣dines, the which shall beate downe the enemies of his Church.THe second part of the vision, which sheweth that the helpe of God is in a readines for his Church, that it should not think that  cannot be defended. For God hath remedies alreadie prepared against so many, and so strong enemies, the which are in this place signified by the name of Carpenters. And this verse containeth an other figuratiue vision. For the Prophet seeth foure men shewed vnto him in the habite, forme, and likelihood of Carpenters, by God himselfe, that is to say, girded or furnished with beetles, and being now prepared and readie to beate in those hornes. In the shew of which vision there is a continuing still of the same Meta∣phor,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. the which was in the former vision going next before. The ind of remedie therefore now propounded or set forth, is answe∣rable and agreeing vnto that same feare, the which was shewed and described vnder the similitude of the hornes. Vers. 21. Then sayd I, what come these to doe? And he answered and sayd, These are the hornes which haue scattered Iudah, so that a man durst not lift vp his head: but these are come to fray them, & to cast out the hornes of the Gentiles, which lift vp their horne o∣uer the land of Iudah, to scatter it. The interpre∣tation of the vision of the Carpenters cō∣taining two things.A Making plaine of the vision which went next before concer∣ning the Carpenters, wherein appeareth both the desire of the Prophet in learning, and also the same louingnes of God in teach∣ing or instructing vs. But this interpretation containeth two things. First, it sheweth that God hath prepared and in a readines for his Church so many remedies, and out of the same places,1. Looke how ma∣ny enemies and in how manie places the Church hath, so manie reme∣dies, and out of so many places, God hath in readines a∣gainst them. out of how
many, and which places there arise enemies against it. Wherefore the Prophet seeth foure Carpenters, although God by one Carpen∣ter onely bee able to throw downe and breake in pieces all those hornes: how great soeuer therfore the terror or dread of those ene∣mies and hornes bee, and such as may make the whole Church a∣frayd, it is notwithstanding an easie thing vnto God to ouerthrow this their so great and so mightie strength also. Further, this repeti∣tion, whereby their crueltie, and the trembling of the Church is a∣gaine described in this selfe same chapter, serueth vnto this ende, least the godly might suppose that God were too weake against such enemies, and least they should measure his power & strength by their owne feare, and so consequently it serueth, that the godlie should cease to tremble at the power and might of men, bee they neuer so fierce, and terrifying or awhaping others. This is one point that is to be noted in this interpretation. 2. After what maner these Carpenters shall helpe the Church.Another poynt is, by what meanes, or after what maner those Carpenters shall helpe the Church at the commandement of God. First of all they shall make afrayd the aduersaries of the godly, then they shall cast them wholly downe, and ouerthrowe their whole power and strength. So then God vseth certaine degrees of punish∣ments in punishing and destroying the enemies of his Church, that is, his owne enemies, both that they may learne to repent, if it bee possible, and also that the Church may the better wey & consider, and more diligentlie meditate or thinke vpon those iudgements of God. CAP. 2. Vers. 1. I lift vp mine eyes againe, and looked, and behold, a man with a measuring line in his hand. The third Ser∣mon vnder a wonderful ma∣ner or vision re∣presenting the building of Ie∣rusalem.THe third Sermon, the which now sheweth and confirmeth e∣speciallie & peculiarlie, that there shall be a building of the citie Ierusalem it selfe. And this also is shewed vnto the Prophet vnder a type or figure, and the same wonderfull, and full of comfort. Vn∣der a type or vision, that the Iewes might mark it the more diligent∣lie. Secondly, that the thing it selfe might in this picture be the bet∣ter layd open before their eyes. Lastly, that this so royall and noble a promise might be set forth vnder a forme altogether diuine and to be astonied at, that is, worthilie, and agreeablie, as it becommeth
the maiestie of so high and weightie a matter.This vision full of comfort. This vision also is full of comfort, both because of the multitude of Angels ordained for the seruice of the Church, and also because of the singular care of Christ for the Church, the which is here set forth vnder the person of the Angel speaking vnto the Prophet. In a word, this Sermon, which intreateth of the state and restoring of the Church, contai∣neth nothing but that which is extraordinarie, diuine, and full of great maiestie. The summe of this vision and chapter is,The summe of this Sermon. That the ci∣tie Ierusalem it selfe (howsoeuer that then it were but rubbish, or an heape of old stones) because it was a type or figure of the Church to come, and the house or seate of the Church that thē was, should, & that very shortly, be restored, builded again, & set vp, in the same glorie, dignitie, safetie, & fauour of God, as it was before.Two parts of this narration. This nar∣ration or discourse containeth two parts. First, the vision it selfe be∣ing figuratiue and darke. Secondly, the interpretation of the same,1. A vision. the confirmation whereof is set downe afterward.2. The interpre∣tation of the same. The vision was an Angel, vnder the shape of a man, that is, an excellent and eue∣end man, offering himself vnto the sight of the Prophet, to the end he should not put him in feare, as Act. 16. ver. 9. there appeareth an Angel vnto Paul in the shape of a man of Macedonia,1. The vision. requesting his helpe there. This man holdeth in his hand a line, that is, an in∣strument at that time most vsuall to measure the spaces of places, according vnto which custome Dauid Psal. 16. ver. 6. speaketh, say∣ing, The lines are fallen vnto me in pleasant places. And this line he holdeth in his hand to shewe, wherefore he was sent. The Prophet lifted vp his eyes, both because such visions are sent from heauen, & so are spirituall: and also for that vnlesse wee lift vp our eyes vnto them, they will quickly slip out of our mindes, and will be without profit. Vers. 2. Then sayd I, whither goest thou? And he sayd vnto me, To measure Ierusalem, that I may see what is the breadth therof, and what is the length thereof. 2. The interpre∣tation of the vision.THe interpretation of the vision, whereby is shewed that Ierusa∣lem, which at that time was the house and seate of the Church of God, should be builded in her iust & old, both length & breadth: not in any lesse, or in some small measure, but in that, wherein it was before. The which appeareth to haue been fulfilled Nehem. 3. for the Lord long sithens had promised by Daniel, that the streetes
thereof should bee builded, cap. 9. ver. 25. in these words: Knowe therefore and vnderstand, that from the going forth of the comman∣dement to bring againe the people, and to build Ierusalem, vnto Mes∣siah the prince, shall bee seuen weekes, and threescore and two weekes, and the street shall bee built againe, and the wall, euen in a troublous time. And the diligence of the prophet in inquiring after the will of God is described in this verse, and commended 1. Pet. 1. ver. 11. and is therefore of vs to be imitated or followed. Vers. 3. And behold, the Angell that talked with me, went forth: and another Angell went forth to meete him. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer interpre∣tation.A Confirmation of the former interpretation made by Christ himselfe, taking another Angell also for witnes, that in the mouth of two witnesses that decree and promise of God might stand, and appeare to be ratified, or established for the former An∣gell, of whom was spoken before: and this latter Angell, who at the commandement of Christ telleth this same thing vnto the Prophet, are two very sufficient witnesses of his promise. Now it was a thing very needefull, that a matter so hard, and past all hope in the iudgement of men, should be confirmed by most sure rea∣sons vnto the Iewes at that time, being yet in feare, and feeling all things to be against them. God therefore taketh two witnesses of his promises.Angels appeare before Christ to obey him, for the help & defence of his Church. And out of this place wee doe see that Angels doe present themselues vnto the obedience of Christ, as who is true God, and doe obey him, and that he vseth their seruice to help vs, and to defend his Church, according as we reade of them Hebr. 1. ver. 14. where speaking of them, that Author saith: Are they not all ministring spirites, sent forth for their sakes which shall bee heires of saluation? Vers. 4. And sayd vnto him, runne, speake to this young man, and say, Ierusalem shall be inhabited without walles, for the multitude of men and cattell therein. The promise made plaine by parts. Two parts of this promise.A Making plaine of the promise by parts, with all speed, or out of hand vnto the prophet, and afterwards Christ will haue it by him to be declared vnto the church, that shee should not faint with long waiting,  but should forthwith be comforted And there are two parts of this promise,Of the buil∣ding. the former of the building againe:
the latter of the conseruation of the church,2. Of the pre∣seruing of the church. in the verse follow∣ing. So then God in this place promiseth that the citie shall be re∣nued, and that it shall be most full of all kinde of liuing creatures and things needfull for the maintenance of cities, in so much that from that same citie a multitude both of men and cattell shall a∣bound, and as it were ouerflow into the villages and countrie. The which thing also may be figuratiuely and mysticall vnderstood of the spreading abroad and inlarging of the church of God, or of Christ by the preaching of the Gospell. And the prophet calleth himselfe a young man, or a child, both by the contempt of his owne person, and also in regarde of the glorious forme that the Angels did then appeare vnto him in. Vers. 5. For I, saith the Lord, will be vnto her a wall of fire round a∣bout, and will be the glorie in the middest of her. The second part of the for∣mer promise, to wit of the pre∣seruing of the Church. What the fi∣gure Sarcasmos is, see Nahum. cap. 3. ver. 14.THe second part of the former promise of God, namely the pre∣seruation of the citie, albeit that at the first it were defended either with no fortresses or bulwarks at al, or else with very weake ones. The which thing also is vnderstood by that Sarcasmos, or bi∣ting frump and taunt, wherewith the Samaritans mocked and laughed to scorne the Iewes building it againe, as it is Nehem 4. ver. 3. Where Tobiah the Ammonite comforting Sanballat being wroth with the Iewes for the building of the wall, answereth and saith in this scoffing maner, Although they build, yet if a foxe goe vp, he shall euen breake down their stonie wall. God therefore by the figure Noema promiseth that the same citie shall bee most safe.Noema, or vn∣derstanding, is a figure, where one thing is said, and an o∣ther thing is ment or vnder∣stood, as in this place, a wall of fire, for a most strong wall, and such a one as none dare to assault. For he sheweth that he will be a defence vnto it, and a firie wall, that is, not onelie a most strong wall, but also such a one as all ene∣mies shall greatlie bee afraide of, and shall not dare to passe ouer, no nor once so much as assay so to doe, or to come nere vnto it. So Isai 26. ver. 1. In the song of the faithfull they doe praise God for that he is as a strong and well fensed wall vnto them, by whose ayde and help they stand safe against all their enemies. The words be these. In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Iudah, wee haue a strong citie: saluation shall God set for walles, and strong bul∣warkes. Againe cap. 60. ver. 18. The prophet sheweth that they shall be freed from all hurt and inconuenience because the Lorde his saluation, help, and deliuerance, shall bee as a strong and sure wall vnto them, to inclose and hedge them in round about, and on
euery side: Violence (faith he) shall be no more heard of in thy land, neither desolation, nor destruction within thy borders: but thou shalt call saluation thy walles, and praise thy gates. And here when as God promiseth that he will be as a firie wall vnto Ierusalem, and that hee will bee the glorie in the middest of her, hee seemeth to allude and haue resemblance vnto that ayde, the which God some time gaue vnto the prophet Elizaeus, as it is recorded 2. King. cap. 6. ver. 17. Where at his prayer, the Lord openeth the eyes of his fearefull seruant, and letteth him see a multitude of horses and firie chari∣ots round about the mountaine, sufficient to encounter the great armie and host of the Syrians, who compassing about the citie of Samaria, had brought the seruant of the man of God into such exceeding great feare. Then Elisha prayed (saith the text) and said, Lord, I beseech thee, open his eyes that he may see. And the Lord opened the eyes of the seruant, and hee looked, and behold, the moun∣taine was full of horses, and chariots of fire round about Elisha. Nay the Prophet teacheth that the citie shall not onely be sufficiently sensed without, but also that it shall be happie within, and aboun∣ding in all things, euen vnto the wonder, feare and astonishment of the enemies. Which thing in this place is added by the figure Auxesis or increasing.What the fi∣gure Auxesis is, see Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4. For the Lord himselfe promiseth that hee will be the glorie in the middest of the citie: that we should vn∣derstand that nothing is more secure, or in more saftie then the church, albeit that vnto the vnfaithful nothing seeme more weak, more dangerous, and forsaken then the refuge thereof. Vers. 6. Ho, ho, come forth, and flee from the land of the North, saith the Lord: for I haue scattered you into the foure windes of the heauen, saith the Lord. An exhortati∣on vnto the Iewes, with a reason of the same.AN exhortation with the rendring of a reason vnto the Iewes, and in their person vnto all men, to embrace so great felicitie or happines of the visible church, and to gather themselues vnto it, leauing all other things and countries. And the circumstance of that time and men causeth, that that this exhortation was ne∣cessarie and to be repeated againe.The circum∣stance of time. The circumstance of the time, because that then all things by reason of many difficulties or in∣combrances did threaten vnto the Iewes destruction, rather then giue hope of building the citie againe.The circum∣stance of men. The circumstance of men, because the Iewes were slack and slow in laying hold and concei∣uing
of the promises of God. And therefore were they thrise cal∣led out by God, to wit first by Zorobabel, Esd. 1. and 2. Secondly, by Esdras, Esdr. 7. Thirdly, by Nehemias, Nehem. 2. And as often as some of these were brought away out of Babylon by some of these Captaines, it is saide, That it was the good hand of God, that is, that it was the great worke of God in perswading and turning or mouing them vnto this iourney, so greatly doubtles were they delited now with those outward seates and dwellings of Babylon, and so fast did they cleaue vnto them. Wherefore God himselfe in displeasure doth here crie out Ho, ho. Hee therefore exhorteth them to deliuer and get themselues out of those miserable and i∣dolatrous countries, in which they were, and that out of hand, and with all speede that may be. And therefore they are commanded to flee and not to goe. So Isai 48. ver. 20. is there the like exhorta∣tion, Goe ye out of Babel: flee ye from the Chaldeans, &c. And Re∣uelat. 18. ver. 4. And I heard another voyce from heauen say, Goe out of her my people, that ye be not partakers in her sinnes, and that ye re∣ceiue not of her plagues. The reason of the exhortatiō.The reason of this exhortation is, because that all those north-countries (in the which they were and seemed to haue obteined some commodities) were so many prisons, or most sorrowfull ba∣nishments, into the which they were thrust by God. Therefore so long as they remained in them, so long should they beare that pu∣nishment and plague of God. Wherefore let them not interpret and take those commodities and pleasures, if they had any there, for a testimonie or witnes of the blessing of God, or prefer them before the toyle and labour of this iourney, and finallie before the holy land. Now the foure windes, spoken of in this place,The foure windes, where they are to be vnderstood to be placed. are to be placed in that same North land, the which stretcheth very far. For in that destruction of Ierusalem exploited by the Chaldeans, no Iewes are red to haue comen ouer into Europa, or into our oc∣cident or westerne parts. Vers. 7. Saue thy selfe, O Zion, that dwellest with the daughter of Babel. A repetition of the exhortatiō with an ampli∣fication of theTHis is a repetition of the exhortation, with an amplification of the same, the which is taken from a briefe comparing toge∣ther of the places, to wit of Sion and Babylon, that is, of Paradise and hell. Moreouer the miserable condition also of those Iewes
which stayed in Babylon, is described most plainely, when as they are willed to deliuer themselues out of it, as out of a most misera∣ble thraldome and bondage. For the word (saue or deliuer) is op∣posed or matched against the seruitude or bondage, the which they then suffered. Vers. 8. For thus saith the Lord of hostes, after this glorie hath he sent me vnto the nations, which spoiled you: for he that toucheth you, toucheth the apple of his eye. A staying in the further laying open of the happines of Ierusalem.THis is a staying in the further laying open of the happines of Ierusalem, continued vnto the end of the chapter, which con∣sisteth or standeth partly vpon promises, and partly vpon exhor∣tations. The promises concerne both the happie state of Ierusa∣lem, that is, of the church of God, and also the most assured de∣struction of the enemies thereof. The exhortations giue encou∣ragement vnto the godly to imbrace by faith so notable promi∣ses of God. Therefore the things which follow doe appertaine vnto the same end,Why those things are so often repeated. vnto the which the former part of this chap∣ter did. But for this cause it was needefull for the godly, that these things should bee often repeated, for that the present state of things, and the condition of the Iewes seemed to be vtterly against such promises, and to be a let vnto them. And first of all the Pro∣phet here repeateth, that which ver. 5. of this chapter he had said of the keeping and saftie of the church, but hee doth it in other words, and with an other kinde of benefite or ayde. For there the Lord promiseth that he will be a firie wall vnto those that are his: here, that those which are his, shall be as deare vnto him, as are his owne eyes, which speech the Psalmist vseth in his prayer vnto God Psalm. 17. ver. 8. signifying thereby that he craueth God his most sure and safe defence, when he saith, keepe me, as the apple of thine eye: hide me vnder the shadow of thy wings. Foure things here to be no∣ted.And here are foure things to bee noted. First, who speaketh here. And here, and in the verses following the selfe same An∣gell speaketh,  which in the fourth verse was willed to runne vnto the Prophet to tell vnto him the things which should come to passe vnto Ierusalem.Who speaketh. But because the place following conteineth exceeding great promises of God, and such as at that time were almost incredible or not to bee beleeued, towards those that are his, therefore here also is againe repeated the commandement of
God, yea and the same the true and most mightie God (which two things are signified vnder these words (Iehouah, and the Lord of hostes) least any being astonished at the present state of things, should despayre, or be without all hope of these benefites of the church, the which should be performed afterwards: and in the verse following the godlie are called back vnto the euent or issue it selfe and experience of things, as vnto the most true witnes of this prophesie, howsoeuer there were no hope of the same. For the state of this people in Babylon was as the lying of a dead man in a graue; or as the condition of the same people in Egypt, to wit, past hope of recouerie, and most miserable in the iudgement of man. The second thing to be noted is,2. When these things shall come to passe. when these things shall come to passe. The answer is, After this glorie. For here the time is described, wherein the godly ought to marke the fulfilling of this promise, not whollie I confesse, but onelie to be begunne, and afterward by little and little to be finished. And after this glorie it shall begin to be done and come to passe, that is to say, after that God shall begin to exercise that power and glorie, when as hee promised before ver. 5. that hee would bee in the middest of his church. And because that the power and glorie of God doth ap∣peare especiallie in the true and sincere or sound preaching of his word, and chiefelie in the preaching of the gospell (which is the power of God, for Paul saith Rom. 1. ver. 16. It is the power of God o saluation) these things also ought chiefely to be referred vnto that time, in the which the gospell of Christ was preached, albeit notwithstanding this blessing of God began to haue some effect, and accomplishment before, as for example, when God destroy∣ed the kingdome of the Babylonians, Persians, the kings Antio∣chi, and Ptolomaei, the enemies of his church.3. To whom these threatnings appertaine. The third thing is, vnto whom these threatnings doe appertaine. Answer, vnto those selfe same persons who were the enemies of the church, and which spoiled and robbed the same Psal. 79. and 83. The fourth,4. What maner of promise this is. what maner of promise, the promise here made vnto the church is. Answer, a most large promise, nay such a one, that a greater af∣fection or loue, and care of God cannot be shewed. For God hol∣deth his church so deare, as his owne eyes.
Vers. 9. For behold, I will lift vp mine hand vpon them: and they shal be a spoyle to those that serued them, and ye shall know that the Lord of hostes hath sent me. After what maner so many nations shall be destroyed.A Making of the matter more plaine, that they should vnderstand by what meanes, or after what maner so many nations, and so mightie, the which persecuted and spoyled the Church of God, might bee destroyed: namely, for that God himselfe will execute and take vengeance vpon them, & will lift vp his hand vpon them. And God, whatsoeuer he will doe, he can doe. And therefore it is not without an Emphasis, or vehemencie and force, the which is sayd in this place (I) and (mine hand). And by this word (lift vp) God sheweth that they shal flee vnto no quarters and coasts of the world, vnto the which he will not turne his hand against them. For in all parts of the world the Church of God hath been afflicted by them.The punishmēt of the enemies of the Church amplified. Finally, he amplifieth or encreaseth their punishment by the lamentable falling out of the matter, and by the circumstance of the persons. For they the very selfe same proude enemies of God shall be a pray vnto their owne seruants, that is, vnto those nation ouer whom they reigned tyrannically before, and shall be spoyled by them: not by any other noble or famous nations, vnto whom it should not be so reprochfull and hard to be in subiection, and to yeeld vnto. But at his hands, whom thou hast vsed, and vexed like a slaue, what gentlenes or curtesie canst thou looke for? And least that so great, and so wonderfull vengeance and threatning of God might seeme to bee vaine, the Prophet, or the Angell himselfe ap∣pealeth vnto the issue and falling out of the matter, that they may vnderstand these things to bee true, and that he may confirme or strengthen the godlie, and terrifie or make afrayd the vngodlie. Vers. 10. Reioyce, and be glad, O daughter Zion: for loe, I come, and will dwell in the midst of thee, sayth the Lord. THis is an exhortation, and also acōfirmation of the former pro∣mises,An exhortatiō vnto ioy and gladnes. taken from a signe or token, namely, from the ioy or gladnes, and the same great, publike, and manifest, not secret, pri∣uat, or obscure or vnknowne, whereunto the Church is exhorted by God, because those promises shall most certainly come to passe. He sheweth the maner also of fulfilling of them by amplification
and expressing of the cause, namely, for that God himself shal come vnto the Iewes, and dwell in the midst of them. And it is no hard thing for God to execute his decrees. For he is Iehouah, and as he is called in the next verse, The Lord of hosts, that is, most mightie, and who hath full and absolute rule ouer all things generallie and parti∣cularlie. So then here are three things to be noted. First,Three things to be noted. who are exhorted? It is the Church of God which is exhorted, and she is ex∣horted with most courteous and gentle words, to wit,1. Who are ex∣horted. by the name of the daughter Sion, the which is not without Emphasis or force & vehemencie: for this word hath in it a mouing of affection.2. Whereunto they are exhor∣ted. Se∣condly, whereunto they are exhorted, namely, vnto ioy & gladnes of mind both earnest and publike, the which the Church ought to testifie or shew by gesture, voyce, and all other honest meanes. For so much signifieth the word Exulta, to leape and skip as it were for ioy. Neither are the benefites of God, especially so great bene∣fits to be lightly tasted of, or receiued. The third thing is,3. Why they are exhorted vnto so great ioy. why they are exhorted vnto so great ioy of minde, to wit, because the grea∣test benefit of all benefits, the which by God may on earth be be∣stowed vpon men, yea euen vpon those which are his owne, shall fall out vnto the Iewes, of his meere or onely good will, fauour, and rcie. For the Lord God Iehouah himselfe shall come vnto her, & well in the midst of her. The which fell out vnto the Church not only by effectuall operation or working, and inuisiblie, but was done in Christ visiblie, or in such sort as it might be seene, and bodi∣lie. For Christ who is that true Iehouah (in whose name the Angel here speaketh) is made vnto vs God to be seene in the flesh, which he tooke vpon him, & hath dwelled in vs, as Paul speaketh 1. Tim. 3 ver. 16. God is manifested in the flesh: and his person, and glorie hath been seene, as Iohn saith cap. 1. ver. 14. The word was made flesh, and dwelt among vs (and we saw the glorie thereof, as the glorie of the only begotten sonne of the Father) full of grace and trueth. Vers. 11. And many nations shall be ioyned to the Lord in that day, and shall be my people: and I will dwell in the midst of thee, & thou shalt know that the Lord of hostes hath sent me vnto thee. The second cō∣firmation of the former pro∣mises.THe second confirmation of the sayd promises of God from a double place. First, frō the euen it self, or fulling out of the mat∣ter, the which the godly are cōmanded to giue heed vnto. Second∣ly, from the repeating of this benefit promised before, of the reall
and manifest dwelling which should be of the true God, that is, of Christ being made man, in his Church, the which (because it is the foundation or ground of all other promises of God, and a most sin∣gular testimonie or witnesse of the good will of God toward his Church) is here repeated againe, that wee should thinke earnestlie and alwayes vpon the same. And of these two reasons doth the An∣gell, and consequently the Prophet (vnto whom this Angel was sent) conclude, that these promises of God are true, and that the Church should finde and knowe indeed, (albeit that all things at that time seemed for to bring despaire, and to fight against those benefits of God) that he spake, and foretold all these things at the commandement of God. Further, here is in this place described a wonderfull euent or falling out of the matter,The cōuersion of the Gentiles. and the which also is a part of the fulfilling of those graces of God, and a cause of the gladnes specified before, namely, the cōuersion or turning of those nations which at that time were altogether Infidels, vnto the true God, and vnto the fellowship of his Church, the which they perse∣cuted so cruelly before. For at that time, wherein God shall fulfill his promises, this wonderfull change and conuersion of the world shall be made ful indeed of comfort & ayde for the Church it selfe, Psal. 87. Wherefore this word (Day) in this place signifieth a long and continuall time. Moreouer, the adioyning of the nations is the worke of God in the nations and peoples vnbeleeuing before, and sheweth that they of themselues, and of their owne accord shall not come vnto God, but when as they shall be conuerted or tur∣ned by God himselfe. Finally, all these things are the words of the Angel speaking vnto the Prophet at the commandement of God, & telling him what Christ (who is the same Iehouah, whose dwel∣ling is promised among vs) shall doe. Vers. 12. And the Lord shall inherit Iudah his portion in the holie land, and shall chuse Ierusalem againe. The conclusion of the former prophesie.THe conclusion of the whole former prophesie, with the answe∣ring of an obiection that might be made, the which is set down in the next verse. The conclusion hath two parts. For it compre∣hendeth both the people, and also the citie it selfe, both which he teacheth, that they shall not only be restored: but also founded and grounded on the same fauour of God, place, situation, grace, and e∣lection, where with their fathers were loued before, and the first ∣tie
inhabited, and that they shall be possessed also by the same title (namely, of the peculiar people or inheritance of God) and that not only for a day or twaine: but for euer, and by right of inheri∣tance, the which right hath a continuance and succession.Store of com∣forts mini∣stred vnto the Church. So then here is a great heape and store of comforts set before the Church. First, when as she heareth that the persons, whereof she shall con∣sist, shal be so liked of God, and accepted after the same maner, that their Elders, namely, the Patriarches and Prophets,1. Because the persons, of whō she consisteth, are so deare vnto God. and the rest of the people of the Iewes were accepted of God. The reason is, for that there is one and the same cause, why God holdeth both those, and these, that is, all his elect deare and acceptable vnto him, and this cause is only Iesus Christ alone. Moreouer, for that God hath, and retaineth his Church as his peculiar people,2. Because she is his peculiar people. or a portion pecu∣liarly seuered and chosen out by him, out of all the nations of the world. Furthermore, because God will haue the same testimonies of his fauour to be extant or remaine among them,3. Because God will haue re∣maining a∣mong them the same tokens of his fauour, which were a∣mong their fa∣thers. the which were sometime remaining among their auncestors, to wit, the citie it self, and the manifest pledges of God his election, which were in it, as the Temple, and the seate or gouernment of the people. For this double preeminence (both which Ierusalem had) was a token of the sauour, and singular election or choyce of God made of this people, Psal. 132. and 87. whereof he maketh mention in this place. But now all these outward and earthly tokens doe cease vnder the Gospell: and there are better then these placed in their stead, the which we haue for a pledge and most certaine testimonie or witnes of ou election made by God, namely, the pure preaching of the word of God, also the manifest fulfilling of these figures, and the light of the Gospell, and other such like trulie and indeed spirituall pledges of the singular loue of God toward vs. Vers. 13. Let all flesh be still before theOr the face of the Lord. Lord: for he is raised vp out of his holie place. What these fi∣gure be, see A∣mos cap. 5. ver. 21. and Ionas cap. 2. ver. 9.THis is an Hypophora, or answering of an obiection that might be made, where with as with an Epiphonema, or acclamation he sealeth vp all the former promises. Least therefore the Iewes might thinke these things to be impossible, when as they haue so many e∣nemies in their way, when as there are so many lets, the which they meet withall: the Prophet sheweth that God will put silence vpon ll these, that is, cause them to cease and be still, because he is Ieho∣uah,
and almightie, before whose face or presence all things must tremble,An excellent commendation of the maiestie and power of God. Psal. 114. and all flesh be still. And here in this place is an excellent praise and commendation of the maiestie, and power of God ouer all, and euery singuler thing, the which is set forth of the Prophet by the figure Epiphonema, or acclamation, to stirre & rouse vp the mindes of men withall. Further, it carrieth an Emphasis or vehemencie and force with it, that here also (flesh, and the face of the Lord) are opposed or matched one against another: for the one hath nothing but weakenes, the other sheweth and carrieth before it nothing but maiestie.The cause of this silence of all things. Last of all, that the minds of the Iewes may bee the more comforted and strengthened, there is added or set downe the cause of this silence imposed or put vpon all things, For that God is now raised vp out of his Sanctuarie or holie place, in the which he seemed so long to haue been asleepe, how long he suffe∣red those that were his to bee afflicted and oppressed of their ene∣mies. And therefore the godlie often in the Psalmes in such cases doe call vpon God, as it were to awaken him being asleepe, and as if he had forgotten them, as Psal. 44. ver. 23.24. Ʋp, why sleepest thou, O Lord? awake, be not farre off for euer. Wherfore hidest thou thy face, and forget test our miserie, and our affliction? Againe, Psal. 74. ver. 2. Thinke vpon thy congregation, which thou hast possessed of olde, and on the rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed, and on this mount Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt. Now therefore he will awake, and earnestly put to his hand, to deliuer those that are his, and will consider of the wrong that hath been done vnto them, and thinke vpon the reuenging of it. So Psal. 78. ver. 65.66. after many iniuries suffered to bee done vnto his people, and as it were winked at, it is sayd that at the length The Lord awaked as one out of sleepe, and as a strong man that after his wine crieth out, And smote his enemies in the hinder parts, and put them to a perpetuall shame. The word Sanctua∣rie, or holie place,Sanctuarie or holie place. I do referre vnto the Temple, that the Iewes might vnderstand, that they had the like testimonies or witnesses of the fauour, presence, and defence of God, as their fathers had of old. For they sayd that God did meete them out of his Sanctuarie, that is, his Temple, when as they signified that he was louing and fauourable vnto them, Psal. 20.1. King. 8.
CAP. 3. Vers. 1. And he shewed me Iehoshua the hie Priest, standing before the Angel of the Lord, and Satan stood at his right hand to resist him. Particular promises for the building of the Church.AFter the generall promises, the which doe generally shew that the Church shall be renued and restored, now God declareth and openeth vnto the Iewes other particular promises, the which also doe appertaine vnto the same end that the generall did. For they be not only a confirmation of the former, but also the accom∣plishment, and fulfilling of the same, to wit, that the godly might vnderstand that God would fully restore his Church, and omit or let passe none of those things, the which are necessarie for the whole and full establishing of so great a benefit.The restoring and renuing of the priesthood. First therefore he promiseth the restoring of the Priesthood, or priests office, both in the order, and also in the glorie, and finally in the succession & con∣tinuance of the same, and this he doth in this whole chapter. And after this method and order doth God declare that his promise cō∣cerning the Priesthood, that he sheweth both the cause of the same casting off of the Priests ministerie or office: and also doth repre∣sent or lay open vnto the view, how great this casting off of it is. For by this meanes his grace and power in restoring this Priesthood af∣terward is the more cleerely knowne, and appeareth, least that this so great a worke of God might bee thought to bee but a common benefit, and easie to be brought to passe and done. And all this is shewed by a vision vnto the Prophet, and not opened vnto him on∣ly in words, that this promise may the more certainly bee knowne to be of God, and that by this meanes the auditors or hearers them selues together with the Prophet might bee the more moued, as namely, seeing and noting euidently in the same the testimonies or witnesses of God his maiestie. And first of all the cause is rehearsed,The cause of the so long stay∣ing of the re∣storing of the priesthood. the which was a let before vnto so great a benefit of God, and the which did so greatly depresse or keepe downe that holie office of the priestly order: and that is Satan or the diuell egging God on continually to take vengeance on their sinnes. For it is he that ac∣cuseth vs before God, as it is witnessed Reuelat. 12. ver. 10. in these words: Then I heard a loude voyce, saying, Now is saluation in hea∣uen,
and strength, and the kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast downe, which accused thē before our God day and night. And he it is that will sift vs, as Christ telleth Peter, and the rest of the Disciples Luk. 22. ver. 30.31. say∣ing: And the Lord sayd, Simon, Simon, behold, Satan hath desired you, to winow you as wheate. But I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith faile not: therefore when thou art conuerced, strengthen thy brethren. And he setteth himselfe both against the whole Church, and euery par∣ticular member of the same: for the defence whereof against Satan, and all other enemies by his meanes procured against it, there is none (sayth the Angel talking with Daniel, cap. 10. ver. 21.) which holdeth with me, but Michael your prince, that is, Christ our Sauiour. How hee setteth himselfe against the particular members of the Church, appeareth most cleerely in the storie of Iob, cap. 1. And Paul witnesseth the same 1. Thess. cap. 2. ver. 18. where he sayth, Therefore wee would haue come vnto you (I Paul, at the least once or twise) but Satan hindered vs. Wherefore by the signification of the word Satan, that is, our aduersarie, his malicious and cruell ende∣uour against the Church is proued. For he is called Satan, because he is an aduersarie, and enemie vnto the Church. The state of the priesthood described in Iosua.Secondly, the state of the priestly order, in the person of Iosua, who then was the hie priest, and head of that Leuiticall ministerie, is here in part described: & afterward more fully in the third verse. And Iosua is sayd to haue stood in the sight of the Angell, to wit, of that Angel, who is both Iehouah, and vnto whom the rest mini∣stred or serued (and this indeed is Christ, that same great messenger of the counsell of God) that hereby the Prophet might giue vs to vnderstand, that the condition and case of that priestly order, al∣though it were then base, was knowne vnto God, and not without the care of God. Vers. 2. And the Lord sayd vnto Satan, The Lord reproue thee, O Satan: euen the Lord which hath chosen Ierusalem, reproue thee. Is not this a brand taken out of the fire? The second part of this vi∣sion, being threefold.THe second part of this vision, wherein is shewed vnto the Pro∣phet, that he afterward might declare it vnto the Church, the foundation or ground of all the promises of God which were to come toward the Pastors and Priests.1. The wil of God. First, the will and election of
God. Secondly,2. Christ his in∣tercession. Christ his intercession or request for the same priesthood. Thirdly, the conseruation and keeping of the same now opened and begun.3. The conserua∣tion of the priesthood al∣readie begun. So then God will therefore restore that ministerie or office, because that he hath now chosen Ierusalem, that is to say, his church of his mere or onely grace, and hath or∣deined and keepeth such things as are necessarie for the establish∣ing, maintaining, and feeding of the same, as is especiallie the mi∣nisterie of the Church, the which in times past consisted in the order of the Priestes and Leuites, and now in the Pastors and mi∣nisterie of the church vnder the Gospell. Secondly Christ, that is, the Lord (who before also was called the Angell and our media∣tor vnto Iehouah his father) prayeth for the same order or priest∣hood daylie, and with great affection vnto his father, and taking vpon him the defence thereof. Christ therefore prayeth, that Sa∣tan, and all enemies of this holy ministerie may be reproued and repressed in deed, that is, may be brideled, by the mightie hand of God that they may not bee able to effect or bring to passe that which they enterprise and goe about. And the repeating of his prayer against Satan (The Lord reproue thee, O Satan, the Lord re∣proue thee) is a wites of the very great affection or loue of Christ toward such his ministers There is a like speech in the Epistle of Iude ver. 9. of Michaell striuing against the diuell, and disputing about the bodie of Moses, whom (Iude saith) durst not blame im with cursed speaking, but said, the Lord rebuke thee. Finallie, the manifest will of God concerning the preseruing of them is also the foundation or ground of the promises following. For the Lord had taken Iosua and others, as it were fire brands all readie on fire and burning, out of the middest of the flames. Hee will therefore preserue them, how vile and base soeuer their estate seeme to be, and neuer to be lifted vp againe, because hee hath al∣readie begun to doe it. And so Dauid by the former experience of God his goodnes towards him, assureth himselfe of the like help in the time following, when hee saith Psalm. 138. ver. 8. The Lord will performe his worke toward me: O Lord, thy mercie endu∣reth for euer: forsake not the workes of thine hands. Vers. 3. Now Iehoshua was clothed with filthie garments, and stood before the Angell. The laying o∣pen of the base estate of the priesthood at that time.THe laying open of that base condition and estate, wherein the priestes, that is, the ministerie of the church at that time were,
because of the contemptible or despised condition of that whole people as yet, so farre as in the iudgement of man the affaires of the Iewes might then be esteemed of. Wherefore the same by an Hypotypôsis or liuely description is now represented or laide open to the view,What the fi∣gure Hypotypo∣sis is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 12. yea and that by God himselfe, to the ende the Iewes and the priestes themselues might vnderstand that this their so base estate was knowne vnto him, when as notwithstanding hee promiseth that the dignitie of the priesthood shall be so great: for it is an allegoricall or figuratiue Hypotyposis. For vnder the name and representation or shew of filthie clothes, the contempt, and base condition of the priesthood is signified, as contrariwise by the sight and beholding of changed and glorious clothing in the fourth verse is noted the happie and glorious estate of that order. For as it is Galat. 4. Thus did the Lord teach that people touching spiritual things, being yet vnder figures and shadowes and weake, that he might signifie and describe spirituall and heauenly things vnder these earthlie figures and signes Hebr. 9. The old apparrel of the priesthood, so glorious and golden, was a signe both of all those spirituall riches and treasures, which should bee in the man Christ, in whom all treasures of wisdome and knowledge are hid, Coloss. 2. ver. 3. and also of that holines, which ought to be in the priestes themselues, who in like maner were figures of Christ. And whereas Iehoshua the high Priest is saide to haue stoode so baselie apparrelled before the Angell himselfe, who also before was called Iehouah, this hath an Emphasis or vehemencie and force, and mouing of affection, both for the confirmation of the certaintie of this whole prophesie, and also for the proofe and shewing of the care of God, and knowledge of the state of his Church, and of those that serue him. It is also a preparation vn∣to the narration insuing in the verse following. Vers. 4. And hee answered, and spake vnto those that stood before him,The first pro∣mise of the re∣storing of the priesthood. Three things to be noted in this verse. saying, Take away the filthie garments from him. And vn∣to him hee saide, behold, I haue caused thine iniquitie to depart from thee, and I will cloth thee with charge of rayment. THe first promise of God, to wit of the restoring vnto those Iewes and times, the office of the Priestes and Leuites: and also of he ministerie of the church.1. The person speaking. Wherein there are three things to be noted. First, the person that speaketh, to wit the same Angell,
before whom stood Iehoshua. And the same is no meane or common Angell, but the head and prince of the Angels. And therefore be∣fore him stood other Angels in a readines to receiue his comman∣dement, and to execute the same, as appeareth in the verse folow∣ing. And he no doubt is Christ our Lord, and the euerlasting sonne of God, who is called both an Angell, in respect that he is our me∣diator vnto God the father, opening vnto vs his will at the full: and also is called Iehouah, in respect that he is equall vnto his fa∣ther. And this Angell answereth, that is, of his owne accord and willinglie promiseth this, which followeth. For so doe I expound the word (answereth) in this place. Secondly is to bee noted,2 What is pro∣mised. what is promised, hee promiseth the restoring of the Leuiticall priesthood, that is, the ministerie of the Church, and that figura∣tiuely by the changing of filthie clothing into gay and gorgeous clothing. For such apparrell shining with gold and pretious stones wore and had the high priest, whilest the order of the priests and Leuites enioyed his bewtie and glorie.3. For what cause it is promised. The third thing to be no∣ted is, for what cause the Angell doth now promise that this shall come to passe, namely because that this Angell of his great and onely mercie and fauour doth now blot out and doe away the ini∣quities of this order committed against him. So then the for∣gienes of sinnes, and our reconciliation or being made friendes with God, which is done onelie by our Lord Iesus Christ alone, is the principall and foreleading cause of all the benefites of God toward vs, as we are taught in this place. Vers. 5. And I said, Let them set a fayre diademe vpon his head. So they set a fayre diademe vpon his head, & clothed him with gar∣ments, and the Angell of the Lord stood by. The second pro∣mise of God of the restoring vnto the mini∣sterie of the church her for∣mer dignitie.THe second promise of God, to wit of the glorie, and the same dignitie to be giuen againe vnto this ministerie of the church once restored, the which it had before, and in times past. The which in this place is set downe vnder shadowes and figuratiuely, and by a Synecdoche. Vnder shadowes or figuratiuelie, when as by the name of a miter or diademe the priestlie dignitie is signified. And by the figure Synecdoche, when as the prophet by the part,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. that is, by the name of the Priestes Miter or diademe doth com∣prehend his whole apparrel and al the dignitie of the priesthood, that is, of the ministerie of the church. For the Miter or this dia∣deme
was but one part only of the Priestes apparrell, yet the chie∣fest and highest part, because it had written vpon it Holines of ho∣lines of Iehouah, and was worne vpon the head, as is shewed in this place. And it hath an Emphasis, or vehemencie and force, whereas it is commanded that a fayre one bee set vpon his head, to wit, so braue, large, and perfect one, as was in time past, least any thing of the former dignitie thereof might seeme to be diminished. Fi∣nally, for the confirming of the euent or falling out and fulfilling of this promise, the Angels which stoode by as ministers vnto Christ, are said now already to haue set this Miter or diademe vp∣pon the head of Iehoshua, yea and that Christ being present, and standing by that is, seeing and marking, that all things should bee done, as he had appointed. Vers. 6. And the Angell of the Lord testified vnto Iehoshua, saying, The third pro∣mise of the con∣tinuance of the priesthood, con∣taining three things.THe third promise of God of the induring and continuing of the priesthood, or ministerie of the church, vnder a certaine condition, the which is conteined in the verse following. And in this place there is a preparation vnto the fulfilling of the promise following. Now this promise conteineth three things, namely first, him which doth vtter and deliuer the promise following. And he also is the Angell,1. Who vttereth this promise. which by his name is called The Angell of Iehouah, that is, the same Christ, so far forth as he is vnto vs the interpreter of the counsels of his Father, and our mediator vnto him. So much therefore the more certaine is this promise, by how much it is vttered by the sonne of God himselfe, Christ, yea and by Iehouah, and in the name of the Lord of hostes, that is, of his father almightie,2. Whom the Angell spea∣keth vnto. as it appeareth hereafter. The second thing here rehearsed is, whom this Angell speaketh vnto. And he speaketh vnto Iehoshuah, not in respect that Iosua was some priuate per∣son, but in respect that hee was at that time by God ordeined the head of the whole order of Priestes among the Iewes. Therefore this one Iehoshuah did represent the whole order of priestes, and ministerie of the Church: so that the promises which are made vnto him, must be vnderstood not to appertaine vnto him alone, but also vnto the whole Leuiticall ministerie.3. After what maner he spea∣keth vnto him. The third thing is, after what maner and forme the Angell speaketh, namely by resti∣fying, that is to say, by a solemne oath, or by making a protestati∣on,
and not in a plaine, simple, and ordinarie maner of speaking, that this promise of God may be vnderstood to be most certaine, how hard soeuer it were iudged for to be performed at that time, in regard of the state and iudgement of that people. Vers. 7. Thus saith the Lord of hostes, if thou wilt walke in my waies, and keepe my watch, thou shalt also iudge mine house, and shalt also keepe my courtes, and I will giue thee place among these that stand by. The promise with a conditi∣on ioyned thereunto.THis is the promise with the condition ioyned with it. And the promise in a word is, that it shall come to passe, that the same order of priesthood shall be continued among the Iewes, yea and that in such sort as it was first ordeined among them by God. The which thing is vnderstood by a threefold kinde of speaking, the which is in this place, where so many partes of the priestlie or Leuiticall ministerie are expressed, as there were before. And of these the first is,1. Matters ap∣perteining to the seruice of God, and vnto the temple and sacrifices, per∣teined to the priestes. that the iudgement of the house of God shall be in their power, as it hath been in times past. For the iudgement of those things, which appertained vnto the seruice and worship of God, and vnto the ordering of the Temple and sacrifices was in the power of the Priestes and Leuites Deut. 17. Secondly, the An∣gell promiseth, that the keeping of the Courtes of God shall belong vnto them. The which also was a most excellent part of the office of the Leuites. For they onely might keepe the Temple of God:2. The keeping of the Courtes of God belonged vnto the priests and Leuites. and more freelie goe into the same, then the rest of the people, as it was ordeined by the Lawe of God. Neither hath this keeping any base thing in it: nay it was a testimonie, or witnes, as if those priestes did stand as Angels, alwaies in the presence of God. As Dauid also doth reckon the meanest of their offices to bee more honorable then the greatest dignitie that otherwise in this world may be obtained among men, when as he saith Psalm. 84. ver. 10. A day in thy courtes (speaking of the house of God) is better then a thousand other where. I had rather bee a doore keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the tabernacles of wickednes.3. He shal be ouer seer of the rest of the Priestes and Leuites. The third phrase, or kinde of speaking and part is, Thou shalt haue authori∣tie and priuiledge to goe in among these, to wit priestes, and thy fel∣lowes, which stand by thee (for so I doe expound it by the verse following, and doe not referre it vnto the Angels) to wit, thou shalt bee as ouerseer of them, as namely one which art ruler ouer
them. God therefore vnderstandeth and promiseth that the pe∣culiar preeminence shall bee restored vnto the high Priest aboue the rest of the order of the Leuites, and commeth downe from the generall ordeining of that whole order, vnto this particular dignitie of the high priesthood. And thus much doth this promise conteine. The condition twofold.The condition ioyned to this promise is twofold. First, ge∣nerall, that he walke in the waies and commandements of God, that is to say,1. Generall. that all the priestes liue holilie, as becommeth godly men, and the sonnes of God, and of the light. The second conditi∣on is particular,2. Particular. that euery one, were they Leuites, or were they Priestes, should behaue themselues vprightlie, and faithfullie in that his charge, standing, and watch, ouer the which he was pecu∣liarlie set by God aboue the rest. Psal. 134. Vers 8. Heare now, O Iehoshua the high priest, thou and thy fel∣lowes that sit before thee: for they are monstrous persons: but behold, I will bring forth the Branch my seruant. A confirmation of all the for∣mer promises.A Confirmation of all the former promises, which went be∣fore in this whole chapter. And it is taken from the cause, and the same necessarilie bringing foorth these promises, as his effectes. This cause is Christ that was long since promised vnto the Iewes, looked for of them, whose type or figure was Ieho∣shua, and also the whole order of the Priestes, and finallie for the loue and sake of which Christ or Messias, GOD dooth most entirelie loue his Church, and careth for those things which appertaine vnto it. For shee is the people or inheritance of Christ, and the fulnes of his mysticall bodie. For as it is Ephes. 1. ver. 22, 23. GOD hath made all things subiect vnder his feete, and hath appoynted him ouer all things to bee the head to the Church, which is his bodie, euen the fulnes of him that fil∣leth all in all things. And this bodie cannot GOD forsake. Wherefore GOD confirmeth that all the former things shall come to passe or bee, because that afterward hee giueth, and shall giue vnto his Church the cause of all these good things to wit, the very person of Christ, whom hee will send. Wee are therefore called backe vnto Christ, and it behooueth vs to looke vnto him, as often as wee doe doubt of the promises of God.
Two parts of this this verse.But this verse hath two poynts. The first, a preface. The second, a promise. The preface teacheth that here is intreated of a matter of very great weight,1. A preface. whereunto consequently we must giue dili∣gent heed. And therefore it is sayd (Heare thou).2. A promise. And not only Ie∣hoshua is commanded to heare, but also his fellowes and compa∣nions, that this promise and comfort may be vnderstood to belong,  not onely vnto Iehoshua the high priest alone, but also vnto the whole order and ministerie of the Church.Diuersitie of degrees in the priesthood. Wherein also there is a difference made in the order of the Church. For some are shewed to be in a greater place and degree, and some in a lesse, whē as some are sayd to stand before Iehoshua as before their Ruler and Cap∣taine, set ouer them by God: and Iehoshua is called the great or hie priest, that this distinction or difference may be vnderstood to bee true. For it was a part of the ceremoniall lawe, that the Church of God, which did wholly consist of the Iewish people, had then also one visible head, the which was a type or figure of Christ. The which notwithstanding the Church of God cannot now haue, be∣cause that according vnto the prophesies of the Prophets it is scat∣tered, and spread abrode throughout the world.Why the An∣gel speaketh vnto the whole order of priests, and comfor∣teth them. Now why the An∣gel speaketh also vnto the whole order of priests, and comforteth them, the reason is, because that the Leuite Priests were despised & mocked of the other Iewes, nay, they were hated of them, as name∣ly being such, who did too much lay open, were too earnest vpon, and accused the sinnes of the people before God. Whereupon they are sayd to haue been monstrous persons, as Dauid also complai∣neth of himselfe Psal. 71. ver. 7. I am become as it were a monster vn∣to ny: but thou art my sure trust. But the Lord on the contrary part doth comfort them. 2. The promise containing two things.Now the promise is, that Christ or the cause of all the gifts of God toward his Church, shall come, to be made manifest, and to be giuen vnto the Church her selfe. Therefore these things are done in the fauour of Christ, to wit, that his people, inheritance, and seate decreed, and ordained by God, might be reserued vnto him. And this promise containeth two things. First,1 The exhibition or shewing of Christ in the flesh. the manifest giuing of the person of Christ, which shall be done vnto the Church, vnder∣stood by these words, Behold, I will bring forth, or cause to come: the which is opposed or set against those promises, the which taught that he was yet to be looked for. And therefore Iohn sayth cap. 1. ver. 17. The law was giuen by Moses, but grace and trueth came by Ie∣sus Christ. And the word of exhortation (Behold) sheweth that the
thing shall be, and that speedilie, and certainlie, that they might by assured faith looke as it were into the thing present.2 A description of Christ. Secondly, this same promise containeth a description of Christ, that wee should consider how great a benefite of God he is: and should not thinke this to be as a simple gift, or some common and meane thing. And Christ is called the seruant of God, to wit, in respect that he was made man. And yet not a seruant after the maner of the rest of the faithfull, the which in many things obey not the Lord their God, Malach. 1. but he is so called by a certaine excellencie. For he was in euery respect to fulfill all the will of God his father, and indeed in that he was man, he fulfilled the same Isai. 61. Moreouer, he is cal∣led a branch, as hereafter cap. 6. ver. 12. Behold the man, whose name is the branch, and he shall growe vp out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord. So Isai 11. ver. 1. But there shall come a rod forth of the stocke of Ishai, and a graffe shall grow out of his rootes. Likewise God sayth in Ieremie cap. 23. ver. 5. Behold, the dayes come, sayth the Lord, that I will raise vnto Dauid a righteous branch, and a King shall reigne, and prosper, and shal execute iudgement & iustice in the earth. And he is termed a branch, not so much for that his condition and state is base,Why Christ is called a branch and here described vnto vs meane and simple in the iudgement of men, as for that he should alone be vnderstood of vs to bee the fountaine, roote, and spring of the whole Church. And therefore that he alone is he, by whose power, and Spirit, and word we are plants and trees in the Church of God: because he is he, of whom alone, as of a spirituall branch wee all are borne againe, and made heauenly plants. For as Iames witnesseth cap. 1. ve. 18. Of his owne will begat he vs with the word of trueth, that we should be as the first fruites of his creatures. And Peter Epist. 1. cap. 1. ver. 23. teacheth vs likewise, that we are borne a new, not of mortall seede, but of immortall, by the word of God, who liueth and endureth for euer. Which thing doubtles agreeth vnto Christ alone, into whom wee must be graffed, that we may be borne spirituallie, and be heauenly branches, Iohn 15. Vers. 9. For loe, the stone that I haue layd before Iehoshua: vpon one stone shall be seuen eyes: Behold, I will cut out the grauing thereof, sayth the Lord of hostes, and I will take away the iniquitie of this land in one day. THis is the rendring of a reason, whereby the Angel or the Pro∣phet sheweth, why, and how, when as Christ, or this branch is
promised vnto vs, wee ought to hope for all those gifts from God,A reason, why and how we are to hope for all the former gifts from God. namely, because it is he alone, whom the father hath layd the foun∣dation, ornament or beautifying, and appeasing of his Church. Therfore he confirmeth the former consequence or reason by the Epithets or proper attributes or titles of Christ, and of this branch, that we should without doubting looke for all things from God by and for Christ. And, that Christ is the foundation of the Church, the word stone doth declare, whereby Christ is here termed, not by contempt, or in despite, but by his name, as Psalm. 118. ver. 22. The stone which the builders refused, is the head of the corner. And I sai 28. ver. 16. Behold, I will lay in Zion a stone, a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a sure foundation. He that beleeueth shall not make haste. And Peter Epist. 1. cap. 2. ver. 7. hauing cited this former text of Isai in∣ferreth, saying, Vnto you therefore, which beleeue, it is aprecious stone: but vnto them which be disobedient, the stone which the builders dis∣allowed, the same is made the head of the corner. So then this stone is sayd to be layd before Iehoshua, and that same whole order of Le∣uites, and finally before the vniuersall Church, that all should lye vpon him, and looke vnto him, as their only foundation. The vse of this stone.And the vse of this stone is added, when as seuen eyes are attribu∣ted or giuen vnto him, with all which he looketh vnto the calami∣ties or miseries and matters of his Church, least we might suppose him to be a blind and idle stone. The same Christ is the ornament or beautie of his Church:What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap 4. ver. 12. the which is here Metaphorically descri∣bed or set foorth vnder the cutting or grauing of a Ring, or Stone, the which is wont to be done in precious stones, that albeit they be of themselues precious alreadie, yet by this trimming they may be∣come more precious, beautiful, and to be had in the greater request. So whilest Christ is present with his Church, there can be wanting no commendation and setting of vs foorth vnto God. Finallie, the same Christ is the appeasing of the Church vnto God. For his o∣bedience causeth, that all the iniquitie of the Church is done away, yea, and that there is taken away in one day from her, whatsoeuer iniquities she hath gathered together in many yeares. Hereby ap∣peareth how great the benefite of Christ is, who in one moment blotteth out all the spots and staines the which we haue taken with long rusting, obstinacie, and stubbornnes.
Vers. 10. In that day, sayth the Lord of hostes, shall ye call euery man his neighbour vnder the vine, and vnder the figgetre The conclusion promising vnto the Church spi∣ritual peace vnder a Meta∣phor of earthly things.THe conclusion, wherein peace is promised vnto the Church, as the sealing vp, and fruite of all the former promises. And this peace albeit it be indeed spirituall, and belonging vnto our minds: yet is it in this place described or set foorth vnder a Metaphor of earthly things, to wit, vnder the description of that time, wherein e∣uerie man inioyeth his owne goods quietly, and safely, and without danger, being troubled by no man: and dareth also, and may bold∣ly inuite or request others vnto the inioying and partaking of the sayd goods. So is the kingdome of Salomon commended 1. King. cap. 4. ver. 24. not only for that he had a very wide and large domi∣nion, euen from the other side of the riuer, from Tiphsa vnto Azzah: but also for that he had plentie of peace round about him on euery side. And for that Iudah, and Israel dwelt (vnder him) without feare, euery man vnder his vine, and vnder his figge tree, from Dan, euen vnto Beer-sheba. So also Micah prophesying of the great peace of the Church vnder the Gospell, cap. 4. ver. 4. sayth, That euerie man shall sit vnder his vine, and vnder his figge tree, and none shall make them afrayd: for the mouth of the Lord of hostes hath spoken it. CAP. 4. Vers. 1. And the Angell that talked with me, came againe and wa∣ked me, as a man that is raised out of his sleepe. This chapter is a confirmation of all the pro∣mises of God toward his Church at all times.THis chapter is warlike. For it answereth and beateth downe to∣gether and at once all the obiections and doubts of al the god∣lie, the which might then come into their mindes against the pro∣mises of God so past all hope, and impossible in respect of men, and not only hard to be performed. Wherefore this is a confirmation of the vniuersall promises of God toward his Church at all times, yea euen in this our time, and for the time to come. The summe of the answer of God vnto all the doubts of men concerning his pro∣mises, is this, That the Church of God is neither gouerned, nor vp∣holden and maintained by the ordinarie meanes or counsailes of men, but by the extraordinarie power, might, & spirit of God. And therefore in desperate matters and cases, or such as are past hope,
that we must notwithstanding hope well, and in things past reme∣die in our iudgement, wayt still for the best touching the euent or falling out nd fulfilling of the promises of God.The wonderful preseruation of God his church set forth here by a vision. But this so won∣derfull counsell and purpose of God, not able to be vttered nor cō∣ceiued of the flesh, in the defending and sauing of those that are his, is notwithstanding here in this place, to the end that it may the better be vnderstood, set forth or shewed by God himselfe, after a most easie maner by a vision. And this vision is taken from things most known among the Iewes in that age, to wit, from that Candle∣sticke, the which was lighted with candles in the Temple of God, and was an ordinarie instrument of the outward seruice of God, & a part of the olde ceremonies and such as were familiar vnto the Iewes, or whereunto they were vsed, & with the which they were very well acquainted. For albeit that this Candlesticke which is here by vision shewed vnto the Prophet, doth in this poynt seeme to differ from the Candlesticke of the Temple, such as is described Exod. 25. because that this had one onely bowle, and that of the Temple seuen bowles: yet this is but a small difference. But herein it was behouefull that the forme of this should be diuers from that Candlesticke of the lawe, that it might the more easilie be shewed vnto vs, that whatsoeuer falleth out, is done or ordered in the Church, the same is done by the one Spirit of God, and not by ma∣ny: and needeth not diuers authors, but one God onely.Why God set∣teth forth this vision vnto his Church. And this first verse sheweth, why God by his Prophet propoundeth or set∣teth forth this vision vnto his church, namely to cōfirme, or streng∣then and comfort the same, the which was rather astonished with the wondring at the former promises, then did beleeue them: and was rather made astonied and brought as it were into a trance, thē comforted. Therefore this sleepe, from which the Prophet sayth he was raised, is the trance, and wondring of amazednes, or an a∣stonied minde, not the sleepe of sleeping or slumbring, and sleepe of the bodie. So the same fell out vnto Daniel cap. 8. ver. 17.18. where he confesseth that he was afrayd at the vision, and fell vpon his face, and being asleepe fell vpon his face vnto the ground. And ver. 27. he sayth that he was not only astonished at the vision, but also was striken and sicke certaine dayes. And cap. 10. ver. 8.9.10. he affirmeth that at the vision, which was there shewed vnto him alone, the men that were with him ran away for great feare, and hid themselues, and that he for his part was so weakened, and brought so low, that there remained no strength in him, for that his strength
was turned into corruption, and that he reteined no power, yea that he was thereby made so feeble, that he was not able to stand, vntill he was set vp vpon his knees, and vpon the palmes of his hands, by the man that talked with him, &c. And that which the Prophet in this place saith to haue fallen out vnto himselfe, wee are to thinke the like also of other godly men, albeit they feare God, and trust in him neuer so much, namelie that they were ra∣ther brought into a wonderment, then confirmed or strengthe∣ned: because that all things, the which they then sawe round a∣bout them, tooke from them all hope of the fulfilling of these promises in time to come. God therefore hauing compassion on his church (the state whereof is described or set forth in the Pro∣phet) doth remit, that is, sendeth againe the second time his An∣gell vnto the Prophet,This Angell here speaking vnto the Pro∣phet, is not Christ, as be∣fore. in whome hee speaketh vnto his Church, and confirmeth or strengtheneth the same. This Angell therefore is another then Christ, to wit, he which was sent at the first, to in∣struct and teach the Prophet in the former chapters. Vers. 2. And sayd vnto me, what seest thou? And I saide I haue looked, and beholde, a candlestick all of golde with a bowle vpon the top of it, and his seuen lampes therein, and seuen pipes to the lampes, which were vpon the top thereof. The vision shewed vnto Prophet.A Plaine laying forth of the matter. For the Prophet sheweth what maner of vision was shewed vnto him from God, the which that hee should giue the more diligent heede vnto, hee in warned by the Angell, that he should not slenderlie or lightly ouer passe so great a confirmation of his faith set foorth vnto him by God, or carelessie and lightlie onely looke vpon it, such as our both negligence and dulnes is wont for to be. The things which appertaine vnto the description of the candlestick, must bee fet from the 25. chapter of Exodus. Vers. 3. And two oliue trees ouer it, one vpon the right side of the bowle, and the other vpon the left side thereof. The second part of the vision.THe second part of the typicall or figuratiue vision, namelie, there are shewed vnto him two Oliue trees also, from which there was continuall oyle powred into that burning candlestick that it should neuer drie vp, or be put out. And yet are not thes
oliue in this place said to be pressed by any man, the which not∣withstanding among vs must needes after an ordinarie maner be done, that the oyle may flow or run from them. Neither is this oyle said to fayle, nor with toyle and labour to bee carried from one part or place into another, that there may be alwaies oyle for the candlestick, but there stand these oliue trees, to wit growing vnto that candle and candlestick on both sides, and they are con∣tinuall, and of themselues without the seruice and help of any men or oyle, milles doe droppe and powre in oyle into the bur∣ning candle or candlestick. Confer this place with that of the Re∣uelation cap. 11. ver. 4. where he saith: These are two oliue trees, and two candlestickes, standing before the God of the earth. Vers. 4. So I answered, and spake vnto the Angell that talked with me, saying, what are these my Lord? A preparation vnto the inter∣pretation of the former vi∣sion.A Preparation vnto the interpretation of the former vision by the way of a dialogue or questioning, and answering, that the Prophet both then should giue the more heede vnto it, and that e also now might bee stirred vp when as we reade these things. And therefore the prophet was warned by the Angel before, that e should diligently behold the vision shewed him by God. This when as hee had done, hee is now astonished at the brightnes or gloriousnes of these things, because they were of gold: and with the newnes or strangenes, because they differed from those which he knew: and with the multitude, he sawe many instruments. He therefore asketh, and that of his owne accord, what all these things did meane?Gods benefites are to be accep∣ted, when he offereth them vnto vs. Doubtles wee are to vse the benefites of God, as when as he offereth himselfe to teach vs, and help vs (as in this place by the Angell) let vs accept of that hand and help of God, neither fearefullie, nor slowlie, nor slightly: nay let vs most large∣lie and plentifullie vse the whole benefite of God. The Angell willed the Prophet, to behold, and marke what things were shew∣ed vnto him: the Prophet desireth the interpretation of them also, not of a certaine curiositie of minde, but that the counsell of God, and this vision might turne vnto the comfort both of himselfe, and also of the Church. So Daniel cap. 8. ver. 15. witnesseth that e saw the vision, and sought also for the meaning. So cap. 9. ver. 22. The Angell Gabriel speaketh vnto him, and telleth him, that hee is ome to shew him the meaning of the vision, &c. The prophet cal∣leth
the Angel (Lord) for honor sake, and not to worship him ac∣cording vnto the maner of the countrie. For the Iewes called the more honorable persons (Raboni) and (Adoni) as Iohn 20. ver. 16. Iesus saith vnto her, Marie. She turned her selfe, and said vnto him, Rabboni, which is to say, Master. So Gen. 23. ver. 6. The Hittites say vnto Abraham, desiring to buy of them a place to burie his wife Sarah in: Heare vs my Lord: Thou art a prince of God among vs: in the chiefe of our sepulchres burie thy dead, &c. Vers. 5. Then the Angell that talked with me, answered and said vnto me, knowest thou not what these be! And I said, No, my Lord. The Angel wondreth at the ignorance of the prophet.AN admiration, or wondering. For the Angell maruaileth that the Prophet being a Iewe and acquainted with the ceremo∣nies of the Temple, is ignorant notwithstanding what all these things (which in a manner were seene the same in the Temple, and were ordinarie) signified.What the god∣lie beleeued touching the ceremonies of the law. For those that were godly in deed (as the prophet was) did not beleeue that those ceremonies and rites of the law, and monuments and the whole furniture of the Temple did of themselues please God, or that they were signes of nothing that was more holie, as the Apostle teacheth Hebr. 9. But they did acknowledge all those things as figures, the veritie or trueth and signification whereof was more reuerend and holy, and to be sought else where, namely in Christ. Yet doth the pro∣phet notwithstanding freely confesse his ignorance, not in respect of that candlestick, the which was ordinarie in the Temple: but in respect of that onely which was extraordinarilie shewed him by God. Vers. 6. Then he answered, and spake vnto mee, saying, This is the word of the Lord vnto Zerubbabel, saying, Neither by an armie, nor strength, but by my spirit, saith the Lord of hostes. A briefe inter∣pretation of the drift of the former vision.A Summarie or briefe interpretation of the scope or drift of this vision, to wit, that the church of God is vpholden, defended, gouerned by the extraordinarie counsels, and power of God, that when as wee demaund of the fulfilling of the promises of God toward his church, we should not looke vnto the meanes of man: but should consider the almightie power of God, surpassing all
the strength of men, the which will fulfill these his promises Psal. 138. But there are three things to be noted in this place.Three things to be noted. First, that this speech is properlie directed vnto Zorobabel, that is the prince of the people at that time, because it is requisite and ne∣cessarie, that he and other princes of the people,1. The speech di∣rected vnto Zo∣robabel. should be com∣forted in such dangers and troubles especiallie. For the rest of the people for the most part, dependeth vpon the disposition of their princes, that is, vpon their constancie or fearefulnes.2. With what words God his extraordinarie maner of hel∣ping his church is described. The second thing to bee noted is, with what wordes this same extraordinarie maner of God in defending and helping of his church is descri∣bed, to wit, By the name and power of the onely spirit of God. For the might and power of God is called his spirit in the Scripture. So is it said 2. Thes. 2. ver. 8. of Antichrist, That the Lord shall con∣sume him with the spirit of his mouth. And of Christ Isai. 11. ver. 4. That he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lippes shall he slay the wicked. And of the Egypti∣ans cap. 31. ver. 3. That they are men, and not God, and their horses flesh, and not spirit. Against this spirit is opposed or set whatsoeuer the world or men doe holde and iudge strong, valiant, great in number, glorious. Therefore vnder the name of (an armie) the Prophet doth comprehend a multitude, wherein men are wont to trust: and vnder the word (strength) whatsoeuer is mightie, valiant, and iudged of force and powerfull in the opinion of men. Then all which this one spirit of God is farre more mighty, that is to say, the onely power of God, euen lacking or without all outward meanes, is stronger then all the strength of men.3. The warran∣ting of this pro∣mise with the twise affirming it to be the word of the Lord. Third∣ly, this double warranting is to bee noted, wherewith all this so excellent and grounded promise is confirmed, first, in the begin∣ning of this verse, when as this word is called The word of Iehouah. Secondly, in the ende of the same verse, when as it is set downe a∣gaine, that this selfe same is the saying, and the most firme or assu∣ed decree of the almightie God himselfe, to wit, that the Church of God should not doubt, no neuer so little, of the help of God, nor yet those which gouerne or rule the same. And therefore that they should haue and hold their eyes both of minde and bodie fixed or fastened vpon God alone, whether they be faithfull Ma∣gistrates, or pastors and ministers of the gospell.
Vers. 7. Who art thou. O great mountaine, before Zerubbabel? thou shalt be a plaine, and he shall bring forth the head stone thereof, with shoutings, crying, grace, grace vnto it. The answering of an obiection of the power of the enemies of the church.THis is the answering of an obiection that might bee made, whereby God with great vehemencie and earnestnes of speech refuteth or ouerthroweth all the power of the enemies of his church, and the doubting & wauering, the which hereupon might stick in the hearts of the godly. And to the ende that this speech might moue vs the more,What the fi∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see Amos cap. 1. ver. 4. by the figure Apostrophe, or turning of speech vnto an other person or matter, it is directed vnto the ene∣mies of the Church themselues. First, of all therefore by way of granting or yeelding vnto them, he describeth this power of the enemies of the church according vnto the iudgement of carnall men, vnder the name of mountaines, yea & the same great moun∣taines, the which carrie a shew, and glorious appearance, and seeme to be inuincible, or such as cannot bee wonne and ouercome. So Psalm. 68. ver. 16. the mountaine of God is described: The moun∣taine of God is like the mountaine of Bashan: it is an high moun∣taine, as mount Bashan: finally, hee describeth them to bee such mountaines, the which might feare men with the very looking on them. Furthermore, he propoundeth or setteth forth vnto the church, the throwing downe of those enemies, and the same full of exceeding comfort vnto the godly:The casting downe of the mountaines. and their casting down li∣eth herein: for that all the same huge high masse of the mountaines shall at the length shrinke and fall downe, so that the worke which was begun, shall be finished by the godly, that is, the Temple shall be made an end of vnto the building vp of the same.The comfort of the godly. The comfort is, first, for that Zorobabel himselfe (against whom these enemies of God did set themselues Esdr. 3. and 4.) shall see this selfe same thing with his eyes. For before him shall these mountaines bee brought into a plaine, and Zorobabel himselfe shall lay the last stone vpon this Temple. Which thing was a testimonie or wit∣nes of the singular mercie of God toward Zorobabel, because that it doth not alwaies so fal out, that those which begin the work of God, doe finish the same, albeit that the worke of God, and re∣storing of his church be finished at the length. Secondly, God doth comfort the whole people of that age and time: For they shal with a great shouting and gladnes prayse God for the finishing of the
Temple, and shall crie, The grace, the grace of God, that is to say, it is the meere, or only and great benefit of God toward vs, that wee see these things. So then the Iewes at that time shall most readily and earnestly giue thankes vnto God, and the same Iewes, which shall see these things to be done, and fulfilled, shall attribute this whole benefite vnto his only goodnes, as the true cause thereof. Vers. 8. Moreouer, the word of the Lord came vnto me saying, A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer comfort.THis a confirmation of the former comfort, the which also is as it were a seale and a sealing vp of the former promise. And the Prophet confirmeth it by the interpretation or exposition of that sentence, God shall bring forth a stone, &c. The which least it might seeme to be feined, or spoken by the Prophet himselfe according to his owne pleasure, and of his own good will and fauour toward Zorobabel, there is a warrantise, authoritie, and weight added vn∣to this interpretation. This warrantise is conteined in this verse, whereas it is expresly repeted, that this which the prophet wil say, was the word of the Lord himselfe, and not his owne, as afterward in the verse following the same is saide againe, namely, That the Lord of hostes sent this prophet vnto them. Therefore al these things are said of him not according vnto the will and iudgement of his owne minde, but by the commandement of God himselfe, and consequently they are most true, and they in the end shall finde them so to be, because they are the word of God. Vers. 9. The hands of Zerubbabel haue laid the foundation of this house: his hands shall also finish it, and thou shalt knowe that the Lord of hostes hath sent me vnto you. The exposition of the peculiar promise tou∣ching Zoroba∣bel.THe exposition of the peculiar promise touching Zorobabel, namely, that this selfe same Zorobabel, which had begun the Temple, should also finish the same. The which things gaue vnto him a courage, & great constancie. Further, this place sheweth that God hath a care not only of the whole and vniuersall building of his church, but also of euery one of them, which put to their hand vnto the furtherance of that building & work. For how much the more sincerely and cheerefullie a man is occupied in the same, so much the more, the truth is, that hee pleaseth God, and that so much the more God hath a care of him, or that he is commended vnto God so much the more for the same.
Vers. 10. For who hath despised the day of the small things? but they shal reioyce, and shall see the stone of tinne in the hand of Zerubba∣bel: these seuen are the eyes of the Lord, which goe through the whole world. A confirmati∣on of the pro∣mise of the fi∣nishing of the Temple by Zo∣robabel.A Confirmation of the sayd promise of the finishing of the Tem∣ple by Zorobabel, partly by way of matching together of con∣traries, and partly taken from the cause, and the euent or falling out of the matter. By the way of contraries, namely, of those which de∣spised those beginnings of the Temple, whose pride and foolishnes the Prophet both describeth, and also refuteth or ouerthroweth. See Esdr. 3. He describeth it, when as he sayth, That they despised so small beginnings of the Temple, and restoring of the Church. And to the end he may the more stirre them vp,What the fi∣gure Apostro∣phe is, see Amos cap. 8. ver. 4. he vseth an Apo∣strophe or turning of speech, and an interrogation or asking of a question vnto them, that here they may vnderstand that they them selues are dealt withall, who either of pride doe laugh to scorne, or of distrust do despise and set nought by the small beginnings of the worke of God.Baz. For this word signifieth both these contempts, to wit,The despisers refuted. of pride and of arrogancie. And the Prophet refuteth or ouer∣throweth them by an earnest affirmation & auouching of the most true falling out of the things, and the fulfilling of this promise. Fi∣nally by the cause.1 By the earnest auouching of the fulfilling of the promise. The earnest affirmation or auouching is contai∣ned in these words: Nay they shall reioyce, nay they shall see (to wit, they which haue despised these small beginnings of things) a stone of tinne, or a plumme line in the hand of Zorobabel bringing this whole building vnto the very last and vtmost end. Wherefore this affirmation of GOD, which is the trueth, is to bee set against the scoffes of men, and the contempt or despising described before. Moreouer,2. By the cause of the same. the cause of this euent or falling out of the matter doth also confirme the same: and that is the prouidence of GOD, the which in this place is described vnder the name of the seuen eyes of God, as hereafter cap. 5. ver. 6. And Reue. cap. 5. ver. 6. in these words, Then I beheld, and loe, in the midst of the throne, & of the foure beasts, and in the midst of the Elders stood a Lambe as though he had been killed, which had seuen hornes, and seuen eyes, which are the seuen spi∣rits of God, sent into all the world. For this prouidence of God resi∣steth all lets, foreseeth all things, which are necessarie for the per∣formance of this thing. Eyes therfore are attributed vnto God, both
in this place, and also before cap. 3. ver. 9. by an Anthropopatheia,Anthropopa∣theia, what it is, see Mic. cap. 7. ver. 8. or attributing vnto God the parts and properties of a man: not idle eyes, but such as haue a care of the whole world: not only behol∣ders of the issue and falling out of things, but doers and workers. Last of al, seuen eyes are attributed vnto him, because that this num∣ber in the holy Scriptures doth signifie perfection,Seuen eyes. and is attributed vnto holie things. Vers. 11. Then answered I, and sayd vnto him, What are these two o∣liue trees vpon the right, and vpon the left side thereof? The third part of the interpre∣tation of the former vision.THe third part of the interpretation of the former vision, the which peculiarly teacheth the signification of the two oliue trees, which stood on both sides of the Candlesticke, and did conti∣nually powre oyle into it. And therefore first of all, that is, in this verse, the vision it selfe is repeated, whose vnderstanding and ex∣position the Prophet desireth. For this was one thing in this whole vision very especiall and singular, that the Prophet sawe the same candle, wanting no snuffing, no helpe of man, no outward putting in of oyle: but hauing a fountaine it selfe of oyle growing vnto it, so much as was necessarie for the maintaining of the light. Vers. 12. And I spake moreouer, and sayd vnto him, What bee these two oliue branches, which through the two golden pipes emptie themselues into the gold? The Prophet is earnest to know the mea∣ning of this vision.AN earnest and carefull asking of the signification of this vision, whereby is shewed how greatly the Prophet meruailed at this one continuall supplie, the which without any arte or seruice of man, and yet most easilie was yeelded vnto that candle, and main∣taining of the light. And therefore the Prophet is sayd againe to haue asked both of the oliues, and also of the way, wherby oyle did continually runne from them into the Candlesticke. For here is a meane shewed, whereby oyle of it owne accord, and without the helpe of any man, was put into the weeke of the candle from the two oliue trees.
Vers. 13. And he answered me, and sayd, Knowest thou not what these be? And I sayd, No, my Lord. The answer of the Angel.THe answer of the Angel, who sheweth that this thing is easie to be vnderstood, and that euen by the very only beholding of the thing. For all things were so ordered by God his prouidence, that the oyle might easilie beseene (God willing and ordaining it so) to runne and flow from the oliue trees of it selfe, as much as was sufficient for all the candles. The Prophet therefore doth confesse his ignorance, because that except we be instructed and taught by the spirit of God, in heauenly matters, bee they neuer so plaine and easie, yet are wee blinde notwithstanding. For as Paul speaketh 1. Cor. 2. ver. 11. What man knoweth the things of a man, saue the spirit of a man, which is in him? euen so the things of God knoweth no man, but the spirit of God. And yet this new forme of the thing was very wonderfull to any man that did consider this matter according vn∣to the iudgement, custome, and reason of man. Therefore he was to giue diligent heed vnto it, as a singular worke of God. Vers. 14. Then sayd he, These are the two oliue branches, that stand with the ruler of the whole earth. The exposition containingTHE exposition or interpretation, the which containeth two things. First, the signification of the thing or vision shewed of the oliue trees. The second, the reason or cause of the same thing or deede.1. The significa∣tion of the two oliue trees. The signification of those two oliue trees was this, name∣ly, that they both were a fountaine set by God on both sides of the Candlesticke, that oyle and light might neuer bee fayling vnto it. And therefore these oliue trees are called the sonnes of fatnes, that is, oylie oliues, plentifull, most fat, hauing a streame or fountaine of oyle, and supplying and ministring oyle without ceasing vnto the Candlestick, which was a type or figure of the Church of God. For the Church of God is the true light of the world, which shineth before all men, Matth. 5. Psalm. 72. God therefore of his surpassing goodnes, and of his infinite wisedome, and wonderfull prouidence towards his Church, doth so dispose and order all things, that she neuer wanteth those things which are necessarie for her, albeit men suppose her to lacke these things, because that they looke only vn∣to
to the ordinarie meanes. This is a singular comfort for the Church. The Lord vpholdeth, maintaineth, ruleth, defendeth and increaseth herby wonderfull, and extraordinarie meanes, the which doe de∣pend vpon his meere or only goodnes, and are vnknowne, and vn∣seene of men.2. The reason or cause of the same. The reason of this extraordinarie and continuall sup∣plie is, because that God the ruler of the whole earth, or the almigh∣tie Lord will so haue it: and therefore hath so disposed all things, doth so see vnto his Church, finally, because God hath so ordained those things, wherewith he wil helpe her euen extraordinarily, that he alwayes hath readie, and at hand the things, which immediatly, and without any labour he can vse for the defence of his Church. Now, whereas the Prophet maketh mention onely of two oliue trees, the reason is, because they were enough to minister oyle vnto that candle, when as they did minister it on both sides, the one on the right hand, and the other on the left hand. God therefore by a small number of things bringeth most great workes to passe in his Church. CAP. 5. Vers. 1. Then I turned me, and lift vp mine eyes, and looked, and be∣hold, a flying booke. What God re∣quireth of his Church.THe Church being ordained and established, God teacheth what he requireth at her hand, namely, that she liue holily, godly, and iustly: otherwise he threatneth that he will be a sharpe iudge and reuenger of her sinnes, as wel as of other mens. And albeit that God hereafter teach that wickednesse and vngodlinesse shall neuer bee anting in the whole earth, no not in his owne Church, so long as she shall be in this world: yet he sheweth where, and when this vn∣godlines shalbe as it were double and two-fold, that is to say, more boundant. The which thing is set downe in the end of this chap∣ter. Now iniquitie shall be more aboundant among the enemies of his Church, the Chaldeans in times past: now all other, which doe hate the trueth of God. Whereof it commeth to passe that God threatneth that there among them his iudgements also shall there∣fore bee the greater, nay doubled. This is the summe of this chap∣ter, the which sheweth the state of the world which thē should be, and the condition thereof after the times of Zacharias which were to come, rather then the condition alreadie past. And it doth not a∣lone containe those iudgements, which God will send vpon the ad∣uersaries
and enemies of his Church: but those also the which he will lay vpon the Church her selfe because of her sinnes.This chapter cōtaineth three seueral visions. And this chapter containeth three distinct or seuerall visions, of the which this is the first, the which declareth the iudgements of God against the Church alreadie established, set vp, and founded. And together with the vision the interpretation thereof is also deliuered by the Angell. Two parts of this verse.As for this first verse, the same doth declare two things. First, that now there is a new argument or matter shewed or told vnto the Prophet,1. A new matter shewed vnto the Prophet. although it bee ioyned with the former, to wit, what shall fall out vnto the Church now established. Whereof it commeth to passe that the Prophet is sayd afresh to haue lifted vp his eyes, and beheld, and yet standing still, and abiding in the same place, & not turning his eyes into any other side from the beholding of the An∣gel expounding vnto him the former promises. So then this vision, the which appertaineth vnto the declaring of the state that should be of the Church now restored, is shewed vnto the Prophet there in the same place.  Secondly, the Prophet commendeth this vision by the cause,The same com∣mended by the cause. for that it is heauenly, that is, from heauen, and shewed him from thence, from an high place, whereunto belongeth this, that the Prophet is sayd to haue lifted vp his eyes on hie, and there to haue seene the things which he now telleth.Commended also by the greatnes of the matter. He also commendeth this vision by the greatnes, or description of the thing it selfe, the which hath three things worthie to be noted. For he seeth, first, a volume or booke written. Secondly, him flying, and not stan∣ding onely in one place.1. Written. Thirdly, in length twentie cubites, and in breadth ten cubites,2. Flying. that is, a booke of a fearfull, bignes, vnusuall, & of such a bignes as was neuer heard of before, as is set downe in the verse following.3. Of a strange length and breadth. And these typicall or figuratiue things agree ve∣rie well with their signification, to wit, with the curse, or iudgemēts of God against men, namely, both these, and all others because of their sinnes.  For the curse or punishment of them is written, both long sithence, and at large ratified in the law of God, Deut. 28. and in many things, so that men, except they needes will, cannot be ig∣norant of it, for as much as it is written at the full. Wherefore when as God doth execute it, he sheweth the force and trueth of his law, or word written, and ratifieth the authoritie thereof. Secondly, this booke flieth,  because that the Lord is angrie not onely with one people, or sinfull nation of the world, but withal the sinful nations of the world. For as it is Rom. 2. ver. 9. Tribulation and anguish shall
be vpon the soule of euery man that doth euill, of the Iew first, and also of the Grecian. For God is not onely the God of the Iewes, but also of the Gentiles, as Paul sayth Rom. 3. ver. 29. and therefore will alike punish the sinners in both nations, that is, in all nations whatsoe∣uer, that are offenders. Therefore this punishment and curse pro∣nounced by God against sinne, wandreth & rangeth into the whole world, and into all nations. Thirdly,  this booke is of such an huge∣nes as hath not been heard of, and as is to bee wondred at, because that those iudgements of God are most hard vnto vs, and it is a fearfull thing to fall into his hands Hebr. 10. ver. 31. Last of all, this booke hath the sinnes of all nations written, and not of one nation only. Therefore this must needes be a great volume or booke, and along, and a large. Vers. 2. And he sayd vnto me, What seest thou? And I answered, I see a flying booke: the length thereof is twentie cubites, and the breadth thereof ten cubites. The Prophet exhorted to take diligent heed to the vi∣sion.AN exhortation, whereby the Angel warneth the Prophet, and stirreth him vp to behold and marke this vision diligently and throughly. For the counsailes and helps of God are not to be heard,  receiued carelesly, or without regard. Vers. 3. Then sayd he vnto me, This is the curse that goeth forth o∣uer the whole earth: for euery one that stealeth, shall be cut off as well on this side, as on that: and euery one that sweareth, shall be cut off as well on this side, as on that. The interpre∣tation of the vision contai∣ning.A Plaine and cleere interpretatiō of the former vision, the which containeth two things. First, what that volume or booke sig∣ifieth. Secondly, why it flyeth vp and downe in the ayre, and stan∣deth not in some certaine place.1. The significa∣tion of that booke. As for the signification of this vo∣lme or booke, it signifieth, and representeth that punishment, an∣ger, vengeance, and curse of God, the which God by his law writ∣ten enacted, and pronounced against sinne and sinners, Deut. 28. Exod. 20. Ephes. 5. ver. 5.6. whose words are these: For this ye know, that no whoremonger, neither vncleane person, nor couetous person, which is an idolater, hath any inheritance in the kingdome of Christ, and of God. Let no man deceiue you with vaine words: for, for such things commeth the wrath of God vpon the children of disobedience.
And Coloss. cap. 3. ver. 5.6. Mortifie therefore your members which are on the earth, fornication, vncleannes, the inordinate affec∣tion, euill concupiscence and couetousnes, which is idolatrie. For the which things sakes the wrath of God commeth on the children of dis∣obedience. 2 Why it flyeth vp and downe in the ayre.Now why this booke flieth, the reason is, that looke whereso∣euer those sinnes shall bee and shall raigne, there also the iudge∣ment of God must be looked for, for to come, as well here, that is among the Iewes, as in the rest of the earth, or any other part of the world. So then whether on this side, that is in Iudea, or on that side, that is, in other parts of the world, any such men, that is, sinners doe appeare, they shall be punished by God. Vers. 4. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of hostes, and it shall enter into the house of the thiefe, and into the house of him that sweareth falsely by my name: and it shall remaine in the middest of his house, and shall consume it, with the timber thereof, and with the stones thereof. The threat∣ning of punish∣ment contei∣ning.THis is a most assured denuntiation of that punishment and vengeance against sinners rehersed before, the which contei∣neth three things. First, a very earnest affirmation, or auouching of the punishment to come,1. The certaintie of the same. the which is not onely ordeined by that same almightie God, but also commanded to be put in exe∣cution: for thus much signifieth the word I will bring forth, or I will send,2. Who are threatned. saith the Lord Iehouah, this punishment vpon them. Se∣condly, is to be noted, against whom it is threatned, to wit against all those which haue broken either the first, or the second table of the law of God. For vnder the name of theeues, the Prophet com∣prehendeth the whole second table by the figure Synecdoche:What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. and by the name of those that sweare by the name of God in vaine, the first table of the same lawe. But theftes and periuries are chiefeliest rehearsed, because that those sinnes at that time did e∣speciallie raigne among men.3. The greatnes of the punish∣ment. Thirdly, how great this punishment or vengeance of God shall be, that is to say, both of long conti∣nuance, and consuming not onely the sinner himselfe, but also all that euer he hath, as for example, his house, and his other goods: the which the Lorde shall touch and strike, not onely with some small losse or hurt, but also shall vtterly destroy, so that, neither wood nor timber, nor the stones of his house shall remaine. For
by these words an vniuersall wasting, rasing, and fearefull destruc∣tion is described, and such a one as Christ mentioneth vnto his disciples should fall vpon the temple of Ierusalem, whose braue building they in a wonderment at the same shew vnto him, vnto whom he answereth Mat. 4. ver. 2. See ye not all these things? ve∣relie I say vnto you, there shall not be here left a stone vpon a stone, that shall not bee cast downe. And out of this there are gathered two things. First, that God is the punisher of the sinnes of euerie man, and that no man can escape the hands of God. Secondly, that the punishments, miseries, and afflictions, which are felt in the world, are sent by God for the sinnes of the world, & are the iust plagues of God for the contempt of men towards him. Vers. 5. Then the Angell that talked with mee, went forth, and said vnto me, lift vp now thine eyes, and see what is this that go∣eth forth. Another vision depending on the former. The end of these visions.AN other vision, the which is as it were an appendix, or a hang∣by, and addition vnto the former, as the third also is, the which followeth hereafter. And the end of these visions is, to shew: first, that God seeth all the sinnes of the world, or of men, and their wickednes, lye it neuer so hidden: secondly, that the same is re∣strained,  and kept vnder by God, that it breake not through all,  and ouercome, and rush through all things: finallie,  that there is by God a certaine stint, and place appointed vnto it, where it may rage more freelie, and at more libertie. Which thing the vision following doth declare. But in this verse the entrance or prepara∣tion vnto the second vision is contained, where both the person shewing the vision, and also his talke is to bee noted.The person shewing thii vision. The person shewing this vision, is in deed the same Angell, who hath all this while before talked with the Prophet: but now he is said to haue gone some what further, as it were from the side of the Prophet by whom he stood, that by this gesture, and going forward he might stirre vp the Prophet to the diligent beholding of the vision, and might signifie that a matter of great weight was now in hand∣ling, to the beholding of the which also the Angell himselfe went forth, that is, the which he desired to beholde. Here then God doth stirre vs vp vnto the diligent both noting, and also learning of this so high a vision, and so great a testimonie or witnes of his proui∣dence, wisdome, power, and iustice. And to this end also appertei∣neth
the speech or talke of the Angell. For the same is an earnest exhortation,2. His talke vnto the Prophet. that both the Prophet, and we also should bend the eyes of our bodie, and also of our minde vnto this sight and vi∣sion. Hereby appeareth how great our blockishnes or dulnes is, who except we be earnestlie warned by God, or by his seruants, doe with blinde eyes, and as it were winking, ouerpasse the nota∣ble workes and witnesses of his prouidence and power, although they be cleerelie before the eyes of all men. Vers 6. And I sayd, what is it? And he said, this is an Ephah that goeth forth. Hee saide moreouer, this is the sight or eye of them, through all the earth. The Prophet hath things shewed him at the first a farre off, and after∣ward more neerelie.THree things were shewed vnto the Prophet, the first a farre off, so that he did not forthwith, nor yet distinctly see all things which were shewed him: then more neerelie. For wee doe goe forward by little and little, in the beholding and perceiuing of the workes of God, and doe by little and little profit in the same: and doe not out of hand, and at one instant conceiue and vnderstand all things. That therefore which is here first shewed vnto the Prophet, is diligently and earnestly to be beholden, It is an Epha, or a bushell. For in this place this word is generally taken, the which notwithstanding among the Hebrues hath the significati∣on, and is a kinde of a certaine measure. For this Epha was to be so big, that it might receiue and hold a whole woman, or a wo∣man vpright, and standing in it: or else sitting and leaning, or lying a side.The interpre∣tation of this vision of the Epha. The interpretation is set downe afterward. And this Epha went forth, and moued, and stood not in one place, but did flye through the whole earth. The interpretation is this, that by this figure is shewed, that the eye of the Lord doth see all wicked persons, or all wickednes and vngodlines, the which, as I saide be∣fore, flieth and rangeth vp and downe in the whole world. God then seeth the same, as before cap. 4. ver. 10. For as Dauid witnes∣seth Psalm. 34. ver. 16. The face of the Lord is against all them that doe euill, to cut off their remembrance from the earth. And this stinted figure and forme of the bushell or measure doth repre∣sent and shew, that God dooth in such sort see the wickednes of men, that hee dooth notwithstanding keepe it in within certaine boundes, limits, and within a certaine measure. For God will not, that according vnto the desire thereof, it shall rage, and breake
through, whether soeuer it listeth. For the rod of the wicked (as it is Psalm. 125. ver. 3.) shall not rest on the lot of the righteous, least the righteous put forth their hand vnto wickednes. And this eye of God, or this Epha, or bushell is moued and flieth, as wickednes it selfe is moued, and flieth: that we should know assuredly, that no∣thing can escape that vnsleepie eye of God, or eye that neuer slee∣peth. For as Dauid saith, Psalm 121. ver. 4. He that keepeth Israel, will neither slumber nor sleepe. And as the writer to the Hebrues af∣firmeth cap. 4. ver. 13. There is no creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but all things are naked and open vnto his eyes, with whom we haue to doe. Nothing therefore is hid from his eyes or sight, but all the wicked wheresoeuer they lye hidden, and in what place of the world soeuer they be, are found out, taken, and seene of it. So then, God, so farre forth as pleaseth him, and as he seeth to be meete, and expedient, dooth represse and keepe back the wicked, not only in his church, because he is not onely the keeper and preseruer of his church: but also in all places of the earth, be∣cause that he also is the keeper and preseruer of all mankinde, and of the societie or fellowship of man. For as Paul writeth 1. Tim. cap. 4. ver. 10. God is the Sauiour of all men, speciallie of those that leeue. Vers. 7. And be hold, there was lift vp a talent of lead: and this is a woman that sitteth in the middest of the Ephah. Two other partes of the former vision.OTher two things are now shewed vnto the Prophet, the which are parts of the same vision, to wit, a great masse or lump all of lead, and broad, the which afterward is made the couer of this Epha: secondly, a certaine woman, the which is cast into this bu∣shell,1. A lump of lead. as it were by God being angrie with her, and in this bushell is she inclosed and shut in, as it were in a most strong prison.2. A woman sit∣ting in the E∣phah. This Masse or couer was to be weightie, as which namely should bridle and keepe in the force, rage, and attempts of the wickednes of men, the which are wont to be most vehement and hard to be kept vnder. And therefore is it said to be of lead,  the which is a most weightie mettall. And doubtles such are the maners of men, al∣together lewd, vnrulie, and barbarous, whereas there reigneth no knowledge, nor worship of God, Psalm 10. Which disordered∣nes of things was then in the world in the last times of the Mo∣narchie or Empire of the Persians, vnto the which times these
things seeme properlie to appertaine, albeit that the doctrine of this place be also generall. Vers. 8. And hee saide, this is wickednes, and hee cast it into the middest of the Ephah, and hee cast the weight of lead vpon the mouth thereof. THe interpretation of the two visions, and things lastlie shew∣ed vnto the Prophet,2. The woman in te Ephah. Rihgnah. to wit, of the Woman, and of the Masse or lump of lead. The woman was a type or figure of the naugh∣tines of men, or of most lewd wickednes. For the prophet or God vseth such a word, as doth not signifie euery common corruption and loosenes of maners: but open wickednes, shameles, and old, the which conteineth both vngodlines towards God, and also in∣iustice towards men. This lewdnes therefore, albeit neuer so ma∣lapart and vnbrideled, doth God notwithstanding restraine, and dooth shut in within certaine boundes and measure, that it may not range at it owne pleasure: or preuaile, and corrupt or marre all things. Yea and God doth after this sort restraine it, being an∣grie with it. And therefore God is said to haue cast this woman into the bushell, or Ephah, and there to haue bound her, and shut her vp with a couer of lead, as it were in a prison that is most strong, that she may not without punishment rome about, flye a∣broad, ouer master, ouer runne, and corrupt all things at her plea∣sure. And so Reuelat. 9. ver. 4. The Locustes that came out of the smoke, and had power like vnto Scorpions, are commanded that they should not hurt the grasse of the earth, neither any greene thing, neither any tree, but onely those men, which had not the seale of God in their foreheads. And so cap. 20: ver. 2. The Angell is said to haue taken the dragon that old serpent, which is the diuell, and satan, and to haue bound him a thousand yeares, and cast him into the bottom∣les pit, and shut him vp, and sealed the doore vpon him, that he should deceiue the people no more, till the thousand yeares were fulfilled: for after that he must be loosed for a little season. Wickednes set forth vnder the figure of a woman.Wickednes is in this place set forth vnder the type or figure of a woman, because that like as the wit of a woman is suttle and craftie, and yet notwithstanding shee pleaseth and liketh men: so sinne and the wickednes of men is alwaies craftie, and yet it doth please and allure vs with the flatteries thereof.
Vers. 9. Then lift I vp mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there came out two women, and the winde was in their wings (for they had wings like the wings of a Storke) and they lift vp the Ephal betweene the earth and the heauen. The third visi∣on.THE third vision, or third part of this chapter, ioyned to the former, or agreeing with the former. For it declareth whither, that is, into what partes of the world that bushell or Epha, which had wickednes, and consequently the iudgements of God, shut p was to be caried, namely into Babylon, and the countries neere vnto it, that the Iewes which remained in that countrie, should speedilie get them out of it, and withdraw themselues out of so great danger, and vengeance of God, as it is in Isai cap. 48. ver. 20. Goe ye out of Babel: flee ye from the Chaldeans, with a voyce of ioy, &c. For a great many of the Iewes after libertie and leaue gran∣ted vnto them by Cyrus to goe home, remained notwithstanding among the Babylonians, being entangled, allured, and bound with the entisements of the flesh, and little wealth, and some few hlie commodities,Thus is that place expoun∣ded by Treme∣lius, albeit that others of great learning doe vnderstand it otherwise, of such as serued King Dauid in these trades. as appeareth 1. Chron. cap. 4. ver. 22.23. Where making mention of certaine of the posteritie of Iudah,  is shewed that they were rather moued to tarrie with the King, d to follow their base occupations, then to returne with the rest of the people, preferring captiuitie before libertie, which thing  the place before named is reported thus: These were potters, and dwelt among plants and hedges (that is, followed their husbandry, and tillages:) there (that is, in Babylon) they dwelt with the King o his worke, that is, for the gaine which they had by seruing him in these trades. So then this place also sheweth, that the enemies of the Church, and such as doe afflict the same (as were the Baby∣lonians) shall in the ende bee most seuerelie or sharplie and for a ng season punished by God. Two parts of this verse.But this verse conteineth two things. First, the maner of the shewing of this vision, the which the prophet reporteth briefelie: Secondly, the vision it selfe.1. The maner of shewing of this vision. The maner of the shewing of this vision, was altogether heauenly, like as were the rest before. For this third vision was also shewed from heauen, that it should bee o lesse certaine vnto vs, then the former.2. The vision i selfe. For the Prophet is said to haue seene it, when as hee had lifted vp his eyes to heauen,  or
vpward. And here the Prophet is not said to haue been admoni∣shed by the Angell, to looke, see, or behold: because that this vi∣sion was shewed vnto him immediatlie after the former, the time not being interrupted or broken off, that is, not some cer∣taine space after the former, but at the same very moment, or minue, and instant of time. Wherefore the Prophet being ra∣uihed as yet with the wondring at the former vision, of himselfe lifted vp his eyes vnto heauen, and there diligently beheld what was shewed vnto him. And this is a new vision, because that the Prophet is said againe to haue lifted vp his countenance. Now this vision was after this maner:  Two women with wings, and carried through the ayre with a pleasant winde, did carrie that same closed bushell or Ephah through the middest of the ayre, and that in such sort, that by reason of the neerenes of the place it might easilie, and certainely bee seene and beheld. And this bushell they cast downe into the land of Sennaar, that is, of Baby∣lon, where it had a place appointed for it by God, and that for a long season, to wit, that the wrath, and curse of GOD might re∣maine there, as it were foreuer, and continuallie, or at leastwise for a long season. For (as it is in the Psalme 74. ver. 8.) in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixt, and he pow∣reth out of the same: surelie all the wicked of the earth shall wring out,Women carrie this Ephah, and why? and drinke the drgges thereof. And women carrie this bu∣shell, not men, for that like as wickednes was represented vnder the type or figure of a woman:  so also the iustice and wrath of God are set forth vnder the figure and shape of women, least that the meeting and mixing together of men and women in the same matter, and vision, might seeme to haue some impure and vncleane cogitation or surmising.  Secondly, that God may be vn∣derstood to bee able to execute his iudgements euen by most weake and feeble things,Two women. such as are women. There are two wo∣men, because that the anger and iustice of God doe alwaies fol∣low and waite vppon one another, and take punishment on the wickednes of men. So Psalm. 85. vers. 10. the mercie and truth of God, and righteousnes and peace are ioyned together: Mercie and trueth (saith Dauid) shall meete: righteousnes and peace shall kisse each other.Winged. These women are winged, that they may bee vnderstood to bee most swift, nimble, and readie to exe∣cute the vengeance of God, and to obey him. Finallie, they are
carried with the winde,Carried with the winde. that the Prophet might teach that all things serue for the vengeance of God, and that this iudgement of God shall be forthwith against the Babylonians, and therefore that the Iewes should not stay and remaine in those countries any longer. Vers. 10. Then said I to the Angell that talked with me, whether doe these beare the Ephah? The prophet asketh the in∣terpretation of the Angell.THE Prophet dooth aske the interpretation of the Angell, wherein he both sheweth his desire to the prophet, & shineth before vs as an example to doe the like. And the women are saide in such sort to beare the bushel, as if they would by and by throw it downe to the earth, to signifie the wrath of God, the which all creatures being the reuengers and instruments of God contem∣ned or despised, doe declare, when as they reuenge the contempt or despising of God against the vngodly. Vers. 11. And he said vnto mee, to build it an house in the Land of Shinar, and it shall be established and set there vpon her owne place. The interpre∣tation contei∣ning.THe interpretation of the vision, the which hath two parts. For he describeth both the place, and also the time or stay and continuance of this iudgement there. The place,1. The place. where this bu∣shell or Ephah most full of the anger and vengeance of GOD was to be placed at the appoyntment of God, is the land of Sen∣naar or Shinar, that is, Babylon, or Chaldaea,2 The time. and the countries nere vnto it,  the which had carried away the people of God into captiuitie, vsed them hardly, and intreated them cruellie, on the which the Lord will now take punishment.  The time of the con∣tinuance of the vengeance of God against the Babylonians shall be for a great season and long. For the vengeance of God shall re∣maine there established, and setled as it were in her foundation, out of the which it cannot afterward be easelie plucked, and pul∣led. Thus dooth the Lord punish his enemies in the end: albeit that whilest they afflict or trouble his church, they doe careleslie contemne or despise, and laugh God to scorne. For (as Dauid teacheth vs Psal. 75. ver. 8.) in the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixt, and he powreth out of the same: surelie all
the wicked of the earth shall wring out and drinke the dregs thereof. And as it is in the Psalm. 32. ver. 10. Many sorrowes shall come to the wicked: but hee that trusteth in the Lord, mercie shall compasse him. It seemeth that these selfe same things may bee applied vnto many nations of our time, which haue most hardlie afflicted the Church of God. CAP. 6. Vers 1. Againe, I turned and lift vp mine eyes, and looked: and behold, there came foure chariots out from betweene two moun∣taines, and the mountaines were mountaines of brasse. Two visions conteining the cofirmation of two promi∣ses before.THis chapter conteineth two visions, the which in a word are the confirmation of two promises rehearsed before, that is; of the restoring and building againe of the church of God a fresh, and of the ouerthrowing and destroying of the enemies of the same, the which at that time for the most part, and chiefelie were the Chaldeans,1. Of the sharp punishing of the Chaldeans. and people of the North. The first vision of this chapter confirmeth that which went lastly and immediatly be∣fore of the most seuere or sharp punishing of those North peo∣ple, or Chaldeans.2. Of the resto∣ring of the Church of God. The second confirmeth those other promises of God, the which did signifie, and shew the restoring of the Church. And albeit whatsoeuer God speaketh and promiseth, be most sure, because it is the word of God, and consequently nee∣deth of it selfe no other confirmation Psalm. 10. yet notwithstan∣ding both in regard of our selues, who are too distrustfull: and al∣so for that time sake, and state of the Iewes, which at that time was most lamentable and contemptable or despised in the iudge∣ment of men, these promises of God which were so hard, and in∣comprehensible, or such as of flesh could not be conceiued, were to be confirmed, both by the sundry & often repetitions of them, and also by the declaratiō & shewing of the maner of the things which should afterward come to passe, as the meanes, by the which God wold execute that his counsel or purpose. The which thing is eui∣dently performed in this vision. For now God teacheth the Pro∣phet, and consequently those Iewes, & so vs likewise which are his Church, by what meanes so great and mightie nations, and people (as those of the North without all question were) might be thus brought downe. And this selfe same thing is also particularlie
in Daniel shewed & declared cap. 7. and 8. but here it is propoun∣ded or set forth only in generall, namely, by the description of the wonderfull prouidence of God,Two parts of this vision, shewing the which doth both gouerne this vniuersall world, and also euery seuerall people and nation of the same, against the which he hath alwayes in a readines the ministers and executioners of his iudgements and will.1. The generall rule of God o∣uer all things. Therefore there are two parts of this vision The one, which sheweth the generall care and rule of God ouer this whole world, and all things, and king∣domes. The other,2. What should fall out to the Chaldeans. Two parts of this verse. which declareth what shall fall out and come to passe vnto those Northren people, and at that time enemies of the Iewes, that is, of the Church of God, ver. 8. Now this first verse doth first of all win authoritie and credit vn∣to the vision insuing: and secondly in part containeth the repor∣ting and declaring of the same. The authoritie of this prophesie is,1. The authoritie of this prophe∣sie. for that it is heauenly, and giuen by God, as the former. And there∣fore in this place the Prophet vseth the same kind of speaking the which he hath done before in the like cases, saying, Lifting vp mine eyes I looked, Behold, &c. And whereas he sayth that he was turned about, he declareth that this vision was shewed vnto him from an other part, and not from that part, whereas he saw the former visiō, to the ende the Church of God should vnderstand that on euery side there are propounded or set forth vnto her euident and cleere testimonies or witnesses of the care of God towards her, so that she will giue heed vnto them, and lift vp her eyes.2. The narration of the vision in part. The narration or tel∣ling of this vision is, for that here are recited foure chariots to bee seene, the which in the holie Scriptures doe signifie the prouidence of God, Ezech. 1. They come out of the mountaines, and the same of brasse, because that the iudgements of God are both hidden and secret, and vnsearchable, and not to be auoyded, and of yron or of brasse, which cannot be broken. So also in effect speaketh Dauid of the iudgements of God, Psalm. 36. ver. 6. saying, Thy righteousnes is like the mightie mountaines: thy iudgements are like a great deepe: thou, O Lord, doest saue man and beast. Vers. 2. In the first chariot were red horses, and in the second chariot blacke horses, Vers. 3. And in the third chariot white horses, and in the fourth cha∣riot horses of diuers colours, and reddish. The particular desciption of the chariots. Horses.THe declaration and description of the foure chariots. Also hor∣ses for the most part and commonly are wont to be vsed by the
holy Ghost for to note out the prouidence of God, as before cap. 1 ver. 8. Reuelat. 6. for the eye of God, and his prouidence doe verie swiftly passe through all things and places, as the horse, of all the beasts that are familiar vnto vs, and tractable, or easie to bee hand∣led,Their colours. Blacke. White. Red. Mixt. is the most swift. Their diuers colours are to bee expounded by the diuers effects of God his prouidence in this world. The blacke colour betokeneth sorrowfull euents or issues and fallings out of matters. The white, ioyfull. The red, bloudie. The diuers and bay colours, sundrie and mixt matters, partly sad, and partly ioyfull. All which things are to bee marked and noted in euerie age, by the di∣uers effects both of the mercie, and also of the iustice of God to∣wards men, and also in euery singular people or nation, and not so in this place to bee vnderstood, that we should restraine or tye the first chariot vnto one nation onely, and the second to some one o∣ther certaine nation, and so of the rest. For here is a generall de∣scription of the prouidence of God, iustly ordering and gouerning this whole world according vnto his wisedome. Vers. 4. Then I answered, and sayd vnto the Angel that talked with me, What are these, my Lord? The interpre∣tation of this vision.THE interpretation of the vision, and first of all generally, after∣ward particularly, that is, of the people of the North, to wit, the enemies of the Church. The generall interpretation of these foure chariots doth teach briefly,1. Generallie. that God doth dispose and order all things in euery part of the world, and rule them by his prouidēce and decree, the which he doth quickly, easily, and without any let execute by his ministers by him thereunto appoynted, in all quar∣ters of the world.Two parts of this verse. And this verse with that which followeth hath two things worthie the nothing. The first, the earnest desire of the Prophet in learning the will of God shewed vnto him obscurely,1. The desire of the Prophet to vnderstand this vision. or darkly, the which desire of his appeareth hereby, both for that he himselfe doth first demaund the same of the Angel, and also doth honorably call him, as the scholler his master. So 1. Pet. cap. 1. ver. 11. often before cited to this purpose, the Prophets are witnessed care∣fully to haue searched after the will of God. And so doth Dauid re∣port of himselfe, Psal. 119. For the word (Lord) in this place, doth signifie such subiection and reuerence onely, as wee doe owe vnto those persons which are of some good account and estimation, and haue rule ouer vs: and not such, as wherewith wee doe worship
God. And after this reuerend maner doth the woman of Tekoah, suborned or suttelly set on by Ioab to sue for the making of Absa∣lom friends with his father, speake vnto King Dauid 2. Sam. cap. 14. ver. 9. saying, My Lord, O King, this trespasse be on me, and on my fa∣thers house, and the King and his throne be giltles.2. The particular noting of this generall inter∣pretation. Secondly, this ge∣nerall interpretation is to be noted particularly, and seuerally. Vers. 5. And the Angel answered, and sayd vnto me, These are the foure spirits of the heauen, which goe forth from standing with the Lord of all the earth. First, the Chariots, are sayd to bee heauenly Spirits, that is to say,1 The Chariot sayd to be An∣gels. Angels. So Psalm. 104. ver. 4. God is sayd to make the Spirits his messengers, and a flaming fire his ministers. And Hebr. 1. ver. 14. it is sayd of the Angels, Are they not all ministring spirits, sent forth to minister, for their sakes which shall be heires of saluation? They are therefore sayd to be heauenly spirits, and not earthly, that is to say, men, that here wee should learne, how great the strength & power is of the executioners and ministers of the prouidence and decree of God. For the angelical and spirituall nature is infinite wayes of more strength and power, then is the nature of men. Whereby we vnderstand that nothing is able to stand against the fulfilling of the will of God, the which shall not bee ouercome of the same. After∣ward vnder the forme of wagons and chariots,2. Why the cha∣riots are sayd to be Spirits. are set forth the ex∣ecutioners of euery the will of God, and they are called Spirits, that we should note, how great their readines and swiftnes is. For both chariots, especially such as goe with foure wheeles, and Spirits are things most swift and speedie. Wherefore they are not slowe, but forthwith doe performe, and bring to passe that thing, which God will haue to be done by them. So 2. King. cap. 19. ver. 35. The Angel with all speed, and setting al delay aside, so soone as he is comman∣ded, doth execute the vengeance of God vpon the armie of the As∣syrians. For sayth the text, The same night the Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the campe of Asshur an hundreth foure score and fiue thousand. Thirdly, they are foure Chariots,3. Foure chariots. that they might answere vnto so many quarters, and parts of the whole world, to wit, that we should not thinke any thing to bee done in any place without the decree of God, and his prouidence. For God by that his heauenly prouidence doth rule all and euery thing in euery part of the world. For as it is Psal. 105. ver. 7. He is the Lord our God: his
iudgements are through all the earth Fourthly,4. They stand al∣waies before God. They are with the ru∣ler of the whole earth, that is to say, they are alwayes prepared, and readie standing before God, wayting for his commandements, and appoyntment, to execute the same. So then not Fortune, but God sendeth them, and gouerneth this vniuersall world. And God is cal∣led the Ruler of the whole earth, that his gouernment in compari∣son of the gouernmēt of men, may be vnderstood to be the highest, and most souereigne. For men how farre soeuer they do beare rule, as Monarches or Kings and Emperours, yet haue they rule and do∣minion or Lordship, not ouer the whole earth: (much lesse ouer heauen, where God notwithstanding beareth rule also) but onely ouer some one countrie of the earth. Fiftly, These Chariots & An∣gels,5. They goe not vntill they be sent. the executioners of the will of God, doe stand in their place, vntill they be sent of God. Which thing is true, whether you vnder∣stand it either of the good, or of the euill Angels. For 1. King. cap. 22. ver. 19. &c. the euill spirit cannot seduce the Prophets of Achab, vntill God bid him goe: and 1. Iob. the diuell is limited in the plagu∣ing of Iob, and cannot goe one haires breadth beioynd his com∣mission. Vers. 6. That with the blacke horse went foorth into the land of the North, and the white went out after them, and they of diuers co∣lours went forth toward the South countrie. THe peculiar and particular interpretation of the chariots. And first of all of the three chariots,2. Particularlie. Berudim. the blacke, the white, the some∣what red (for so doe I expound the word of diuers colours, or spotted, and specked, the which is in this verse, least that the same chariot might seeme here to haue been altogether ouerpassed). So then these three chariots are specially sent foorth by God, namely, the black first:The North countrie. afterward the white into the North countrie: the some∣what red into the South. The North countrie without all doubt, in regard of the standing of the Prophet and of the place, where this vision was shewed (this was the lande of Iewrie) I say this North countrie is Babylon,The black hor∣ses sent into Chaldea. and Chaldea, where the people of GOD was oppressed, the Church in captiuitie, and the enemies of God him∣selfe bare sway and ruled. Into this the blacke horses are sent first. By the blacke colour of the horses are vnderstood that their effects also in those countries shall be blacke, and sad, and sorowfull. There is therefore shewed what shall fall out vnto those peoples, & them
that shall dwell among them, by the decree of God, to wit, misera∣ble destructions, and a lamentable state. For the white horses,The white hor∣ses not sent to∣gether with the blacke, but after them. the which should signifie more ioyful matters, are sent indeed into the same countries, but afterward, and not forthwith: least the Iewes, which as yet were among the Chaldeans, vpon hope of that better falling out of matters, should dwell or stay there any longer: whē as the more ioyfull estate of the Chaldeans and Babylonians was farre off, and a long while to be wayted for. And in the meane sea∣son the present and yet to come condition of that whole countrie is most lamentable, & miserable: such no doubt as it could not chuse but to be, the Empire and gouernment being taken from the Baby∣lonians by the Persians: and the matter and trueth it selfe by the change of gouernments doth teach it so to fall out vsually.The third cha∣riot of diuers colours. The third chariot, to wit, that which was of diuers colours, or somewhat red, is sent into the South, that is, into Egypt, and Arabia: for in re∣spect of the standing of the Prophet, and of this vision, or place where this vision was shewed, both Egypt and Arabia are South. The condition and state of which countries is described vnto the Iewes, that they should not dreame of an happie estate for them∣selues in those countries. And therefore that they should rather stay in Iudea it selfe, and runne vnto it, to wit, those Iewes, which were not yet in it, when as they vnderstood that both on the right and and also on the left there was foreshewed nothing but grea∣test miserie. These horses partie or diuers coloured, and somewhat red, do betoken that the state of those countries shal be vncertaine, and also miserable and troubled: but yet such notwithstanding, as hath some little and small ioye mixed with it, and that also ob∣scure or darke, like as the red colour is mixed darkly of white and blacke. Vers. 7. And the reddish went out, and required to goe, and passe through the world, and he sayd: Goe, passe through the world. So they went through the world. The red or red∣dish chariot.THe fourth Chariot is expounded, to wit, the red, or reddish. He is sent forth by God into the rest of the parts of the world, that the Iewes should knowe, not onely what the state of the nations neere vnto them should bee, but also of the whole world, and of people that were farthest off. And such is it shewed that it should be, as namely, was the colour of the horses, that is, afflicted, trou∣bled,
doubtfull and diuers, that all things being considered, and the whole world being set before their eyes, the Iewes might gather that they should dwell safest of all in Iudea, and in that same cu∣stodie or keeping of the true God: and that their estate in compa∣rison of other people was happie.This chariot desireth to goe through the world. But whereas it is sayd, that this chariot desired of God that it might goe through the rest of the whole world, whē as the three other chariots had now their charge alreadie appoynted by God: it doth not teach that the Angels are more carefull of this world, then God is: but first of all, that neither these themselues, although they be Angels, nor yet any other crea∣tures, can doe, or bring to passe any things, besides, or without the expresse commandement, wil, and bidding of God, albeit the crea∣tures themselues oftentimes doe not vnderstand so much Second∣ly, it teacheth the readines of all heauenly Angels to performe o∣bedience, when as all of them doe offer their seruice vnto GOD as it were to striues, and willingly are at hand and readie to serue him. Vers. 8. Then cryed he vnto me, and spake vnto me, saying: Behold, these that goe toward the North countrie haue pacified my spirit in the North countrie. An admonitiō vnto the Pro∣phet, cōtainingLAstly, this is a speciall admonition of God vnto the Prophet, touching the enemies of his Church, & consequently vnto the Church, that God might comfort her. Wherfore this verse hath two parts.1. A comfort for the Church. First, a speech of Christ willingly and of his owne accord vn∣to the Prophet, to shewe, what the comfort of the Church should be.2. God will not rest vntill he haue punished the enemies of his Church. Wherein is shewed the care of God for his Church. Secondly, the thing it selfe, which is shewed, namely, that the minde of God was not quiet, or will not bee quiet, before that grieuous and sore punishment bee, or shall by him bee taken vpon his enemies, the which haue afflicted or trouble his Church. Vers. 9. And the word of the Lord came vnto me, saying, The secōd part of this chapter being rather a sermon or hi∣storie, then a vision, the drift whereof is two fold.THe second part of this chapter, in the which there appeareth not so much a vision vnto the Prophet (such as were the for∣mer) as there is declared a certaine ordinarie admonition vnto all Prophets, the which was made by God, as often as God would haue them to doe their dutie, and the people or any other to bee
spoken vnto in his name. Here therefore nothing is shewed vnto the eyes of the Prophet to be seene, but onely there is taught, what bee ought both to doe, and also to say: so that this is rather a ser∣mon and an historie, then a typicall or figuratiue vision. But the scope or drift of this Sermon and historie is twofold. The first,1 A confirmatiō of the former doctrine touch∣ing the buil∣ding, garnish∣ing, & enlarg∣ing of the tem∣ple.  confirmation of the former doctrine touching the Temple of God (by the which the true church is signified) not onely to bee built, but also to bee garnished, and to bee increased with the ri∣ches and giftes, and comming of all nations thereunto. So then this place agreeth with that of Aggaeus cap. 2. vers. 8. and with the second chapter of this Prophet before, ve. 11. The second drift, is a comfort of the Iewes, who, to the end that they might now haue and see some tast, and as it were some proffer of the glorie that should be of the second temple to be built at the comman∣dement of God, they doe see Iehoshua the priest first garnished with fayre crownes: secondly, the Temple it selfe bewtified with the said crownes hung vp in it for euer, the which were made of gold and siluer, and other giftes sent euen as far as from Babylon vnto Ierusalem. Now touching this verse, it hath a confirmati∣on of the whole narration and fact following, because that the Prophet at the expresse bidding, and commandement of GOD, oth whatsoeuer hereafter followeth. Vers. 10. Take of them of the captiuitie euen of Heldai, and of To∣bijah, and Iedaiah, which are come from Babel, and come thou the same day, and goe vnto the house of Ioshiah, the sonne of Ze∣phaniah. The comman∣dement of God conteining the fact, and the exposition and reason of the same. In the fact are to be noted.THe precept or commandement of God, the which conteineth both the fact, and the exposition and interpretation of the fct, and reason of the same ver. 12. hereafter, and so forth. In the fct these things are to bee obseru. First, the persons, of whom the Prophet receiued the siluer and the gold, and the other giftes (of the which afterward the crownes should bee made) the per∣sons were foure men that were Iewes, which were newlie come from Babylon,1. The persons, bringing for the temple of God these giftes from themselues, and from other Iewes, which were yet at Babylon. The men are these, Cheldai, Tobia, Ieddaiah, and Chen the sonne of Tzaphaniah. The zeale of these is commended afterward, and
is to bee followed.2. The place. Secondly, the place is to bee noted, into the which the prophet is commanded to goe, namely into the house of Iosias the sonne also of Tzaphaniah, whereinto these foure men as they came from Babylon, were first and newlie come. It is likely that this Tzaphaniah was some great man, and such a one as gaue intertainement vnto strangers.3. The time. Thirdly, the time, the selfe same day that the Lord spake vnto the Prophet, is hee comman∣ded to goe, not to make delay, or to put it off vntill another daye. For the people did need a speedie and hasty comfort. Moreouer, by this meanes God declareth that hee doth shew vnto the Pro∣phet, what should come to passe, namely, that the selfe same daye these three men should come vnto the house of Tzaphaniah out of the captiuitie of Babylon. Vers. 11. Take euen siluer and golde, and make crownes, and se them vpon the head of Iehoshua, the sonne of Iehozadak the high priest. The fact.THe fact, that is to say, what the Priest is commaunded to doe, namely to receiue the golde, and the siluer, the which they brought as a gift vnto the Temple: and to make of it receiued many crownes: and all those so made to set them vpon the head of the high priest (who was both a figure of Christ, and also the visible head of this Temple vpon this earth) for a testimonie or witnes of the great garnishing, glorie, bewtie, and maiestie, the which should be in the Temple of God, and in the priestes, and all others that serued in the Temple of God, howsoeuer they seemed then, and at that time to be base, and the beginnings thereof to be vile and base. So then these things were a type, or figure, both of the spirituall, and also of the earthly glory, the which was after∣ward, first, in that Temple of Ierusalem, then in the Church of God gathered out of all nations, by the preaching of the gospell. But how many crownes there were, is not expressed: yet it is like∣ly by the 14. verse, that there were foure, according vnto the num∣ber of the persons, which brought those giftes, to wit, of euery one of their giftes one.
Vers. 12. And speake vnto him, saying, Thus speaketh the Lord of hostes, and saith, beholde the man, whose name is the Branch, and he shall growe vp out of his place, and he shall build the Tem∣ple of the Lord. THe interpretation of the former precept, and fact: in the which there are two things to be noted. First,The interpre∣tation of the former fact in the which are to be noted. what that crow∣ning of Iehoshua ment: Secondly, what is the cause or foundati∣on of this honor bestowed vpon the high priest. For the first, this setting of the crownes vpon the head of Iehoshua did fore∣shew that there should be restored vnto the priesthood or mini∣sterie of God his honor, and that in all poyntes, or whollie:1 The meaning of this crow∣ning of Ieho∣shua. and not onlie in the halfe. And therefore Iehoshuah was garnished with many crownes, and not with one onely, to the end it might be vnderstood by this sacrament and signe of many crownes,2. The cause of this honor be∣stowed vpon him. that this ministerie should afterward be glorious and bewtified most plentifullie, and so farre forth as the reason of man his iudge∣ment doth suffer, most aboundantlie. Now the cause, or the foun∣datn and ground of this so great honor of the ministery of God,  or of the church, is Christ, to wit, that man, who in this place,  and before, cap. 3. ver. 8. is called a Braunch, and Luc. 1. ver. 78. He is rmed the day spring, that is to say, hee by whom, and through whose power and vertue, all those, which are plants in the church of God, doe bud, and spring, and afterward doe florish, liue, and take deepe roote. So Christ faith of himselfe Iohn▪ 15. ver. 1.2. I am the true vine, and my father is an husbandman. Euery branch that beareth not fruite in mee, hee taketh away: and euery one that beareth fruite hee purgeth it, that it may bring forth more fruite. Therefore Christ alone is the foundation and fountaine of so great glorie, dignitie and honor of the ministerie of God, that is, of the priesthood of the law, and of the ministerie of the gospel. In him therefore aboue all the rest, and first of all this glorie was to appeare, doth appeare and hath appeared: and in the mi∣nisters of the church, who doe borrow this honour from him, it doth so farre forth shine, and shall shine forth, as there is or shall be betweene them both, to wit betweene Christ, and the ministers themselues of the Church, the counsell of peace, that is, great con∣cord, coniunction, conformitie, and agreement. So before cap. 3. ver. 8. this same Prophet did draw comfort, and promised glorie
from Christ the branch vnto the priests. Three parts of this verse.But this verse containeth three things. First, the trueth and cer∣taintie of this prophesie, by the earnest repetition of these words (Say vnto him, saying) and also by the rehearsing of the almightie power and maiestie of God,1. The trueth & certaintie of this prophesie. the which is contained in these words (The Lord of hostes). The second, the name of this man Christ, which was to come,2. The name of the man Christ. and to take vpon him the nature of man, is here expressed, whereupon the whole glorie of the ministerie of God and of his Church is grounded, not his proper name I graunt, but a figuratiue name, or a name of dignitie, by the which the effi∣cacie or power of Christ, and his degree of honour in the Church of God is signified, to wit, for that he is the branch, that is, the ground faith, roote, foundation, and nourishment of all the faithfull. And he shall come, both in his place, and also in his time. The third thing is, what that same man,3. What he shall bring to passe. the man Christ shall effect or bring to passe, that is, he shal build that Temple of the Lord, whereof the Temple of Ierusalem was a figure. So then by the name of the Temple in this place is signified the Church of God, the which at all times hath been gathered together by Christ through the preaching of the word of God. The which promise albeit that it seemed hard, yet shall it haue his accomplishment and fulfilling: and therefore o the ende the Iewes might bee most assured of it, it is repeated a∣gaine in the verse following. Vers. 13. Euen he shall build the Temple of the Lord, & he shall beare the glorie, and shall sit and rule vpon his throne, and he shall be a Priest vpon his throne, and the counsell of peace shall be betweene them both. THe figure Auxesis,Auxesis, what this figure is, see Oseas, cap. 7 ver. 4. A three fold glorie of Christ or increasing. For he amplifieth that same glorie of Christ, that the priests and ministers of the Church may the more assuredly beleeue and perceiue, how great their glorie shall be. And here in this place is described or set forth a three-fold glorie of Christ, to wit, his honour, rule, priesthood, yea, & the same firme, apparent, & glorious.1. His honour. His honour comprehendeth whatsoe∣uer outward beautie and excellencie may be noted and seene in the kingdome of Christ, as in times past vnder the lawe, was the gold and siluer of the Temple: the precious stones in the garment of the high priest: his dignitie among men, and such other like, the which notwithstanding were in the ministerie of the Temple, and also in
the Temple it selfe. Now also euen vnder the Gospell Kings and Princes are brought vnto Christ, and there may bee seene an out∣ward glorie of the true Church of God, how great soeuer it be, Psal. 72. The rule of Christ is described vnder the name of sitting & do∣minion, and the selfe same is also glorious and manifest,2. His rule. because he hath a throne: and moreouer it is vniuersall, because Christ is sayd generally that hee shall rule, and not ouer one or two nations on∣ly. For whereas Luk. 1. Christ is sayd, that he shall rule or reigne in the house of his father Dauid, this doth not restraine the rule of Christ vnto one certaine nation, but doth spread it ouer the whole world. Lastly, the Priesthood also of Christ is rehearsed,3. His priesthood. and the same also manifest and glorious, because it also hath his throne. So then the Church also, and the Ecclesiasticall or Church ministerie hath her iurisdiction, and her throne, although distinct or seuered from the ciuill, as appeareth by this place. Hence also is gathered, that the same Christ is both the King and also the Priest of his Church, and that for euer, because both are by God shewed to bee in Christ without any limitation of time. The applica∣tion of the glo∣rie of Christ vnto Iehoshua.There followeth the application of the glorie of Christ vnto Ie∣hoshua the high Priest, and consequently vnto the whole ministe∣rie of the Church, whereof the hie Priest at that time was as it were the head, or chiefe part. And it is contained in these words: The nsell of peace was betweene these two. Therefore the ministers of the Church shall feele and receiue this glorie, so farre forth as they shall consent and agree with Christ, that is, as they shall not dissent or disagree from the doctrine of Christ: and as they and Christ shal bold together. The Prophet therefore hath propounded or set forth two men, to wit, Iehoshua as the type or figure, and the Mi∣nister; and Christ, as the trueth and fountaine, of whom he sayth, that the counsell of peace shall be betweene them, that is, singular con∣sent, and correspondence (as they terme it) or agreement, the one with the other, to wit, that the ministers of the Church, in the exe∣cution of their office, haue regard vnto the glorie of Christ alone. Except some man had rather to referre these words (these two) vn∣to the two thrones, the which shall agree within themselues,* Kisse in the Hebrew is the feminine gen∣der, and the ar∣ticle (hem) in Schenehem (them two) is the masculine gender. or to∣gether to promote or set forward and aduance the glorie of God: but the nature of the gender in the Hebrew word for (a throne) is against it.
Vers. 14. And the crownes shall be to Helem, and to Tobijah, and to Iedaiah, and to Hen the sonne of Zephaniah, for a memoriall in the Temple of the Lord. A comfort for the Iewes, and in their person, for all the god∣lie.A Double conclusion or rule, the which enlargeth, and also set∣teth out or bringeth light vnto the signification of the former fact, especially vnto the comfort & confirmation or strengthening of the Iewes, which heard the former promises, that they should not doubt of them. It enlargeth it, for that the Prophet teacheth accor∣ding vnto the promise of God, and the interpretation of this exam∣ple or fact, that not onely the Iewes, but also all people, yea those that did dwel farre off should bestowe gifts, and also their seruice for the building of the Temple of God. It setteth out, and enlighte∣neth the same, because that all and euery of them, which shall bee so minded, shall winne praise and great glorie, yea and the same immortall in the midst of the Church, Psal. 112. Dan. 12. For the righteous man shall be had in euerlasting remembrance, yea euen with God, and God doth honour those which haue honored him, 1. Sam. 2. ver. 30. So then indeed this first rule or conclusion teach∣eth how great honour,Thse that in faith imploy their seruice for the furthe∣rance of the Temple of God, shall be honou∣red both of God and men. yea and that true honour, and agreeable vn∣to the will of God, remaineth for all those which doe seruice for the Temple of God either earthly, or spirituall, of a true faith: and that both with God himselfe, and also with all good or godly men. And therefore Esdr. 2. all those, which with a constant minde returned vnto the restoring of the worship and seruice of God, are recko∣ned vp, yea the mules themselues, and the mule keepers and muli∣tors, so also Nehem. 7. By this signe therefore of hanging vp of the Crownes in the Temple of God, to the praise and remembrance of those foure men (who brought both their owne gifts, and also the gifts of others) is shewed the great praise, and renowmed name of the godlie, which doe build the Church of God, and serue the same. Vers. 15. And they that are farre off, shall come and build in the tem∣ple of the Lord, and ye shall know, that the Lord of hosts hath sent me vnto you. And this shall come to passe, if ye will obey the voyc of the Lord your God. THe second conclusion, or rule of the adioyning of other people, yea euen of such as dwell farre off, that together with the Iewes
they may build the Temple of God, but the spirituall Temple.The gentiles shal ioyne with the Iewes in the building vp of the Spiritu∣all Temple. The which thing was most trulie brought to passe by the preaching of the Gospell, and the conuersion or turning of the Gentiles vnto Christ. But to the end the Prophet may take from them all distrust of a matter so hard and vnhoped for, he appealeth vnto the issue or falling out of the matter, the which he promiseth, that it shall be most assuredly. Lastly, cast the Iewes, or any other should abuse so great promises of God vnto the wantonnes & securitie, or care∣lesnes of the flesh, he sheweth that these things shall fall out vnto them only, which shall obey God by faith. For infidelitie or vnbe∣liefe doth keepe vs backe from the partaking of the graces and be∣nefites of God. CAP. 7. Vers. 1. And in the fourth yere of King Darius, the word of the Lord came vnto Zechariah in the fourth day of the ninth moneth, e∣uen in Chisleu. The prophet answereth a question mo∣ued by the Iewes.HItherto the Prophet at the commandement of God, hath she∣wed and set downe those things, the which did appertaine eui∣dently vnto the confirmation of the building, restoring, and preser∣uing of the nation of the Iewes, the Citie, and Temple: now he an∣swereth vnto a question moued vnto him by the people and the priests, to wit, the demanders of the same being Sareezer,Sareezer, and Reguemme∣lech moue the question at the appointment of the whol people. and Re∣guemmelech, men of good place and countenance. For these were appoynted or chosen to aske this question, as it were the messen∣gers and Embassadors for the whole people, who should shew vn∣to both the priests, and also the Prophets, the desres and requests of the whole people: these I say, were chosen hereunto by the whole people, the which were returned from the captiuitie of Babylon, & dwelt at Ierusalem, and in the whole land. And by occasion of this question, God doth againe rehearse his promises toward the natiō of the Iewes, and the citie of Ierusalem, and confirmeth the former. And this question of the people was a most true testimonie or wit∣nes of the fulfilling of the former promises now alreadie begun. For the Iewes that were returned from the captiuitie propoūd or moue this question:The question of the Iewes. Whether they ought to afflict or punish and humble themselues, as they did before, and likewise to fast, when as they see with their owne eyes, the Temple for the most part now builded a∣gaine,
and doe feele their condition and estate changed, and of that which before was most miserable, to bee made now more ioyfull. All which things are the effects of God his promises, foretolde by the Prophet Zacharias. Now there is a time to mourne, and a time to reioyce, Ecclesiast. 3. So then when as the occasion of that affli∣ction and mourning was ceased, they doe demand of the Prophets of God, and of the Priests, Whether they ght to mourne stil not∣withstanding, and doe the selfe same things, the which they did in the chiefest state and time of their sorowe.The answere. The answer is, ver. 20. of the eight chapter following, That they ought not. Two parts of this verse.But touching this verse, the same containeth two things. First, a confirmation of the doctrine, and answer following. It is the word of the Lord,1. A confirmatiō of the doctrine folowing. and not the Prophet Zacharias his owne word. Second∣ly, it noteth the time, to wit, the fourth yeare of the reigne of Da∣rius. The former promises were deliuered in the second yeare of the reigne of the sayd King:2. The time of the deliuerie of the same. and the Temple of God was finished in the sixt yeare of Darius, Esdr. 6. Thus by the circumstance of the time we doe vnderstand that now alreadie the worke of the Tem∣ple for the most part was in a good forwardnes, and that there shi∣ned a ioyfull hope of better successe of things in the Iewes owne countrey. Vers. 2. For they had sent vnto the house of God Sharezer, and Re∣gem-melech and their men, to pray before the Lord. The reason, why the Pro∣phet hath a new inspirati∣on and word from God.THis is the rendring of a reason why God gaue vnto the Prophet a new instinct or inspiration, and word, by occasion of the histo∣rie, or thing done. For the whole people enquired the will of God touching a new question. And God would not denie the desires of those that were his, and therefore he answereth by the Prophet. For the people delt well, and in very good order, who in their hard case and doubt, doe aske of God in his ministers. This their exam∣ple therefore is of vs to be followed. So 2. King. cap. 1. ver. 6. Ahaziah King of Samaria is greatly reproued of God by the ministerie of the Prophet Elijah, because he sent to Baal-zebub to knowe whe∣ther he should recouer of his hurt which he had taken by a fall through a windowe, and sought not by God his Prophets to vn∣derstand the will of the Lord in this matter. Wherefore Deut. 18. ver. 15. Moses giueth the people of Israel this comfort, that after
his decease God will not leaue them staylesse, and helples, nor vn∣certaine and doubtful whither to goe for to be resolued and taught in the will of the Lord, for (sayth he) the Lord thy God will raise vp vnto thee a Prophet like vnto me, from among you, euen of thy brethrē: vnto him ye shall hearken. And therefore in the Psalm 74. ver. 9. whē as the Church for a time, in the wrath of God is depriued of this be∣nefite, and the ordinary course of the Prophets and ministerie cea∣sed, by whom they might bee instructed, and enquire of the will of the Lord, they complaine of this want, and crye out vnto God, and say, We see not our signes: there is not one Prophet more, nor any with vs that knoweth how long. 3 Partes of this verse.But in this verse of our Prophet there are three things to be no∣ted. First, the good order of the Church for the people, yea & that all of them, asketh and desireth to knowe some thing of the priests, yet doe they not this tumultuously,1 The good order of the church. nor by the confused or disorde∣red multitude: but out of their whole bodie they appoynt certain, and send them in the name of the rest vnto the Priests. Secondly,2 Who are to be demaunded touching the will of the lord. who are to be asked, and demaunded concerning the will of God, namely, the ministers of the Church, either ordinary, as the priests: or extraordinary, if there be any, as in times past were the Prophets. And therefore it is sayd, Malach. 2. ver. 7. The Priests lips should pre∣serue knowledge, and they should seeke the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hostes. So then the people asketh not Zorobabel, though he were a godly man, or other politike Magi∣strates, of matters appertaining vnto conscience: but the ministers of the Church. The third thing is, how,3 After what maner we must come vn∣to God. or after what maner wee must come vnto God, to wit, by prayer, and supplication. For after this sort ought both the ministers of the Church themselues, and o∣thers also to come vnto God, who seeke after the will of God, and the true interpretation of his word? Vers. 3. And to speake vnto the Priests, which were in the house of the Lord of hostes, and to the Prophets, saying: Should I weepe in the fifth moneth, and separate my selfe, as I haue done these so ma∣ny yeares. The question of the people.THe declaring of the question, & request of the whole people re∣turned frō the captiuitie, Whether now also they ought to fast, & to hūble thēselues as they did before, when their estate was most
afflicted, or troublous? And that here they speake of such a certaine fast, as at that time was vsuall, and accustomable among the Iewes, although it were extraordinarie, appeareth both by the answere of God, ver. 5. the which was agreeable vnto the question of the peo∣ple, and also by the very words of the question it selfe, the which by the adioynts, & things accompanying it, doe describe a fast, name∣ly, when as it is sayd, Shall I weepe, and separate my selfe? the which two things those doe which are in sorowe and heauines. Now, a true fast is ioyned with sorowe and heauines of minde, as the same is notably set out Ioel 2. ver. 15.16.17. in these words: Blowe the trumpet in Zion, sanctifie a fast, call a solemne assemblie. Gather the people: sanctifie the congregation, gather the Elders: assemble the children, and those that sucke the breasts: let the bridegrome goe forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride chamber. Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weepe betweene the porch and the altar, and let them say, Spare thy people, O Lord, and giue not thine heritage into reproch, that the heathen should rule ouer them. Wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God? See more hereof Isai 58. Two things to be noted in this question.Wherefore in this question two things are contained. First, a de∣scription of the fast. Secondly, the kinde of the fast. The fast is de∣scribed or set forth by the name of mourning & affliction, or hum∣bling of themselues,1. The descripti∣on of the fast. that thereby may be vnderstood that the cause of this question is iust. For it was vnfit and vnseemly, that in so ioy∣full a time, wherein the temple was peaceably and quietly builded, they should weepe,2. The kind or time of this fast. and be in sorowe. Moreouer, the kinde or time of the fast maketh also for the vnderstanding of the cause of this question. For the people doth not aske of other fasts appoynted in the law of God, and such as were set and ordinarie fasts: but of this only, to wit, an extraordinarie fast, the which was yearely kept in the fift moneth, because that in the same moneth the Temple was destroyed by the Chaldeans, as appeareth 2. King. cap. 25. ver. 8.9. in these words: And in the fift moneth, and 7. day of the moneth, which was the 19. yeare of King Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, came Ne∣buzar-adan chief steward & seruant of the King of Babel, to Ierusalē, & burnt the house of the Lord, and the Kings house, & all the houses of Ierusalem, & al the great houses burnt he with fire. So Ier. 52.12. the same thing is recorded almost in the very self same words. Where∣fore the Temple being now restored or builded again, the cause of
mourning ceased, and therefore the effect also, which was fasting and mourning, ought to cease in like maner. Vers. 4. Then came the word of the Lord of hostes vnto me, say∣ing, A twofold an∣swere vnto the former questiō.THe answer of the Prophet vnto the former question, & the same two-fold by the mouth and commandement of God himselfe. The first generally, the which sheweth in generall what is to bee iudged and deemed of this whole kind of things and actions.1. Generally. The second, specially or particularly,2. Specially, and particularly. the which sheweth what they ought to thinke of that same fast of the fifth moneth, yea and of the seuenth and tenth moneth also, the which fasts the Iewes had ap∣poynted extraordinarily, but yet yearely, to afflict or humble them∣selues, as is to bee seene hereafter, cap. 8. ver. 19.Why it was re∣quisite that the Iewes should general∣ly be taught what was to be iudged of these outward mat∣ters. Now it was be∣houefull and requisite that the people of the Iewes should bee an∣swered generally, what was to bee iudged of this whole kinde of things, not onely because all men generally doe alwayes attribute too much vnto these outward things, as if the most true worship of God stood in these things (such is both the hypocrisie, and also the grosse ignorance of men) but especially the Iewes were too much giuen alwayes vnto such things, ceremonies, and actions, because that they had receiued them from God, and therefore they placed in them the weight and sway of true religion, and of the worship & seruice of God Isai. 1.12. &c. where in regard of the confidence and trust which the Iewes did put in these ceremonies, God sayth vnto them by his Prophet, When ye come to appeare before me, who requi∣reth this of your hands, to tread in my courts? And cap. 66. ver. 3. God telleth them: He that killeth a bullocke, is as if he slew a man: he that sacrificeth a sheepe, as if he cut off a dogs necke: he that offreth an ob∣lation, as if he offred swines bloud: he that remembreth incense, as if he blessed an idoll: yea they haue chosen their owne wayes, and their soule delighteth in their abominations. So Amos cap. 5. ver. 22. the Lord sayth, Though ye offer me burnt offrings and meate offrings, I will not accept them: neither will I regard the peace offrings of your fat beasts. The Lord therefore by this answere would haue this er∣ror pulled out of their minds, the which did stick so fast, and cleaue so hard in them, the which moued this question of fasting. Where∣fore God teacheth that he is neither delighted, nor appeased with these things in themselues: but with true godlines and charitie or
loue, such as he himselfe by his Prophets hath prescribed or ap∣poynted vnto them in his word. Further, this verse and all other such like, in the which it is sayd, that the word of God came, or was giuen, and that from the God of hostes, that is, almightie, doe con∣firme the doctrine which is to be expounded, and doe winne and get authoritie vnto the same, and audience, and reuerence from the author of it, namely, God himselfe. Vers. 5. Speake vnto all the people of the land, and to the Priests, and say, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth, & seuen moneth, euen these seuentie yeares, did ye fast vnto me? doe I approue it? The answer of God cōtaining two things.THe summe of the answere of GOD, the which containeth two things. First, that God was not delighted with the fasts of them∣selues, either of the fifth moneth, or of that other of the seuenth mo∣neth,1. That God was not delighted in these fasts of themselues. ordained by them also for the death of Godolia, 2. King. 25. albeit they had obserued them a great space, and long season so∣lemnely, and yearely. And this answere is indeed made vnto the whole people, but yet notwithstanding by the Priests, vnto whom especially God doth direct the Prophet, because it is their office to teach the people: and it is the office of the Priests to be taught of God, either ordinarilie, or extraordinarilie, as it is here done by Za∣charias. And the Prophet expresly maketh mention of the seuentie yeares, those namely, wherein the people was in banishment and captiuitie in Babylon, because that all that whole time especially the Iewes had kept those their extraordinarie fasts straitly, & hard∣ly. Finally, the repeating of the word (me) hath an Emphasis or ve∣hemencie and force in it, the which sheweth that before God the abasing of these outward things is the greater, yea, and a thing vn∣pleasant vnto God, vnlesse that true godlines or charitie and loue of minde doe goe before. Vers. 6. And when ye did eate, and when ye did drinke, did ye not eate for your selues, and drinke for your selues? 2. Why these out∣ward workes of themselues please not God.THe second thing to bee noted in this answer of God, to wit, the cause, for the which these outward works of themselues are not acceptable vnto God, whether they be extraordinarie, that is, com∣manded by men, or ordinary, that is, commanded by God himselfe. And first of all the extraordinarie workes the which are done of
men of their owne accord, doe not please God, because that men themselues doe them for their owne commoditie and pleasure, and not by the commandement of God. And therefore in them re∣gard and consideration of men is rather had and sought, then of God. And therefore in them men doe drinke, and eate, and fast vn∣to themselues: and there commeth thereby no profite vnto God, Psal. 16. Wherefore whether they eate, or whether they drinke, it is all one vnto God, neither haue they thereby the more, or the lesse with God, that is, neither are they therefore the more, or the lesse acceptable vnto God, as Paul teacheth 1. Cor. 8. ver. 8. Meate ma∣keth not vs acceptable vnto God: for neither if wee eate haue wee the more, neither if we eate not, haue we the lesse. And therefore when as there was a iarre in the Church of the Romanes between the Iewes and the Gentiles about these matters, Paul, Rom. 14 ver. 3. for the appeasing of that strife, giueth this counsel, Let not him that eateth, despise him that eateth not: and let not him which eateth not, iudge him that eateth: for God hath receiued him. And ver. 6. He that ea∣teth, eateth to the Lord: for he giueth God thankes: and he that eateth not, eateth not to the Lord, and giueth God thankes. Vers. 7. Should ye not heare the words, which the Lord hath cryed by the ministerie of the former Prophets, when Ierusalem was inha∣bited, and in prosperitie, and the cities therof round about her, when the South and the plaine was inhabited? Fasts and other outward works ordained by God, doe not of themselues please God.AS touching fasts, and other such like outward workes appoyn∣ted by God himselfe, neither are they also of themselues accep∣table vnto God, but those things rather please him, the which by his Prophets he hath alwaies required at the hands of men, yea, and euen at that time, when as they had greatest felicitie or successe of things. God indeed appoynted vnto the Iewes fasts, and other out∣ward rites or customes and fashions, but yet such notwithstanding as wherein he would not haue the chiefest part of his worship and seruice to bee placed consist, nay he gaue those ceremonies as to∣kens, and stirrings of vs forward vnto his inward worship only, the which he alwayes vrged or earnestly called vpon by his Prophets. Wherfore God doth not in this place cal back the Iewes vnto those ceremonies: but vnto those sermons and words, the which by his Prophets he had so often beaten into their heads, and set forth, and openly deliuered, and commanded that they should obserue or
keepe, the which are afterward declared verse 9. and in those that follow. So then the hypocrisie of men, and of the Iewes is shewed, who ouerpassing, nay neglecting and setting nought by the chiefe part of the worship and seruice of God, doe stay in these outward things, as the onely meanes to appease God withall. For these ce∣remonies are not properlie those words, the which God propoun∣ded or set forth by his prophets: but rather those things which fol∣low hereafter, and in the which there appeareth a true testimonie or witnes of godlines or loue. Further it hath an Emphasis or force, whereas God saith, that he cryed and sounded foorth those things, the which hee now also required of them, that both the trueth of God, and the conformitie or agreeablenes of his wor∣ship and seruice might be shewed: and also the care of God with a loude voyce to call them back vnto a better minde. And this al∣so hath a weight and force with it, where as hee saith that hee did the same, when as both the citie did as yet still florish, and all the o∣ther cities neere vnto it, yea and moreouer the whole countrie it selfe, so farre as it reacheth, and is stretched out toward the South both in the mountaines, and in the plaine. For this circumstance of time sheweth the great and daylie care of God for that peo∣ple, that is, those that are his, and also his continuall course and constancie in exacting and requiring still the same kinde of his true and inward worship and seruice. For like as the nature of God is one and the same alwaies: so also his true and inward wor∣ship, is, and hath been alwaies one, and the same. Vers. 8. And the worde of the Lorde came vnto Zechariah, say∣ing, He sheweth more plainly what these wordes are, which God re∣quired of their fathers. For God For God sheweth, what those wordes are, the which so carefullie, and daylie, and earnestlie (as namely for that they were his true worship) he did by his Prophets require of their fathers and Elders, that they should not perish, but that they might bee acceptable vnto him. And now God requireth the selfe same yet still of them their po∣steritie, and desireth that they may bee obserued; that they also may please him. And this is shewed by the way of matching to∣gether of cōtraries, the which doth not only garnish this sentence, but also doth bring a great light vnto it, and cleerelie teacheth, that God is trulie worshipped, not with outward ceremonies,
but with the earnest motion of the heart: that hee is not delited with the afflictings or exercises of the bodie, but with the true dueties and effectes of faith and charitie. Therefore doth Paul al∣so alwaies match these the one against the other, as 1. Tim. cap. 4. ver. 7.8. in these words Cast away prophane, and olde wiues fables,Olde wiues fa∣bles. Godlines. Bodily exercise. Godlines. and exercise thy selfe vnto godlines. For bodilie exercise profiteth little, but godlines is profitable vnto all things, which hath the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. And then verse the 12. he sheweth what be these fruites of godlines, wherein hee would haue Timothie to be a patterne for them to follow, saying, Let no man despise thy youth, but be vnto them that beleeue, an ensample in word, in conuersation, in loue, in spirit, in faith, and in purenes. So a∣gaine Tit. 1. and 2. where there is a matching together of con∣traries betweene rites and ceremonies and the true workes of godlines.What the fi∣gure Noema, see Zach. cap. 2. ver. 5. But here in this place by the figure Noema all the works both of faith, and also of charitie are commended. The workes of faith, or of the first table by the consequent, or that which fol∣loweth. For if charitie or loue toward our neighbour, and the workes of the second table be acceptable or pleasing vnto GOD, much more is faith so, the which loueth both God himselfe, and also is the cause of our loue toward our neighbour. So then of ne∣cessitie by the workes of the second table, or of charitie true faith or the first table is vnderstood and gathered especially to be com∣manded vnto vs. For (as it is Galat. 5. ver. 6.) In Iesus Christ neither circumcision auaileth any thing, neither vncircumcision, but faith, which worketh by loue. And all the workes of Charitie are here conteined by the figure Synecdoche,What Synec∣doche is see A∣mos cap. 3. v. 2. and by the reckoning vp of part or a certaine sort of them. But in this place are exprestie re∣cited three sortes of the workes of Charitie or of the second table. Verse. 9. Thus speaketh the Lorde of hostes, saying, Execute true iudgement, and shew mercie and compassion, euerie man to his brother. All duties the which men owe vnto ech other, in respect of a∣ny publike of∣fice.THe first conteineth all the workes the which men doe owe vnto men in regarde of any publike office, which they beare, as for example, Kings vnto their subiects, Iudges vnto those ouer whom they are set to rule. Of these it is required that they should (iudge) that is, execute that their office, and that in (trueth) the
which is here set against all accepting of persons, and all fauour. Concerning this dutie thus is it commanded Deut. 1. ver. 17. Yee shall haue no respect of person in iudgment, but shall heare the small as well as the great: yee shall not feare the face of man: for the iudge∣ment is Gods, Psalm. 82. The second sort here reckoned vp de∣scribeth the duties, the which generallie men owe vnto men, so far forth as wee are all of vs brethren one vnto another, and made after the image of God. Now this doe we owe one vnto another, first, that we bee touched with mercie, and moued with a fellow feeling of the miseries one of another: Secondly, that wee doe good vnto them that be in miserie, and help them. To that inward affection apperteineth the word Racham,Racham. Chesed. compassion: and the word Chesed mercie, belongeth to the effect of this affection, or vnto bounteousnes. And therefore Galat. 6. ver. 10. Paul counsel∣leth vs saying, While wee haue therefore time, let vs doe good vnto all men, but especiallie vnto them, which are of the house hold of faith, Hebr. 13. Vers. 10. And oppresse not the widdowe, nor the fatherles, the stranger, nor the poore, and let none of you imagine euill against his brother in your heart. Particular du∣ties toward some certaine persons.THe third sort hath those duties, the which men doe owe par∣ticularlie vnto certaine persons by the commandement and feeling of true charitie it selfe, that is, rather, and more readily then vnto the rest of other men. And these are such dueties as both the law of GOD, and also the feeling of humanitie it selfe doth commaund vs to performe especiallie vnto persons afflic∣ted, or in trouble and misery, as vnto Widdowes, Fatherles children, strangers, the poore, and such as are destitute or voyde of man his help Deut. 16. ver. 11.14. Psal. 82. And this is that which we doe owe vnto them, namely, that because they easelie lie open vnto iniu∣ries and wrongs, and are not able to resist, and stand against those that oppresse them, we neither should our selues take from them that which is their own, nor suffer it to be taken away from them. Finallie, by way of making it more plaine, it is here further shew∣ed, what maner of charitie or loue ours ought to bee towards them, and also all other men, namely, that we should not so much as in heart thinke, or wish, or deuise any euill against them, much lesse execute it in deed.
Vers. 11. Or And But they refused to hearken, and pulled away the shoul∣der, and stopped their eares, that they should not heare. The former doctrine confir∣med by an ex∣ample familiar vnto the Iewes.GOd confirmeth the former doctrine by an example familiar and knowne vnto the Iewes, that they may bee the more mo∣ued, and giue heede vnto it. Whereby they are taught, that their forefathers selt punishments, and the same most grieuous, and the wrath of God, and that very great, because they worshipped and serued not God in such sort, that is, according vnto the rule set downe before. For they gaue heed only vnto those rites, and out∣ward ceremonies, mocking God, touching which, the people as yet propounded the question, as the chiefe part of God his wor∣ship and seruice, being in deed too much addicted or giuen vnto these outward things, and very wickedly, and through great error of minde, placing the whole sway and waight of their saluation, and peace with God, in these in a maner toyes, and trifles.Two partes of this narration. But this narration hath two partes. The first sheweth the contempt of the forefathers of this people (who asked this question of God) concerning the true worship of God, and their rebellion.1. The contempt of their forefa∣thers. The second, the iudgement of God against them for the same. This their contempt is described by an amplification,2. The iudgment of God for the same. the which conteineth a proceeding as it were by degrees, and also a recko∣ting vp of those partes (wherein their stubborne despising of GOD dooth consist) besides that the phrase also,1. And And And And and maner of speech of the Prophet, being knit together with many * copula∣tiue coniunctions, doth the better paynt out the greatnes of the rebellion of those former Iewes, that the iudgement and wrath of God against them may appeare to bee the more iust: and that their posteritie or others should not follow them, because that all en see that they are to be dispraised and discommended. Three degrees of their con∣tempt.And furthermore, this verse hath three degrees and partes of his manifest contempt, or despising of God, the which was, and appeared in the Iewes before they were so miserablie afflicted or punished in the captiuitie. The first degree is, They refused to har∣.1. They refuse to heare. For by little and little men doe fall into the manifest con∣tempt of God: and no man vpon the suddaine, and at a push be∣commeth most lewd and filthie. First, therefore men refuse to giue eare vnto those things, to considder and weigh those things, the which are said vnto them by the seruants of God. They doe
not at the first vtterlie refuse at all to heare, but they refuse to con∣sider, and to giue heed vnto the things, which they haue heard. The second degree, The pulled away the shoulder, or they set their stubborne shoulder against it. A Metaphor taken from men that do not willinglie take the burden,2 They pulled backe the shoulder. What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. which is laid vpon them, nay which doe refuse it, and cast it off, and therefore withdrawe the shoulder, wherewith they should carrie the burden, and striue a∣gainst it. There is a like maner of speaking Nehem. 9. ver. 29. But they behaued themselues proudely, and hearkened not vnto thy commandements, but sinned against thy iudgements (which a man should doe and liue in them) and pulled away the shoulder, and were stifnecked, and would not heare. For those things which men doe willingly take vp, vnto them they are said to yeeld a willing shoul∣der. Sophon. 3.3. They stopped their eares. In the second place therefore men refuse to doe, and take vpon them those things, the which hauing heard before, they foreslowed to meditate or thinke vpon. In the end they stop their eares, and harden them, that now they will not so much as onely heare and hearken vnto those things, that is to say, they re∣fuse and disdaine so much as with the eares of their bodie onely, to receiue those things, the which before they onely despised to giue heed vnto, and to doe. Vers. 12. Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone, least they should heare the law, and the words which the Lord of hostes sent in his spirit by the ministerie of the former Prophets: there∣fore came a great wrath from the Lord of hostes. 4. They made their heart as hard as an a∣damant.THe fourth and last degree of the manifest rebellion of men, to wit not only the hardning of the eares of their body, but also the wilfull stopping of the eares of their heart. And this stub∣bornes is described or set forth, both metaphorically, and also by way of matching together of contraries. Metaphorically, in the word Adamant. For they did not lightly harden their heart, but most stubbornly, so that now their heart and rebellious mind a∣gainst God, was not only a stone, but also most hard aboue all stones, such as is the Adamant, so that it neither would, nor could by any meanes receiue the words of God, by meanes of that ouer much hardning. The matching together of contraries lieth in the descriptiō of that word which they despised. For it was the word of almighty God reuealed by his spirit, and so consequently ma∣kinge
for their saluation: and by the ministery of the prophets, not of any men whatsoeuer, but of most choice and approoued instru∣ments of God was the same word shewed & deliuered vnto them. Now euery one of these things seuerally, much more all of them ioyntly do increase this rebellion of the Iewes, or of men, and their contempt or despising of God.The punish∣ment of their rebellion. The rebellion of men being set downe, now followeth their punishment, that is to say, the iudge∣ment of God against them, and the same most iust, and also most greevous. And as against such kinde of men, the anger of God goeth before, and then followeth the punishment and paine: so is both of them in this place orderly described. The wrath of God therefore was iustly against so stifnecked disobedience, yea and that great wrath, the which appeared by the effects, that is the punishment, which followed. And by the proportion of the rebellion it ought to be great, that the punishment might be equal and aunswerable vnto the fault. Vers. 13. Therefore it is come to passe, that as he cried, and they would not heare, so they cried, and I would not heare, saith the Lord of hostes. The descripti∣on of their pu∣nishment.THe description of the punishment, the which consisteth of three partes, whereby the greatnes thereof is shewed, that o∣ther men, and the Iewes themselues might shunne, and feare to i∣nitate or follow such stubbornes of minde against God.1. The first de∣gree of their punishment. The first degree of the punishment is that they were not heard of God, no not when they cried vnto God. The reason is from the rules of dis∣tributiue iustice, as they call it, and such as punisheth the sins of men, the which commaundeth, that men should be punished after the same manner, after the which they haue offended. They would not heare God crying vnto them: so likewise were not they heard of God, when as they cryed vnto him in their afflictions or troubles. So God telleth them of the like punishment in his Pro∣phet Isai cap. 65. ver. 12. in these wordes: Therefore I will number you to the sword, and all you shall bowe downe to the slaughter, because I called, and ye did not answere: I spake, and ye heard not, but did e∣uill in my sight, & did chuse that thing, which I would not. So Psal. 18. ver. 25.26. Dauid teacheth, that God will deale with men ac∣cording to their behauiour and deseruing: with the godly (saith he of God) thou wilt shew thy selfe godly: with the vpright man, thou
wilt shew thy selfe vpright. With the pure thou wilt shew thy selfe pure, and with the froward thou wilt shew thy selfe froward. Now this is a most grieuous punishment, not to bee heard, or receiued of God. Vers. 14. But I scattered them among all the nations, whom they knew not: thus the land was desolate after them, that no man passed through, nor returned: for they laide the pleasant land wast. 2. The second de∣gree of their punishment.THe second degree of this punishment, they were scattered as it were with a strong whirle-winde, and cast out of their na∣tiue soyle among sundrie nations, and not all of them carried as banished persons, and captiues into some one certaine land, and countrie, but one into this countrie and another into that, with a great and fearefull scattering, and renting in peeces of the same bodie, and nation. Yea and moreouer they were driuen vnto na∣tions vnknowne vnto the Iewes themselues, at whose hands they could looke for no humanitie or courteous intertainement, as namely vnto whom they were Barbarians:3. The third de∣gree of their punishment. and they vnto them. The third degree of their punishment, for that their very land it selfe did for their sake feele the most grieuous iudgements of God also, as lacking inhabitants, and her blessing from God, that in stead of a pleasant land, the which it was before, that same land of the Iewes should bee laide wast; and become an huge and great wildernes. For as it is in the Psal. 107. ver. 34. God turneth a fruite∣full land into barrennes, for the wickednes of them that dwell therein. CAP. 8. Vers. 1. Againe the word of the Lord of hostes came vnto mee, saying,Two parts of this chapter. 1. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer doctrine.THis whole chapter conteineth two things. Frst, it hath a con∣firmation of the former doctrine touching the true worship and seruice of God to be defined and restored by the true works of godlines and charitie,2. An answer vn∣to the question moued in the former chap∣ter. and not onely by outward ceremonies, as appeareth hereafter ver. 16.17. Secondly, an expresse answer vnto the question propounded in the former chapter vers.
and so forth. But touching the beginning of this chapter it is a garnishing or a staying in the further laying out of the matter by the way of matching together of the contraries, to wit of the punishment or iudgement of GOD against the forefathers of the Iewes, and of the promise alreadie made vnto their poste∣ritie by the free mercie of GOD, and not vttered, and be∣slowed vpon them for any righteousnes or desertes of theirs, as appeareth hereafter verse 15. And it was requisite that these promises should bee set after these iudgements and punish∣ments of God against the Iewes, least they might suppose God to bestil angry with them, and consequently might lay aside al hope and minde of building of the temple, and repairing of the City, & of their longer stay in the land of Iudea, as is shewed ver. 9. For this rehearsing of the promises of God, especially so notable and uident touching the restoring of Sion, yea and of the City it selfe, nd of the long continuance of them both, did very greatly both omfort them, and also incourage them to go lustily forward with the building. Moreouer this verse, like a the beginning also of the verse folowing hath a confirmation of the doctrine, which lloweth, namely for that the Prophet was cōmaunded by God,  and the almighty God, to vtter, and to promise these thinges  his name vnto the Iewes, that is, vnto his church.Why this pre∣face of the Pro∣phet is so often repeated (Thus saith the Lord of hostes.) And this pre∣ce of the Prophet is often repeated, to wit because in so great ly burly and trouble of thinges, in so lamentable destruction of that people, and so great power and boldnes of their enemies, (the which were against that building of the Temple. Esdr. 4. ver. 1) this promise or doctrine, was so much the more diligently to be confirmed. Ver. 2. Thus saith the Lord of hostes, I was ielous for Zion with great ielousy, and I was ielous for her with great wrath. The chiefe came of all the promises of God towards his church, isTHe manner & order of the Prophet, his staying still in the con∣firmation of the former doctrine. For first of all he setteth owne the very cause it selfe, nay the chese cause of all the pro∣mises of God to come, and which were to be rehearsed, namely the only mercy and good will of God towards them: both that these Iewes the posterity of their forefathers, should not thinke that they had deserued these things at the hand of Gd with their ceremonies or holines of life: and also that they might vnderstand
what was the most certain foundatiō of these promises made vn∣to them, to wit the purpose and will of God, which is vnchaunge∣able. So then the most true and chiefe, and principall cause, nay the onely cause that moueth God to bestow so great benefites vp∣on them,His only boun∣teousnes, and louing good will. and vs all, that is, vpon his church, is the very bounteous∣nes and louing good will of GOD toward those, whom he hath wholly chosen. For as at the first he chose and loued them for that cause onely: so also for the same cause doth he cherish and defend them. And this free good will of God towards those that are his is described and set foorth by the adioyntes, to wit, his Iealousie. For as Augustine saith, He which loueth, the selfe same also is iea∣lous, and will haue the thing which is deare vnto him, to bee safe, without danger, and to doe well. But that the nature and greatnes of this loue of God toward vs, whom hee hath chosen, may bee knowne, there is added or set downe a difference, namely, that this ielousie of God is great, and earnest. And the Prophet dooth de∣scribe this ielousie by a worde of like signification, to wit, of heat, or of burning loue. For that same sincere or vnfeined and pure loue, both of GOD toward vs, and also ours toward GOD is an exceeding burning and heat of the heart, wherewith wee doe burne and loue. Vers. 3. Thus saith the Lord, I will returne vnto Zion, and will dwell in the middest of Ierusalem, and Ierusalem shall be called a citie of trueth, and the mountaine of the Lord of hostes, the ho∣ly Mountaine. Effects of God his loue.FRom the cause he commeth vnto the effects and the same ge∣nerall, and in consideration and respect of the other, first in re∣gard of order. And in this place there are reckoned vp three, which are as it were the causes of them that doe follow, at least∣wise, they goe before in regard of order.1. God his recon∣cilement with those that are his. The first is, God his re∣concilement or being made friendes with those that are his, the which metaphorically is called the returning of God vnto vs, and those that are his, from whom God seemed before (in respect of outward things, and of the most miserable estate of that people) to bee farre distant,2. His dwelling among them. and a great way off in the iudgement of men Psalm. 74. and Psalm 85. The second benefit or effect of the good will of God toward those that are his,Schacan. is his dwelling, yea, and that his sure dwelling among them (for this dooth the Hebrew word
signifie, to haue a sure and setled dwelling. Further it hath an Em∣phasis, or vehemencie and force, whereas God is saide to dwell in the middest of those that are his, to wit, that he may the more ea∣silie bee present with the whole bodie of his Church,3. His sanctifying of them. and euery one of the faithfull, and help them. The third effect and benefit is, The sanctifying of them. For like as God dwelleth among those that are his, so also doth he sanctifie them by his presence and dwelling among them, Iohn 17. By the which is vnderstood that this presence of God is not a bodily presence, but spirituall: for as much as it bringeth holines vnto our mindes. And doubtles the presence of God is the dwelling and efficacie or working of his holy Spirite in vs by the preaching of his worde, the Sacraments, and inward mouing in vs. Further hereby also is gathered, that this same presence of God is not idle, and without effect in his Church. And by the name of the citie, and of Sion,4 What the fi∣gure Metony∣mia is, see O∣seas cap. 4. ve. 3 he doth by the figure Metonymia, signifie and betoken the inhabitants them∣selues, both which were in the citie, and also which in regarde of their office were, and dwelt in the temple. In the citie, that is, in the men of the citie, he will haue trueth for to be, that they should not be hypocrites before God, and lyars, and league breakers one vnto another: and in the mount Sion, where the Temple was, hee will haue holines to be, that in the same the true worship, that is, which is appoynted by God, may be done, and that reuerently. Vers. 4. Thus saith the Lord of hostes, there shall yet olde men, and olde women dwell in the streetes of Ierusalem, and euery man with his staffe in his hand for very age. The securitie or saftie of the Church.THe fourth benefit, the securitie, or saftie of the Church, or the continuance and defence of the same euen on this earth. So then the course and order of the speech of the Prophet, and of the promises of God descendeth or commeth downe from spirituall benefites vnto earthly benefites. For as Paul writeth, 1. Timoth. cap. 4. ver. 8. Godlines is profitable vnto all things, which hath the promise of the life present, and of that that is to come. Now this defence and continuance of the Church is described or set forth by those adioyntes, the which only come to passe and fall out in the time of great peace, and quiet continuance, to wit long life of the citizens, saftie of the old men, and finallie great num∣bers of children, and publike playing in the streetes. God there∣fore
promiseth that the citizens of Ierusalem, which shall dwell in the same, shall bee long liued, and shal come vnto great hoarenes of head, and old age, yea of both sexes or kinds, that is to say, both men and women, the which is a signe and adioynt both of a citie of long continuance, and also inhabited in peace. Vers. 5 And the streetes of the citie shall be full of boyes and girles, playing in the streetes thereof. 5. Store of childrē playing in the streetes.ALso the number of children of both sexes, that is, male and fe∣male, and their freenes from danger and feare of enemies, & the same publike (which then appeareth, when as they freely and bold∣ly play in the streetes without feare) is a most certaine signe and token of the continuance and peace of the sayd citie. And it hath a mouing of affection, in that he maketh mention both of old men, and of children, and it addeth a great Emphasis or force vnto this sentence. Vers. 6. Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Though it beOr Wonderfull. vnpossible in the eyes of the remnant of this people in these dayes, should it ther∣fore beOr Wonderfull. Their doubting & distrustful∣nes many waies answered. vnpossible in my sight, sayth the Lord of hostes? THis is the answering of an obiection that might bee made, that they should not distrust these so great and large promises of God, because of their smalnes and fewnes. For the Prophet answe∣reth this their distrust and doubtfulnes of mind many wayes.1. Frō the power of God compa∣red with the strength of mē. First of all here in this place from the nature and power of God himself, the which is propounded or set forth by comparing of it with the strength of men. For albeit the fulfilling of so hard and royall pro∣mises, seeme, nay, is vnto men not onely admirable or wonderfull, but also impossible, shal the same therefore be vnpossible vnto God himselfe, who is both Iehouah, and also the Lord of hosts, that is, al∣mightie? Therefore the word (wonderfull) in this place is put for impossible,Iippalle. as it is Luk. cap. 1. ver. 13. For with God nothing shall be impossible. And Ierem. 32. ver. 27. Behold, I am the Lord of all flesh, Is there any thing to hard for me?2. From experi∣ence it selfe. The second solution, or answering of their doubt is taken from experience it selfe, in these words (the remnant of this people). For that remnant had indeed alreadie pro∣ued the effects of these promises of God. Wherefore they ought to hope wel for the time to come afterward. Moreouer in these words
(the remnant, and, in these dayes) is contained the reason also of the distrustfulnes of the people, namely, because they measured the ful∣filling and performance of these things, both by the present state of things, and also by that their fewnes or smalnes. Vers. 7. Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, Behold, I will deliuer my people from the East countrie, and from the West countrie. 3. From God his earnest auou∣ching of the sayd former promise.THe third solution, or answering of their doubtfulnes, from God his earnest affirming, or auouching of the sayd former promise, whereby God doth not only repeate it, but because he is true of his word, and cannot lye, he doth also confirme it, as if he should say, I will doe it, I will doe it: I promise it, yea indeed I promise it. This selfe same solution or answer therfore doth answer, and satisfie that doubting of the Iewes, by reason of their remnant only, that is, by reason of their fewnes. For God promiseth that he will both saue their whole nation wheresoeuer it shall be, and from thence wil ga∣ther it together into one bodie, as Psal. 107. ver. 3. The Prophet ac∣knowledgeth, or rather indeed willeth the people to acknowledge, that God gathered them out of the lands, from the East, & from the West, from the North, and from the South. And therfore Psal. 126. ver. 4. the people pray vnto God, saying: O Lord, bring againe our captiuitie, as the riuers in the South. And this promise of gathering them together againe from what places soeuer they shall be scatte∣red into, God maketh vnto them, because they should not faint, or be dismayed because of their fewnes, after which maner also Christ comforteth his Disciples Luk. 12. ver. 32. saying: Feare not, little lcke, for it is your fathers pleasure to giue you the kingdome. Three things to be noted.But there are three things to bee noted in this God his earnest a∣vouching of the former promise. First, the person promising, Behold, I, that is, the true God, and Iehouah,1 The person pro∣mising. the which is matched against n offering themselues, and promising something. Secondly, the thing promised, to wit, saluation, that is,2. The thing pro∣mised. their preseruation and kee∣ping against violence or force, suttletie, and the plots of mē against the Church of GOD. Thirdly, the place, to wit, how farre & wide soeuer the faithfull bee scattered into the rising,3. The place. and going downe of the Sunne, that is, into the East and West, and into other quar∣ts of the whole world, God neuerthelesse doth keepe them, and also will keepe them most safely, and hereafter.
Vers. 8. And I will bring them, and they shall dwell in the midst of Ie∣rusalem, & they shall be my people, and I will be their God in truth, and in righteousnes. An amplifica∣tion of the be∣nefite taking a∣way al occasion of doubting from the faith∣full.AN amplification of the benefite, wherewith he doth once for all shake off all their doubtings and distrustfulnes. For God pro∣miseth that he will not only saue them, and the scattered remnants of the people, but also that he will gather them together into one bodie: and furthermore, that being thus gathered together they shall dwell in Ierusalem, and consequently the citie necessarily to be restored and builded againe. And finally, he promiseth that he will be their God, yea and that for euer, and with most large effects. Therefore looke how many words there are, so many sentences, & most large promises are there, the which both may, and also ought to take away all distrust from all the godly. Thefe words, They shall be my people &c. doe shew the renuing of the couenant of God (the which seemed to be broken off because of their captiuitie, and the destruction of the Temple and citie) which is the fountaine of all the gifts of God. For vpon that couenant depend all the benefits of God toward vs. Moreouer, these words, In trueth and righteousnes, doe declare that God will cherish and preserue them not onely in words and promises, but also for euer and in very deed, that is, in the effect it selfe: for so in this place doe I expound the word (righte∣ousnes) for the effects. Vers. 9. Thus sayth the Lord of hostes. Let your hands be strong, ye that heare in these dayes these words by the mouth of the Pro∣phets, which were in the day, that the foundation of the house of the Lord of hostes was layd, that the Temple might be builded. An exhortatiō vnto the buil∣ding of the Temple.AN exhortation, the which is ioyned vnto the former doctrine, & confirmeth the same by the causes thereof, the which are here alleaged. And he exhorteth them vnto the building of the Tem∣ple, the which was begun before, but yet was afterward left off, be∣cause of the latter decree of Cyrus, and Assuerus: but was taken in hand againe vnder Darius, but yet faintly forwarded by the Iewes, because they preferred the priuate buildings of their owne hoses, before the Temple of God, as Aggeus sheweth cap. 1.
Three partes of this verse.This verse containeth three things. First of all, the thing it selfe, that is, the summe of the exhortation. And it is, that they would strengthen their handes vnto that building of the Temple of God to be lustilie finished,1. The summe of the exhorta∣tion. the which they went slowlie and slacklie about. So Isai vseth the like exhortation, but in an vnlike sence cap. 35. ver. 3. where hee saith, strengthen the weake hands, and comfort the feeble knees. So Hebr 12. ver. 12. Wherefore lift vp your hands which hang downe, and your weake knees. In this exhor∣tation their negligence in the former time is briefelie, but yet sharplie noted and touched. The second thing is,2. Who are stir∣red vp vnto this worke. who are in this sort stirred vp vnto this work, to wit those which liued at the selfe same time, and had heard, and yet did heare with their eares the promises of God touching the restoring of the Temple Esdr. 5. For they are worthelie accused of great negligence, as who name∣ly being stirred vp, and admonished by GOD, were not moued therewithall notwithstanding. Againe God would haue these selfe same see the fulfilling of these promises, the which they had heard, that they might learne to trust God, and might bee confir∣med or strengthened against all doubtings. The third thing,3. The time how long they had left of this worke. hee setteth downe the time, wherein they had ceased, and shewed themselues to bee faint and careles, to wit, not for one yeare or twaine onely, or for some short space: but from that space of time, wherein the temple began to be builded. And this if it bee gathered out of the 3. Esdr. 2. Ioh. and 7. of this prophesie, it shall be found to haue been the time of 44. yeares, in all the which the Iewes were negligent. Vers. 10. For before these dayes there was no hire for man, nor any hire for beast, neither was there any peace to him that went out, or came in, because of the affliction: for I set all men, euery one a∣gainst his neighbour. THis is a rendring of a reason of the former exhortation from the comparing together of diuerse times,A reason of the former exhor∣tation. What the fi∣gure Hypopho∣ra is see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. whereby they shall easily gather that they are exhorted by God vnto that work. And here is also contained a secret Hypophora, or answering of an ob∣iection that might be made, that they should not thinke that their labour now also should be vnprofitable, as it was before, or that there should be any disturbance or letting of the worke, or that their state should be vnquiet. For the Prophet doth answer, that
God is now reconciled or made friendes with them. Wherefore the Iewes did now alreadie feele the effectes of this couenant, whereof Zacharias made mention before vers. 8. And in the de∣scribing or setting forth of this comparison, is first of all set down the most lamentable condition of the former time, wherein they ceased from the work, as appeareth Agge. 1. ver. 6. in these words: Ye haue sowne much, & bring in little. ye eate, but ye haue not inough: ye drinke, but ye are not filled: yee cloth you, but you bee not warme: and hee that earneth wages, putteth the wages into a broken bagge. This lamentable condition of the former time is described by the reckoning vp of three things,The miserie of the former times described three waies. the which doe declare the great mi∣serie of the men, and the curse of God against them, to wit, The labour of the men,1. The labour of men and beasts was vnprofita∣ble. and also of the cattell, was at that time vnpro∣fitable Deut. 28. But the contrarie falleth out, where God fauou∣reth our dooings, as it is Psalm. 128. ver. 2. When thou eatest the labours of thine hands, thou shalt be blessed, and it shall be well with thee. Secondly,2. Warres and dangers on eue∣rie side. Warres and daungers are on euery side. Such was the time that is spoken of 2. Chr. 15. ver. 5. And in that time there was no peace to him, that did goe out, and goe in: but great troubles were to all the inhabitants of the earth. Lastlie, there was no peace and agreement betweene the citizens themselues,3. Ciuill discord within them∣selues. and those that were countrie men, but there were betweene them vncourteous dis∣cords and iarres. Vers. 11. But now I will not intreat the residue of this people, as a fore time, saith the Lord of hostes. The ioyfull e∣state of the Iewes when they began to build the Tem∣ple againe, matched with their miseries, when they left off to build the same.THe matching together of contraries, the which sheweth the ioyfull condition of the latter time, namely wherein they be∣gan to build the Temple, contrarie vnto that former estate of theirs, when as they left of the building of the same. And here in this verse, time is matched with time, namely the time past with the time present, that is, their leuing of, with their building, although it be both the selfe same God which sent both those e∣states vpon them: and also the selfe same people, which feeleth and felt both estates, that they should vnderstand that God dooth now make them partakers of the effectes of his couenant, and therefore that they should hope well for the time to come: and consider, how much the building of the Temple of God dooth differ from the neglecting or letting alone of the same.
Vers. 12. For the seede shall bee prosperous: the vine shall giue her fruite, the ground shall giue her increase, and the heauens shall giue their dewe, and I will cause the remnant of this people to possesse all these things. A threefold happines of this time, set a∣gainst a three∣fold miserie of the former.HEre he setteth thing against thing, to wit, a threefold happines of this time, against the threefold miserie of the former time. For now there is peace both for to sowe, and also for to gather in that which is sowed: in the former time nothing was in saftie vn∣to any man. Now the fruite of the earth is most plentifull, and the labour both of men and beastes most profitable:1 Now peace. Then warres. then they lost all their labour and cost to. Agge. 2. ver. 19.20. Consider, I pray you, in your mindes, from this day, and afore from the 24. day of the ninth moneth,2 Now plentie: Then scarse∣nes and losse. euen from the day that the foundation of the Lordes Temple was laide: consider it in your mindes. Is the seede yet in the barne? As yet the vine, and the Fig-tree, and the Pomegranate, and the Oliue tree hath not brought forth: from this day will I blesse you.3. Now quiet pos∣sessing of their owne. Then ciuill dis∣cord and strife. Now euery one his possession in this people is and shall bee safe and quiet vnto him: at that time euery man stroue and went toge∣ther by the eares with his owne neighbour. Vers. 13. And it shall come to passe, that as yee were a curse among the heathen, O house of Iudah, and house of Israel, so will J de∣liuer you, and yee shall be a blessing: feare not, but let your hands be strong. An amplifica∣tion of their ioyfull estate, by the happines of the time to come also.AN amplification of their ioyfull estate, by the description, and happines of the time to come also. For this happines shall be so great, that in time to come it shall be a forme of praying or wishing of the blessing of God vnto others, or vnto themselues. So then this happines of the Iewes shall be both manifest vnto all men, and also great, and to be wished for by the consent and agree∣ment of all men. And moreouer God both by the comparing to∣gether of the former miserie of the said Iewes: and also by the shewing of his minde and purpose toward them, doth make this promise toward them to bee the more welcome, and euident. By the comparing of their former estate, for that in times past they were a former of cursing, and banning, whilest the iudgements of
God against them being captiues, were to bee seene both mani∣fest, and bitter. And in this respect doth Dauid Psalm. 102. ver. 8. complaine that hee sometimes was a reproch vnto his enemies, saying: Mine enemies reuile me daylie, and they that rage against me, haue sworne against me. But now, and hereafter they were a forme and patterne of the great fauour and blessing of God. And by the shewing of his minde toward them, he maketh this pro∣mise the more welcome and euident vnto them, for that hee will (saue) them, that is, deliuer them out of all their miseries, and blesse them, yea and that also for the time which was to come, and to follow afterward Psalm. 37 in the end. Last of all is added a con∣clusion necessarilie gathered of all these things before, to wit, the exhortation vnto the worke of the Temple lustilie, and without feare either of disturbance or letting, or that their labour should be vnprofitable and vnfruitefull. For hereunto appertaineth the summe of these promises, to wit, that they restore and set vp a∣gaine the temple, that is to say, the worship and seruice of God. Vers. 14. For thus saith the Lord of hostes, As I thought to pu∣nish you, when your fathers prouoked me vnto wrath, saith the Lord of hostes, and repented not. A reason of the former ampli∣fication.THis is the rendring of a reason of the former amplification, that is, of so great a blessing of God which should fall vpon the Iewes, whereunto also there is added the answering of an ob∣iection, that might be made. The reason is, for that God being ap∣peased toward them, dooth now thinke, and purpose to doe good vnto them. The answering of an obiection, for that albeit he did worthelie afflict or punish them and their ancetours before, yet notwithstanding hee hath now decreed with himselfe to bestowe benefites vpon them. The answering of the obiection is contei∣ned in this verse: and in the verse following the reason or answer vnto the same. For the calling to remembrance of their former e∣state, and of the most grieuous threatnings of God against them, might trouble their mindes Ierem. 25. God therefore preuenteth or meeteth as it were by the way with this obiection. He confes∣seth therefore that they were before, and also most iust (hee mea∣neth his threatnings) because that he was prouoked and kindled
by the most stubborne vices of them and their forefathers, how soeuer hee bare with them with a gentle, patient, and mercifull mind. But as if the patience of God had been ouercome with their vncurable wilfulnes, that which is added (it repented me not) shew∣eth that the counsell and purpose of God was both seasonable or in due time, and iust, when as he chasteneth the Iewes, and his Church: and also that such punishments are healthfull and profi∣table for his Church, the which by God are inflicted or layd vpon it: for they are medicines. Vers. 15. So againe haue I determined in these dayes to doe well vnto Ierusalem, and to the house of Iudah: feare ye not. An answer vn∣to the former obiection.THe answer vnto the former obiection, That God is now turned, that is, appeased with the Iewes, and therefore that his thoughts are otherwise touching them, to wit, now good and ioyfull. Not that God doth chaunge his minde, but that men being tamed and changed by afflictions or troubles, doe finde GOD otherwise to∣wards them, then when as they were stubborne and rebellious a∣gainst him. Albeit that euen this very same, that men doe repent from the stubborne wickednesse of their life, is not of themselues, but of the grace of God preuenting them. But here is shewed only, that men, before they haue God appeased with them, can looke & hope for no good at his hand. For the fountaine of all the gifts of GOD toward vs, is his fauour and reconciliation or being made friends with vs, the which when as it cannot be done but by Christ the Mediator, doubtles it is only of free gift, and for to bee attribu∣ted vnto his mercie, and not vnto our workes, or deserts. In the end of this verse he repeateth againe, Feare ye not, because that the re∣membrance of that same former anger of God towards them, did sticke deeply in their mindes, the prints whereof were euen then yet still remaining. And therefore that same feare and trembling could not so easily be shaken off, & put a way, neither could this ex∣ceeding fauour and loue of God so soone be perswaded vnto them, no nor yet once be conceiued in their mind: so distrustfull doubt∣les are men by nature of the promises of God.
Vers. 16. These are the things that ye shall doe. Speake ye euery man the trueth vnto his neighbour: execute iudgement trulie and vp∣rightlie in your gates. An admonitiō.THis is an admonition, by the which he doth both teach them the way, wherein, if they walke, they shal continually feele that same fauour of God: and also confirmeth the doctrine deliuered in the former chapter touching the true worship & seruice of God,Wherein the true worship of God doth cōsist. namely, that it doth not consist in outward ceremonies, but in the true workes of godlines and charitie, the which are reckoned vp in this place. The workes of charitie both priuate and also publike are contained in this verse by the figure Synecdoche,What the fi∣gure Synec∣doche is, see A∣mos cap. 5. v 21. the duties of pri∣uate persons by the word (trueth) and the offices of publike per∣sons, as of Iudges, by these words (the iudgement of peace) that is, vpright iudgement, pronounced or deliuered with a calme & quiet minde, not angrie, nor partiall, not of any distempered or troubled affection: as for example, through hatred, or enuie, or fauour. Vers. 17. And let none of you imagine euill in your hearts against his neighbour, and loue no false oth: for all these are the things that I hate, sayth the Lord. The workes of godlines cōtai∣ned vnder the word (oth) or swearing.HEre also are contained the works of godlines by the figure Sy∣necdoche, vnder the name of an oth, or swearing. There is also shewed how sincere and pure our minde and heart ought to be in both kinds of these dueties, that we should not follow these works feinedly after the maner of hypocrites. For we must refraine euen from euill thoughts, much more from deedes: because that euill thoughts themselues do displease God, and he doth hate them, like as he doth euill workes. Vers. 18. And the word of the Lord of hostes came vnto me, say∣ing, A passing vnto the answering of the question of the Iewes moued in the former chapter touching their ordinarie fasts.A Passing vnto another matter. For the Prophet commeth now vnto the question moued in the 7. chapter of the ordinary fasts of the Iewes, concerning the which the Iewes asked counsel of the Prophets and Priests, whether they were now also of them to bee
obserued and retained. The Prophet answered, that they were not, both for that the true worship and seruice of God doth not consist in them: and also for that in stead of fastings and mourning, God will haue them keepe feast dayes, in the which they should reioyce and bee glad. But in this verse the Prophet getteth authoritie vnto his answere, when as he sheweth that it is not of himselfe, but from the almightie Iehouah. The which thing he also repeateth againe in the verse following, that it may the more be credited or be be∣leeued. Vers. 19. Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, The fast of the fourth mo∣neth, and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seuenth, and the fast of the tenth, shall be to the house of Iudah ioy and gladnes, and prosperous hie feasts: therefore loue the trueth and peace. The answere vnto the for∣mer question moued by the Iewes concer∣ning the obser∣uing of their fasts.THe answer vnto the question moued, by the matching together of the contraries of those things, the which not onely they, that is, the Iewes ought to obserue, but also we, & generally the Church of God at all times. Here therfore are two things to be noted. First, the answer it selfe. Secondly, the matching together of contraries. in the answer, this is of great moment or weight, for that God not only maketh answer concerning the fast of the fift moneth (of the which the question was moued) but also of al other extraordinarie fasts,1. The answer it selfe. the which the Iewes had ordained in remembrance of their miserie, and of the iudgements of God against them:2. The matching together of contraries. as of the fast of the fourth moneth, because then the walles of the citie of Ierusa∣lē were cast downe with the engins of warre by Nabuchadnezzar. The fast of the fift moneth, in the which the temple it selfe was bur∣ned.  The fast of the seuenth moneth for the slaying of Godoliah. Lastly, the fast of the tenth moneth, wherein the besieging of Ieru∣salem was begun. But as concerning the leauing of the fast of the fift moneth, the reason was most manifest, because that the Temple of God was now alreadie almost finished at that time, in remem∣brance of the destruction whereof notwithstanding, the Iewes did mourne, and afflict or punish themselues, in the fift moneth, that is, in Iune. Touching the other fasts the doubt was greater, because the citie was not yet builded, but remained still destroyed, and on∣ly rubbish. But yet notwithstanding the answer is all one concer∣ning them, to wit, that they also are to bee abrogated or done a∣way.
2. Into what workes their fasts are now to be turned.The Antithesis, or matching together of contraries sheweth, in∣to what workes those fasts are now to bee turned. First, into feast dayes both ordinarie and also extraordinarie, in the which for the benefit receiued from God, and the changing of their condition or estate the Iewes were to reioyce holily,1. Into feast daies that is to say, inwardly, true∣ly, and from their heart: and be glad, that is, that they should testi∣fie or witnesse this inward ioy of their minde in their gesture it self, and also in countenance. But al these things they must doe (in God) and according vnto his commandements, and not according vnto the wantonnes of the flesh, and intemperance, and surfetting. For God would haue the feast dayes to be ioyned with such holy glad∣nes. And therefore Deut. 12. ver. 18. the Lord by Moses instructing the Iewes of their behauiour in such kind of feasts, sayth, And thou shalt reioyce before the Lord thy God in all that thou puttest thine hand to. And in this respect Christ answereth for his Disciples against the Scribes and Pharisies, chalenging him for their so seldome fa∣sting, Matth. 9. ver. 15. and saying, Can the children of the mariage chamber mourne as long as the bridegrome is with them? But the daies will come, when the bridegrome shall be taken from them, and then shall they fast.2. What things instead of these fasts they ought to obserue for euer. Secondly, the matching together of contraries teacheth, what they ought to doe, and ordaine and obserue in stead of these fasts, yea and that for euer (for those feast dayes were part of the ce∣remonies, and therefore were not ordained to continue for euer) namely, that they should loue the trueth and peace. Vnder the name of trueth he commendeth vnto the godly, sinceritie or vp∣rightnes without hypocrisie and dissembling, in all things. And vn∣der the name of peace, mutuall concord or agreement one with an other, the which two are as it were the fountaines of other vertues, at least wise especiall effects of true godlines and charitie. Last of all, he will haue that wee should loue these selfe same vertues, that is, that we should reuerence them, with a true, and not feined heart and affection: secondly, that we be giuen with our whole studie & mind vnto the retaining and performing of them. Vers. 20. Thus sayth the Lord of hosts, That there shall yet come peo∣ple, and the inhabitants of great cities.A reason of the former answer wherein 1. He getteth au∣thoritie vnto his prophesie.THis is the rendring of a reason of the former answer, to wit, why those dayes of mourning and fasting are to be turned into these ioyfull and feast dayes. And first of all the Prophet getteth autho∣ritie
vnto his prophesie from the authoritie of God, the which he doth often here set downe, because that an hard matter, and almost incredible or not to be beleeued was set forth. Secondly,2. Deliuereth the cause of this ioy. he deliue∣reth the thing it self, that is, the cause of that ioy, and the same most iust, namely, that the other nations of the whole world shall in the ende ioyne themselues with the Iewes to seeke and worship God. Then the which what could be told or fall out more ioyfull, and to be wished for of the Iewes, and men that are desirous and louers of the glorie of God? But the Prophet propoundeth or setteth foorth this so ioyfull a promise, with the diligent reckoning vp of all the parts and circumstances thereof, to the end that the greatnes of so great a benefite might the more easily be considered both of them then, and also of vs now, and that our giuing of thankes vnto GOD therefore should be the greater. Wherefore all this place vnto the ende of the chapter is a staying still in the laying out of the same matter,What these fi∣gures are, see Oseas cap. 6. ver. 1. and A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12. Two circum∣stances of this promise. the which also doth consist of most pleasant Prosopopoeiaes and Hypotyposis, the which doe offer the thing it selfe vnto the view of the eyes more cleerely, so that in a maner it may seeme to bee seene, and not to be read. Moreouer, this verse containeth two circumstances of this pro∣mise. The first, of the time, in this word (yet). The second, of the thing, in the word (they shall come). For so much the more ioyfull & certaine is the promise, for that the time to come hereafter is pro∣mised to bee like vnto the time past, to wit,1. Of the time. when as many people come from all places vnto Ierusalem to seeke the God of Israel,2. Of the thing it selfe. as appeareth by the Acts of the Apostles cap. 8. and Psal. 96. where the Prophet exhorteth both the Iewes and the Gentiles to praise God for his mercies, saying: Giue vnto the Lord the glorie of his name:  bring an offring, and enter into his courts. Worship the Lord in the glo∣rious Sanctuarie: tremble before him al the earth. Secondly,  it is most ioyfull whereas the Prophet sayth, they shall come, that is, euen for honor sake taking their iourney from out of their owne cities, they shall goe and come as farre as vnto the land of Iurie. So Psalm. 84. ver. 6.7. Dauid praiseth the courage of the people that passe through the wildernesse to assemble themselues in Zion, saying: They going through the vale of Baca, make welles therein: the raine al∣so couereth the pooles. They goe from strength to strength, till euery one appeare before God in Zion.
Vers. 21. And they that dwell in one citie, shall goe to another, saying, Vp, let vs go and pray before the Lord, and seeke the Lord of hoste: I will goe also. Two other cir∣cumstances.TWo other circumstances, or parts and amplifications of the for∣mer promise▪ the which are set forth by the figure Prosopopoeia, or Hypotyposis.1. They shal come not one by one, but by heapes. One is, for that not euery one by himselfe, or seue∣rally only, to wit, one after another, but gathered together and by heapes in a great companie they shall come, the which thing hath a greater testimonie or witnesse of their zeale, and honour vnto the worship of God, as appeared immediatly before out of the testi∣monie of the Psal. 84. ver. 7. The other circumstance sheweth the end,2. Why they shall come. why they shall come thither, namely, to worship the true God. And here in this place the true worship of God is described or set forth vnder the name of (praying and seeking). The word praying comprehendeth inuocation or calling vp vpon God▪ and giuing of thankes. And the word seeking, the knowledge of God set from his word, out of the which appeareth and groweth faith and obe∣dience. Vers. 22. Yea, great people and mightie nations shall come to seeke the Lord of hostes in Ierusalem,Or and toThe face of the Lord. Two other cir∣cumstāces also. pray before the Lord. HEre also are two other circumstances expressed, namely, the qualitie or dignitie it self of the people which shall ioyne them∣selues with the Iewes to seeke the true God: and the place,1. The dignitie of the commers. where they shall seeke him. As for their dignitie, the same is here set forth two-fold, namely, their multitude, and their excellencie. For (many shall come).2. The place wher they shall seeke God. The which is set against the small people, which then dwelled in Iudea. And the selfe same shall be mightie nations, the which shall excell among the rest in same, power, and rule bea∣ring. Whereby the Church of God shall bee the more ioyfull▪ and greater,  and the glorie thereof the more cleere, and renowed. The place also is set downe,  whither these people shall come, to , Ie∣rusalem it selfe, the chiefe and head citie of the Iewes, that they should vnderstand that they haue therefore a most iust and most true cause of ioy,Why they shall come to Ierusa∣lem rather thē vnto any other place. and that they are indeed honoured by God. A the Prophet by the way setteth downe a reason, why these people shall come vnto that place especially, namely, because the face or
presence of the Lord shalbe there. He calleth the face of God those visible signes of the presence of God, which were at Ierusalem, namely, the Temple it selfe, and the sacrifices which were offered in the Temple. So then the people did seeke that place, not being mo∣ued with the consideration of the soyle or land it selfe, nor with the dignitie of the walles and stones, nor with the riches or excellencie of the people of the Iewes: but for that there were there at that time the manifest tokens of the presence of God, such as now are the pure preaching of his word or of the Gospell, and the sincere or true administration of the Sacraments ordained by himselfe. Vers. 23. Thus sayth the Lord of hostes, In those dayes shall ten men take hold out of all languages of the nations, euen taken hold of the skirt of him that is a Iewe, and say, We will goe with you: for we haue heard that God is with you. Yet two other circumstances.LAst of all, two other circumstances also or other parts of the for∣mer promise are here set downe and added by the figure Hypo∣typosis, and Prosopopoeia, to wit,1. The zeale of the commers. the earnestnes or zeale of those that come, and their number. Their earnestnes or zeale shall bee most great. For ten men of the nations shall followe after one Iewe, as their Captaine, yea and that willingly, and of their owne accord,2 Their number. & with great affection:  because those ten shall hold fast that one Iew most strongly, as namely, from whom they will not be pulled away. So doth the Prophet Isai speake of the calling of the Gentiles, cap. 2. ver. 3. in these words, And many people shall goe and say, Come, and let vs goe vp to the mountaine of the Lord, to the house of the God of Iaacob, and he will teach vs his wayes, and we will walke in his paths: for the law shall goe forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Ierusa∣lem. So Dauid Psalm. 102. ver. 15. Then the heathen shall feare the name of the Lord, and all the Kings of the earth thy glorie. And ver. 21 22. That they may declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Ierusalem, when the people shall be gathered together, and the king∣domes to serue the Lord. The number of them is declared in these words, (they shall come out of all nations and languages) and not only out of one part of the world: as for example, out of the East, or out of the West: but also out of the North, and out of the South. This at the length was brought to passe after, and by the preaching of the Gospell, Acts 2. And Christ sayth, Mat. 8. ver. 11. That many shall come from the East
and West, and shall sit downe with Abraham, Isaac, and Iaacob in the kingdome of heauen. There is also added or set downe a reason to pull downe the pride of man, or of the Iewes, least that whilest we doe seeke the visible Church of God, men themselues might seeme to be sought.A reason why the Gentiles should seeke vn∣to the Iewes, that is, vnto the Church of God. The reason is, (because God is with you). So then God himselfe is to be sought, and not men, when as we doe adioyne our selues vnto the visible Church. And that we ought thus to doe, this place doth plainly shew, except we will bee made vnexcusable be∣fore him. For when as wee heare now, what things God doth giue vnto his in the visible Church, shall we despise and not care for i▪ that is, shall we not seeke after it? CAP. 9. Vers. 1. The burden of the word of the LordOr Against the lande that is neere, or lyeth round about thee. in the land of Hadrach: and Damascus shall be his rest:Or Because the eye of the Lord is the beholder of men, as of all the tribes of Is∣rael. when the eyes of man, euen of al the tribes of Israel shall be toward the Lord. WHether this prophesie were deliuered at the same time that the former were, or at some other time, it doth altogether consent and agree with them, because these two things doe follow necessarily and mutually, or one the other, namely, the building of the Church of God, the which hath been declared before, and the destruction of the enemies thereof, the which in this prophesie is threatned, that it shall be. And he maketh mention only of certaine people and nations neere vnto the Iewes, and such as were alwaies their enemies, & troublous vnto them, but yet such, as by the which it is easie to gather the like of the rest of the enemies of the Church of God. And these are rather mentioned, both because they were better knowne vnto the Iewes, and were more cruell▪ vnto them. Such were those that are spoken of Esdr. 4. ver. 9. Rehum the cha∣celour and Shimshai the scribe, and their companions, Dinaie, and A∣pharsathcaie, Tarpelaie, Apharsaie, Aroheuaie, Bablaie, Shushaca▪ Dehane, Elmaie, and the rest of the people. And such as he recit cap. 5. ver. 6. Tatnai captaine beyond the riuer,  and Shether-bo and his companions. And such as are reckoned vp, Nehem▪ 4. 1. The summe of this Sermon or prophesie.But this verse hath three things. First, the summe of the Ser∣mon or prophesie insuing. For it containeth a burden, or the bit∣ter iudgements of God, and not any promises to be deliuered: and the same from Iehouah, that is, from the most true and most
mightie God. Secondly, against whom, to wit,2. Against whom it is bent. generallie against all the countries neere vnto the Iewes, but speciallie against them of Damascus. For I agree vnto those who expound the Syrian word (Chadrach) for a countrie that is neere or lying round a∣bout another countrie. Wherefore Damascus is first rehearsed, in the which especiallie the iudgements of God shall bee for a long season, and shall stay there as in their proper home: and shall not flye presently away, and remaine there but for some little while, as hath been shewed generallie before in the fift chapter.3. A reason of the iudgements of God against these nations. Thirdly, the reason of these iudgements of God against these strangers from the couenant of the people of GOD, the which also is in stead of answering an obiection that might bee made, to answer those, which should make some doubt of these threatnings of God. And the reason is, Because the eye of God doth behold and marke these people and nations also, and dooth in the end iudge them also, as he doth the tribes of Israel, and those which are his church. So the Psalmist teacheth vs Psal. 113. ver. 6. That God a∣baseth himselfe to behold things in the heauen, and in the earth, nei∣ther is there any creature, which is not manifest in his sight: but (as it is Hebr. 4. ver. 13.) all things are naked and open vnto his eyes, with whom we haue to doe. And he spareth not to punish his owne people, when they displease him, as Dauid doth teach vs Psal. 103. ver. 7. He made his waies knowne vnto Moses, and his workes vnto the children of Israel. Or He shall border (to wit the eye or prouidence of God.) Two partes of this verse. Vers. 2. And Hamath also shall border thereby: Tyrus also and Zidon, though they be very wise. ANother particular rehersall of those places, and nations, the which shall be punished, and comprehended or caught with the selfe same iudgement of God that the countrie of Damascus was. Wherefore this verse hath two things to be noted,1 A rehearsall of other places to be punished. the recital of the places, and secondly an especiall obiection touching the Ty∣ians. But by Damascus shall Camath or Hamath also the head tie of Syria,2. An obiection, and answer for Tyrus. which was called Coele (and the which also was af∣ward named Antiochia) bee conteined in this border, and also Tyrus, and Sidon. For thus much doe these words signifie, and he shall bound or border, that is,  the Lord shall close in Chamath with in the same seate of his iudgements. For, to bound it within the same seate, is to comprehend, and compasse it within the
boundes of the seate by him limited. Now touching the especi∣all obiection for the Tyrians, this was it, that this citie was euery way most strong, and so consequently free from these iudgements of God. But here in this place there is reckoned vp but one kinde of these munitions, and the same the best, namely the Counsell, the which Tyrus had at home. For the citie was stored with most wise men, and gouernours, like as at this day the citie Venice is thought to be. For it hath a most wise politicke Senate or Coun∣sell. Vers. 3. For Tyrus did build her selfe a strong hold, and heaped vp siluer as the dust, and golde as the myre of the streetes. Two other kindes of muni∣tion in Tyrus.Two other kindes of the munition of the saide Tyrus, her holdes, and treasures. For albeit that in the word munition in the Hebrew there be an allusion or resemblance vnto the name of Tyrus (for Matsor is a munition,1. Her holdes. and Tsor, is Tyrus) yet I not∣withstanding doe vnderstand thereby the holdes or fortresses of the citie,2. Her treasures. whether she had them by nature, & situation of the place, or by the industrie and diligence of men. By the word (Charuts, Gold stamped or coyned, or golden money, and by siluer) I vnder∣stand her treasures laide vp, and kept for the vse of warre. Both which in how great aboundance they were in this citie appeareth by similitudes of dust and myre, the which are not set downe here, as meere Hyperbolaes, as 1. King. cap. 10. ver. 27. where King Salomon is said to haue giuen siluer in Ierusalem,What the fi∣gure Hyperbo∣le is, see Hab. cap. 2. ver. 11. as stones, and Ce∣dars as the wilde figtrees that growe aboundantly in the plaine. Vers. 4. Behold, the Lorde will spoyle her, and hee will smite her power in the Sea, and she shall be deuoured with fire. An answer vn∣to the former obiection for the Tyrians.AN answer vnto the former obiection, taken from the power of God, and the issue or falling out of the matter, or destruc∣tion of the citie, the which, after what maner it shall bee, is here liuely painted forth, that all men may vnderstand that fables are not told in this place by the Prophet, but the vnchangeable truth of God. So then he which shall throw downe Tyrus, is the Lord, yea and he which hath rule and power ouer her. The representati∣on of the thing it selfe, and of the destruction of Tyrus, as it were
to be seene with the eyes, doth shew that it is set forth as a matter decreed by God. Wherefore God shall first of all make here poore,  or spoyle her: Secondly, her munitions,  or holdes shal be throwne into the Sea. Finallie, the citie it selfe shall bee burnt with fire.  These things fell out vnto Tyrus, when as it was taken by Alex∣ander the great, as appeareth by the histories written of Alexan∣der the great. Verse. 5. Ashkelon shall see it, and feare, and Azzah also shall bee very sorrowfull, and Ekron: for her countenance shall bee asha∣med, and the King shall perish from Azzah, and Ashkelon shall not be inhabited. The punish∣ment of the Philistims.THis is a staying still in the laying out of the same matter. For the Prophet of God reciteth other nations, which were ene∣mies and troublous vnto the Church of God, and so consequently to be punished. Generallie the Philistims:1. Generallie. and speciallie certaine of their townes or cities, to wit the chiefest, are rehearsed,2. Particularlie. whom God dooth threaten most grieuouslie, least any enemies of GOD might thinke that they shall escape due and iust punishment. Here therefore in this verse is first contained the iudgement of God against three chiefe Lordships, and head cities of the Phili∣stims, to wit Ascalon, Aza, or Gaza, and Ekron,Ascalon. Aza. Ekron, Ascalon. the especiall and peculiar punishment of euery one of the which is described or set forth. And first of all the feare and great trembling of Asca∣lon, vpon the suddaine and fearefull sight of the destruction of Tyrus.1. Here feare. For Tyrus was as it were the hold and the glorie of other cities and countries neere adoyning, whither they alwaies hoped that they might flye. Therefore it being destroyed, great feare no doubt was striken into all those that were neere vnto it.2. Her laying wast. Gaza. Secondly, the desolation or laying of it wast is mentioned. For she shall not afterward be inhabited. As for Aza, or Gaza, first, shee shall bee sorrowful for the destruction of Tyrus,1. Shall be sor∣rowfull. as namely with the which she had traffique, and by which she gained. Furthermore she shal loose her King, yea and moreouer her kingdome for euer, so that afterward her authoritie and glorie shall be nothing.2. She shall loose her king and kingdome. Ekron shall be confounded with shame. Ekron shall be confounded with shame, because that same Tyrus is destroyed, the which onely she beheld, and had respect vnto, as her ayde, and fortresse. And these things then fell out, when as Alexander of Macedonia, and his successors brought into their subiection, and
wasted all those whole countries, to wit, Palestina, and Edumea, and other countries neere vnto them, destroyed their townes, and vexed them most hardly with continuall warres. Vers. 6. And the stranger shall dwell in Ashdod, and I will cut off the pride of the Philistims. The punish∣ment of Azo∣tus, or Ashdod.ANother stay about the laying forth of the same matter, to wit of Azotus the head citie of the Philistimes. Whereupon the Prophet teacheth that their whole power shall perish, and be cut off, when as this citie shall be destroyed. And the punishment of Azotus or Ashdod is, that albeit in deed she shall be inhabited (and shall not be laid wast, as Ascalon) yet shall she not be inha∣bited by the Philistims themselues, and the own countrie people: but of bastards, that is, a rabble and rascal companie of vnknowne persons, and such, as no man can tell or shew the countrie of their parents. The which thing is not onely wont to bee most grieuous vnto the owne countrie people, when as they see themselues to be driuen out, and put by the possession and right of their owne na∣tiue and mother citie: but further it is a token also of the ex∣treame miserie of their land and countrie. Hereby therefore doth the Prophet testifie or witnes, that the whole glorie of the Phili∣stims shall be destroyed. Vers. 7. And I will take away his blood out of his mouth, and his abominations from betweene his teeth: but hee that remaineth, euen he shall be for our God, and he shall be as a prince in Iudah, but Ekron shall be as a Iebusite. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer matter for the comfort of the church, and also the stirring vp of the Philistims vnto the true worship of God. What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12.AN amplification, the which secretlie containeth the cause of the former punishments and plagues against the Philistims, whereunto notwithstanding God setteth downe a promise, both for to comfort his church withall, and also for to stirre vp the Phi∣listims vnto the true worship of God. The amplification is, when as God addeth that it shall come to passe, that he will then take a∣way all their bloodie robberies and pillages, and pull away their abominations, the which selfe same are the most true causes of the most sharpe iudgements of God against men. And this selfe same doth God describe or set forth Metaphoricallie, to wit, com∣paring them vnto Beares, Wolues, and Tygers, and other cruell,
and flesh-eating wilde beastes, that the lewdnes of these men may appeare to haue been the more barbarous and sauage. So dooth Dauid describe the tyrannie and crueltie of wicked oppressors Psal. 10. ver. 9. when he saith, Hee lyeth in waite secretlie, euen as a lyon in his denne: he lyeth in waite to spoyle the poore, when he draw∣eth him into his net. So againe hee complaineth of the vngodly Psalm. 57. ver. 4. saying, My soule is among Lyons: I lye among the children of men, that are set on fire: whose teeth are as speares and arrowes, and their tongue a sharp sworde. So Plato in Politico, com∣pareth euill magistrates vnto wilde beastes. Yet in the meane sea∣son there is a comfort set downe,A comfort for the Church. that the church may vnderstand that the same shall come to passe, the which God promised in the former chapter verse 23. namely, that many of her enemies should turne vnto her. So then it is taught, that it shall come to passe, that of the very Philistims themselues most worthie of pu∣nishment and destruction,The wonderful conuersion of the Philistims described by the effectes. The Ekronites shall haue as honorable a place in the Church of God, as Araunah the Iebusite sometime had in the middest of Ierusalem, who was hono∣rablie accoun∣ted of by Da∣uid himselfe, 2. Sam. 24. ve. 18, and so following. some remnants notwithstanding shall remaine, the which shal come vnto God, but yet of the onely fa∣uour and endles mercie of God. And the comfort is so much the greater vnto them both, namely the Iewes, that is, the Church of God, and the Philistims, for that their most true, and wonderfull, and most manifest conuersion is described by the effectes. For the remnants of them shall not onely bee consecrated vnto God: but also among the Iewes themselues and the godly, the Philistines shall be leaders of the way, and guides vnto others vnto godlines, in so much that the Ekronites, who of al the rest of the Philistims in times past had lest traffick, or familiaritie, and acquaintance with the Iewes, shall come to dwell afterwards in the middest of Israel, and of the church (as the Iebusites in the middest of Ieru∣salem 2. Sam. 24.) so that they shall bee the beginning to worship God godly and holilie in the Church of God it selfe. Vers. 8. And I will campe about mine house against the armie, a∣gainst him that passeth by, and against him that returneth, and no oppressor shall come vpon them any more: for now haue I seene with mine eyes. Another com∣fort of the Church from the inward saftie & peace of the same.THe former comfort of the church was taken from the increase of the same, because of the comming of strangers vnto it, yea and that of those, who before were most deadly enemies vnto it. But this comfort now, is from the inward saftie, and quiet of the
church,Two partes of this verse. the which she should hereafter inioye. But this verse hath two things, to wit, first, a description of this securitie or safetie of the church,1. A description of the saftie of the Church. and secondly, the cause of the same. And first of all, the description sheweth the defence, the which the church shall haue at home, to wit, God himselfe pitching his tentes for his church, as appeareth Psalm. 34. For God promiseth that hee will watch for his temple against all sortes of enemies Psalm. 121. and 124. that we should not thinke our saftie to come from our owne strength. Secondly, he sheweth the driuing away of forraine ene∣mies, so that there shall bee no hoast of enemies that shall set vpon the church. Finallie, that there shall be no violence or oppression in the people themselues one against another: or wringing and vexing by those that shall rule ouer them. But these things are especially to be vnderstood of the spirituall kingdome of Christ. The cause of this so great a benefite,2. The cause of the same. is the onely mercie of GOD toward his church, who both seeth the afflictions thereof with his eyes, Exod. 3. and also of his goodnes and bountie taketh pittie and compassion on her Psalm. 68. ver. 16. where the Psalmist faith that God deliteth to dwell in mount Zion, (that is, in his church) yea and that the Lord will dwell in it for euer. And ver. 21.22. he sheweth how that God will both destroy her enemies, and also saue and deliuer her from all daungers in these words: Surely God will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairie pate of him that walketh in his sinnes. The Lord hath said, J will bring my people a∣gaine from Bashan. I will bring them againe from the depthes of the Sea. And therefore in consideration of this anger of God to∣wards his enemies, and loue and mercie toward his church, hee cryeth out by way of admiration in the end of the Psalme, O God, thou art terrible out of thine holy places: the God of Israel is he that giueth strength and power vnto the people: praised be God. Vers. 9. Reioyce great lie, O daughter Zion, shout for ioye, O daugh∣ter Ierusalem: behold, thy King commeth vnto thee: he is iust, and saued himselfe, poore, and riding vpon an asse, and vpon a colt, the fole of an asse. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer comfort of the church, conteiningA Confirmation of the former comfort of the church taken from an encouragement of her, or from an outward signe and to∣ken (for when God doth encourage and allure vs, hee doth con∣firme his promises vnto vs) the reason whereof is addded. As for
the encouragement or exhorting of the Iewes,An exhortati∣on, or stirring of her vp to ioy. and reioycing. it is vnto exceed∣ing great and notable ioye: and the which also God will haue to be most manifest, or openlie knowne, and not to be hidden and couered, the which is signified by these wordes (reioyce greatlie.) For the Church is commanded to crie out or to shoute with the voyce for a publike testimonie or witnes of her ioye. But these wordes, (Daughter Zion, and daughter Ierusalem) are put for the whole people, for to moue and stirre vp affection, but the ioye of may dens is more acceptable and pleasant, and therefore they are rather stirred vp and exhorted to reioyce then men. Moreouer, by the selfe same wordes the whole citie is allured vnto the same ioye of minde, of the which citie there are two partes, to wit, Si∣on, the which was the tower it selfe of the citie, and the place where the Temple was builded: and Ierusalem, that is, the other part of the citie.2 The cause of this ioy. The cause of this so great ioye and gladnes is also most iust, and euident, to wit, the manifest comming of her King, that is to say, her defendor, and protector. For the presence of Kings is a most safe defence vnto their people, and cause of ioye, if so be they be the true fathers of their people, as the King is, the which is described or set foorth in this place Such a king was Dauid vnto his people, and so great a care had hee for their welfare and defence against their enemies, and so great loue did they beare to him againe, acknowledging their saftie to stand in his saftie, and therefore will they not suffer him to goe forth with them vnto battell, ut make answer vnto him, offering so to doe (as it is 2. Sam. 18. ver. 3.) Thou shalt not goe forth: for if we flee a∣way, they will not regard vs, neither will they passe for vs, though halfe of vs were slaine: but thou art now worth ten thousand of vs: therefore now is it better that thou succour vs out of the citie. And therefore Psalm. 118. they signifie their exceeding great ioye, the which they had conceiued, for that God had placed him King in the stead of Saul, ver. 26. saying: This is the day, which the Lorde hath made: let vs reioyce and be glad in it. Further in the description or setting forth of the comming of this king there are three things to be noted, namely,1. The qualitie of the King. the qualitie of the king, the maner of his comming,2. The maner of his comming. and the cause of the same. The qualitie is twofold. For this King (of whose comming the Prophet saith that they are to reioyce) is indued with iustice, whereby he shall euery where set downe lawfull and good order,3. The cause of the same. he shall take away things disordered, keepe back violence,  defend
the good: and he is also indued with saluation, whereby he will deliuer those that are his out of dangers. And for as much as this King was and is Christ the Messias, the true and euerlasting King and keeper of his Church, he is said to be indued with sal∣uation and iustice, in respect that he is a man: and not in respect that he is God. For in respect that he is God, he hath both these of himselfe, and not of any other. But in respect that he is a man, he hath receiued the same both from himselfe, and also from his Father.  The maner of his comming, shall be base in deede, and despiseable in the reason of men, and therefore the maner of his comming shall not be glorious, but such as is the comming of the simple and poorer sort of men, namely, sitting only vpon an asse, yea and that the colt of an asse vsed to the yoake, that is, exercised vnto labour, and not fatted, nourished, and kept for pompe, or onely to bring coltes, such as great personages are wont to haue for glorie and pompe. For so dooth Matthew report this place cap. 21. ver. 5. Behold, thy King commeth vnto thee, meeke, and sit∣ting vpon an asse, and a colt, the fole of an asse vsed to the yoke. And Iohn saith cap. 12. ver. 15. Feare not daughter of Sion, beholde, thy King commeth, sitting on asses colt. These asses vsed to the yoke, Hesiodus lib. 2. Ergoon Kai Hemeroon, calleth Talaipoorous, that is, induring great toyle and labour. And by these things is shewed, that the power of this King shall not be humaine, but diuine, and that we are to esteeme of it not after an humaine, but after a di∣vine maner. Last of all is expressed the cause of his comming in these wordes, (Hee shall come vnto thee) that is, for the profit of the Church, and not for his owne profit. For Christ comming into this world profited not himselfe, but his church onely, and was made man, not for his owne sake, but for our sake. Vers. 10. And I will cut off the chariots from Ephraim, and the horse from Ierusalem: the bowe of the battell shall bee broken, and hee shall speake peace vnto the Heathen, and his dominion shall be from sea vnto sea, and from the riuer to the ende of the land. After what maner Christ shall be a King vnto his church.THis is a making of the former matter more plaine, wherein is shewed, after what maner, and after what sort this Christ, or saluation shall be a King vnto his church, the which hee had saide in the verse before. And it is shewed to betwo fold, both a making
of a generall peace betweene all nations:1. He shall make peace among all nations. and also a most large power and dominion or rule of this King. The making of peace is declared by the effects, to wit, for that he shall cut off all armour & instruments of warre, and cause them for to cease, both from E∣phraim and Ierusalem, and sinally in euery place, that is, among the heathen themselues. For there shall be great peace in the whole world, when as this King shall come, which is not precisely to bee vnderstood of that same former comming, whereof he spake in the verse going next immediatly before this, but also of that time wherein Christ was borne in the world, and of all that time, where∣in his Gospell is receiued, and he himselfe reigneth among men. For then are men of wilde beasts made men, true peace is set be∣tweene men, and braules cease, and discords are taken away. So doth Isai cap. 11. ver. 6. describe this time, and this peace, when he sayth: The Woolfe also shall dwell with the lambe, & the Leopard shall lye with the Kid, and the calfe, and the lyon, and the fat beast together, and a little child shall leade them. And thus doth Dauid set forth the power of Christ, and his goodnes towards his Church, Psal. 46. ver. 9. in these words: He maketh warres to cease vnto the ends of the world: he breaketh the speare, and burneth the chariots with fire. And not only weapons shall be taken away, but peace, or the words of peace shall bee betweene both the Iewes, and also other nations. The fruite of the receiuing of the Gospell is peace: of the refusing thereof, discords, and ciuill or homewarres within our owne selues. 2. The domion or rule of Christ.The rule of Christ (and consequently of the spreading abrode of the Gospell) shall stretch most farre & wide, the which none shall be able to withstand. For it shall be stretched from sea to sea. These things no doubt are to be vnderstood of the calling of the Gentiles vnto the Gospell, and of the spirituall peace of the Church, the which is in the consciences, by the consent of the faith of the Gos∣pell, the which maketh al the godlie in al places to be friends with∣in themselues. So doth Dauid vnder the person of Salomon ex∣presse this peace of the Church, and largenes of the borders of the kingdome of Christ, Psalm. 72. ver. 7.8. saying, In his dayes shall the righteous flourish: and aboundance of peace shall bee so long as the Moone indureth. His dominion also shall be from sea to sea, and from the riuer vnto the ends of the land.
Vers. 11. Thou also shalt be saued through the bloud of thy couenant. I haue loosed thy prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. A comfort for the Church.A Comfort. For the Messias or Christ sheweth, that he will com∣municate or impart that his kingdom vnto the Church herself, and doth rehearse an effect thereof shewed now alreadie by him∣selfe. And this communication or imparting is set forth by the fi∣gure Aposiopesis,What the fi∣gure Aposiope∣sis is, see Oseas cap. 8. ver. 10. or keeping backe something vnspoken, because of the earnest affection or loue of Christ toward his Church, to wit, in these words, Yea euen thou in the bloud of thy couenant. For there must bee supplied (shalt reigne; or haue rule from sea vnto sea, &c.) For the good things or benefites which Christ our King hath, the same he doth impart vnto vs (for in himselfe, as it is Reu. 1. ver. 6. he made vs Kings and Priests vnto God his father) because that our so∣cietie or fellowship with him is vnseparable, and he doth acknow∣ledge his Church to be the filling vp, or the fulnes of his body, Eph. 4. And as Paul writeth 1. Coloss. ver. 18.19. He is the head of the bo∣die of the Church: he is the beginning, and first borne of the dead, that in all things he might haue the preeminence. For it pleased the father that in him should all fulnes dwell. The cause of the imparting of the benefits of Christ with vs. Bedam Beri∣thick, for the bloud of thy co∣uenant.Now the cause of this communicating or imparting of his be∣nefites with vs is added, to wit, the couenant of the Church with God, or Christ, that is, the fauour of God, and his adoption of her. And therefore in this place I doe expound the letter (Beth) for thy couenant. And the Prophet in this place rehearsing the couenant, according vnto the fashion and maner of that time, that is, of the ceremonies of the lawe, addeth (bloud) because that the couenant of God with the Church, and cōtrariwise of the Church with God, was not made and established but by bloud and bloudie sacrifices. So the writer vnto the Hebrewes witnesseth cap. 9. ver. 20. that whē Moses sprinkled the booke and the people with bloud, he sayd, This is the bloud of the Testament, which God hath appoynted vnto you. So is it also in Exod. cap. 24. ver. 8. Then Moses tooke the bloud and sprinkled it on the people, and sayd, Behold, the bloud of the coue∣nant, which the Lord hath made with you concerning all these things. Further, the effect of this rule of Christ, & kingdome of the church, was now euidently shewed and declared alreadie, namely, the de∣liuerance of them was made alreadie indeed, who did before lye
miserablie in Babylon as in a most drie pit, and in a graue (for here is an allusion or resemblance vnto the storie of Ioseph, who by his brethren was put into a drie pit Gen. 37. ver. 24.) and languished & were held their captiues, whom Christ by that might, and accor∣ding vnto that power, which he hath ouer al nations, loosed out of those bands, and bad them, and made them to be free. So doth he daily loose vs from the bands of finne, and of Satan. Vers. 12. Turne ye to the strong hold, ye prisoners of hope: euen to day doe I declare that I will render the double vnto thee. An exhortatiō vnto the Iewes, and in their person, vnto the Church of God.AN exhortation, that the Iewes might vnderstand, how certaine things are promised vnto them. So then God commandeth that now henceforth withall their mind they wayte for, & hearken after those promises of God made vnto Ierusalem, that is, vnto his Church, and that they haue their eyes turned and fastened there∣vpon, and consequently that they come vnto the same citie. The word hope which is here added in the word (Turne ye) sheweth that in this place is not spoken of the returning and drawing backe of the feet only: but also of the hope and expectation or looking for of the fulfilling of the promises of God, and consequently of our conuersion, hope & heedfulnes of mind vnto them, that we should not faint, or quaile, being ouerwhelmed with the euils, the which fall out vnto vs in the meane season. But here are three things to be considered. First, who are exhorted. Secondly,1 Who are ex∣horted. whereunto they are exhorted. Thirdly, what is here promised by God, or by the prophet vnto those that are exhorted.2. Whereunto they are exhor∣ted. They that are exhorted are prisoners of hope, that is, the godly, which were afflicted or punished most mi∣serablie and most hardlie, as namely, who are most like vnto those which are bound, and shut vp in a most filthie prison, but yet ho∣ping neuerthelesse in the promises of GOD,3. What is pro∣mised vnto those that are exhorted. and giuing heede or hearkening after them, according vnto that saying of Iob, Albeit that he kill me, yet will I notwithstanding trust in him, cap. 13. ver. 15. They are exhorted vnto the citie Ierusalem it selfe, that they should flee thither as vnto a most strong tower or hold.  And why Ierusa∣lem is called (an hold) the reason is, for that as it is in the Psalm. 49.  God doth keepe, fortifie, and defend it. Psal. 122. and 125. ver. 2. be∣cause that he is fauourable and louing toward it. It is therefore cal∣led a hold, because it is strongly enuironed round about with moū∣taines, as appeareth by the Psalme last quoted, where the Prophet
sayth, As the moutaines are about Ierusalem: so is the Lord about his people from henceforth and for euer. So farre forth therefore both the Church now, and also Ierusalem in times past, is a most sure and safe place vnto vs, as it hath the promises of God, and as we haue re∣gard vnto the same. Therefore they are exhorted, not onely to goe into this tower, but also that they turne their mindes vnto the pro∣mises of God made vnto it.  Thirdly, exceeding great gifts are pro∣mised vnto the Iewes exhorted, and consequently vnto the Church of God, namely, not only those which they had and felt before: but the double of them, that is, all things farre more plentifullie. Which promise was fulfilled in Christ, and through Christ, by reason of the gifts, which Christ the Messias giuen vnto vs, hath giuen, and daily giueth vnto his Church. Vers. 13. For Iudah haue I bent as a bowe for me: Ephraims hand haue I filled: and I haue raised vp thy sonnes, O Zion, against thy sonnes, O Grecia, and haue made thee as a Gyants sword. Why the Iewes should flee vnto Ierusalem.A Garnishing or staying in the further laying out of the former matter, the which also containeth the rendring of a reason, namely, why the Iewes should flee vnto Ierusalem, to wit, because there should bee most grieuous warres betweene them and the Grecian Kings, the which ruled in those countries, and in the coun∣tries neere thereunto, that is, betweene the Iewes, and the succes∣sors of Alexander the great in the East Empire: yet shall the Iewes haue the vpper hand in those warres, God fighting for them. This is the summe and substance, the which is layd forth by an amplifi∣cation in this place,Two parts of this verse. to lay open vnto vs the more cleerely the glorie and grace or fauour of God. And first of all this verse containeth a cause of the seeking vnto that hold of Ierusalem:1. A cause of see∣king to Ierusa∣lem. and then second∣ly a promise of victorie. The cause therefore, were those hard and long warres betweene the whole nation of the Iewes, and the suc∣cessors of Alexander in the East,2. A promise of victorie. or the Kings of Syria. The which thing to be true the issue or falling out of the matter, and the histo∣rie of the Machabees doth witnesse: and also Daniel cap. 11. Wher∣fore by these words Iudah,  Ephraim, Sion, the whole nation of the Iewes is signified: as vnder the name of the sonnes of Grecia, the successors of the Macedonian & Grecian Empire, first established by Alexander the great. But the victorie is by GOD promised vnto the Iewes, because
that God himselfe will strengthen them, and raise them vp in those warres: and direct their bow and their weapons in the battell, Psal. 144. will minister or giue them strength to fight withall, and will furnish them with courage and stoutnes of minde. Finally, because they shall be vnto God against those his enemies, as it were swords in the hands of Gyants, and most valiant men, by whom their ene∣mies are foorthwith destroyed, and ouercome. Which thing the warres of Iudas Macchabeus against the Captaines of Antiochus, doe proue to haue been most true.  Neither may it be obiected, if the Iewes shall haue the vpper hand, why then must they flee vnto Ierusalem.  Answer. For that this selfe same victorie hath therfore fallen out on their side, because that they fought for Ierusalem, and the citie beloued of God, that is, the Church of God, and would haue the same to be safe & preserued vnto God, where they might worship him according vnto the diuine and written word of God. Vers. 14. And the Lord shall be seene ouer them: and his arrow shall goe forth as the lightning: and the Lord God shall blow the trum∣pet, and shall come forth with the whirlewinds of the South. What the fi∣gure Hypoty∣posis is, see A∣mos cap. 8. ver. 12.THe figure Hypotyposis, the which both confirmeth the former promise of victorie, and also sheweth that the whole praise and glorie of the sayd victorie is due and to bee giuen vnto God onely, because that he properly shall ouercome, and not the armie of the Iewes that fight. So then in this place there is represented as it were vnto the view or sight,God shall doe al the parts of a warriour in this fight for the Iewes. the state or behauiour of God in the armie of the Iewes, and the fight set forth by diuers most notable simili∣tudes, where also all the parts of the fight are briefly rehearsed, and attributed vnto God. First of all of a Captaine, because he shall bee seene in that set battaile of the fighting Iewes,1 A Captaine. as a Captaine is wont for to be. He shall doe the part of a Souldier, because that he shall fight with his arrowes against the enemies of the Iewes.2. A Souldier. And those his arrowes shall bee so swift and fearfull, as is the lightning from heauen, at the which men doe feare and tremble. Further, he shall also execute the office of a Trumpeter and watch man,3. A Trumpeter. for he shall blow the Trumpet, that the Iewes be not ouertaken as it were at vnwares by their enemies. Last of all, he shall doe the office of a Centurion, or Leader of the band:4. A Centurion or leader of the band. for he shall march before them in the battell, but accompanied, not with men, but with wirlewindes of the South, (such as are wont to arise from Theman, that is, from
the South quarter Abacuc.The meaning is, that Theo∣dosius in his warres was e∣uery way pro∣sperous, in so much that both winde and wether did as it were conspire and agree to srue him, as well as his Souldiars. 3.) and the same very strong and boy∣sterous, with the which he shall forthwith throw downe his ene∣mies. Like vnto this is that which is written of the victorie of Theodosius the Great. O nimium dilecte deo, tibi militat aether, Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti. Which may thus be englished: O high and deare belou'd of God, For thee the skie doth fight; And coniur'd windes doe becke and bowe Vnto thy warlike might. These things fell out oftentimes in the warres of the Macha∣bees, as appeareth by their historie. Vers. 15. The Lord of hostes shall defend them, and they shall de∣uoure them, and subdue them with sling stones, and they shall drinke, and make a noyse as thorow wine, and they shall be filled like bowles, and as the hornes of the altar. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer narration two wayes.A Confirmation of the former narration or discourse, both from the cause, and also from the effect. From the cause, because God will defend those that are his, and therefore he will fight for them. And thus doth Dauid describe God fighting for his people Psal. 68. ver. 22.23, 24. in these wordes:1. From the cause The Lord hath said, I will bring my people againe from Bashan: J will bring them againe from the depthes of the sea: that thy foote may be dipped in blood, and the tongue of thy dogges in the blood of the enemies, euen in it. They haue seene, O God, thy goings, the goings of my God, and my King, which art in the Sanctuarie.2. From the effect The effect is, the great ioye and glad∣nes, the which the conquerours themselues shall inioy, as Dauid also sheweth the like in the Church of God, for the which Psalm. 68. ver. 4. he willeth them to sing and reioyce, when he saith, Sing vnto God, and sing prayses vnto his name: exalt him, that rideth vpon the heauens, in his name Iah, and reioyce before him. And this effect of their ioy and gladnes is described, or set forth partlie by things following it, and partlie by the similitude of things, the which then were done in the Temple of God, and in their sacri∣fices. The things that follow it, are publike feastes, the which then the conquerours themselues shall make and keepe, and that with a great noyse and sturre, as vsuallie is done both in a great
assemblies of people, and also of them that in battaile get the vp∣per hand, who haue ouer throwne and subdued their enemies which were fearefull vnto them before, such as then in the campe of the Grecians was the first band of those that did cast stones with slings and of the Darters, and those which are called Agra∣rij, as Arianus in libr. de expeditione Alexandri Magni speaketh and teacheth. These therefore after that the Iewes haue ouer∣come, and consequently haue vanquished the whole host of their enemies, they shall make feastes. The similitudes taken from the sacrifices are thus: They shall be filled with gladnes most largely, as with wine. Wherefore like as in the sacrifices the holy cuppes a∣bound with wine, and the corner of the altar (where the blood of the sacrifices is wont to be powred out) floweth with blood: so shall the people of God abound with ioy and gladnes, when they haue ouercome their enemies. And therefore God shall fight for them. Vers. 16. And the Lord their God shall deliuer them in that day, as the flocke of his people: for they shall bee as the stones of the crowne lifted vp vpon his land. The conclusion, conteining the cause and ef∣fect of their deliuerance.THe conclusion, whose both cause, and also notable of effect or consequent is here described or set forth. The conclusion is, & Iehouah, or the Lord shall saue thē, that is, therfore that same almigh∣tie and euerlasting God (who is called Iehouah) shal deliuer them, and saue them out of al the way-layings, threatnings, strength, and dangers of their enemies. The which hath euidently appeared in those altogether miraculous victories of the Machabees. For I had rather referre these things vnto that time, then vnto that deliue∣rance, whereby the Iewes through the great miracle of God were deliuered from the threatnings, rage, and crueltie of Alexander the Great being angrie with the Iewes, Alexander being by and by changed at the sight of Iaddi the high Priest. Againe I doe expound the word (Those) generallie of all the Iewes, both Elect and also hypocrites, albeit the fruite of that benefit of God were healthsome and profitable in the Elect onely. For the Hypocrites abused it. And this is the conclusion of the former promise of the victorie that the Iewes should haue against the Grecians,1. The cause of their deliue∣rance. that is, the Grecian Kinges of Syria, the successors of Alexander. But the cause of this deliuerance and decree of God is, for that
Iehouah is peculiarlie the God, keeper, and shepheard of them, that is, of the Iewes: & the Iewes are his people, & flock Psal. 105. & Psal. 78.71. Where the people cōmitted vnto the gouernement of Dauid, are called god his people, and God his inheritance, when he saith, He chose Dauid also his seruant, and tooke him from the sheepe foldes; Euen from behind the ewes with young brought he him to feede his people in Iacob, and his inheritance in Israel. Now God saueth or deliuereth his sheepe, whom he both will keepe, and also according vnto the dutie of a Shepheard ought to keepe. Lastly, the effect of this deliuerance is described or set foorth, namely the tokens,2. The effect of this victorie. and those same notable monuments of their victorie, set vp in euery place, the which markes and monuments are in this place called stones of the crowne, or excellent, and no∣table stones (and not Iewels or precious stones) set vp by the Iewes vpon the ground, or land, after the maner of an ensigne, or marke of victories, as Gen. 28. ver. 18. The stone that lay vnder the head of Iacob while hee slept, and saw the ladder reaching from the earth vp vnto heauen, the which stone hee set vp as a pillar, and powred oyle vpon the top of it, in remembrance of that which there had fallen out. So Gen. 35. ver. 20. Iacob setteth vp a pillar vpon the graue of Rachel, who died in trauaile by the way home∣ward. And in many other places of the Scriptures you shall reade of the like, as for example the stones set vp in Iordan by Ioshuah, and Exod. 17. ver. 16. Moses built an altar, and called the name thereof, Iehouah-nissi, for a memoriall of the great ouerthrow gi∣uen vnto the Amalekites. These Trophees also or monuments of victorie doe appertaine vnto the sundrie victories of the Macha∣bees against Antiochus, and his successor. Vers. 17. For how great is his goodnes! and how great is his bew∣tie? corne shall make the young men cheerefull, and new wine the maides. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer promise by the figure Epi∣phonema which what it is, see Ionas cap. 2. ver. 9.AN amplification of the former promise by the figure Epi∣phonema, or acclamation, that men might be stirred vp vnto the earnest consideration and weighing of the benefites of God, the which for the most part they make but small accounte of, or passe them ouer blind folded. The Prophet therefore wondring crieth out and pronounceth, that neither the number of the bene∣fites of God toward his church, nor their profit, and excellencie,
can sufficiently of any man be rehearsed, no nor of himselfe nei∣ther. Afterward by an argument from things compared he shew∣eth, that at the length and in the end they shall bee publikely ac∣knowledged, and set forth by all sortes of men. For if this good∣nes and bounteousnes of God be praised of boyes and girles that are not indued with any great iudgement, by reason of the excee∣ding great and euident store of all things powred out by God vp∣on his church, how much more shall it so be by men growne, and such as haue a setled and stayed iudgement in the considering of the liberalitie of God? So then this blessing of God shall make then young men, and maidens eloquent and full mouthed in the publishing and setting forth of the prayse of God Psalm. 8. CAP. 10. Vers. 1. Aske you of the Lord raine in the time of the latter raine: so shall the Lord make white cloudes, and giue you showres of raine, and to euery one grasse in the fielde. The scope and drift of this chapter.THe scope and drift of this chapter is to teach the Iewes, and consequently the church of God, how she ought to behaue her selfe, in whom alone she is to trust, vnto whom she must hearken, till the full accomplishment and performance of all the former promises dooth appeare, which is Iesus Christ the Messias which was for to come. And the summe of the doctrine here deliuered is, that they relie vpon God alone, and that they detest, and shunne all idols, and worshippers and seruers of idols, because that God will grieuouslie punish such pastors or shepheardes of the people, and will gloriouslie defend and aduance his people that serueth him, and cleaueth vnto him. So then this chapter is both an hol∣some admonition, and also as it were a certaine answer of an ob∣iection that might be made, and a forewarning against the idola∣tries that should fall out among this people (such as were diuers brought in among the Iewes in the time of the Antiochi, and o∣thers Kings of Syria) that being betimes warned to auoyde them, they might learne to bee wise, and contrariwise knowe what they were to hope for, and to follow.Two partes of this verse. 1. A commande∣ment to seeke vnto God in all our necessities.But this verse containeth two things. First of all a precept or commandement for the relying vpon God alone, the calling on
him,2. A promise that our prayers shall be heard and seeking vnto him in all things, that shall be needefull for them. The second, an excellent promise of God concerning the hearing of their prayers, that is, the prayers of the church. The commaundement is deliuered by the figure Synechdoche,1. What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver 21. setting downe the part for the whole, for albeit it speake onely of the lat∣ter raine to be asked of God, yet doth it generallie shew, that wee are whollie and altogether to depend vpon that same Iehouah a∣lone (that is, the true God) and whatsoeuer wee desire, to aske the same of him. But by the name (of the latter raine) the Prophet by a Metaphor taken from fruite and seasonable raine,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap 4. ver. 12. doth sig∣nifie, that whatsoeuer holsome and profitable thing for vs in re∣garde either of the soule or bodie is to be wished for, that all the same is to be asked of God alone. Of the profitablenes of the lat∣ter raine, consider what is written Deut. 11.14. in these wordes, where God saith: I also will giue raine vnto your land in due time, the first raine and the latter, that thou maist gather in thy wheate, and thy wine, and thine oyle. And Iames cap. 5 ver. 7. borroweth a similitude from thence to moue the godly with patience to waite vntill it please the Lord to heare them, saying: Bee patient there∣fore, brethren, vnto the comming of the Lord: Beholde, the husband man waiteth for the precious fruite of the earth, and hath long pati∣ence for it, vntill he receiue the former, & the latter raine. And this is set against that drought and barrennes, the which the Iewes felt of late in their ground, as appeareth Agg. 1. v. 11. where the Lord faith, And J called for a drought vpon the land, & vpon the mountaines, & vpon the wine, & vpon the oyle, and vpon all that the ground bringeth forth: both vpō men, & vpō cattell, & vpon al the labour of the hands: the which drought the more grieuous it was vnto them, so much the more welcome vnto them should this promise of fruitefulnes, and seasonable raine, be. For by earthly benefites they, yea, and also we, in such kinde of promises are put in minde of heauenlie benefites. Therefore after this commandement there is set downe a promise of God, and the same also most notable and excellent, concerning the hearing of the prayers of those that doe call vpon him. For God in great aboundance will giue that same rayne as∣ked of him, yea with lightning and thunder. And these indeed for the most part are the adioyntes, or things that come or follow after great raines, and with great raines. So Virgill lib. 4. Aeneid. describeth or setteth forth a great tempest.
Interea magno misceri murmure coelum Incipit, insequitur commista grandine nimbus. Thus englished by Phaer. By this time heauen with rumbling noyse and clowdes is ouer cast, And thunders breake the skies, and raine outragrous powreth fast, and showres of haile and sleet so sharpe,— Moreouer, the Lord shall giue plentious raine, that is, raine of showres. For that is most plentifull, much, and grealy moystening the earth. So Dauid painteth forth God his blessing and increasing of the fruites of the earth by these meanes, Psalm. 65. ver. 9.10. after this maner: Thou visitest the earth and waterest it: thou makest it ve∣rie rich: the riuer of God is full of water: thou preparest them corne: for so thou appoyntest it. Thou waterest abundantly the furrowes there∣of: thou causest the raine to descend into the valleyes thereof▪ thou ma∣kest it soft with showres and blessest the bud thereof. I hese words ther∣fore of Zacharias (white clowdes, and showres of raine) declare the kinde of this raine. Lastly, by the effects is this raine described, the which shall in such sort make the earth fruitfull, that euery man in his owne fielde and ground shall haue both grasse, and hay and corne (for I take the word grasse generally in this place): and shall seele no barrennes of the earth. Vers. 2. Surely the Idols haue spoken vanitie, and the South sayers haue seene a lye, and the dreamers haue told a vaine thing: they comfort in vaine: therefore they went away as sheepe: they were troubled, because there was no shepheard. The figure Hy∣pophora, or the answering of an obiection. What this fi∣gure is, see A∣mos cap. 5. v 21.THis is the figure Hypophora, or the answering of an obiection, whereby he feareth the Iewes from praying vnto Idols in any necessitie whatsoeuer, and from regarding of them, that they may the more assuredly vnderstand, that they must relie vpō God alone only. Aske ye (sayth he) of the Lord, because the Idols can doe no∣thing, if they be called vpon by you. Wherfore the Prophet answe∣reth those, who peraduenture would call the people back againe vnto Idols, as it was done both before the captiuitie of Babylon, 2. Chron. 36. and also after the captiuitie, Iere. 44. ver. 22. where God sheweth that for their idolatries their land was layd waste, Ezech. 9. and finally, 1. Mach. after their bringing back againe or deliuerance from that captiuitie, vnder the Antiochi. And he setteth downe a
reason why they should not seeke vnto Idols,A reason why they should not seeke vnto idols namely, because they shall be disappoynted of their hope, if they call vpon Idols, or seeke help at their hands: for they are vaine, and lyes, and consequently Idols doe deceiue their worshippers. And not only they are so: but also their ministers, yea the chiefest of them, to wit, their Diuines, or Southsayers. For they speake nothing but lyes, nor dreame or pro∣phesie any thing els. He therefore maketh mention of their South∣sayers, because among the Idoll ministers or seruers they were the chiefe. And here also he hath expressed the name of those Idols, the which were wont to be asked concerning things to come, and are called Theraphim.Theraphim. A confirmatiō of his answer of the vanitie of idols.Further, he alleageth a confirmation of this his answer concer∣ning the vanitie of Idols, to wit, the testimonie or witnes of the ido∣lators themselues, which were in that people, who albeit they haue worshipped, and did worship Idols neuer so much, yet were they as a straying and wandring flocke without helpe, without a shep∣heard, and running euery where vp and downe. For all this they neither had, nor found any to gouerne and to helpe them, Ezech. 34. Ierem. 23. Isai. 29. Vers. 3. My wrath was kindled against the shepheards, and I did visit the goates: but the Lorde of hostes will visit his flocke the house of Iudah, and will make them as his beautifull horse in the batel. Another con∣firmation of the former de∣horting of thē from the wor∣ship of idols.ANother confirmation of his said dehorting or discounsailing of them from the worship of Idols, namely, for that God himselfe is most grieuously angrie against these shepheards, the which do set forth Idols to be worshipped, and will visite vpon them, that is, will punish them, as most filthie goates, & the plagues and destructions of his people. For they do most filthilie infect them with their smel, of what degree or estate soeuer they be, whether they bee rulers of the Common wealth, or of the Church, who doe teach this. And this appeareth to bee true both at all times: and also when as the Iewes were carried away into captiuitie, because of their idolatrie, and whē as vnder the Antiochi he did so afflict or punish the heads of his people for their idolatrie, that there was in a maner at that time no forme or Common wealth of that people. Further, where as the Shepheards or guides of idolatrie are expresly sayd that they shall bee punished, the rest of the people which followeth such
guides, is nothing at all excused. For if the blinde leade the blinde, both shall fall into the dike, Matth. 15. ver. 14. Againe, They shall all be confounded, who do trust in idols, and serue them. Psal. 115. and Psal. 97. ver. 7. Nay, this is rather a reason from the greater vnto the les∣ser, thus: If the Lord neither hath spared, nor will spare the Shep∣heards, and Rulers which were idolators, how much lesse will hee spare others? Moreouer, against this wrath of God toward idola∣tors doth the Prophet on the contrary part set and match the fauour of God toward those which are godly indeede, and those, which shall call vpon the true God, to the ende the godlie might bee the more confirmed and strengthened in the inuocation or calling vpon of God alone: and that Idols might bee detested and abhor∣red. And therefore in this place I doe expound the Hebrew word (Ki, but) to shew this contrarietie.God promiseth two things vn∣to the godlie Iewes. For God promiseth two things vnto the Iewes which are indeed godly, and do call vpon him. First, that it shall come to passe, that he himselfe, who is God almightie, and the Lord of hostes, will cherish them, that those which are the house of Iudah, (for he expresly nameth them,1 All maner of helpe. that they may bee the more assured that these promises do appertaine vnto them) that God I say will helpe them, bee present with them, comfort them, which things the Idols doe not. For the word (visite) doth compre∣hend all kinde of the helpe of God, when as it hath not the word (gnal) ioyned with it, as on the other side being ioyned with the same particle gnal, it threatneth all kind of the iudgements of God. In this latter signification doth God vse this word (visite) in this place against the idolators, and in the former toward the godly. Se∣condly, God promiseth that it shall come to passe,2. That they shall be famous and valiant. that the self same godly shall be strong, notable, and beautifull, and famous aboue o∣ther people, like vnto a warre horse, to wit, such a one as is coura∣gious, and armed, that is, dressed, trimmed, and furnished vp for the battell, of the which his master is wont to haue an especiall care, & to haue him in request and account aboue the rest. Finally, the Lord of purpose tooke this similitude of a warre horse, to signifie vnto thē darkly by the way that there should afterward be warres, but in the which they should not neede to feare any thing, because that they should bee like vnto most strong horses, the which in the warres ouerrunne and throwe downe all things, and therefore are they diligently nourished, and brauely or comely garnished and set forth.
Vers. 4. Out of him shall the corner come forth: out of him the naile, out of him the bowe of battell, and out of him euery appoynter of tribute also. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer promise by the reckoning vp of the sun∣drie gifts of God toward his Church.AN amplification of the former promise, taken from the recko∣ning vp of the sundrie gifts of God toward the Iewes, and con∣sequently his Church, the which gifts also doe shewe the maner how the Iewes shall bee both strong, and also beautifull, to wit, be∣cause they shall haue in abundance al things, which are wont to be needfull both at home, and also abrode: yea and moreouer both in the time of peace, and also in warre. Finally, euery appoynter of tribute shall in the ende once bee driuen out of their borders, that they may be oppressed by no man. Wherefore I expound this word (out of him) of the Lord, who shal giue vnto the Iewes these things, which are afterward reckoned vp in this verse. And that which is in the last place (out of him the appoynter of tribute shall come forth) signifieth, that euery tribute gatherer, which did vexe them before, shall depart and go away from that people, God driuing him forth. Further, these words, Corner, Naile, Bowe, Itake as spoken prouer∣bially, for any thing, wherof there is both great vse, and great force, and briefly, the which men cannot lacke in building, in the dispo∣sing and ordering of matters belonging to the house, and in fight and warres. All these benefits are giuen vs of God by, & for Christ his sake. And these similitudes are elsewhere vsed to like purpose, as Isai cap. 22. ver. 23. where God will signifie that Eliakim, who was to succeed Shebne in his office, shall stand sure in his place, he sayth, And I will fasten him as a nayle in a sure place, and he shall be for the throne of glorie to his fathers house. Vers. 5. And they shall be as the mightie men, which tread downe their enemies in the myre of the streetes in the battell: and they shall fight, because the Lord is with them, and the riders on horses shall be confounded. The applifica∣tion.THe application. For that which he had sayd generally before, he now applieth vnto one kind, namely, vnto the vse of warres, the which afterwards in this nation should bee very rise and great: like as now adayes also the Church of God is daily vexed or grie∣ued
and troubled. Wherefore God promiseth two things vnto thē,Two things promised to the people of God. the which are very necessarie for victorie. First, that they shall bee valiant, stoure, and strong in these warres, and euen like vnto Gy∣ants, and that they shall tread downe their enemies,1. They shall be strong and vi∣ctorious. as they tread down the myre and durt of the streetes or high wayes. The second, that they shall not only bee so valiant against the footmen of their enemies, but also against their horsemen,2. They shall pre∣uaile not only against the footmen, but also the horse∣men of their e∣nemies. whom they shall easilie slay, ouerthrowe, put to flight, and consequently make ashamed, that they should vnderstand that euery way the victorie should be theirs, and sure on their side. And this hath appeared in the warres of the Machabees, and in other battailes also: and now also appea∣reth in sundrie warres of our men, as among the rest of Zisca with the Emperour Sigismundus. The reason is added, because that God shall be with the Iewes, that they should not attribute vnto them∣selues the praise of this victorie, but giue the same whollie vnto God. Vers. 6. And I will strengthen the house of Iudah, and I will pre∣serue the house of Ioseph, and I will bring them againe, for I pitie them: and they shall be as though I had not cast them off: for I am the Lord their God, and will heare them. The same pro∣mise againe re∣peated for the further assu∣rance of the Iewes, and Church of God.A Garnishing of the former matter. For he doth againe promise the same thing, repeating his earnest assurance made vnto them before, that the Iewes should be assured (and consequently we our selues) of the helpe of God both in publike, and also in priuat affli∣ctions or troubles. But now he addeth thus much more, that not only the Iewes, but also the house of Ioseph shall feele the said helpe of God. By which name some doe vnderstand the rest of the Tribes, the which were carried away by the Assyrians before the destru∣ction of the kingdom of Iudah. But if this name be taken according vnto the letter, it is to bee referred vnto those fewe, the which retur∣ned both with Zorobabel, and also with Esdras afterward, Esdr. 2. and 8. and moreouer vnto those which dwelled in the other Tribes afterward. But if it bee taken in a mysticall, or spirituall sense and vnderstanding, the Prophet comprehendeth the whole Church, vnto all the which, and not vnto some one part thereof only, God promiseth that he will be fauourable, and present with it. But the chiefe part of this verse doth consist in the shewing foorth of the
cause of these so great promises of God, that men should not attri∣bute them vnto their owne merits or deseruings. And here is a dou∣ble cause alleaged,Two causes of these promises. and both of them excludeth or shutteth out all workes of men, and calleth vs backe vnto the only grace and mer∣cie of God, as the true and alone cause of those promises. So Dauid acknowledgeth, Psal. 44 ver. 3. that the people of Israel did not in∣herit the promised land for any worthines in themselues, but onlie through God his loue and fauour vnto them, saying: They inherited not the land by their owne sword, neither did their own arme saue them: but thy right hand, and thine arme, and the light of thy countenance, because thou diddest fauour them. So Psal. 68. ver. 22. he teacheth vs, that the Lord would haue vs knowe the deliuerance of his Church to be his owne work, when he sayth, The Lord hath sayd, I will bring my people againe from Bashan: I will bring thē againe from the depths of the sea.1. The mercie of God. The first cause of these promises is, The mercie of GOD, whereby he hath compassion on vs, that is, on his Church, freely pardoning her sinnes. The second, because he is their God, that is,2. His election. hath chosen them of his meere or only grace. This latter is the cause of the former, that is to say, the election of God is the cause of his taking pitie and compassion on vs. The effects hereof, That he heareth vs when we pray vnto him: and doth in such sort renue & restore vs againe, as if hee had neuer abhorred vs, to wit, because through Christ he is fully and perfectly reconciled, or made friends with vs. Vers. 7. And they of Ephraim shall be as a giant, and their heart shall reioyce as through wine: yea their children shall see it, and be glad: and their heart shall reioyce in the Lord. That which was promised of the strength of the Iewes, confirmed by a double compa∣rison.BY a double comparison he doth both confirme, and also make plaine that which he had sayd before of the strength, which the Iewes should haue in their battailes. The first is taken from the strength of the tribe of Ephraim, the which among the rest of the tribes of Israel was counted most populous, or full of people, and in warres most strong. And therefore in the Psalm. 60. ver. 7. it is sayd of that tribe,  Ephraim also shall be the head of my strength. This also may appeare by the 78. Psalm. ver. 9. that in it selfe this tribe of E∣phraim was of great force and power, either to defend it selfe, or to hurt his enemies, albeit that God being angrie with them for their
idolatries, and other sinnes, they had the ouerthrow in that battaile, and fled before their enemies. The children of Ephraim (sayth the Psalmist) being armed and shooting with the bowe, turned back in the day of battel. So strong then shall the Iewes bee in their battels a∣gainst their enemies, as the Ephraimites in times past were wont to be strong against their enemies.  The second confirmation is from the maner of their ioy and gladnes, that they may be assured of the victorie. For both their fathers, that is, those of growen yeares, and their sonnes, that is, their young children, shall in such sort reioyce for these victories, as they are wont to doe which haue their heart merrie, and refreshed or cheered with wine taken moderatly. Psal. 23. and Psal. 104. ver. 15. where Dauid sheweth that wine moderat∣ly drunken, maketh glad the heart of man. Finally, they shall re∣ioyce in Iehouah, or in the Lord, both that their ioy may be vnder∣stood that it shall be holie, and not wanton, and that the Prophet may shew that in this gladnes the praise shall be giuen vnto God, and not vnto themselues by the Iewes getting the victorie. Vers. 8. I will hisse for them, and gather them, for I haue redeemed them: and they shall increase, as they haue increased. The answering of an obiection touching those that were still in Babylon, & their fewnes.THis is the answering of an obiection, least because of the rest which yet abode still in Babylon, and by reason of the small number of thē they should distrust of the former promises of God. First therefore he answereth vnto that their debating concerning those that were absent, that it shall come to passe, that these also to∣gether with themselues shall most eas,  and quickly be gathered and come together. The which came to passe in that their second, and third comming out of Persia and Babylon, the which was ta∣ken in hand by Esdras, and Nehemias, Psal. 126. Secondly,  he an∣swereth vnto the obiection of their fewnes. The children of Israel shall be increased, as at the first. For that promise of God made vn∣to Abraham, Gen. 13. ver. 16. I will multiplie thy seede, as the dust of the earth, &c. shall also bee of force in these.No one nation of the world so great in num∣ber as the Iewes at this day. The which promise doubtles appeareth euen at this day yet now in the Iewes, albeit miserably dispersed or scattered. For there is not any one nation yet at this day in the world so great in number as that is, if the disper∣sed Iewes might be all gathered together into one place.
Vers. 9. And I wil sowe them among the people, and they shal remem∣ber me in farre countries: and they shall liue with their children, and turne againe. An amplifica∣tion and con∣firmation of the former pro∣mise of God.AN amplification of the promise of God immediatly going be∣fore, touching the multiplying or increasing of the nation of the Iewes, and a confirmation of the same, by a most excellent and manifest effect thereof, to wit, the Iewes shall be so many in num∣ber, that they shal be scattered among other nations as pearles, and sowed among them for the spreading abrode of the knowledge of the true God. Wherfore there is promised an exceeding multiply∣ing or increasing of this nation, & the same described by the signe or token spoken of before.Three benefites of God toward the Iewes. So that this verse containeth these three benefites of God. First, that the Iewes are in such sort to be scatte∣red, and carried among other nations, as the seede is sowne in the fieldes for hope of haruest,1. They shall be scattered a∣mong the hea∣thē to be prea∣chers of the grace and glo∣rie of God. and not that they shall bee cast out in∣to most lamentable bondage and banishment, as they were before among the heathen. Wherfore this thing sheweth the multiplying or increasing of this people: & that which otherwise might seeme most wofull, namely, to liue without the borders of their countrie, that the same shall bee both profitable and glorious for the Iewes, who by this meanes are sent forth to be as it were preachers of the glorie of God among the heathen, that they might sowe the first seedes of the grace of God, which was to be shewed toward them. This scattering abrode of the Iewes, as it were an heauenly sowing, fell out after their returne fm the captiuitie of Babylon. Where∣vpon both Acts. 2. and also 1. Pet. 1. and 1. Iam. ver. 1. they are called Diaspora,2. They shal haue free libertie to serue God a∣mong other na∣tions. that is, a scattering or sowing abrode. The second bene∣fite of God is, That it shall come to passe, that in those countries, howbeit neuer so farre off, they shall notwithstanding serue God: they shall be suffered, and also may freely retaine and godly vse the remembrance and calling vpon of God: The which doth not al∣wayes appeare to haue been done and graunted vnto them in the captiuitie of Babylon. So the Iewes euery where had their Syna∣gogues by the permission or sufferance of the Magistrates, when as before the time of Christ they were thus scattered among the hea∣then, as may be gathered both by the Acts of the Apostles: and al∣so by the historie of Iosephus. The third benefite, That the same
Iewes shall with their whole families both haue their being and dwelling among those nations in safetie, and shall returne to Ie∣rusalem,3. They & theirs shall dwell in saftie among the heathen, and may re∣turne to Ie∣rusalem, when they will. when they will, both to sacrifice, and also to dwell. The which was not lawfull for them to do in the time of their captiui∣tie. So then here by the way of matching together of contraries is a comparison made between the estate of the same Iewes, when as they were in exile or banishment among the Babylonians, and when as the Lord shall scatter them among the Gentiles, as the preachers of his glory, and fore-runners of his Gospell. Others doe referre this vnto a mysticall or spirituall sence of the calling of the Iewes, and Gentiles, the which I confesse also to bee true, but first these things ought thus to be vnderstood according vnto the letter, as they also in very deede fell out, and came to passe. And the euent or falling out of the matter is the best interpretati∣on of Prophesies. Vers. 10. I will bring them againe also out of the land of Aegypt, and gather them out of Asshur: and I will bring them into the land of Gilead, and Lebanon, and place shall not be founde for them. A confirmati∣on of the second promise made before touching the bringing backe of the Iewes from captiuitie.A Confirmation of the second promise, the which also is contei∣ned before ver. 8. For when as both naturall affection toward their brethren moued the Iewes which were returned, to thinke of the Iewes their brethren being yet still exiles, or in captiuitie among the Babylonians: so also was that multiplying or increa∣sing of the nation promised before, after that God had gathered together and brought back againe those selfe same exiles and cap∣tiues. God therefore promiseth that it shall come to passe, that he will bring them back out of all nations whatsoeuer, where they yet remaine in banishment or captiuitie, either among the Egyp∣tians, whither they had fled after that the Temple was destroyed Ierem. 44. or among the Assyrians, as the ten Tribes 2. King. 17. And that it shall come to passe, that they shall dwell againe also in those places, in the which they were once placed by God, to wit, in Galaad, and Lebanon, which two places by the figure Synecdo∣che,What the fi∣gure Synec∣doche is, see A∣mos, cap. . ver. 21. are reckoned vp for the rest of the partes of the promised land Finallie, that it shall come to passe, that the same nation shall be so populous or full of people, that there will not any more bee roome enough for them in the promised land: and that therefore
the Iewes, as he said before ver. 9. must be fayne to goe to dwell a∣mong other nations. Accordingly hereunto doth Isai. cap. 49. ver. 20. prophesie of the great increase of the Church of God, saying, The children of thy barrennes shall say againe in thine eares: The place is straite for me: giue place to me, that I may dwell. And againe cap. 54. ver. 1. Reioyce, O barren that diddest not beare: breake forth into ioye, and reioyce, thou that diddest not trauaile with childe: for the desolate hath moe children then the married wife, saith the Lord. Vers. 11. And hee shall goe into the sea with affliction, and shall smite the waues in the sea, and all the depthes of the riuer shall drie vp: and the pride of Asshur shall be cast down, and the Scep∣ter of Egypt shall depart away. The answering of an obiection against their returne.THis is the answering of an obiection, that they should not de∣spaire, or be without hope of the returne of their brethren, ei∣ther for the hardnes of the waies, and iourneyes, or for the power of the kingdomes,1. The hardnes of the waies, might seeme to be a let vnto them. in the which they are exiles or captiues, the which peraduenture would withstand or let them being willing to goe away. All this shall be no let, answereth the Lord. For as concerning the iourneyes and waies bee they neuer so hard and combersome, they shall not let, neither the sea, nor the riuers, nor the waues, or floodes. For the riuers shall drie vp, be they neuer so deepe, when they shall returne vnto Ierusalem: this people retur∣ning shall passe the sea, being so straite and gathered in, as they did of olde in Egypt, so that it may be gone through on foote. Finallie, the waues and flouds shall fall, and being strooken, as they were some times with the rod of Moses, shall sinke downe. So then in this place there is an allusion or resemblance vnto those miracles, the which were wrought by God in the first deliuerance of the people, that nothing should be any let vnto the people, going vn∣to the place that was promised vnto them. He therefore promi∣seth that the same help of God shall be readie for them, when as they shall returne vnto Ierusalem from the captiuitie of Baby∣lon: the which thing came to passe, Esdras and Nehemias being their Captaines, See Isai. cap. 40. ver. 12. And cap. 43. ver. 1.2. in these words, But now thus saith the Lord, that created thee, O Ia∣akob: and he that formed thee, O Israel, Feare not: For I haue re∣deemed thee: I haue called thee by thy name, thou art mine. When
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the flouds, that they doe not ouerflowe thee. Wher thou walkest through the verie fire, thou shalt not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle vp∣on thee. But these things in a prouerbiall kinde of speaking doe declare, that it shall come to passe, that all waies shall be easie vnto them, and such as they may passe through. So it appeareth to haue come to passe Esdr. 8. ver. 21.22. where he saith, And there at the Riuer Ahaua, I proclaimed a fast, that wee might humble our selues before our God, and seeke of him a right way for vs, and for our chil∣dren, and for all our substance. For J was ashamed to require of the King an armie, and horsemen, to helpe vs against the enemie in the way, because we had spoken vnto the King, saying, The hand of our God is vpon all them that seeke him in goodnes, but his power, and his wrath is against all them that forsake him. So we fasted, and be∣sought our God for this: and he was intreated of vs. 2. The power of the kings in whose lands the Iewes shall be, might also seeme to be a stay vnto their returne.Further, as touching the kings, in whose dominions and coun∣tries the Iewes were, and who as yet at that time seemed to bee e∣nemies vnto the Iewes, and not to fauour them, as the Persians were (albeit that they had before giuen the Iewes leaue to de∣part) neither shall they also be able to stay or let them, that God should not bring his people out of their kingdomes, as of olde Pharao withstood the Israelites. The reason is, because the pow∣er both of the Assyrians the which the banished Iewes doe feare: and also the kingdome and scepter of the Egyptians, shall be cast downe, and shall perish, so that then it cannot be any let or stay vn∣to them. In a word, nothing can let the worke of God, and the decree of the deliuerance and redeeming of his Church Isai. 40. Vers. 12. And I will strengthen them in the Lorde, and they shall walke in his name, saith the Lord. The conclusi∣on of this chap∣ter, and of the former promi∣ses.THe conclusion of the whole chapter, and of the former promi∣ses, the which sheweth, both that, they shall haue their fulfil∣ling, and accomplishment, and that also of the meere or onely grace of God. And therefore the prophet saith, that the people or Church of GOD shall bee strengthened, but in Iehouah, or the Lord: that the people shall walke, but in the name of God. Both these doe signifie, that they shall haue this strength, both to fight against their enemies, and to returne from the places of their ba∣nishment or captiuitie, from the Lord, and not of themselues: in
the name of God, and not in their own strength. Albeit the word (walke) may also be referred vnto their life, the which he promi∣seth shall be agreeable vnto the will of God: that wee should vn∣derstand, that then at the length wee are made partakers of the promises of God, when as wee obey him, and walke in his feare. There is added an earnest confirmation of this whole prophesie, in these wordes, The saying of the Lord, or, thus saith the Lord, of the which I haue spoken often before. CAP. 11. Vers. 1. Open thy doores, O Lebanon, and the fire shall denoure thy Cedars. The dirft of this chapter,THe drift and purpose of this Chapter is twofold. First, to fore∣tell that there shall bee warres in Iudea, and in the countries neere vnto it,1. To forewarne them of warres to come. both vnto the terrifying or fearing of the wicked, and the fore arming of the godly and faithfull: and also for the yeelding of a reason, and making more plaine of the promise made before touching the victorie which the Iewes should haue against their enemies. For to what end should he speake of victo∣rie, but because that there should be warres? So then in this place are briefelie foretold both the warrrs which were before the Ma∣chabees, and also those which were in their gouernement, yea and also in those countries afterward, euen vntill the comming of Christ: for I doe not thinke that here are rehearsed those warres, the which fell out after the comming of Christ. Albeit that the things, which here are spoken, may bee applied also vnto all the afflictions of the church at any time, that the godly may be fore armed, and that the wicked, and such as are hypocrites in the Church, may bee called backe vnto repentance, if it may bee, for feare of the calamities or punishments, hanging ouer their heads. This is the first drift of this chapter.2. To shew the causes of so great afflicti∣ons of the church. The second is that the cau∣ses of so great afflictions of the Church of God may be declared, and that by this meanes all men may be put in minde of their du∣tie, both the rulers of the common wealth, and the rulers of the Church, and also the Subiects. The causes of these euils and pu∣nishments here recited, the which afterward fell out, and doe al∣so now a dayes fal out vnto the church of God, are the negligences of the pastors or rulers as well of the common wealth, as of the
ciuill Magistrates: as of the Church, as the Priestes and Leuites then, and the Ministers of the word of God now. By which re∣citall the rulers of that nation were betimes put in minde of the performance of their dutie: and yet notwithstanding did that negligence indure, nay became alwaies worse and worse, vntil that God did vtterlie breake off the olde couenant of that people, and sent hi Christ, who gaue new pastors vnto his Church, Matth. 25. And the selfe same causes doe also make the pastors of the Church guiltie euen at this day, if so bee they shall bee careles, and neg∣ligent. This verse con∣taineth the de∣struction of Coelosyria.Now this first verse foretelleth the desolation, or laying wast of a countrie, the which among many other neere vnto the Iewes, was more further off from Iudea, to wit, of Coelosyria, the which is contained betweene the two mountaines Libanon. The which fell out not vnder Alexander the Great, winning Asia, and Syria: but vnder his successors, to wit, the Kinges of Syria, such as were the Antiochi, the Seleuci, and others, the which made and had continuall warres in those countries with the Ptolomees of E∣gypt, and often with the Syrian Kings, as appeareth most mani∣festlie by Iustinus the hystorian, and by Appianus in Syriacis, and by the continuall historie of that time. But in this place, and in those that follow, for the mouing and stirring vp of affections, God vseth the figure Prosopopoeia,What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see Ose∣as cap. 6. ver. 1. and the same is directed not vn∣to men, but vnto mountaines, and things without life, as in Mi∣cheas often, and in the Prophet Isai, cap. 1. ver. 2. Heare, O Hea∣uens, and hearken, O earth, &c. For the Lord, or the Prophet spea∣keth vnto Libanum, a mountaine of Phoenicia, or rather of Syria, to open his doores and gates. And why I pray you doth he this? To wit, that the Cedars, and most excellent trees, the which this mountaine Libanus dooth beare, as his riches, wealth, and orna∣ments, might be burnt, and consumed. For that there doe growe the goody Cedars the Psal. 29. ver. 5. doth witnes, where it is said, The voyce of the Lord breaketh the Cedars, yea, the Lord breaketh the Cedars of Lebanon. By this kinde of speaking the Prophets also doe shew that things without life doe notwithstanding heare the voyce of God: and therefore that men ought so much the more to heare the same. Further, doores or gates, are attributed vnto Libanus, because as Plinius saith, lib. 5. Nat. hist. cap. 20. A∣gainst the mountaine Libanus, the mountaine Antilibanus is set or lieth out in lengh, ioyned vnto it as it were with a certaine
wall: so that these were, and are narrow passages, and gates, kept also some times of the kings of Persia by a wood ward or a wood∣reeue, that is, a speciall officer for that turne, as appeareth Nehem▪ 2. ver. 8. where mention is made of Asaph the kings keeper thereof, that he should deliuer from thence timber for the building at Ierusa∣lem. By the name of Cedars some will haue all the most notable men of that countrie to be signified, whose destruction is signi∣fied, that the Church should not be troubled by meanes thereof. Vers. 2. Houle, firre trees: for the cedar is fallen, because all the mightie are destroyed: houle ye O Okes of Bashan, for the de∣fensed forrest is cut downe. Two partes of this verse.TWo things are to be noted in this verse. The first is, an amplifi∣cation of the former prophesie. For not onely the Cedars, but also the Firre trees are stirred vp vnto mourning,1. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer prophesie. nay vnto how∣ling, that is, exceeding wailing and crying to bee heard euery where. The reason, because euery the most excellent, and most glorious things (whether ye haue regard vnto men,2. The destructi∣on of the land of Basan. What the fi∣gure Synec∣doche is see A∣mos, cap. . ver. 21. or vnto any other things) in those countries are cut downe, wasted, consu∣med, and destroyed, or to bee cut downe and destroyed. By which effect the greatnes of the destruction is signified. The lat∣ter part of the verse foretelleth the destruction of another coun∣trie, the which also is neere vnto Iudea, to wit, the prouince of Ba∣san, the which was neerer vnto Iudea, and yet beyond Iordan. For Basan was the land of king Og,An Allegorie is a figure, whereby one thing is said in wordes, & an∣other thing signified in sence, and mea∣ning, as in the former verse by Cedars, great men, and here by okes the poorer sort. Numb. 12. Afterward the histo∣rians, as Stephanus, haue giuen all that land vnto Arabia. For it was wonne by the Arabians. So then this land also is called vnto mourning, because that the wooddes of that countrie, yea, the de∣fensed forrest, is destroyed. By the figure Synecdoche, by the most notable part of that countrie, that is, the Oken wood de∣stroyed, God sheweth the destruction of the whole people. For that countrie was both full of mountaines, & also full of woodes, abounding, not with Cedars, as Libanus, but with Okes, by which word some doe Allegoricallie vnderstand the common people, and poorer sort, vnto whom also destruction is threatned. But all sortes of men of that place of what degree soeuer they bee, are thereby vnderstood.
Vers. 3. There is the voyce of the houling of the Shepheards: for their glorie is destroyed: the voyce of the roaring of Lyons whelps: for the pride of Iorden is destroyed. The foretelling of the iudge∣ment of God a∣gainst the Iewes them∣selues.THe third foretelling of the Iudgement of God now against the Iewes themselues, whose shepheards (whom afterward he calleth Lyons) are first of all said to houle, because that God will first of all punish them for their negligence, or slouthfulnes in feeding of the flock committed vnto them. And he calleth Iu∣dea, the Pride, or Excellencie of Iorden, that is to say, that countrie, which of al those which adioyne vnto the riuer Iorden, is and was without all doubt the most excellent, and most braue and daintie. This also doth God foreshew shall be destroyed. Vers. 4. Thus saith the Lorde my God, Feede the sheepe of the slaughter. The care of God his church committed to the Prophet.THe mouing and stirring vp of affections, for God by way of taking pittie and compassion, dooth commend and commit the care and charge of his Church and people vnto the Prophet, because it shall bee very ill gouerned by those, which hereafter will call themselues the Shepheardes thereof. Therefore both to condemne,The things here spoken vn∣to Zacharias, are chiefely fulfilled in Christ. and correct that same negligence of the Shepheardes (the which should bee, and waxed euery day worse and worse, e∣uen vntill the destruction of that nation) and also to shew how great miseries there should be by this meanes in that people, God will haue the gouernment of his people to be giuen vnto other Shepheardes. But the things which are here spoken and comman∣ded by God vnto the Prophet Zacharias, because that Christ is the head both of the prophets, and also of all Shepheards, they are chiefelie to be vnderstood of Christ,1. Who is com∣maunded? who at the length dooth take vpon himselfe the charge of his church, those, whom he hath appoynted Shepheardes, either sleeping,2. What is com∣maunded. or treacherouslie neglec∣ting or foreslowing of their dutie. 3. Whereof there is commaun∣dements?And this verse hath three things to be noted. First, whom God commandeth: Secondly, what hee commaundeth: and thirdly, whereof God giueth commandement. For the first: God com∣mandeth the Prophet, that is, another, then the ordinarie Shep∣herds, but extraordinarie, such as were the Prophets.1. The Prophet. For thus
doth God teach, how carefull he is for his Church, namely as who, when as the ordinarie Shepheardes cease to doe their duties, ray∣seth vp extraordinarie. And thus much doth Christ seeme to win out of the mouthes of the pharises themselues by the parable of those vndutifull husbandmen, which foreslowed the vineyard committed vnto their charge, and also slew those that were sent to receiue the fruites thereof, when as vnto Christ demaunding what they thinke that the Lorde of the vineyard will doe vnto those lewde husbandmen, they make this answer Matth. 21. vers. 41. Hee will cruellie destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard vnto other husband men, which shall deliuer him the fruites in their seasons. Now this extraordinarie gouernement, the which is giuen vnto the Prophet, seemeth to be to be vnderstood of the Ecclesiasticall, or spirituall gouernement onely: and not of the gouernement of the common wealth, as if both gouernement were committed vnto the Prophet, albeit that afterward both the gouernement of the common wealth, and also the gouernement of the Church became most corrupt. But the Prophet in this place doth represent the person of Christ, who cōming into this world, himselfe by himselfe tooke vpon him this charge of the church, being spirituall, and not an earthly kingdome, the which hee left vnto Cesar Matth. 21. ver. 12. When he went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that sold and bought in the Temple, and ouer∣threw the tables of the money changers, and the seates of them that sold doues. And Matth. 22. ver. 21. when hee willeth them To giue to Cesar, the things, which are Cesars, and vnto God, the things, which are Gods.2. The spirituall gouernement of the Church. In the second place is to be considered, what God com∣mandeth, and committeth vnto the Prophet, namely the spirituall gouernment of his church, whereof I haue spoken, so farre forth as he representeth the image of Christ.3. Of God his Sheepe. The third thing is, where∣of God giueth commandement, to wit, hee giueth commande∣ment touching his Sheepe, whom to moue affection, and compassi∣on withall, hee calleth Sheepe of the slaughter, that is to say, the which are handled, and vsed of their Shepheardes both of the common wealth, and also of the Church, euen in such sort, as if they were meere or onely beastes deliuered and appoynted vnto them for a pray, and vnto the slaughter, and to be deuoured. A∣gainst which kinde of rulers it is said Psalm. 14.4. Doe not all the workers of iniquitie knowe, that they eate vp my people, as they eate bread? And against such the Lord by his Prophet Ezechiel cap. 34.
ver. 2. crieth out, and saith, Woe bee vnto the Shepheardes of Israel, that feede themselues: should not the Shepheards feede the flockes?Who are to be vnderstood by the name of Sheepe. And by the name Sheepe, the Prophet signifieth, not the whole people, or euerie one that is a Iew, but him onely who is a sheepe, and godly, and not filthie, and a goate in the Church of GOD. Whereby we are taught, that God hath not this especiall care of euery one in the Church, but of those onely which are his Elect, or Chosen. Vers. 5. They that possesse them, slay them, and sinne not: and they that sell them, say, Blessed be the Lord: for I am rich, and their owne shepheards spare them not. The first rea∣son, why the sheepe are to be giuen vnto o∣ther Shep∣heards.THe first reason, why therefore these Sheepe of God were to be committed vnto others, then the ordinarie gouernours, name∣ly, because the ordinarie gouernours did not feede them, but vn∣mercifullie slew them. Therefore here is now described, what maner of Shepheardes the ordinarie Shepheards were. First, they were outragiously cruel, as namely who do slay & kill, yea,The Shep∣heards of that time. & that scotfree, or without any punishment, the very selfe same their own and Gods sheepe, the which they ought to saue,1. Cruell. as their most pre∣cious goodes. For euen then, when as they doe this, they are not counted guiltie, or esteemed so by others. So great doubtles was the tyrannie of those Shepheardes toward their sheepe, and such was their authoritie ouer the people of God, and so grounded, and setled, that their greatest iniuries, and tyrannicall against the Church of God, was iudged to bee their right, and their lawfull power, such as the right and power of the King, in prophane or wicked Kings is described or set forth for to be, 1. Sam. 8. from the eleuenth verse vnto the 18. wherein is shewed that hee shall make their sonnes his horse men, and chariot driuers, his souldi∣ars, his plow men, his haruesters, his smithes, and such like: their daughters, his apothecaries, and cookes, and bakers: that hee will take away their goodes, and giue them vnto his nobles, and fi∣nallie vse them euery way most seruilelie and slauishlie.2. Couetous. Second∣ly, they shall be couetous vnsatiablie, that is, in such sort, as they can neuer be filled. For they sell those sheepe, which they ought to redeeme euen with their owne blood: and growe rich by them with great blasphemie against God, whom they make the author of such riches sacrilegiouslie, and most theeuishlie gotten. For
they say, blessed be the Lord, who hath giuen vs these thinges. So doth Christ accuse the Pharises of his time, and Shepheardes of the Iewes, who reteined these maners brought in, and accustomed of long time, Matth. 23. ver 14. where hee cryeth woe vnto them for the same, saying, Woe bee vnto you Scribes and Pharises, hypo∣crites: for ye deuoure widdowes houses, euen vnder a colour of long prayers: wherefore yee shall receiue the greater damnation. This that is here said of their couetousnes to haue been true, appeareth by the historie of the Iewes in Aristobulus, Antipater, Herod, and in all the rest, also in the Priestes, which vntill the time of the destruction of Ierusalem were their Kinges and Shepheards, Io∣seph.3. Hypocrites. in Antiquitat. lib. 13. & de Bello Iudaico lib. 2. Thirdly, they were Hypocrites. For they goe about to hide and couer their sa∣crileges or notorious robberies, their making marchandise of the people, and their prayes and booties, with the holy name of God, as with a vaile. So speaketh Christ of the ordinarie Shep∣heards of the Church of his time Matth. 23. ver. 15.16.23. Woe be vnto you, Scribes and Pharises, Hypocrites: for yee compasse sea, and land to make one of your profession: and when hee is made, yee make him twofold more the childe of hell then your selues. Woe bee vnto you blinde guides, which say, whosoeuer sweareth by the Tem∣ple, it is nothing: but whosoeuer sweareth by the golde of the Temple, he offendeth. Woe be to you, Scribes and Pharises, Hypocrites: for ye tit he mynth and anyse, and commin, and leaue the weightie matters of the law, as iudgement, and mercie, and fidelitie. These ought ye to haue done, and not to haue left the other. So also doth Peter describe or set foorth the Popish Clergie, in his second epistle, cap. 2. ver. 3.10.14. after this maner: Through couetousnes shall they with fained wordes make marchandise of you, whose iudgement long agone is not farre off, and their damnation sleepeth not, chiefely them that walke after the flesh, in the lust of vncleannes, and despise the go∣uernement, which are presumptuous, and stand in their owne conceit, and feare not to speake euill of them that are in dignitie, hauing eyes full of adulterie, and that cannot cease to sinne, beguiling vnstable soules: they haue hearts exercised with couetousnes, cursed children. Against these are the true Shepheards matched, being described by the same Peter in his first epistle, cap. 5. ver. 2. where he saith: Feede the flocke of God,They are vn∣worthy of their charge and of∣fice. which dependeth vpon you, caring for it not by constraint, but willingly: not for filt hie lucre, but of a readie minde. Fourthly, they are altogether vnworthie of their charge and of∣fice.
For these shepheards are not touched with any affection or loue at all toward the sheepe of GOD committed vnto them. So doth Paul warne the Bishops, Acts. 20. ver. 29. saying: For I knowe this, that after my departing shall grieuous wolues enter in among you, not sparing the flooke. For this doth the word (feede) signifie in this place, to wit, with a louing affection to be careful for the good and benefit of the sheepe. Vers. 6. Surely I will no more spare those that dwell in the land, sayth the Lord: but loe, I will deliuer the men euery one into his neigh∣bours hand, and into the hand of his King: and they shall smite the land, and out of their hands I will not deliuer them. The second reason, why the sheepe are to be committed vn∣to good sheap∣heards.THe second reason, why God worthilie committeth the charge of his sheep vnto good shepheards, because great miseries hang ouer the world, and the land of the Iewes, among whom notwith∣standing God will haue those that are his to bee gouerned by his word, and to bee preserued. Wherefore there was neede of a shep∣heard. And he properly both was, and also now is, Christ: and not men. For he doth trulie, and indeed gouerne his Church, and saue it in hard and troublous times. So then a great calamitie or miserie of that countrie, which was to insue, is described in this place, and threatned, the summe whereof is first of all set forth.1. The summe of the miserie, which was to come vpon the land. And that is this, namely, God will no longer spare the inhabitants of the land: both by reason of those sinnes of the shepheards reckoned vp be∣fore (for the people also is worthilie punished for the sinnes of the shepheards, as who namely agreeth and consenteth vnto them:) and also because of the sinnes of the people themselues, the which are afterward described ver. 12. Secondly, the same miserie is layd open more plainly, and at large, namely, that God will deliuer eue∣rie one into the hand of his neighbour, and of his ruler, as it were his hangman, both that they may mutually vexe one another, yea and that their rulers especially might slay them. The which thing came to passe vnto them in the times of the Alexanders, of the Ari∣stobuli, of the Caiaphasses, and Annasses. And then also will not God deliuer them, that is, he wil not saue the rest besides his sheep, whilest the whole land of Iudah shall be thus troden vnder foote, wasted, and defiled with the bloud of her owne people by her shepheards.
Vers 17. For I fed the sheepe of slaughter, euen the poore of the flocke, and I tooke vnto me two staues: the one I called Beautie, and the other I called Bands, and I fed the sheepe. How the Pro∣phet behaued himselfe in the execution of the former cō∣mandement of God touching the feeding of his sheepe.A Consequence, or shewing how the matter fell out. For it follo∣weth in order, that hauing declared the commandemēt of God vnto the Prophet touching the feeding of his sheepe, and his peo∣ple, we should vnderstand, what was the obedience of this Prophet, and the execution of this commandement. And this is here now set forth euen vnto the end of the chapter in order. And first of all in this verse the Prophet sheweth, how great was his diligence and care (and consequently of Christ, whereof this was a figure) in fee∣ding this people.1. The diligence of the Prophet in feeding the flocke. Secondly, whom he especially fed, that is to say, who were indeed partakers of this care of Christ for his church. And they trulie were these only, who are here called the sheepe, and poore of the flocke,2. Who were par∣takers of this diligence. that is, which were teachable, and humble, and obe∣dient vnto God, as hereafter ver. 11. the Prophet himselfe doth ex∣presly expound the same. The will and care of the Prophet in deed, and consequently of Christ, was to feede all: but all other besides the sheepe, and these poore ones of the flocke would not, and refu∣sed to bee fed, and heard not this shepheard, and therefore they pe∣rished. For as Christ sayth, Ioh. 10. ver. 27. His sheepe heare his voyce, and he knoweth them, and they follow him, and he giueth vnto them e∣ternall life,The great care of Christ in fee∣ding the flocke, declared, and they shall neuer perish, neither shall any plucke them out of his hand. But how great affection and diligence there was in God, or in Christ to feede this whole flocke,1. By the repea∣ting of these words, I haue fed the sheepe. appeareth here by a double signe or token. First, by the earnest repeating of these words, I haue fed the sheepe, I haue fed the flocke. For this kind of speaking is an earnest protestation and declaration of the heart and mind of the Prophet, (and consequently of Christ) touching the gouerning of this peo∣ple,2. By executing of both parts of wel gouerning. of whom because he tooke compassion, he also in this place to moue affection, calleth the sheepe of slaughter. Secondly, by the exe∣cuting of both parts,1. In restoring good order. the which are required in the well gouerning of a people. The first, in restoring againe of good order gone to ruine and decay.2. In putting downe euill shepheards. The second, in putting downe of euill shepheards. The first, the Prophet describeth or setteth forth in this verse, by a fi∣gure or signe, the which the Prophet, that is Christ, tooke vnto him.
So then the true and wholsome gouerning of that people consisted first in bringing againe of true order, to wit, in purging the pure do∣ctrine of the word of God deliuered vnto them, from all superstitiō, and in the restoring of other things (whereby the excellencie of this people aboue others, and their order in religion, and in policie appeared) and also in the preseruing of the most straite vnion and agreement of that whole people within themselues, and that forme and rule appoynted by God. Wherefore the Prophet representing the person of Christ, sheweth that he also was desirous, and tooke vpon him the care of restoring of this gouernment, and deliuering it vnto them. And this doth he declare by two signes most fit to sig∣nifie the same. For he sayth that he tooke vnto him two roddes, or shepheards hookes: the one, which he called Beautie, or Comlines,Beautie. to wit, of the signification of the thing which it signified: the other, he named Cordes, or Bands, and fellowship, namely, of the ende,Bands. and signification of the thing, whereof it was a signe and figure. Wher∣fore, as appeareth hereafter, ver. 15. God by the consideration of the sheephooke and signe (the which the Prophet as a shepheard took vnto him) would haue it shewed vnto his people as it were by a fi∣gure, what maner of shepheards he then would giue, and also what maner of shepheard he himselfe would be vnto that people. Wher∣fore that rod, which is called Beautie and Comelines,What was sig∣nified by the rod Beautie. was a signe of that same whole order, truth, and forme or beautie, the which God went about to restore vnto them both in true religion, and also in true policie, whereby the fairenes, comlines, and beautie of that state did shine forth. This excellencie and beautie of the state of the Iewes aboue al other nations, Moses doth liuely expresse Deut. 4. ver. 6.7.8. in these words: Keepe them therefore, and doe them: (he speaketh of the lawes and ordinances, which God had giuen vnto them) for that is your wisedome, and your vnderstanding in the sight of the people, which shall heare all these ordinances, and say, onely this people is wise, and of vnderstanding, and a great nation. For what na∣tion is so great, vnto whom the gods come so neere vnto them, as the Lord our God is neere vnto vs, in all that we call vnto him for? And what nation is so great, that hath ordinances, and lawes so righteous, as all this law, which I set before you this day? The second rod, which is called Bands, was a signe of that vnion or agreement,What is ment by the rodde Bands. both in true faith, and also in the politike order ordained by God, the which God procured also to bee done in this whole nation, Psal. 133. but in vaine. And in these two poynts is contained that same first part
of wholsome gouernment, the which is called due and lawfull, and right order. And for this cause are these things sayd so diligently to be procured by God, that wee should vnderstand that the cause of the destruction, and ruine of this people doth not lye, nor is in God, but in both the shepheards, and also the people. Vers. 8. Three shepheards also I cut off in one moneth, and my soule lothed them, and their soule abhorred me. The second part to be ob∣serued in good gouernement, is the present deposing of bad shepheards.THe second part, and caution or prouiso to be obserued in the e∣stablishing of true gouernment, namely, that all euill shep∣heards bee deposed, and put away, and that forthwith, and out of hand, so that they be not tolerated or suffered, no not so much as for the space of one moneth, that is, for a very short and little space. For as the good are to bee set vp and retained, so are the euill euen the very first day, and out of hand to be remoued. The which also God, or Christ sheweth in this place to haue been done by him, in the person of the Prophet, that is, in his owne type or figure. But these things both haue place daily in the Church of God:When this de∣posing of bad shepheards was fulfilled a∣mong the Iewes and also espe∣cially were fulfilled among the Iewes, when (as it appeareth by the historie of the Machabees, and by Iosephus) God would haue so many ambitious and proud hie Priests, Kings, and Iudges to be re∣moued, and displaced, euen by the heathen princes: as for example, Menelaus, Iason, the Aristobuli, the Hircani, &c. the Annasses, and o∣thers. And thus farre hath God shewed, what maner of care he had for the feeding of this people. The rebellion, vnthankeful∣nes, and diso∣bedience of the Iewes toward God for all his benefites to∣wards them.Now is set downe, and followeth on the other side, what, and how great the rebellion, vnthankfulnes, and stubbornnes or diso∣bedience of this people was against God. Therfore I translate these words, And my soule lothed them, &c. by the aduersatiue particle or coniunction (but) But my soule was wearied in them, or, lothed them, &c. that the Lord might shewe, that he laboured in vaine among them so long, and so greatly. The reason is added, the which pro∣ueth the whole fault and blame to be in them, to wit, because they lothed God himselfe, and abhorred his admonitions, and not only cared not for them or despised him and them. Whereby it came to passe that God, after long patience and tarrying for them, began to be wearie of them, or to lothe them. For in this place the Prophet hath briefly comprised those things, the which notwithstanding came to passe a long while after, but he was cōtented in few words
to haue comprehended, or set downe the falling out of the matter, as it was. So then the Iewes were in the end reiected or cast off, be∣cause of their disobedience and rebellion against God, and God was wearie of his care and carking for them. Vers. 9. Then sayd I, I will not feede you: that that dyeth, let it dye: & that that perisheth, let it perish: and let the remnant eate, euery one the flesh of his neighbour. What is men by God his lo∣thing, or being wearie of the Iewes.THe making of the former matter more plaine. For he sheweth what this meaneth, where it is sayd, that God was wearie be∣cause of the obstinacie or stubbornnes of the Iewes, to wit, that he left of the care of them, as of his flocke, and would haue euery one of them to suffer the due punishments for their lewdnes and wil∣full rebellion.A three-fold punishment. Wherefore here is described or set forth a three fold punishment. First, their casting off, wrought by God himselfe, in these words, I will not feed you, to wit, any more, or any longer.1. God will cast them off. The which, what it signifieth, is declared afterward in the verse follow∣ing in these words, I will disanull, or, make voyd my couenant, &c.2. He wil not giue them a mind to repent. The second punishment, That he will deliuer ouer euery one vnto his owne destruction, and that God will not giue them any more a mind to be sorrie for their fault, or to repent. The which is a most grieuous punishment, and vengeance of God against men, Reuel. cap. 22. ver. 11. pronounced against such as are past all hope, and hardned in their sinnes, where it is sayd: He that is vniust, let him be vniust still: and he which is filthie, let him be filthie still. And of such speaketh God, Iere. 15. ver. 1.2. saying, Though Moses, and Samuel stood before me, yet mine affection could not be toward this people: cast them out of my sight, and let them depart. And if they say vnto thee, whither shall we depart? Then tell them, Thus sayth the Lord, Such as are appoynted vnto death, vnto death: and such as are for the sword, to the sword: and such as are for the famin, to the famin: and such as are for the captiuitie, to the captiuitie. This punishment euen yet now appeareth at this day in the Iewes most stubbornly resisting the Gospell. The third punishment is,3. Those that shall be left a∣liue shall eate one another. That the remnants of those that shall bee left aliue, shall eate vp one another. The which thing fell iustly so out among the Iewes, when as they destroy and kill one another with mutual and ciuill, or home warres, within themselues. And to conclude, they did in the end ouerthrow themselues, in the besieging of the citie Ierusalem.
Vers. 10. And I tooke my staffe, euen Beautie, and brake it, that I might disanul my couenant, which I had made with all people. A confirmatiō of the former threatnings by a visible signe.A Confirmation of the former threatnings, taken from a visible signe set before the Iewes, the signification whereof is added. The visible signe is vsed, that the very hypocrites themselues, and rebels, might be the more moued. There is also a cleere and plaine interpretation thereof set downe: that they should not afterward haue any excuse of ignorance, but should plainly vnderstand the meaning of God.The signe. As for the signe, it was this, namely, that the Pro∣phet before their faces brake that same his rod, the which he had called Beautie and Comlines.The interpre∣tation. The interpretation, that this breaking of the rod did signifie, that God had broken that couenant, the which of old he had made with all those tribes (the which were so many nations, and so many people in most great numbers, as there were tribes therein) in Abraham, and the Patriarches. And therfore that they should not now any more haue the pure & true doctrine of God: nor any politike state or order. In the which two poynts consisted the beautie and praise of that nation, as it doth in like ma∣ner of any other people whatsoeuer. But by this place appeareth now (in which time there hath been an accomplishment of these threatnings of God) that the Iewes are strangers from the coue∣nant of God. The which thing also this confirmeth, to wit, that this whole nation of the Iewes is without Baptisme, that is, a most cer∣taine signe of the couenant of God with men, instituted or ordai∣ned by God himselfe. Vers. 11. And it was broken in that day: and so the poore of the sheepe that wayted vpon me, knew that it was the word of the Lord. THe figure Auxesis,Auxesis: what this figure is, see Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4. or increasing. For he amplifieth, and confir∣meth the matter from two places. First, from the very falling out of the matter, the which followed immediatly: The same day, sayth the Prophet: not wherein the Prophet spake these things, but at what time they desperatly cast off, and refused God. Now this fell out especially at the time of Christ crucified, and in all the time that followed after the same. Secondly, he confirmeth this thing by the very confession of the godly, who did manifestly acknow∣ledge that thing to haue been fulfilled, the which God had fore∣told:
and therefore that this was the word of God, and true. For the falling out of the matter accordingly, is a most true witnes of the prophesies of God. This place agreeth with that saying of Christ, Matth. 11. ver. 19. The wisedome of God is iustified of her children. And this chiefely came then to passe, when as all the godlie Iewes after the death and ascension of Christ, when warres began to growe, departed all from Ierusalem and went to Pella, as Eusebius witnesseth, lib 3. Hist. cap. 5. Further, the Prophet calleth the children of God, the poore of the flocke, as before ver. 7. because they are afflicted, and humble aboue the rest, and willing to be taught. Vers. 12. And I said vnto them, if yee thinke it good, giue mee my wages: and if no, leaue of: so they weighed for my wages thir∣tie peeces of siluer. A reason why God left of the care of his peo∣ple.THis is the yeelding of a reason, which sheweth the causes, why God hath left of the care of his people, and cast them away, to wit, the great vnthankefulnes of the people most manifestlie declared by a visible signe, and testimonie or witnes. For they did not esteeme a pinne, or a rush all this labour and paines of God, the which he had taken in teaching, gouerning, and keeping or preseruing of them, both by himselfe, and also by his Prophets. Wherefore this verse containeth two things. First,Two partes of this verse. a request of the Prophet speaking in the name and person of God, touching the valewing, and giuing vnto him due wages for his paines. Se∣condly,1. The Prophets requesting his wages. the peoples vnequall and lewde valewing of the same. The Prophet therefore requesteth, that they would valew Gods, and his care and paines taken with them and for them,2. The peoples vnequall va∣lewing of the same. as it was worth, that is, at a reasonable and due valew, or else that they would put him away, as one whose labour and seruice they doe thinke vnprofitable for them. Whereby appeareth that it is law∣full for the true Ministers of GOD in the ende to leaue those flockes,  in the which after sufficient and long time, and daylie pa∣tience, and a great while waiting they see no fruite of the word of God. For albeit the blessing must come of God 1. Pet. 5. yet not∣withstanding, when as the hearers become not the better, but the worse by the preaching of the worde, they are to bee left, as swine, vnto whome God his pearles are not to bee cast any lon∣ger, as Christ himselfe doth counsell Matth. 7. ver. 6. saying, Giue
yee not that which is holy to dogges, neither cast yee your pearles be∣fore swine, least they treade them vnder their feete, and turning a∣gaine, all to rent you. Now the people valew this so long, and continuall, so diligent, and so profitable paines, and care of God, and of all his Prophets toward them,These coynes I confesse my self to be ignorant in, neither is it greatly mate∣riall to stand long about thē. He that will further be herein satis∣fied, let him talke with some learned french man. The Prophet by 30. pieces of siluer, meaneth a very little and smal price, and a matter almost of no∣thing. at nothing, to wit, at thirtie pieces of siluer onely, that is, at thirtie common sicles, euery one of which was two drachmas, or groates, that is seuen Solidos, or shillings, or souces, Turnois. Albeit some had rather haue the common sicle to haue made onely foure French Carolins. But the holy sicle was of a greater valew, namely twise as much as the common sicle. So then thirtie common sicles doe make ten pound French, and ten shillings, or souces Turnois. After the same maner, and of the same sicle I doe thinke that is to bee vnderstood, the which is Matth. 26. ver. 15. and 27. ver. 3. of the thirtie pieces of siluer, for the which Iudas betrayed his master Christ. For these things were a type or figure of those things which afterward fell out in Christ, and doe teach at how vile or base and small a price our Lord Ie∣sus Christ the Sauiour of the world was esteemed, or valewed by the Iewes. Doubtles no cow, nor the verie vilest slaue or bond man that euer was, hath been rated at so small a valew. Vers. 13. And the Lord said vnto me, cast it vnto the potter: a goodly price, that I was valewed at of them. And I tooke the thirtie peeces of siluer, and cast them to the potter in the House of the Lord. God cannot a∣bide to haue him, and his, to be so baselie accounted of.A Commandement of God, whereby is vnderstood, that God can no longer abide himselfe, and all his to bee so smallie ac∣counted of. Therefore hee willeth this price of his valewed la∣bour to be cast away, as a thing vnto him altogether reprochfull, and a most assured testimonie or witnes of the great contempt or despising both of him, and his. But some doe mysticallie or spiri∣tuallie expound these 30. sicles of siluer of vaine and toyish ce∣remonies, with the which these mē would worship God, contem∣ning or setting at nought true godlines, which things God reiec∣teth Isai, cap. 1. ver. 13. saying, Bring no moe oblations, in vaine, in∣cense is an abomination vnto me: I cannot suffer your new moones, nor Sabbaothes, nor solemne dayes (it is iniquitie) nor solemne assemblies. And cap. 66. ver. 3. God saith of these things, He that killeth a bul∣locke,
is as if he slow a man: he that sacrificeth a sheepe, as if he cut off a dogges necke: he that offereth an oblation, as if hee offered swines blood: he that remembreth incense, as if he blessed an idoll: yea they haue chosen their owne waies, and their soule deliteth in their abomi∣nations: This interpretation I confesse to bee true. But yet not∣withstanding these things are to be taken according vnto the let∣ter, and were fulfilled in Christ, as appeareth Mat. 27. verse 9.10 where it is said, Then was fulfilled that which was spoken by Iere∣mias the Prophet, saying, And they tooke thirtie pieces of siluer, the price of him that was valewed, whom they of the children of Israel valewed, and they gaue them for the potters field, as the Lord ap∣poynted me. Three things here comman∣ded.Further, the Lord doth here command three things. First, that this money should be cast away by the Prophet, in token of con∣tempt. The reason is added, to wit, in mockage, for that forsooth it is a goodly, that is, a trifling price and reward,1. That the mo∣ney be cast a∣way. and appoynted by the Iewes for a most manifest contempt or despising of so great, and so long, and so profitable care, and paines both of God himselfe, and also of all his Prophets for them. Secondly, he com∣mandeth that it be cast away vnto the potter, that is,2 That it be cast away vnto a potter. vnto a most base, and most contemptible craftes man. For hereby is shewed, that not any the most basest artificers would bee content with so meane and small a price for their so long worke and seruice, be it neuer so base and simple. And therefore much lesse was God, or the Prophets of God to be valewed at such a matter of nothing. Yet out of this place ought not to be gathered, that wee can ei∣ther valew the due and iust price and worth of the benefites of God, or pay the same vnto him for his paines: but onely that the giftes and graces of God, and seruice of his Ministers, ought al∣waies of vs to be had in greatest account & regarde. Thirdly,3. That it be cast vnto à potter in the Temple. God commandeth that it be cast away in the Temple it selfe vnto some potter, both that in a manifest and publike place the Prophet may witnes, that God doth condemne this his contempt, and also that by this meanes he might the more sharplie pricke the Sacrificers, and Priestes themselues, vnto whome this care appertained, that God should not be thus contemned, or despised: but that the wor∣ship and seruice of God might flosh, and be obserued according∣ly: both these things was obserued in that same lowe and small price, which Math. 27. the Priestes payed vnto Iudas Iscariot for the buying of Christ at his handes, as if he had been a most vile
bondslaue, and Iudas afterward cast it down in the temple, where∣withall was bought the potters field, the which is wont to bee bought for a very small price. Vers. 14. Then breake I mine other staffe, euen the Bandes, that I might dissolue the brotherhoode betweene Iudah and Israel. An other signe shewing the diuision of the tribes, and dis∣agreement be∣tweene them.ANother signe and outward token, wherewith by an amplifica∣tion, the vtter casting away of this people from God, which was afterward to insue, is declared, to wit, it is foretold that it shall come to passe, that there shall no more bee any peace and agree∣ment betweene them, but that Iudah shall be separated from the other tribes, and contrariewise, that is, the other tribes shall be se∣parated from Iudah: who notwithstanding before liued both ioy∣ned together and agreeing within themselues, and also were bre∣thren. Two partes of this verse.This verse containeth two things: The signe it selfe, and the de∣claration of the same. Both partes are easie, by that which hath beene saide vppon the seuenth verse.1. The signe. But the accomplishing, and fulfilling of this disiunction and separation of this people ap∣peared, both after the death of Christ,2. The interpre∣tation of the sae. vnto the destruction of Ierusalem, and also is to bee seene at this day, at which time wee doe see that nation to bee most miserablie scattered, and that they doe not knowe one another, nor yet agree within them∣selues. Vers. 15. And the Lord sayd vnto me, Take to thee yet the instru∣ments of a foolish Shepheard. The third signe, contrarie vnto the two former.THe third signe contrary vnto the two former, wherby is shewed the destruction that shall bee of the whole nation, because of their most wicked gouernment, which shalbe by their Shepheards as wel politicall, or of the Common wealth, as Ecclesiastical, or of the Church. The which was most especiallie fulfilled in all that time, the which passed before the times of the Machabees, vnder the Antiochi, and afterward also (when as the same parties of the house of the Machabees were both Kings and also Priests) vntill the comming of Christ: but most chiefelie of all it was fulfilled from the time of Christ his Passion, vntill the destruction of Ie∣rusalem, to wit, by the space of fourtie yeares continually, as may
sufficiently bee vnderstood by the second and third booke of Io∣sephus of the warres of the Iewes, and also at the besieging of the citie it selfe. The two former signes did shew the care of God for them: this sheweth the casting of them off in such sort, that God will deliuer them ouer vnto such Shepheardes, as are fit to punish their sinnes. A commande∣ment vnto the Prophet for the taking of a new signe vpon him.But this verse hath and containeth a commandement of God concerning the Prophet his taking, and other figure and signe vp∣on him. And this figure was a signe of the most vniust and most cruell grouernement of these Shepheardes, which should be after∣wardes, whome this people, refusing Christ, should haue ouer them. For they were notable vesseles, or instruments of a foolish Shepheard.Keli. For the Hebrewes doe vse the worde (vessell) gene∣rallie for the signifying of any instrument and thing. Vers. 16. For lo, I will raise vp a shepheard in the land, which shall not looke for the thing that is lost, nor seeke the tender lambes, nor heale that that is hurt, nor feede that that standeth vp: but hee shall eate the flesh of the fat, and teare their clawes in peeces. The interpre∣tation of this signe. Three things to be noted.THe declaration, and interpretation of the former signe, the which dooth liuely describe or set foorth all the partes and poyntes of a bad Shepheard either politick, or Ecclesiasticall. And here are three things to be noted. First of all, that these bad Shepheardes, are in deede called Shepheards, but improperlie,1. That those bad Shepheards are called Shep∣heardes. as fained faith, is called faith, 2. Iam. and a painted man, is called a man: that these visardes of Popish Shepheards should not be∣guile vs with their faire and glorious title. For Idols also are cal∣led Gods, Psalm. 115. and 1. Cor. 8. ver. 5.6. For though there bee that are called Gods, whether in heauen, or in earth (as there bee many Gods, and many Lords) yet vnto vs there is but one GOD, which is the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him: and one Lord Iesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him. But the right and true name of these Shepheards is, to bee called dumme Dogges, Isai, 56. ver. 10. Their watch men are all blind: they haue no knowledge: they are all dumme dogges: they cannot barke: they lye and sleepe, and delite in sleeping. The second thing to bee noted is,2. That they are appoynted by God. that such Shepheardes also are appoynted by God, namely to pu∣nish the sinnes of rebellious and disobedient persons, and God in
his anger giueth such Shepheardes. So God speaketh Hosea. cap. 13. ver. 11. I gaue thee a King in mine anger, and J tooke him away in my wrath. And in Isai, cap. 3. ver. 4. I will appoint children to bee their princes,3. The descripti∣on of a bad Shepheard. and babes shall rule ouer them. Thirdly, the descripti∣on of a bad shepheard is to be noted, against the which that is to be opposed or set, the which is made by Christ of a good Shep∣heard, Iohn 10. ver. 11. I am the good shepheard: the good shepheard giueth his life for his sheepe, &c. And this description sheweth two perpetuall, or continuall notes of bad shepheardes, in this verse, to wit, their negligence, and cruelcie. In the verse following is added the third note, namely, the flying away of the shepheard, by the which he forsaketh and leaueth his flocke, as Iohn witnes∣seth cap 10. ver. 12. An hireling and he that is not the shepheard, nei∣ther the sheepe are his owne, seeth the wolfe comming, and he leaueth the sheepe, and flyeth, and the wolfe catcheth them, and scattereth the sheepe. The negligence of these shepheards is in feeding: their crueltie in deuouring, and also in killing their flocke. And the negligence of shepheardes is not of one sort,Foure poynts of a negligent shepheard. but manifold. For here are reckoned vp foure sortes of it. For the whole flocke, or euery particular member thereof, or moe members, doe either stand, or else haue fallen alreadie, or are likely to fall by and by: and moreouer they are either hole and sound, or else hurt and bro∣ken. Wherefore God sheweth in all these poyntes what is the du∣tie of good shepheards, that on the contrarie part, they may bee vnderstood, who are bad, and negligent shepheardes. As for that flocke,1. The flocke that standeth. and the members thereof which doe stand, they are to bee fed, both with heauenly doctrine, and to be gouerned with good lawes.2. The flocke that is fallen. But that flocke and the members thereof, which haue alrea∣die fallen, and haue gone a stray, like wanton Lambes, they are to be sought vp againe.3. The flocke rea∣die to fall. When they haue not already fallen, and gone cleane out of the way, but are likely by and by for to fall, they are to be visited. When as they are hurt or broken, they are to bee cu∣red, and healed.4. The flocke that is hurt, and broken. Who is a neg∣ligent shep∣heard. Whereof it commeth to passe that hee is a negli∣gent shepheard, whosoeuer either feedeth not the flock standing: or seeketh it not vp, going now a stray: or dooth not visit it, being likely to fall: or when it is hurt and wounded, doth not, so farre as in him lyeth, cure and heale it, as Pet. 1. cap. 5.2. they are willed so far as in them lyeth, to feede the flock. As for the crueltie of bad shepheards,The crueltie of bad shepheards two fold. the same is two fold, namely, either in deuouring the flock, or else in slaying, and in breaking or hurting of the same. Of
these kind of Shepheards both politicall, and also Ecclesiasticall, this our age hath infinite examples. The bad Shepheard his leauing and forsaking of his flocke, and fleeing from the same, is contai∣ned in the verse following, being the third note of them. Vers. 17. O idoll shepheard that leaueth the flocke: the sword shall be vpon his arme, and vpon his right eye. His arme shall be cleane dried vp, and his right eye shall be vtterly darkened. A threatning against the bad shepheardsA Threatning of God against the Shepheards themselues with most grieuous indignation, or reprouing of them. God there∣fore threatneth also these foolish and bad Shepheards, that they likewise shall in the end be destroyed, and vtterly rased out by him. And this punishment by the figure Synecdoche,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. is described or set forth by making mention of two of the chiefe and principall mem∣bers of the bodie, to wit, the Arme, and the Eye. These two mem∣bers in a Shepheard ought especially to bee whole, sound, and liue∣ly. The Eyes, that the Shepheards may see & perceiue those things which are profitable for their flocke, or hurtfull. The Arme, that they may defend and keepe their flocke. For these two members being taken away, men are vtterly vnprofitable and vnfit especial∣lie for the charge of defending, gouerning, and feeding others. But in these words and members there is a Metaphor.What a Meta∣phor is, see A∣mos cap. 4. ver. 12. For by the word (Eye) he signifieth wisedome, and by the word (Arme) might, po∣wer, and strength, both which the Lord threatneth shall bee wan∣ting, and that he will take them away from these couetous, & cruel, and negligent, that is, bad shepheards of his people, Isai. 3. ver. 1.2.3 in these words: For loe, the Lord God of hostes will take away from Ie∣rusalem, and from Iudah the stay, and the strength: euen all the stay of bread, and all the stay of water, the strong man, and the man of warre, the Iudge and the Prophet, the prudent, and the aged, the captaine of fiftie, and the honorable, and the counseller, and the cunning artificer, and the eloquent man. This is now especially fulfilled among the Iewes, and hath been fulfilled, both before the times of the Macha∣bees, and afterward all those fortie yeares from the death of Christ vnto the destruction of Ierusalem, and now also. But there is a most hard and sharpe reproofe contained in these words (O vnprofitable, or idoll shepheard, &c.) added for this cause, that they being so often admonished by God, may be made vnexcuseable, and bee shewed altogether contemners or despisers of their charge and dutie.
CAP. 12. Vers. 1. The burden of the word of the Lord vpon Israel, sayth the Lord, which spred the heauens, and layd the foundation of the earth, and formed the spirit of man within him. The drift of this chapter.THe drift of this chapter is, to comfort the godlie and elect of God, that they bee not discouraged, being feared with the for∣mer threatnings. And God doth comfort them, with the rehearsal of the notable, and indeed miraculous victories, the which he gaue vnto his people of the Iewes, by the ministerie & seruice of the Ma∣chabees, of whom this whole chapter seemeth peculiarly to be vn∣derstood, albeit that by the same may be gathered that God wil ne∣uer forsake those that are his. For he hath sayd (as it is Hebr. 13. ver. 5.6.) I will not faile thee, neither forsake thee: so that wee may boldly say, The Lord is mine helper, neither will I feare what man can doe vn∣to me.In what sense God his victo∣ries for his peo∣ple are called burdens. Therefore those sundrie, happie, easie, and manifold victories of God for his people against their enemies are described or set forth, the which are named or called burdens in this place, not in regard of the people of God, whom he fauoured, & whom by these victories he deliuered: but in respect of their enemies ouercommen by God. Wherefore this place is to be translated thus: The burden by the word of the Lord denounced or threatned vnto other nations, namely, because of Israel. For the word (gnal) in this place doth not signifie against, but (for) or (because of) that is, for Israel his sake. Vnles some man had rather take the word (Massa, a burden) generally in this place for any maner of denouncing or declaring of a thing, as well ioyfull, as sorowfull: and not only burdenous, as if he should say, a declaration made by the word of God vnto Is∣rael, that is, which Israel should now heare for his comfort, like as he hath vnderstood the former threatnings vnto his feare and repen∣tance. And herein also God seemeth to haue followed the respect of the time, because that these victories followe that same ouer∣throwe of the whole state both Ecclesiasticall, and also political, made by those euill gouernours, whereof hath been spoken in the chapter before going. But the thing it selfe, that is, that burden, the which the Iewes should bee vnto other nations neere vnto them, doth the Prophet first of all briefly set foorth by three similitudes, that those nations might so much the sooner abstaine or leaue off
from their confederacies and warres against the Iewes, being admo∣nished of their exile or banishment and * ouerthrow,I put in the word (ouer∣throw) because it may happilie be the fault of the Printer to make exilio for excidio in the latin. which they should haue for the same, and so by this meanes that they might be made vnexcusable. Then doth he describe the victories that should be against the nations fighting against the Iewes. But this verse hath an entrance or preface vnto this whole pro∣phesie, wherein both the sayd prophesie is briefly propounded or layd downe, and also commended and confirmed. The summe of the things which are to be spoken afterward,This verse con∣taineth an en∣trance or pre∣face vnto this prophesie, pro∣pounding and confirming the same. is propounded in this word, The burden of the word, that is, a burden, which must be decla∣red, and which was reueiled. For this terme (word) is taken for a re∣uelation made by God vnto the Prophet, whether it were made by word, or by vision. Further, the selfe same is shewed by these words (for Israel). For these words teach vnto whom these things shall be a burden, not vnto the Israelites, but vnto their enemies. Moreo∣uer, this selfe same prophesie is here commended two wayes. First,This prophesie commended. from the person of the author thereof, or of him that doth cōmand and declare these things. For it is Iehouah, the Lord or true God,1. From the per∣son of the au∣thor thereof. which sheweth that these things shall be. Secondly, from his po∣wer, the which for the greater Emphasis, vehemencie, or force sake, and for the terrifying or fearing of the vngodly,2. From his po∣wer. What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is see Amos cap. 5 ver. 21. and for the com∣fort of the godly is here expressed ouer three sorts of most excellent things (by the which the whole world is contained by the figure Synecdoche). For God ruleth ouer these things, and hath power o∣uer them, to wit, ouer Heauen, Earth, and Men themselues. Ouer Heauen, because he doth stretch or spread it forth, Gen. 1. Ouer the Earth, because he hath founded, or layd the foundation of it, Psalm.Against the old reuiued or renued error of those that hold the soule to be begotten. 24. Ouer Men, because he doth create, and forme, or frame their soules in them, yea, and that alone without any helpe of their pa∣rents. For the fathers beget the bodies only. So are wee taught to beleeue of God in this poynt, Hebr. 12. ver. 9. in these words, More∣ouer we haue had the fathers of our bodies, which corrected vs, and we gaue them reuerence: should we not much rather be in subiection vnto the Father of spirits, that we might liue? So Eccle. cap. 12. ver. 7. And dust returne to earth as it was, and the spirit returne to God that gaue it.
Vers. 2. Behold, I will make Ierusalem a cup of poyson vnto all the peo∣ple round about: and also with Iudah will he be, in the siege against Ierusalem. The first simi∣litude, shewing how great a burden the Church hath alwayes been vnto her ene∣mies.THe first similitude, whereby is shewed how great a burden Ie∣rusalem, and consequently the Church, shall bee vnto her ene∣mies inuading or setting vpon her, as it hath appeared in the time of the Machabees, and alwayes at all other times. He therfore com∣pareth her vnto a cup of confusion, or poyson, that is, the which be∣ing drunke of, great distemperature or trouble is bred in the minde of the drinker. Such is the riuer Gallus sayd to be, whereof who so drinketh,The riuer Gal∣lus. as Ouid affirmeth, runneth mad by and by. The people therefore which shall assault Ierusalem shall do nothing with good and aduised counsell, but like vnto mad men they shall destroye themselues, and theirs, and deale in all things disorderously, as if they were drunken with the wine of giddines or brainsicknes, as they in the Psalme 60. ver. 3. doe complaine, saying, Thou hast she∣wed thy people heauie things: thou hast made vs to drinke the wine of giddi es. And vnder a much like similitude doth he expresse the greatnes of the plagues that shall in the end fall vpon the wicked, when they shall haue taken their full draught of the wine of God his vengeance, Psal 75. ver. 8 in this maner: In the hand of the Lord is a cup, and the wine is red: it is full mixt, and he powreth out of the same: surely all the wicked of the earth shall wring out, and drinke the dregges thereof. Some translate it, a cup causing sleepe, that is, making drunke, the which is all one. For drunken men doe nothing right∣ly, and with aduise, but confound all things, or doe all things out of order. Three things to be noted.But here are three things to be noted. First, who shall thus make Ierusalem? Secondly, vnto whom he shall so make it? Thirdly, whē he shall so make it.1 Who shall make Ierusa∣lem so? I, sayth he. So then he which is almightie, shall doe it, albeit this seemed a matter not to bee beleeued, because of the fearfull and lamentable estate of that citie vnder the Kings of Sy∣ria, and because that the Church is alwayes a small flocke, yea, and moreouer almost also of no strength. So Christ affirmeth that num∣ber to bee small, Matth. 7. ver. 13.14. when he sayth, Enter in at the straight gate: for it is the wide gate, and broade way that leadeth to de∣struction:
and many there be which goe in thereat, because the gate is straite, and the way narrow that leadeth vnto life, and fewe there bee that finde it. And Luk. 12. ver. 32. Feare not, little flocke, for it is your fathers pleasure, to giue you the kingdome. Secondly,2. Vnto whom he shal so make it? he shall make Ierusalem a cup against all people neere vnto it, because that they aboue the rest were most deadly enemies vnto the Iewes, that is, the Church. Lastly, he shall make it such a cup against the ene∣mies, especially in the time of the besieging of it, that is,3. When he shall so make it. when as it shall be besieged, and pressed, or hardly vsed by those people, and this shall God doe for Iehudah, that is, that in that citie the rem∣nants of the true Church may be preserued and saued. Vers. 3. And in that day will I make Ierusalem an heauie stone for all people: all that lift it vp shall be torne, though all the people of the earth be gathered together against it. The second si∣militude.THE second similitude, wherein the same burden, whereof he had spoken, is declared. In the second place, Ierusalem, or the Church of God shall be an heauie, and a weightie stone vnto her e∣nemies, whom whosoeuer shall goe about to beare, and to remoue out of his place, he shalbe torne and broken in pieces with the stone it selfe, the weight and very edge or sharpnes of the stone, in how great number soeuer they shall be gathered together: In a word, they shall be pressed downe with it. See the exposition and inter∣pretation of this verse Luk. 20. ver. 18. where Christ comparing himselfe vnto a stone, sayth, Who soeuer shall fall vpon that stone, shall be broken: and on whom soeuer it shall fall, it will grinde him to pow∣der. Therefore albeit all nations neere vnto it, doe conspire and be gathered together against Ierusalem, yet shal they by it be crushed in pieces as of a most hard and weightie stone. Vers. 4. In that day, sayth the Lord, I will smite euery horse with sto∣nishment, and his rider with madnes, and I will open mine eyes vpō the house of Iudah, and will smite euery horse of the people with blindnes. The former sentence ex∣plained, or made more plaine.A Making plaine of the former sentence. For he sheweth by what meanes it shall come to passe, that they that bee gathered toge∣ther against the Iewes, and consequently those that bee the godlie indeed, albeit they be a mightie armie, shall neuertheles by them
bee ouerthrowne, namely, because that God being moued with mercie toward those that are his, shall strike all the strength of their enemies, both with stonishment, and also with blindnes. Where∣fore in this place there are three things to be noted.Three things to be noted. First of all, that the praise and worke of this victorie of the Iewes, and ouerthrow∣ing and daunting of their enemies is not attributed vnto the godly them selues,1. The praise of the victorie gi∣uen vnto God. but vnto God. For he shall strike, that is, he shall doe it, and scatter so mightie armies: and that, by sending both an asto∣nishment vpon the enemies of his Church, that they shall be able to bring nothing to passe with their strength, bee it neuer so great (for they shall remaine astonied, as it were dead with sleepe, and vnmoueable:) and also by sending blindnes vpō the samd enemies, as he did vpon the Sodomites, seeking the doore of Lot, that they shall not be able to put that in execution, the which they attempt, and goe about neuer so rashly and foolishly. So in the Psal. 76. ver. 5.6. the godly acknowledge God to haue brought a feare and asto∣nishment vpon the strong men of Saneherib, and to haue cast them as it were into a deadly slumber, when they say: The stout hearted are spoyled: they haue slept their sleepe, and all the men of strength haue not found their hands. At thy rebuke, O God of Iaacob, both the chariot and the horse are asleepe.2. God shall strike the strength it selfe of their e∣nemies. The second thing is, He shall strike the strength it selfe of their enemies, the which is signified by the name of (the horse, and the rider) in the which the chiefe strength of warres and armies doth consist. The third, the cause why God doth this,3. Why God shall doe this? namely, of his onely mercie toward his elect or chosen, for he shall open his eyes vpon the house of Iudah, that is, he shall be∣hold their calamities or miseries, and shall take pitie vpon them. Vers. 5. And the Princes of Iudah shall say in their hearts, The in∣habitants of Ierusalem shall be my strength in the Lord of hostes their God. What the fi∣gure Auxesis is, see Oseas cap. 7. ver. 4.THe first Auxesis, or increasing of the former matter. For God doth amplifie or increase this selfe same benefite and his helpe, from the maner of the same. It shall bee so manifest and euident, or plaine to be seene, that the Captaines themselues of the people of the Iewes shall freelie and openly both acknowledge and also wit∣nes the same: when as notwithstanding men for the most part, and especially Captaines, are wont to challenge vnto themselues the praise of the victorie, that is, of the armie which they haue ouer∣commen,
as it is sayd hereafter,Two partes of this verse. ver. 7. But this verse containeth two things. First, an acknowledging of the power of God in deliuering those that are his out of the hands of their enemies by a wonder∣full victorie, and after a wonderfull maner.1. The acknow∣ledging of the power of God in this victorie. For all the Iewes shall confesse, that their power, and the power of the Inhabitants of Ie∣rusalem, and the strength of their whole armie to haue been from that same God of hostes, who is their God. Therefore the power of God in sauing those that are his shall bee so manifest, that neither the Captaines of the warre themselues, nor the dwellers at Ierusa∣lem (who were thought to bee the strength of the whole nation) shall dissemble, hide, or denie the same. For Mathathias, & Iuda, of the citie Modin did signifie so much in the writing and title or in∣scription of their Ensigne. For it was written vpon their Ensignes, Machab. 1. Who is like vnto Iehouah, glorious and strong? Where∣vpon they were afterward called Machabei of those notes or let∣ters in their Ensignes.The Machabes did carrie in thei ensignes these foure let∣ters M, C, B, I, alluding vnto these foure He∣brew words be∣ginning with these letters, Exod. 1. ver. 11. Mi Camo∣cah Beelim Ie∣houah? Who is like vnto thee amōg the gods, Ihouah? of which foure letters they were called Macbi, both by their countrie men, and also by strangers, and afterward corruptly Ma∣chabaei, or Ma∣chabes. There is a like place Psalm. 18 ver. 31. Who is God besides the Lord? and who is mightie, saue our God? And Psalm. 89. ver. 6. Who is equall to the Lord in the heauen? and who is like the Lord▪ among the sonnes of the gods? O Lord God of hostes, who is like vnto thee, which art a mightie Lord? But where as it is sayd (They shall say in their hearts) the Prophet doth not hereby exclude or shut out open confession, and confession with the mouth of that their acknowledging of the extraordinarie power of GOD in these warres: but onely teacheth, that they shall confesse and acknow∣ledge these things earnestly, not hypocritically: truly, or from their heart, and not dissemblingly, or feinedly. And that these things may the better be vnderstood to belong, according vnto the letter, vnto the times of these Machabees, which first deliuered the peo∣ple from that miserable tyrannie of the Antiochi, the which then shall be the Captaines of the people, are in this place called Ela∣phim, or Aluphim, that is, such Captaines as did not weare any kingly Crowne: but rather which were onely Magistrates, Gouer∣nours, or Rulers of the people, such as also the Leuites were. For the Machabees were Leuites. So 1 Machab. 2. and Ioseph. lib. 2. cap. 8. de Antiquit. Iudaeor. these Machabees are sayd to haue borne offices only, and are called Captaines of victorie. This therfore is here first to be noted. The second thing is, Vnto whom God was a strength, namely, both vnto the Captaines of the people, and also vnto the whole people, and finally vnto them of Ierusalem themselues, who then did lye miserablie oppressed vnder that tyrannie. So then no
part, or citie of that people could attribute vnto themselues the praise of so great and mightie deliuerance. So God euen now a∣dayes also doth saue and deliuer his Church by extraordinarie meanes. Vers. 6. In that day will I make the Princes of Iudah like coales of fire among the wood, and like a firebrand in the sheafe, and they shall deuoure all the people round about on the right hand, and on the left: and Ierusalem shal be inhabited againe in her own place, euen in Ierusalem. The third simi∣litude.THe second amplification of the sayd benefite of God in the de∣liuerance of those that are his, the which containeth the third similitude, by the which the word (burden) whereof hath been spo∣ken before, is expounded. But this verse or amplification hath three things. For first it containeth the maner of this strength, the which the Lord will extraordinarily giue vnto those that are his. Second∣lie, the number of those which shall be destroyed.Three parts of this verse. Thirdly, the ef∣fect of that citie preserued, the which the enemies notwithstanding were most desirous to haue to be destroyed.1. The maner of the extraordi∣nary strength, which God will giue vnto his Church. First, the maner of this strength is set out or made plaine by a similitude. For the Captaines of Iehudah shall bee like vnto an hearth, whereon afterward much wood is burnt. And Iames, cap. 3. ver. 5. vseth the like similitude of fire, the which although it be but small at the first, yet it consumeth a great deale of matter. Behold (sayth he) how great a thing a little fire kindleth.2. The number of those that shall be destroyed. And so doe the people vse the like comparison, when they pray vnto God to make a great consuming of the enemies of the Church, Psal. 83. ver. 14.15. saying, As the fire burneth the forrest. and as the flame setteth the mountaines on fire:3. The effect of the citie pre∣serued. so persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afrayd with thy storme. And these Cap∣taines shall also bee like vnto a firebrand, or burning wood in the middest of sheaues or heapes of strawe,1. What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. or stubble, Isai. 30. ver. 30. With the which double Metaphor of an hearth of fire consuming wood, and a burning firebrand among heapes of straw is shewed, that albeit the remnants of the people of God were then but small, as some little earthen hearth, or panne to keep fire in, yet shal they notwithstanding easilie bee conquerours of their enemies, and as soone as fire consumeth drie wood. These things thus fell out in those first warres of the Machabees, as appeareth lib. 1. Machab. and Ioseph. lib. 12. de Antiquit. Iudaic. Secondly,  the number of those
that are to bee destroyed and slaine. All the people neere vnto them shall be slaine, the which shall come together from all pla∣ces to hurt the Iewes, frō what countrie or coast soeuer they shall assault the Church of God, either at the right hand, or at the left hand. A very notable and continuall promise of God for the sa∣uing of those that are his. 3. Lastly,  the effect of this help of God shall be wonderfull. For the citie it selfe of Ierusalem, the mother or head citie of the nation (the which alone all these people and armies did most chiefelie assault) shall stand, and endure, yea and that in saftie, and also in her place. Confer this place with these Psalmes, 83, 48.68. Vers. 7. The Lord also shall preserue the tentes of Iudah, * as afore time: therefore the glorie of the house of Dauid shall not boast,Or First of all. nor the glorie of the inhabitants of Ierusalem against Iudah. The third am∣plification of the benefite of God.THe third amplification, taken from the state of the people, the which, before these things come to passe, shall bee most miserable, and consequently the sauing and restoring thereof shal be past all hope, at that time. But God doth in such sort amplifie his benefite, both because men are vnthankefull, and doe ouer∣passe his grace and fauour, either with blinded eyes, or else doe not esteeme it as is meete: and also because that this deliuerance of the people was the wonderfull work of God, the which ought to profit, and to be set forth to containe or keepe them and their posteritie in the feare of God: but it was forgotten of them by and by. Now this desolation and destruction the which was a∣mong that people, at that time (at the which God did deliuer them) is briefelie described or set forth vnder the worde (Tent.) For Tentes are the vncertaine and for a very short time, dwellings of men scattered, and wandring vp and downe. For the whole land of Iewrie, otherwise being a countrie most florishing, was after this miserable sort wasted and spoyled by the Antiochi.Two partes of this verse. And this verse containeth two things. The one, the order of the thing done. For God shall deale after this maner: first,1. The maner of the dooing of the thing. he shall deliuer those Iewes, the which shall dwell in the fieldes, and without the cities, or at least wise without Ierusalem. Then afterward hee shall deliuer the citie it selfe.  And this doth altogether and fullie agree with the falling out of the matter, lib. 1. Machab. The se∣cond
thing is a conclusion arising from this falling out of the mat∣ter,2. These victories ascribed vnto God, and not vnto men. by the which appeareth that these victories are attributed vn∣to God, and not vnto men. Furthermore, a certaine wonderfull, and strange thing shall fall out, to wit, that the deliuerance of the peo∣ple shall not be brought to passe, by them of Ierusalem, for those that dwel in the fieldes and villages (as it was wont to be done be∣fore, as namely, when as the chiefe help of the countrie is from the cities, and this citie was the head of the whole nation) but contrariwise, the countrie, and scattered people shall deliuer the citie. So then at that time, that is, in those victories neither shall the house of Dauid, and the Princes of the Iewes (the which were then yet remaining of that familie) nor the citie Ierusalem it selfe, (the which was the head citie, and the bewtie, and ornament of the whole land) glorie or boast against or aboue that Iuda dwelling in tentes, and miserablie torne in sunder, and scattered before. Vers. 8. In that day shall the Lord defend the inhabitants of Ie∣rusalem, and he that is feeble among them, in that day shall be as Dauid: and the house of Dauid shall be as Gods house, and as the Angel of the Lord before them. After the peo∣ple of the coun∣trie, the Citi∣zens of Ierusa∣lem it selfe also shall be deliue∣red.IN the second place the Lord also shall deliuer the citizens of Ierusalem themselues, (in the which was his Temple) and hee shall defend them, and take them out of the hands of their ene∣mies. The which doubtles came so to passe. But God doth here promise two things. First, that hee will defend the Iewes, as if he should set himselfe as it were a shield against the enemies of his Church,1. The Lord will defend them. and against their dartes. Secondly, he promiseth vn∣to them wonderfull strength, and the same also most euident by degrees.2. Their strength shall be won∣derfull. He that shall then be feeble in that citie, shall notwith∣standing be stoute and strong, as some times was Dauid, that most valiant and warlike man, who confesseth God his power in indu∣ing his with extraordinarie strength and knowledge in fight Psal. 18. ver. 34, 35, saying,1. The feeble shal be strong like Dauid. Hee teacheth mine handes to fight, so that a bowe of brasse is broken with mine armes. Thou hast also giuen mee the shield of thy saluation, and thy right hand hath stayed me, and thy louing kindnes hath caused me to increase. So 2. Sam. ver. 8. Hu∣sha exceedingly commendeth the strength of Dauid, & his skil,
and policie in warre, vnto his rebellious sonne Absalom, to dis∣swade him from his purpose. Thou knowest (said Hushai) thy fa∣ther and his men, that they be strong men, and are chafed in minde, as a beare robbed of her whelpes in the field: also thy father is a vali∣ant warrier, and will not lodge with the people. So cap. 18. ver. 3. doe the people also set forth his valour and prowesse in these wordes: Thou shalt not goe forth: for if we flee away they will not regarde vs, neither will they passe for vs, though halfe of vs were slaine: but thou art now worth ten thousand of vs: therefore now it is better, that thou succour vs out of the citie. Moreouer,2. He that is of the kings blood, shall be as an Angell. he that of Dauid shall be of the blood royall, as namely who ought to be the guide and cap∣taine of the rest, he shall bee as an Angell, yea and as that Angell, which went before them in the desert, and led them, that is, a most strong Angell of God. Exod. 32. ver. 34. Vers. 9. And in that day will I seeke, to destroy all the nations that come against Ierusalem. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer promise.A Confirmation of the former promise by way of matching to∣gether of contraries. For like as before God promised that he would defend Ierusalem, that is, his Church: so in this place on the contrarie he threatneth, and that most plainely, that hee will destroy the enemies thereof.Three things to be noted. And here are three things to be no∣ted. First, the most earnest diligence of God, in searching out, and ouerthrowing the enemies of his Church. For he saith,1. The diligence of God in sear∣ching out the enemies of his Church. I will seeke them out from euery where round about: and that diligentlie. For this is the force and signification of the word Bakasch. The second, whom he will seeke out, namely (all) which shall come a∣gainst Ierusalem, that is to say, all the enemies of his Church, such as were they,2. Whom he shal seeke out. who in the time of the Machabees besieged Ierusa∣lem, as Antiochus Illustris, or Epiphanes, Antiochus Eupator, Tri∣phon, & the rest, Machab. 6. Ioseph. lib. Antiquit. Iudaic. 12. cap. 14. and others afterward.3. They shall vt∣terly be de∣stroyed, and none left. So then whosoeuer shall set vpon the Church, shall be destroyed by God. The third, God shall in such sort destroy them, that hee shall vtterlie rase them out, and not scatter them onely, but that nothing shall remaine of them.
Vers. 10. And I will powre vpon the house of Dauid, and vpon the inhabitants of Ierusalem the spirit of grace, and of compassion, and they shall looke vpon me, whom they haue pearced, and they shall lament for him, as one mourneth for his onely sonne, and bee sorie for him, as one is sorie for his first borne. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer promise by a threefold gift which shall follow their deliuerance.AN amplification of the former promise and benefit toward those that are his, first the Iewes, and afterward all those that are Christes out of what nation soeuer. And he doth amplifie it, by the reckoning of a threefolde gift, the which shall follow that deliuerance of the people. First, for that God shall power out spi∣rituall giftes, both vpon the princes themselues, and also vpon the common people.1. God shall pow∣er out spiritu∣all giftes both vpon the prin∣ces, and also vpon the peo∣ple. For vnder the name of the house of Dauid, I do comprehend the Princes and the Captaines, and vnder the name of the Citizens of Ierusalem, the rest of the Iewes, among whome were the chiefe and more better sort of them of Ierusalem, which did dwell in that same head citie, and holy place. And therefore are they recited by name, but by the figure Synecdoche, they doe signifie the rest of the Iewes also. The second gift of God adioy∣ned vnto the former benefite of his,Amos, cap. 5. ver. 21. is the spirit both of grace, or of mercie and compassion:2. The spirit of mercie, and prayer shall be powred out vpon them. and also of prayer, the which spirite God will power out largely vpon them. By the word (grace) therefore God promiseth his mercies toward the Iewes. For hee fauoureth them, being moued thereunto with these alone. This mercie of God did seem to be broken off, or ceased because of the so long afflictions of the people, but yet the same people shall feele it to be restored againe. And by the word prayer, he vnder∣standeth a godly minde, and acknowledging God, and grounded in faith, and the which in afflictions hath recourse vnto God, not vnto idols, or men, and giueth thankes vnto him for benefites re∣ceiued. Lastly, such a minde as the godlie indeed haue, which pray vnto God through faith Psalm. 77. ver. 3, 4, 5, 6. and so forth. But these giftes doth God call (Spirit) both because they are the effectes of the Spirit of God in vs, and his giftes, 1. Cor. 12. and also because they are inward motions, and altogether spirituall feelings of the minde. Now the inward force and power of God in vs, is called Spirit, according vnto the proprietie of the Hebrew tongue. Hee saith also, I will powre out, that is to say, I will giue
these healthsome and profitable giftes in great aboundance. And these spirituall giftes are more of vs to be accounted of, then is the deliuerance of the body, because this bodily deliuerance, vn∣lesse these spirituall giftes were added, would turne vnto our de∣struction, because we should not acknowledge the same as a bene∣fite of God, nor prayse God for it, except hee himselfe gaue vs this feeling, that hee bestowed this deliuerance vpon vs of his grace and mercie. The third gift,3. Their repen∣tance and tur∣ning vnto God. is their repentance and conuer∣sion or turning vnto God. For they shall looke diligently vpon God, whom before they did pearce with their sinnes and idola∣tries, and strike through, prouoke, and wound euen vnto the very bottome and innermost partes of his heart and brest. For so it ap∣peareth that the word (pearce) is taken in this place, and is confir∣med Psal. 22. ver. 16. where it is said: Dogges haue compassed mee, and the assemblie of the wicked haue inclosed me: they pearced mine hands, and my feete. In these wordes therefore of our Prophet (they shall looke vpon me, whom they haue pearced, &c.) earnest re∣pentance of minde is described or set forth. Now that which is here Metaphoricallie spoken of the diuine nature of Christ (who is that same God,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. That which is here spoken of the diuine na∣ture of Christ, was also vpon earth fulfilled in his humane nature. who was prouoked by the Iewes, as Paul teacheth, both in the desert, and also as often as this people did fall vnto the worshipping of idols, 1. Cor. 10. ver. 9. where Paul willeth the Corinthians, that they tempt not Christ, as some of the Iewes in the wildernes did, and were destroyed of serpents) the selfe same according to the letter was fulfilled in his humane or mans nature, as Iohn teacheth cap. 19.37. alleaging this place for proofe of the same. And Reuelat. 1. ver. 7. in these wordes, Behold, hee commeth with cloudes, and euery eye shall see him, yea euen they, which pearced him through, in so much that it cannot be doubted (except we make the Spirit of God the best expounder of himselfe, a lyar) but that hee which here saith hee was pearced through, is Christ, which afterward was incarnate, or tooke flesh: and that he is the same true God, the keeper of Isra∣el, which speaketh in this place. What shall fal out vnto the Iewes after these promises, and after this deliuerance.And they shall lament for him.) A continuance of this Prophesie, by the which God sheweth, what shall afterward come to passe vnto the Iewes, after that they haue receiued these giftes, and this deliuerance, namely, that the Church shall not bee without her afflictions, and exercises notwithstanding. And therefore he
rehearseth the sorrow and lamenting, which they shall make for him, whom at that time God shall vse for the captaine, and in∣strument of his grace toward them. And therefore I referre the relatiue voyce (him) in this sentence (and they shall lament or mourne ouer him,The Relatiue (Him.) Antonomasia is a figure, whereby we doe change one name for ano∣ther, as the A∣postle, for Paul, Iob, for a poore man, and full of miseaie: the sauiour, for Crist. And bere, the rela∣tiue (him) for whosoeuer should be their deliuerer. or for him) neither vnto God, nor yet vnto Christ, but by the figure Antonomasia, vnto him or them, by whom God at that time wrought this miraculous deliuerance, and sa∣uing of the people, I meane the first Machabees. But their name is not added or set downe, but suppressed, or kept in by concea∣ling the same, as in mourning is wont to be done. For then com∣monly wee doe not name those, whom wee doe bewaile, but con∣ceale them being knowne as it were vnto euery one. So Ieremias cap. 4. Lament. bewailing Iosias, doth not any where name him notwithstanding. Yet if any man will applie these things which follow, vnto the mourning and lamenting of the Church (the which bewailed Christ treacherouslie and cruellie condemned and put to death Luc. 23. ver. 27. where hee reporteth that there followed him a great multitude of people, and of women, which wo∣men bewailed and lamented him,) it may very well fitte, and agree thereunto. For all the deliuerers of Israel were a type or figure of Christ the true Captaine and redeemer of his Church. But first of all, these things doe belong according vnto the letter, vnto that mourning the which the Iewes made partlie for Mathathias, and partlie for Iudas the Machabees 1. Mich. 9. ver. 20.21. Iosep. lib. 12. Antiquit. in the last chapter, being most like vnto that mourning, the which they had made before for Iosias 2. Chr. 35. ver. 24.25. This mourning therefore hee describeth or setteth forth, both by the outward pompe, and also by the inward sorrow. For the Prophet hath comprehended them both. By the worde (Saphad) is declared the outward pompe and funerall rites: and by the word (Hamer) the sorrow of the minde, or true heauines. Furthermore hee describeth the saide mourning by a similitude, or comparison of most lamentable sorrowing. For (saith hee) the Iewes shall in such sorte bewaile him as pittifull and tender hearted parents, are wont to lament their onely sonne taken a∣way from them by death.
Vers. 11. In that day shall there bee a great mourning in Ie∣rusalem, as the mourning of Hadradrimmon in the valley of Megiddon. The first am∣plification of this mourning, compared vnto that for Iosias, the which was exceeding great, & made an ordinance vnto the chil∣dren of Israel.THe first amplification of the mourning described before And it is taken from things compared together, or from a com∣parison, to wit, this mourning shall be in the very middest of Ie∣rusalem, a most strong citie, the head of the land, and an holy ci∣tie, and not onely in the countrie, and villages: yea, and it shall be such a mourning, as was some time for King Iosias in Hadra∣drinmon the valley of Magiddon, concerning whose death and most sorrowfull mourning for the same, thus it is written 2. Chro. 35. ver. 24.25. So his seruants tooke him out of that chariot (name∣ly wherein he was shot at by the shooters of Necho King of Ae∣gypt in the valley of Megiddo, verse 22.23.) and put him in the second chariot, which he had, and when they had brought him to Ierusalem, he died, and was buried in the sepulchres of his fathers: and all Iudah, and Ierusalem mourned for Iosiah. And Ieremiah la∣mented Iosiah, and all singing men, and singing women mourned for Josiah in their lamentations to this day, and made the same, for an or∣dinance vnto Jsrael: and behold they bee written in the Lamentati∣ons. Some thinke also that there is an allusion and resemblance vnto this place, Reuelat. 16. ver. 16. in these wordes: And they gathered them together into a place called in Hebrew Arma∣gedon. Vers, 12. And the land shall bewaile euerie familie a part, the fa∣milie of the house of Dauid apart, and their wiues apart, the familie of the house of Nathan apart, and their wiuer apart. Vers. 13. The familie of the house of Leui apart, and their wiues apart: the familie of Shemei apart, and their wiues apart. Vers. 14. All the families that remaine, euery familie apart, and their wiues apart. The second amplification taken from the maner of the mourning, and number of the maners.THe second amplification from the maner of the mourning, and the number of the mourners. And it is amplified, to shew, both how great that deliuerance shall bee, the minister and Cap∣taine whereof shall be had in so great regard and estimation of
the whole people: and also to teach that the remembrance and death of the good Captaines of Israel (especiallie so farre foorth as they were a type or figure of Christ) ought to bee deare and pre∣cious in the Church of God. But of olde in the time of the lawe, this funerall pompe and maner of mourning was more tolerable, or to be borne withall, then now it is, because that the godlie and faithfull were yet vnder ceremonies,Moderate mourning for the dead per∣mitted vnto Christians. but are not now so: & yet is it not forbiddē Christians after a moderate sort to mourne for theirs that are dead, 1. Thess. 4. Act. 8. ver. 2. where the godlie and faith∣full mourned for the death of Steuen. The maner of the mourning in this place is, that not euery one alone by himselfe, but gathered together shall mourne.1. The maner of their mour∣ning. Men by them∣selues, and wo∣men by them∣selues. And this is a publike testimonie or witnes of mourning, and publike sorowe, and not onely a signe of the pri∣uate heauines, and sadnes of some fewe. Againe, for that the men or males by themselues shall mourne, and likewise the women by themselues and apart, as well for ciuill honestie and comelines, the which the Iewes also do at this day obserue in their publike assem∣blies (for they are not wont to mixe both sexes together in those publike meetings, as it may also appeare Exod. 15. ver. 20. that this order in their meetings was obserued, by this that Miriam and her women doe apart by themselues praise God for their deliuerance) as al∣so that euery sexe may the more freely lament, and that one sexe for shame of another should not bee withholden and kept from powring foorth their teares.2. The number of the mourners. The number also of the mourners is here described or set forth, to wit, first and generally, the whole land of the Israelites, and all the families. For that whole people shall bewaile those Captaines of their deliuerance, and figures of Christ: and then afterward the Princes also of this people, and euery the most honorable among all that people of God, shall bewaile those Captaines: as for example, the house of Dauid: the house of Na∣than, which succeeded in dignitie, when the house of Salomon de∣cayed, Luk. 3. the house of Leui, in the which also the Priests are contained. Lastly, the house of Semei, who among the other Le∣uites was at that time most famous, and well knowne, 1. Chron. 6. ver. 17.
CAP. 13. Vers. 1. In that day there shall be a fountaine opened to the house of Dauid, and to the inhabitants of Ierusalem, for sinne,OrFor separatiō for vncleannes. and for vncleannes. The summe of this chapter.THe summe of this chapter is a briefe narration or discourse both of the chiefe gifts of God, and also of the euents or fallings out of matters, the which should come to passe, and did indeede come to passe among the people of the Iewes, that is, the Church of God, after the restoring of the estate both of the people and also of the Church by the Machabees, vnto the last besieging and destruction of the citie of Ierusalem, the which is contained in the chapter fol∣lowing. Therefore this prophesie containeth the order of time, and is fitly ioyned vnto the former. And it rehearseth two especiall be∣nefits of God toward the Church or the Iewes, to wit, a way of cleā∣sing of sinnes, and purging of idolatrie from his Church & Temple. And it doth in like maner recite two strange euents, or fallings out of things, to wit, the massacring or murthering of the true Shep∣heards, and the cutting off of the people, and their great punish∣ments by reason of the same. Now all these things (whether ye re∣spect the benefits, or the fallings out of the things) haue been in such sort fulfilled, that in other matters they haue attained their ac∣complishment but in part, & figuratiuely, but in Christ most chief∣ly and most truely they haue had their whole, and their full perfor∣mance and accomplishment. Three partes of this verse.This verse containeth three things. First, the rehearsing of the time in the which this prophesie should come to passe. In those dayes, that is to say, after those things shall come to passe, the which haue been described in the former chapter,1. The time of the fulfilling of this prophesie. then shall these things which follow fall out. And not in one day, but in processe of time. For in this signification is the word (day) to be taken, to wit, for a long time, and for the whole space of time, wherein these things were, or began to be. The second, the thing it selfe, that is,2. The first bene∣fit of God. What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. the first benefit of God, which shal come to passe, doth the Prophet declare and set downe, and that after a Metaphorical kind of speaking, and such as is taken from the rites and ceremonies of the law. This af∣terward also was fulfilled according to the letter, and hath now
likewise place in the Church of God. He promiseth therefore that there shall be in the Church and people forgiuenes of sinnes readie at hand, and a cleansing of all sinnes, as before: but yet after a di∣uers maner, in respect of the outward signe, to wit, for that this cleansing was to be made before either by sacrifices, or else by wa∣ter kept for that purpose. Whereupon there were waterpots euerie where in the houses of euery one of the Iewes, wherein water was kept, wherewith they might purge and cleanse themselues, Iohn. 2. ver. 6. Mark. 7. ver. 3.4. In that day therefore, that is, afterward, there shall be a fountaine flowing of it selfe, and open and readie vnto e∣uerie one for the cleansing of sinnes, both those, which do separate vs from God, and also those which for a time, or else for euer, doe seuer vs from the common conuersing, or being, and companying with other men, by the commandement of God, of which sort are those sinnes, which are reckoned vp Leuit. 12. and 15. And these are contained vnder the word (separation) as those former vnder the name of (sinne.) When these things were fulfilled.Now these things were fulfilled typically or figuratiuely, when as the worship of God, the sacrifices, the washings ordained by God (which had ceased vnder the Antiochi, or were very seldome vsed for feare) were restored againe by the Machabees, the Temple being purged, and the whole outward worship of God being re∣stored in the Temple, as it was before. And it was then indeed tru∣lie fulfilled, when as Iohn the Baptist baptised in the riuers all those that repented, which came vnto him, and did first of all vse in the Church, by the commandement of God, and according vnto this prophesie, the Baptisme of the Church, the which is a testimonie or witnes of the washing away of all our sinnes made by GOD through the bloud of Christ. So then this place containeth a pro∣phesie, and a promise of instituting or ordaining that Baptisme, the which we haue at this day in the Church, and the which is sayd by Iohn the Baptist to haue been commanded from God out of heauen, as may appeare Matth. 21. vers. 25. by Christ his demaund vnto the Scribes and Pharises touching this matter, when he as∣keth them of the Baptisme of Iohn, whether it were from heauen, or from men, thereby indeed without all doubt giuing to vnder∣stand, that it was from God. Lastly, the sayd Baptisme was allowed and established by Christ himselfe in his owne person,3. Vnto whom this fountaine shall be opened. Matth. 3. Thirdly, it is here to be noted, vnto whom this fountaine shall bee
opened, namely, vnto the house of Dauid, and vnto the inhabitants of Ierusalem. Vnder which words by the figure Synecdoche,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5 ver. 21. he doth containe the rest of the families of Israel also, yea and moreo∣uer all the godly out of any nation whatsoeuer: but first of all this Baptisme the signe and Sacrament of the cleansing of sinnes, was offered, and declared, and communicated or imparted vnto the Iewes: and then afterward vnto other nations by the Apostles, vn∣to whom also the Church and doctrine of God was spread by the same Apostles. Vers. 2. And in that day sayth the Lord of hostes, I will cut off the names of the Idols out of the land: and they shall no more be re∣membred: and I will cause the Prophets and the vncleane spirit to depart out of the land. The second be∣nefit.THe second benefit of God, the which shall then be also, namely, the ouerthrowing of idolatrie vsed before euen in Ierusalem it selfe, and the casting downe of the authoritie of all false teachers. This verse therefore hath two things, that is,Two partes of this verse. two parts of this se∣cond benefite. And first of all, a promise of the vtter destroying of Idols among the Iewes, the like whereof is made also in Isai,1. A promise of the vtter de∣stroying of I∣dols. cap 1. ver. 18. where he sayth in these words: And the Idols will he vtterlie destroy. Wherein the person of him that promiseth is expressed, (and the same is God almightie) least any man might doubt that this could not bee brought to passe because of the power of Idola∣tors, and the reuerence of the Idols themselues among these Idola∣tors. This ouerthrowing of the Idols also is expressed, to wit, they shall be cast downe in such sort, that not only they shall be cut off, but also the very remembrance of them shall perish from the mouthes of men, Psal. 16 and the worship and reuerence of them, which is in the hearts and mindes of men, shall also be taken out of their hearts and minds. Lastly, these Idols are in contempt called the fearebugs of men,Gnatsabbim. as they likewise are termed by the same name 1. Sam. 31. ver. 9.1. Chron. 10. ver. 9. When these things were fulfilled.Now these things had their accomplishment and fulfilling, first after the Temple was purged by the Machabees vntill the destru∣ction of Ierusalem. In all the which time the Iewes were so con∣stant or stedfast in remouing of Idols from themselues, and from the Temple of God, that they often skirmished with the Romanes
about that matter, Ioseph. lib. 1.2. & 3. de Bello Iudaico: neither are they sayd, or read since that time, especially in Iudea to haue been Idolators, as they were before vnder the Antiochi, and before also vnder the Kings of Iudah and Israel. Secondly, this selfe same thing hath much more been fulfilled after the preaching of the Gospell, and is now at this day also fulfilled in the true Church of God, out of the which Idols were afterward cast by the Christian Emperours themselues, and now also are remoued, and alwayes haue been re∣fused by the Christians. This therefore is one part of the second be∣nefit in this place comprehended and contained. 2. The false tea∣chers loosing their authori∣tie in the Church.The second part is, the false teachers loosing of their authoritie in the Church, nay moreouer their correction and chastising, as is shewed in the verses following. Here therefore God promiseth that he will remoue the false Teachers, whom he calleth Prophets, to wit, in a generall signification taking this word, and not for those which truely doe foretell things to come, but for those which pro∣fesse or take vpon themselues to bee the interpreters and expoun∣ders of the law and word of God, but falsely. Further, God also pro∣miseth that he will remoue their Father, and Spirit, to wit, the vn∣cleane Spirit. And by the name of the vncleane Spirit is the diuell signified, as where it is sayd, Matth. 12. ver. 43. Now when the vn∣cleane spirit is gone out of a man, he walketh throughout drie places, seeking rest, and findeth none. Likewise Mark. 1. ver. 26. And the vn∣cleane spirit tare him, and cried with a lowd voyce, and came out of him. ☞ For the diuell is the author of all error and lying, as Christ, Iohn 8. ver. 44. witnesseth, that he is a lyar, and the father thereof, as he is also the author of that corruption which is brought into the true and heauenly doctrine, the which is signified Reuelat. 16. ver. 13. by the vncleane spirits like frogges comming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false Pro∣phet. Now God sheweth that he will earnestly and diligently o∣uerthrow all that same false interpretation, and doctrine of the false Prophets, when as he promiseth that the author thereof also shall be remoued out of the Church of God. And this was fulfilled e∣speciallie by Christ himselfe, who confuted or ouerthrew the false doctrine of the Scribes and Pharises, Matth. 5. Secondly, by his A∣postles through the preaching of the Gospell: and now by the true Pastors of the Church of God, out of the word of God.
Vers. 3. And when any shall yet prophesie, his father and his mother that begat him, shall say vnto him, Thou shalt not liue: for thou speakest lyes in the name of the Lord: and his father and his mo∣ther that begat him shall thrust him through, when he prophesieth. A Confirmation of the former promise of the rooting out of false doctrine, the which is taken from the euent, issue,A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer promise of the rooting cut of false doc∣trine. or falling out of the matter. For the false teachers shall be in such hatred, that they shall not so much as be priuatly borne with of their friends, or at their hands remaine vnpunished, much lesse publikely, or open∣ly. And here are three things taught. First, who shall punish false Prophets yea euen priuatly, to wit, their very parents which begat them, the which is in this sentence twise repeated very effectuallie, and not only their father, but also their mother,1. Who shall pri∣uatly punish the false Pro∣phets. whose affection to∣wards her children is wont to bee most tender, but at that time the loue of godlines, and the desire and liking of true faith shall ouer∣come, and get the vpper hand in them. And so was it commanded concerning such as should entice vnto idolatrie, were they neuer so neere of kinne. Deut. 13. ver. 9. Thou shalt euen kill him (saith God in that place) thine hand shall be first vpon him to put him to death, & then the hands of all the people. And that which here is set downe in precept, seemeth by Moses to bee testified of the children of Leui, that it was performed in action, when they drew their swords at the commandement of God, and slew euery man his brother in the reuenge of the great idolatrie which was committed, in worship∣ping of the golden Calfe, whereunto he alludeth Deut. 33. ver. 9. saying: Who sayd vnto his father, and vnto his mother, I haue not seene him, neither knewe he his brethren, nor knewe his owne children: (meaning that he slew all, without partialitie) for they obserued thy word, and kept thy couenant. For wee ought to loue GOD more then our owne children. For Christ sayth, Matth. 10. ver. 37. He that loueth father or mother more then me, is not worthie of me. And he that loueth sonne or daughter more then me, is not worthie of me. And out of this place is easily gathered, if he ought to doe this, who is as it were a Magistrate but only in his owne familie or houshold, how much more ought he to punish the said false Shepheards, who is a Magistrate in the Common wealth, that is, vnto whom a grea∣ter care and charge of reuenging the glorie and doctrine of God,
is cōmitted by God himself? The second thing is, what punishmēt shall be appoynted for them,2. What punish∣ment they shall haue. namely, death and destruction. For so I thinke these wordes to bee expounded, Thou shalt not liue, Shall thrust him through. Not that all false doctrine and the teacher ther∣of is to be put to death notwithstanding (for one doth more hurt and is obstinate or stiffe necked in his opinions then another in the Church of God) but, for that, if the case so stand, or fault be such, that the sonne be to be punished with death by his father, or by his mother for his stiffe standing in his error, the parents will not spare that their sonne themselues, there shall be in them so great a zeale of maintaining of the trueth. The third thing is, for what cause the Prophets both are to bee iudged false,3. For what cause the Prophets are to be iudged false Prophets, and also to be punished. and also to bee punished, to wit, for that they haue taught a lye, & that in the name of the Lord, as if they were true Prophets. So then their fault and sacrilege or robberie appeareth to be two-fold, and both of them committed against God, to wit, for that they corrupt or falsifie his trueth (for this is a lye) and doe falsely boast that they are sent of God, that is, that they are lawfully called. Yet neuerthelesse doth not this ex∣cuse those from punishment, who when as they doe not take vpon them the name of a Shepheard in the Church, yet do they notwith∣standing sowe and spread abroad lyes and errors. For it is all one, when as a man doth teach falshood and heresie, whether he giue himselfe out to be called, or doe not giue himselfe out so to be. For euen in this that he teacheth, he doth professe himselfe to be a shep∣heard, or a Prophet, and will haue himselfe to be beleeued to bee sent of God. Vers. 4. And in that day shall the Prophets be ashamed euery one of his vision, when he hath prophesied: neither shall they weare a rough garment to deceiue. The false tea∣chers shall ac∣knowledge their faults.A Staying in the further laying open of the former matter, where there is declared another euent or issue and effect of the sayd promise, to wit, that those selfe same parties, who in times past and before did take vpon them to be Shepheards, but falsely, shall freely acknowledge their fault, and leaue off from the charge of teaching which they haue taken vpon them. So then first of all the false Pro∣phets themselues shall be ashamed of those their lyes, when as they haue tolde them, so great doubtles shall the light of the trueth bee,
and so great in the Church of God shall be the hatred of all men a∣gainst heresies and lyes. These things were fulfilled,When these things were fulfilled. like as were those also which are contained in the former verse, first among the Iewes themselues, the light of the word of God, or of the lawe be∣ing restored vnto them, together with publike libertie to teach and professe the same vnder the Machabees. Secondly, they were also fulfilled, when as Christ so many times made the Scribes and Pha∣rises ashamed teaching false thinges: and lastly, by the Apostles through the preaching of the Gospell. For many which before were Pharises, became Christ his Disciples, and ceased, and left off to be false teachers.This prophesie fulfilled in our time. But in our time this notablie hath had his accom∣plishment, when as the Gospel hath been restored vnto the world, because that infinit numbers haue both called backe and condem∣ned their false doctrine, and also haue giuen ouer that their office of teaching. So thē the false teachers themselues shall be ashamed of their errors. Secondly, they shall abstaine from teaching, and con∣demne the estate of their former life. The which thing is described or set forth by the Metaphor taken from a speciall kind of apparell,What the fi∣gure Metapho∣ra is, see Amos cap. 4. ver. 12. but common notwithstanding, the which they did weare, which would seeme to be the Prophets of God, and professed this kind of life. And this kinde of apparell is called rough or hairie, because it was made of haire, or such like course matter, such as was the gar∣ment or mantell of Elias, 2. King. cap. 1. ver. 8. and the apparell of Iohn the Baptist, Matth. 3. ver. 4. who is there sayd to haue had his garment of Camels haire. Vers. 5. But he shall say, I am no Prophet: I am an husbandman: for man taught me to be an heardman from my youth vp. The abiuring of their error, and change of their state of life.THe abiuring or forswearing of their error is described, and the change of their life, the which is an effect of their former repen∣tance, and detesting of their error. Their abiuring is contained in these words, I am no Prophet: the change of their life, I am an hus∣bandman, and was so trained vp from my youth. So then they shall rather take paines with their owne hands for their liuing, then bee fed as before like idle and fat bellies by lying, so great shall their loue be of the trueth, and hatred of lying.
Vers. 6. And one shall say vnto him, What are these wounds in thine hands? Then he shall answer, Thus was I wounded in the house of my friends. They shall ac∣knowledge that they haue been punished for their false doc∣trine.AN amplification. For he amplifieth this loue of the trueth, the which then shall be in the very same men, who were false Pro∣phets before, namely, for that they shall not bee ashamed freely to confesse and acknowledge, that they haue iustly been punished, & receiued wounds at the hands of their friends for those their lyes. Further, they shall call them friends by whom they haue bin stroo∣ken and corrected for their corrupting or falsifying of the word of God, that thereby we may vnderstand how great, and how earnest loue there is of preseruing the trueth in the true Church of GOD. Hereby appeareth how great a worke of God it is to call backe a false teacher vnto the acknowledging of the trueth, and how ex∣cellent a gift of God it is towards him, whom God doth so change, that of a wolfe he maketh him a sheepe. The which notwithstan∣ding Isai cap. 11. hath foretold should come to passe in the preach∣ing of the Gospell. These things are daily seene to fall out among vs, through the grace of God. Vers. 7. Arise, O sword, vpon my shepheard, and vpon the man, that is my fellowe, sayth the Lord of hostes: smite the shepheard, and the sheepe shall bee scattered: and I will turne mine hand vpon the little ones. The murthe∣ring of the true teachers, and their punish∣ment which so vse them.THE second part of this chapter, in the which are declared the meere or only fallings out of things, and yet such as are ordinary in the world. And the same are two, to wit, the murthering of the good Shepheards of the Church, the which is done of the world, & the great affliction or punishment of the world for the same, in the which neuerthelesse God doth alwayes preserue some Church. Concerning the first, Christ teacheth his Disciples, Matth. 10. ver. 17. that for the truths sake they shall deliuer thē vp to the Councels, and shall scourge them in their Synagogues. And Iohn 16. ver. 2. sheweth, that the time shall come, that whosoeuer killeth them, will thinke that he doth God seruice. And touching the second, he likewise affirmeth that in the world that thus dealeth with the seruants of God, nation
shall rise against nation, and realme against realme, and there shall be pestilence, famine, and earthquakes in diuerse places, Matth. 24. ver. 7 It is therefore a wonder that these things fal out in al ages, and that the world repenteth not, and in the times following becommeth not more wise through the examples of the former age. It is a wonder also that these things could come to passe among the Iewes, which did boast that they were the people of God, especi∣ally being in this place by God so fatherly and diligently warned before of the destruction and affliction or punishment of their nation for the same cause. Now touching the first euent or falling out of things concerning the killing of the good Shepheards, the same is here described or set foorthby the figure Prosopopoeia,What the fi∣gure Prosopo∣poeia is, see Os∣as cap. 6. ver. 1. that this whole speech may haue the more emphasis, vehemencie, or force, and may the more sharplie strike and pearce the mindes of the readers: and also it is set forth as it were vpon the suddaine, and breaking off from the former matter in hand, because that it is a wonder and a strange thing, after so great light of the trueth opened by God, and in so great an earnestnes of the godly and good men to defend and maintaine the same, there should yet bee some, who notwithstanding should persecute the same. The Prosopopoeia is vnto the sworde himselfe, that the persecution may bee noted that it shall bee exceeding great and most cru∣ell, as if all bandes being broken, this persecuting sword should raunge and rage against the godly and good Shepheardes of the church. 1. The persecuti∣on.But this verse containeth two things. First, a description or setting forth of the persecution. Secondly, the preseruation of the Church of God in the same notwithstanding. This most cruell persecution is described by a most cruell instrument,2. The preseruing of the church in the same. to wit a sword, by the which in this place is comprehended all deadly pu∣nishment, the which forthwith shall bee shewed and laide vpon the good shepheardes. So Christ, as Tacitus speaketh,1. The persecuti∣on described. was puni∣nished with a deadly or hainous punishment. So was Iames by Herod, Act. 12. ver. 2. So finallie were many good men handled before the comming of Christ,1. By the instru∣ment. as it appeareth Hebr. 11. v. 36.37. and certaine otherverses there following. Againe, this persecution is described by the persons, which shall bee afflicted.2. By the persons persecuted. For they shall be Shepheardes, and the same not of the common sort, but euery the best, and most faithfull (who in this place are called the
fellowes of God, and said to stand ouer against him, or by his side, as who namely in that their charge depart not from the mouth, eyes, and doctrine of God, nor will neuer so little turne a side, but alwaies haue their eyes bent vpon God. This therefore is a generall thing, as afterward appeared by the falling out and ful∣filling of the matter, and appeareth now a dayes also. For the world hateth the best seruants of God, and especiallie the Iewish Church of God, that is, the visarded Church, and which is but the Church onely in name, and also murthereth thē Ioh. 16. but most principallie this was fulfilled in Christ, being slaine of the Iewes, who Matth. 26. ver. 31. citeth this place of the Prophet, to proue the foretelling of his passion, and the scattering of his Di∣sciples, when as he their master should bee taken. Last of all, this most cruell persecution is described by a most lamentable, but yet ordinarie euent,3. By the most lamentable scattering of the flocke. or falling out of the matter, to wit, that then the poore sheepe of God, and the bodie of the Church shall bee scattered, as appeareth Act. 8. ver. 1. and now also. And thus in this place is the persecution of the church described. But the pre∣seruation of the same is here also promised, the maner whereof is afterward declared ver. 9. but in this place the Lorde promiseth two things by way of answering an obiection,God promiseth two things for the preseruatiō of his church. that the mindes of the faithfull should not quaile, because of the mention made of so hard and sore afflictions. For this doth God meete withall in these wordes,1. His hand shall not be heauie vpon it. but I will bring backe, or turne mine hand vpon the little ones. First, therefore he promiseth that he will not make his hand heauie vpon his church, but that hee will immediatlie drawe it backe for the loue and fauour of those that are his. So Isai. 65. ver. 8. God promiseth that he will not vtterly destroy his people, but spare some of them in these wordes: As the wine is found in the cluster, and one saith, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it: so will I doe for my seruants sake, that I may not destroy them whole. So cap. 47. ver. 6, he is angrie with the Babylonians, because they shewed no mercie vnto his people, but laide their heauie yoke vpō the anci∣ent. Secondly,2. The godly onely shall be parta∣kers of this pro∣mise. he sheweth vnto whom he promiseth this, namely not vnto all, but onely vnto those which are the true godly, and humble in heart, whom in this place the Prophet calleth little one, as Christ also dooth Matth. 11. ver. 25. where hee saith, I giue thee thankes, O Father, Lorde of Heauen and Earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and men of vnderstan∣ding,
and hast opened them vnto babes. Vers 8. And in all the land, saith the Lorde, two partes therein shall be cut off, and dye: but the third shall be left therein. The land of the Iewes shall be most mise∣rably punished for persecuting the Church of God.THe second euent or falling out of the matter, namely the most lamentable and miserable affliction of the whole land and na∣tion of the Iewes, the which fell out vnto the Iewes for the afflict∣ing of the church of God, as Christ himselfe sheweth, Matth. 24. ver. 9. and so foorth, where the great persecutions of the godly are foretold, the fulfilling whereof Paul also confirmeth 1. Thess. 2. ver. 14. when he commendeth them for their suffering of grie∣uous persecution, like as the churches of the Iewes had done be∣fore them. And 2. Thess. cap. 1. ver. 6. he teacheth that God for this cause wil recompense tribulation vnto those, which troubled them: and this did the falling out of things vnto the Iewes proue to bee most true. For that nation after the death of Christ was wonderfully, by little and little wasted and consumed by the Ro∣manes, vntill at the last it was by them destroyed and ouer∣throwne: although not vtterly, as it appeareth also at this day. And looke what Iudgements of GOD are threatned vnto the Iewes, afflicting the Church of God, the same also are set foorth vnto other people, and doe remaine for thē, as is to be seene Reu. 8. and 9. chapters. Two partes of the world are said, that for this cause they shall bee destroyed, and that the third onely shall bee preserued, which shall be the Church. Vers 9. And I will bring that third part through the fire, and will fine them as the siluer is fined, and will trie them as golde is tried: they shall call on my name, and I will heare them: I will say, It is my people, and they shall say, The Lorde is my God. How the rem∣nant of the Church shall be saued.A Making more plaine of that, which went before. For he shew∣eth how the Lord will cause that third part to be left, and will preserue the same, namely, through the middest of afflictions or troubles. In the which selfe same thing is contained a prophesie of the persecutions that should bee in the Church, and a fore strengthening and confirming of the said Church, that shee doe
not faint in them,Three partes of this verse. or be troubled and disquieted with the so sor∣rowfull falling out of things. But this verse hath three things. First,1. A prophesie of the persecuti∣ons of the church. a prophesie, as I said, of the afflictions, which were to come, which are signified by the name of fire. Secondly, the maner, measure, and order of the same: namely, they shall not consume the Church, but shall purge it, like as the fire purgeth gold and siluer from the drosse,2. What they shall worke in the same. and trieth it. Afflictions doe swallow vp the vngodly, and doe deuoure them: but they onely trie the good, and make the elect of God more pure. So Peter 1. Epist cap. 1. ver. 7. Teacheth that many tentations fell out vnto the godly, That the triall of their faith being much more precious then gold, which perisheth (though it be tried with fire) might bee found vnto their prayse, and honor, and glorie, at the comming of Christ. And GOD saith of his Church Isai 48. ver. 10. Behold, I haue fined thee, but not as siluer, I haue chosen thee in the fornace of affliction. Whereby appeareth how profitable affliction is vnto the Church. It is good that thou hast humbled mee, and brought mee downe, saith Dauid, Psalm. 119. ver. 71. The third thing is, what confirmation of faith shall growe by this affliction,3. What confir∣mation of faith shall growe by these afflicti∣ons. namely, that then the Church shall come neere vnto God, and shall call vpon him: and againe God himselfe shall more clearelie shew himselfe vnto her, and shall heare her prayers and requestes. Finallie, he shall then giue more assured testimonies or witnesses vnto the Church her selfe of his couenant with his Church, the which she shall acknowledge, and follow, and therefore shall answer GOD, when he calleth her. Wherefore the calling vpon God, and the acknowledging of him as a father, is greater, and more certaine in the godly in the time of affliction, then in the time of prosperitie, because that in the happie successe of things we are wont to be secure or careles: but in trouble wee shewe our selues more obedient vnto the holy Ghost, drawing this fruite out of afflictions, as it were light out of darkenes. For albeit (as it is Hebrewes 12. verse 11.) no afflicti∣on bee pleasant for the present time, but grieuous, yet afterward it bringeth the quiet fruite of righteousnes vnto them, which are there∣by exercised.
CAP. 14. Vers. 1. Behold the day of the Lord commeth, and thy spoyle shall be diuided in the middest of thee. The drift of this chapter.THe drift of this chapter in a word is to shew, what shall fall out vnto the Iewes, and also vnto the citie Ierusalem it selfe after the times described in the former chapter. And it is a dou∣ble prophesie: one of the destruction of the citie, and not of the whole nation of the Iewes. The which euent or issue as in order of time it was first fulfilled, so also is it in this place first described, or reported. The second prophesie is of the enlarging and sprea∣ding abroad of the Church of God, notwithstanding by that doc∣trine, the which proceeded or came foorth of Sion, or Ierusalem throughout the whole world, toward the East and West. And fi∣nallie vnto this last prophesie there are threatnings adioyned a∣gainst those of what nation or countrie soeuer they be, the which shall despise this same doctrine of God, and the assemblie of the church, the which by the same is to bee gathered. But it might seeme a thing out of season, that God should threaten the destru∣ction of that citie, which was not yet builded. But the Lord would betimes admonish those that are his, both of this selfe same thing, and of those things, which should come to passe vnto this people, that the wicked might looke vnto themselues, and repent: and the good should not afterward be dismayed with the beholding of so great euils or miseries, or should bee quailed or out of hope by meanes of the same. Three partes of this verse.Now this verse containeth three things. First, a rehearsall of the time, and the same certaine, the which is signified by the word (day) and also by this word (behold) for these words doe shew some certaine thing,1. The time of this prophesie. albeit the very moment and instant of time be not in this place added and expressed. And vnto the same purpose pertaineth this worde (commeth.) Secondly,2. By whose de∣cree this time shall come. the prophet descri∣beth him, by whose decree and commandement this day or time shal come. And he is Iehouah, that is, the true God, the which is added, that the godly should not thinke so great afflictions or troubles to fal out vnto themselues, and vnto the church of God, without the knowledge, decree, and wil of God. Nay that daye is
from the Lord, it is the Lords day, and commeth vnto him, because that it is the day of the iust vengeance of God against the con∣temners or despisers of his name. So euery where in other places is it called the day of the Lord.3. What shall fall out vnto the Iewes, and vnto the citie Ierusalem. Thirdly, he briefelie laieth downe the thing it selfe, the which shal fal out vnto the Iewes and vnto the citie her selfe, namely, that it shal bee taken by the enemies, and in such sort, be brought vnder their power, and that  ∣mies should freelie and boldlie roue and range in it being vanqui∣shed and ouercomne, that they should diuide the spoyle thereof in the middest of it, as they doe, which doe not feare the power of them, ouer whom they haue gotten the vpper hand. And this most briefe prediction, or foretelling dooth very manifestly conteine the winning of Ierusalem (the which the verses follow∣ing also doe confirme or approue,) and the same not after a com∣mon maner, but such as should bee most lamentable: nay the de∣struction it selfe of it. For before this time, the estate of the Iewes was very short and bare, so that now, if they would neuer so fame, they should not be able to helpe that their head citie. Now this destruction was exploited or atchieued by the Romanes, Titus the sonne of Vespasian being their Captaine, as appeareth by Io∣sephus, and by the Roman Historie. For it was in deed taken be∣fore by Pompeius, but yet sustained no crueltie: but it was vt∣terly ouerthrowne by Titus, and the spoyles thereof were most frankelie then diuided in the middest of it. Vers. 2. For I will gather all nations against Ierusalem to battell, and the citie shall be taken, and the houses spoyled, and the wo∣men defiled, and halfe of the citie shall goe into captiuitie, and the residue of the people shall not be cut off from the citie. The last de∣struction of Ie∣rusalem here described. Foure things here to be notedA More plaine laying opē of the taking of the city mētioned be∣fore, whereby we are taught, that in this place the last destruc∣tion of Ierusalem is described: and not any such calamitie or mi∣serie as fell out vnto it before vnder the Antiochi, or Herod, or Pompeius. And this verse containeth foure things, the which doe fullie iumpe and agree with the very falling out of the matter in the last taking of Ierusalem by Titus.1. The number of the enemies. The first is the number of the enemies. Out of euery nation there shall come an armie gathered against that citie, God, willing so to haue it, the Ro∣manes being their Captaines. For God at that time was determi∣ned
to execute against her his iust iudgements: both because of other sinnes of the Iewes: and most especially for the slaying therein of that same chiefe Shepheard and Author of life, Christ his sonne, Act. 2. ver. 21.22.23. Act. 3. ver. 15. In this first poynt therefore thus it came to passe: For the armie and host of Vespa∣sian, was both exceeding great in number, and also gathered to∣gether out of al nations of the world, to wit, both of people neere, and also dwelling farre off, Ioseph. lib. 3. Belli Iudaic. cap. 1. & 3. Secondly, the calamitie or miserie of the Citie is here described,2. The miserie of the Citie. It shall be taken, the houses shall be spoyled, the women shall be defiled. It shall therefore suffer all most sharpe and cruell things, the which cities that are taken and wonne, are wont to feele and suf∣fer. See Iosephus,3. Their captiui∣tie. li. 7. de Bel. Iudaic. from the 13. cap. vnto the 20. cap. The third, the banishment, or captiuitie of them, that is, both of those of Ierusalem, and also of other Iewes, and captiuitie is added, Ioseph. Ibid. cap. 17. Fourthly,4. The Iewes that are left, though they dwell not at Ierusalem, yet shall they dwell else where. that for all this notwith∣standing, the Iewes shall not bee so vtterly destroyed, that those which were left aliue, should afterward dwell in no cities. Nay they shall dwell in cities, not at Ierusalem I graunt: but euery where in other places of the earth. That which the falling out of the matter proueth to be true euen at this day. Vers 3. Then shall the Lord goe forth, and fightOr In the middest of those nati∣ons. against those na∣tions, as when he fought in the day of battell. A confirmati∣on of the for∣mer prophesie taken.A Confirmatiō of the former prophesie, taken both frō the cause & also frō the effectes, the which in this place are so plainly re∣ported, that the matter it self may seem not only to be written, but to be set before the view of the eyes, & to be painted forth vnto vs. And first of al the cause & the reason,1. From the cause why so great calamity or mi∣serie can be brought vpon a citie so well sensed and full of people, (as Ierusalem some time was) is,2. From the ef∣fects. vers. 5.1. for that God himselfe will fight a∣gainst it, and will be in the middest of the campe of the enemies. For so doe I interpret these wordes He shall fight, bagojim, that is, among, or in the middest of those nations gathered together a∣gainst Ierusalem, and he shall fight among them, not as an enemie, and aduersarie vnto those nations, but as an helper.God at that time shall for∣sake Ierusa∣lem. Wherefore I expound the hebrew letter (Beth) not for Gnal, that is (against) but for (for or, betweene.) But here are two things contained. First, that it shall come to passe, that then God, who vntill that day
had been the keeper of this nation, and citie, shall goe forth of the citie, that is, shall leaue his holy places, temple, and citie, and hold it as giuen ouer, and forsaken. In fine shal get him vnto ano∣ther place, namely, vnto the enemies besieging the citie. See Ioseph.He shall fight against it, as a fellowe souldi∣ar with their enemies. lib. 7, Iudaic. bol. cap. 12. The second is, that it shall also come to passe, that God being in the Campe of the enemies shall fight against the Iewes, and Ierusalem, as a fellow souldiar, and companion of their enemies: yea and God himselfe shall fight a∣gainst the Iewes, not lightlie, but most earnestly, and stoutely, in such sort as he vseth for to doe, when as he fighteth most eagerly in the hardest and forest battailes, where it appeareth most ma∣nifestly that he is present, and warreth, as hee did for Gedeon, for Dauid, for Ezechias, and oftentimes for others. Vers. 4. And his feete shall stand in that day vpon the mount of Oliues, which is before Ierusalem on the East side, and the mount of Oliues shall cleaue in the middest thereof: toward the East, and toward the West there shall be a very great val∣ley, and halfe of the mountaine shal remoue toward the North, and halfe of the mountaine toward the South. The figure Hy∣potyposis, what this is, see A∣mos, cap. 8. ver. 12.THe figure Hypotyposis, or a most liuely setting out of the mat∣ter, as it were in his colours, whereby the place (in the which God shall stand to fight against the Iewes) is described, and there is further shewed, that such fortification as the citie hath planted about her by nature, as it were strong holdes and fortes to defend her withall, the same shall either be destroyed, or serue for the munitions of their enemies, that it may the more easilie be vn∣derstood, that the same thing, which the prophet hath threatned shall be brought to passe, and that nothing shall stand against it, or let it, be it neuer so well framed, either by nature or art for the defence and munition or strengthening of that citie. But in this place also there are two things to be noted.Two things to be noted. First the place, where the Lorde shall stand on the other side, or ouer against the citie. And it is the Mount Oliuet,1. Where God shall stand to fight against the Iewes. which in the histories is commonly called Elaeon, or Elaion. This mountaine being seuered from the citie by a valley, and the brooke Cedron, and being onely sixe fur∣longs from it, the Romanes did first of all take, and did fortifie or strengthen it with most strong garrisons, to restraine the out
roades, and issuings or breakings forth of the Iewes. And doubt∣les, as Iosephus teacheth, who is a most notable interpreter of all this prophesie, lib. 6. de Bello Iudaico. cap. 3. the citie was great∣ly pressed, and much annoyed from this mountaine and garrison. Therefore looke in what place their Ancetours some fourtie yeares before tooke Christ, and brought him vnto most cruell torments, in the selfe same place God himselfe stood to punish them most sharplie, and as they had deserued, most hardlie, Iohn 18. Matth. 26. ver. 30. where it is expressed how Christ went with his Disciples after the eating of the Paschal Lamb, vnto Mount Oliuet, where he was taken. Secondly, the casting downe,The fitting of this mount Oli∣uet for the vse and turne of the enemies. or the breaking and digging of this mountaine of Oliues, and the ma∣king of it fit for the vse and turne of the enemies, is to be noted. For the souldiars that besieged the citie shall digge it through, that there may be left a great valley in the middest betweene both partes of the mountaine so digged, that the tentes and garrisons of the enemies planted in that place, might bee the safer against the assaultes, and breakings foorth of the besieged Iewes. Final∣lie, this mountaine shall bee so broken off in the ende, to cast downe the fortes of the Iewes, and to annoy the citie, that one part of the mountaine shall fall toward the South, and the o∣ther toward the North. The which thing I iudge then to haue been done, when as the Romanes with most great labour raysed vp that same wall in three dayes (wherewith they compassed a∣bout the whole citie) and brought it through the middest of Mount Oliuet, Ioseph. lib. 6. cap. 13. These things therefore dooth God seuerally recite, that afterward it might bee vnder∣stoode by the very falling out of the matter that this prophesie was true: and that, when as these things should come to passe, the Iewes might knowe that their vtter destruction was neere at hand: and so that they might euen then at the leastwise re∣pent. So GOD shewed vnto the Niniuites, on what side their citie should bee taken, and what at that time should bee the power, and attemptes of the enemies against them, Nahum. 2. verse 6. and cap. 3. and yet neither of these repented for all this
Vers. 5. And yee shall flee vnto the valley of the Mountaines: for the valley of the Mountaines shall reach vnto Azal: yea, yee shall flee like as ye fled from the earthquake in the dayes of Vzziah King of Iudah: and the Lord my God shall come, and all the Saintes with thee. NOw he rehearseth the effectes of this cause,2 The effects of the cause speci∣fied before v. 3. Three partes of this verse. that is, of God fighting against the citie. The first is in this place recited, to wit, the fleeing of the Iewes, yea and the same most shame∣full, and full of great despaire and trouble. But this verse con∣taineth three things. First the fleeing of the Iewes, as I said, be∣ing now vnable,1. The flying of the Iewes. and wanting strength to withstand their ene∣mies, Secondly, the place by the which, and vnto the which they shall flee. They shall flee by the valley of the Mountaines. For Ierusalem was on euery side compassed about with Mountaines,2. The place whi∣ther the Iewes should flee. Psalm. 125. Ioseph. lib. 6. de Bello Iudaic. cap. 6. Without the citie (saith he) two mountaines were compassed with deep valleyes, and the rockes letting on both sides they could no way be comen vnto. Out of which place of Iosephus it appeareth that the valleyes of the mountaines neere vnto the citie were most fit to flee vnto: and thereby there is light brought vnto this place. Lastly, they shall flee vnto Azal, because that the same valley of the Mountaines neere vnto Ierusalem shall reach vnto Azal, and therefore shall seeme most fit for their secret fleeing. If there bee any place left for coniectures or gesses, I doe thinke Azal to be that same part of the citie, and holde, the which both was most safe against the e∣nemies, and also most fit for to flee vnto, the which by Iosephus is called Bezeta, concerning the which, Iosephus himselfe must bee read,3. The great feare of them that shall flee away. lib. 6. Belli. Iudaic. cap. 6. Thirdly, the feare and trembling of the people in this flying is described, the which shall not bee after the common and vsuall maner, but an extreame suddaine feare, and full of despaire, as namely who shall then acknow∣ledge the hand of God to be armed against them. And the great∣nes of this trembling is set forth by a similitude. For it shall bee like vnto the same, wherewith the Iewes were strooken of old by reason of the earthquake, the which fell out in the dayes of Vzzi∣as the King as we haue seene before, Amos cap. 1. ver. 1. This hi∣storie at that time was very well knowne vnto the Iewes. Further,
by way of an Epiphonema, or acclamatiō, the cause of this so great trembling in this people, is added by the Prophet, to wit, the com∣ming of God being angrie against the Iewes, with those his holy Angels, with the which he sheweth himselfe full of maiestie and feare vnto men, not in any visible forme: but by extraordinarie effectes, and maruailous, so that men must then needes tremble, when as God appeareth in such sort, and so terrible or fearefull. For as the Psalmist reporteth Psalm. 89. ver. 7. God is very terrible in the assemblie of the Saintes, and to be reuerenced aboue all that are about him. Psalm. 93. And Iude, ver. 14.15. Beholde, the Lorde commeth with thousands of his Saintes, to giue iudgement against all men, and to rebuke all the vngodly among them, of all their wic∣ked deedes, which they haue vngodly committed, and of all their cru∣ell speakings, which wicked sinners haue spoken against him. Vers. 6. And in that daye shall there bee no cleare light, but darke. The second effect.THe second effect, is the most lamentable state of the people then, so that at that time, neither the light shall bee welcome and deare vnto them, neither yet shall it be sweete and pleasant vnto them to liue. And this doth Christ confirme Luc. 23. ver. 3 saying, Then shall they begin to say vnto the mountaines, Fall on vs, and to the hilles, Couer vs. And the falling out of the matter after∣ward hath likewise taught the same. Further, this so heauie a pu∣nishment of the Iewes, iustly laide vpon them by God for the slaying of Christ sheweth, both that the sinne and wickednes of the Iewes in murthering of Christ the sonne of GOD, was so great, as none can be greater, and also how grieuous punishments are threatned and prepared by GOD against the obstinate or stifnecked persecutors of the Church, and of his Christ, euen at this day. Vers. 7. And there shall be a day (it is knowne vnto the Lord) neither day, nor night, but about the euening time it shall bee light. A promise con∣taining three things.NOw is there added a promise vnto the former threatnings, for the comforting of the godly Iewes. For this verse per∣taineth
especially vnto the Iewes.A ioyfull day or time for thē, but not at the feast. And this promise containeth three things. First a Day, or some time more ioyfull, then that which was mentioned in the former verse. For before such was the condition of the Iewes, that then neither life it selfe, nor this light was welcome vnto them because of the exceeding afflicti∣ons, wherewith they were pressed both in the besieging of the ci∣tie, and also after that it was taken, in sundry quarters of the world (by the iust iudgement of God) the which Iosephus reciteth, lib. 7. Bell Iudaic. cap. 21. and 25. and so forth. Wherefore that same first time and day was nothing precious nor deare vnto them. But there shall succeede this so heauie a day or state of theirs in the mercie of God, another day, not altogether cleare and bright vn∣to them at the first: but yet more ioyfull then the former, in the euening or latter ende of the which second time and day, a true and full light shall shine vnto the Iewes, because (as Paul saith) the Iewes then, and about the end of the world shall be conuerted vn∣to Christ Rom. 11. ver. 25. For (saith the Apostle) I would not, bretheren, that ye should be ignorant of this secret (least ye should be arrogant in your selues) that partly obstinacie is come to Israel, vn∣till the fulnesse of the Gentiles bee come in, and so all Israell shall be saued. So then by the word (one day) a certaine and a set time is signified by God: but a long, and not a short time, comprehen∣ding many yeares continuallie, and not the space of 24. houres. And by the adding of these wordes (neither day nor night) the Pro∣phet betokeneth, a certaine middle state, case, and condition, the which is neither in all poyntes to bee wished for, and happie (as is the day) neither yet in all pointes (as is the night) is most heauie and lamentable and full of murthers and slaughters of the Iewes, as it was before, but such as shall be somewhat dimme or darke, as the day vseth for to be in the boblight or twilight, either in the morning or in the euening, when as it is neither fully day, nor ful∣ly darkenes. So then this middle state is promised vnto the Iewes, after those most sharpe and bitter miseries. And such is now doubtles the nation of the Iewes in all places of the worlde, where they are, neither yet vtterly rooted out, nor yet gathered together, but likevnto the twie light. For it is in a doubt, whether it be a people or no: darke because of their burdens, and yet not cleane put out, through the great mercie, faithfulnes, and proui∣dence of God. This is the first poynte that this verse containeth.
2. A most ioyfull day in the end.Secondly it promiseth, that afterward, and in the end of this se∣cond time there shall shine out vnto the Iewes a most ioyfull estate of the sayd people. For he sayth, At the euening time of that day there shall be light vnto them. Wherefore this also properly belong∣geth vnto the Iewes, albeit vniuersally and generally God alwayes be present with those that be his after their long afflictions. By the word (light) it is certaine that a most happie state is signified, as where it is sayd, Psal 97. ver. 11. Light is sowen for the righteous, and ioy for the vpright in heart. Such a state therefore is here promised vnto the Iewes. And this light is the conuersion or turning of the Iewes vnto the Gospell and faith of Christ, the which Ezechiel cap. 37. ver. 16.17. & so forth, hath foretold that it should come to passe: and Paul confirmeth the same, Rom. 11. ver. 25. cited but a little be∣fore in the expounding of this verse, and the which the very state of this world doth seeme plainly to promise, least God in the ende should bee vtterly without a Church, the which now for the most part hath perished among vs of the heathen, nay euen in those pla∣ces among vs of the Gentiles where the Church yet remaineth, e∣uen in those same very places through our owne great fault, is by little and little extinguished or put out.3. The answering of an obiection. The third thing containeth the answering of an obiection, because the Prophet doth not di∣rectly set downe this day. For it might bee obiected or alleaged, This day shall neuer bee, because thou the Prophet of God doest not declare the same vnto vs. Zacharias answereth: This day or time shall be, but the moment or present instant thereof is knowne onely vnto God, and as yet reuelled or opened vnto no man. And truly there are many things, the which God hath foretold that they shall come to passe, but the moment or time whereof he hath not signified, as the time of euery man his death: also of the last iudge∣ment, Acts. 1. of the conuersion of the Iewes, Rom. 11. of the ouer∣throwing of the kingdome of Antichrist, 2. Thess. 2. and also this prophesie and promise peculiarly vnto the Iewes. But that which followeth pertaineth generally vnto all the Gentiles, among whom in the meane season, and vntill that time these things shall come to passe. God shall gather together his Church out of the very ruines, and as it were the rubbish of the Iewes, as he is a wonderful, that is, a most mightie and most wise workmaster, who can bring foorth light out of darknes, 2. Corin. 4. ver. 6.
Vers. 8. And in that day shall there waters of life goe out from Ieru∣salem, halfe of them toward the East sea, and halfe of them to∣ward the vttermost sea, and shall be, both in sommer and winter. A promise of the gathering together of the Church.A Promise of the gathering together of the Church euen after the vtter ouerthrowing of Ierusalem, yea and out of the remnants thereof, the which no doubt was brought to passe by the miracu∣lous worke of God. But that this whole place with that which fol∣loweth may be vnderstood, there are two certaine things to be no∣ted from the continuall vse of the holie Scripture.The things here following concerne not all, but only the godly Iewes. First, that the things, which follow touching the building of the Church of God, are spoken not in respect of all the Iewes, whom Zacharias spea∣keth vnto, but in regard of the godly onely, whom alone God his purpose was to comfort with this promise. The second, That by the name of Ierusalem is vnderstood not onely that same earthly citie,By Ierusalem is ment not on∣ly that same earthly citie, but also the true Church of God. but also the true Church of God, in what place of the world soeuer it shall bee, of the which that same earthly Ierusalem was a figure, Heb. 11. Whereupon the things that followe are properly to bee vnderstood of the Church of God, the which Ierusalem be∣ing destroyed, was gathered together among the Gentiles by faith in Christ, and by the preaching of the Gospell. Although perad∣uenture the things which are here spoken, shall haue place in the citie it selfe which is to be restored (and not in the temple, or sacri∣fices, or ceremonies) when as God shall call the Iewes vnto the Gospell, like as in the former verse they are foretold that they shall be called. Foure things to be noted in this verse.But this verse containeth foure things. First, the time, in the which this prophesie shal haue his accomplishment, and fulfilling. In that day (sayth he) that is, after the destroying of the citie by the Romanes.1. The time of the fulfilling of this prophesie. For this word (day) betokeneth a long time. The se∣cond addeth a promise, Liuing waters or waters of life shall go forth. By the name of waters are signified the spirituall graces of God, as hath been expounded before,2. A promise of the waters of life. Ioel. 3.18. So is it also taken, Ezech. 36. ver. 25. where God sayth, Then will I powre cleane water vpon you, and ye shall be cleane: yea, from all your filthines, and from all your idols will I cleanse you. So also is it taken, Ioh. 7. ver. 38. He that be∣leeueth in me, as sayth the Scripture, out of his bellie shall flow riuers of the water of life. And of these waters without all doubt our Bap∣tisme
ordained of God is a figure and a Sacrament. Thirdly,3. From whence, and whither they shall flow. this verse containeth the place, both from whence those waters shall come forth, and also into what place they shall flowe. The place from whence they shall come, is Ierusalem and Sion, as it is agree∣ablie hereunto, Isai. 2. ver. 3. The law shall goe forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Ierusalem. For from thence the Gospell came into the whole world. The place wither they shall come is the East, and the whole West, the which in this place is described vn∣der the name of two Seas well knowne vnto the Iewes. For the preaching of the Gospell was carried through the whole world both by the Apostles, and also by their true successors.4. The continu∣ance of these waters. Fourthly, this place sheweth, how continual, enduring and lasting these gra∣ces of God shall bee in the Church. For they shall bee perpetuall, both day and night, and winter, and sommer (at which times of the yeare brookes and other waters that are not liuing or springing are wont for to faile, and be dried vp) that in this selfe same poynt may bee contained an amplification of so great graces of GOD, through the which godly men shall liue, yea and that for euer, but spiritually, Ioh. 6. and day and night, and alwayes, or continually. Vers. 9. And the Lord shall be King ouer all the earth: in that day shall there be one Lord, and his name shall be one. The first am∣plification of this benefite, containingTHe first exposition or amplification of this benefite of God, the which containeth two things, to wit, a description of true god∣lines or religion, and the most farre spreading abroad of the same throughout the whole world.1. A description of true religion When as God therefore shall gather together his Church, then also true and pure religion shal be resto∣red, yea and that vnto the whole world: and it shall not be corrupt in one part and sound in another poynt, as it often falleth out:2. The farre spredding a∣broad of the same. but it shall be altogether and in euery poynt throughly pure and per∣fectly sound. And this true religion doth the Prophet describe or set foorth three wayes. First, when as the Iehouah, that is, the true God is acknowledged to the King, to wit, of vs, ouer whō he ought to rule. Secondly, when as Iehouah or the Lord is acknowledged to bee but one, that is, when as the one true God and not many are worshipped. Thirdly, when as his name, that is, his maiestie and power alone is acknowledged, and is not diuided among many, as among some other lesser and pettie gods, as both the heathen did in times past, and the Papists also doe at this day.
Vers. 10. All the land shall be turned as a plaine from Geba to Rim∣mon, toward the South of Ierusalem, and it shall be lifted vp, and inhabited in her place: from Beniamins gate vnto the place of the first gate, vnto the corner gate, and from the tower of Hananiel, vnto the Kings wine presses. The second amplification of the former benefit.THe second amplification taken from the full and manifest re∣storing of the Church, the which is contained vnder the type or figure of Ierusalem, the which was yet then to bee builded againe at that time, wherein Zacharias liued. Wherefore the true worship of God, and the true Church of God shall manifestly bee restored. And therefore it is sayd that it shall bee such, as a citie builded in some high place aboue the middest of the plaine lying round a∣bout it, the which is plainly seene on euery side. For as Christ spea∣keth, Matth. 5. ver. 14. a citie that is set on an hill, cannot be hid. And the place and space from whence it is seene, is here described to be very broade or wide, to wit, from the borders of Beniamin (in the which was Rama, 1. King. 15.) vnto the borders of the tribe of Si∣meon (where was Rimmon, Iosue. 19.) that by this meanes wee should vnderstand, that the sight of the Church of God should be euident, and in the view of all nations and people, and not hidden, or vnknowne. Further, as the Church shall be restored manifestly, so shall it bee restored thorowly, and hauing no want in any part thereof: not in the preaching of the word, not in the Sacraments, not in the discipline of the Church must there bee any thing wan∣ting. This perfection is set forth vnder the figure of the citie hauing all her parts, of the which reade Nehem. cap. 3. There is a like place Reuelat. cap. 21. ver. 18.19. and so forth, of the spirituall or heauenlie Ierusalem. Vers. 11. And men shall dwell in it, and there shall be no more destruc∣tion, but Ierusalem shall be safely inhabited. The third am∣plification of the former be∣nefit, takenTHe third exposition or amplification of the former promise and benefit of God, taken from the number & safetie of the Church. The number is signified in these wordes, They shall dwell in it, not one or two only,1. From the nūber of the Church. but very many: and she shall be inhabited, that is to say, Ierusalem, or that same Church of God, which shall bee gathe∣red by the preaching of the Gospell, shall indeede bee dwelt in in
great numbers and multitude of people.2. From the safe∣tie of the same. The securitie or safetie of the same is declared in these wordes: She shall be inhabited safely, that is, without any danger, either inward or outward: neither shall she suffer destruction any more. For the word (Cherem) in this place signifieth destruction, the which oftentimes did fall out vnto that citie. For it was destroyed both by Nabuchadnezzar, and also by the Emperour Titus. And it was likewise oftentimes taken, as Iose∣phus teacheth, lib. 7. Bel. Iudaic. cap. 18. So then henceforth, or here∣after, it shall neither bee destroyed, as before: and when as it shall be inhabited, it shall not be dwelt in with feare, Psal. 121. Psal. 144. because God shall defend it vnder the shadowe of his wings. But this boldnes and safetie is rather to bee vnderstood spiritually, then carnally, as Paul teacheth Rom. 8. in the end of the chapter. For as concerning men, it hath been sayd vnto the godly, Ye shall alwayes suffer trouble in this world. Vers. 12. And this shall be the plague, wherewith the Lord will smite all people that haue fought against Ierusalem: their flesh shall consume away, though they stand vpon their feete, and their eyes shal consume in their holes, and their tongue shall consume in their mouth. Why the Church shall dwel in safetie.THe rendring of a reason of the former exposition. For this cause shall the Church be inhabited in safetie, because God shal strike the enemies thereof, yea, and that all of them, with a very great and fearfull plague. And not onely the men themselues, but also the beasts that serued those men, to a and trouble the Church of God, ver. 15. Here therefore is threatned destruction vnto the ene∣mies of the Church, and the same most grieuous, but yet vpon cau∣ses, and naturall diseases. And this verse containeth three things.Three parts of this verse. First, the author of the plague, and he is the true God. Iehouah (saith the Prophet) shal smite them. Secondly, who shalbe smitten, name∣ly,1. Who shall plague the ene∣mies of the Church. al people which haue fought against the church of God. Lastly, with what plague or punishment they shall bee smitten, to wit, with a fearfull plague, but yet such a one, the which shall not be done, and bee altogether after an extraordinarie, or miraculous maner,2. Who shall be smitten. but such, as with the which many are wont to dye: They shall therefore pine away in their bodie: yea, and in their whole bodie,3. With what plague they shall be smitten the which these words, flesh eyes, and tongue doe signifie: also very quickly, to wit, standing on their feete, and with most bitter paines. For a con∣sumption
is a most lamentable and most hard kind of death, and which other men doe most greatly abhorre and lothe. There are examples in Antiochus the Noble, 1. Machah. 6. Ioseph. lib 12. An∣tiquit. cap. 11. In King Herod▪ Act. 12. In the Emperour Maximinus, Eusb. lib. 8. hist. Ecclesiast. cap. 5. & 16. In the Heretike Nestorius, Theodor. lib. 2. Euagrius lib. 1. hist. cap. 17. Vers. 13. But in that day agreat tumult of the Lord shall be among them, and euery one shall take the hand of his neighbour, and his hand shall ris vp against the hand of his neighbour. An extraordi∣narie iudgemēt of God vpō the enemies of his Church.A Threatning of the sayd iudgement of God against the enemies of the Church, but extraordinarily, and altogether miraculous∣lie, to wit, for that the selfe same enemies of the Church shall both be taken with a panical or distraughtfull kinde of sudden feare, as they call it: and also shall murther one another, so that God shall destroy them by themselues. Hereof wee haue examples in the Scriptures, as Iudg. 7. ver. 22. in the Madianites murthering one an other, comming to fight against the Israelites: and likewise 1. Sam. 14. ver. 15.20. of a sudden feare sent by God vpon the armie of the Philistims, by meanes whereof they fell one vpon another, and slew each other: and Christ hath foretold the like, Matth. 24. ver. 7. the which things also haue been since Christ, yea, and in our time, to wit, when as people, which haue persecuted the Church of God, haue afterward with mutuall warres and battels within themselues slaine one another, and haue been most pitifull spectacles of this prophesie vnto the whole wo▪ The which examples if the world, our historie riters haue not marked, their creleses doubtles is very, great, yet neuerthelesse do the examples hereof appeare in the Kings of Syria, and of Egypt, who after they haue afflicted the Church, haue in like maner destroyed themselues.Or Vers. 14. And Iudah shall fight alsoFor Ierusa∣lem. A confirmatiō of the helpe of God against the enemies of the Church, ta∣ken against Ierusalem, and the arme of all the heathen shall bee gathered round about, with gold and siluer, and great abundance of apparel. AN amplification or confirmation of the former helpe of God in the destroying of the enemies of his Church, taken from the maner of the same, and from the effects.1. From the ma∣ner of this help. The maner is, for that Iu∣dah himselfe shall fight for Ierusalem, and not against Ierusalem,
as some doe expound it. And this doth signifie, that the godly, and such as are trulie faithfull, shall with great courage and cheeeful∣nes of minde fight for the defence of the glorie of God against the armed enemies of the same. So the godlie are sayd; Heb. 11. ver. 34. by armes to haue conquered hosts of men, and not only by praiers, that by this place we may vnderstand the foolish Anabaptists to be soundly refuted or ouerthrowne, who holde it vnlawfull to take armes, or to make warres. The effect of this help of God is de∣clared in these wordes,2. From the effect of the same. The riches of the nations neere at hand ound about shall bee gathered in Jerusalem, namely gold, and sil∣uer, and their apparrell for a spoyle taken from those enemies, the which the godly shall haue vnto themselues, God giuing it them. Therefore the church shall plentifully and aboundantly be enriched with the spoyles of their enemies, God in such sort de∣fending it, as of olde in times past he made them wealthie with the spoyles of the Egyptians. Vers. 15. Yet this shall bee the plague of the horse, of the Mule, of the Camel, and of the Asse,God his iude∣ment against the bruite beastes, which serued against the church. What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amo cap. 5. ver 21. Three things to be noted. and of all the beastes that bee in these tentes, as this plague. ANother part of Gods iudgement, namely, against the bruite beastes themselues, and by the figure Syneedoche against all the instruments and furniture of the enemies of the Church, which haue serued them, whilest they afflicted the Church▪ For they also shall be punished by the hand of GOD, and with the same plague that the men themselues were punished, and not onely one kinde of beastes, as Horses, or Mules, but all, which serued their turne; Horses, Mules, Camels, Asses;1. All things fighting against the glorie of God, displease him. and finallie of what sort soeuer they be (whether they serued the enemies of the Church ordinarilie, or extraordinarilie) they shall be punished, and smitten by the hand of God. Wherefore this place teacheth three things, first that not onely men indued with reason, which doe fight against the glorie of God, and his people,2. That they shall all be punished. doe displease God, but also all instruments, which men vse in that behalfe. Se∣condly, that none of those instruments shall be spared.3. The cause why these things without rea∣son displease God. Thirdly, that the cause of this iudgement of God against those thinges without reason is, not that God hateth the things▪ which he hath creatd, bu because they haue been in the tens of his enemies, that is, haue been weapons and instruments of the fighting against
his glorie. So God curseth and abhorreth all instruments of idola∣trie, Isai. 30. ver. 22. where God speaketh thus: Ye shall pollute the co∣uering of the images of siluer, and the rich ornament of thine images of gold, and cast them away as a menstruous cloath, and thou shalt say vn∣to it, Get thee hence. And contrariwise he blesseth both men, that doe blesse him, and also all those things, which men do vse to blesse God with all, Deut. 28. Vers. 16. But it shall come to passe, that euery one that is left of al the nations, which came against erusalem, shall goe vp from yeare to yeare to worship the King the Lord of hostes, and to keepe the feast of Tabernacles. The calling of the Gentiles, here described after the ma∣ner of the wor∣ship of God v∣suall at that time, and the reason why it is thus described.THe last place of this prophesie, to wit, the calling or conuersion of the Gentiles, yea euen of those who before persecuted the Church of God, vnto the true God, the which like as it is described, and that notably, so also it had his accomplishment by the preach∣ing of the Gospell. But this conuersion, and the effects thereof, in deed wonderfull, are here described or set forth, according vnto the maner of the worship of GOD, and ceremonies vsed at that time, partly that the Iewes might vnderstand the more easily, that the godlines of the Gentiles should bee true godlines, the which then consisted in those rites and ordinances: and partly that they should rather consider the inward signification of those ceremonies, then the outward rites and maners of them. And not that the Gentiles, which were conuerted vnto God after the passion or suffering of Christ, should still retaine or keepe the vse of these ceremonies and shadowes, as the Apostles teach, Coloss. 2. Acts. 15. the which in Christ had their fulfilling, and body, and so consequently their end. For as Paul speaketh, 2. Coloss. ver 17. These are but shadowes of things to come, but the bodie is in Christ. And so are we taught, Heb. 10. ver. 1. That the law hauing the shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of the things,1. Who of the Gentiles shall be conuerted. can neuer with those sacrifices, which they offer yeare by yeare continually, sanctifie the commers there∣vnto. Now this verse hath a promise, or a prophesie of the conuersion of the Gentiles,2 After what maner they shall be conuer∣ted. which was to come▪ the which containeth two things. First, who of the Gentiles shall be conuerted. Secondly, af∣ter what maner, that is, how trulie and sincerely or vnfainedly they shall bee conuerted.  So then, after that all things before declared
shal come to passe, the Gentiles which shall be left, shal be conuer∣ted, and not one or two of them, but whosoeuer shall remaine a∣mong them, that is to say, men out of euery nation shall come by heapes and throngs vnto Christ: not that euery seuerall or particu∣lar man notwithstanding out of euery nation shall bee conuerted vnto God, but those onely out of euery nation, which shall be elec∣ted, or chosen by God. To this effect, Luk. Act. 13 ver. 48. speaketh, saying, And when the Gentiles heard it, they were glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained vnto eternall life, beleeued. And not only those Gentiles shall be conuerted vnto the true God, and Christ by the preaching of the Gospell, which did fa∣uour the Iewes before: but those also, which did persecute them before, and had besieged Ierusalem it selfe.  And they shall truelie be conuerted, the which thing is described by the effects, the which were then the true testimonies or witnesses and parts of the out∣ward worship or seruice of God. For they shall worship Iehouah the true God, yea, and that as their King, and the God of hostes, that is, all mightie. Wherefore they shall acknowledge and wor∣ship in Christ, the true God, as peculiarly their God, King, and Fa∣ther. And this shall they doe continually: for euery yeare they shall goe vp (as at that time the law of God appointed to be done, Deut. 16.) to call vpon, or pray vnto God. And lastly, according vnto the commandement of God. For they shall keepe the feasts appoyn∣ted by God (as the feast of Tabernacles) that is to say, they shall worship God according vnto his commandements and will, and not according vnto their owne braine and fancie: and the Gentiles shall come together with the rest of the Iewes, and shall worship God with the same rites, in the same places and assemblies which they doe, that there may bee great consent and agreement of them all in worshipping of God: and there shall be no schismes or diui∣sions and discord in that so great a multitude gathered together of Iewes and Gentiles seruing God. Vers. 17. And who so will not come vp of all the familes of the earth vnto Ierusalem to worship the King the Lord of hostes, euen vpon them shall come no raine. A confirma∣tion of the for∣mer promise.A Confirmation of the former promise by a penaltie or punish∣ment, the which by God is added against the rebellious Gen∣tiles, and such as will not obey him. For this punishment sheweth
that God altogether would, that the Gentiles should be conuerted. Therefore he setteth downe a punishment for the disobedient, first generally: afterward particularly. For those Gentiles, the which are more strange and turned away from true religion, such, as euery where in the holy Scripture the Egyptians are taken for to be. This verse therefore hath a threatning of a punishment against the Gen∣tiles,Two partes of this verse. the which then did not ioyne themselues vnto GOD, and a shewing what that punishment should be.1. A threatning of punishment against the dis∣obedient Gen∣tiles. The threatning of the punishmēt is frō God, that it may be most assuredly beleeued that it shall come to passe, and that it cannot be shifted off by the rebel∣lious Gentiles. The shewing what the punishment is, followeth, & the same forsooth shall bee a withholding from them of showres and raine,2. What that pu∣nishment is. wherewith the fields and sowen ground, and the earth vseth to be made fruitfull. So Dauid witnesseth of God his making the earth fruitfull with the raine from heauen, Psal. 65. ver. 9. saying, Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou makest it very rich: the riuer of God is full of water: thou preparest them corne: for so thou appoyntest it. Likewise, Isai. cap. 30. ver. 23. Then shall he giue raine vnto thy seede, when thou shalt sowe the ground, and bread of the in∣crease of the earth, and it shall be fat, and as oyle: in that day shall thy cattell be fed in large pastures. So then God will not raine vpon them: but the heauen shall be brasse, and the earth yron, the which by this meanes shall yeeld nothing vnto them to liue withall. Vers. 18. And if the familie of Egypt goe not vp, and come not, it shall not raine vpon them. This shall be the plague, wherewith the Lord will smite all the heathen, that come not vp to keepe the feast of Ta∣bernacles. A particular threatning a∣gainst the E∣gyptians.A Particular and peculiar threatning of punishment against the Gentiles, which are more enstranged from the true worship of God. Therefore that they should not flatter themselues, because of their continuall hatred against the Iewes, and thinke that they should be free from this punishment, they are also comprehended in this place. For they shall be punished by God with the same pu∣nishment, wherewith the other Gentiles shall bee punished, the which did alwayes more fauour the Iewes, and their religion, that is, the true religion. Further, all those wilfully stubborne Gentiles, and enemies vnto true godlines,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is see Amos cap. . ver. 21. are here by the figure Synecdoche contained vnder the name of the Egyptians. For these alwaies pro∣fessed
themselues to bee open enemies of the Iewes, that is, of the people of God. Wherefore they also shall bee punished with the same plague that other people are, vnlesse that they bee conuer∣ted or doe turne vnto the true God, namely, that they shall lacke raine, the which was so much the more welcome, and profitable vnto that nation of the Egyptians, for that it is parched with the heate of the sunne, and although it be made fruitfull with the ouer∣flowings of the riuer Nilus, yet notwithstanding it hath needed raine, and doth neede. So Psal. 105. ver. 32. Dauid affirmeth, that in stead of raine, he gaue them haile, and flames of fire in their land. So then the Egyptians themselues, mortall enemies otherwise of true religion, shall at that time be conuerted vnto God. Thus also doth Isai prophesie of them, cap. 19. ver. 21. saying, And the Lord shall be knowne of the Egyptians, and the Egyptians shall know the Lord in that day, and doe sacrifice and oblation, and shall vow vowes vnto the Lord, and performe them. And truely so it came to passe: for Egypt after the passion of Christ seemeth first to haue publikely or openly professed religion, to haue had Christian Schooles, and Doctors, & Monkes: like as it first also generally and openly fell away from true religion afterward. Vers. 19. Or This shall be theSinne. Or punishment of Egypt, and theSinne. punish∣ment of all the nations that come not vp to keepe the feast of Ta∣bernacles. The conclusion of the former place contai∣ning 3. things.THe conclusion of the whole former threatning and shewing of punishment, the which hath three things to bee noted. First of all, that he calleth this ceasing or staying from the exercise of the outward worship of Cod, and from the keeping of the ceremonies ordained by God, Sinne. And doubtlesse it is sinne,1. The abstaining from the exer∣cise of true re∣ligion, called Sinne. not to do those thinges, which God for his worshipping requireth to bee done: whereof it commeth to passe, that punishment appeareth worthely to bee threatned vnto those, which shall neglect or forslowe those ceremonies of God in the Church of God. So then out of this place the Libertines of this our age are soundly refuted or ouerthrowne, who doe bring in, and allow the contempt or despising of the Sa∣craments ordained by Christ. The second thing is,2. All are com∣māded to wor∣ship God with one outward worship. that he com∣mandeth all, whether Egyptians, or other nations to worship God with the same and all one ceremonies and all one outward wor∣ship. For in as much as euen the lawfull outward worship of God
is also ordeined by God, it is not to be changed, and omitted or ouerpassed by any man. Furthermore, when as God cannot bee worshipped either outwardly or inwardly, but according vnto his word, surelie it is not lawfull for any man to ordeine an out∣ward worship of his owne head, and consequently according vn∣to the pleasure of his owne minde. But this is spoken of the out∣ward worship it selfe, and not of the comelines, and ceremonies, and ordinances necessarie for the mainteining and keeping of this outward comelines, the which among diuers nations may be diuers in the Church of God.3. The feast of Tabernacles onely mentio∣ned. The third is, for that here is espe∣cially mention made of the feast of Tabernacles, because this feast both was more solemnlie kept among the Iewes, then the feast of first fruites, of Whitsontide, and certaine others, Nehem. 8. and also was a most euident testimonie or witnes of the first gathering together of the people of Israel, that is, of a free ordeined church. Therefore it was better liked of the people, and a more eui∣dent signe of their vniting or knitting together within them∣selues, as is vnto vs the holy Supper of our Lord Iesus Christ. Vers 20. In that day shall there be written vpon the bridles of the horses, The holines vnto the Lord, and the pots in the Lords house shall be like the bowles before the altar. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer. promise from two ef∣fectes.AN amplification of the former promise of the conuersion of the Gentiles vnto the true God, taken from the effects, mani∣festly witnessing the great godlines of their mindes, and the effec∣tuall working of the Spirit of God among them. And in this place there are reckoned vp two effectes, the same outward, I grant, but yet shewing the inward godlines of the minde of these men vn∣to Godward.1. The inscription of the bridles of their Horses. The first, the bridles or the belles of their horses (for the hebrew word Metsilloth may be translated both waies) shall haue the selfe same thing written vpon them, the which some times was written vpon the Miter of the high priest, to wit, Holi∣nes vnto the Lord. This shall be an especiall outward witnes of this thing wholly consecrated, and acceptable and dedicated vnto God. Thus then shall all the godly, euen among the gentiles dis∣pose and order all things,What the fi∣gure Synecdo∣che is, see Amos cap. 5. ver. 21. and especially the things pertaining vn∣to houshold (as are horses, the furniture belonging vnto horses, and by the figure Synecdoche, all other things the which they shall vse both at home and abroade) that they may shew that they haue
consecrated them vnto GOD, may vse them holilie, and applie them vnto the glorie of God, and the witnessing of their wor∣ship and reuerence to Godward. And hereunto serueth the ex∣hortation of Paul 1. Cor. 10. ver. 31. Whether yee eate, or drinke, or whatsoeuer yee doe, doe all to the glorie of God. And that which hee hath 1. Tim 4. ver. 4. That euery creature of God is good, and no∣thing ought to be refused, if it be receiued with thankes giuing. And finallie hereunto appertaineth that which Iude saith in his epistle, ver. 23. Hating euen the garment, which is defiled with the touching of the flesh, so great holines and godlines doubtles shall there then be of the Church, both outward and inward. I omit or let passe in this place to speake of the fond interpretation of Theod. vpon this place, lib 1. Hist. cap. 18. Namely, that this prophesie was then fulfilled, when as Constantinus Magnus caused the bittes of his horse, and an helmet to be made for himselfe of the nayles of the Crosse of Christ, Ruff. lib. 1. Histor. cap. 8. Socrat. 1. cap. 1. affir∣meth the same. And this shall bee the effect of the Gentiles in things priuat, and such as otherwise are profane, or serue for com∣mon vses. But in publike matters, and also in matters Ecclesiasti∣call or appertaining vnto the Church, that is, in things dedicated vnto GOD, there shall be no lesse testimonie or witnes of their godlines, and of the effectuall working of the Spirit of God.2. The things of smallest holines among the Gentiles con∣uerted, shall be as holy as the holiest things in the Temple of Salomon. He therefore in this place sheweth also the second effect, to wit, what shall bee the holines in things dedicated peculiarlie vnto GOD, namely, that the things, which among the Gentiles conuerted shall haue the least degree of holines, shall notwithstanding bee as holy, as those things which in the Temple of Solomon had the highest degree of holines, or the next vnto the highest. And this doth the Prophet declare by a similitude taken from the ceremo∣nies, and things well knowne of that time. For the pottes, where∣in the flesh of the sacrifices was sodden in the house and Temple of God (and these haue the least degree of holines in the Tem∣ple, and are for the most part alwaies foule) shall bee as holy a∣mong the Gentiles, as the basons or bowles, which are before the Altar, to wit of Incense, couering the Shewbread. In a word, this is the meaning of God, the efficacie, force, and working of the holy Ghost shall be farre more plentifull through Christ in the Church of the Gospell gathered out of the Gentiles, then it was of olde, and in times past vnder the law. Whereof it com∣meth to passe, that Christ is called the mediator of a better or
more excellent Testament Hebr. 8. ver. 6. and Paul Ephe. 3. ver. 5 sheweth, first, That the mysterie of God was not opened vnto the sonnes of men, as it is now reueiled vnto his holy Apostles, and Pro∣phets by the Spirit. And hereof it commeth also to passe, that the graces of God are said to be by him more largely poured out, and more liberallie giuen vnto men, then vnder the olde Testament. Acts. 2. Ioel. 2. And hereof also speaketh God by his Prophet Isai, cap 44. ver. 3.4. saying: I will powre water vpon the thirstie, and floodes vpon the dry ground: I will powre my Spirit vpon thy seed, and my blessing vpon thy buddes, and they shall growe as among the grasse, and as the willowes by the riuers of waters. Vers. 21. Yea, euery Pot in Ierusalem and Iudah shal be holy vnto the Lord of hostes, and all they that sacrifice, shall come and take of them, and seethe therein: and in that day there shall be no more the Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hostes. Two other ef∣fectes ofh this grace of God.TWo other effectes of the said grace of God toward his Church gathered together by the Gospell (for this both promise, and also the effectes of this promise do without all question apper∣taine vnto Christ,1. All the Pots in Iudah and Ie∣rusalem shall be holy vnto God. and vnto his kingdome.) The first (the which in like manner is declared by a comparison of ceremonies and things at that time vsed) to wit, that al the Pottes the which shall be in Iudah and in Ierusalem, shall be holy vnto God: yea and that so holy, that the flesh of the Sacrifices may as well be sod in them, as in the Pots dedicated vnto the Temple. For the Pots of all the godly shall be holy vnto God: this therefore is the meaning, the holinesse,The meaning hereof. the which is now seene, and is peculiar in things dedi∣cated vnto the Temple of God, the same shall then be in all the houses of the godly, and in their furniture, and vessell: for al things which are in the familie of the holy, are themselues also holy. Wherefore God shall then euery where be worshipped so holily, as he is now in his Temple. Iohn, 4. And so Paul willeth 1. Tim. 2. ver. 8, That men pray euery where, lifting vp pure hands vnto God. He shall as godly be worshipped of euery faithfull person in his owne house; as he was of olde, and in times past in his house and Temple by the Iewes. And this is one effect of that same grace of God, the which by Christ shal be bestowed vpon his Church, the which also dooth shew her full deliuerance that shall be from the ceremonies of the Law, when as the same holinesse of the
Temple shall be spread ouer all places: this freedome from the ceremonies of the Law, Paul witnesseth that the Galathians were called vnto, Galat. 5. ver. 13. and biddeth them take heed, That they vse not this libertie as an occasion vnto the flesh, but that they serue one an other by loue. The second effect is,2. There shall be no Canaanite in the house of the Lord. There shall no Ca∣naanite be any more, or any vngodly person in the House of the Lord, that is, in the church. This promise pertaineth to the state of the Church, which shall be in heauen onely, for so long as here vpon earth there shall be a Church of God: it shall alwaies haue the e∣uil mixed among the good, that we should not in vaine after the maner of the Donatistes, Circumcellians, and Anabaptistes, He∣retikes, seeke a Church altogether pure and free from spots and faultes in this earth. For Christ, Mat. 13. ver. 28, and so forth, by the parable of the tares sowen among the good corne teacheth, that in this life the bad shall alwaies be mingled among the good. Wherefore the word Canaanite in this place is not vsed for a Mer∣chant, but for an vngodly man,What the si∣gure Metalep∣sis is, see Oseas cap. 4. ver. 18. by the figure Metalepsis (the person for the qualitie of the person) such as the Canaanites are euery where in the holy Scripture said to haue beene. So then these things do shew, what maner of Church both in this earth, and also in the heauens, the Church of God shal be, alwaies blessed of God, by and through his onely begotten sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, Amen. FINIS.
The Commentary of Lambertus Da∣naeus, vpon the Prophet Malachias. The Argument. Malachias the last of all the Prophets.THe last of the Prophets, whose wrytings, and prophesies are extant or remaining among vs, was Malachias: albeit some Psalmes seeme to haue been written after the times, wherein he liued, namely when as the Church of God was miserably af∣flicted or troubled by Antiochus Epipha∣nes, and his Successors, as is the Psalme 79, and many others. Now this Prophet seemeth to haue liued vnder Nehemias,In what time this Prophet liued, and Pro∣phesied. being now an olde man, when as the priestes neglected or for slowed their dutie, the peo∣ple gaue them no maintenance, and finally when as all things were wonderfully out of order in the obseruation of the worship of God,The shortnes of this Author vpon this Pro∣phet, may be supplyed by the larger commē¦taries of mai∣ster Gilbee, vpon the same Prophet. the ceremonies of the law, and the executing of the Priestes office, as is gathered out of Nehemias, cap. 10. & 13. Wherefore if the second chapter of this Prophet, ver. 13. be compared with Esd. 10. and Nehem. 10. and cap 13. that which I haue said will appeare, namely that Malachias began to prophesie about the latter end of Nehemias CAP. 1. Vers. 1. The burden of the word of the Lord to Israel, by the mini∣sterie of Malachi. The confirma∣tion of the cal∣ling of the Pro∣phet.THis whole chapter is one Sermon, wherein the contemning or neglecting and forslowing of the worship of God, and the great couetousnesse and niggardlinesse of the people, in giuing and paying things necessarie for that worship is most sharplie re∣prehended, or reproued, and found fault withall. He sheweth
that the summe of his doctrine is threatnings of God, confirming briefely, and first of all his calling. Vers. 2. I haue loued you, sayth the Lord: Yet ye say, wherein hast thou loued vs? was not Esau Iaacobs brother, sayth the Lord? yet I loued Iaacob. The principall point of this prophesie.THe generall proposition, or principall point, wherein is con∣temed the summe of al the benefits of God toward the Iewes, the which consisteth herein, for that God of his meere or onelie goodnesse hath loued them before other nations, yea before the nation of the Idumaeans, the which notwithstanding was not on∣ly of the lawfull seed of Abraham, but came also of the same fa∣milie of Isaac, and moreouer by the right and priuiledge of na∣ture seemed to be the better, and to be to be preferred before the Iewes. And the Prophet bringeth in the people as it were mur∣muring and answering againe against God, that the stubbornnes of that age may seeme to haue been most peeuish and dogged a∣gainst God, whereunto notwithstanding ours is verie like. Vers. 3. And I hated Esau, and made his mountaines wast, and his heritage a wildernes for dragons. A confirmatiō of the prefer∣ring of the Iewes before the Idumeans, taken from the vnequalitie of their estates vnder the Ba∣bylonians.HE confirmeth the selfesame which he said before of the prefer∣ring of the Iewes before the Idumeans. First from the dislike and vnequall falling out of the calamity or misery and captiuitie, the which fell out vnto them both vnder their common enemies the Babylonians. The vnequalitie appeared herein, for that the Countrie of the Idumeans; and nation was by the Babylonians brought vnto exceeding great wastnes, and desolation or destru∣ction: but the Iewes at that time liued and dwelled in safetie in their owne homes, and in a most fruitfull countrie. Vers. 4. Though Edom say, we are impouerished, but we will re∣turne, and build the desolate places: yet saith the Lord of hostes, they shall build, but I will destroy it, and they shall call them, the border of wickednes, and the people, with whom the Lord is an∣grie for euer. An amplifica∣tion of this be∣nefit bestowed vpon the Iewes.HE amplifieth, or increaseth the benefit by God bestowed vpon the Iewes, by the state of the miserable condition of the Idu∣means,
the which he sheweth shall be continuall or lasting and in∣during, whatsoeuer they attempt or assay to the contrarie. The which no doubt was a great testimonie or witnes of the hatred of God against the Idumeans. Vers. 5. And your eyes shall see it, and ye shall say, The Lord will bee magnified vpon the border of Israel. The second to∣ken of the loue of God toward the Iewes.THe second argument or token of his goodnesse or loue toward the Iewes doth God here alleage: in the which selfe same there is also a great comfort of them, namely, that they in the end and at the last should see the glorie of their owne God, that is, of the true God spread abroad euen vpon all forraine nations also. And this was fulfilled by the preaching of the Gospell, and the conuersion of the Gentiles vnto Christ. Vers. 6. A sonne honoreth his father, and a seruant his master. If then I be a father, where is mine honor? And if I be a master, where is my feare, sayth the Lord of hostes vnto you, O Priests that despise my name? and ye say, Wherein haue we despised thy name? The vnthank∣fulnes of the Iewes matched against the kindnes of God.A Matching together of contraries. For against those his bene∣fits towards the Iewes, he setteth and matcheth their great in∣gratitude or vnthankfulnes, as who namely did neither acknow∣ledge nor worship God for Father, nor Master. And first of all he setteth vpon the Priests themselues, who ought to shine before the rest of the people as an example of godlines, and who also when as they were admonished, or put in mind of their dutie, yet they stub∣bornly chummered and answered againe. Vers. 7. Ye offer vncleane bread vpon mine altar, and you say, wherein haue we polluted thee? In that ye say, The table of the Lord is not to be regarded. The Iewes foūd faultie in the contemning of God his wor∣ship.GOd doth conuince or proue the Iewes in fault by one kinde of his worship or seruice most manifestly contemned or despised, and of their open blasphemie also against his very altar. For when as the Iewes beheld that same altar of the second temple to be lesse outwardly garnished then the altar of the first Temple, they also supposed the same altar to be lesse holie then the former: and iud∣ged
the things that were offered thereupon vnto God, to be in like maner lesse holie and acceptable vnto God, the which is a blasphe∣mous cogitation or surmise of God, as if God did measure holines by these outward things. Vers. 8. And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, it is not euill: and if ye offer the lame, and sicke, it is not euill: offer it now vnto thy prince: will he be content with thee, or accept thy person, sayth the Lord of hostes? The Iewes pro∣ued guiltie and vnthankefull by an example of offering of things forbid∣den, and also by a reason from the lesser vnto the greater.GOd proueth the sayd Iewes to be guiltie, and sheweth them to be vnthankfull by an example and rehearsall of things offered against the law, as it is to bee seene, Deut. 15. ver. 21. where speaking of sacrifices to be offered, he sayth, If there be any blemish therein, as if it be lame, or blind, or haue any euill fault, thou shalt not offer it vn∣to the Lord thy God. Also Leuit. 22. ver. 22. Blinde, or broken, or mai∣med, or hauing a wenne, or skiruie, or scabbed: these shall ye not offer vnto the Lord, nor make an offring by fire of these vpon the altar of the Lord. Againe, the Lord here reproueth them by an argument or reason taken from the lesse vnto the greater, as for example thus: An earthly Prince will not take these things well in worth, much lesse therefore will God accept or like them at your hand. Vers. 9. And now, I pray you, pray before God, that he may haue mer∣cie vpon vs: this hath bin by your meanes: will he regard your per∣sons, sayth the Lord of hosts? A remedie for this their so great fault.YEt he sheweth that there is a remedie remaining and left for this their so great a fault. And this forsooth is their humble prayer vnto God. For albeit these faults bee committed by them, yet is the mercie of God readie for all them that earnestly pray vn∣to God. And this kinde of speaking being as it were vnioynted, and not knit together with copulatiue coniunctions, and sharpe∣ned with often interrogations or asking of questions, as it were with woundings and many pricks of conscience to rouse vp and waken such as are dull and sluggish, carrieth a very great weight and force with it.
Vers. 10. Who is there euen among you, that would shut the doores, and kindle not fire on mine altar in vaine? I haue no pleasure in you, sayth the Lord of hostes, neither will I accept an offring at your hands. An amplifica∣tiō of the fault of the Priests by the reward promised for their seruice.AN amplification of the sayd fault of the Priestes, by a reward promised vnto the Priests. For the Prophet sheweth, that the anger of God is so much the more iust against them, for that none of them would doe seruice in the Temple and worship of God for nothing, no not those which were but the bare keepers of the doores of the Temple, as it is also Psal. 84. much lesse the Priestes themselues, the which were by God placed in an higher place in the Temple, and ordained to offer and to make sacrifices vnto GOD himselfe: the which was the most honorable degree in the whole ministerie of the Leuites, and next vnto God. For the rest of the or∣ders of the Leuites did seruices vnto the Priests, and sacrifices. Vers. 11. For from the rising of the Sunne vnto the going downe of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in euery place incense shall be offered vnto my name, and a pure offering: for my name is great among the heathen, sayth the Lord of hostes. The second am∣plification of the fault of the Priests.THe second amplification of the sayd fault of the Priests, taken from the maiestie of the name of God, the which, God by the repeating of the promise doth more earnestly confirme, that it shal bee reuerenced among all the Gentiles, that is, holilie worshipped. And this thing pertaineth vnto the kingdome of Christ, and was at the last fulfilled by the preaching of the Gospell. Vers. 12. But ye haue polluted it, in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted, and the fruite thereof, euen his meate, is not to bee re∣garded. Vers. 13. Ye sayd also, Behold, it is a wearines, and ye haue snuffed at it, sayth the Lord of hostes: and ye offered that which was torne, & the lame, and the sicke: thus ye offered an offering: should I accept this at your hand, sayth the Lord? BY the way of graunting and yeelding so much vnto them the Lord confesseth, That the labour and paines indeed of the priests
doing sacrifice, and slaying offrings,The Priests ra∣ther sought their owne gaine then the glorie of God in offring of sa∣crifices vnto him. is great (in so much that they sweate and toyle, and wearie themselues thereabout:) but he teach∣eth the same to bee about a matter of nothing, and wherein they displease God: nay whereby they rather manifestly shewe foorth the contempt or despising of his worship, then his true seruice and worship indeed: because that these Priests and offerers of sacrifice in as much as they were couetous, serued themselues, & not God. Vers. 14. But cursed be the deceiuer, that hath in his flocke a male, and voweth, and sacrificeth vnto the Lord a corrupt thing: for I am a great king, sayth the Lord of hostes, and my name is terrible among the heathen. God his iudge∣ment threat∣ned vnto all those that deale deceitfully in his worship & seruice.A Generall conclusion, the which threatneth the iudgement of God against all those which mocke God, either openly, or by some subtiltie, or which by any meanes deale falsely, deceitfully, & corruptly in the seruice and worship of God. For God (who also is terrible or fearefull euen among the heathen themselues) will not suffer them to escape vnpunished, when as they make a mocking stocke of him, and yet in the meane season notwithstanding with full mouthes giue out and boast, that they are his people. CAP. 2. This chapter hath two Ser∣mons, one a∣gainst the Priests, & the other against the people.THis chapter hath two Sermons, of the which the first is directed peculiarly against the Priests, as the lights and examples of the whole people, and it lasteth vnto the tenth verse. The second is a∣gainst the rest of the whole people, who themselues also were most grieuously infected with other their both generall and also peculiar vices. Vers. 1. And now, O ye Priests, this commandement is for you. Vers. 2. If ye will not heare it, nor consider it in your heart, to giue glorie vnto my name, sayth the Lord of hostes, I will euen sende a curse vpon you, and will curse your blessings: yea I haue cursed them alreadie, because you doe not consider it in your heart. IN the chapter before going he particularly and specially repre∣hended or reproued the Priests for the neglecting of the sacrifi∣ces.
Now in this chapter he generally exhorteth them vnto the di∣ligent doing and performing of the other parts of their office and duetie,The Pristes ex∣horted vnto the doing of the other parts of their dutie. setting downe the menacing and threatning of most grie∣uous punishments. Vers. 3. Behold, I will corrupt your seede, and cast dung vpon your faces, euen the dung of your solemne feasts, and you shall bee like vnto it. Punishments concerning the contempt of their publike office, and also the priuate o∣uerthrow of their families.THese punishments partly respect or concerne the despising and contemning of their publike office, and partly the priuat ouer∣throwing of their families, the which in the ende shall ouertake them continuing and going on in the neglecting or forslowing of the worship and seruice of God. Vers. 4. And ye shall know, that I haue sent this commandement vnto you, that my couenant, which I made with Leui, might stand, sayth the Lord of hostes. An amplifica∣tion of the e∣quitie of God his threatnings against them.GOd sheweth and amplifieth the equitie of his threatnings a∣gainst them, both by the equitie and profitablenes of his league and couenant with them, and also by his peculiar benefite toward that one tribe of Leui, the which he chose out of all the tribes of Is∣rael to doe his sacrifices, 1. Sam. 2. Vers. 5. My couenant was with him of life and peace, and I gaue him feare, and he feared me, and was afrayd before my name. He reproueth them by the ex∣ample of the godlines of their father Leui.AN earnest reprouing of them by the example of the godlines of their fathers, the which they had at home & in their owne families of whence they came, to folow, and the which also obtei∣ned great rewardes of God for the keeping of his couenant. See Leuit. 8. and 1. Sam. 2. and the which godlinesse of their fathers, and faithfulnesse in the doing of the seruice and worship of God these had no care nor keepe to imitate or follow.
Vers. 6. The law of trueth was in his mouth, and there was no iniquitie found in his lippes: he walked with me in peace and e∣quitie, and did turne many away from iniquitie. A declaratiō of the couenant made with the house of Aaron.A Declaration of the couenant made with the house of Aaron, nay with the whole tribe of Leui, and of the obseruation or the keeping of the same, the which he teacheth to haue consisted herein, that the puritie and soundnes of the heauenly doctrine might purely be taught by them, & also by the said Leuites might be applyed particularly vnto euery one of the godly for the vse and correction of manners. The dutie of the Pastors or mini∣sters of the gospell is the same at this day, as Paul teacheth 2. Tim. 3. ver. 16. where he sheweth, that the whole scripture giuen of God by inspiration, is profitable to teach, to improue, to correct, and to instruct in righteousnes, that the man of God may be absolute, being made per∣fect vnto all good workes. Vers. 7. For the priestes lippes should preserue knowledge, and they should seeke the law at his mouth: for he is the messenger of the Lord of hostes. Wherein the office of the Priestes and Leuites did e∣specially con∣sist.AN ascending or going vpward, in the which the prophet go∣ing vp from the particular vnto the general, sheweth general∣lie that the office both of the Priestes, and also of the Leuites, did chiefly consist in this one poynt, that they shuld teach vnto others the true vnderstanding of the law of God, the which they them∣selues had truely learned before, because that they were peculiarly ordeined vnto this office by God. The selfe same is to be applyed vnto the ministers of the Gospell. For among other the partes of a true minister Paul wryting vnto Titus, cap 1. ver. 9. sayth, that he should hold fast the faithfull word according to doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with wholsome doctrine, and improue them that say against it. Vers. 8. But ye are gone out of the way: ye haue caused many to fall by the law: ye haue broken the couenant of Leui, sayth the Lord of hostes. The diligence of their forefa∣thers in doing of their duetie, matched with the negligence of these men.BY the way of matching together of contraries he compareth the negligence of the Leuites of his time, both with the dili∣gence
and godlines of their forefathers, and also with the former description of their office, that they might the more bee conuinced or proued faultie of negligence, and of their manifest contemning of the worship and seruice of God, by both these comparisons. Vers 9. Therefore haue I also made you to be despised, and vile be∣fore all the people, because ye kept not my wayes, but haue been par∣tial in the law. The conclusion of this first ser∣mon, shewing that they are worthely to be punished by God.THe conclusion, wherein he teacheth that they are worthilie to bee plagued with great punishments by God. And chiefly for that they bowed and bent that law of God, whereof they were or∣dained keepers by God, vnto the pleasure and fauour of men, in so much that they applied the word of God vnto that which liked men. And thus they became, and were the seruants of men, & not the seruants of God. And such times, 2. Tim. 4. ver. 3. Paul teacheth should come, When they should not suffer wholsome doctrine, but ha∣uing their eares itching, shall after their owne lusts get them an heape of teachers. But such as applie their doctrine vnto the humours of men, cannot please God, accordingly whereunto Paul speaketh, Galath. 1. ver. 10. For now preach I mans doctrine, or Gods? or goe I a∣bout to please men? for if I should yet please men, I were not the seruant of Christ. And this is the first Sermon of this chapter. Vers. 10. Haue we not alone father? hath not one God made vs? why doe we transgresse euery one against his brother, and breake the co∣uenant of our fathers? The second ser∣mon, prouing the whole peo∣ple guiltie of many grieuous crimes.THe second Sermon, in the which the whole people themselues are proued guiltie of many crimes, but especially of these foure, that is, of Couetousnes, of defiling themselues with the Heathē, of Polygamy, or hauing of more wiues thē one at one time, & of ma∣nifest or open & heathnish vngodlines against God. And when as the Prophet reproueth their couetousnes and deceit,1. Couetousnes. he sheweth the same vtterly to fight and bee against both that same common band (the which is betweene all men) and also against that more neere friendship & straite familiaritie the which was among them∣selues, because of the one or common originall or first beginning of this whole nation, springing and comming from their father Is∣rael or Iacob.
Vers. 11. Iudah hath transgressed, and an abomination is committed in Israel, and in Ierusalem: for Iudah hath defiled the holines of the Lord, which he loued, and hath married the daughters of a strange god. 2. Their defiling themselues with other wicked nationsTHe second very detestable and abominable crime of theirs, to wit, their mixing and defiling of themselues with others & pro∣phane or wicked nations. For God his chiefe desire was to haue this people holy vnto himselfe, and to be separated or seuered from other nations: but they notwithstanding defiled themselues with the vices and idolatrie of infidels, made marriages with them, the which by the law of God were forbidden. For among other dea∣lings the which it was vnlawfull for them to haue with these na∣tions, God sayth vnto them, Deut. 7. ver. 3. Neither shalt thou make marriages with them, neither giue thy daughter vnto his sonne, nor take his daughter vnto thy sonne. This place therefore fully agreeth and iumpeth with that of Nehe. cap. 13. and of Esd. cap. 10. Where∣by appeareth, at what time this Prophet liued, and prophesied. Vers. 12. The Lord will cut off the man that doth this: both the ma∣ster and the seruant out of the Tabernacle of Iaacob, and him that offereth an offring vnto the Lord of hostes. Al sorts of men guiltie of this defilement.HEre he sheweth that all sorts of men, namely, Magistrates, Sub∣iects, yea and moreouer the Priests themselues were guiltie of this pollution or defilement, and reproueth them all: and so conse∣quently God denounceth and threatneth vtter destruction against them all, without any regard of their persons, or dignitie. See Esdr. cap. 10. as I haue sayd, and Nehem. cap. 13. Vers. 13. And this haue ye done againe, and couered the altar of the Lord with teares, with weeping, and with mourning: because the offring is no more regarded, neither receiued acceptablie at your hands. Their continu∣ance in this sin.HE increaseth their disobedience, for that they continued in this wickednesse, when as notwithstanding they themselues had now twise openly in the Temple acknowledged this their lewdnes and sinne, and confessed that themselues and their sacrifices were
not accepted or regard of God. The first acknowledgement of this sinne is extant or to be seene, Esdr. cap. 10. The second, Nehem. cap. 10. ver. 30. where among other poynts of the couenant, that they sealed vnto, this was one, That they would not giue their daughters to the people of the land, neither take their daughters for their sonnes. And cap. 13. ver. 25. where Nehemias taketh an oth of them for the performance hereof. Out of this place appeareth, as I haue sayd, at what time this Prophet prophesied, to wit, in the last age of Ne∣hemias. Vers. 14. Yet ye say, Wherein? Because the Lord hath been witnes be∣tween thee & the wife of thy youth, against whom thou hast trans∣gressed: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy couenant. 3. Their Polyga∣mie, or hauing more wiues thē one at one timeWIth a gentle transition or passing from one kinde of marriage forbidden, he falleth into another, namely, into Polygamie, or their hauing of more wiues then one at one time, the which third crime of theirs God reproueth in this people. But against this ac∣cusation this people answered againe, pretending or alleaging the example of Iaacob, of Dauid, and of others, who had many wiues at one time. But al these examples doth God confute or ouerthrow, by the first institution or ordaining of marriage. Further, he shew∣eth the treacherie and crueltie of these men hauing many wiues, against their sayd wiues, the which was not in Iaacob, and Dauid, and by which their crueltie euen against their wiues, they proue that nothing can make them more courteous and gentle. Their treacherie God improueth, for that these doe violate or breake that same holie couenant and band of marriage, and the which he him∣selfe had ordained at the first: their crueltie, for that, forgetting their now accustomed and first & tender loue with their first wife, they tooke a new wife ouer and aboue, the which is a very great vnkind, and vnnaturall part. Vers. 15. And did not he make one? yet had he abundance of Spirit: and wherefore one? because he sought a godly seede. Therefore keepe your selues in your spirit, and let none trespasse against the wife of his youth. The true na∣ture of mari∣age.WIth a necessarie interpretation he maketh plaine the true na∣ture of marriage by the true end thereof, the which he descri∣beth
or setteth forth, by the first ordaining therof, which was made by God. For God the first author of marriage, being most wise and most mightie ioyned one only vnto one, and not many, that by this meanes both a lawfull issue, and such as is acceptable vnto GOD, might be sought for by men. In the which institution or ordinance the Prophet teacheth that wee ought to tarrie and continue. See Paul 1. Cor 7. ver. 2. and 7. who runneth vnto the first institution of marriage, to shewe the nature and force thereof. Vers. 16. If thou hatest her, put her away, sayth the Lord God of Is∣rael, yet he couereth the iniurie vnder his garment, saith the Lord of hostes: therefore keepe your selues in your spirit, and trans∣gresse not. The answering of an obiection, the which was but a toleratiō for that time and people for the hardnes of their hearts, as Christ expoun∣deth it, Mat. 19THe answering of an obiection, by the which al refuge and helpe of excuse is taken away from them, and their fault is increased, both for that there was a remedie giuen vnto them against the griefes and wearines of the former marriage, namely, Diuorcemēt, the which they refused to vse, and neglected or cared not for the same. Deut. 24. and also for that they nourished in the middest of their bosome this shamefulnes and multitude and number of ma∣ny wiues, and increased the same, without any punishment for it: nay, tolerated or bare with the same, with the manifest contempt or despising of true and lawfull marriage. Vers. 17. Ye haue wearied the Lord with your words: yet ye say, Wher∣in haue we wearied him? When ye say, Euery one that doth euill is good in the sight of the Lord, and he deliteth in them. Or, where is the God of iudgement? 4. Their mala∣pertnes or sau∣cines against God himselfe.THe fourth crime, to wit, a general, and prophane or heathenish vngodlines and malapertnes of these men against God, where∣vnto they fell at the last by little and little from and by the accusto∣ming themselues vnto the former vices. And this their wickednes is described or set foorth to bee so great, as there cannot be greater. For with manifest or open scoffes and reprochfull taunting wordes and speeches very prophane or heathen like and lewd, they did spoyle and robbe God both of his holines, and also of his iustice and truth, the which is more then heathenish, and most notorious and vile wickednes, and vngodlines.
CAP. 3. Vers. 1. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seeke, shall speedilie come to his Temple: euen the messenger of the couenant, whom ye desire: be∣hold, he shall come, sayth the Lord of hostes. Two parts of this chapter.THis whole chapter containeth but one only Sermon, the which hath two parts. The first part opposeth, or setteth and matcheth the infinite goodnes of God,1. Setteth the goodnes of God against the wickednes of the Iewes. against the former vices and sinnes a∣gainst him, through which his goodnesse he promiseth that the Christ, and Messias looked for shall come, and that shortly, which Christ shall restore, renue and purge the whole state of his Church. Whereby the mercie and trueth of GOD appeareth toward his Church. For as Paul speaketh, 2. Tim. cap. 2. ver. 13. If we beleeue not, yet he abideth faithfull: he cannot denie himselfe. This part con∣tinueth vnto the 6. verse. The second part, the better to shew this selfe same infinite or endles mercie of God,2. The long pa∣tience of God toward them. describeth or setteth forth his long patience and sufferance, in bearing with the rebel∣liousnes of this people, & mouing and stirring thē vnto repentance. A promise of the Messias to come, contai∣ning the histo∣rie of things to come, and a cō∣mendation of the sayd Mes∣sias.This first verse is a repeated promise, and therefore most assured and certaine, of the comming of the Messias, being euen now pre∣sent and hard at hand, wherein is contained both the historie of things to come, and also a diligent commendation of the Messias himselfe. The historie, for that there is shewed whom the Lord would send next before the comming of his Messias, to wit, Iohn the Baptist: and that indeed was done, both that the comming of so great a Prince might bee the better noted and marked, and also that he might be the more honorably receiued.  The commenda∣tion of the Messias is,  in that the Prophet calleth him both looked for, and also the Messias, and the Lord, and the Angel of the coue∣nant, and sheweth that he shal haue the highest and chiefest autho∣ritie to restore the Temple, and worship of God. Vers. 2. But who may abide the day of his comming? and who shal en∣dure, when he appeareth? for he is like a purging fire, and like ful∣lers sope. An amplifica∣tion of the mi∣nisterie of the Messias.HE amplifieth the ministerie or office of the Messias to come, by the hardnes of the worke, the which he shall performe. And
this hardnes of the worke shall arise hereupon, namely, of the most corrupt maners of all sorts of men at that time, whom he commeth to amend, and to denounce or shewe the iudgements of God. And therefore he shall be to be feared. For, as it is Matth. 3. ver. 12. He shall come with his fanne in his hand, and will make cleane his floore, & gather his wheate into his garner, but will burne vp the chaffe with vn∣quenchable fire. Vers. 3. And he shall sit downe to trie and fine the siluer: he shall euen fine the sonnes of Leui, and purifie them, as gold and siluer, that they may bring offrings vnto the Lord in righteousnes. A seuerall set∣ting downe the parts of the office of the Messias.HE seuerally setteth downe the parts and benefites of the office of the Messias. First, that he shall purge both the Leuites them∣selues from their sins, and the worship of God from the blemishes that were added vnto it, and restore it vnto the former beautie and brightnes, and that with authoritie aboue the other Prophets. So Mark. 1. ver. 22. it is reported of him, that they were astonied at his doctrine: for he taught them as one that had authoritie, and not as the Scribes. And Ioh. 2. ver. 15. Iohn beareth record of him, that he was more excellent then he. And Matth. 21. ver. 12. it is sayd of Christ, that he went into the Temple of God, and cast out all them that solde and bought in the Temple, and ouerthrew the tables of the mony changers, and the seates of them that sold doues. Vers. 4. Then shall the offrings of Iudah and Ierusalem bee accepta∣ble vnto the Lord, as in old time, and in the yeares afore. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefit.HE amplifieth this benefit by a singular effect thereof, that is, by another benefit, which shall followe thereof, namely, that then the sacrifices and offrings of the whole people shall be as accepta∣ble and sweet, as they were at any time before. Vers. 5. And I will come neere vnto you to iudgement, and I will bee a swift witnes against the Soothsayers, and against the adulterers, and against false swearers, and against those that wrongfully keepe backe the hirelings wages, and vexe the widowe, and the fatherles, and oppresse the stranger, and feare not me, saith the Lord of hosts. The second part of the of∣fice of Christ.THe second part of the ministerie or office of Christ, appertai∣neth to the reprouing and condemning of the euill maners of
men, and all vices, although here bee made a reckoning vp but of a few onely for example sake. And he teacheth that the Messias will doe this in a fewe yeares. For Christ executed that his office in the middest of a weeke of yeares onely, that is, in three yeares and an halfe, Dan. 9. Further, the Prophet sheweth, that the Messias, when as he shal correct the wicked maners and vices of men, shall do the same by the force and power of heauenly doctrine (the which he shall teach:) and the testimonie or witnesse of the conscience of those whom he shall reproue, rather condemning them, then by a∣ny reall vengeance or punishment, or penaltie of monie, which he should lay vpon them. So it appeareth, Iohn 9. Vers. 6. For I am the Lord: I change not, and ye sonnes of Iaacob are not consumed. The second part of this ser∣mon commen∣ding the mercy of God toward the Iewes.THe second part of this Sermon, wherein Malachias commen∣deth the great mercie of God toward the Iewes by his long sufferance and patience, for as much as they long sithence had de∣serued vtter destruction for their sinnes, and yet God saued & pre∣serued them. And of this his benefite toward them, God teacheth that there was but one only cause, to wit, his trueth and faithfulnes in his promises. Vers. 7. From the dayes of your fathers, ye are gone away from mine ordinances, and haue not kept them: returne vnto me, and I will returne vnto you, sayth the Lord of hostes: but ye sayd, Wherein shall we returne? God commen∣deth his owne mercie, & con∣demneth the rebelliousnes of the Iewes.BY the matching by the way of contraries, of the long and conti∣nuall stubbornnes and disobediēce of this people, with his good will euen now prepared and offered vnto them, God commendeth both his mercie, and also increaseth the rebelliousnes of the Iewes, whose peeuishnes also he liuely painteth forth by their impudent or shameles chummering and muttering againe. Vers. 8. Will a man spoyle hisOr God. gods? yet haue ye spoyled me: but ye say: Wherein haue we spoyled thee? In tithes and offrings. God proueth the wickednes of the Iewes to be vnexcusableGOd pleading with the Iewes as it were with equall law, proueth their wickednes and lewdnes to be vnexcusable, because that
they did sacrilegiously or theeuishly retaine and keepe backe vnto themselues through notorious couetousnes and despising of the maiestie of God, the very selfe same things, the which he had ordai∣ned, and commanded to bee payd vnto his worship and seruice. The which thing how wicked it is, he sheweth by a reasō of a God, and Lord, also by the dutie of a man that is a seruant, and by the comparing of them both together. Vers. 9. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye haue spoyled me, euen this whole nation. The wrath of God most iust against this people.HE sheweth the wrath and anger of God to be most iust against them for this wickednesse. For not only one or two of them did this, but the whole nation making a certaine conspiracie within themselues against God, that they might vtterly cast him downe from his dignitie and right. Vers. 10. Bring ye all the tithes into the store house, that there may be meate in mine house, and proue me now herewith, sayth the Lord of hostes, if I will not open the windowes of heauen vnto you, and powre you out a blessing without measure. A remedie a∣gainst the for∣mer threat∣nings.HE setteth downe a remedie against the former threatnings, namely, their repentance, and the maner of this repentance, to wit, that they offer willingly and readily those things, which God hath commanded to bee offered for his seruice and ministerie. The which thing that they may doe the more cheerefully, he promiseth a great blessing from heauen it selfe, and an endles powring out of all good things vpon them. Vers. 11. And I will rebuke the deuourer for your sakes, and he shall not destroy the fruite of your ground, neither shall your vine be bar∣ren in the field, sayth the Lord of hostes. An amplifica∣tion of their happines.HE amplifieth this their happines to come, for that it shal not on∣lie be exceeding great, but also most safe against all hurts and damages likely to insue: namely, God himselfe with holding and driuing them away, that they may obey God with a more willing and readie minde, and thinke the better vpon the greatnes of this promise.
Vers. 12. And all nations shall call you blessed: for ye shall be a plea∣sant land, sayth the Lord of hostes. An other am∣plification of the sayd bene∣fit.THe sayd benefit of God is againe amplified, both by the publike testimonie of all nations concerning the same felicitie or hap∣pines of the Iewes, and their desire to inioy the like: and also by the comparing and chaunging of their former most miserable estate, with this second manifestly most happie estate that shall be by this meanes. Vers. 13. Your words haue been stout against me, sayth the Lord: yet ye say, What haue we spoken against thee? Vers. 14. Ye haue sayd, It is in vaine to serue God: and what profit is it that we haue kept his commandement, and that we walked hum∣blie before the Lord of hostes. Their second crime and no∣torious blas∣phemie.THeir second crime and fault defended and denied by them with the same impudencie or shamelesnes of minde, and publike stubbornnes, that the former was. And this is their notorious vn∣godlines and blasphemie, wherewith they did reproue God of a most shamefull lye, to wit, as if oftentimes he had not performed his promises made vnto those that are his, of the which number with full mouthes they boasted themselues to be. Vers. 15. Therefore we count the proude blessed: euen they that worke wickednes, are set vp, and they that tempt God, you, they are deli∣uered. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer wickednes.THe first amplification of this last former wickednes and stub∣bornnes, for that the Iewes sayd that they had proued indeede that God was a lyar. For that he was more gentle and liberall vnto those that did despise him, then vnto those that did serue and wor∣ship him. Vers. 16. Then spake they that feared the Lord euery one vnto his neighbour, and the Lord hearkened and heard it: and a booke of remembrance was written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought vpon his name. A second am∣plification of the former vn∣godlines.SEcondly he amplifieth the former wickednes, for that this vn∣godlines was so great, and so publike, that it was not lawfull for
godlie men in a maner once to whisper or mutter against it, the which in the meane season notwithstanding GOD himselfe did heare. This false accusation therefore against himselfe doth God confute or ouerthrowe, first threatning that it shall not bee vnpu∣nished, for that he auoucheth that it is in such sort written before him, that neither he, nor any of his Saints can euer forget it, but that they must punish it, or desire to haue it punished. Vers. 17. And they shall be to me sayth the Lord of hostes, in that day that I shall doe this, for a flocke, and I will spare them as a man spareth his owne sonne that serueth him. The blaspemie of the vngodly refuted by the difference that shall be be∣tween them and the godly.AGaine God refuteth or ouerthroweth the said blaspemie a∣gainst himselfe by that difference, the which shall most mani∣festly appeare then betweene the godly, and the vngodly: also betweene them that worship God, and them that despise him, when as God shall execute his Iudgements. For those godly ones shall be free from the punishments of the others, that is, of the vngodly, for that God shal then acknowledge them for his owne, as namely who haue serued God, as their father. Wherefore it is most meet that they should be seuered from the vngodly, as it shall also come to passe at the same time. Vers. 18. Then shall you returne, and discerne between the righte∣ous and the wicked, betweene him that serueth God, and him that serueth him not. The Iewes re∣futed by their owne testimo∣nie or witnes.FInally (wherein is both the fruite and also the conclusion of the former reprehension) he ouerthroweth the same Iewes by the very testimony or witnes of themselues: if so be that they will themselues also feele and receiue the blessings by God prepared for the godly. And they shall tast of them, if they turne them∣selues vnto God by true repentance of mind, and do now begin to worship him. Therefore in this end of this sermon there is an exhortation vnto earnest repentance of mind.
CAP. 4. Vers. 1. For behold, the day commeth that shall burne as an ouen, and all the proud, yea, and all that doo wickedly, shall be stubble, and the day that commeth, shall burne them vp, saith the Lord of hostes: and shall leaue them neither roote, nor branch. The restoring of the Church, the Author and time of the same, is contei∣ned in this Ser∣mon.THis chapter conteineth one sermon, wherein the Lord promi∣seth the amending of so miserable and corrupt an estate of his Church, as he had described or set foorth before, and the resto∣ring of it vnto better: and reciteth both the Author thereof, to wit the Messias, long promised before: and appointeth also the time, namely when as God shal send Iohn the Baptist, that second Elias. Now this first verse is a promise of this new state of the church which should be renued and restored,The renuing of the Church, and the destru∣ction of the wicked. the which because it could not be those wicked and vngodly ones remaining in the Church, whome he had described before, he teacheth that their most grieuous and last destruction and ouerthrow should by and by be, taking a similitude from a most hotte burning fire, and such as should most easilie deuour them as light stubble. The which thing although some doe expound of the last destruction of Ieru∣salem, the which fel out in the end after Christ, his ascension or going vp into heauen: I rather expound it of those miseries, the which the Iewes suffered after the dayes of Malachias vntill the comming of Christ vnder the Grecian Kings of Syria and Egypt. Vers. 2. But vnto you that feare my name, shall the Sunne of righ∣teousnes arise, and health shall be vnder his winges, and ye shall go forth, and grow vp as fat calues. The happines of the godly.HE sheweth by the contrarie how happy and full shall be the good successe and estate of the godly and the faithfull (whom in this place he calleth those that feare God) that it might be the more ioyful vnto them. That it shall be full, he teacheth by the cause, for that the Church shall then haue and see the Messias (in whome there is full and perfect righteousnes, and the remedie and medicine for all our sinnes and miseries) and that with
the cleare and euident, and hence foorth no more darkened and light of knowledge. And the Church shall see it in the Gospell, in heart imbrace it. Vers. 3. And ye shall tread downe the wicked: for they shall be dust vnder the soles of your feete, in that day that I shall doo this, saith the Lord of hostes. An amplifica∣tion of the for∣mer benefit.AN amplification of the former benefit of God, taken from the most full victorie, which the godly in the end shall haue ouer the wicked, because that the godly in the end shal at the full haue rule ouer the wicked, neither shall the godly be any more afraid of them. And this do I vnderstand of the full and last hap∣pinesse, and resurrection, or rysing againe of the godly: Psalm. 149. Vers. 4. Remember the law of Moses my seruant, which I com∣manded vnto him in Horeb for all Israell, with the Statutes, and Iudgmentes. A double ad∣monition.A Profitable admonition consisting of two partes, the first con∣teined in this verse, the secōd expressed in the verse folowing. The first, wherein the godly are taught, namely that vntil such time as these things come to passe,1. That they must continue in the law of God gi∣uen by Moses. they must perseuere or conti∣nue and serue God both in the morall, and also the ceremoniall, and political, or Iudicial law of God, giuen vnto them by Moses: and that the must not by any meanes turne from the same vnto the inuentions and heathenish ordinances of men. Vers. 5. Behold, I will send you Elijah the Prophet before the com∣ming of the great and fearefull day of the Lord. 2. Of the time and notes that the former be∣nefite is giuen them of God.THe second admonition concerning the time, and the notes and markes, by the which the godly shall vnderstand & know the former benefit to be giuen by God. And this shall then bee when as Iohn the Baptist shall be sent, the which shall begin that same wonderfull restoring and renuing of the Church. So doth Christ himselfe expound this place of Iohn the Baptist Mat. 11. ver. 13.14. in these wordes, saying: All the Prophets, and the Law Prophesied vnto Iohn. And if ye will receiue it, this is Elias, which was to come. The like is, Mark. 1.
Vers. 6. And he shall turne the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers, least I come and smite the earth with cursing. A commenda∣tion and appro∣bation of the office of Iohn the Baptist.A Commendation and an approbation or allowance both of the person, and also of the office of Iohn the Baptist, together with a description or setting foorth of his office. And here withall also doth the Euangelist Marke begin his historie of the Gospell, cap. 1. ver. 1.2. after this maner: The beginning of the Gospell of Iesus Christ, the Sonne of God: As it is written in the Prophets, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which shall prepare thy way before thee. And with this place of Malachias fully agreeth the place of Luke, cap. 1. ver. 17. where the Angel Gabriel sayth vnto Zacharias concerning Iohn the Baptist, He shall go before him (to wit, before Christ) in the spirit and power of Elias, to turne the hearts of the fathers to the chil∣dren, and the disobedient to the wisedome of the iust men, to make rea∣die a people prepared for the Lord. Praise be vnto God. FJNIS.
The table. A Declaration of the covenant with the house of Aaron. 1123 Abakuk his life. 79 Abdias. 60 Abstaining from evill the first part of Repentance. 256 Afflictiōs are wont to put vs in mind of God. 449 a difference betweene the Afflictiōs of the godly & the vngodly. 700 Aggeus 63. his life & death. 80 Aegyptiās become Christiās. 1111 Amasias his counsell to Amos. 305 his subtiltie. 304 Ammon his destruction. 833 the Ammonites crueltie. 215 Amos accused of conspiracie. 302 might not prophecie in Bethel. 304. the second of the Canoni∣call prophets. 203. more anci∣ent then Oseas and Isaias. 54. suc∣ceeded Ionas. ibid. Amos his calling described. 306. his preaching. 204. his life & death. 75. to whom he is sent & at what time he prophesied. 205 Anarchy is the cause of all wicked∣nesse. 490 the difference betweene an Angell and a Prophet. 3 Angels attend vpon Christ. 928 Anger pursueth the authors therof. 583 Anna 63 Antichrist and his prophets false pro¦phets. 11 Apollo the devill of Delphos. 11 Aeromancie. 10 Astrologie. 10 Azarias. 51 the punishment of Azotus. 1020 B BAlaam. 36. a notable sooth∣sayer. 658 Balthasar. 738 Baptisme what it is. 1082 the destruction of Basan. 1048 what is meant by the oakes of Basan. ibid. Benefites entice men to wickednes. 435 Gods Benefites are to be accepted whē they are offred vnto vs. 953 Beasts punished for men. 785. 1107 why Bethel is called Bethaven. 397 Broccard a peevish prophet living in Holland. 394. conferred withall about his writings. 31. refuted. 30 C CAptivitie is a hard thing. 730 the destruction of Caelosyria. 1047 the vision of the Candlesticke and meaning thereof. 951 the Chaldeans power and crueltie. 2872 Chasas signifyeth a lye. 590 Christ the foundation of all rhe pro∣mises of god towards his church. 641. the foundation of the Apo∣stles and Prophets. 12. a Prophet of the new Testament. 42. the redeemer of the Church. 90 Christ his dominion & rule. 1025 his description. 1054. his glorie
threefold. 982. his care in fee∣ding his flocke. 1054 how Christ shall be a king vnto his Church. 1024 the true Church of God what it is. 793 the true Church of God never vtter∣ly destroyed. 218. not cast away, though it be punished 832 what maner of cōpany the Church of God shalbe. 850 the authority of the Church is from Christ. 646. the happinesse ther∣of. 996. the comfort thereof. 834 836. the benefites of God tow∣ards it. 813. what he requireth of his Church. 961. from whome he will gather it. 349. he rende∣reth like for like to the enemies thereof. 80 the afflictions of the Church come to passe by the providēce and will of God. 924. a lesson for the Church of God at all times. 650. a description of the restoring of the Church. 332. why the enimies of the Church are called hornes. 924 all Church matters belonged to the Priests. 945 Contempt of Gods law the cause of divers sinnes. 867 Contempt of God and the manner of the same. 431 Counsellers of Belial. 698 Covetousnes is unsatiable. 595 the corruption of the Court a great mischiefe vnto kingdomes. 443 bad practise of Courtiers. 442 the time of the Creatiō of the world vntill Christ, divided iuto seven a∣ges. 46 Cruelty displeaseth God. 216. 117 sundry kindes of Crueltie. 314 D A Daller what kinde of coyne it is. 374 Damascus the chiefe citie of Syria. 207. punished. 209 the nearer a Danger is, the more cir∣cumspect wee ought to be to es∣chue it. 762 what is meant by one Day. 1100 Devill the authour of lies. 1084 Diademe what it is. 737 Divinours. 2 E ELias. 52. compared with Moses. ibid. the Earth punished for the sinnes of the people. 317 Elizeus prophesied foure and fiftie yeres. 53 Enemies of Gods Church destroyed 1106. a vision of the Epha and meaning thereof 966 Evill what it signifieth 233 what it is to put a far of the Evil day 282 Extasie contained vnder vision. 28 F FAith hath the promises of this life and of the life to come. 965. confirmed by afflictions. 1092. the nature thereof. 625. the force thereof. 808. Faith going before knowledge and how. 370 Famine. 249. described. 293
The description of a Fast. 988. ma∣ny kindes thereof. 774. all sortes must come thereunto. 775 Fatherlesse children finde helpe of God. 564 tokens and effects of Feare. 716 Flattery getteth friends. 618 Forgivenesse of sinne a benefite of God. 848 Fruitfulnesse in bearing of children was in old time reckened for an especiall blessing of God. 390 G GEntiles called and converted. 1109. 1108. Geomancie. 10 the Gibeonites villanie and the pu∣nishment of the same. 477. 478 Glory is vsed for issue or childrē. 480 Gluttonie. 390 God described. 260. is vnchangea∣ble. 517. hateth them which work wickednesse. 484. cōpareth him∣selfe to a leopard. 547. Iudgeth ac∣cording vnto the truth. 664. can neuer be deceived or hindred. 856 hath rule over death it selfe. 539. is the fountaine of goodnesse in Christ. 426. is ever the authour of death to any. 530. is not sub∣iect to passions or affections. 654. is alwaies true and never faileth. 629. is careful to punish sin, thogh men be carelesse in committing it 439. 96 continueth his benefites towards his children. 532▪ spareth the world for a small company of the godly. 828. is strong and holy. 517. declared his will by his pro∣phets. 10. teacheth vs by none o∣ther way but by his word. 502. is to be served both with soule and body. 488. fighteth for the Iewes. 1029. is Lord over all, but not fa∣ther of all in Christ. 88. loves whō he punisheth. 233. is alwaies neere to his Church. 357. delighteth not in iniustice or crueltie. 620. the true God compared with false gods. 628. he only is to be trusted vnto. 494. in himselfe he can not be hurt, but in his members. 698. he only calleth prophets. 911▪ how he is said to repent. 290. Naturall reason doeth teach that there is a God. 97. nothing can hinder him in his purposes. 571. when he is said to doe evill. 234 Gods power laide foorth by effects. 690. his omnipotencie described. 327. three effects of Gods favour toward his Church. 787. his foure sore iudgements. 367. his loue to∣wards his children. 684. his anger the cause of the destruction of mā. 921. his kingdō first to be sought for. 453. his benefits towards the Israelites. 225. they are then to be received whē they are offred. 502. five effects of his maiestie. 252. his titles heaped vp, and what we are thereby to learne. 239. his giftes towards the godly. 565. 566. his anger like a flame. 693. his anger the fountaine of all misery and ca∣lamitie. 481. his passage ioyfull. 268. his favour towards his is per∣petuall. 811. his love towardes his Church. 920. his power described. 259. how he is said to remember
or forget. 315. in what sense he is said to sweare by his holinesse. 243. what his riding and sitting vpon vs is. 501. why he impar∣teth his benefits with vs. 1020 we must swear by the name of God alone. 398. it is better to fall into Gods hands, then into the hands of men. 482. 483. all good gifts proceed from God alone. 291. the end of the vse of the giftes of God. 786. the happie estate of those whome he favoureth. 631. no help against his punishment. 873. whome he chideth, he sa∣veth, vnles they hurt themselves. 826. to worshippe God after a straunge manner is to contemne him. 456 Gods revelation after 3. maners. 28 exāples of his anger. 515. a cōtra∣rietie betweene the true God & I∣dols. 886. Gods help to be pre∣ferred before mans. 463 an admonition for the godly. 353. to continue in well doing. 428 H HAbacuk. 61. his time of pro∣phesying. 899 Hydromancie. 10 Hypocrites worship God in shewe onely, not in sincerity of heart. 659. how they repent. 357 I IAcob his base estate. 536. his ver∣tues. 524 what I dolatry is. 355. a description of the Idolatry of the Iewes and punishment of the same. 460 to attribute the administration of the word vnto the course of pla∣nets is Idolatrie. 652 Idolatrie hated of God. 365 Idolatrie the cause of the iudge∣ments of God 817 what good followeth the banish∣ment of Idolatry. 273 Idolatrie encreaseth by degrees. 522 Idolatry defaceth the true worship of God. 534 Idolatrie infectious 453 the nature of Idolaters. 542 Idolatours are not the Church of God. 355 Idolatours vnder the shew of religi∣on doe mock God. 521 The vanitie of Idols and falshood. 433 why Idols can not help vs. 885 why we should not seek vnto Idols. 1036 How great a sinne it is to enquire of things to come at Idols. 393 Idol places in what sense called san¦ctuaries. 299 Iehoshua the type of Christ. 946 Iehu. 52. his punishment and why it was inflicted. 344 Ieremy accused of treason. 301 Ieremy weareth a woodden chaine. 71 the situation of Ierusalem. 18 what is meant by Ierusale 1102 why God is said to dwell in Ierusa∣lem. 577 the stubbornnes of the Iewes against God. 845. their punishment. 219 the desire of God to have the Iewes repent. 845. destruction threat∣ned vnto them. 819
the Iewes are put in feare by other mens example. 829. their affli∣ction and deliverance. 642 the Iewes punished for afflicting Gods Church. 1091 the commendations of Iohn Bap∣tist. 2136 all Infants guiltie. 488 Insecta what they are. 745 Ioel. 60. his stocke. 744. the time wherein he prophesied. 743. his life and death. 78 Ionas the first canonicall Prophet. 205. he succeeded Elizeus. 53 Ionas the true Arion of the Poets. 107 Ionas threatneth destruction vnto Ninivie. 688. vttereth his owne sinne. 99 what Ionas did in the whales belly. 182 Ionas his praier. 183. his rebellion. 91. his stocke. 88. his miraculous deliuerance. 110 Iosephus. 687 three kinds of Ioy. 703 Isaias bare-footed. 71 Israel is called an emptie vine. 487 the Israelites were sinners of olde. 520. rebelled against God a long time. 497. serued Idols aboue 2. hundred yeares. 362 God calleth dumb creatures to be witnes against the Israelites. 656 what caused the Israelites to sinne against God so grieuously. 504 the Israelites ascribe the cause of their benefit to other, and not to God. 358 the Israelites punishment for contē∣ning God. 454 the Israelites in their captiuitie retai∣ned no seale of Gods couenāt. 348 the Israelites riotous life described. 238. their falling away frō their kingdome, from the worship of God, and from the Priesthoode. 457. their superstition. 244. their vnthankfulnes. 435. their stub∣bornnes past recouerie. 381. their incest, crueltie, and couetousnes. 222 the dutie of Iudges. 621 the kingdome of Iudah neuer resto∣red to its former glory. 597 the greatnes and certentie of Gods Iudgements. 830 the Iudgements of God vpon his Church ought especially to be regarded. 588 we are Iustified through Christ be∣fore God. 854 K HOw farre Kings may helpe or not helpe vs. 552 L HE Laboureth in vaine that de∣spiseth God. 40 the doctrine of the Lawe twofold. 501 the end of the first and second table of the Lawe. 430 destruction followeth the loue of Lying. 608 Losses stirre vp men to call on God. 96 casting of Lots in what cases vsed. 98. Gods providence appeareth in them. ibid. the Loue of God towarde wicked
men. 823 effects of Gods Loue. 1000 M CEremonies restored by the Ma∣chabees. 1082. whence the Machabees had their name. 107 Magistrates called watchmen. 672 the life and death of Malachy. 81 Man is but a bubble. 495. the cause of his owne destruction. 549. by nature easily drawen to Idolatry. 435 Markes & bounds not to be remoo∣ved. 416. a curse against them which do so. ibid. how the Mariage betweene God & vs is contracted. 369, 368 a promise of Messias to come. 1128 his office. 1129 Micheas later then Isaias, and the time of his prophesie. 576. his life and death. 75 the highest degree of Miserie. 741 Musicke in it selfe very lawfull. 284 N NAhum prophesied of the ruine of Assyria 59. 688. the time wherein he lived. 687. his life and death. 79 It is a great commodity to have a good Neighbour. 584. we ought to performe iudgement & mer∣cie vnto our neighbours. 529. the maners of Noble men once for∣lorne become most wantō. 445 O OBadiah his calling is from God. 858 when Oseas begā to prophesie. 340 why he is placed first among the small prophets. 338. his life and death. 75. he is commanded to marry a common harlot. 341 P THE comfort of the Penitent. 778 the People sinne after the manner of the princes. 434 436 Philanthropeia what it is. 510 the Philistines cruelty. 211. there pu∣nishment. 212 the office of the Priests and Levites. 1123 why the Priests wete called Cama∣rim or Chemerims. 493 the state of the Priesthood described in Iosuah. 940 The covetousnesse of Priests. 112 Gods iudgements upon deceitfull Priests. 1121 Princes should be examples of well doing 611 Princes reprehended. 259 spirituall Promises 787 what Prophesie is generally. 5 Prophesie of two sortes. 10 Prophesie defined by Paul. 19 Prophesie of greater vse then the gift of tongues. 20. hath two endes. 12. the instrumētal cause of Prophesie. 9 Prophesie vseth onely the mother tongue. 20 divers names given to Prophets. 3 God alwaies raised vp Prophets to put the Israelites in mind of their dutie. 338 the excellencie of the bookes of the Prophets. 13 the signification of the Prophets
names out of Isidorus. 83 how the writings of the godly Pro∣phets have bene gathered. 63 Rules to be obserued in expounding the Prophets. 69 the signification of the Prophets names. 82 the order of the Prophets in the He∣brew. 82 in what age each Prophet lived. 45 48 when the Prophets of the old Testa¦ment ceased. 41. when the new ceased. 43. when the true prophets of God be∣gan and ended. 38. notes of true and godly Prophets 34 Gods Prophets shall prophesie whe¦ther they will or no that forbidde them. 600 Prophets of the Gentiles. 9 false Prophets are called Prophets. 3 a description of false Prophets. 605 false Prophets in three respects. 35 titles given to false Prophets by the holy ghost. 475 tokens of false Prophets. 1086 why God suffereth the heathen Pro∣phets to fore-tell some things of Christ. 23 Poligamie of the Iewes. 110 the Popish confessours. 388 what is ment by the holy Pots of Iu∣dah. 1114 Postellus the canker of Christianitie. 475 after what maner we sinne after the same God punisheth vs. 464 the end of the Punishments of God 759 Pyromancie. 10 R REformation of life must begin at the true worship of God. 274 Regeneration a benefit of God. 849 a description of true Religion. 1103 what true Repentance is. 256. 266. it only can stand against the threat¦nings of God. 240. 264. the fruit thereof. 564. it is the gif of God. 1067 what manner of Repentance ours ought to be. 100 who they be that truly repent. 912 the prayer of the Repentant contei∣neth two things 561 when God is angry Riches availe nothing. 828. they are not alwaies tokens of Gods favour. 531 S VVHat Sacrifice is acceptable to God. 472 Samaria why so called. 242. the de∣struction thereof with the cause of the same. 558 the Sardians in reproch are called dog-cheape slaves. 798 the hardnesse of Saving the godly. 828 Scriptures are to be vnderstood lite∣rally and spiritually. 831 bad Shepheards appointed by God. 1063. a description thereof. 1064 who are signified by the name of Sheepe. 1050 what Silence is commanded. 263 who should be Simple as doves. 449
Sinne condemned by the light of nature. 101. a cause of divorce betweene God and vs. 523 when Sinnes are said to cry vp into heauen. 91. no helpe from God vntil our sinnes be pardoned. 553 Sophonias. 0. his life and his death. 80 Spaine like to be a whip to correct the sinnes of the professours of the Gospell. 870 the Spainyards crueltie. 874 the Soule is not begotten. 1067 the Standing still of the sunne and Moone and the meaning thereof. 893 good Successe in affaires perswa∣deth the wicked that their dea∣lings are good. 530 T THe feast of Tabernacles. 1112 true Teachers murdered. 1088 false Teachers loose their authoritie. 1084 the punishment of loytring Teach∣ers. 386 why the godly must come to the Temple of God. 625 the second Temple finished in the 6. yeare of Darius. 899 Tentation, which God vseth to his children bringeth forth patience. 326 Theodosius his good successe. 1030 Truth getteth hatred. 618 the Turks crueltie. 874 Tyrants breake the lawe of consan∣guinitie. 213. punished. 212 Titus Vespasian destroied Ierusalē. 1092 V VIctorie is to be attributed to God and not to men. 1074 Vision threefold. 29 Visitation what it is. 672 Vagodly hate the godly. 476 the Vnthankfull first exalt them∣selues: secondly forget God. 546 W VVHoredome. 390 goeth to∣gether with surfetting. 442 Wickednes is set downe vnder the figure of a woman. 968 the diuers practises of the Wicked and of the godly. 594 the note of a Wise man in the midst of troubles. 264 Wo what it doth signifie. 278 the Worde of God ought to be the rule of our life. 402 what a misery it is to Wāt the word of God. 319 Workes of themselues please not God. 990, 991 Z ZAcharias. 63. talketh with an Angel. 917. his office & cal∣ling frō God. 910. his life & death. 81 the time of the prophesie of Zopho∣nias. 16 FINIS.
