724 99854115 19522
THE MOST excellent, profitable, and plea∣sant booke of the famous doctour and ex¦pert Astrologien Arcandam or Alean∣drin, to fynd the fatal desteny, constellation, complexion, and naturall inclination of euery man and childe by his byrth: with an addition of Phisiognomie very delectable to reade. Now newly tourned out of French into our vulgare tonge, by William Warde. I R Printed at London by Iames Rowbothum and are to be solde at his shop in Chepe∣syde, vnder Bowe churche.
To the ryght ho∣norable and vertuous lord the Earle of Shrowesbury, knyght of the moste noble order of the Garter. &c. Iames Rowbothum wysheth longe lyfe, with the encrease of godly honour. I Doubt not (right hono∣rable) but the mynde of man is free, and hath the rule and power of him selfe throughe the vertue of hys libertye, and that the wise man by his reason, and reasonable sapience, hath domini∣on ouer the starres and their impressi∣ons, namely ouer all naturall inclina∣tions, and celestiall destnies, withoute any forced necessitie to do this or that, which commeth by the grace and gyfte of God, the gouernour of the vniuersal worlde. Euen so Stilpo (by reason ru∣lyng him) auoyded whoredome, al∣though he were naturallye enclyned therevnto. Yet not withstanding it is
most certayne, that men haue some in∣clinations and complexions by nature which some men know either by Astro¦logie, or by coniecture of their nature, called Phisyognomie, and thei that con¦iecture are called in Greeke Physiogno∣mones which tell by coniectures, notes, signes and tokens, the inclinations of mens affections. The Philosophers in¦deed haue inuented and found out phi∣siognomy to the great commoditie of men, for to knowe to what vertue or what vice yong children were enclined to the end thei might amend their vici∣ous and faultie nature with good edu∣cation, & not to geue the brydle to their affections, but to moue them to scien∣ences, studyes, and other qualities, whereunto nature moste calleth them and maketh them moste enclined. So Apelles and Zeusis folowed and lear∣ned naturally the arte of painting. So Polyeletus and Praxiteles folowed the art of making pictures & images. So Demosthenes & Cicero chose the
art of Oratorie and eloquence, in plea∣dyng matters in the law: So Homere and Virgil folowed poetrie: So Socra¦tes, Plato, and Aristotle handled Phi∣losophie. And nowe all is altered and chaunged and almost cleane ouertur∣ned, and goeth (as I might saye) ouer∣thwartly lyke the Crabbe. For he that should be naturally a plowman, is for∣ced to the study of pleading, and to bee an Oratour or Philosopher, or elles of some higher learning, snoring on his bookes, turning and returning himself this way and that way, as though he sat vpon coales or hoate embers. Con∣trariwise, they that are well borne, and called by the benefite of nature to all honesty often times are constrained to seruyle doyngs. The knowledge then of Phisiognomy is requisite & profita∣ble to men, so that men abuse it not, as some fond people do (commonly called Egiptians) which are as it were raue∣ning Harpies, hunting after the gaine of money, which haue brought to passe
by their lyes, that this parte of philoso∣phie is now in no estimation, which is to be lamented, seyng that euen Hun∣ters know by cōiectures, notes, signes, draughtes, lineamentes, & sight of the body, the nature and propertie of dogs: And by the lyke meanes Horsecorsers do knowe the nature of Horses, as the Poete Vergill describeth in the thirde booke of his Georgykes saying. The good Colt by and by marcheth high vpon the grounde, & orderly extol∣leth himself, or elles setteth down often tymes his soft thighes the one after the other: And first he dare goe in durtye wayes, or into great riuers, and ven∣ter vpon a bridge whiche he knoweth not: neither feareth he any vaine noyse or cry. The good horse hath a high neck, a lytle head, a short belly, fat behinde, & faire before, hauinge a full mane. The red is faire, faire also is the speckled, faire is the browne baye: and euyll is a whyte colour in a horse. And worse is the colour betwene whyte and red.
A good horse can not stande still at the sounde of a trumpet that he heareth a far of. The eare we see waggeth vp & down, euery member moueth, foming at the mouth, he breatheth out and ga∣thereth in vnder his nostrels fier & hote breath. A thicke mane hangyng on the syde alonge downe all his necke: and a double chyne ending broade vpon hys back. He treadeth deepe in the ground, and in treadinge he astonieth it. His hard hoofe of horne sowneth, with o∣ther qualities belōgyng to a good horse. But nowe a dayes no man careth to coniecture, or to know by coniectures, or to referre mans naturall inclina∣tions to such a profit. And though there were no other profite risynge by it but onely to make a troubled mynde mer∣ry (whereunto we oftentimes see mu∣sick applied which is one of the sciences commonly called liberall:) this art of phisiognomy ought not be contemned. And therefore wayinge wt my selfe the pleasauntnes of this part of philosophy
and hauing occasion to publishe in our vulgare tongue this litle booke of Ar∣candam or Aleandrin doctour & moste expert Astrologian, treating of the pre∣dictions of the byrth & fatall disposition of yong childrē. I was so bold as to de∣dicate ye fruite of this labour vnto your lordship, and to honour it with the ho∣nourable tytle of your honours name, most humbly besechinge your lordshyp fauorably to accept it as offered of one who wisheth vnto you and yours all health, wealth, long life, and much en∣crease of vertue & honour, nothing dou∣tinge but that after your lordshippes weyghty and serious affaires, you shal not be greued to recreat your self with the reading of some pleasaunt parte hereof, whiche maye ease such tedious exercises as your lorship may vpon oc∣cosions take in hande. Your honours most humble, Iames Rowbothum.
A briefe declara∣tion moste certaine and profita∣ble, for to fynde out (as much as the art of Astronomie can certifie) mans fate and constellation indicatiue, tou∣ching the naturall inclination of man: Made by Arcandam the learned and expert Astro∣logian. THe maner to fynde oute the destnie and constella¦tion is this. Fyrst, if you wyll knowe the constel∣lation of any man, take his natural name which is cōmonlye called his proper name and the proper name of his mother, in suche sort as neither of ye said two names in any wise be chaunged or depraued from the vulgare or proper callynge (as of∣ten tymes it chaunceth by the common apellation of mens names) but that thei be perfect and not diminished. And for two causes the name of the mother is
taken and not of the father. Fyrst, be∣cause the mothers syde is more appa∣rent then the fathers. Secondlye, al∣though the father be the originall of the conception and generation of the childe yet the chylde touchyng the bodye hath more of the mothers matter and sub∣staunce then of the fathers. Yea and as oftentymes it happeneth, some parte of the fathers seede doeth not entre nor serue touchynge the materiall composi∣on. For man is verely a thyng actiue, and by no meanes passiue, and touching him selfe can haue no action. Whereby it consequently appeareth that the child concernyng the bodye hath more of the mothers substaunce then of the fathers. Wherevnto a thyrde cause maye be ad∣ded, that for as muche as the chylde is nourished of the mothers substance and not of the fathers, that then the constella¦tion enforsyng hys effect & signe in the chyldes body, doeth rather conuert the same with the mother & the bodye of the mother, then with the father and the
body of the father. And therefore truely and determinatlye to know and learne the chyldes fate and constellation, hys proper name muste be taken togethers with the natural and proper name of the mother. Then diligently consider euery letter of the said two names, and amon∣ges the same gather ye numeral letters, suche as signifie a number, which accor∣dyng to the auncient accompt are seuen as .I. signifieth one .V. fyue .X. tenne .L. fiftie .C. a hundreth .D. fiue hundreth, M. signifieth a thousand. Taking all and singular letters of the sayde two names, as well the number as such as signifie a number. Then ga∣ther the whole summe, which summe so collected, diuide if it be possible by .xxix. because of the .xxix. constellations of the starres, or because of the particuler sig∣nes celestiall whiche after the auncient maner is the firste diuision of the sig∣nes. And hereby it appeareth that the principall partes of the particular starres and signes celestial in number
are .xxix. as here after shall appeare. So that the number signified by the nume∣rall letters of the two proper names aforesayd ought to be deuided by reason of the sayde signes. And sometymes the sayde number doth amount iuste to the summe of .xxix. and sometyme it exce∣deth the same, wherein is to be noted that either the number doth excede or elles is equall. If it excede, then the number ought to be applied and diuided by theyr vnities to the sayde signes addynge to euery of the signes their vnities begynnynge at the first signe which is the head of Aries and so of the reste successiuelye. And where so euer the last vnitie shall faile or shall be placed, there and in that sygne and in the parte of that signe, the Infant (whose constellation you seeke to knowe) vndoutedlye is borne, and thereby you shal geue iudge∣ment and truely pronounce that in that signe the fate and constellation of the Infant consisteth. Not withstandyng
that peraduenture, accordyng to the ma¦ner and course of the starres, tymes and monethes, some other signe shoulde seeme to haue dominion ouer that nati∣uitie. And because that the signe where∣in certaynely the Infant is borne doeth not alone beare rule in the tyme of the byrthe, but all and singuler effectuallye doe concurre accordynge to the more or lesse in euery nauitie. So that eftsones it chanceth that some signe distinct from that signe appropriat to the moneth doth more effectuallye rule and more excel∣lentlye expresse his effectes. Therefore to the intent you maye perfectly beholde the fate and constellation of the partie that is borne, you must not onely looke vpon the signe allotted and appropriate to that moneth wherein determinatlye any is borne: but chiefely you must haue respecte to that signe whiche speciallye hath dominion aboue others in the tyme of the byrthe, not withstandynge that signe appropriate to the moneth hath the principall effect.
And whether one signe is more excel∣lent or effectuall then another you may moste certainlye and truely knowe by thys arte. Let vs retourne then vnto our for∣mer proposition, and saye that either the summe of the number signified by the numeral letters of the names aforesayd doth not amounte to .xxix. or elles that it doth principally atteyne to that summe, or is equall, or elles excedeth the same. But nowe after the agrement and con∣corde of the number, take also the con∣uocation and assemble of the signes ce∣lestiall, whiche are touchyng theyr par∣ticuler partes .xxix. as is aforesayde, or xxx. as shalbe sayde hereafter, begyn∣nyng at the first particuler signe, which is the head of the signe Aries. And wher so euer the laste vnitie of this number shall reste or remaine, that is the speciall signe and is of most force in the tyme of the nauitie. But if this number dothe not surpasse the number of .xxix. but therevnto is equall, then the laste signe
whiche is the tayle of Pisces is the chie∣fest signe at the natiuitie. Semblablye yf this number doeth excede the num∣ber of .xxix. then this number is to be di∣uided so manye tymes by .xxix. tyll the number of .xxix. be founde out. And then for euerye vnitie one signe must be ac∣compted yeldyng to euery signe his vni∣tie: and then the laste vnitie, whiche is xxix. is attributed to .xxix. and to the last signe whiche is the tayle of Pisces, as was sayde a lytle before, and that signe chiefely hath dominion in the natiuitie of the infants. But if that number last∣ly remainynge be within the number of xxix. then euerye vnitie of this number ought to be distributed to euerye parti∣culer signe beginninge first at the head of Aries, and wheresoeuer the laste vni∣tie of this nūbre doth remaine the same is the principall signe, and chiefely hath gouernement at the byrth of the infant. Here also oughte diligently to be no∣ted that the celestiall signes maye be ta∣ken two wayes, that is to saye totally or
touchyng the whole effectes of the same and are in number but twelue. That is to wete: Aries (and is the first signe, at whiche you must begynne, and then fo∣lowe successiuely tyll you come to the signe of Pisces whiche is the twelfeth) Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagitarius, Capricor∣nus, Aquarius, Pisces. Nowe eche of these signes in his whole effecte doeth especiallye beare rule in that moneth whiche is appropriate to the same. And euery signe intierly hath dominion ouer euery moneth suche as therevnto is ap∣poynted. As for example: Aries hath do∣minion in Marche which is the first mo∣neth accordynge to the computation of Astronomers. Lykewyse Taurus in Aprill, and so the rest consequently suc∣cedyng. And although the foresayde sig∣nes singulerlye and appropriatlye haue their monethes speciallye assigned as is aforesayde. Yet all these twelue signes in euery moneth at all tymes, euerye day and houre, euery moment & minute
of an houre, do concurre in the nauitie of euery byrthe, although not equallye yet accordyng to the moore or lesse. And that signe whiche chiefely hath domini∣on in the natiuitie, the same is the con∣stellation of the Infant. Moreouer the signe wherein the Infant is borne, al∣though it be not that signe which is ap∣propriat to the moneth but some other, yet it is easie to be knowen frō the signe perticularly appoynted to the sayde mo∣neth. Likewyse the sayde signes maye be taken two wayes not intierly but specially touchynge their partes and by acceptyng the same in suche perticular wise (chiefely after the reconing of aun∣cient Astronomers) they be nyne and twentye, for fyue of them that is to saye: Taurus, Gemini, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarius are euerye of theym diuyded into three pryncipall partes. As into the Head, the Beallye, and Tayle, and is as muche to saye, into the begynnynge, the myddle, and the ende.
Whereby it foloweth that these fyue figures so deuided doe include fyftene particuler sygnes whiche are there .xv. principall partes for thre tymes v. make fyftene. And the other seuen sygnes. That is to saye Aries, Cancer, Virgo, Libra, Sagittarius, Capricornus and Pisies, emongs whom three partes are contayned in Virgo for his taile is di∣uyded into twayne as shall bee saide hereafter, althoughe here it hath but .ii. partes. All which seuen are deuided but into two principall partes, to weete into the heade and taile and so include .xiiii. particular sygnes for twise seuē is xiiii. Whereby it manifestlye appeareth by the premysses that the sygnes particu∣lerlye accepted are in number .xxix. be∣cause .xv. and .xiiii. make .xxix. Further it is to be noted that in all and euery the aforesaid signes being wholy accompted according to the maner before remem∣bred al these .xii. are concurrents eyther more or lesse in the natiuitie of euery in∣fante. For eche man hath in the foresayd
signes a parte & proprietie as for exam∣ple. The infante that is borne in Aries,Aries. disposeth his lyfe in that sygne and in that parte of Aries which is most pliant to his natiuitie. And specially the parte whiche according to the quantitie hathe cheifest dominiō in that signe, and is the fyrste house of his natiuitie whiche is a signifier of lyfe. &c. And also placeth in the sayde sygne his speche, wysedome, augmentation of al his workes, his be∣gynnynge, his name, and the originall of his lyfe and yeres. In Taurus is conteyned the sub∣staunce of the infante,Taurus. his gaine or losse his liuing, Debtes, Gyftes, Seruaun∣tes, Helpers, such as be obedient to his commaundementes, his witnesses and treasure. And this signe because it is the seconde house signifieth the ende of hys youthe. Gemini are bretheren.Gemini. This sygne because it is the thyrde house is a token of brethren, systers, frendes neyghbors brethren of husbandes and suche as pro∣cede
of the mothers syde, and signifieth the mother her selfe. Lykewyse it is a token of fayth, religion, commaunde∣mentes, embassadours, newes, mutati∣ons, small iorneys, and a space of lyfe before death approche. In Cancer the Infante disposeth hys father,Cancer. graundfather, and all his pa∣rentes on hys fathers syde, to wete, all his auncetours ascendynge from the ryght lyne males, and his sisters and o∣ther inheritours, except such as are in∣heritours by the succession of the dead. Also it signifieth houses landes, rightes, treasures, and what so euer is hid vnder grounde, prisons, and prisoners, and all suche as happeneth to the dead beynge buryed, after the buryall, or wythout burial, as eft soones it chaunceth to such as be hanged, beheaded, or otherwise slaine. And because it is the fourth house it signifieth death before he growe to mans state and the ende of thynges. Leo.Leo betokeneth Infantes, loue, mes∣sangers, nouelties, giftes, rewardes,
fayre promyses, or myrthe, goods by the father & such as shall happen after death whether it be praise or infamie. In the .vi. sygne whiche is Virgo are conteyned infirmities,Virgo. and thyngs con∣trary to health, seruauntes, maides, ly∣inge, accusation, vnrighteousnes, places prisons, mutation from place to place, Catayll of small stature. And because this sygne is the syxth house it doth insi∣nuate ende of life and all suche thynges as shall happen before olde age. In Libra whiche is the seuenth sygne marriages are conteyned,Libra. mischiefe and peryll in marriage, contencions, open enimies, warres, emmities, theues, partakynge, and opposition and euerye thyng opposite, participation of mar∣chaundise, expedite and small voyages, and because it is the seuenth house it no∣teth the moitie and ende of lyfe towarde olde age. In Scorpio is conteyned death, feare,Scorpio. sadnes, labour, dispeyre, seperatiō, aide of aduersaries, pollicies, witte, letall,
poyson, substaunce or hereditamentes aswell of straungers as of affinite suche as the heyers oughte to possesse after death and signifieth because it is ye eight house ende of lyfe after the approche∣ment of olde age. Sagitarius.In Sagittarius beinge the .ix. house are expressed longe Iorneys, or farre pe¦regrinations and all thinges therevnto incident. Also it signifieth faith, religi∣on, wisedome, Philosophie, writtinges, Bookes, Epistles, Newes, interpreta∣tions of dreames and thynges to come great wonders, muche honour and ioye. And for as muche as this sygne is lorde of the nynth house it sygnifyeth a begin¦nynge and enteraunce into halfe of the lyfe. Capricor∣nus.The .x. house is Capricornus whiche prefygurateth kingdome, gouernment, auctoryty dignities offices and all artes that maye be exercised and whereby a man maye be a Master, it sygnifyeth al∣so ecclesiastical iurisdiccion, things stolne or carrieth awaye, prayse and fame it
pronosticateth also mothers, graunde∣mothers, & ancestors of feminine kinde, mothers in lawe, and halfe the tearme of lyfe. In the eleuenth sygne which is Aqua∣rius the birth appointeth his proper and prosperous constellation,Aquarius. and it beto∣keneth praise honour, greate fortune, faythefull frendes ayde of kynges and princes, treasour, and societie and sygni∣fieth half the yeares of mannes life. Pisces being the twelfeth house doth demonstrate significations of werines,Pisces. sadnes, pouertie, priuye hatred, deceipt feare, sorowe, lamentacion, blasphemye ambushmentes, houses, prisons, captiue handes, rebuke, and beastes meete to ryde vppon. In maner aboue expressed is intrea∣ted onelye of the infante borne in Aries althoughe the same must be diuided and spoken of euerye sygne ascending in the natiuitie of euery byrth and of all other sygnes folowing the sygne of the natiui∣tie til by recours the number of .12. be at∣tayned
whether anye be borne in Tau∣rus or in Gemini whiche is in order, is written the thyrde signe or in any of the twelue signes. And therefore you shall diligently note that euerye of the afore∣sayde houses is in him selfe the first, and hath his seconde, thyrde, fourth, fifth, sixth, seuenth, eyght, nynth, tenth, ele∣uenth, and twelfeth house. And this I remember because the lyke whereof we haue sayde of the signes, the same I woulde shoulde be vnderstanded of the houses. And euerye house accordynge to their qualities hath eleuen other houses beside him selfe of whome their signifi∣cations be deriued. All which (well beloued reader) maye through the dexteritie of thy witte be easely vnderstanded, whether the in∣fant be borne in Taurus, in Gemini or in Libra, as before. And so euerye man maye learne to knowe by this art deter∣minatly his owne fate, his proper and passiue constellation, not forced of ne∣cessitie, but by the naturall inclination.
because as Ptolemeus sayeth, a wyse man shal rule the starres. As muche to saye. A wyse man maye let and prohi∣bite the very future effectes,The hea∣uenly in∣clinatie no be no in∣forcemen∣tes to the wyse. which pro∣cede of the starres and the influences thereof. And so yf he wyll he maye rule the sayde starres and heauenly mocions. And therefore for a monition vnto thee, the sayde starres doe not enforse and constraine thee to any thynge, except it he suche as are proclyue and readye to be drawen by them, and suche as wyll folowe nature rather then reason after the maner of brute beastes. Wherefore for a more euident doctrine and in∣struction of the premesses, the Scheme or figure ensu∣wyng is placed.
The fyrst celestiall principall and entier sygne called Aries. ♂ ♈ ram
The Figure. (The East.) The house cadent. The house succedyng. (Noonetyde.) The house cadent. The house succedyng. (The West.) The house cadent. The house succedyng. (Mydnyght.) The house cadent. The house succedyng. Aries, the first house. Taurus, the ii. house. Gemini, the iii. house. Cancer, the iiii. house. Leo, the v. house. Virgo, the vi. house. Libra, the vii. house. Scorpio, the viii. house. Sagitarius, the ix. house. Capricornus, the x. house. Aquarius, the xi. house. Pisces, the xii. house. The figure of the Infante in whose natiuitie Aries hath do∣minion. But yf Taurus beare rule, then Taurus must be figu∣red in the first house, in the se∣conde house Gemini, and in the thyrde Cancer. And yf Gemini beare rule, then Gemini muste be placed in the fyrst house, and Cancer in the seconde. And so of the other Sygnes. ¶Place this figure next before the signe of Aries.
IN the fyrste treatise the sayde signe of Aries is discribed with the efficacie and power thereof. Which Aries is diuided into two principal partes.Aries diui∣ded into two princi¦pall panes containing fyue chap∣ters. That is to saye, into the head and tayle. And this treatise conteyneth .v. Chapters. In the fyrst the head of Aries is descri∣bed with the efficatie and fortune there∣of. In the seconde the tayle and force thereof. In the thyrde the special iudge∣ment of Aries accordynge to the male. In the fourth, the iudgement especiall after the female. In the fyfte and laste the generall and totall fortune of Aries. The fyrst Chapter which is the head of Aries,the fyrst particular sygne. being the fyrst particuler signe celestiall is called Aluathay, & after some mens opinions Salhay, hauynge foure starres disposed in this maner. Where is to be not vnderstanded that who so euer is borne in this signe touchynge the disposition of the bo∣dye,colour and makyng of the body. accordyng to the ef∣fect of ye signe shalbe somwhat ruddy or
yellowe colour, and shall haue a smale bealy, nymble and straite, thynne and leane of body, and shall also haue vpon his left foote a sygne or marke,Marke or sygne. and the lyke vpon the left elbowe. And if for∣tune fauour he shal haue a mutable en∣heritaunce.inheritance That is to saye beyng once obteyned shall sodenly be loste, and yet in short tyme shal recouer it again. And this parte of fortune is by a certaine na∣ture indifferent. Likewise touchyng the good fortune,Good for∣tune. the same shall haue many frendes, and shall hate the euyll and fo∣lowe the good, imploying good tournes vpon ingrate and vnthankefull men.Significati∣ons of the mynde. Touching the disposition of the mynde he shall be subtile, politike, and craftye. And concernynge infirmities, and sick∣nes,Infirmities the same shall be more prone to paynes in the head then to anye other disease, wherewith he shalbe vehement∣lye vexed, besydes whyche disease the healthe shall bee good and prosperous. And for a more apte aduertisement of the fortune of this signe, I referre to
the vniuersal chapter of this signe Aries where is entreated the entier effecte and generall fortune thereof, and is the fifte Chapter of thys treatise. The seconde Chapter mencioneth the taile of Aries,the .ii. perti¦culer signe or the latter part ther∣of, accordyng to the signe particuler is called Allothayn and of some Alhuthou. This signe hath foure starres, one in the tayle and three in the loynes or bel∣lye figured in thys maner. Where is to be noted that who soeuer is borne in the tayle of Aries or in the seconde particu∣ler sygne celestiall. Fyrst touching the disposition of the bo∣dye shall be very hearye,the body. and shall haue a greate bearde, coloured eyes, whyte teethe, a fayre Nose, greate eye Bro∣wes, and shall bee of coloure Redde mixte wyth the Croceall or Safferon coloure.
And touchynge the disposition of the mynde,the mynde and quali∣ties therof. shalbe eloquent, solitarie in life, prodigall in necessitie, deceiptfull, and many tymes shall folow after ambush∣ments, and prone to hurte others. If the same be borne in the seconde houre of the nyght, there shalbe a white or pearle in the eye, and in the ende shalbe starke blynde, and touchynge the myndes in∣clination shalbe a searcher of wordes, factes, and other secretes. Lykewyse shalbe irefull, enuious, and yet shalbe rather enuied of others, then greatly ge∣uen to that vice. Whereof it wyll come to passe that he shall haue manye ene∣mies which wyll seeke after his destru∣ction.the terme of lyfe. And touching the lyfe and maner thereof, he shall lyue fourtie yeres and then shall waxe sicke, but if he shall chaunce to recouer that sicknes he shall lyue foure score yeres, and then dye in his bedde.Ill fortune Moreouer touchynge ill for∣tune, he shall haue a strype in the face either with a sworde or stone, and shalbe afflicted with manye miseries. So that
he shall receyue no commoditie wyth∣oute losse and some hynderaunce.Good for∣tune. And concernynge prosperous fortune, he shall be happye in tillage. The thyrd Chapter wherein the iud∣gement of Aries is remēbred touchyng the male, and bothe partes of this signe because both do concurre in all the effe∣ctes determinatly, especially concerning the sayde male. What so euer male therefore, that is borne in this signe and in euery part thereof,the body. after the dispositi∣on of his body shal haue a certain marke in his shulders, and in his lefte foote as is sayde before. Secondarely touchyng his mynde, he shalbe of good stomacke,the mynde studious, proude, inconstant and lyuely. And in his fyrst degree of youth he shal∣be very contencious, irefull, and shame∣fast. He shalbe very couetous, and shall attayne to great authoritie in bying and sellyng, by reason he shall deny that he hath any substaunce, affirmyng hym∣selfe to be very poore & worthe nothing. He shalbe glotonous, and in all meates
shall fynde lacke, that is to saye, not sa∣tisfied, whereby hys rauenous & greedy stomacke shall continuallye murmour and grudge. Inwardelye he shall freate wyth angre, and can not keepe it se∣create, but vtter and disclose the same. Lykewyse he shall bee a lyer and false in wordes, faynyng fayre speache, ami∣able countenaunce and obedient ge∣sture, and thereby hyde his dissimula∣tion and falsehode, he shall speake one thynge and doe another, promysynge golden hylles, but performe nothynge. Thyrdly, touchynge his lyfe and maner thereof,Chaunces in the lyfe tyme. he shall passe parte of hys lyfe in great authoritie. And shall suffer payne in the stomacke, and for a wo∣mans sake shall susteyne muche so∣rowe. Also he shall receyue woundes of foure footed beastes as of horses, and suche lyke, whereby he shall bee in daunger of death. Also aboute the three and twentye, and fyue and thyrty yeres of hys age he shalbe in peryll of poyson. Moreouer, yf he escape certayne disea∣ses,
he shall lyue tyll the age of foure skore and seuen yeres,Diseases. and three mo∣nethes. And the Mondaye shall be hys contrarye daye.Contrarye d And therefore lette him not washe hys head nor putte on anye newe apparell, or begynne anye notable thynge vppon that daye, be∣cause all suche thynges hauynge re∣specte to misfortune and maner of ly∣uynge are infortunate. Fourthlye, touchynge the good for∣tune,Good for∣tune. he shall haue good lucke to other mens goods. He shall be made ryche by his wyfe, and shall atteyne to great substaunce. He shall enioye great store of cattaile, and shall daylye encrease to further wealth. He shall wander into far countreys, for saking both his owne countrey & parents. When he cōmeth to xxiii. yeres of age he shal attein to better things & shall haue to do with a masse of monie. And being .xl. yeres old he shalbe of great wealth & amoūt to great digni∣tie: such things as he goth about to take in hād shalbe brought to great perfectiō.
His promocions or offices he shall exer∣cise with much fauour. He shall not marrye his fyrste wyfe whiche shall be allotted vnto hym,Mariage. but another of whome he shall haue noble and wor∣thye Chyldren. He shall loue and be dayly conuersant wyth the Catholicke Churche. And to speake vniuersally suche as are borne in the tyme of the daye, shall be fortunate and in great fa∣uour with Prynces and noble men, but if in the nyght they be vnfortunat. The fourth Chapter discourseth the iudgement of Aries,description of the bo∣dye. concernynge bothe partes and the efficatie of the same, espe¦cially touchyng the female. Therefore the mayde that is borne in thys sygne shall haue in the myddest of her bodye before or behynde, or vppon her feete, certayne naturall markes, and a heare dependynge downe to her feete. Lykewyse touchynge the disposition of her mynde, she shall be diligent and paynefull.the minde. She shall be fayre, curste and curious of thynges newe. She shall
haue a certayne honourable shamefast∣nesse, that is to saye, endued wyth chastitie and bashefulnes, and therefore called honourable. She shall be merye, and her myrthe shall daylye encrease. Lykewyse that thynge whiche is done by her aduise shall haue good perfecti∣on. And after the vmacitie and lyuely∣nesse of her spryte, she shall be curste and tauntynge in wordes. And tou∣chynge her lyfe and maner of her lyfe,Sicknes, she shall be full of syckennesse from the age of foure yeres to seuentene yeres, and then let her beware of marriage.Marriage. Lykewyse she shall suffer a certayne in∣firmitie called the lunatyke passion, whiche is a great disease, and yf she escape the same, she shall lyue tyll she be thre score and nyne yeres of age.Length of lyfe. Touchyng her good fortune, she shall enioye the goodes of her parentes and shall trauayle in places vnknowen,Good for∣tune. and after .xxxiii. yeres of age, she shall ariue in places of better aduenture. She shall haue manye Chyldren by her husbande
and shall bee called a mother of other mennes chyldren, but her first begotten shall dye. And touchynge her euyll for∣tune,Ill fortune she shall be hurte of a foure footed beast and subiect to many perylles. The syxte Chapter of this treatise, mencioneth the generall fortune of Ari∣ries. Where it is to be knowen that the signe of Aries touchynge bothe partes, signifieth fortune in warre fare, and the seruice of others.Forreyn euentes. Lykewyse fortune in all kyndes of marchaundise especial∣ly in redde thynges, bloudye thynges, and in fyer and bloode, in the shambles, and in euery facte done by fier, it signi∣fieth fortune in hospitalitie. Infantes borne in this signe,Infirmities males or females, shalbe voyde of head ache, but greatlye troubled with the strangullion, grauell and stone.Dayes. The fortunate daies be Mon∣daye and Twesdaye, wherein they may attempt anye newe enterpryse.What parte of the worlde is best. Lyke∣wise the Infante borne in this signe a∣boute the East parte is more fortunate then aboute anye other parte. There∣fore
yf the same wyll prosper in anye af∣fayres he oughte to directe his doynges thereunto, yea if it be aboute marriage. Let him also haue the doore of his house open towardes the East and his bedde standynge towardes the same parte al∣so.Garments. Let hys garmentes be blacke and redde. His nature is bothe whote and drye,Nature. and therefore Choler is moste abundaunt in hym.
Taurus the se∣conde and principall sygne celestiall. ♀ ♉ depiction of bull
THe seconde principall traictise of this booke entreateth of the princi∣pall signe called Taurus, whyche signe is diuided into three chiefe partes that is to saye into the Head,Taurus di∣uided into thre partes containing vi. chapters Bealy and Tayle. This treatise is diuided into .vi. Chapters. The fyrste conteyneth the head of the sayde sygne. The seconde the bealy. The thyrde the tayle. The fourth the iudgemente of the same tou∣chyng the male. The fyfte touchynge the female. The syxte and laste entrea∣teth of the generall fortune of the sayde Taurus. Concernyng the fyrst Chapter of this treatise, wherein the head of Taurus is spoken of which is the thyrde particu∣lar signe called Adoldaya,the thyrde particuler. hath .vii. starres disposed in this sort. And is to be noted yt whosoeuer is borne in this signe fyrst touching the disposition of the bodye and vinacitie of this signe shalbe of colour pure, of bodye fatte,the bodie. fayre and without
spotte, his lippes thicke and hangynge downe his stature shorte. He shall haue a beautifull face, his heare longe, but verye faire, and shall haue manye mar∣kes in his bodie. But the speciall marke shall be in his necke because he shall be very hearye. He shall haue great eyes of colour lyke a Catte or blacke. Tou∣chynge the disposition of the mynde,of the bo∣dye. he shall be much ayded and succoured, and of his aiders shall receyue no hurte, he shalbe aduenturous and of good cor∣rage. And touching his life and the ma∣ner thereof,Infirmities he shalbe greatlye troubled with paine of his heart. The first terme of his lyfe shabe at .xxiiii. The second at lxx. in either of these termes he shall be wonderfull sicke,terme of Sicknes. but in the seconde terme he shall suffer an infirmitie of the Apostume Cynanches commonlye cal∣led the Squinsie, whiche breadeth in the throte, whiche if he escape, he shal lyue to foure skore, but in the ende he shall die of the sayde apostume. Touchynge the influence of this signe,Hurtes. he shall be
bitten with a Dogge, and shall haue a notablye strype wyth a Stone, or Yron. Lykewyse you shall vnder∣stande, that yf it chaunce the Infant bee borne earlye in the mornynge, he shall bee thycke and grosse. And tou∣chynge the disposition of hys mynde,Qualities. he shall be pleasaunte, apte, and bolde, and chiefelye in hys youthe, but he shall bee of an vpryghte conscience, and a good Companion. Yf he be borne in the fyrste parte of the nyghte, he shall haue a greate Noase, and a smale head. He shall haue manye frendes and shal haue a dilectation in sundry kindes of pleasures. In the seconde Chapter of this trea∣tise the Beallye is descrybed, whyche is the seconde parte of Taurus, and the fourthe particular sygne.the .4. perti¦culer signe There∣fore it is to wette, that thys sygne hath seuentene starres, of thys forme and fashion folowynge, and is called Co∣ebram. And who so euer is borne in
this signe. Fyrst tou∣ching the disposition and quantitie of the bodye,the body. he shall bee narowe betwene the shulders, and in the Arme hooles verye hearye, hys face in∣different rounde, and his eyes verye fayre. he shal haue a marke in hys bodye, ey∣ther vpon his yarde, loynes, or the priuy partes, or elles betwene his Arme∣hooles. One of his armes shalbe hurte, and shall receyue a wounde vppon his head.The quali∣tie of the mynde. And touchinge the disposition of his mynde, he shalbe smilynge, merye, artificiall, and shall take good aduise∣ment in his doynges. He shall be liberal and willyng and shall geue hys enheri∣taunce to one of his owne familie. Hys mynde shall be fired vppon the goodes of Fortune, and vppon theyr happye or vnhappye aduentures.
He shall loue contencion and embrace women, and especiallye he shall loue two aboue others in hys lyfe tyme, to the whiche he shall vse carnallye, he shall be verye ritous, but not so muche as he that is borne in the fyrste parte of the signe. Touchynge hys lyfe and maner thereof he shall haue two spe∣ciall diseases whiche is the cough and payne of the galle.Diseases. In the fourth yere of his age, he shall be affected wyth a greate disease, but yf he shall recouer the same, then shall he be free tyll twen∣tye, at whyche tyme he shall be sycke agayne. But yf he escape that sicknesse, he shall continewe to foure skore yeres or foureskore and tenne. He shall dye in a straunge countrey alone,Death. naked and wythoute absequies at hys buri∣all. He shall not bee buryed.Buriall. No man shall mourne for hym. And there shall be no man that wyll saye, he was my neyghbour. Concerninge his good fortune,Good for∣tune. he shal amonge straungers at∣teyne either vnto good or euill successe.
He shalbe entangled and subiecte to di∣uers troubles, and as is aforesayd shall dye in a straunge countrey, and at the tyme of hys death shall depart wythout companye. If he be borne in the firste parte of the nyghte he shalbe inconstant and mouable, hauynge smale regarde to hys owne familie. If he be borne in the daye time, he shalbe wounded vpon some parte of his bodie. And touchynge his minde, he shalbe a good man and of a good disposition doyng his affaires af∣ter a simple and plaine sort without any regarde of diuinations or knowledge of thinges to come. And the thirde Chapter entreateth of the taile of Taurus whiche is the fifte signe celestiall and hath two starres shaped in this forme, The 5 perti¦cular signe and is called Aliuiseri. Whereby you maye knowe that who soeuer is borne in this signe fyrst touching the dispositi∣on of his body and quantitie thereof,of the bo∣dye. he shalbe of an indifferent forme and sta∣ture,
he shal neyther be whyte nor black but of a colour like honny or nutbroune but his head, face and heare, shall bee beutifull. In his face he shall haue a na∣turall signe or marke, or in his left eye, or elles in his bealy, or righte thigh, and shalbe balde.the minde. Touching his mynde he shalbe solitarie in his busynes doynge the same without cōpany of others, in so much as if it be possible he will haue no man to knowe of it, because he tru∣steth no man. He shalbe ware in his do∣inges for that he mistrusteth all men. He shall be couetous daylye musynge howe he maye get other mens goodes. He shalbe stronge and prone to angre, but it shall not continue, he shall also be verye inconstant. All whiche notwith∣standinge in the ende he shall indeuour him selfe to walke vprightly. And tou∣chinge his life and maner of his lyfe, he shall lyue in trouble,Sicknes, and contiue to fiue and twentie yeres before he be sicke and if he escape that sicknes then, he shall atteyne to fourtie. He shalbe luckie in
tillage, and happye to the female kynde as well foules as beastes, and amonges others fortunate to women. But not∣withstandyng that felicitie, he shall not kepe anye number of seruauntes. Marriage.He shall marrye a wyfe, and for a cer∣teyne space shalbe withoute Chyldren. He shall susteyne enuye and malyce, he shalbe bitten of a Dogge, and stroken vppon one of hys sydes, and hurte wyth a stone. One of his bones shall be bro∣ken. And yf it chaūce that be he borne in the nighte, then he shall haue a naturall signe vpon hys arme. He shall be swifte to iorney or trauell. He shalbe wyse ryotous, and notablye beloued of wo∣men, although in other thynges he is of colde nature, whyche chaunceth by reason of the totall effecte of thys sygne. The fourth Chapter describeth the iudgement of Taurus,The iudge∣mēt of the male. touchynge all & euery the parts thereof concernyng the male. And what so euer male chylde is borne in thys sygne Taurus in what
parte so euer he bee borne after the dis∣position of the bodye, he shall bee woun∣ded or marked in the stones or yarde. He shall bee riotous and stronge, dea∣lynge wyth thynges of great force. And after hys mynde he shall be wyse, and sigulerlye presume in hys owne wytte and force, whereby he shall greatlye prolonge the terme of hys lyfe. He shall gyue no heede to the counsell of hys neyghbours. Nor be carefull and vigilant aboute hys owne affayres. He shall bee beautifull, liberall, and wylfull, a liberall geuer, and for that cause beloued of all men. Concernynge hys lyfe and maner thereof:Infirmtiie. He shall haue seuen diseases, or seuen principall termes. In the three and twentie yere of hys age, he shalbe affected wyth a no∣table maladie, & if he escape al hys infir∣mities, and atteyne to olde yeres, then he shall acquire greate substaunce and much money,Wandering in forteen countries, and by his diligence shall haue great fortune to goodes.
He shall be a great trauailer, and shall passe to vnknowen places, he shall not abide in his owne countrey, but wan∣der from place to place, and from cytye to cytye. And by reason of such alterati∣on obteyne great riches. When he is three and thyrtie yeres of age, he shall see his money and substaunce encrease. At thre and twentie he ought to marry,Marriage. but if he marrie a maide, she shall die. And she being dead he ought to marrye another maide by whome he shalbe made more riche and welthie. He shall be verye fortunate and happie in van∣quishing his enemies.Ill fortune Touchinge his euill fortune, in the fifte yere of his age he shall haue a wounde on his head, arme, or bealy, and bitten with a Dogge he shall haue a marke with a sworde or elles with fier, and sometimes in daun∣ger of drowning.Contrarye daye. Monday is his contra∣rie daye, and therefore vpon that daye let him attempt no new enterprise. The fifte Chapter mencioneth the iudgement of Taurus touchinge the
woman.The iudge∣mēt of the female. Whatsoeuer female or wo∣man that is borne in this signe after her bodies disposition shalbe marked in the face legge or thigh. She shalbe of a good vnderstanding, doubtfull, carefull, mur∣muring. She shalbe be painefull and obsequious,Husbandes and maried to many hus∣bandes by whome she shall haue many Chyldren. She shall haue a naturall paine in her eyes & feete. And ouercom∣myng al her diseases which are thertene in number,Diseases. she shall atteyne to foure skore yeres: and accordynge to her good fortune she shal obteyn a certein promo∣cion.Substance. She shall encrease in ryches by oc∣casion of husbande men and straungers.Infamie. She shall susteyne a notable infamie or slaunder, because in her youth she shall abuse her bodie. Other mens goodes she shall make her owne, whereby she shall vse thefte. She shall continuallye be reproued of lyke offence, and in the ende delyuered from the same, and then chaunge her dwellyng place. The sixte Chapter maketh mencion
of the generall fortune of Taurus.The gene∣ral fortune of Taurus. Wherefore it is to be knowen that this signe hathe a singuler and notable for∣tune in all inequitable beastes that can not be ridden, be they fayre or not fayre, especiallye suche as are of colour whyte. Moreouer thys signe hath fortune in all thynges that maye be geuen.Good for∣tune. It hath also fortune in thynges that belonge to womens apparell or fortune and other delectations. It hath also fortune in all feminine kynde. It hathe fortune in whyte garmentes. The borne in this signe hath a speciall lucke towardes the Southe, and therefore let him direct his chamber doore and bedde towards that parte. Lykewyse let hym dispose all hys busynes that wayes. Concernyng the euyll fortune,Ill fortune the borne in this signe from the middes of September tyll the middes of Marche is moste fortunate aboue other tymes of the yere.Frendes. He is al∣so vnhappie amonges frendes, because he is naturally colde and drie, and there∣by melancolyke, & so consequently sadde
and of sadde conuersation, whereby lyke as he procureth frendes in hast, euen so he loseth and forgoeth them againe. He shall be fortunate in harde enterprises,Sicknes. and shall vanquishe his enemies, yf he passe foure and thirtie yeres, he shall be very longe lyued. He ought to beware of poysons, Collickes, Squinsies,Diseases. Apo∣stumes, Vlcerations whiche growe in the Throte, wherewith amon∣ges others he shall be vexed.
Gemini the thirde celestiall and principall sygne. ☿ ♊ depiction of twins
THE thyrde treatise of this booke, hath a discourse of the thyrde prin∣cipall and entier signe celestial cal∣led Gemini,Gemini is diuided in to 3 partes conteining 6 chapters. and is diuided into syre Chapters lyke vnto the other whiche immediatly before precedeth. Whereof the first entreateth of the head of Ge∣mini, the seconde of the bealye, and the thyrde of the tayle. The fourth of the iudgement of Gemini touchynge the male: The fifte concernyng the female, and the sixte treateth of the generall fortune of Gemini. The first Chapter entreateth of the head of Gemini,the 6 perti¦cular signe beyng the sixe signe particuler, and includeth fiue starres dis∣posed in this forme. Who∣soeuer is borne in thys si∣gne touchyng the inclina∣tion of hys bodye,the body. and first accordyng to the quallitie and quantitie thereof, he shalbe fayre, meane of stature, beautifull in the face, and hath his eye browes comely and all his members well proporcioned and his
sight clere and sharpe. But touchynge the qualitie his heare is blacke his voyce thryll and pleasannt. He hath a sygne or strype in his body. That is to saye vp∣on his head, in his eyes, handes or knees and his mouthe hurte. He is of great strength and force, hearye, and natural∣lye slowe. And after the disposition of his mynde:the minde. He is geuen muche to pray∣er, fearefull and not prone to anger. He is naturally riotous,Infirmities although with wo∣men he shall not be very fortunate: Length of lyfe.Concernynge his lyuynge and maner thereof he shall be troubled with the payne of the backe and shall be vexed with an euyll spirite. He shall lose cer∣tayne of his teeth, and shall lyue tyll he be .vii. or twelue yeres old .xl. or .lxxxiiii. and shall dye in his bedde. And after hys good fortune he shall haue much goods, and shalbe greatly praised of men. His honour shall with better successe hap∣pen in age then in youth. And touchyng his euil fortune he shall haue .ij. wiues, but that directly hath not respect to the
euil fortune but indifferent. He shal ap∣ply with diligence his owne affaires, yf he be borne in ye latter part of the night, he shalbe a seller of flesh & a marchaunt of Catail which are apt to be eaten and saleable in the shambles. And so conse∣quently shalbe a sheder of blood. The ij. Chapter entreateth of the bel∣ly of Gemini,The 7 perti¦cular signe whiche is the vij. perticu∣ler signe, and hath foure starres dispo∣sed in this forme, and is called Alcaya.of the bo∣dye. Where is to be no∣ted that whosoeuer is borne in this signe, first touchinge the disposition of the bodye, he is na∣turallye blacke, hearye, of shorte sta∣ture and straunge. He hath fayre eye∣browes, and a blacke spotte vppon hys Elbowe or pryuye members. And af∣ter the disposition of hys mynde,the mynde he shall be moste happely gyuen to prayer. He shall be timerous and fearefull. His wordes swete and pleasaunt, not∣withstandynge he shall be riotous and vnthryftye.
Length of lyfe.He shall lyue tyll he be tenne yere olde, and yf he escape hys sicknes then, he shall lyue tyll he be thyrtye, and yf hys lyfe be prolonged any further, then he shall liue til he be .xliiii. & if he reuiue his sticknes,Diseases. then he shall liue .lxxii. He shall be troubled with the payne of the backe and vered with an euill sprite. He shal haue much substaunce and rule ouer his owne affayres. If he be borne in the seconde houre of the naturall day, then after his bodies disposition, he shal be hearie and haue a spotte in his eyes, and shall lease many of hys teeth. Like∣wyse yf he be borne in the thyrde houre of the daye, he shalbe happy and of na∣ture whote and moyste. But if he bee borne in the nyght, then he shalbe a sel∣ler of fleshe, or a sheder of bloode, and shall lyue of suche substaunce as happe∣neth to him by marriage. The thyrde Chapter of this treatise, describeth the latter parte of Gemini,The 8 perti¦culer signe & is the .viij. perticular signe celestial, hauing .ij. starres
disposed in this fourme, & is called Al∣daman, wher is to be noted that who so euer is borne in the sayd signe touching the disposition of the body,the body. is naturallye collick and drye, his Galle ascending in∣to the head by his fumositie. His eyes se∣mynge to threaten or disdayne, and hys face chaunging colours, somtime white and pale and sometime reuerteth to his own naturall colour, that is to say, lyke to honny, & yet not withstanding hand∣some and well made in his members & body sauyng that his eyes are somwhat lytle. His voice great, and vpon his fore∣bead or face, hath a marke or strype, or elles the  vpon one of his hands, his brest, priuy partes, or yarde.the mynde And after the mindes inclination hath a good and honest hart, a beneuolant wyll, a fine & pregnant wirte, by reason whereof he shall learne many thinges in so muche that throughe the viuacitie of the same, he shall perceyue and throughly vnder∣stand the thynges that be heareth, ap∣plying the same as though before they
touched hym selfe. He is mere and plea saunt not wythstandynge of cholericke nature. And as he is soone angrye euen so he is soone reconciled. He is bolde of spech & words, before the presence of his prince by reason wherof he wil not spare to touche anye man. Lykewyse he is ve∣rye prone and apte to swearynge, do∣inge or speakynge nothynge wythoute an othe. He is lyght of suspicion, and thereby wyll vtter wordes vnsemelye. He is a great dissemulatour, and sprea∣de: abroade of fansies and tryfles or tones. He is a great drunkarde, and ve∣rye riotous, and by reason of muche bibbyng and swillinge of wyne greatly geuen to leacherye. His first sicknes shall be at .vij. yeres of age,Sicknes, which if he escape then the second shall be at .xxiiii.lxxx. or lxxx, and shall dye of a disease in the throte. Accordynge to hys good fortune he shal finde money and treasure hidden in the earth.Good for∣tune. He shall haue two Chyl∣dren at one hyrthe. And after hys euyll fortune,Ill fortune he shal lyue vnquietly with his
wyfe, who shall lyue but a shorte space. Hys parentes shall not be ryche, whom he shall burye, and shall haue no brother lyke vnto hym self but one. The fourth Chapter determineth the iudgement of Gemini touchynge the male.The iudge∣mēt of the male. And whosoeuer is borne in Gemini, in whether parte of the same soeuer he be borne, first touchynge the disposition of hys bodye, he shall haue an indifferente and comelye stature,the body. beautifull, and fayre of face, stronge and of greate force. He shall haue great authoritie and thynges of muche value to be solde. Hys bodye shall be na∣turally marked. And after the dispositi∣on of the mynde, he shall be an inge∣nious and cunnynge Artificer,the mynde and muche geuen vnto excellent Artes. He shall bee naturallye wyse, and shall truste muche therein, and by reason of the same, what so euer he enten∣deth to goe aboute and accomplyshe, he shall brynge it the sooner vnto good effecte.
Lykewise he is pleasaunt and merciful, easie to be spoken vnto, and by vertue of this constellation shalbe acceptable in al men. He shall not be, muche curious o∣uer his owne affaires, he shall, be sobre and moderate in meate and drinke, and yet not withstanding luxurious and ge∣uen to women. He shall be contencious and vnquiet with his neighbours by reason of his prone disposition to angre and cholor. And for his said promptitude to choler he shall susteyne muche peryll and blame, and yet not withstandyng a profitable man and beloued of all men. Touchynge his lyfe and maner of hys lyfe, he shalbe entangled with manye troubles by reason of his wyfe. And con∣cernyng his euyll fortune,Ill fortune he shal suffer much pain in hys backe or guttes with∣in, and about the stomack. But if it hap∣pen that he eskape his first diseases,Diseases. he shal lyue tyll he be an hundreth and ten and thre monethes. Lykewise touchyng his good fortune,Good for∣tune. he shalbe wt catel great∣ly enriched. He shall finde money that
hath bene hyd in the grounde, and shall triumph ouer his enemies. His chiefest fortune shalbe towardes the East, and therefore towards the same let him dis∣pose all his affaires. In the fiftie yere of his age towards the sayde East part he shal finde money. And touching his euil fortune, he shall trauell muche vpon the sea, and when he is .xxxii. yeres olde, he shalbe in danger of the fier & sword, but yet delyuered from that peryll and shall receyue hurt of some fourefooted beast. The Twesdaye is his vnfortune daye,Euil dayes. and therefore vpon that daye let hym at∣tempt no enterprise, nor washe his head or feete, or put on any newe apparell, or suche lyke. The fifte Chapter entreateth of the iudgement of Gemini touching the fe∣male.The iudge∣mēt of the female. Whereit is to be noted that what soeuer mayde chylde that is borne in this signe, first touchynge her body, she shalbe very fayre, and haue a wound vp on her body. And touchyng her mynde she shall of nature be very wyse and in∣genious.
She shall be mery and courte∣lyke, diligent and readye to obey. She shalbe very wylfull and whote of minde and by reason of the sayde heate of will, complexion, or nature, somwhat angrie, which wil not lōg cōtinue. And because she is free of speche, she shall be muche boastynge of her selfe, and a great lyer speakynge one thynge and daynge the contrarye.Length of lyfe. If thys mayde or woman doe escape the force of her diseases, she shal lyue tyll .lxxxiij. yeres of age. She shall susteyne many notable infirmities and diseases of her bodye within the tyme of her age of .xxxiij. and chiefelye aboute fiftene yeres the Phrensie or Lunatike passion by the space of four∣tye dayes,Lunatik of Moneage. whiche disease is commonlye called the Moneage, or infirmitie of the Moone, whereby the Pacient is called Lunaticus. Semblably, tyll she be .xxxviij. she shall passe ouer many sorowes,Good for∣tune. but by reason of Phisicke whiche shalbe mi∣nistred vnto her she shall recouer. Like∣wyse touchynge her good fortune, be∣cause
of many troubles whiche she shall suffer, at length she shall obteyne to greate honoure and muche seruyce, and obedience shall be done vnto her, and through her husbandes fortune she shal verye muche reioyce, and through him atteyne to great promicion. And at three & fourtye she shall begyn to waxe ryche. She shal see reuengement ouer her ene¦mies, and after .xlv. shall be called a mo∣ther of Chyldren. And her first begot∣ten shall be no male but a female,Chyldren. accor∣dyng to the force of her naturall constel∣lation. And touchyng her euyll fortune,Ill fortune. she shalbe labourious and painfull, and tyl .xxxv. yeres of age, she shalbe enrap∣ped with muche paine and sorowe. She shall be hurte with whore water, and shal haue a fall from an hic place. She shalbe bitten with a Dogge. Twesdaye is her contrary & infortunate day,Euil dayes. there∣fore let her not wash her head vpon that day, or do any new fact or enterprise. The .vj. chap. mencioneth the cōmon fortune of gemini,The gene∣ral fortune of Gemini wher is to be noted ye
THe fourth signe called Cancer be∣ing the fourth treatise,Cancer is diuided in to 5 partes conteining 5 chapters. is deuided into .v. partes or .v. Chapters. The first entreateth of the head of Cancer. The .ij. of the taile hauyng no mo parts but those twayne. The .iij. of the iudge∣ment of Cancer touching the male. The .iiij. touchinge the female. And the v. of the vniuersall fortune thereof. The firste entreateth of the head of Cancer,the .x. perti¦culer signe and is the .ix. particuler signe called Albacra, & hath .x. starres shaped in this forme: where is to be noted, that who so euer is borne in this signe, in ye day time,of the bo∣dye. touchinge the bodies disposition shalbe leane of body only, & of heare come∣ly. His eyebrowes narow. His nostrylls ample, wyde, brode, or large. He shall haue naturall signes in hys brest or side, in hys arme or ryghte Elbowe, in hys Legge, and sometymes vppon the face. Touchyng the disposition of the mynde this partie shall bee verye irefull,the mynde and
thereby a great lyer, a Chyder, and figh∣ter euen against his owne frendes. He shalbe blacke of colour, muche resem∣blyng the colour of Honnye. He shall be eloquent, expert and wittie, a Carier of tailes, and reporter of wordes. He shall be glorious, reuengynge and a great drynker. But yet in all the premises wyll hee glad to receyue aduertisment of his frendes, for the admendement of those vices.Good for∣tune. Touchyng the good for∣tune, he shall bee of a good inclination, Thereby recoueryng a number of fren∣des. He shall lyue thyrty yeres, and then shall susteyne a great sickenesse,Sicknes. whiche yf he eskape, he shall lyue to the age of fourtie and eyght yeres, and then shall be sicke, whiche yf he recouer, he shall lyue .lxxxx. He shall bee payned in the raines of the back, in his knees and eies, he shall be bitteen with a Dogge. And touching his indifferent fortune he shal marry .iij. wiues, but the thirde wife of these .iij. shal bury him, & before he die he shalbe bitten with a dog, as is aforesaid.
If he be borne in the night, then after his myndes disposition he shall be verye angrie, wicked and madde, ready to stryke. And concernyng his diseases, he shalbe payned with the headache, in the harte, or backe, or els in all. Touchynge his good fortune, his ende shalbe better then his beginninge. And touching hys euyl fortune, he shalbe in ye thraldom of a great man. Likewise he shall possesse the goodes of his kynred. The seconde Chapter of this present treatise describeth the the tayle of Can∣cer, whiche is the tenth particular signe caled Alearf, and hath twoo Starres in thys forme. Where is to be knowen, that who so euer is borne in this signe (except there be any speciall or vrgent cause ye contrary.) Touching the bodies dispositiō, he hath a smale body & short, but not so extreme smale, but yt it shalbe of an indifferēt bignes: the same shal haue two markes, that is to wette, vpon his legge and priuy parts nere the
guttes, and shall haue a strype vpon his lyppes. His eyebrowes shalbe very hea∣ry, and his face swolne and puft vp. He shal haue a marke vpon his ryght hand, in his forehead, breste, bealye or guttes. He shall receyue sucke of two nourses. His colour is very blacke, but his bodye shalbe somewhat white (chiefly his face) and hearie, and yet after the course of this parte of the signe, he shalbe redde. After the disposition of the minde, he shalbe wise and discrete. He shall not be a sercher of many matters, but rather dulle & stack. He shalbe ireful, wrathfull molestious or greuous, and wicked or vngracious in strykyng. And although he be wrathful, yet his angre shalbe pri∣uye and hidden from anye man, in so muche that when he is angrie, no man shall knowe any cause why but himselfe onely, and therfore desperat in striking. He shalbe prone to adultrie, by reason of the heate whiche hath dominion in him in whome the fyer beareth the chiefe rule. He shalbe a great offender,
and shall commit muche mischiefe, and shall be soone angrie. Lykewyse tou∣ching his lyfe and maner thereof, he shall lyue fourty yeres, and shall dye in a straunge lande. He shall suffer great paine in his backe and head. And tou∣chyng his good fortune, for his diligent and pleasaunt conuersation, he shall be beloued of all men with whome he is familier, and shall haue many Chyl∣dren. He shall gayne much by his lands and Vinyardes, and his end shal vaine, He shal not tary long in his way and ior¦ney, but hauyng accomplyshed his pur¦pose shal soone retourne. Concernynge his euyll fortune, that although he haue manye Chyldren, and in the same shall be fortunate, yet his owne brethren shal not lyue longe, but shall remayne bro∣therlesse. He shalbe hurte by fyer, and depryued of some bone, and shall haue a strype vpon his head. The third chapter of this treatise dis∣courseth the iudgement of Cancer tou∣ching the male. Where note that who∣soeuer
male childe is borne in this signe first touchyng the disposition of the bo∣dye, he shall be naturallye mightye and stronge, whose body shall be grosse, and touchynge the disposition of the mynde, he shall be wyse, wittie, somewhat gen∣tle, a great and manifest Scorner and Mocker, and shall speake playnelye. He shall be naturallye Cholericke, and a great Threatner, but his anger wyll be soone appeased, and shall be well be∣loued of all men. And touchynge hys lyfe and maner of his lyfe. This man within the space of two and twenty yere especially aboute the ende of that tyme, he shall susteyne sicknes. Lykewyse in thre yeres folowynge, that is to saye, about .xxvj. yeres old, he shalbe in great daunger of life. Semblably he shal haue vij. diseses or notable infirmities, which if he escape, he shall liue according to the efficacie of this signe .lxxx.viij. yeres & iij. monethes, & shall die of the disease of the belly. Cōcerninge his good fortune, imediatlye after he be .xxiiij. yeres olde:
He shall see his riches beginne to en∣crease, & such thinges as he is borne vn∣to he shall possesse aboute the middle of his age, that is to saye, when he is .xliiij. yere old. He shal haue the gouernmēt of some Castel or Hold, & shal haue autho∣ritie in the common wealth. His for∣tune is to haue .iij. maisters, & by for∣tune of one man he shall atteyne vnto great promocion. He shal trauell farre & shal haue to do wt many affayres, & re∣ceiue much sorow by meanes of a straū∣ger. He shal purchase maners & farmes & shal finde money that is hidde, he shall be enriched by his wyfe. And touchyng his euyll fortune he shall vndoubtedlye susteyne diuers and sundrye troubles and daungers. He shalbe hurte with a sworde, in daunger of drownynge, he shall fall from an high place, and shalbe in peryll of fier. He shall receyue hynde∣raunce by his owne children, and shal∣be poore tyll he be twentye yeres olde, hys seruice and good iournes shall bee counted ingrate, displeasaunt, & axed
to vnthankfulnes. He shal haue victorie ouer his enemies. A great mā shal rule ouer hym and of him, accordinge to the force of this signe, he shalbe externated and banished for some notable facte. Wednesday is his contrary, and moste vnfortunate, and therfore vpon that day let him not washe his head, nor put on anye newe apparell or doe anye notable thynge. The .iiij. Chapter discloseth the iud∣gement of Cancer touching the female and is to be noted that the maide borne in the saide signe after the disposition of her bodye, shalbe lusty and of stronge complexion. She shalbe well proporcio∣ned, neate, somwhat fatte, nimble, and wel made. She shalbe very wittie, wise prouident and subtile, irefull, diligent, shamefast, double minded, painfull, bold whote of mynde, and spitefull, but her angre wyl be soone appeased, & through the vehemencie of her angre wyll spare for no talke, but vtter her stomack. And she is vnmerciful and wil haue no com∣passion
vpon one that wepeth. She shall haue al great fluxe before she be .xxxij. yere old, and at .xxxij. she shalbe in dan∣ger of death. Lykewyse at .lxxx. yeres she shalbe in lyke daunger of death, be∣cause through the force of her constella∣tion she shalbe subiect to great peryll. And at .lxxx.vj. yere she shall dye. Touchyng her good fortune when she is .xxx. yeres olde she shall haue a sonne, and after .xxxviij. she shall atteyne vnto great promocion. She shall haue Chyl∣dren by .iij. husbandes, and by all thrée shalbe in great honour. She shall conti∣nually be enryched, and shall possesse much Cattail. And touchinge her euill fortune she shall be greatly enuied and shalbe hurt with a sworde. She shalbe troubled with water, & suffer displeasur in her body by fier, & shalbe very muche vexed with the collick. In the 38 yere of her age she shal suffer much peril throu∣gh her nieghbors, she shall lese her first husbād, & her husband shal loue another mans wife. In the .viij. moneth of her xxx. yere, she shall by her parents negli∣gence
suffer some danger by a whot bur¦ning iron, whereby she shalbe in daun∣ger of death. The .v. chap. entreateth of the indiffe∣rent fortune of Cācer, wher is to be no∣ted yt the borne in this signe is fortunate in his affaires, & chiefly marchandise, & in cattel not apt to be ridden, especiallye such as be of colour of white, his fortune shalbe better vpon land then water & in such things as may be caried or trāspor¦ted by water chiefly ye colour beīg whit. He is likewise verye fortunat in tillage & in ambassage, when ye Mone is grow∣ing, or before the ful, for when it decrea∣seth then he is infortunat. The borne in this signe shall suffer muche coughing, consumption in the lungs, plurisie, brea¦king out, the skapes, & such like, if it be a maid ye is borne in this signe beside these inward diseases she shalbe in danger of drowning. His weke dayes whiche are good be Mōday, Thursday & friday. His euil day is Twesday. As for Wednes∣daye and Saterdaye be indifferent.
His better fortune is towardes the Southe, and therefore let him direct all hys affayres that waye, and that waye also place his chamber doore, and bedde. He that is borne in this signe, is natu∣rallye sanguine, muche disposed to Cholor mixte wyth Phleame. And therefore let him weare his apparell of coloure Redde and Whyte. Redde because of Fyer and blood, and White by rea∣son of Phlea∣me.
Leo the fyfte celestiall and principall sygne. ☉ ♌ lion
THe .d. treatise discloseth the effect of Leo beyng the fifte total signe and is deuided into three partes. That is to saye, into the head, belly, and taile, and hath sixe Chapters. The first en∣treateth of the head of Leo. The seconde of the belly. The third of the tayle. The fourth of the iudgement of Leo tou∣chyng the male. The fifte of the female. And the sixte of ye equal fortune of both. The firste entreateth of the head of Leo, whiche is the eleuenth perticu∣ler signe, & is called Algebachac hauing iiij. starres disposed in this forme. And note that who soeuer is borne in this sig∣ne, first touchinge the dis∣position of the bodye hath a comely face, plain and corpulent, a fierce loke & terri∣ble. A litle nose & brode, but yet come∣ly, and a body proper. His mouth shalbe hurt, hauing therevpon a strype, but yet notwithstanding his teeth faire & great eares. His shulders great & brode, but his back wel made. He shal haue certein
naturall markes, & the firste in his face, the rest vpon his thigh, brest, legge, and priuy parts. Touching his colour, his body shalbe white, his face neither black nor white but indifferent. Touching the disposition of the minde, he is natu∣rally geuē to be notably proude & of such stomacke that in hys heart, he woulde wishe himselfe comparable to Kinges, yea and them to excell, yf it were possi∣ble. And he is of suche and so greate pryde, that by reason of his haultie co∣courage, as well in value as dignitie, or other sufficiencie, he wyll suppose no man in the world (be he neuer so great) to bée hys equall or matche, or at least wyse greater then he, and also in hys heart iudgeth hym selfe to surpasse or is able to excell in humaine felicities all and singular other persons. He is also co¦uetous and very ireful, and yet that not∣withstanding, of much myrth & pastime in so much ye continually he wold be me∣ry & plai: he wil be a wise man & proper, & the Magik sciēce wil do him great stede.
Lykewise touchyng his lyfe and maner thereof, he shalbe muche vexed with the headache, in suche forte as he shall be straughte of his wittes by reason of the fumes, whiche ascende from the Galle. He shalbe pained in his thighes chiefely in the vpper parts thereof. He shal haue thre principall diseases, the firste when he is .xiij. yeres olde. The seconde when he is .xl. yeres olde, yf he eskape the first. If he also eskape the second, then the .iij. he shall fele aboute .xlviij. which also yf he recouer, then shall he atteyne to the summe of a hundreth yeres. And either he shall die vpō ye swordes point, or elles by some greuous infirmitie of the body. And accordinge to his prosperous for∣tune, he shall passe from one promocion to another, in so much as amonge kings and princes he shalbe familier and well beloued. He shall get muche treasure, and bring it heaped together. He shall lose them againe, and at length shall fal in daunger and displeasure of some pier or noble man.
The .ij. chapter entreateth of the bel∣lye of Leo, & is the .xij. perticuler signe,the 12. perti¦culer signe being called. Alcomencon, and hath .iiij. starres formed in this maner. Where note that who so euer is borne in this Sygne, hathe a marueylous euil and infortunate constellation. First touchynge his body and maner thereof, whether he borne in the nighte or daye, hath a broade breste, a longe face, smale stones, and slender legges, and hath a natural marke in the raines of his back. Touchinge his mynde, he is of hearte proude or irefull. For eftsoones he is angrie, and is of speche very rusticall. He is verye doubtfull and suspicious in his doynges. Touchynge his good for∣tune, he shall haue no good fate, but by vertue of this signe shall be moste infor∣tunate as is aforesaid. For he that is bor∣ne in this signe is subiect to manye trou¦bles, yf he be borne in the daye he shal∣be verye fearefull and timerous when
he trauaileth, yf he be borne in the night what houre so euer it be, sauing the se∣conde, then he shalbe of a mery counte∣naunce, and shall haue a rounde nose, a stripe vpon his head, and a naturall marke vpon his féete. He shalbe wittie, fearfull and carelesse. He shal haue thrée diseases. The firste shall chaunce when he is .xj. yere olde. The seconde when he is .xxiiij. And the thyrd when he is .lviij. And shall dye vpon the sworde, or elles of some other great infirmitie of the body. He shall haue two wyues whyche shall faythfully loue hym, but them he shall not loue, but rather shall hate to the vttermoste. He shall haue a strype in hys Head, or Hyppe, whyche shall happen by fyer, or shall haue some other sygne. He shall be depriued of hys speche after the disposition of the Sygne, and influence thereof, vnlesse the same by some perticular cause bée wythstan∣ded or elles interrupted by the diuine clemencie, or elles by the libertie and wyll of the Lady of thys Science whose
libertie this Sygne, not withstandynge maye bée applied to good, and to vertue, and to workes godlye, who also maye appease and mitigate the influence and malyce of the sayde Sygne. Semblably yf he be borne in the seconde houre of the nyght, ouer and besydes the premis∣ses. Touchynge his euyll fortune, he shall lese hys Infantes and Children, and fewe shall remayne on lyue. Lyke∣wise he shalbe curious in searchynge of Parables and Mysteries. Hys firste Chylde shall be a female, and the se∣conde a male. Durynge hys lyfe he shall susteine much trouble and perylles. The thyrde Chapter mencioneth the tayle of Leo, or the latter parte there∣of, whyche is the tenth perticuler Sygne. And hath one onelye Starre in thys forme. And who so euer is borne in thys Sygne, tou∣chynge the bodyes disposition, is suffi∣ciently bygge of stature, whose voyce is vehement and bygge.
He shall haue thre naturall markes in his brest, & shalbe marked in the throte, legge, or middle of the hande. And shall haue a strype vpon his bellye, his colour shall be whyte, mixte with a roseall co∣lour. His heares shalbe of colour some∣what redde, but his eyebrowes some∣what blacke, and shal haue much heare. Also concernyng the mynde, he shall be lowly, gentle, not ambicious, but paci∣ent. He shall suffer infirmitie, but the same he shall tolerate with muche paci∣ence. In eating he shalbe very moderat after the qualitie of this signe. Likewise angrie he shall be and lecherous, in so much that although he marry a wyfe of his owne afinitie, yet he shalbe disposed to lecherye. He shall haue two maner of sickennesses. The firste at .xxiij. yeres olde, at what tyme he shalbe sicke of the smale Poxe or of an ague. The seconde, shalbe at .xliiij. yeres olde. Both whiche yf he eskape, he shall lyue .lxxxx. yeres and shal die in exile and out of his owne Countrey. Lykewyse, concernyng hys
good fortune, he shall raigne and beare rule ouer his owne Countrey, and shall haue authoritie to iudge either suche as is a thefe or malefactour, or of another man, or els such as was his owne fugi∣tiue or Verlet. Moreouer he shalbe of power to do many thyngs with Lords & Piers of Realmes. He shalbe very hap∣pye in matters of husbandrye. He shall haue a verye fayre and beautifull wyfe, whose colour shalbe salowe lyke to one that hath the greene sicknes, and she shalbe one of hys owne kynred, whome when he hath marryed, GOD wyll gyue vnto him muche substaunce accor∣ding to the efficatie and influence of this signe. He shall auoyde many perylles and shall enioye goodes abundaunt. He shall haue paines in one his of feete and shalbe bereft of both. He shalbe depri∣ued of one of his bones. And vpon hys belly shall be hurte, either with iron or fier. In his affayres he shal not accom∣plishe his wyl, except it be in Wynter tyme or in the Spryng. Sixe monethes
he shalbe fortunat in hys busynes, euen accordynge to hys Hearts desire: That is to saye, in September, October, No∣uember, December, Ianuary, and Fe∣bruarye. In Sommer & Autumne he shall not be so fortunate. He shall lese much goods, and his labour shall litle a∣uaile, by reason of the three markes in his breste. Let him not passe from one Countrey to another, because chaunge is not profitable to him. If therefore he wil be fortunat, let him continue in one place certeyne. The .iiij. Chapter mencioneth the iudgement of Leo touchynge the male. Where note, that what soeuer man Childe is borne in this signe. First tou∣ching the vniuersal disposition of the bo¦dy. serch the .iij. perticuler signes of Leo aforesayde, and there see the condicions equall of the same. And touchyng the disposition of the mynde, he shalbe na∣turally wittie, subtile, eloquent, coragi∣ous, irefull, and sollen. For he wyll be soone angrie, and soone pleased againe.
His stomack and subden angre is such, that by reason of his natural animositie he shall susteyne muche contumelie and displeasure. He shalbe very couetous, ar¦rogant bold & wilful to al thyngs, which he séeth or heareth, in so muche as what soeuer he eyther heareth or séeth, al that doth greatly please hym, and that he embraseth and desyreth to enioye and do the same, accordyng to the exigence and maner of the thynge he heareth or séeth, and specially, yf the thyng heard or séene be stable and able to be suffe∣red, but within a whyle after he wyll be werye thereof, and care nothynge for it. Lykewyse he is bountifull and liberall, because he can not kéepe se∣crete the thynge he possesseth, and al∣thoughe he woulde kéepe it secrete, he can not but with great difficultie. He is naturally gentle and quiet, but yet a de∣rider and mocker. And touching his life and maner therof, he shall haue .vij. ter∣mes or special sicknesses, whereof the firste thrée shall be verye vehement.
The first shalbe when he is .x. yeres old. The second when he is .xx. And the .iij. when he is .xl. And yf he passe and skape the sayd .iij. diseases, then naturally and with happines inough, he shal attayne to .lxxx. and .viij. yeres. In lyke maner touchyng his good fortune, he shal with good successe abyde the brunttes of ma∣lyce, and the state of hys lyfe. He shall haue dominion ouer his Countrey, and shal vanquish his enemies, although he shal obiect him self to many afflictions & daungers, from the whiche he shall by Godds helpe right well eskape. From xxx. yeres vpwarde he shall aspyre to his better fortune, and then shal sée his sub∣staunce augment. Of honourable per∣sonages he shal purchase muche welth, and thereby hys house shalbe plentifull of money and abundaunt of ryches. Concernyng hys euyll fortune, he shall haue a fall from an hygh place, and shal haue payne in one of his feete, and by water shal susteyne trouble. He shall not kepe his first wyfe. Twesday shalbe
his contrary daye, wherein if he be wise, let him doe no newe matter or beginne anye enterprise. In the .v. Chap. is entreated the iud∣gement of Leo, touching the female. Who accordinge to the maner and state of her body, shall haue a broad brest and small thighes which are tokens of bold∣nes and stoutnes of stomack. She shalbe verye menstruous and fertile inough, not withstandinge she shall haue but few Children, with certein other condi∣tions of her bodye before declared in the iij. perticuler signes. After the dispositi∣on of her mynde she shalbe naturallye subtile wittie, & desirous of learnyng. She shalbe chaste, shamefast, courtilike diligent and of good stomack, by reason whereof she shalbe, very prone & subden to angre & yet shalbe soone again appea∣sed. And not withstanding her angre, yet in her owne housholde very liberall, by whose meanes the house shalbe plenti∣ful of meate & drink. And because of her natural subtiltie, she shalbe very bolde,
for as muche as what soeuer she hea∣reth or séeth if it seeme to comprise anye subtiltie or difficulty of matter, imidiat∣ly she wil desire to know it. She is libe∣ral because she can not keepe close suche things as she hath. She is very lowly & humble, & if she chaunce to be spotted wt any sinne, imediatly she will fall downe prostrat vpon the ground, & humbly aske mercy & forgeuenes of her Creator. Con¦cerning her lyfe and maner thereof, she shall suffer the lunatike passion & a nota¦ble payne of her hart & stomack, which if she eskape, she shal liue till she be .lxxxv. yeres of age. She shall also be pained in her toes. She shall haue sufficient re∣uengement vpon her enemies. And af∣ter her euyll fortune she shall haue ma∣ny fortunes. For first she shal haue a fal from an high place, and her body hurt wt iron or fier. When she is .xxiij. yeres old she shalbe married, and by her husband atteyn to promotion. Her husband shall not lyue long, but shall die by meane of poyson or witchecrafte. And at length
shall marry another who shall loue her derely. Of her neighbour she shall re∣ceyue damage in her treasure. When she is .xij. yeres old vnlesse she take good hede shall be deceyued by oppression vp∣on her bodye, and shall lese her maiden-head. She shalbe troubled in the water and in daunger of lyfe. Thursday is her contrary day, and therefore let her do no notable thyng vpon that day, washe her head or put on any apparell. And here is also to be noted, that the best remedy to auoyde all her misfortunes, is first to ad∣dresse her selfe, by prayer to our Lorde GOD onelye, with all her heart. And to carye aboute her precious Stones suche as be orient and glisterynge. And then easly she shal ouercome al her mis∣aduentures by gods helpe. The .vj. Chapter determineth the ge∣neral iudgement of Leo, & is to be noted that this signe hath a singuler fortune in warfare & dominion: besides which they yt be borne in Leo, haue pains in the sto∣mack, apostumes, & pestiferous agues
Such as be borne in the seruice of great men, the same this signe presenteth to their seruice. He shalbe fortunat to gold brasse, horses, and to suche marchandise as be of colour red. Frō the mid of Octo∣ber to the mid of Aprill, & from the mid of Iuly to the mid of August, he shall prosper otherwise not. And touching the weke, he shall haue .iij. happie dayes, to wete, Sonday, Twesdaye, & Wednes∣day. Saterday is his infortunate daye. But Munday, Thursday, & Friday, be indifferēt. Likewise his fate is towards the East, and therefore let him place his chamber dore, bed, windowe, and all his affaires into that parte, espe∣ciallye yf they be no∣table.
Virgo the syxte celestiall and principall sygne. ☿ ♍ virgin
THe .v. treatise of this booke entrea∣teth of the .vj. entier and celestiall signe called Virgo, with the three principall partes thereof. The first be∣ing the head of Virgo. The seconde the first parte of the tayle, and the thirde the seconde part of the same. And is diuided into .vj. Chapters. The firste Chapter mencioneth the head. The .ij. the firste part of the taile. And the .iij. the .ij. part. The .iiij. the iudgement of Virgo, tou∣ching the male. The .v. the female. And the .vj. the common and indifferent for∣tune of Virgo. The firste Chapter determineth the head of Virgo, being the .xiiij. perticuler signe called Lacxa, and hathe .v. starres in this forme dispo∣sed. And he that is borne in thys signe, shall be fayre and beautifull, and of comely stature, whyte vpon his breste, but his heares shalbe redde. And by the
force of this constellation. He is natu∣rally enclined to haue curled heare and redde, and by nature loueth the same, in so much that if he haue not such heare of that colour, yet he will séeke to haue the same coloured by art. He shall also be naturally marked in the face, bellye, thigh and legge, and vpon his right El∣bowe, and the said mark can not by any meanes be put away. Concernyng the disposition of his mynde, he shall be ho∣nest, skilfull, apte, shamefast, a louer of iustice. His minde shalbe good and hys voyce vehemente and loude. He shall bée as symple as a Lambe, hauynge no regarde or care vppon the goodes of the worlde, or the goodes of fortune. He shall knowe nothynge that is good, nor shall take héede of anye man, but shall trust all men. He shall take no regard of harmes wherwyth he myghte bée infected, and that by reason of the foure naturall markes vpon hys Face, Bellye, Thyghe, and Legges, aforesayde.
And by force of the same, he shalbe very negligent, imploying more care vpon his owne affaires as is aforesayde. But yf he woulde take héede, no doubte he might bryng them to good effect. He shal be desirous and couetous. He shalbe irefull and subden, and by reason of hys soubden foresyght of offence, he shal pre∣uent the angre of his brethren. Tou∣chyng his life and maner thereof, if this man be borne in the .iiij. houre of the na∣turall day, he shall dye without any sick∣nes, but if he be borne in the fifte houre, then before his death he shall be verye sick. He shall haue .iiij. termes or princi∣pall sickennesses. The first, when he is xv. yeres of age. The .ij. at .xxij. The .iij. at .xxxvj. And the .iiij. and laste at fiftye, which if he escape, he shall atteyne to .lx. Lykewyse touchyng hys good fortune, the man so borne shall haue a good fate, and by reason thereof shall be exalted, and haue great preferment. He shall haue many Chyldren, and yf he woulde vse diligence vpon his owne busynes,
he shoulde profite very much, especially in tillage. When he is .xxxvj. yeres olde he shalbe preferred to honour and digni∣tie. But if he be borne in the first houre of the naturall daye, then he shall be a great kyng or lorde. But if in the thyrde houre then kyng of all kynges, a migh∣ty Soueraigne. He shall haue great pro∣speritie, and shall exagarat to hym selfe infinite treasure. Lykewise touchynge his euil fortune, when he is married his wyfe shall lyue but a short space, and he him selfe shall dye with her, or wythin a whyle after. And although he shalbe a∣bundaunt in Children, yet few of them shall lyue. He shall fall into many mise∣ries, because he shalbe payned in the belly or some other place. He shal more∣ouer be marked in his priuye partes. If he be borne in the .iiij. houre of the na∣turall day, then shall he dye soddenly wythout any disease. He shalbe diuorsed from his wyfe, whereof he shall haue great heauines and sorow. The .ij. chapter entreateth of the first
part of the taile of Virgo, called Aleca∣neth, and hath .v. stars shaped in this forme, & is the .xv. per∣ticuler signe. Whosoeuer is borne in this signe,the 15. perti¦culer signe after his bodies disposition, & first ac∣cordyng to the quantitie. He shalbe high in stature. He shall haue a brode and large face and a beautiful, a long and great beard, a fair nose. After the qualitie of the same he shal haue faire hear, narow eyes, and al his body shalbe white. He shalbe natu∣rally marked in the forehead, in the vp∣per hip, vpon his shulders, the paulme of his hand, in his belly & guttes. After the disposition of the minde, he shalbe wise, his counsell shalbe heard & apte to euery thing. He shalbe lowly, good, deuoute, & shal loue to be praised. He shal by nature atteyn to liue to .lxij. yeres, and shall dye before he be olde. And touching his good fortune, he shal haue two wiues, which shalbe very substanciall and riche, in so much as by them he shall possesse great
riches. Lykewise he shalbe very apt to euery thing whiche hath a good ende. Concerning his euill fortune, he shalbe bitten of a Dogge in the face and on his body. He shall haue fewe Children, and they shal not be long lyued, but shall die in short space. Further, all such thynges as are spoken of in this Chapter are ge∣nerall, and generally belong to all suche as are borne in this signe. If the partie borne in this signe happen to be borne vpon the Fridaye, then he shall haue great misfortune. If he be borne in the nighte, then he shall haue a naturall marke vppon the Crowne of the Head, the Bellye, the Face, or foote, and shall haue greate Feete. And touchynge the disposition of the mynde, he shall bee an vpryght man walkynge iustelye, seldome exceadynge the pathe of equitie. Lykewyse he shall haue two dyseases especiall, wher∣of the fyrste shall bee when he is foure∣tene yeres of age.
The other at .lv. or .lxxx.viij. and shall dye in hys owne house, but the cause of hys death shall be a stroke wyth Iron or a sworde. After hys good fortune he shal marry two wyues, and one of them shall haue a very small necke. Lykewise he shall haue muche by meanes of hys Children. Also touchyng his euill for∣tune in olde age he shall fall into the thraldome of a man of honour or power, and shalbe stroken with Iron, and in his owne house shall dye of the sayde stroke. In gettinge of riches shall take muche paynes and labour, and straungers shal enioye the fruites of his trauell. the 16. perti¦culer signeThe .iij. Chapter entreateth of the ij. and last part of the tayle of Virgo cal∣led Aliena, beynge the .xvj. signe particu∣ler. Where is to be noted, that whosoe∣uer is borne in this signe, touchyng the disposition of hys bodye and the qualitie thereof. He shal haue a fayre stature and a simple countenaunce. He shall haue a naturall signe not able to be put awaye vpon hys ryght Elbowe. Accordynge
to the disposition of the mynde, he shal∣be honest, apt to learnynge, wyse, good and shamefast. He shalbe very coue∣tous in tillage, but in other affayres he shalbe remisse and negligent, whereas if he would take héede he should greatly profite. Lykewyse touchyng hys lyfe, he that is borne in this signe, and specially yf he be borne in the .v. houre of the day, he shall naturally haue .iij. sickennesses whereof the firste shalbe when he is .xij. yeres old. The ij. when he is .xxxij yeres olde. And the .iij. and last, when he is xl yeres olde. If he chaunce to eskape the first, which wylbe very daungerous then he shalbe afflected with the .ij. whi∣che yf he also eskape, then he shall attein to the .iij. And touchinge his fortune be∣fore he be .xxxvj. he shal obteyne to a cer∣teyne of honour and office. He shal haue many Chyldren and shall profit greatly in tillage as is aforesayd. And if he wold be careful and diligent, he should great∣ly profit in all matters. Hys euyll for∣tune is, yt he shal fal into many troubles
by reason he shalbe muche payned in the bellye, or by some other meanes shall be extremely vexed. He shall haue a strype vppon hys Head, or hys Face, or vppon bothe, but notably in his priuye partes, where he shalbe greatly pained. And al∣though he shall haue many chyldren, yet fewe shal remaine on lyue, and in that poynt shalbe very infortunate. He shal∣be a great Horder, and a greate gathe∣rer together of money, but by mys∣chaunce shall lose hys money so gathe∣red. If he be borne in the .iij. houre, then he shall be moste puysaunt a Kynge of Kyngs, & consequently most fortunat, yf he borne in ye .iiij. houre he shalbe infor∣tunat, because he shal die soddenly. If he be borne in ye 5 houre then in his body he shalbe very foule & deformed, but in ri∣ches he shalbe very abundant plentiful. The fourth Chapter discourseth the iudgemente of Virgo touchynge the male, and first touchyng the disposition of the body, he shalbe beautifull, of good behauiour, and shall haue a naturall
marke in his shulders and loynes, and in none other place. He shalbe longe li∣ued. He shall haue .iij. fortunate and speciall dayes in the weeke. That is to saye: Sonday, Twesday, and Wednes∣day. His infortunat day is Friday. And that day euer is somewhat infortunate. His good fortune is toward the South. And therefore let hym dispose his affai∣res that waye, together with the doore and bedde. The same is naturally of the Melancolyke complexion, and is of na∣ture cold and drye. Therefore his appa∣rell ought to be of some darke or blacke colour. The fifte Chapter toucheth the iud∣gement of Virgo, concerninge the fe∣male. Wherefore note that the mayde or woman borne in this signe, shall be marked in the said places as is described in this Chapter precedent. Touchynge the disposition of her mynde, she shall be wittie, shamefaste, chaste, gentle, bene∣uolent and glad to please al men, wher∣by she shalbe beloued of all men.
But she shalbe somewhat curste, and that only belongeth to her euyl fortune. Aboute .xvij. yeres of her age, she shall marry, and her first husband she shall not loue, who shall dye, and afterwards marry the .ij. Her first Chyld shalbe of excellent beautye. She shalbe enrap∣ped with many sorowes. She shal suffer diuers maladies, which yf she eskape she shall lyue .lxx. yeres .vj. monethes, & v. dayes. Her fortunat dayes bée Wed∣nesday and Sunday. Her infortunat day is Saterday. Therfore vpon that day let her begynne no new worke, but abstayne from all notable busynes. They that be borne in this signe as wel men as women shall suffer much payn in their thighes, féete, and head. Her fortune is towards the South, &c. as in the former Chap. And both kynds shal∣be liberall. The .vj. Chapter compriseth the com∣mon fortune of Virgo. Where is to bée noted that the borne in this signe haue their fortune in tillage, and in al things
generally thervnto apperteining, espe∣cially in all things that be sowen. They be subiecte to paines of the thighes and feete as fistulas or such like, ache in the head, dropsie, the flixe or collick, besides others before mencioned. And emonges other countreis thei shal visit the citie of Ierusalem, the riuer of Euphrates, Spaine, & other countreys adioyning. And their good fortune or chief dominiō is towards the South. Their fortunate dayes are Sundaye, Twesday & Wed∣nesdaye. Their infortunate is Fridaye and Saterday: but Friday to them that be borne in this signe is euer infortu∣nate. He that is borne in this signe, as is aforesaide is melancholike, colde, and drie. And therefore let him weare black apparell, or such as be of darke colour, and of no lyght colour, because this signe is altogether melancolick that is to saye: ear∣thie.
Libra the seuenth celestiall and principall sygne. ♀ ♎ depiction of scale
THe .vij. treatise doeth demonstrate the effect of the .vij. Celestial signe called Libra, and is diuided into .v. Chapters. The firste determineth the head of Libra. The .ij. the tayle of Li∣bra. This signe hath but onely the sayde two principall partes. The .iij. Chapter mentioneth the iudgement of Libra touchyng the male. The .iiij. touchynge the female. The .v. and last the generall and common fortune of Libra. The first Chapter of this treatise en∣treath of the head of Libra,the 17. p¦culer sig whiche is the .xvij. celestiall and perticuler Signe and hath .iiij. starres disposed in this for∣me. Be it knowen therefore that who∣so euer is borne in this signe first touchynge the proporcion and disposition of his body, he shalbe fair in face, well fauoured, painefull, and learned. Concernynge hys lyfe and ma∣ner thereof, he shall suffer payne of hys head, heart, and galle. He shall haue a
paine in his neck, and in his ioyntes. He shal haue thre speciall diseases. The first when he is .xv. yeres olde, which if he re∣couer, he shall haue the .ij. at .xxxviij. Which if he lykewise eskape, he shall at∣teyn to .lxxxx. yeres, and then shall suffer his last and finall infirmitie. Touchyng his good fortune, beyng borne in the se∣cond houre of the naturall day, he shalbe the chiefest of all hys kynne, & although he be of power and authoritie yet the ex∣ecution thereof shall not be profitable or prosperous. He afteer his euyll fortune shal lose his first wyfe. He shalbe in dan∣ger of a sworde, therefore let him take good heede thereof. The second Chapter of this .vij. trea∣tise argueth of the taile, and latter parte of Libra,the 18. perti¦culer signe whiche is the .xviij. perticuler signe called Alcabenech, hauynge two starres, disposed in thys sorte. Where note that who soeuer is borne in this signe, touchynge the disposition of the body, shalbe beau∣tifull,
and shalbe naturallye marked in the head and mouth, or nere the mouth. He shalbe hurte vppon the mouth, and his face shalbe redde, his heare smothe and redde. After the disposition of the mynde, he shalbe meary, thristie, speci∣ally for hym selfe, he shalbe of good sto∣mack, knowen and honoured emonges hys kynred, and shalbe of wyll feruent. Thirdly he shalbe greatly payned in the heart, and shall haue three speciall dis∣eases. The first shalbe when he is .xvj. yeres of age. The seconde when he is xxxvj. The thyrde and laste when he is xlviij. Touchynge his good fortune, he shall enioye greate patrimonies and ri∣ches by his parentes. And by reason of a naturall marke whiche he hath in hys head after many euill fortunes, he shall possesse muche good, and shall be full of children. In his youth he shall lye with a woman of excellent beautie. He shalbe a Chauncelour or head of the people: tou∣ching his euil fortune, he shalbe stroken wt a sword. He shal lese one of his bones.
He shal die either by the stripe of a sword or elles of the payne of the belly. He shal fall into a ryuer, but shall ryse agayne, and shalbe in daunger of fier. And in the ende of his life shall susteyn pouertie. The .iij. Chapter entreateth of the iudgement of Libra, touchyng the male Where note, that who so euer shalbe borne in this signe, first touching the dis¦position of the body, he shalbe wel made & proporcioned. He shall haue a naturall marke vppon one of his armes. Tou∣chinge the disposition of the mynde. He shalbe a great fornicator, merye, holde, fortunate especially vpon the water. He shall excogitate and serche out many se∣cretes, & shalbe verye perylous. He shall be very desirous to wander in the world to viewe the fashions therein, and the sundrie vanities and condicions thereof, and for that cause shall traiuell into ma∣ny countreys. He shalbe freatynge in∣wardly by fittes, and by fittes also shal∣be quiet. Towarde straungers he wyll vse flatteryng wordes and sweete com∣munication,
but towardes hys owne seruauntes, if thei be euill, he will vse sharpe and croked wordes. He shalbe suspected of a great crime, but it shalbe so close as it can not be proued. He shall suffer great paine in hys necke, ioyntes, and bellye, and shall haue .iij. especiall sickennesses. The firste shalbe when he is .xv. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is xxxviij. And the .iij. when he is .lxxxx. at what tyme he shall dye. Concernynge his good fortune, in his youth he shall be neyther poore nor ryche, but after∣wardes he shall accumulate vnto hym∣selfe great substaunce. He shall occupye and haue to do with other mens money. He shall triumph ouer his enemies. Touchyng his euyll fortune he shall be wounded with yron, a clubbe, or wyth a stone, emonges the rest of his misfor∣tunes. He shalbe in daunger of a sword, and therfore let hym beware thererf. He shall continue in the place where he was borne, not withstandyng for a time he shall trauell into farre countreys,
whiche fortune maye be to him indiffe∣rent, he shal forgoe his first wife, whiche also is a fortune indifferent. Thursday is his contrarye day, and therefore vpon that daye, let him not washe his head, and put on no new apparel nor beginne any notable enterprise. The .iiij. Chapter declareth the iud∣gement of this signe touchinge the fe∣male, where note that the maide borne therein, first touchinge the disposition of the bodye, she shalbe faire, and of excel∣lent beautie. Touchinge the disposition of her mynde she shalbe frendlye, amia∣ble, wittie, and a louer of her owne fa∣milie. Concernynge her lyfe and ma∣ner thereof, she shall suffer a naturall payne in her stomacke. She shall haue two diseases. The firste shalbe daunge∣rous, and when she is two yeres olde. And the seconde when she is .lxxviij. ye∣res of age. After her good fortune she shall haue in occupyinge a great masse of money. In her seconde husbande she shall greatly reioyce, and shall triumph
ouer her enemyes. Accordynge to her euyll fortune, she shall haue a strype or wounde in some place of her bodye. Shee shall haue twoo husbandes, and by the deathe of her first husbande she shall bee vnfortunate. Thursdaye is her vnluckye daye. And therefore let her not washe her head vp∣on that daye, or begynne anye thynge notable. The fifte Chapter describeth the com¦mon and vniuersall fortune of Libra. Where note that Libra hath hys for∣tune in beastes equitable or apte to be ridden, especiallye if thei be of colour white. Likewise Libra his fortune is in al faire things, & in the bargains thereof especially if thei be white, & generally in al beautiful things, belonging to world¦ly delectatiō, chiefly in womens aparel, & in al things proceding frō the water, & in al things yt be transported frō a far, and that be of smalest weight. The borne in this signe are aboue others giuen to em¦brace lerning, & the study of the sciences.
The good and fortunat dayes, are Mon¦day and Fryday. The infortunate daye is Wednesday. The borne in this signe shall be troubled with infirmities & dis∣eases of the belly, as with ye dissenterie, lienterie, grypynges, and other paynes procedyng of wynde, and chiefely about the backe bone. They be naturally of sanguine complexion, and thereby whote and moyste. And because he is fortunate in things that be whyte, ther∣fore let hym vse whyte apparell. The good fortune of thys Signe is towardes the West. And therefore hys house, bedde, and all hys affayres, suche as bee notable are to bee dire∣cted that way.
Scorpio the eyght celestiall and principall sygne. ♂ ♏ scorpion
THe .viij. treatise entreateth of Scor¦pio, the .viij. signe celestial, and con∣teyneth .vj. Chapters. The firste speaketh of the head of Scorpio. The .ij. of the bellye of Scorpio. The .iij. of the taile. The .iiii. of the iudgement of Scor¦pio touchynge the male. The fifte tou∣chyng the female. The .vi. and last of the common and generall fortune therof. the 19 perti¦culer signeThe firste Chapter entreateth of the head of Scorpio, which is the .xix. celesti∣all and particuler signe called Alchayt, and hath .vij. starres in this maner. Where note that what soeuer as well male as fe∣male, beynge borne in thys signe, firste tou∣chyng the disposition of the body, is well coloured and hath muche heare. Hys bo∣dye fayre and whyte, sauynge that hys Nose is foule and deformed. Hys eye∣browes narrowe, and hys Chekes smale. He hathe a marke naturall not farre from hys Nose, vpon his lefte foote
and shulders. Also the lyke vppon the paulme of hys hande, and vppon the legge. He shall be curteous of speache discrete and profitable in manye artes. He shall be beloued with his Parentes, Neyghbours, and Frendes, and espe∣ciallye wyth hys Parentes, and suche as he loueth, he shall liberallye enry∣che wyth muche goods and honoure. Towardes women he shabe of a lyght and inconstaunte mynde, and yet shall vse no deceypte or malyce towardes them. But yf he were of smale con∣science, he myghte dooe wyth them and vse them as he lysted, because he shall be greatlye beloued wyth them. Lykewyse touchynge Glottonye, why∣che is the verye Handemayde of Leche∣rye, the partye borne in thys signe aboue all meates shall loue bread, espe∣ciallye crustye bread, whereof he shall be a greate eater. He shall bee verye irefull, and therevnto soddenlye dys∣posed.
He shall be a greater talker. He shall be faynte harted and fearefull. And al∣though his angre be vehement, and yet the chiefest effect thereof shall consist in words. One of his familie he shal great∣ly hate. His first wyfe shalbe faire and a cleare of cōplexion. Concernyng his lyfe and maner thereof. He shal lyue honest∣ly and quietly with his wyfe. He shall naturallye be full of diseases, but yet thereof verye pacient. He shall haue .iij. speciall maladies. The firste when he is xiiij. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is xliij. The .iij. and last when he is .lxv. Concernynge his good fortune. He shal be a man that shall vse correction, and shalbe very discrite. He shalbe honora∣ble and from one degree of estate shall ascende to another. And accordynge to his euyl fortune, he shalbe stryken vpon the head, and shalbe bitten with a Dog, or some other beast. He shall dye vpon a swordes poynct. He shalbe greatly affe∣cted with selfwel, and with vehemencie of wordes and tauntes. He shalbe na∣naturally
enclined to haue paine in hys bellye, wherewith he shalbe much trou∣bled. He shall fal into the hands of great men. He shall haue carnall companye with .iiij. women, whereof the .iiij. shal∣be marked vpon the checke. The .ii. Chapter maketh declaration of the bellye of Scorpio whiche is the .xx. parti∣culer Signe hauynge thrée starres shaped in this forme, for whosoeuer is borne in this signe, shalbe fayre, and yet not pure whyte, but mixt, somewhat disposed to redde, and shalbe redde headed. His mouth and head shal∣be great, and shalbe of a meane and comely stature. He shalbe a great prat∣ler, and notable lecherous, angrye, and therein very vehement. His angre shal∣be disposed to mischiefe, and ready to re∣uengement, muche lyke an Adder. And although he be one day merye, yet ano∣ther daye he shalbe sadde. He shall doe muche mischiefe. Lykewyse touchynge his lyfe and maner thereof. Fyrst in his
backe he shall suffer muche payne. He shall naturallye be aflected with an in∣firmitie in his heart and stomack. Thre peciall sickennesses he shall haue du∣rynge hys lyfe. The first when he is .xv. yeres of age. The seconde when he is xxxvj. The thirde and laste when he is xlix. Concernynge hys euyll fortune. He shall incurre into manye troubles and misaduentures. He shalbe marked or hurte wyth some toole or instrument of yron vpon hys head, face, breste, right side and priuye partes. And here note that all ye thynges aforesayde, are gene∣ral & spoken generalli, & touch al & singu¦ler such as are borne in ye belly of Scor∣pio, whether it be in the day or nyght, or what houre soeuer it bee. But yet here further is to be cōsidered, that the borne in this signe, whether it be in the daye or night, ouer & besydes the premisses tou∣chyng hys bodye, shalbe effeminate, and touchynge hys lyfe and maner thereof, he shalbe flatteryng, skappye, and shall haue a payne in one of hys feete, yf he
be borne in the thyrde houre of the daye it signifieth good fortune, for he shall bée luckye in tillage of grounde, but in marchaundise lytle fortunate. But yet not wythstandynge in those trafiques, whyche he shall attempte he shall re∣ceyue muche profite. Semblablye tou∣chynge hys euyll fortune, he shall dye of a strype wyth a sworde or elles in hys iorney trauelynge and shall haue a marke vpon his knee and backe. The thyrde Chapter describeth the tayle of Scorpio called Elebrah, whyche is the one and twentie parti∣culer Sygne, and hathe syxe starres in thys maner, where note that who soeuer is borne in thys Sygne. Wheather it bée by Daye or Nyght, or what houre so euer it bée.
Furst touchyng the disposition of the bo¦dye shalbe beautifull, neate, hauynge faire, eyebrowes, cleare eyes and smale leane checkes and thinne and vnder his Iawe shall haue a marke. If anye be borne in this signe in the tyme of Win∣ter, then his complexion shalbe effemi∣nate. If he be borne in the Sommer then touchinge the disposition of his bo∣dy he shalbe beautifull, but yet grosse and fatte vnder his apparell. Also if any woman be borne in this signe, she shall be of an indifferent stature and beautie, her face faier, of smothe here and by rea∣son of her colde complexion she shall de∣syre to weare much clothyng. She shall haue a blemishe in her eyes, and shalbe marked vppon her arme, fingers, and knee. If he be a man, he shalbe of san∣guine complexion, and mischiefuous in geuynge a blowe. He shalbe naturally enclined (not, withstandynge it seeme merueylous) to contradictories, that is to saye, to iustice and vnrighteousnes, to losse and gaine, to truth and falshold,
and all by reason of the concurrence of the opposites and contrarye signes, and yet not withstanding the signe that is of greatest force, shall beare the chiefe rule touchyng the premisses. Touchinge iu∣stice, he shall be naturally geuen to ho∣nestye, he shall be iuste and of muche e∣quitie, and in all his affayres greatly in∣clined to iustice. And touchinge the con∣trarye he shall be a greate Inuenter of newes, a Talebearer, a Lyer, deceypt∣full, enuious, and false, prone to deceyte as well by his looke as by hys laughter. He shalbe full of discorde and a sower of debate, chieflye emonges brethren and frendes, whereby it appeareth that he is naturallye inclined to iniquitie and vnrighteousnes, crafte and deceipte not withstanding his nature also to the con∣trarie. But yet the signe of moste force as is aforesayde doeth principallye beare rule in this natiuitie. And to saye anye thynge touchynge his lyfe, and maner thereof, touchynge his future inclina∣tion, we can not. For as muche as the
concourse of the starres in this natiui∣tie are dyuers. Lykewyse concernyng his good fortune or indifferent fortune, thys man at one tyme shall want, and at another tyme shall haue sufficient. He shall haue thrée wyues, whereof the firste shall bée a wydowe. The se∣conde and thyrde shall bée virgins, but the thyrde shall bury hym. And here is méete to bée knowen that by reason of the generalitie of this signe, and of the concourse of the signes, thys natiue shoulde bee coupled to foure wyues, but yet the chiefest shall preuayle. He shall bée of power and libertie to doe and ac∣complishe hys owne desiers. Happye shal he be to the femine kynde, that is to saye, to thinges of that kynde, as cattaill and such lyke. He shall bée twise bitten with a dogge or other beast vppon the shulder and on his nose ornostrels shall haue a marke. He shalbe in daunger or thrall of men of power or authoritie. Hys laste Wyfe shall burye hym by reason of the marke vppon his arme,
or the bytte of the Dogge as hys con∣stellation doeth therevnto chyefelye en∣clyne. The fourth Chapter describeth the iudgement of Scorpio, touchynge the male. Where note that the Chylde borne in thys Sygne (touchynge hys bodye) vppon hys feete and handes shall haue a naturall marke. And tou∣chynge hys mynde, he shall bee bounti∣full and liberall, so that he shall not keepe secreate hys substaunce. In the seruyce of others, he wyll bee mearrye, trustye, bolde and pleasaunt. In his conditions stronge, stable, and not wauerynge, not desistynge or lea∣uyng of from hys affayres beynge once begonne. Touchynge his lyfe, he shall haue three principall diseases the tymes whereof bee not here noted, whyche yf he chaunce to eskape he shal lyue .C.x. yeres and .x. monethes. And accordynge to the vertue of this signe ther shalbe no impediment in the constellation, except it happen by some perticuler cause.
His fortune shalbe good for that in hea∣ryng and seyng his lucke shalbe prospe∣rous. He shall atteyne to greate wyse∣dome and learninge, and to the magike science he shal greatlye applie himselfe, and the mysteries thereof diligentlye serche out. And yet his diligence so ta∣ken doeth include a certeyne doubte or duplicitie, by reason of the force and effi∣catie of the worde. For it maye signifie greate inuestigation and diligence and that perteyneth to his good fortune, or elles it maye signifie a causable in∣firmitie procedynge of the sayde Ma∣gike science, whiche belongeth to euyll fortune. He shall haue greate abun∣daunce of money, and the same daylye shall encrease and multiplye. By mea∣nes of a woman he shall be greatlye en∣riched, and ouer hys enemyes he shall haue the victorie. In forreyne places he shall exercise tillage, and at length shall retourne home into hys owne countrey wyth gayne. Of his betters by waye of rewarde, he shall receyue
Horsses, Shepe, Oxen and other bea∣stes. Thys natiue shall bee in greate daunger, and excepte he take héede, he shall be hurte wyth a sworde. Sater∣daye shall be his contrarye daye, and therefore vppon that daye, let hym not wash his Head, or put on any new gar∣ment, or elles attempte any straunge enterprise. And some affirme that he that is borne aboute the ende of thys Sygne, shall be of neyther kynde, or of bothe, that is to saye, as well male as female. The fifte signe declareth the effecte of Scorpio concernyng the woman. Who hath her recourse to the partes of thys signe before mencioned in eche Chapter. Notwithstandyng ouer and besids the premises, thus much is to bée spoken. For fyrste, you shall note that she shall bée of a frendlye condicion, obe∣dient seruiceable, fearefull, and shame∣faste. She shall bée wrathfull and haue him in deadly hatred that doth her anye displeasure. She shall haue Chyldren
by three husbandes, and wyth them shall lyue in greate felicitie. She shall vanquyshe her enemies, but yet tylle she bee thyrtye yeares of age she shall susteyne muche sickennesse. Neuerthelesse, of Cattayle she shall haue haboundaunce, and manye people shall bee vnder her gouerne∣ment. But yet in her youth she shall ab∣use her bodye in playinge the Harlot, yf the force of the iminent constellation do take his effecten, bitte she shall bee with a Dogge, and in the ende shalbe blinde. Of her brethren and parentes she shall receyue much trouble. Saterday shalbe to her infortunat day, therfore vpon that daye let her not washe her head, put on any newe garmentes, or doe any other straunge facte. The syxte Chapter entreateth of the generall fortune of Scorpio. There∣fore the borne in thys Sygne is na∣turallye moyste, Phlegmatycke or
Sanguine. And suche shall bee singu∣lerlye fortunate of all thynges that bée of coloure redde, and in byinge and sellynge of all suche. The lyke for∣tunate in all thynges factible, or to bee forged wyth or in the fyer, extrahi∣ble or belongynge to the same, and in marchaundyse of vnknowynge thyn∣ges. And therefore as muche as he can, lette hym weare suche garmen∣tes as bee Redde. The lyke for∣tunate in Warrefare and Tillage, and in all Beastes belongynge to the same. Fortunate in Hospitalytye, whe∣ther it bee doone for money sake, lucre, or for Goddes sake. The vnfortunate Dayes bee Thurs∣daye and Saterdaye. The reste bee good, especiallye Twesdaye. He shall bee affected wythe the Chyragre or Goute in the Handes. Wyth the Scia∣tica and payne in the Head.
And yf Saturne bée founde to bée as∣scendent, than he shall haue great payns in his toes. Hys fortune is towards the South, and therefore let hym dispose hys affayres that waye, and con∣uert to that part hys cham∣ber Doore, Bedde Wyn∣dowe, and the lyke.
Sagitarius the .ix. celestiall and principall sygne. ♃ ♐ depiction of archer
THe .ix. treatise maketh relation of the .ix. celestiall and principall signe called Sagitarius, whiche is diui∣ded into two partes, that is to saye, the head and the tayle, conteynynge fiue Chapters. The firste entreateth of of the head of Sagitarius. The .ij. of the taile. The .iij. of the iudgement of Sa∣gitarius concernynge the male. The iiij. of the female. And the .v. and laste of the generall fortune therof. And ouer and besydes the sayde fyue Chapters, there is a generall rule nexte after the second Chapter, not wythstan∣dyng the generalitie mencioned in the ende of this treatise. The firste Chapter entreateth of the head of Sagitarius called Albaham, be∣ing the .xxij. particuler signe,the 22. perti¦culer signe & hath viij. starsfashioned in this maner. Where note that who so euer is borne in this Signe, firste touchynge the disposition of his bo∣dye,
hath a beautifull bodye, comely to beholde, longe and talle, and through∣out beautifull, a lytle head, a thycke face, a fayre nose, whyte téeth and short. Vppon the lefte parte of hys Head he shall haue a strype, and the lyke vppon the Crowne of hys Head, hys left Hand hys Fyngers, Armes, Teates, and a∣gaynst hys Heart. He is nymble, swifte on hys féete, and verye expedite in run∣nyng. He shall haue a naturall marke vppon hys pryuye members. He is of colour blacke, whose face shalbe lyke to them that haue the gréene sickennes. Touchyng the disposition of the mynde he shall by nature haue a good wytte, and a sharpe, and therewithall constant and firme. He shall loue wyse men, and shall embrace all suche as bee of discretion. Therefore touchynge thys parte of na∣ture, and the naturall constellation bea∣ryng rule in this natiuitie, he shall ac∣quire vnto hym selfe possession wyth wyse men.
And althoughe that he haue a couetous mynde naturally disposed to auarice, by reason of the concourse of certain starrs, yet by meanes of the dominion of thys Signe, he shalbe studious of good thin∣ges, and shalbe inclined to vertue, and especially to the vertue of liberalitie. And therefore he shall not be muche in∣clined to the opposite or contrarye, nor yet to extorte other mennes goods. And because principally he is bent to vertue, it will folow that he shalbe of great au∣thoritie, & exalted in hygh degree of ho∣nour. Moreouer although he be natu∣rallye inclined to liberalitie, and not to rapine or extorcion, yet he shalbe pro∣cliue and giuen to many vices, that is to say, to pryde, couetousnes, lecherie and glotonye, and chiefly to pryde lytle estee∣myng other mennes doyngs or sayings, very haultye, in so muche that what so∣euer question any do aske of him, be shal get no answere at hys handes. And by reason of hys pryde aforesayde, he shalbe a great Cauillour, Lyer, Chyder, and
full of contention. He shall haue a verye pestiferous and venemous tongue. And although he be naturally inclined to a certeyne spice of liberalitie, for that he wyll couet to possesse nothyng vniustly, yet he shall bée desirous to gette sub∣staunce, and couetously to enioye it. Whereby consequently it appeareth, that wholly he is not gyuen to couetous¦nes, but to a certayn spyce therof to a de∣sire to haue. Lykewyse he is inclined to Lechery. For with thrée women speci∣ally he shall haue to do, but some tymes (by natures impedimēt) he shal not pro∣iect his séed, although he be very desirous therevnto. He is much disposed also to glottony chiefly to catyng of herbes and in his meate doth greatly loue them. Furthermore note here that the premis∣ses do not only belong to the man, but to the woman also subiect to that con∣stellation. Concernyg hys lyfe and ma∣ner therof. He shall bée long sick, and shall haue a payne in hys heart. He shal haue thrée speciall sickennesses. The
first when he .xx. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is .xlvij. The .iij. and last, when he is .lxxx. Touchyng his good for∣tune, he shall bée in great estimation and honour. He shall haue manye chil∣dren, & amongs al he shal haue a twinne or two borne at one byrthe, and of them he shall see the thyrd generation. He shal atteyn to his fathers enheritaunce. In all hys affayres he shall prosper and day∣ly he shall sée his goods encrease. He shal come into the worlde wyth his owne starre, that is to say, he shall enioy all thyngs accordyng to the influence of his signe. He shall haue much trouble in the water. He shall fall into a riuer but he shall eskape drownyng. He shall lose the most part of all hys goods and shall fall into the hands of his enemie and sometymes into handes of a woman a she enemie. He shall bee bitten with a beast in the middest of one of his fingers of hys right hand, and shall dye an exile out of hys countrey. His most derest frend beloued aboue others he shal lese,
and he shall bée wonderfully troubled with deuilles and euill spirites. The seconde Chapter describeth the condicion of the tayle of Sagitarius, whiche is .xxiij. particuler signe called Albeyda,the 23 perti¦culer signe and hath vij. starres fixed in thys maner. He that is borne in thys signe, firste touchynge the dis∣position of his bo∣dye. He shall haue a body comelye, a ruddye face, redde heare, narowe eye-browes, eyes lyke a Catte, he shall bee balde, and beautifull to beholde, natu∣rally marked vppon the head, his left side, and vpon hys ryght nostrill. After the disposition of the mynde he shalbe very ready to anger, and therein also shalbe very sonbden, and the payne beyng past, he wyll soone be appeased. He shalbe of an excellent witte, and na∣turally geuen to the exercise of rydynge
and shotynge. He shall not he circum∣spect in hys doynges, nor yet foreseyng in thynges that maye happen. He shall haue muche payne in his guttes, and in hys head, especially he shall suffer thrée seuerall sickennesses. The first when he is .xxj. yeres olde. The seconde when he is .lxij. yeres of age. And the thyrd when he is .lxxx. And touchyng his good for∣tune, yf he doe not take away or re∣moue the naturall marke which shalbée vppon his ryght buttocke, or right no∣strell, then his Constellation shall bée prosperous. But yf the sayde marke bée violently remoued from the place, then his fate shall bee hindered and empe∣ched. He shall bée valient in armes, and therein also victorious. But if the houre of Saturne doe concurre with Sa∣turne in hys natiuitie, he shall be impo∣tent by reason of the influence of that planet, and therefore shal with great la∣bour atteyne to anye commoditie, and with muche difficultie acquire his for∣mer good lucke. But yet not withstan∣dyng
the impediment of Saturne, yf the marks aforesayd be not taken away yet he shall obteyne the victorious fea∣tes aforesayde. But yf his mother par∣happes do take awaye that marke from the places aforesayde, some euyll happe may chaunce vnto hym. For he shall haue much a doe to repell the influence of Saturne. The sayde markes doe ve∣hementlye resist the malyce of the pla∣net by reason of theyr notable vertue. So that Saturne shal do no great hurte although he doe some hynder. And tou∣chynge the euyll fortune of the borne in thys Sygne of Sagitarius. He shall bee in manye troubles. He shall bee hurte wyth whotte burnynge yron. He shall bee in daunger of Theues not onelye by traueylynge by the waye, but also in Cytyes. He shall also lose and forgoe manye possessions purcha∣sed by hym selfe, whyche shall bee con∣fiscate and taken from hym through the malyce of certeyne naturall markes, whereof one shall bee in hys stones.
And another vppon hys lefte side, by force wherof, he shal not long after lose hys syght. Lykewyse thou shalt haue in remem∣braunce this rule folowyng, touchyng the taile of Sagitarius, generally apper¦teyninge to all men borne in this signe. And first thou shalt know that if it hap∣pen he be borne in the seconde houre of the daye, not withstandynge the premis∣ses he shall be foule and euill fauoured. He shalbe balde, and his Children also shalbe balde, by reason of the markes a∣foresayde, whereof the one shalbe vppon his ribbes, and the other vppon his left syde. Also by force of this constellation, he shalbe very lecherous, and shalbe dis∣eased with a great infirmitie. but he shal recouer. In lyke maner touchynge hys good fortune, he shall haue two Chyl∣dren borne at one byrthe. Hys possession and lyuynge shall bee indifferent, for sometymes it shall bee diminished, and sometymes encreased. All these thinges thou shalte diligentlye note, ouer and
besides the things conteyned in the two Chapters aforesaid. In the thyrd Chapter entreatyng of Sagitarius iudgemente touchynge the male. There is to be noted that he that is borne in thys Sygne, shall haue a merye and pleasaunt countenaunce. Lykewyse, touchynge the disposition of the mynde, he shall bee gentle, faith∣full, meeke, liberall mixte wyth stub∣burnesse, by reason whereof, he shall bee of greate authoritie, gentle, kynde, courtelyke, and a great bankettour, by reason of whyche hys curtesye manye well repayre vnto him, and be gestes at hys table. And by meanes of his libera∣litie he wyll bee a bountifull geuer of Horsses and other fourefooted beastes. He shall bee verye ingenious, wyttye, artificiall, sobre, graue, paynefull, and carefull of his affayres. He shall bée sub∣tile and very ware aboute his doyings. So that he wyll not disclose hys se∣creates to no man, but secreatelye wyll keepe them to hym self, & the same wyll
very finely keepe hidde in his breste, for that almost he is mistrustfull all men. He shall be with manye vices encom∣bred, because he is naturallye gyuen to be a great fornicatour, and one that will be soone angrye, and yet soone appea∣sed againe, and when his anger is once done, then he wyll vtter muche fayre and gentle talke somewhat ioyned with couetouusnes. He shall be skabbye and very full of ytche. He shall bee aflected wyth two notable & strong sickennesses. The one when he is .xxxiij. yeares of age, whiche shall bee so vehement that he shall stande in greate hazarde of lyfe, whiche yf he eskape, then shall he haue the seconde, whyche shall happen when he is foure skore and eyghte yeares of age, whereof he shall dye. Semblablye, touchynge hys good fortune. The first Chylde that he shall haue, shall bee a sonne. He shall haue to his frend a Pier of a realme, with whome he shall dwell in housholde and shall possesse other mennes gooddes. In lyke maner
chynge hys euyll fortune, he shall bee in daunger of three seuerall frayes, and her that shoulde bee hys firste wyfe he shall not enioye. And by the malyce of others he shall bee in displeasure wyth hys frende aforesayde, and yet in the ende he shall ouercome theyr malyce, and bee reconsiled to hys frendshyppe agayne. He shall be hurte wyth Iron vnlesse warely he take heede thereof. Sondaye is hys contrarye daye, there∣fore vppon that daye let hym attempte no newe enterprise, nor washe his head, or put on any newe apparell. The fourthe Chapter of thys pre∣sente Treatyse describeth the Iudge∣mente of Sagitarius touchynge the female. And here to learne for to knowe the disposition of her bodye, you muste repayre to the Chapters of the head and tayle of Sagitarius (whiche is before recited) where you shall finde manye thynges spoken of the female borne in thys Sygne.
And touchynge the disposition of the mynde, she shall bee verye muche gy∣uen to the Artes of Magicke, and to Witchecrafte, and by reason of the sub∣teltie of her wytte, she shall putte the same Artes in practyse. She shall bee verye curste, carefull, mercyfull, chylde∣bearynge and a great Lyer. She shall incurre great peryll, especiallye for one offence that she shall commytte, for whyche offence she shall bée brought to Iudgemente: Whyche peryll yf she eskape, then she shall lyue tyll she bée three score and .viij. yeres olde. She shall fullye accomplyshe her fate. And althoughe she bee subecte vnto muche malyce and daunger, yet she shall obteyne the vyctorye ouer them all. She shall haue twoo husbandes, whereof the seconde shall bée the bet∣ter. Sondaye shall bee her vnfor∣tunate daye, and for that cause, lette her attempte no new enterprise or other notable or newe thynge.
The fifte and laste Chapter ma∣keth rehearsall of the generall Fortu∣ne of Sagitarius. And firste the borne in thys Sygne shall bée Fortunate, bothe in the lawe of GOD, and also in the lawe of the Worlde. He shall bee happye in all kyndes of Marchaundyse, especyallye in that Arte that chyefelye vseth the Presse, and in Taylours crafte. Also in the Drapers scyence. Chyefelye in clo∣thes of fayreste Coloure, yf they bee retayled percelle meale by the Yarde, or Elle. Also in the Bouchers occupatyon, and Beastes whyche are accustomed to bee solde in the Shambles. Thys Sygne is also Cholerycke by nature, and therefore the borne in thys Sygne is naturallye Cholerycke, by reason wher∣of he is whotte and drye. And he shall haue a great payne and gryefe by mea∣nes of a soore Impostume in the Lun∣ges. And also of a consumyng and vehe∣ment Ague, whyche is called Hectica.
And also of an inflamation that shall procede from the Lounges, accor∣dynge to the qualitye of thys Sygne. The apparelles and the coloures whi∣che oughte to bee moste vsed of the borne in thys Sygne, is Graye, Browne, Yelowe or Redde, whyche Coloures by reason of the heate and Fyer, are moste apte, moste necessa∣rye, and conueniente. The one halfe of the lyfe shall bee for∣tunate, and the other halfe vnfortu∣nate, not onelye in dayes, and houres, and in Monethes, or Weekes, but al∣so in whole yeares by the number of syxe. That is to saye: by syxe and syxe. Syxe good yeares, and syxe badde, yeares. The Male or Female that is borne in thys Monethe, hathe hys special For∣tune placed in the Weste. And there∣fore towardes that parte of the Worlde lette hym dyspose all hys doynges, concernynge hys House, hys Doore,
and hys Bedde, and all hys speciall affayres, and notable actes. &c
Capricornus the .x. celestiall and principall sygne. ♄ ♑ sea-goat
THe .x. treatise entreateth of the .x. principall and celestiall signe called Capricornus. This signe is diui∣ded into .ij. principall partes, that is to saye, the head and the tayle, for that cause it is diuided but into .v. Chapters whereof the firste entreateth of the head, The .ij. of the taile. The .iij. of the male. The .iiij. of the female. And the v. and laste of the common and generall fortune of Capricornus. The firste Chapter entreateth of the head of Capricornus beynge the,the 24. perti¦culer signe xxiiij. particuler signe and is called Aadab whiche hath thrée star∣res dysposed in thys maner. Where is to bée noted that the borne in thys Sygne touchynge the disposition of the bodye, hathe a fayre bodye and come∣lye well fashioned, especiallye in youth
it shall not bee properlye Blacke nor Whyte, but some what gyuen to bee Redde. Lykewyse, he shall haue cer∣tayne naturall Sygnes in the Head, the Breste and the Knée. The eyes soore, and full of payne. He shall bée naturallye symple, learned, and wyse, and yet not wythstandynge, verye in∣credulous and harde of belyefe. In so muche, as he wyll beleue no man, al∣though he sweare. He shall bée angrye and Chollerycke, and in hys angre ve∣rye noyous and hurtefull. A man of bloode, and greatlye thrystynge after the bloode of hys enemyes. So that yf he chaunce to haue the superioritie ouer hys enemyes, he wyll destroye them all, or the most parte of them, if not wyth hys owne handes, yet be mea∣nes of others. He shall bée verye craftye and subtyle, and that vnfaynedly. And yet in hys doynges trewe dealyng and verye iust, and a great louer of trueth, doyng the thyng that he goeth about wyth much thought, although there∣wyth
some crafte bée included. Hys gate and goyng very crafty althoughe out∣wardly it shall not appeare. Who in his age shall bee very profitable and good to many. This man doeth naturally loue the trymmyng of hys bodye, and hath so great delyght in hys owne beautye, that he shall thynke none to bee lyke vnto hym selfe. And hys speciall respecte shall bee towardes hys Head, hys Bearde, and Heare. Lykewyse, by reason of the vehe∣mencye of hys naturall Complexti∣on he is by nature muche enclyned to sleepe after meate, and at the Table, whyche commonlye he putteth in practyse. Lykewyse, touchynge hys lyfe, and maner thereof. Touchynge disea∣ses and syckennesses, there is no∣thynge to bee founde certeyne in this Chapter. And yet in the fourth Chap∣ter where the Iudgemente of Ca∣pricornus is entreated concernynge
the woman, it is reade that the borne in this signe, shall haue one speciall and principall disease when he is .xxxix. ye∣res of age, whiche yf he eskape, he shall lyue tyll he be .Cviij. yeres of age. And touchyng sicknes. He shalbe naturallye diseased and singulerlye affected wyth the payne of the heart and stomacke, whereof he shall dye. Also touchynge the euyll fortune of this signe, ye shall vnderstand that the borne in this signe, that is to saye, in the head of Capricor∣nus accordyng to the force of the con∣stellation he shall be depriued of one of his members, and some of hys téeth. In the .ij. Chapter of this .x. treatise is expressed the taile of Capricornus, whi∣che is the fyue and twentye particu∣ler Sygne called Astaldabor hauynge two starres placed in this sorte. Where is to be no∣ted that whosoeuer is borne in this signe after the disposiciō of his body, he shalbe beautiful white
and smothe heared, fayre eyes, hys eye∣browes, well made, hys colour Yelow, and shalbe naturally marked in the face and also in hys body, with manye sun∣dry markes. That is to saye: aboute hys necke, and neare vnto hys eye. He shall haue short lippes, in so much that for the shortnes thereof, when he speaketh, he shall shewe all the teeth in his head. He shall bee well learned, and somewhat bent to bee proude, whiche shall happen euen by nature. He shalbe a sower of Corne vppon other mens labours, that is to saye: he vseth other mens doinges to the commendation of hym selfe. He shall dispise all men, and bee a great prayser of hym selfe, dispysinge others, and greatly standinge in his owne con∣ceyte. He shall bee irefull, and verye fierce in angre, in so much that he shall bée greatly offended with hys owne pa∣rentes. He shall bee verye lecherous and a louer of all sortes of women, and speciallye he shall committe adultery wyth nyne sundrye woman, besydes
all other syngle and common women, and not withstandyng this his great de∣sier and affection to women, sometimes by wichecrafte and sorcerye, he shalbe letted from committynge fornication with diuers women. Lykewyse he shal∣be a notable great drynker. But not wythstandynge the vices aforesayde, wherevnto he shalbe much apte and in∣clined, yet he shalbe a iuste man and much inclined to iustice, a despyser of euyll and a great louer of hys compani∣ons. And where he shalbe naturally ge∣uen to be a drynker, yet in hys meate and dyet, he shalbe very spare and tem∣perat. He shall feele great payne in hys head. But yet the seconde payne, that is to saye, the payne of hys belly, shalbe greatlyer in hym. He shall also in his go∣ing bee troubled wyth a payne in hys Legge. Also he shall haue eyght special sicknnesses. The firste, when he is fourtene yeares olde. The seconde, when he is twenty. The thyrd, when he is one and twenty.
The fourth, when he is thyrtye. The fifte, when he is sixe and thyr∣tye. The sixte, when he is foure and fourtye. The .vij. when he is sixe and fourtye. The .vij. when he is .lx. And then by force of his constellation. He shall dye through the weakenesse of hys members. Moreouer, touchynge hys good fortune he shall haue two sonnes, and shall re∣ceyue inheritaunce from his Progeni∣tours. And hys ende shall bee better then his begynnynge. He shall bée na∣turallye gyuen to the marchaundyze of Goates, and therein shall bée both for∣tunate and luckye, yf he wyll diligently folowe the same trafficke. Lykewyse, touchynge hys euyll for∣tune, he shall bée subiecte to the hande of hys enemies. He shall bée depriued of one of hys members, and thereby shall bée maimed. And before the tyme of hys death, he shalll suffer manye and sun∣drye great troubles at the handes of a noble man.
The thyrd Chapter determineth the iudgement of Capricornus touchynge the male. And for the man chylde borne in this signe, there is nothynge founde certayne, touchynge the disposition of his body in this Chapter, and therefore recourse muste be made, to the Sygne wherein the male Chylde is borne. That is to saye, to the head of Capri∣cornus, or elles to the tayle, and there the truth concernyng hys corporall dis∣position maye bee founde. And yet not wythstandynge (ouer and besyde the premisses) suche one hath a lytle head, hollowe eyes, and a softe speache. And touchynge hys mynde he shall be very incredulous & harde of be∣liefe, in so much as them that sweare, and confirme theyr sayinges wyth othe, he shall not credite. And therefore lyke as he shall not beleue others, euen so it is as meete that other shall bee as harde of beliefe to hym, and shall not credite hys wordes thoughe he bynde them wyth othes. He shall naturally
bée verye subtell and secrete in all hys affayres, and therein shall bee a subteil and crafty deceyuour, and a bolde suffe∣rer and bearer of aduersitie. Lykewyse he is naturally couetous, irefull, and therein verye soubden and mischeuous, vsynge a mischeuous and vngracious stomacke, and therefore with greate difficultie he shall retourne to hys for∣mer quiet. And not withstandynge the aforesayde vices he shall bée naturallye geuen to be ciuile, honest, amiable, and pleasaunt. Moreouer, touchyng hys life and maner thereof, he shall bée full of sickennes. But yf he eskape one verye vehement sickennes (whyche shall hap∣pen when he is twentye yeares of age) he shall lyue by force of thys Constella∣tion, eyght and fiftie yeres vnlesse some naturall impediment of anye perticuler or vniuersall cause opposite doe occurre and happen. His lyfe shall bée shorte∣ned by reason of the truncation and cut∣tyng of some of hys members. He shallbe marryed to two wyues, and
the seconde he shall marrye, when he is one & thyrty yeres of age, whyche shal bée hys better Wyfe, by whome he shall bée greatlye enryched. He shall en∣ter into other mennes laboures, and enioye gooddes gotten by others. He shall treade the grounde of manye Countreyes, and at length shall re∣tourne to hys owne Countrey, and to the place of hys nauitie wyth greate gayne and substaunce. He shall haue to doe wyth muche treasure, and shall enioye parte of the same. Touchynge hys euyll fortune, he shall suffer muche aduersitie in the place where he was borne. And for that he is naturallye subtyle, and of myschie∣uous mynde. He shall suffer muche trouble and yet shall ouercome it well ynoughe. Hys fyrste Wyfe shall dye before he bée one and thyrtye yeares olde. Sondaye is hys contrarye and vnfortunate daye. Therefore vppon that daye lette hym attempte no newe facte, or anye notable enterpryse.
He séemeth to bée of a melancolycke or earthye Complexion. And therefore he hathe hys Fortune chyefelye dyspo∣sed towardes the Northe parte. And here thou shalte diligentlye note, that he whyche is borne in the ende of thys Sygne, shall bée borne in Adul∣terye. And thys Sygne hath no power in the natiuitie of women, but onely of the males. The fourth Chapter of thys tenth Treatyse descrybeth the Iudgemente of Capricornus, touchynge the female. And thou shalte note that the woman-borne in thys Sygne, hathe nothynge in thys presente Chapter that is cer∣tayne touchynge the dysposition of her bodye. And therefore looke in what parte of this signe soeuer she bée borne, there thou shalte fynde her naturall and corporall disposition. And therewyth also thou shalte haue recourse vnto the nexte Chapter ensuynge, and the diffe∣rence shall be founde to bée greate be∣twene both the kyndes.
For as muche as the bodily disposition, as well the stature as the other compo∣sition of either kynde is indifferent and equal. Moreouer touching the dispositi∣on of the mynde. The woman Chylde borne in this signe shall bee very wyse, and a geuer of good counsell, in so much as by reason of her great wisedome and consideration she shall bee acceptable to all sortes of men. She shall atteyne to a good fate and constellation ioyned with muche ioye, and meane of her witte. She shall brynge her deuises to good effect. She shall be naturally ge∣uen to bee of curste heart, verye whotte and wylfull speciallye in those thynges touchynge the disposition of her wytte and pollicie and thereby verye desirous to knowe suche thynges as bee moste pleasaunt vnto her wyth her neygh∣bours, and specially suche as be moste acquainted with her. She shall bee cur∣teous and frendly. She shall be soone abashed and desirous to see the world, & therfore shal trauell in vnknowē places.
She shal receyue hurte of a foure footed beaste, whereof yf she eskape she shall lyue foure skore yeares. Lykewyse tou∣chynge her good fortune, she shalbe cal∣led a mother of Chyldren for that by force of her constellation, she shalbe chyldebearynge and apte to Chyldren especially to sonnes. She shall also be a∣bundaunte in foure footed beastes, and after she is passed the age of fourtye ye∣res, her tyme folowyng shalbe more prosperous. And concernynge her euyll fortune. She shall bée hurte of foure foo∣ted beastes, and shalbe very fearefull vppon the water. Her lucke ouer her Cattell shall not be very prosperous. Sonday is her vnfortunate daye, and therfore vppon that day let her attempt no speciall matter, especiallye of anye great effect. The .v. Chapter of this .x. treatyse ha∣uynge his title of the generall and vni∣uersall fortune of Cappricornus, is chiefly prosperous in husbandrye, and in all kyndes of Beastes and Cattell,
concernyng the same, and in all weighty and ponderous matters touching earth, and that whiche is possible to bee done wyth earth, with stones with wodd, and wyth the hydes of the beastes before re∣membred. Likewise, in bying and sel∣lyng of grayne, and other heauye mat∣ters abundant vpon the earth, and espe∣cially growing in the same. This signe is prosperous in dull and heauy beastes as Asses, Swine, Oxen, and such lyke, and in all kynds of workes possible to be done with great and painefull labour. The borne in this signe shall bee more healthfull in trauell then in doynge no∣thyng. Likewise this signe ouer and be∣sides the particuler euentes, is muche disposed to Impostumes of the sto∣macke, to the Coughe, and to inflama∣tions of the Lyuer. Also hys tyme tou∣chyng his indifferent Fortune, is diui∣ded into two principall partes, not one∣ly in dayes, weekes and monethes, but also in yeres, for the tyme is diuided by the number of fyue, because continually
there shalbée fyue good yeares and fyue badde. This signe also extendeth hys Fortune towardes the Southe. And therefore let hym dyspose all hys wholle affayres (yf he mynde to prosper) that waye. And from tyme to tyme let hym vse to weare Blacke gar∣mentes.
Aquarius the .xi. celestiall and principall sygne. ♄ ♒ water-bearer
THis .xj. Treatise makinge menci∣on of the .xj. Sygne called Aquari∣us, is diuided into thrée principall partes, comprehendynge .vj. seuerall Chapters. The .j. conteyneth the head of Aquarius. The .ij. part the belly. And the .iij. the tayle. The .iiij. the male. The v. the female. The .vj. and last, the com∣mon and generall fortune therof. The .j. Chapter makinge declaration of the head of Aquarius, being the .xxvj. particuler Sygne, hathe two starres framed in this sort, and is called A∣strad. Where is to be noted, yt who so euer is borne in this signe, shalbe beautifull in the face and bodye, hauynge a naturall marke in the head, the brest, and left foote. The colour not altogether whyte, but somwhat dis∣posed to black, & to the colour of Honny. Touchyng the disposition of the mynde very well learned, but naturally vniust & a doer of much wrong, very desirous
to walke after meales. And not with∣standyng the naturall inclination to the doyng of wronges, yet he is of nature godly, pitifull, pacient, and a louer of companions, and yet somwhat inclined to the contrary, as to impietie and god∣lynes, iniquitie and right, vnrighteous∣nes, iustice and mercye. He shalbe so pi∣tifull that he shall accuse no man, but rather be an excuser. He shall natural∣lye suffer an ache in the Head, and a payne of the Heart. He shall haue two naturall sickennesses. The first, when he is twenty yeres of age. The seconde, when he is fiftye. He shall bée greatlye honoured, and from manye troubles, which he shall suffer, almightye GOD shall mercifullly delyuer hym. And hys Fortune shall bee indifferente. That is to say, some tyme hauynge sufficient, and at other tymes also he shall lacke. Also, a Dogge shall greuously byte hym vppon hys Thyghe or Legge. He shall wander into a straunge lande, and in the myddest of hys wealthe and
substaunce muche adueruersitie shall happen. The seconde Chapter of thys pre∣sent Treatise describeth the Bellye of Aquarius, whiche is the .xxvij. particu∣ler Signe called Alscadabra, and hathe xij. starres formed in thys sort. Who so euer is borne in thys signe shall haue a good body well complexio∣ned and made. And thys bodye shall bée Whyte naturallye, and shall haue some natu∣rall marke in hys Face, Backe, and El∣bowe. Hys Bodye shall bee naturallye full of holes, & shal haue vpon his head a blowe or strype with a sword or dagger. Thys man shall bee verye wyse, meeke chaste, and shamefaste. And shall loue no vanities, but rather shall embrace trueth and vertue.
He shall feare GOD, and desire to do rather good then euill, to which good qualities he is naturally gyuen. And by reason he is tender, he shall haue no na∣turall force to do anye actuall or corpo∣rall labour, and consequently not geuen to walke much. He shalbe much payned in the raines of his backe. He shall haue iij. principall diseases. The .j. when he shalbe .xxix. yeres of age. The .ij. when he is .xxxvij. The .iij. and last when he is lxxxx. Concernyng hys good fortune, that although he shal enioy in his owne countrey no kynde of office or promoci∣on, yet in a straunge countrey he shall attaine to much honour. Concernyng his euill fortune, he shall suffer much trouble, and sundry discommodities ouer and besides the bityng of a Dogge or some other beast, either vppon hys arme or legge. He shall haue much euill fortune by meanes of hys Parents, for they shalbe taken from him by death, and from them shall receyue no kynde of inheritaunce or substaunce. And by
force of thys Constellation, he shall end hys lyfe in a straunge Countrey, and in the water. The thyrde Chapter of this treatise descrybeth the Tayle of Aquarius, be∣ing the .xvij. particuler Sygne of Hea∣uen called Algassarall, whych hath two Starres placed in thys maner. Where is to be noted that who so euer is borne in thys Sygne. Fyrst touchynge hys bo∣dyes disposition, shall bee fayre of bo∣dye, and of a ruddye face, shorte in sta∣ture and somewhat balde. Touchynge the qualitie of the mynde he shall bee naturallye verye lecherous, and greatelye gyuen to the loue of wo∣men, vehemently desirynge theyr com∣panye. A greate Surfetour, greatlye occupyinge hym selfe in bankettynge and Bellye cheare, frequentynge the same wythoute measure.
He shalbe verye couetous and desirous to haue, for what he seeth he wyll couet to haue. Which vices not withstanding yet geuen to quietnes, greatly embra∣singe peace and concorde, and muche abhorrynge discorde, auoydynge the meanes thereof, as muche as lyeth in hys power. Lykewyse, he shall bee en∣dewed wyth a certayne frensie, and shall by a naturall sicknes in a straunge Countrey yelde furth hys breath. Thrée principall termes or diseases he shall suffer. The first, when he is twen∣tye yeares of age. The seconde, when he is fiue and fourtye. And then he shall bee in great daunger of death. But yf he eskape the same, he shall lyue one hundred and twentye yeares, and three dayes. Lykewyse, touchynge hys good fortune, he shall lyue a longe space with hys Wyfe and shall gette muche sub∣staunce and ryches. And althoughe he shall haue great losse, yet he shall haue plentye. Touchynge hys euyll fortune, he shalbée without a head, and depriued
of hys Parentes, and Brother. In a straunge Countrey he shall ende hys lyfe, as before is remembred. The .iiij. Chapter entreateth of A∣quarius iudgement touchyng the male. And to learne the disposition of the bo∣dye, recourse must bee made to those thynges that bee reported in the three Chapters before mencioned, where ve∣ry largely is intreted the particuler for∣tune of Aquarius. Ouer and besides he shall haue a great audacitie of speache. Semblablye touchynge the disposition of the mynde, and especiallye concer∣nynge hys lyfe, he shalbe couetous, le∣cherous, prone to angre, contencious, a lyer, because he shal speake one thyng and do another, and that shalbe by force of hys principall constellation. Not withstandynge the sayde vyces, he shalbe very ware and circumspect, wyse, pollityke, trustynge in hys owne wyse∣dome, and shall haue a certeyne excel∣lencie of arte and knowledge. Carefull ouer his affayres euen from his youth.
Singulerlye beloued, courtelyke ho∣nest and good. Honest he shall bee for that he shall bée conuersant with the ho∣nest. Good he shall bee by vertue of the Constellation, and therfore naturallye inclined to goodnes, singulerly embra∣sing all thyngs good and honest. Merci∣full, for that he shall extend the same to such as haue néede of mercy, specially Orphanes and wydowes, to whome he shall not onely bee pitifull, but a bene∣factour and defender. He shall wander into manye places, and thereby by ly∣tle and lytle shall bee enriched. Lykewyse, touchynge hys lyfe and ma∣ner thereof. He shall haue two speciall sickennesses. The first when he shall bée sixe and thyrtye yeares of age, whyche shall bée verye vehement and daunge∣rous, whereof yf he bée acquieted, then he shall feele the other, when he is foure skore & ten yeres of age, & of that laste dysease wythout fayle he shall dye. In lyke maner touchyng hys good For∣tune, he shall bée happye, for that he
shall bée skylful in Arte and knowledge by reason whereof, he shall atteyne to preferment. He shall haue the charge and gouernement of manye and diuers sommes of money, and by a straunge man shall vnlooked for enioye muche treasure. And concernynge hys euyll Fortune, hys abode shall not continue in the place of hys owne natiuitie, but wanderynge abrode shall perambulate straunge places, and in them shall con∣tinue. And not withstandynge thys hys peregrination and dewellynge in suche places is indifferente either to good or euyll Fortune. Therefore as séemeth to me, it tendeth indifferentlye bothe to good and euyll fortune. He that is thus borne, hys firste wyfe shall not long tarye with hym, and after she is dead, all thynges shall haue moore prosperous successe wyth hym. And the losse also of thys Wyfe, as speciallye I doe note, seemeth not to me to belonge to euyll Fortune, but to indifferente.
Lykewyse, vppon the water he shall bee very vnfortune, which by nature he shal abhorre. He shall bee enwrapped wyth many and sundry daungers and amon∣ges others speciallye with his wyfe and woman. Saterday is his contrarye and vnhappy day. Therefore vpon that daye he must attempte no notable enterprise or facte, nor yet vpon that day washe his Head, put on newe garmentes, or doe other nouelties remembred and spo∣ken of in the treatise before. The .v. Chapter of this .xj. treatise descrybeth the iudgement of Aquarius touchynge the woman. And here is to be noted, that the woman borne in thys signe touchyng the disposition of her bo∣dy, shalbe delicate and tender, and by force of this constellation shall haue a marke in her ryght hande. She shall bee trewe, faythfull, constant, wyttye, and of a good complexion, and disposed to all goodnes, speciallye to mercye and pitie. Lykewyse, touching her lyfe and maner thereof, she shall haue a great disease in
her eyes, and shall haue two speciall sickennesses, whereof the chiefest and moste daungerous shall bee when she is of eyghtene yeares of age. And the se∣conde she shall haue (yf she chaunce to eskape the first) when she is foure skore yeres olde, and then shall dye accordyng to the effect of this constellation. Also touchynge her good fortune, she shall abounde in Chyldren. She shalbe enryched with other mens goodes, and shall atteyne to an indifferent wealthe. When she is .xv. yeares of age, For∣tune shal fauour her better, and she shal enioye a better state. Muche euyll For∣tune shall happen vnto her in her tyme, and amonges others, her good name shall be blotted with infamye, and shall be defamed with the corruption of her virginitie, and shall haue experience of straunge places, and be verye odious to her enemyes. Her first Husbande shall put her from hym. She shall be hurte wyth foure footed beastes, or shall bee very neare the same. But it seemeth to
me she shall passiuelye receyue a hurte or daunger. The .vj. Chapter entreateth of the common and generall fortune of Aqua∣rius, whiche consisteth speciall in tillage and in beasts méete for tillage together, and in all beasts of great quantie and fatnes, as Asses, Moyles, Swyne, Ox∣en, Kyne, and such lyke. Lykewyse, for∣tunate in buyldings, in earth, in stone, in wod, in hydes of beasts, specially the beasts afore remembred. Furthermore, it is cōmonly and for the most part fortu¦nate in those things which be done with great labour and exercise. This signe is fortunat toward the west, therfore they muste dispose their affayres that waye. The Sunday is vnfortunate for them, therefore that daye let them not doe any newe notable worke, as is saide in the o∣ther treatises. They shalbe vexed with long feuers quotidians and cold. Accor∣ding to the vertue of the constellation, their tyme is diuided into .xv. so that the first .xv. yeres going before, are good and
lucky, the .xv. yeres folowing are vnluc∣ky and vnfortunat: and neuertheles in the good fortune of the first .xv. yeres the Sunday is alwayes vnfortunat. As tou¦ching the good fortune of the first .xv. ye∣res, amonge the vnfortunate dayes, the Twesday and Saterday haue the prin∣cipall poynt in the good Fortune. They be naturally fanguine, whote, and moyst, and therefore they must weare redde and blacke garmentes.
Pisces the .xii. celestiall and principall sygne. ♃ ♓ depiction of fish
THe .xij. treatise of this Booke spea∣keth of the .xij. and laste principall signe of Heauen, called Pisces, and is diuided into two principall partes, the Head and the Tayle. Thys treatise conteyneth fyue Chapters. The firste, maketh mencion of the Head of Pisces. The second of the Tayle. The .iij. of the iudgement of Pisces for the male. The iiij. of the iudgement for the female. The .v. and last, of the common fortune of Pisces, bothe of the male and female together. The first Chapter maketh mencion of the Head of Pisces, which is the .xxix. particuler signe of Heauen, called Al∣gafayser, and conteyneth two starres thus set. He that is borne in thys signe, shall bee Whyte, and soft of body, and na∣mely of a whyte face. He shall haue a large brest, a comely beard, a fayre forehead, fayre eyes, more blacke then whyte. He shall
haue many naturall markes on his bo∣dy, by the which according to the vertue of the Constellation rulynge, he shalbe naturally inclined to fidelitie and wise∣dome, but rather he shalbe faythful and wyse in deede. Moreouer, he shall haue a naturall marke vppon hys Elbowe or in hys Foote, and shall peraduenture lose one of hys members, or elles it shal fayle hym. He shalbe of a smylyng coun∣tenaunce, merrye, and louyng pleasure and playe, naturally enclined to equitie: but yet couetous accordynge to the con∣iecture taken of his Constellation. And thoughe he be naturallye subiecte to the payne of the Head, he shal bée healthful, of a sounde wytte, and of a wholesome complexion. By the vertue and lyuely∣nesse of hys complexion, he shall lyue naturally thre skore and ten yeres with∣out any notable sickennesse, sauinge the head ache, whiche he shall often tymes haue. As concernyng hys good fortune, he shall gette muche money, and pos∣sesse manye possessions. He shall haue
thrée Wyues, and shall bée troubled wyth the thyrde. When he shall bée in publycke offyce, manye woulde hurte hym, and yet they shall doe hym no hurte, because of theyr weakenesse, and finallye he shall surmounte them: for theyr enuye and malyce shall haue no power agaynst hym. As concernynge hys euyll Fortune, he shall fall into manye aduersities and troubles by hys Constellation: Yet not so but that all these fore sayde thynges in this Chap∣ters be generall as touchynge the influ∣ence and efficatie of the Signe, and that they doe appertayne generallye to all that be borne in thys Signe. For yf it chaunce that anye be borne in the thyrd houre of the daye, as touchynge the dis∣position of the bodye, he shall haue a naturall marke in his Nostrelles, and shall haue longe eyes. As concer∣nynge the disposition of hys mynde and wytte, he shall bée a verye suspecte man harde of beliefe, and therefore not beleued.
As concernyng the maner of his liuing, he shall haue a great sickennes and fer∣uent in his Nostrels, so that by the fer∣uentnes of it he shall dye where he was borne. He shal haue .iij. greuous sicken∣nesses. The first at .xxvij. yeres. The .ij. at .liiij. The .iij. at .lxx. yeares. And then he shall dye of this sicknes, yf he eskape the other twayne, or elles bee in great daunger. As concerning his good for∣tune, although by the effect of the Con∣stellation, he shoulde fall into a ryuer, yet he shalbe saued from it, and shall rise oute of it againe yf he fall in, whyche thynge belongeth to hys good fortune. He shall haue many Chyldren. He shall bée myghty, and rule in Ilandes. By the mercy of GOD, and the good∣nes of the Constellation, he shall eskape from all his trouble. As concernynge hys euyll fortune, he shall fall into a ryuer as is aforesayde. And also into the handes of a myghtye man, and into muche trouble. Yet not wythstandynge that these thynges doe
appertayne to his euyll Fortune, they shall haue a good yssue and ende. For he shall bée delyuered from these vera∣tions as afore is sayde. Whereof it fo∣loweth, that this fortune is euil by acci∣dēt. Furthermore, because of the marke that he shall haue in hys Nostrelles, he shall burye hys Parentes, whyche he shall lose accordynge to hys Constella∣tion. Whiche thynge belongeth some∣what to hys euyll Fortune. He shall lose some of hys temporall gooddes, whyche he shall haue gotten wyth great labour, and shall wholly bée spoyled of them, or of the moste parte of them. The seconde Chapter maketh men∣cion of the Tayle of Pisces, whiche is the .xxx. and laste particuler Sygne of Heauen called Luaten, hauynge twen∣tye Starres, sette and disposed in dewe order, in suche maner and forme as here foloweth.
He that is borne in this signe in the first houre of the naturall day shall be fayre of looke, hauynge fayre eyes, fayre face, and fayre of all his bodye. He shall natu∣rally haue ma∣nye markes. As concernynge the mynde & wytte, he shalbe witty, and prudent, and amiable, hys voyce well sownyng, and liberall more towarde straungers then to hys neighbours. Staungers shall haue much ryches of hym that is thus borne. He shall haue thrée vehement sicken∣nesses. The first at .xxviij. yeres. The se∣cond at .lvj. The thyrde and last at .lxxx. yeres .v. monethes, at the second houre of the fifte moneth. He shalbe a good whyle without Children in wedlocke, yet he shall haue many. He shall haue a
charge in a straunge countrey: But he shall dwell in hys owne natiue coun∣trey. And if it chaunce he be borne at the seconde houre, than as touchyng the dis∣position of his body, he shall bee marked in the breast, and in hys Fynger. As concernynge the disposition of hys mynde, he shall haue naturally all the signes and markes that he shall haue whyche is borne in the first houre, or in another, sauynge the seconde houre, for he that is borne in the seconde, is na∣turallye lyberall, and yet couetous. As concernynge the maner of hys lyfe, you muste saye of hym that is borne in the seconde houre, as of the other that is borne in another houre of thys signe. He shall bee aboundaunte in vittayle and ryches. He shall oute lyue two Wyues that he shall marrye, by whom he shall haue hys gooddes and possessi∣ons. He shall bee myghtye and stronge by Sea and by lande, and shall haue a sonne of power and myghte, of whome he shall see great thynges, and shall
haue generation of him. Some of hys members shalbe diminished: and yf he eskape such a passion, he shal fal no more into it, whiche thinges appertaineth to hys good fortune. And finally, he shalbe delyuered from all aduersitie. Touchinge his euyll fortune, he shall lose some of hys goods by violence. He shall fal into a ryuer, whereoute he shal ryse agayne, and shall take no hurte at all, as is aforesayde. He shall come into the handes of a puysante man, from whome he shalbe delyuered. He shall lose by violence muche ryches whiche he had gotten, without recouery or hope of recouerye. The thyrde Chapter determineth of the iudgement of Pisces for the male. The man chylde borne in this Sygne shall haue a naturall marke in his head shulder, or foote, and a scarre in the mid∣dest of his bodye, or some where elles. He shall bee a player, merrye, a dispy∣ser of Fortune, verye harde of beliefe, lecherous beyonde measure, and haue
great fansye to women, whereby he shall suffer greate contumelye and hyn∣deraunce. He shall bee furious and ha∣stye to anger: but as he is soone angrye, so shall he bee soone pacified agayne. He is naturally couetous, hardye, stan∣dynge in hys owne conceyte, frendelye, vnkynde, a lyer. Yet not withstandynge these vices he is wittie, accordynge to hys nature, auaricious, couetous and greedye of learnynge, eloquente, obsti∣nate in hys learnyng, defendynge hys conclusions obstinatly and wittilye. And though he haue a smale witte, yet it is readye, sharpe, and prompte. Suche a one borne thus is gyuen to the com∣panye and loue of good men, earnestlye louynge hys frendes, and wyllynglye wyll venter hym selfe for them, where∣by he shall suffer hurte and detriment. He shall haue seuen greate syckennes∣ses, whereof three shall bee verye extreame, and speciallye the syxte, whyche he shall haue at foure and thyr∣tye yeares of age. And yf he eskape it,
he shall lyue .lxxxv. yeares, and .iij. mo∣nethes, and .xiij. dayes, he shal dye of the vij. sicknes. Vntyll .xxxiiij. yeares of hys age, he shall not be ryche nor poore, nor shall come to any honour. He shall bee ryche by the death of hys kynsfolke. He shall gette muche gooddes by hys labour, trauell, and notable industrye. He shall haue the reuenge of hys ene∣myes, and see the punishement of them. He shall marrye at .xxxiij. yeares, and yf he marrye before, he shall not kéepe hys Wyfe longe, but shall marrye another. He shall bee called the father of Chyl∣dren, and shall haue manye, yet he shall not haue a sonne at the begynnyng. If he wyll remedye hys euyll fortunes, and be delyuered from them, he muste cal earnestly vpon GOD, desiring mer∣cy for Iesus Christes sake, and by that meanes he shal be delyuered. In marri∣yng a Wyfe he shall bee somewhat in∣fortunate, because it shall not bee expe∣dient for him then, but in the age of xxxiij. yeares as is sayde. He shall bee
hurte by his neyghbour in hys gooddes. He shall haue manye suytes in the law, because of hys gettyng: and shall suffer muche and diuers tribulation, and spe∣cially in hys youth, wherein certayne thynges shall come luckely to passe with hym. The Saterdaye shall bee vnfor∣tunate for hym: Therefore that daye he maye not attempte nor take in hande any newe thyng. The .iiij. Chapter describeth the iudgement of Pisces for the female. The mayde that is borne in this signe, shal haue a marke by nature in her head or face. She shall be feruent and earnest verye honest, louynge the deckynge of her body: desyryng to haue braue appa∣rell: hardy, eloquent, hauynge a readye tounge to speake, wyttye, wyse, pitifull, mercifull, faythfull, amiable, liberall, of a merrye heart. She shall bee tormen∣ted wyth the grypynge and frettynge of the Bellye, payne of the stomacke, wyth the Lunatike passion or Fransie, whereby she shall haue greate trouble
the space of eyghte monethes: and af∣ter that she is eskaped from it, she shall lyue two and seuentye yeares. She shal comme to greate honour, and haue ma∣nye Chyldren, and shall bee called the mother of Chyldren: yet hereof she shall haue some misfortune: because her fyrst Chylde shall bee a doughter and not a sonne accordyng to the constellation. As for the mans parte beynge enclined to the contrarye, and surmountinge the naturall complexion of thys mayde, sometyme for the meetynge of certayne perticuler causes, whyche maye alter the complexion of the man and of the woman, and maye somme thynge chaunge it. She shall bee burned and hurte with fyer. And yf it chaunce that her fyrste Chylde bee a sonne, he shall not bee a trewe male, because of the op∣position and inclination of the mother, whereof I haue already spoken. At .xxv. yeares of her age, she shall haue suyte with her father or mother, or agaynste them both, yf thei lyue. The Saterdays
shalbe contrary to her & vnlucky, there∣fore that day she maye not beginne anye notable worke. The .v. Chapter reciteth the common fortune of Pisces. They that be borne in this signe, haue their fortune, in art of a handy crafts man, and in marchandise of cloth, if thei be faire, also in metalls, and in marchaundise of fleshe, and na∣mely in marchandise of corne & wheate and barley: and moreouer in horse, in diuinitie & the ciuill law, thei shalbe sub∣iect to whot sicknesses & burninge, as to feuers, fretting of the belly, poison, speci¦ally at ye yeres of 44 & 68, thei shal haue 3 lucky daies in ye weke, Monday, thurs∣day & fryday, the twesday & saterday vn∣lucky, ye wednesday & sonday indifferēt. Furthermore thei haue 6 good yeres & 6 bad, thei haue their good fortune toward the south therfore thei must dispose their doore, bed, & such like affaires that waye, thei be cholerick, wherby thei be balde, & thei must weare grey apparell or black, and not red, grene, white, or blewe.
¶Besides that whiche is written in the Prologue set before the treatises here expressed by Chapters, you muste number & reken this letter N. amonge ye numerall letters that signifie ye num∣ber, and it is as much as two beyng com¦poundes and made twise of the letter. I. Nowe, for to finde the totall or princi∣pall signe, you must diuide the number by .12. Of a thousande there remaineth the number of 4. Of 900 nothing. Of 800 8. Of 700 4. Of 600 nothing. Of 500 8. Of 400 4. Of 300 nothing. Of 200 8. Of 180 nothing. Of 160 4. Of 140 8. Of 120 nothing. Of 100 4. Of 80 8. Of 60 nothing. Of 50 2. Of 40 4. Of 30 6. Of 20 8 The number that commeth of the letters of number, muste bee diuided by 30, for to finde the particuler signe of the chylde that is borne, because there be 30
particuler signes, and because of the tayle of Virgo, whiche is diuided into two partes, whereof foloweth the diui∣sion of the numbers by 30. Of 1000 10. Of 900 2. Of 800 20. Of 700 10. Of 600 nothing. Of 500 20. Of 400 10. Of 300 nothing. Of 200 20. Of 180 nothing. Of 160 10. Of 140 20. Of 120 nothing. Of 100 10. Of 80 20. Of 60 nothing. Of 50 20. Of 40 10. Furthermore, you must note that the number whiche commeth of the nume∣rall letters of the name of the Chylde and of hys mother muste bee diuided by 29 whereof the diuision foloweth. Of 1000 remaineth 14. Of 900 1. Of 800 17. Of 700 4. Of 600 20. Of 500 6. Of 400 23.
Of 80 22. Of 60 2. Of 50 21. Of 300 10. Of 200 26. Of 180 6. Of 160 15. Of 140 24. Of 120 4. Of 100 13. Of 40 11. Of 30 1. The numerall letters signifiyng the number. I. one. II. two. V. fyue. X. tenne. L. fyftye. C. a hundred. D. fyue hundred. M. thousand. Some men wyll not admitte N. for a signifiynge letter of two amonge the other seuen: yet there bee certayne names wherein this letter may serue in the steede of o∣ther letters. FINIS.
OF PHISIO∣nomie. Nowe, for as muche as the ma∣ners of the mynde do folow the temperature of the bodye, I haue thought it meete and con∣uenient to adde here some sig∣nes of the Phisionomie, ac∣cordyng to the quantitie or qualitie of some partes of the bodye,
  ¶Sygnes. ¶Nature. The head Great. Of a dulle wytte. Asses. Verye smale. Fooles.   Meane. Of a good wytte. Naturall. Sharpe poynted lyke a Su∣gar lofe. Vnshamefast. Vaunters. Wyth Heare ryght vpwarde. Fearefull. Passion. Wyth Heare ryghte downewarde. Symple.   Wyth Heare much curled. Fearefull. Ethiopians. Wyth thycke Heare. Euyll.   Wyth Heare curled at the ende. Of good courage. Lyons. The for∣head. Verye smale. Hard to be taught. Hogges. Rounde. Of a dull wytte. Asses. Longe. Flatterers. Dogges. Square. Couragious. Lyons. Without wrynckles. Flatterers. Passion. Rough and wrynckled. Hardye. Lyons. Hangyng ouer the eyes. Sadde. Passion. Hygh and loftye. Liberall. Lyons.
the eares. Smale. Gesters. Appes. Great. Dulle. Asses. Blacke and hangyng. Folyshe. Asses. Meane. Of good wytte. Natural The eye∣browes. Ioyned together. Sadde.   Seperated muche. Fooles. Hogges. Fyne and softe. Couragious. Lyons. Thyn and hard. Vncleanelye. Hogges. Thycke hangynge downewarde. Fooles.   the eyes. Somewhat redde. Shamefaste. Passion. Moyste and shynnynge. Merye. Of good maners. Watrye weepyng. Drunkardes. Passion. Runnyng. Sleepye. Passion. Verye lytle. Faynte hearted. Apes. Verye great. Slowe. Oxen. Meane. Of good disposition. Naturall. Farre into the head. Malicious. Apes. But a lytle into the head. Couragious. Lyons. Bolt out of the head. Fooles. Asses. Somewhat great, and not farre inwarde. Meeke and gentle. Oxen, Oft wynkynge. Fearefull. Passion. Redde. Angrye. Passion. Verye blacke. Fearefull.  
Blewe. Fearefull.   Blacke yellowyshe. Of a good stomacke.   Chollerycke. Furious. Goates. Sparkelynge. Merye shamelesse. Dogges. Of many colours. Fearefull. Passion. Bryght and cleare. Lecherous. Cockes. The nose Rounde blunt and great. Couragious. Lyons. Lyke a Haukes byll. Couragious. Egles. With great endes. Couetous. Oxen. Sharpe at the ende. Angrye. Dogges. Flatte in the middes. Lecherous. Buckes. Wyde and open. Angrye. Passion. Verye blacke. Fearefull. Ethiopians. Verye white. Fearefull. Women. Somewhat browne. Stronge. Meanesse. Aberne. Of a good heart. Lyons. Freckled. Subtell. Foxes. Redde. Wyttye.   Enflamed. Angrye. Passion. The face Sharpe poynted. Faythfull. Dogges. the Chyn Wyth a rough nodde. Liberall. Lyons. Great. Stronge.   Longe. Fearefull and eaters.  
the necke Sklender and smale. Weake. Women. Fleshye. Angrye. Bulles. Shorte. Deceytfull. Wolues. Meane. Couragious. Lyons. The backbone hearye. Vnshamefast. Brute beastes. the hands The fingers coupled. Vncleanelye. Hogges. Short and great. Rashe and cruell.   Nayles large and whyte. Manlye.   Narrowe and longe. Cruell.   Oblyque or awrye. Impudent.   Smale. Craftye and subtyll.   Breast. With heare. Inconstant. Byrdes. Wythout heare. Shamelesse. Women. Ample and large. Stronge. Lyons. Nauell. Farre from the brest. Gluttons.   Equally distant. Prayse worthye.   the place about the priuye mēbers. Ful of bones or sharpe. Stronge. Male. Fleshye and fatte. Weake and delicate. Female. Hanches. Full of sinowes. Stronge. Male. Fleshye. Weake and delicate. Female. Thighes Full of sinows & thicke. Stronge.   Full of sinows and smale. Lecherous.   Great and euyll fashioned. Vnshamefaste.  
Legges. Ful of sinows & euil fashioned Stronge. Male. Fleshy and well formed. Weake and tender. Female. Feete. Full of sinows and equally proporcioned. Stronge. Male. Narrowe and smale. Weake and tender.   Wyth croked and nayles. Vnshamefaste, rauenous, greedye.   Wyth ryght nayles. Commendable. Naturall. Bodye. Verye smale. Wyttye, sharpe.   Verye great. Slowe.   Meane. Wyse.   Euyll proporcioned. Craftye.   Well compassed. Stronge.   Of a lyght fleshe. Wyse.   Of a soft fleshe. Forgetfull.   Of a harde fleshe. Dull and heauye of spirite.   Mouyng. Lyghte. Inconstant.   Slowe. Of a grosse wytte.   Heauye. Graue, couragious.   Voyce. Stronge. Graue iniurious. Asses Graue endynge sharpelye. Fearefull, egre or fierce. Oxen, Softe and lowe. Gentle. Shepe. Graue and moderate. Stronge. Dogges. Sharpe and stronge. Angrye. Goates.
HEre by the nature you muste vn∣derstand the inclination and natu∣rall complexion, whiche speciallye we maye coniecture by the coloure of the bodye. For naturallye blacke men are fearefull as the Ethiopians be. Whyte men also bee timerous and fearefull: and they that bee of a meane coloure Blacke and Whyte, bée strong and bolde. They that bee yellowe of the coloure of Golde bee couragious as Lyons. And yf they bee to yellowe, they bee malicious as Foxes. They that bee some what pale and darcke coloured bee fearefull: and this is referred to the perturbation that commeth of feare. They that bee ve∣rye pale, and almoste greene for pale∣nesse bee colde: and therefore they are vnapte to moouynge, slowe, and negli∣gent to worke. They that be of sanguin colour and somewhat redde, are nimble and ready to work. They that be of a fi∣ry and enflamed colour become oute of their wits, and be like mad men, when
thei be to muche chafed. So you muste cōiecture of other colours that take part of the aforesayd. They that desire to see many other signes & tokens of the natu¦rall inclination, muste haue recourse to Aristotles litle booke intituled of the phi¦siognomy: & to the works of Galene, spe¦cially to his litle booke, where he sayeth that the maners of the minde do folowe the temperature of the body. Further∣more, you muste note yt we haue foure humours, which Galene calleth the ele∣ments of liuing thinges yt haue blood, to wéete: blood, fleme, collor, & the melanco∣ly humour. The blood is whote, moist & swéete. The spettle called fleme, is cold moist, & without qualitie, as the water is, if it bee not depraued. The collor or flaua bilis is whote, dry & bitter. The me∣lancoly humour is cold, dry, bitter & ear∣thy. The blood norisheth. The fleme hel∣peth the moouing of the ioynts. The col∣ler clenseth & maketh cleane the flema∣tike excrements of the bowels: & prouo∣keth the power or strength excretiue.
The melancolicke humour helpeth the bellye in hys actions: For, because it is egre and bitter, it constreyneth and presseth the mouthe of the Ventricle or bellye called the stomacke, and maketh it embrace and reteyne the meate, vn∣tyll the digestion bee made. The bloode maketh men moderate, merye, plea∣saunte, fayre, and of a ruddye colour, which bee called sanguine men. The fleame maketh men, slouthfull, sluggyshe, neglygente, drowsye, fatte, and soone to haue graye Heares. The Choller maketh them angrye prompte of wytte, nymble, inconstante, leane and of a quycke digestion. The melancolike humour, whiche is as it were the substaunce, the bottome, and leese of the bloode, maketh men rude, churlyshe, carefull, sadde, auaricious, deceyuours, traitours, enuious, feare∣full, weake hearted, and dreaming and imaginynge euyll thynges, vexed with the trouble of the mynde as though thei were haunted wyth a malignaunte
spirite. These humours than maye bee referred to the Phisonomye: for by them a man maye knowe the naturall inclination of men. You maye also referre therevnto the temperature of ages. For the puerilitie or Chyldehode, whiche is from the byrthe vnto fiftene yeares or there aboute, is whote and moyst. The adolescēcie or youth, which endureth vntyll fiue and twentye ye∣res, is of a good and meane tempera∣ture. The youthe or floryshynge age of mans state, whiche endureth tyll fiue and thyrtye yeres, is of a whote and drye temperature. The fourth age is the first parte of olde age, whiche endu∣reth tyll fourtye and nyne yeres: and then men begynne to ware colde and drye, and lyke vnto a plante that dryeth vp and wythereth, and they bee called in Latyne Senes The seconde parte of olde age endureth vntyll end of the life: and the men be called in Latyn Seniores. And this age is also diuided into two or three degrees. They that be in the first
degree, haue yet theyr greene olde age, whiche yet maye handle and execute ci∣uill matters. They bee of the seconde degree, whiche drawe them selues by lytle and lytle from the sayde affaires because of theyr weakenesse. They of the thyrde degree are in extreme feeblenesse. If you desyre to knowe anye moore of the signes of Phisogno∣mie, you shall finde them by diligent readynge of authours.
The prediction of the maners and natures of men, by considerynge of theyr face and other partes of theyr body. ¶Of the iudgement of the head. SEynge that the head is the part that is most séene of al the parts of mans bodye, Hypocrates in his .vj. booke of common sicknesses, not without cause sheweth how to iudge of the whole bodye by the consideration of the head. For that which is either grea∣ter or lesser then it oughte to bee is al∣wayes faultie and not good, and they that haue this faulte or lacke, haue also those thinges that do euidently appar∣tain to the faulty & hurted myndes. And now euen as the head whiche is litle, is neuer without faulte, so that whiche is great, is not altogether parfite and good: but sometyme good and somtime yll. It is a signe of goodnes or of wickednes.
But the best fashion is the round head, and somwhat low on both sydes, as yf you shoulde imagine a verye rounde Sphere made of Ware to bee some∣what lowe of eche syde. The best forme then and shape of a head, is that whiche is meanely greate, and hath a comelye conuenient roundnesse: whiche appea∣reth before and behynde somewhat lowe. The principall cause why the head is lytle, is the lacke of matter or substaunce. And the cause of the great∣nes of it, is the abundaunce and super∣fluitie of the substaunce and seede man. But yf there bee lytle matter wyth the force of the firste formatiue vertue, it shalbe of a good forme and shape, and lesse euil, for as much as in the creature the noughtines of the fashion is ioyned with smalenes of the head. The braine foloweth the forme and fashion of the skull. For yf the skull bee corrupte, the brayne shalbe also corrupte. The head of man hath more brayne proporcional∣lye then all other beastes. The male
hath more braine then the female. The head of man hath moe ioynynges then all other thynges: and the male moe then the female. A well fashioned head is lyke a mallet, whereof the fore parte and the hynder parte, be lofty and high. The forme or fashion of the meane ventricle, muste bee a lytle pressed to∣gether, and so the cogitatiue is the more noble. If the forme before be lowe, the man hath no iudgement. And the hyn∣der parte bee lowe, he hath no memo∣rye, and hath a weakenesse of mouyng hys synowes, and consequentlye of all his bodye: for by the force of the braine is declared the force of the necke and synowes: and also the brodenesse of the shulders and of the breast, and the par∣tes of the sydes called Hypocondria, whiche be ioynynges to the lyuer and lunges. The head that is of a reasona∣ble fashion augmenteth the witte and vertue, and declareth a magnificence in the man: but when it is euyll is fashio∣ned it sheweth the contrary.
The iudgement of the head. THey that haue a great head, and yet not out of measure, are com∣monly faire and well condicioned. They that haue a greate head oute of measure be fooles, idiotes, dull heades. When the head is great proporcioned to the body, and specially to the necke, so yt the neeke be stronge, and meanelye great with the sinowes great & strong, it is a very good signe. The head fashi∣oned lyke a Sugar lofe, declareth the man to be paste shame, a deuourer, bold and rashe, which thing commeth of the heat and drynesse of the brayne. It is a another thyng when the head is great and the other members are not great accordynglye. The head is of a good fashion, when the ventricle before is also of a good fashion, and moyste ynoughe. For the takynge of the kindes commeth of the moysture, and the re∣teynyng commeth of drynes in the part behinde. The head with a meane ven∣tricle
somewhat pressed together about the sides, declareth the ventricle cogi∣tatiue to be ready to comprehende and deuise, that whiche is comprehended, and that because of the vnitie of the spirites that are in that place. The head rounde signifieth, mobili∣tie, vnstablenes, forgetfulnesse, smale discretion and lytle wysedome in the man, for sometymes the mouing of the spirites stayeth. The lytle head necessa∣rily sheweth an euill signe, for asmuch as it soone falleth into a sickennes, be∣cause that in it there is litle brayne, and the ventricles narowe, wherein the spi∣rites to straightly kepte doe not theyr office: for they are oppressed, enflamed, and choked vp, wherefore they imagine not well, they dispose nothing wel, they haue no memory. Suche men are com∣monly soone angry, & are fearfull, & kepe their anger long, by reason of the great drought, and whote temperature of the braine. Thei take in hand false matters thei speake yll, & haue a double tongue.
The longe head withoute measure, ha∣uynge the Organes a wrye, and not ryghte, noteth vnshamefastnes and follye. The head lowe and flatte beto∣keneth insolencie and dissolutnesse. The head high before betokeneth pride. The head that hath as it were a holow hoole behynde and is lowe and holow, declareth man to bee subiecte to angre and deceyte. The greate head wyth a large forehead and a face lyke a Gy∣aunt, is a signe of a slowe man, gen∣tle, stronge, and not easye to be taught. When the head is ryghte and almoste flatte in the myddest, and of a meane greatnes, it sheweth the man to haue greate wytte, and to bee couragious. If the head bee in all poyntes of a good measure, it is a signe of a great wytte and that the man is sharpe and libe∣rall. We meane the head not to great nor to smale, but accordynge to the quantitie and measure of the bodye.
¶The Iudgement of the body by the colour. BLacknes in a man like a glistering horne is a token of adustion as wel in the members as in the heare. A blacke colour sheweth the man to be of a small courage in feates of warre fearefull and craftye and is to be com∣pared to them that dwell in the southe. A greene colour, darke, or blacke, de∣clareth the man ready and prompte to anger. Men that haue a verye redde or redde headed in colour are subtile and craftie. As the common sayeng among the Frenche men is l'ay veu bein peu de petites gens humbles, & rousseaux fideles, that is to say I haue sene fewe litle mē humble or lowlye, & fewe redde head∣ded men faithfull and true. They that haue a pale and a dead face, and yet a redde forehead and lowe eyes, are alto∣gether shamefaste. And to them you may attribute passion. The white co∣lour & samewhat ruddye, signifieth the
man verye stronge and courageous. Suche are the northen men. The co∣lour that is verye whyte sheweth the man to be contrarye to vertue. A pale coloure sygnifyeth the man to be withoute courage in deedes of warre, fearefull, and a turner of his backe, yf syckenes be not the cause of thys pale∣nes. When a browne colour is myxed with a pale, it declareth the man to be a blabbe of his tonge and a prater, sone angrye, and a speaker without any tem¦perature. This colour then tendeth to an extreeme folly. They that be but a lytle red and freckled and haue quaue∣ring and moouinge lyppes and wyde nostetrells be commonly couragious and readye to wrathe and anger: and to theym also is passion attributed. A meane redde colour noteth a readye and pregnaunt wytte and vnderstan∣dynge. They that be of a fyrye colour or verye neere, keepe theyr anger longe and are harde to pacyfye or to be ruled when they are angrye. When
the vaines of the braine and of the tem∣ples be seene and the eyes sanguyne, it is a sygne that the man is subiecte to vehement wrath, and that sometime he is folyshe & out of his wyts. When the face is redde, it is a sygne of shame or dronkennesse you shall then knowe this colour by the sygnes of the eyes. ¶ The iudgement of the heare by the substaunce. THe heare smooth and thicke beto∣keneth meekenes, colde and moi∣sture. The further that the brayne is from heate, the more hearye is the head. The heate of a man that goeth to the vpper partes percinge throughe from all partes goeth thorowe the skinne of the heade and maketh an hu∣mour to comme oute of the holes that it maketh, and the fynest parte of this humour vanysheth away but the gros∣ser remayneth wythin and is turned in to heare. Whyche is harder than the
skinne and that by the meanes of the outward colde, & the heare is as bigge as the pore or hole, and as longe as the violence and force of thrusting it out is great. When the heare commeth oute slowlye, it is a signe of a moyste com∣plexion and not sanguyn. If they come a pase the body shall enclyne rather to drynesse than to moysture. And whan heate and drougth doe ioyne together the heare commeth out the sooner, and therewithall grosser. The multitude of heares declareth a hote man and the grossnesse of theym sheweth him to be full of fumosite. And therefore that happeneth more in yonge men than in yonge children. For in children the sub∣staunce is more vaporous than moyst. But in yong men it is contrary wher∣fore contraries folow their contraries. Abundaunce of heare in yong children sheweth their complexion that encrea∣seth and augmenteth, to tende to me∣lancolines. The curlinge of the heare signifieth heate and drines, & cōmeth of
the crokednes of the pores. The heares that be right vp in the head & the heare also that standeth vprighte in the rest of the body betoken fearfulnes in ye man. The heares right or thicke declare the man to be cruell and whan they be rare then they shewe him to be a deceiuour and if they be curled and turninge vp∣ward it is a signe of a hoate complexiō. And they be fast together appearing vp on the forehead they declare a myghty courage and a brutall as the courage of beares. The heares that be pressed downe and couched together vpon the myddle of the forehead rysing together vpon the toppe of the heade shewe the man to be hoate, and without know∣ledge of honestye. The heares that be thine slender and fewe in number be∣side the temples declare the man to be colde and without force. The reason is for in that place, are the great arteres & that place ought naturally to be hoote, and consequently to haue aboundance of heares for asmuch as the generation
and growynge of heares commeth of heate. Therfore whan the heare is thin and slender in that place, there is lacke of heate, and this ought to be ascribed vnto women for thei neuer haue a bon∣dance of heare in that place. The heare thinne and hard besyde the temples de∣clare the man to be colde and feareful. And when they be thycke in the same place and besyde the eares it is a sygne of heate & whordome. And thei be there stable, blacke or yellowe they signify a violēt mind or courage. If thei be grosse and somewhat whiter, it is a signe that the man shall be indocible whom men shall not rule nor tame. The abundāce of grosse heares & pressed downe, with the abundance of heare in all the rest of the body, doe shewe in an infante a me∣lancolines to come, that is to saye, that he shall fall into a furye or folly. When heares growe in a man that is already aged it is a token of great adustiō by na¦ture, yt which engendreth folly & priua∣tion of wytte and sense. Women are ne¦uer
bald, for their nature is like the na∣ture of infantes or children. The gel∣ded men lykewyse neuer waxe bald for they be almost of the nature of womē. The heares yt are made curled by tou∣ching like vnto the wrinkling of pepper doe sygnifye weakenesse in the vertue digestiue and age comminge haste∣lye on. ¶The Iudgement of the co∣lour of the heare. THE signification of the colour of the heare is not veryfyed for the most part but in temperate clima∣tes. Yet a man maye Iudge thereof some thinge in euerye climate in ma∣king comparison of men of ye climate vn¦to other as to ye Flemynges & Ethiopi∣ans. For the Ethiopians be blacke & their heare is curled and extreme croo∣ked. Yet therefore their complexion shall not be hoate but thys heate and curlynge of heare commeth of an out∣warde heate.
For they be rather colde, for as much as the heate goethe oute by vapours. But Fleminges whiche dwell in cold regions, are whit and haue their heare some what of a yellowe colour flatte and playne. And yet for all that we may not say that generally they be cold but rather that their complexion is ve∣rye hote: for the heate is within them as it commeth to passe in winter &c. A white colour signifieth either a vehe∣ment colde, as it appeareth in olde men that haue white heares or elles a great dryenesse, as it happeneth in things ve∣getatiue when they drye vp, the which for their blacknes or greenesse turne in to whitenesse. And that neuer hap∣peneth vnto men but at the end of sick∣nesses dryinge vppe. Heares haue fo∣wer principall colours to weete blacke redde, aberne and whyte or graye. The regions and ayer doe some thinge in the aperation of the heares. The whytenesse of heares commeth by wante of naturall heate or by rotten
fleame. And is a sygne some tyme of wanton maners and conditions. The blacke heare cometh of superabundant coler aduste or of bloode aduste, redde heare sygnifyethe heate whyche is not aduste for they be of a diminished heate The heares that be very redde declare the man to be a craftye deceiuour, de∣priued of wytte colerycke, ful of wrath and furious withoute reason. The heares that be of a cheste nutte colour declareth the man to be vpryght, iuste and well beloued of men. Golden heares, that is to saye yellowe heare or of the colour of golde, come of colde diminished. The abern coloured or yel∣lowe heare hold something of cold, and the heate is dead in the moyst, and this is referred vnto infantes. The people of the northe notwythstandinge haue thys heate bycause of the region. And therefore this muste be noted for suche thynges doe manye tymes deceyue the Iudgers of Phisyognomye. The blackenesse of heares whyche is lyke
to a bryghte horne with some roughnes and crookednes declareth the heate of the complexion: but the heare that is onelye blacke sygnifyeth fearfullnesse and couetousnes. The colour that is as it were a bright glistering horne, is like to the nature of Mars. Neuertheles the heares be not grosse, but somwhat fyne of the finesse of the humours, and are made blacke wyth a greate heate, which thing appeareth in breade tosted vpon the coales bycause the moysture in gone. But when the rest of the body is to heary then Mars & Saturne doe employ their forces. And suche men are commonly theues and robbers and when they haue their breast onely hea∣rie, it is a signe of heate & of a great cou∣rage. When all the body is couered wt heare, it is rather a signe of ye courage a fowerfooted beast then of a mā: when the nod of ye necke is couered wt heare euen from the heade it is a sygne of strength and of courage and in that the man is like to the lion.
¶ The Iudgement of the forehead. THe face is the onelye partie where the man onely becommeth. They that haue a great forehead are cō∣monly slouthfull and are compared to oxen. They that haue a broad forehead commonly chang their minde and yf it be very great, they be fooles of lytle dis∣cretion and rude of witte. Vnderstand take this brodnes wt the iust quantitye of the length and largenes. They that haue a rounde forehead are subiecte to wrath and anger specially if their fore∣head be open & plaine. And they be also insensible like vnto Asses. They yt haue a litle forehead and narrow be fooles, & doltes, not easely to be taught, slouens, deuourers lyke swine. They ye haue a metly long forehead haue good wits & ar easely to be taught but yet they are som what vehemēt as dogs be. They yt haue square forehed of a meane greatnes for mall to the heade are vertuous, wyse,
and couragious like Lions. They that haue a plaine and flatte forehead and wt out wrinkle will not bowe, & be wtout wytte contumelious, and much subiect vnto anger, obstinate, and full of contention. They that haue a longe and stretched oute foreheade be flatte∣rers and such haue their parte of passi∣ons. They that haue a darcke and coue∣red foreheade be audatious and terri∣ble. A lowe forehead and obscure, ma∣keth the man readye to weepe, and in that he folowethe the pecockes. The forehead that is great hath euer muche grosse fleshe, and contrarye the lytle forehead hath fine & thinne fleshe. The lytle forehead and finesse of the skynne betoken a fyne wytte and wauerynge. Nowe than the spirite or wytte, is a fyne body engendred of the vapours of the bloode. And this spirite or wytte beareth the vertues of the soule to the spirituall mēbers. And therfore where there be grosse humours there a good wytte cannot be. When a foreheade is
to much wrinkled, it is a signe of a man wythout shame, and this wrinkling cōmeth of to much moysture, although that sometime it proceedeth of drieth, & if the same be not in all ye forehead, it de¦clareth the man to be full of anger, and very subiect to anger and kepeth longe hys anger and hatred wythoute cause. They that haue a shorte foreheade, the temples and the checkes flatte preste downe, & large chawbones he subiecte to the disease called the kinges euyll. They that haue as it were a litle cloud on ye toppe of their nose or in ye middes, as narrowe are coumpted angry men as bulles and Lions. A hygh forehead large and longe signifieth encrease of goods. A low foreheade is no signe of a manly mā. The forehead that is some what swelling vp aboute the temples wyth a grossenes of fleeshe wyth the Iawes also full of fleeshe, declareth a greate courage anger, pryde and a grosse vnderstanding.
¶ The Iudgement of the eyebrowes. THE eyebrowes are places in the ioynture of the bones, and there∣fore they growe in manye men when they be olde. The eyebrowes that be very heary declare folyshnes of maners and mischeife. The eyebrowes thicke with abundance of heare ioyned to the beginning of the nose do sygnifye a great adustion, & such men are of an euyl nature. If the eyebrows yt be hygh vpward do descend to the begynning of the nose and aboue are rysyng to the tēples, it is a signe that heat & drougth do rule, and such men be crafty & male∣factours If ye eyebrows descend down∣wardon ye side of the nose, & rysyng vp∣ward on the syde of the temples, they declare men to be without shame and dulle and that bycause of a furyous heate. The eyebrows thinne and of a competent greatnes, declare the, temperature and goodnes of the hu∣mours
and they that haue them so are of a greate wytte. The eyebrowes longe shewe the man to be arrogant and wythout shame, but when they be longe wyth much heare they sygni¦fye the man to thinke and to haue hys mynde vppon great thynges. The eyebrowes whyche descende downe¦warde on the syde of the nose, and ray∣sed vpward on the syde of the temples, and hangyng downeward on bothe sydes declare the man to be wythout shame enuious, folyshe insatiable, and lyke vnto hogges. The eyebro∣wes which descend crooked on the side of the nose declare the man to be witty in naughty thinges, and whan they be crooked on the out side of the eye, they signifie the man to be recreatife & mer∣ry. If ye eyebrowes be right as though they were drawen with a lyne and lōg it is a signe of an euyll minde weake and femnine and as womens mindes bee. When the eyebrowes comme togyther, they shewe the man
to be verye pensyfe and not very wyse. Hanging eyebrows and falling downe vpon the eyes, declare enuye: but yf they be crooked they sygnifye a smalle memorye. The eye browes that be rounde compassed lyke a bowe, so that they ioyne almoste to the nose, declare the man to be subtyll wytty and studi∣ous. The eyebrowes thynne meete or measured by the diamenter, and greate betoken a good wytte. ¶The Iudgemente of the eyelyddes. THE eyelyddes are sette aboue the great coueringes of ye smal vaines by a grosse vapour. The fyne∣nesse of the skynne declarethe the sub∣staunce of the matter that is to saye of the humours and that coler hathe the domynion. And they that haue such heare, be malycyous and vitious vnto whome you maye also ascribe the other passyons of colere.
And when that place is verye fleshye (as the eyes of the Dules) it is a signe of fraude and guyle. The eye lidde ap∣pearyng hygh aboue, and seemeth ful∣ler then it is, declynynge a lytle aboue the eye, declareth the sight to be other then the common sight of men, and to muche fixed and set vppon one thyng. But yf the sayde eye lydde tend down∣warde, it is a signe that the man is full and fatte, and namely when it is redde rounde aboute, it is a signe that the man is a dronkarde and riotous, &c, whyche thynge I haue tryed in manye men which dyd haunt tauernes. The reason is, because suche a disposition of the eye lydde signifieth weakenesse of the eyes, and consequentlye of the brayne. Wherefore they that haue them so, feare often tymes the Wyne. If thei be thinne and fine downward, so that the whyte of the eye bee coue∣red, it is a signe of drynesse of humors. And if that happen in any sharpe passi∣on, it is a signe of death. When the
heare of the Eyelyddes is croked downewarde, or naturally tourned or wreathed at one syde, it is a signe of lyinge and subteltie. They that haue verye great or grosse Eyelyds, sée farthest of, for they conserue theyr syght wyth heate and outwarde colde. Whan the corners of the Eyes bée broade, it is a sygne of diseases of the Eyes. And yf they haue anye fleshye apparence, they signifye Dronkennes, and specially when ye Eyes bée appa∣rent and cleare, and haue theyr coue∣rynges dryed vp. The Eyelyds aboue the Eyes, whi∣che couer them beneath signifie longe lyfe. They that wagge and remoue often theyr Eyelyddes, bée fearefull, and wythoute good sence or wytte. The Eyelyddes thynne, sygnifye healthe, and declare the thoughte of the man to bée nygh vnto good. The iudgement of the eyes.
THe complexion of the Eyes is moyst, & they bée made of .vij. lids, whiche are called in Latyne Tunicae oculorum, with thrée humours. The passions of the mynde bée decla∣red specially by the Eyes, as tribulati∣on, myrth, loue, hatred, & suche other. The Eyes haue foure principall co∣lours, to wytte, blacke, somewhat whyte, chaungeable, darcke, and tau∣nye. The forme of the Eyes that bée rounde, are the moste wauerynge and rollyng that bée, the most parfyte, and vncorrupt, because there is no square∣nes in them. The Eyes that haue cor∣ners are most fylled wt superfluities in ye same corners: the eyes yt be great be∣token fearfulnes & weakenes, for their grossenes cōmeth to a great abūdance of moisture in ye brain, wherin ther is a certeyn coldnes, which is spred amōg ye mēbres, & quencheth ye blood: wherfore euen as the sprite of the blood maketh the man bold, so the cōplexion that is cold and moiste maketh him fearefull.
The eyes that bee bolt forewarde, de∣clare follye in the man. But when thei bee hollowe inward they shewe a ma∣licious subteltie in the man. Broade eyes tendynge to the largenes of the bodye, and lyke vnto Hogges eyes, de∣clare a moysture of the bodye. They that haue theyr appearynge outwarde and loftye see not verye well: for their eyes bee farre of from their fountaine whiche is the brayne. And suche men are commonlye greate babblers and praters. The hollowe eyes farre in the head haue a sharper sighte than the other. The rollynge or waggynge of the eyes commeth of heate and beto∣keneth wrath, lecherye, and boldenes. When the eyes moue deformely, so ye nowe thei runne, and now they stande styll, it is a signe of great malyce, and that suche men are full of wicked cogi∣tations. They that remoue theyr eyes swiftly with a sharpe sight, be theues, vnfaythfull, and full of deceyte. Suche men haue a subtell witte, but it is
readyer to euyll than to good. A sted∣fast looke, commeth of two great and stedfast cogitation, and oftentymes of a desyre they haue to deceyue. They that haue a looke lyke women, are whoremaisters and withoute shame: for that disposition commeth to them by such a complexion as women haue. When a man looketh as thoughe he were a chylde, so that hys face and eyes, be alwayes smylyng, it is a signe that he shall be of a longe and merrye lyfe. Merrye and laughyng eyes with the rest of the face, betokeneth flattery, lecherye, and backebytinge. The eyes that bee as it were yellowe, signifie crueltye and deceyte, as it appeareth well ynoughe in baudes and murthe∣rers, this colour commeth of a Chol∣ler raignyng and adust. Lytle eyes sig∣nifie malyce, folly, and weakenesse in a man. The hollownes of the eyes com∣meth of a dryeth, whiche dryeth vp the muscles and ligamentes. Whereof ensueth a contradiction in the inward
partes, & that the man becometh brain∣les. The eyes are set & situat natural∣ly in man accordyng to the largenes of the body. The Eyes that are of diuers colours & dimme in the balle of them betoken folyshnes. The boltyng oute of the Eyes doth represent diuers ob∣iectes, whereby it commeth to passe that the man is confuse with this di∣uersitie of obiectes, goynge aboute to beholde them all together. The Eyes that tend vpward, signifie goodnes, but if they be red & great tending vpward, thei signifie wickednes, folly, & dronk∣nes, And that cōmeth of the weakenes of the brayne, whyche is verye moyste and not temperate. The eleuation of the Eyes commeth by accident, for the cause of it is to muche heate, the Sygne whereof is the redde colour: whereof also commeth the pertur∣bation of the reasonable soule. As we sée in the great anger of men. The extention of the Eyes and of the face, shewe the malyce of the man: because that heate and drynes bée the
cause thereof. And the whote soule, bryngeth commonly some euyll signe. The Eyes that bée as it were hidden in the head, sée further of then other and signifie suspicion, malyce, daun∣gerous anger and naughtye conditi∣ons: they declare the man to haue a great memorye, and speciallye of In∣iuries: audacious, cruell, full of crafte, a lyer, vicious, and a Whoremon∣ger. &c. Whan the Eyes are nowe shutte nowe open, and by and by stande styll, suche men haue not yet committed any crimes, but they haue them in theyr heart. The Eyes haue diuersities of colours because they bée Diaphanes and of a rare substaunce and fyne. And therefore the spirites of the syght shew their qualities in the Eye. As a womā that hath her flowers spotteth the looking glasse, & marreth children in the cradell, & somtime hur∣teth whole & sound eyes: when there be many apparent spots in the ball of the Eye it is a signe of noughtynes.
And yet shall the spotted eye be worse, yf it bee of diuers colours. The chaun∣geablenes of the eyes commeth of no∣thyng but of heate raysynge vp the va∣pours vnto the eyes. And the greater the varietie is, the greater is the heate. For as much as the spottes be diuers, the adustion of the spirite raysed vp, is the greater, whereof commeth the di∣uersitie of maners, and the multitude of vices. And of this great varietie, the honeste and commendable iudge∣ment is corrupted. The eyes that bee redde as coales, signifie wickednesse and obstinatie. For by the colour of fi∣er, is signified greate Choller. They that haue meane eyes, enclinynge towarde the colour of the skye, or somewhat blacke, haue a sharpe and pearsyng vnderstandynge, and be faith¦full and curtesye. Almansor saieth that the best and moste commendable co∣lour of the eyes is betwene blacke and chaungeable, yf they bee not full of beames, or yf there bee not any rednes
or yellownes in thē, those eyes declare discretion & vnderstanding. His reason is, because they bee withoute Choller or Melancoly adust. The colour of the eyes graye and blacke, specially where bee no spottes, is cause of moyste hu∣mours and temperate without adusti∣on, whereof foloweth the spirite lyke vnto the nature. And of this spirite commeth the vnderstandynge and spe∣culation: the diuers coloured is made of a moore cleare visible spirite, there∣fore suche men are well borne, and sée∣kers of knowledge and science. The worser eyes haue whyte spottes or blacke or redde, or of some other co∣lour. And they that haue suche eyes are worse then all other, and more to be reproued. The chaungeable great and of aberne colour, yf they haue ly∣tle redde sparkes very dustye signifieth the man to bee troubled in hys mynde and vicious: but yet bolde and wyttye. When there be lytle redde spottes in the eyes, and tourne moore to blacke
than to red so that they séeme blacke, it is a sygne of a noble heart, iuste, good & witty. The Eyes that shyne wythin as spottes of Whyte betoken cleane men, stable, and verye courtise. The Eyes that haue lytle spottes all together red, & yet not roūd but square, and shynynge lyke fyer wythin & vn∣derneath, & that there bée other be∣syde them that bée pale, & other blood colour, & that the circles whiche close in the ball of the Eye bée sanguine, & that the Eye bée of a good greatnesse, & that the Eyelyds & the ball do re∣moue & wagge much, it is a Sygne of a cruell heart, moore than a man would thinke: the redder those lytle spottes bée & the smaler, so much the moore do they shew the great anger & wickednes in the man: the spottes that bée greater & darker, diminishe those great vices: but they take them not away all together: the blacke spot∣tes or sanguine in the blacke ball of the Eye or browne do signifie malice
or poysonyng. The pale spottes signi∣fye secreate wyckednesse. And you muste note that as muche as the co∣lours are moore vehement, the moore efficatie they haue. Yet there bée some Eyes coloured lyke the Rainebowe, the whyche yf they bée drye, declare great lacke of wytte: But yf they bée moyst, they sig∣nifie magnificence & wysedome: yet wyth wrathe & infamous whoredome. If the ball of the Eye be blacke, & clo∣sed in with the foresayde yellowe co∣lour, or if it seme lyke gylt (as the Phi∣sitions say) it betokeneth the bloody Flixe in the neather partes. The great Eyes & long Eyebrowes, betoken short lyfe. They that haue in theyr Eyes a blackyshe Whyte, are commonly great Personages, & lyue in great honour. The waueryng or moouyng Eyes & sharpe, sygnifie theft, whych is attri∣buted vnto Haukes.
The drye eyes and full of veynes, be∣token priuation of wytte to come or present. The eyes compassed aboute with dimme darkenesse, declare that the man is seasoned with euyll do∣trine, and that he is vnfaythfull and temperat. But when they shyne much and be without spotte, it is a token of goodnes. When the eyes shyne verye muche, and are browne, and sanguine it is a signe of rashenes and of priuati∣on of witte: But yf they be well pro∣porcioned, they betoken good state of the wytte. The colour of the eyes meane betwene blacke and chaunge∣able is commendable aboue all other sortes aforesayde, yf they bee not full of beames and streakes, eyther yellow or red. If the eyes bee great, and verye cleare and cleane, they signifie iustice, docilitie, prouidence, and good aduer∣tisment. If they bee eminent, red, and smale, it shalbee a signe of the thought and the tongue vnrulye, and of an vn∣constant mynde. Tremblyng eyes and
browne, betoken a man withoute shame, vnfaythfull and vniuste. When the eyes haue a competente greatnesse, and be verye bryght, it is a signe of magnanimitie, & that the man enterpryseth greate thynges & bryn∣geth to passe great matters. Somtime it is a signe of anger, and that the man is gyuen to Wyne, that he is a thefe, and couetous beyonde measure. When the eyes bée great and smiling it is a signe of a dull man, lecherous, and that foreséeth not what shall come after. Hollow eyes and smylyng as it were lying in wayte, or to spye, speci∣ally, yf the chéekes, the eyebrowes, and the lyppes do moue all together, it is a signe of wycked cogitations, deceytes, and namely, yf somtyme the eyelids bée ioyned together, & touche one ano∣ther, it is a signe of most wycked thoughtes. Sad eyes are not much to bée feared: for they bée to the cogitati∣ons of moyst eyes, & betoken study of good sciences. But yf the eye browes
and the Forehead be of a good bredeth & styll, & that the Eyelyds be good, it is sygne of a faythfull mynde, graue & gentle: the sad Eyes & dry wyth shar∣penes of the Forehead & stedfast looke, & castyng down of the Eyelyds signi∣fie hurt & cruelty, & that the man hath a rash boldnes: they that haue wa∣try Eyes are louers of Wyne, and become bald, and such men haue al∣ways a moyst Brayn & weary: they that haue theyr Eyes very watry & running, are slepy & loue to sleepe. Ble∣rines or watrynes of the Eyes com∣meth of grosse blood, & of a melanco∣ly humour whych falleth into the Eye lyds: the watrynes of the Eye by the looke of the disposition, betokeneth drunkenes: yf it bee wyth depression of the Eyes, it declareth slepe. The flat Eyes sygnifye slownes: wherein the man is compared to Ox∣en. The meanes of the Eyes sygni∣fieth goodnes and puritie. The Eyes that be somwhat hollow, betoken
magnanimitie. But yf they be moore hollow, it is a sygne of mekenes. If the ball be black, it is a sygne of a slouthfull and dull man. The ball of the Eye that hath round about certain Pearles, signifieth the man to be en∣uious, a babbler, fearfull, and very daungerous. The Eyes that stand awry wyth a vehement ague, sygni∣fye death. If the Eyes tarry longe open, it is a sygne of folyshnes, and that the man hath no shame. The Eyes that bee very blacke, be∣token fearefulnesse, and desyre to scrape together gooddes. And yf they bee not verye blacke, but somewhat yellow, it is a sygne of a good and ver∣tuous mynde: the Eyes that bee Browne, or Whyte, signifie feareful∣nes, and specially the Whyte: the eyes that be not altogether Browne, beto∣ken a good courage and mynde: the Eyes that be full of vaines, signifie fo∣lishe men and destitute of their wittes, and that is referred vnto Goates.
Now the eyes are called full of vaines which haue many lytle lynes or strea∣kes, as the minutes of vaynes bee, by the which the colour of the eyes is made diuers. The eyes that bée en∣flamed signifieth the man to bée paste shame. The eyes are enflamed when they shyne and are brighte, & glyster lyke fier: for they bée kyndled wyth yre and wrath. And yf they sée one thynge, they thynke they sée twayne. The eyes and the chéekes red betoken dronkenes And when they bée red & drye, it is a sygne of wrathe & angre. When the eyes bée browne or troubled, it is a sygne of feare. The meane eyes and lowe, betoken shamefastnesse & hone∣stye. The steddye eyes snd somewhat red betoken whoredome & deuouring The chaungeable eyes & shorte de∣clare a couetous man & desyrous of goods. But yf he haue the forehead and eye browes halfe retyerd he is the moore couetous.
¶ The Iudgement of the face. THE face is taken symplye for a naturall looke: but the vysage is vnderstand of the qualitie of the mynde. The face of them that be very cleane is meane in the cheekes and temples and somewhat fatte. And that face is a trewe face, louing and not disdaynefull. The merrye face commeth of a merry harte, and so the contrarye. The meane forme that is to saye neyther to greate nor to lyt∣tle, is very handsome. He that hath a full and fatte face is importune, a lyar, a deuourer, and not very wise. A fatte face maketh the man circum∣specte in his affayres, and sygnifyeth a sharpe wytte. The thynnes of the face betokeneth the man to be pensiue. A rounde face sygnifyeth folly: and a greate face sygnifyeth slouth. The face that is very litle sygnifieth naugh∣tinea, craft, flattery, no liberalite: & fear¦fulnes. They yt haue a croked face, are
of a naughty and wicked dysposytion. A longe face testifyeth the man to be without shame and iniurious and that cometh of heate. The temples swollē with great veynes and arteries, signi∣fye wrath and anger. If the fleshye face be somewhat thicke, and not very neat it is a signe of fearfullnes and of great follye. A grosse and rusticall face wyth broade Iawes, sygnifyeth a rude and blount nature. ¶The Iudgemente of the visage or of the face. THe asperite or sharpnes of ye face, of ye state of the lipps, of ye chekes, of the forehead, and of the county∣naunce, sygnifieth a folyshe man and without sence or wytte. The face that sweteth often, yea with a lytle mouing betokeneth heate, leacherie, glottonye, and that the man is a great eater, and therefore falleth into indigestion: and at the last into great sycknesses. When the face is hollow lyke a valley, more
leane than fatte, it sygnifyeth the man to be iniurious, enuious, a lyer, a rioter cruell, and specially yf he be of an adust colour and somewhat blacke or elles yellow. The face well proportioned of fleshe, of colour, & other things appar∣taining, declare a commendable lyfe, and aboundaunce of vertues. Euerye fatte face & full signifyeth an ignorant man, and gyuen to pleasures. Take héede you be not deceiued in the iudge∣ment of Lazer men for their eyes be∣come round and their vaines appeare. The lyttle visage heareth witnesse of a lyttle vnderstanding, of wyckednes, of folly and of ignorance. ¶ The iudgement of the nose. THe nose that reacheth downe euen to the mouthe of a competent big∣nes declareth the gristle and the brayne thereof to be of a hoate com∣plexion and sygnifieth goodnes and au∣dacitye. Whan the nostrells be greate and wyde it is a sygne the mans codds
and stories be greate, and that he is a whoremonger, a traytour, false, au∣datious, a lyar, enuious, couetous, a nyggard, and but a little fearfull and of a grosse vnderstandinge. The Nose sheweth the disposytion, of the hart: yf it be great, it is a sygne that the man is subiect to wrath. A lyttle nose and a greate also declare the secrete partes of the man, and of the woman. The pryuye member of a man great, commeth of a grosse and hote matter. Yet the foote of the woman declareth her matryce. A narrowe foote, longe leane sheweth the lyke of the matryce of the woman, and so the contrarye. The measure of halfe the foote beyng bare, is the measure of the length of the matrice, yea in all women. Greate lippes declare the skynne or the lyppe of the gate to be great, and so contrary And specially in a maide. The nostrells of the Nose shewe the stones of the man. If they be greate and wyde it is a sygne that hys coddes be greate
and large: but if they be smalle it is a sygne that the coddes be narrow and smalle. Wherefore the rule cannot fayle (vnlesse it be by accident) that is to saye by syckenes and yll rule, as dauncyng, or suche lyke. For tra∣uayle and labour encreaseth the mem¦ber. And so manye haue theyr righte hande greatter then the lefte bycause it laboureth more. A hawke Nose sygnifyeth magnanimytye and cou∣rage, cruellty, rapacitye, and bold∣nes whych thynge commeth of heate. And therefore they that haue thys hawke Nose are commonlye angrye and full reuenge and gyue themsel∣ues to vnlawefull thynges. A flatte Nose sygnifyeth violence whoredome and yet neuertheles weakenes. For that commeth of fleame & of moisture If the nose be short the mouth litle and the teeth short & great, that commeth of moystenes and colde. A sharpe nose, a longe necke, and the voyce fayer & shrill come of coleryke temperature.
When the nose is broade in the middes toward the typpe, it is a token of super∣fluitie of wordes, of lyeing of anger. I haue knowen such men excéedinge in vices and chieflye in lyes. They that haue their nose sharpe at the ende are commonly lyars hurtfull, and conten∣tious. For that procedeth of coler. The nose that is great at the end, declareth desyrours of thynges as oxen are. And such men couet all that they see, and specially in carnal voluptuousnes. And moreouer are commonly very angrye. Large & wide nostrells betoken whore∣dome. The nose that is great at the end signifieth insenble men past shame and vnapt to be taught. The nose turned vp¦ward and round at the ende is a sygne of magnanimitie and greate courage which is in lyons. The nose thynne and small at the ende like a birds byll signi∣fieth lightnes and folly. ¶The Iudgement of the nose and nostrells.
THE nose that is crooked and hard from the forehead to the mouth, is a sygne that the man is without shame. A hollow nose and the forehead rounde and emynent aboue, declareth leacherous men. If the nose be croked nygh vnto the forehead it is a sygne of a man past shame and without honesty. The nostrelles crooked are ascribed to men of a good hart. The Nose tending to the laterall partes of the man, yf it declyne onely to one parte of the posyti∣on, goyng from the gyrdle on the side of the last part betokeneth some hurt: But deuyded into both the partes of the posytion, it sheweth syckenes or hurt, and that commeth eyther of the primatyue cause, or of the cause goe∣yng before. The Nose that is in hys begynnynge almoste flatte. Beto∣keneth lyberalitye suche are the Ly∣ons. A redde nose whyche hath a hole at the verye foundation, and the bredth of it somwhat swellynge, after
the fashion of strawberies, betoke∣neth dronkenes: and suche men are commonly moyste and lecherous, spe∣cially yf that sygne be on the body of a small measure. And thys hath bene tryed. Open and wyde nostrelles sygnifye readynes to anger. The thinne and very open nostrelles, be∣token crueltie and disdainfull thought. The nostrelles thynne and longe syg∣nifye vnstablenes and lyghtnes. And yf they be thynne and sharpe they sig∣nifye quarelyng men. Whan one part of the nostrelles is myxed wyth the forehead and taken honestly from the forehead and seperated by a good composition so that it be not to hyghe nor to lowe with some lyne descendyng it is a signe of constancie, manlines and prudence. The nostrelles ryght vp betoken distemperance of tonge. The nostrelles that be in all things greater, are better than the lesser. The lyttle nostrelles are naturallye ascrybed vnto seruile and bound wyttes and to
vnfaithefull men. The wyde No∣strells shewe a token of myrthe and strength. And when they be verye narrowe, rounde, and almost stop∣ped they betoken follye. The large∣nes of the nostrells, the Iawes fatte, and the small quantitie of heare on the chéekes, sygnifye a moyst complexion. If the heare that groweth in the no∣strells of a man be great thycke, and muche, it is a sygne of a hard wytte and spirite and vnmoouable. But yf there be lyttle heare and softe, it be∣tokeneth a gentyll and easye wytte, and good to be taught. ¶The iudgement of the eares. THE greate Eares are engen∣dred of aboundaunce of matter and suche men haue common∣lye a lyttle necke, and fayer. They be sanguine somewhat colericke wyth grosse bloode and some thynge
aduste. And those men are very vnpa∣cient and prone to anger. When the eares be great and ryght beyond mea∣sure it is a sygne of follye, and abun∣daunce of manye superfluous wordes and longe lyfe. If they be so greate that they maye be compared to Asses eares, it is a sygne of follye and slow¦nes. And when they be greate and hange downeward, they sygnifye ry∣ches. If they be thynne and drye, it is a sygne of greate vnstablenes, and that the man shall not haue much goodes. Very small eares betoken folyshe men théeues and whoremongers. The small eares sygnifye the same thynge that the other before doe and therwith all they sygnify deceyte and malignite. When the eares be narrowe and very long it is a sygne of enuye. And yf they be verye longe they shewe and declare an enuious man. Lyttle eares, sygnifye shorte lyfe. The eares that be to rounde declare an in∣docible man. If the muscle of the
eares be ioyned fast wyth the fleshe of the throte. it is a sygne of follye, and vanitye. Plyable eares declare the proportion of the heate and moy∣sture. The right eares stiffe and full of gristles, declare that drynes hath domi∣nion. The eares that be lyke halfe a cyrcle meane, and hollow, and Ioyned to the line and middle somwhat pressed together toward the centre, styckinge neare to the head declare goodnes of na¦ture. The eares that be couched close to the head sygnifie dull men slow and slowthfull. The eares that be hydden and fyxed ryghte to the head betoken slowth. The eares that be hearye betoken long life and a good hearing. The meane eares amonge all the sortes aforesayde are good, and to∣kens of goodes, If there be anye greate quantitye of longe heare and thycke in the eares it betokeneth a hoate courega and a desyre of carnall pleasure.
¶The Iudgement of the Iawes and chekes. MAlae be the emynent partes vn∣der the eyes and Maxillae is the diminutiue. The chaffes be the parts of the Iawes oute of the whych the beard groweth. The Iawes are taken offten times for the chaffes. The Iawes specially declare the complexi∣on of ye man. The Iawes that is to say the eminent cheke of the vpper part of the mouth with the length of ye Iawes of the parte of the composition sygny∣fye malicious men. The short Iawes and farre out from the vpper part of the mouth sygnifye malyce backbiting violence enuie, specially whan in those partes there is no fleshe. The leane Iawes & of a thinne substance browne or somewhat yellowe declare a hote & a dry complexion. The Iawes that be as it were black, wyth a purged substance of fleshe signifye exces of dryenes and colds as it appeareth in a melancolye
man. The grosse fleshe of the Iawes is a signe of a grosse nature of coward∣nes and sometyme violence. The Iawes that be to thynne betoken ma∣lignitye. And they that be softe and long sygnifye importunate babblynge and prating. The chéekes that be ful, with full and blowen temples, be∣token great wrath. Whan the chekes are small and so sytuate, that they appeare cutte and seperated from the eyes, it is a sygne of aboun∣daunce of euyll humours. The roundenes of the chéekes de∣clare enuye. Whan the chéekes be lyghte and euyll sette, they sygni∣fye length of tounge, importunitye and much talke. Redde chéeks (as is a∣boue sayd) signifie dronknes. ¶The nature of the mouth. THE mouth great & wyde betoke∣neth wrath, boldnes & warre. And such men are comonly glottons.
A wyde mouth withoute measure. as thought it were cutte and stretched out sygnifieth rauening inhumanite, wic∣kednes, a warlyke hart and cruell, like vnto beastes of the sea. Such men are greate talkers, boasters, babblers, enuions, lyars, and full of follye. The mouthe that hathe but a lyttle closynge and a lyttle openynge, sygny∣fyeth a fearful mā, quyet & yet vnfaith∣full. The mouthe that is verye ap∣parent and rounde wyth thyckenes of lyppes, sygnifyeth vnclenlynes, follye, and cruelltye. The mouthe whyche hath a quantitie in his sytuation with a lyttle shutting, and smylynge eyes wyth the reste of the face, sygnifyeth a carnall man a louer of daunses, and a greate lyar. Whan the mouthe turneth in speakinge it is a sygne that it is infected wt some catarre or murre as it is manyfest ynough. The long chynne declareth the man to be verye lyttle subiecte to anger, and of a good complexion: and yet he is somewhat
a babbler and a boaster of hymselfe. They that haue a litle chinne, are much to be auoyded and taken heede of, for besydes all vices wyth the whych they are fylled they are full of impietye and wyckednes and are spyes, lyke vnto ser¦pentes. If the ende of the chynne be round it is a signe of feminine maners and also it is a sygne of a woman. But the chynne of a man muste be almoste square. The iudgement of the lippes. THE lyppes be of softe fleshe with a good moouinge bycause of the speech. The greate lyppes are meete for fooles and dullardes. The redde coloure of the lyppes, on the syde of the openynge of the mouthe, commeth of the vaynes that be in that place. The naturall coloure of the lyppes is redde in the vtter partes bycause of the fynesse of the skynnes, and sygnyfyeth cleanes
of complexion and wythoute myxti∣tion of troubled bloode in great ver∣tue. The blacknes of the Lyppes sygnifieth the contrarye, for the ver∣tue of the bloode and naturall heate is gonne and those that haue suche Lyppes are syckely. The neather lippe lose and verye redde sygnifyeth greate fleshelynes, and vnshamefast∣nes in a woman. The lippes grosse de∣clare great substance of matter drawen of heate. And the grossenes declareth the humours and the grosse spyrites, of the whyche proceedeth dulnes of vnderstandynge. If they be ryghte and thycke, that is to saye fyrme and fast, and Ioyned togyther Mars is theyr planette. And lykewyse whan the mouthe is greate. Softe lyppes and somewhat smy∣lynge whyche be in a merrye face be∣token fleeshelyenes. Yet sometime they be also deceyuours, theeues and full of fraude and gyle.
They that haue not red lyppes wyth∣in are sycke, or very neare to sickenes. The lyppes of the mouth very great, and slacke, or to muche tourned out∣ward signifie simplicitie, and readines to wrath and grosse witte: and fleame ruleth in them. Thynne lyppes and lose in the vppermost partes, so that the vpper lyppe be bowynge downe to the ioynyng of the lyppes, signifieth magnanimitie: thynne lyppes and hard appearyng aboute the téeth signi∣fie a beastly vnderstandyng and wytte vnapt to be taught. The lyppes that bée great beneath in the neather part, betoken folysh men, and lyke to Asses. The vpper lyppe very apparent in the Gummes, signifie men that loue con∣tumelies and euyll slaunderynge, and are alwayes in brawlynge and contra∣uersies: the lytle lyppes with a lytle mouth, signifieth weakenesse of the spirite and naughty crafte. The best maner or sorte of lyppes and mouth is when they are not to moyste, for the
moystnes of the mouth and lyppes, sygnifye fearefulnesse and maligni∣tye. The greate blabbe lyppes, beto∣ken greate follye, babblynge and au∣dacitie. The lyppes that bée neyther to thycke nor to thynne, and some∣what tourned outwarde, sygnifye, se∣cretenesse, pollicie, wrathe, and a great wytte. The lyppes that bee well co∣loured, moore thynne then thycke, signifie a fayre condicioned man, and chaungeable to two wayes: But ra∣ther vnto vertue. And of suche men Iupiter is the Plannette. The lyppes that bée not equall, so that one is grea∣ter then the other, declare the man to bee wyse and of a chaungeable for∣tune. The vpper lyppes smale and somewhat loftye, signifie the man to bee a blabbe and a longe tongue, ve∣rye enuious, and an accusour. Thynne vpper lyppes, hangynge and tourned insyde out, betoken a theefe, and a deceyuour. You maye not iudge of the Ethiopians lyppes vnlesse you
haue bene conuersaunt amonge them and diligentlye noted and obserued theyr qualities. But of our regions and countreys, we maye geue iudge∣mente. ¶Of the teeth. WHen the teeth that bée lyke Dogges teeth, bée long and fast, and that they stycke oute of the mouth, it is a sygne of a glotton, sub∣iecte to angre, wicked and a foole. Weake teeth thynne and smale, de∣clare all the bodye to bée weake, and the lyfe of the manne to bee shorte and weake. The sownde made wyth the teeth betokeneth follye or lacke of wytte, whyche thynge happeneth sometyme to Chyldren sleepynge, whyche is a token of Wormes. Greate and broade teeth, apparente eyther wythin, or wythoute, sygnifye vanitie in a man, slouthe, simplicitie, but yet a good wytte.
Some saye that is is signe of a grosse wytte, procedynge from grosse hu∣mours: the téeth that bée extreme drye altogether without moysture, signifie in a sicke man death, and in a health∣full man they shewe a sicknes verye nigh at hande, for the moyst roote sée∣meth to be cōsumed. And the bodies of suche men are as a lampe withoute Oyle: ye téeth that be full of reume sig∣nifie a fault of the head, or elles of the stomacke, through the communica∣tyng of the head and the lunges, which becauses of a descendyng or runnyng at the nose (which goeth by the throte) of coughing or quinseys, and of swel∣lyng in the throte. Beastes that haue theyr teeth gagged lyke a sawe drinke lyckynge: but those that haue them vniforme and euen drynke suppyng. ¶Of the tongue.
THe tongue is made to tast and to pronounce woordes and to vtter the voyce. The tongue that is tourned right downe, or that stutteth or stumbleth, signifieth the flixe of the belly: they that be subiect to laskes and flixes become stutters, because of the matter whiche descendeth from the head, whiche entreth into the poores of the tongue and muscles, whereof it commeth to passe, that the tongue is the greater, and thereby made broder, and so shorter: and therfore some stam∣mer and stutte. The tongue that is ti∣ed before, can not well pronounce wor∣des or letters, but pronounceth C, in¦steade of S: and that maketh the man to stutte. And yf it be tyed behynde it can not well pronounce the letter R, but in steade of R, it pronounceth L, they that stutte feare wyne, for they wyll bee dronke commonly, and there∣fore drunkards doe stammer, and can not well pronounce this word (Tren∣tatry). The heauines of the tongue in
youth, signifieth soddayne death after it waxeth once lyghte. The greate and broad tongue declareth a rude wytte and vnderstandynge and flematycke humours. He that stutteth and repe∣teth often the fyrste syllable of a worde is readye to melancolynes. The tonge that is touched wyth a lyght mouynge and is cause of repetynge the wordes by corruption of speeche, betokeneth follye violence and wrathe: because of the moouyng of the spirites, and of the heate whiche hasteth the prouocation vnaduisedlye. When the tongue is longe and redde withall, it is a sygne of wysedome: for it declareth good and commendable humours. A whyte tongue betokeneth pouertie and mi∣serye. The tongue that is hurte or marred wyth heate vnnaturall sygni∣fieth distemperaunce and euyll dispo∣sition speciallye of the belly and breast. A longe tongue, grosse and so rounde that a man maye wype hys owne nose with it, declareth a nature lyke an
Oxe. The tongue that is shortened wyth some humours loseth hys taste. All men that stutte be rude of bodye and proude. ¶Of the voyce. THey that haue a slowe voyce and graue, are quiet men and easye to bee spoken to, merry and well manered. The voyce that is graue and drawen long, betokeneth strength I meane the grosse voyce, and that soundeth lyke a trumpet. The force of the voyce, foloweth the wydenesse of the Veynes, and the multitude of spirites: all the whyche thynges come of heate. The men that haue a grosse voyce are verye iniurious and are compared to Asses. They that haue a grosse voyce by nature, wyth∣out forcynge it are stronge, and that is referred to Dogges. They that haue a grosse voyce, and sowndynge well, are warrelyke and eloquent.
A sharpe or shryll voyce signifieth fear∣fulnes. By this voyce I meane a smal voyce and not a great: the voyce shryll and soft, and broken betokeneth a wo∣manlyke feare, and is attributed vnto them yt be effeminate: the voyce sharpe and stronge, declareth men to be full of anger, it is the propertie of Goates. A weake voyce betokeneth narrow ar∣teries, and want of spirite, which thin∣ges come of cold. A softe voyce and not drawen or stretched oute, betokeneth meekenes, which is in shéepe. For you muste referre and compare the voyce as well as all other thyngs to the like∣nes of beastes. The antiuocates, that is to saye, they that speake great at the fyrst and smale at the laste, and haue a sharpe voyce are full of wrath, and yet they be soone appeased agayne, & are of a gentle affection. A meane voyce in sounde and in greatnes, declareth the man to bee wyse, circumspecte, iuste, and trew. They that haue an vnplea∣saunt sound of theyr voyce, and discor∣dyng
are numbred amonge the fooles: they that be hasty in theyr speache (spe∣cially yf they haue a shryll voyce) are commonlye wycked and greate fooles, importune, and lyers. But yf the voyce be great, the man will common∣ly be angry, and of a noughty nature. They that haue a soft and sweete voice are enuious, and full of suspicion. They that moue muche and often and speake with mouinge of theyr handes, are vncleanely, eloquent, and decey∣uours: But they that moue not so theyr handes, haue a perfite witte and vnderstandynge, and haue also a good disposition and good counsel: they that speake in the Nose are lyers, euill wyl∣lers, and enuious. ¶The maners and condi∣cions of men & prouinces. THe Spaniards are meanly strong but for to doe all other thynges, which are possible to be done, they surmount & passe many other nacions.
And there be many among them very excellent, and that in diuers maners in castyng the stone, in nymblenes and in manye other thynges. In Portugale the men are melan∣colye and sanguyne for the most parte: manye of them are sufficient stronge, althoughe they haue no lyuelynesse of witte or spirite. The Sicilians are collericke, and melacolicke, and stronge of bodye: they exercise them selues in wrastelynge, or at the castynge of the barre, and are nymble and quycke. The Italians for the moste parte are weake men, and some amonge (althoughe the number bee smale) haue greate strength, and are wont to bee moore excellent than other, but yet rather of imitation then by inuention. They bee slender, and of a stature be∣twene greate and meane. In Germanye the men are flema∣ticke, whiche shewe manifestlye the nature of that complexion, that is to
saye, that they bee flematycke and ve∣rye Chollerycke. Furthermoore, they hee of a greate bodye, but yet fewe there are amonge them that haue great bodylye strength, or anye greate actiuitie and nymblenesse, to doe anye harde thynges, though they bee ve∣rye industrious to doe materiall thyn∣ges, whiche concerneth anye worke of the handes. The Frenchmen be made and pro∣porcioned of fleame and of Chollere, and are for the moste parte slowe and weake. Yet there are some of them sin∣gulare, and surmounte others in ma∣nye thynges, but the number is smale. They bee robute and stronge, but thei haue not the meane and waye howe to vse theyr strength. ¶The iudgement of other partes of the body. THey that haue a lytle Necke and a long, haue a good voyce & great & are fooles, feareful & malignāt.
But they that haue a short necke, are very whote and great deceyuours. They that haue a greate necke, are great fooles, and great eaters: the nod of the necke long and broad, signifieth good courage and pryde: the eleuation of humour, signifieth a rude & vnfaith∣full nature. When the armes of the body that is right vp, are so longe that the hands reache to the knees, it is a sygne of actiuitie and nymblenesse at worke, of audacitie, and of goodnes, with liberalitie: But when they bee shorter it is a sygne of a louer of dis∣corde, and of an ignoraunt person. The paulme of the handes long, with longe fyngers, signifie an apte man to manye artes, namelye to mecanycall & handye craftes, & prudent and ware in all hys affayres. For there is in hym a sygne of good regiment and gouer∣naunce: the greatnes of the fingers sygnifie folly and imprudencie. You must also measure the place from the nauell vnto the ende of the breast
and to the beginning of the necke. If the parte of the breast be bygger, it is a sygne of prudencie and wysdome, but yf that whiche is in the breast vnto the nauell, bee greater it is a sygne of a de∣uourer. If the bellye bee to slacke, as though it were emptye, it is a sygne of fearefulnes, of wyckednes and of de∣uouryng: the bellye that is somewhat softer and deeper, is a sygne of the force and vertue of the wytte, and of magnificence. The sydes thynne and narowe and deepe, betoken feareful∣nesse: But when they bee moore fleshy and harde, they shewe the man to bee dnapt to be taughte. And they that bee round, as though they were swollen, sygnifie much vnprofitable talke. The backe broad and sound, is a sygne of manlynes, & the womans is contra∣rye. If the body of thē that haue croked bodyes bee softe, it is not so euyll as yf it were in a thick & hard body. If the lo∣wer part of ye chyne of the back be hid∣den in the breadeth and to abundaunt,
and enuironed with fleshe, it agreeth with women. That whyche is longe and sharpe at the ende, it declareth dis∣temperaunce of the carnall desyre, and fearefulnes. Then the chyne of the backe of a man is that whiche is mani∣fest in the bones moderate and sound. The haunches harde and solyde, and seperate from the bones, betoken a stronge and warrelyke man. But yf they bee broade, ample, and full of fleshe, they signifie a feminine vnder∣standyng and witte: But yf they bée to leane and full of wrynckles and com∣passed about with a thyn skynne, they signifie the wickednes of Apes. When the knees touche one the other in goynge, they bee referred to the wo∣man kynde. When the lower partes of the shynnes nexte to the heeles, and the heeles, and the vnder parte of the feete bee broade, and full of fleshe, it is a sygne of a foolyshe man, or wyth∣out wytte. The vnder part of the féete seperated from the synowes and ar∣teries,
sheweth a cleare vnderstan∣dynge, noble, and manly. If the feete bee soft, and enuyroned with fleshe, it is a sygne of a softe and womanlyke wytte. The feete verye longe shewe the man to bee vigilant and geuen to deceyte, seekynge the hurte of manye men. The féete very thynne and short, betoken malignitie. The shorte feete hauynge the sole hollowe is an euyll sygne. ¶Of the goyng of the feete. THey that marche or goe a greate pase are stoute men and attayne to the ende of theyr enterpryses. But they that goe alytle pase, and shorte, haue but a lytle courage. The croked goyng, is cause of griefe, and of obscuritie of wytte. When the man goeth lyghtlye hauynge all hys bodye vpryghte, it is a sygne that he wyl take in hande some enterprise, and by and by doe some great thynge.
But if a man go swiftly with his eyes lookyng downewarde, and go altoge∣ther croked, it is a sygne of a nyggard, fearefull and subtyle. They that haue the nod of the necke short, are audaci∣ous and bolde, and yet fearefull. They that haue a harde brayne, it is a sygne that they bee indocible. The nod of the necke tourned vpwarde, signifieth in∣solence, rygour, follye and vanitie. When the nod of the necke hangeth on the pectorall partes, they declare the mynde to bee occupied in thoughtes and imaginations. And it is also a sygne of sparynge and of wyckednes. The throte sharpe sygnifieth lightnes. The shulders thynne, right, and poyn∣ted, sygnifie the man to bee a lyer in wayte to deceyue. The Elbowes thynne, sygnifie imbecillitie & weake∣nes. And when they bee verye full of fleshe they betoken weakenes. But when they bee meanely solyde & harde great of artires and muscles, they be∣token a noble bodye, & of good courage.
Whan the fingars are soft it is a signe that the mā is easye to be instructed and taught. Whan they be hard he is strōg and vnapte to be taughte. Whan the handes be short and the fyngars strong it is a good signe. If the fatte and lyttle hands haue very short fyngars they be. token a deceyuour, a spye, and a thefe. The hands thinne and crooked, shewe the man to be a greate talker & babler. The nayles white brode & some what redde sygnifie a very good Iudgement. But whan they be narrow & very long it is a signe of folly, & cruelty. The nai∣les yt be bowed & croked signifie impu∣dency, and violent rapacite. The nailes that be depe within the fleshe & sticke to fast vnto it signifie excessyue crueltye & great folly. The nailes that be to short pale black, and sharpe, declare a naugh∣tye malignant man. These signes that be attributed to the nailes of them sel∣ues haue no vertue nor force. But whā they be ioyned vnto other greater they haue some efficacie or forte. Whan the
fingars be ioyned and sticking the one to the other, they signifie vnclenlynes. And that be cafte & fast together round shewe malignitie, couetousnes and the man to be a whoremonger. Whā they be small and thinne it is a signe of folly. The short fingars and great signifie en¦uie, audacity, & cruelty. And whan they be two long and to slender, it a signe of a wyttles man & farre from wisedome. And if there be to greate distaunce be∣twen them, it is a signe of lightnes and of to muche talke. But whan they be meanely great & of an honest forme and fashion it is a sygne of verye good ma∣ners. Now these thinges are ment as∣well of the nailes & of the tooes as of the fyngars and handes. A slender & thinne breast & without vertue or strength, sig∣nifieth weaknes of heate. They yt haue their pappes hanging & their breast en∣uironed with softe fleshe, are giuen to wine, and to leachery yea excessiuelye. They that wagge their shulders & lyfte vp their necke shalbe coūpted arrogant
& proud. But they that wagge all their body shewe euidently that they be effe∣minate. And among al these the moste tollerable kind are they ye bowe down their bodye on the right syde when they sturre, and the folyshest are they that turne body toward the left syde. Of the breath. WHan the breath sometime resteth and than a long time after brea∣keth out in great aboundance, de∣clareth the man to be in great trouble of mind. Also when the head shaketh & sigheth, it is a signe that their is in it some naughty and euill framed thing. The spirite that maketh a noyse, and is greatly mooued and thrust oute, it is a signe of cruelty & that the man is giuen to wine. They also yt haue their breath troubled and grosse as they that haue runne longe are voyde of counsell and subiect to anger, and haue also a facilite readines to do and to speake. This rule ought to be obserued in all signes and
tokens so that you must take the super∣fluitie in euill part and the meane and temperature to be good. Whā ye thighs be to croked and to heary it is signe of whoredome. This is referred vnto the goates. Aristotle saith more yt the but∣tocks that be very dry signifie virility & mālines & they yt be very fleshy & moist signifie effemination, & they that be as it were cut, declare the wickednes of ye man. And this is referred vnto beares and apes. The signes of an impudent man be suche as folowe. First he hath bright shining eyes & open, the eyelides far a sonder: great féete, & great handes he reiseth himself against thē ye beholde him. He is red of colour & hath a sharpe voice. And beside all these signes of im∣pudency he is iniurious. The heary mā which hath blacke heare right & smoth, the mouth, the chinne, and the temples heary, great eyes and glisteryng, is fu∣rious, enclined to whoredome: a louer of fraies and fightinge, euill tounged, Ieronimus Gardanus a Phisition of Milan
a man truly of great learning & know∣ledge saith thus in his .xii. booke de sub∣tilitate. Euē as all lame mē are wicked so all they which are in health haue not good maners. For it is more requisite, & there is more a doe to forme a mind without faulte, than a body. Wherfore the most wicked of al other, are ye croke backed men seing the faulte of them is neare vnto the hart whych is the prince of all ye body. Next are the blind and the squint eyed men, forasmuch as nature hath failed about ye braine. After them come the dome & the deffe. And then the halting men & after thē are they yt haue their fingars fast ioyned together, or to farre a sounder the one from the other for nature hath failed in them, in mem¦bers lesse necessarye. They that be ful of wartes haue the nexte and last place and the scarred bodies folow them. ¶The Iudgement of other partes of the body.
THE largnes of the breast and the greatnes of the shulders and back sygnifye bouty, and audatitye, with capacitye of wytte and wisedome But ye smallnes of the backe declareth the man to be of a discordaunt nature. The meanes of the breast and equal∣nes of the backe is a very good sygne. The shulders lose declare weakenes of the mynde and fearfullnes. They that haue a great belly are vndiscreete, fooles, proud and whoremongers. The meane belly and narrow stomack sygnifie hyghnes of vnderstanding and good counsell. The smallnes of the legges declare ignorance and the grea∣nes of thē, sygnifie audacitie & strength of body. Aboundance of fleshe at the knes sygnifyeth debilitie and weaknes or effemination. They that haue a wyde pase in goyng and slowe, prospere commonly in their doynges & affayres. But they that haue a lyttle pase are violent, and of small strength and in their workes of an euyll will. Finallye
he hath a good memorye and well com∣posed in nature that hath a softe fleshe moyste and meane betwene rough and softe, and whan he is neyther to great nor to litle when he is whyte, declining to reddenes: or whan he is neyther to much but meanely blacke. Gentyll of continuance hauing the heare full and meane. Great eyes somewhat round A meane head, and of a good fashyon, wyth a great necke well and equally sette. The shulders faste and ferme wythoute wauerynge to or fro not ha∣uing muche fleshe in the small of the legges, and knées. A cleare voyce smal temperate: some what smilyng & not mockig: hauing a lyke loke of mirth &c. Yet you maye not be to hastye in gy∣uing Iudgement or aduyse in one of these signes: But take the testimonye of them all. And you haue the dyuer∣syte of signes tending to dyuers things turne alwayes to the better parte and the moste approued. Then may you pronosticate and gyue Iudgement
more assuredlye of greate and smalle thynges to comme, yea of eue∣rye man what soeuer he bée, for as muche as you shall knowe moore certaynely hys déedes and hys maners, in kéep∣ynge thys rule and waye. FINIS. R. H.
