8148 99853492 18876
Orders agreed vpon, and set downe by the right honourable Sir William Brooke Knight, L. Cobham, and L. Warden of her Maiesties Cinque Ports: and the right worshipfull Thomas Randolph Esquire, Master and Comptroller generall of all her Highnesse Postes, for her Maiesties seruice, concerning the Postes established in Kent, according to the direction and auctoriie giuen by the Lords of her Highnesse most honorable priuie Councill in that behalfe. FOrasmuch as the Lords of her Maiesties most honorable priuie Councill, haue found it expedient and necessary, by publique orders imprinted (both for the preuenting of inconueniences in time to come, and her Maiesties better seruice hereafter) to set downe and signifie her Maiesties pleasure touching the Postes of this Realme in generall: And by those orders haue bene pleased to giue authoritie, and specially to appoint vs The Lord Warden of the Cinque ports, and the Master of the Postles, to deter∣mine of, and set downe some speciall Articles for the reformation of matters of Posting particularly within the shire of Kent: we, according to the direction and intent of their honorable Lordships in that be halfe, haue appointed and published these Orders and Articles following. That all the standing Postes appointed within the shire of Kent, shall enioy the benefite granted generally vnto all the  Realme, and by their honorable Lordships expresly set downe, namely, that for their better attendance vpon  and faithful performance of their dueties, her Maiesties pleasure is, that they be exempted from all atten∣ , Assses, Sessions, Enquests and Musters. euery Post, hauing the name & place of a standing post, shal reside and dwell vpon the same (as by their Lordships commanded and shall haue alwayes in his stable, or in a readinesse, sixe good and sufficient Post horses at the least, with  fitte and belonging, whereof two to serue for the packet, the rest to be ready at all occasions, for such as ei∣  Maiesties affaires, or otherwise, for more speed shall run the Post. They shall also haue three hornes, & the same  is by their Lordships is set downe, viz. passing through any towne, and meeting of companie, and thrice at the  mile. euery Post shall keepe a faire and large paper booke well bound, aswell to set down such Packets, as for her Ma∣iesties shall be caried by them, as also to register the names of all such as in her Maiesties seruice, or otherwise,  Post. And the same shall signifie, either vnto her Maiesties Secretarie, the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports,  aet of the Postes, at all times, and so often, as vpon occasions it shall be required at their hands. all strangers of what nation souer, either comming into this Realme, or going out, whether they ride in Post,  shall take their horses from stage to stage, & at the hands of the standing Posts onely, or with their knowledge ment. And for euery stranger so riding the Post with horne & guide, the Posts shall take for euery stage after the  llings sixe pence each horse: But if they ride in iourney, whether it be that the Posts do horse them, or appoint  of the horses shal receiue the full composition of his hire, & shal not exact or take aboue two pence the mile.  all Englishmen, natiue and borne subiects of this Realme, that either in her Maiesties affaires, or for their  more speed shall ride in Post with horne and guide, shall also be horsed by the ordinarie and standing Posts  their appointment, and shall pay for euery stage the prices accustomed and aboue mentioned. in case Carriers shall come so fast, and in such numbers, that the Postes owne furniture shall not suffice. That  be lawfull for them to take vp, and appoint such as haue horses to hire, to supplie their want, taking and yeeld∣  cases the same prices to the owners of the horses, that the Posts themselues do take for their owne. And to  the Posts shall be assisted and aided by the Maiors, Bailiffes, Portreeues, Constables, and other officers of their  according as by their Lordships is prouided for, and commanded. all ordinarie Through Postes appointed for the seruice of the Merchants for Flanders and France, at all times  all dispatches and voyages, shall take their horse from stage to stage, and at the hands or appointment of the  Postes, aswell for themselues, as all such as are of their companie and conduction. no Post or guide, ryding with any man in Post, shall ride without his horne, and the same to blow as is prescri∣ all not passe the next stage, without the consent and priuitie of the Post of the place, vpon paine of ten shillings  the Post iniured, and restitution of so much as he should haue gained, but shall bring the partie or company so  the house of the ordinarie Post, where he is to receiue fresh horses, or shall signifie the same vnto the Post, (the  companie ryding, being men of sort, that for their pleasure will make choise of their lodging.) Neither shal he refuse  ale or other carriage of any man so riding, behind him, so that the same exceed not the weight of fourtie pounds . intended hereby to hinder the libertie of any Englishman, or naturall borne subiects of this Realme, ryding  but that he or they may make choise, and at their owne pleasure hire such horses, and at such prices as they can.  that they ride not with horne nor guide, which markes are onely reserued for the Postes to vse or allow of, for the  in ryding, and better expedition. any Hackney-man, or others hyring horses by the iourney, shall without the knowledge and liking of the Post,  vse either horne or guide, the Post of the next stage by whom he passeth, shall arrest and stay the guide, and com∣ to safe custodie, and take such further order with the partie ryding, as by the necessitie of his busines and affaires,  discretion shall finde expedient. that the Postes for the more expedition of such packets as for her Maiesties seruice shall be caried by them, shall  quarter of an houre after they shall be brought vnto them, depart with them, and vse the diligence in ryding, set  the Lordships of her Maiesties Councill, that is to say, in summer, accounting from the Annunciation of our  untill the feast of S. Michaell the Archangell, to ride after seuen miles the houre, and in the winter which is the , fiue miles the houre, more or lesse as the way shall fall out. ly, for the better obseruation of these orders in generall, and euery particular article thereof, it is hereby com∣ that from henceforth, if any Hackney-men, Ostelers, Tapsters, or others whatsoeuer, hauing horses to hire, shall  to these orders, either directly or indirectly, deliuer any horses either vnto Englishmen or strangers, otherwise then ed, without the priuitie and allowance of the standing Postes of the place, the officer or officers of the place, or the  Iustice of the peace of the shire shall commit the same person so offending to prison, & there to abide, vntil he haue put in  with sufficient surety to the Post of the place for the due obseruing & keeping of these orders for the time to come.  to this end, her Maiestie, and the Lords of her Highnes priuie Councill, do straightly charge and command all Iu∣  the peace, and Sheriffes of the shire, Maiors, Bailiffes, Portreeues, Constables, Headboroughs, and all other her  seruants, to see obserued, so far as in them lyeth, & to bee assisting and aiding vnto her said ordinary and standing  for the due execution of the same, as they tender her Maiesties seruice, and will answere to the contrary. Allowed  Lords of her Maiesties priuie Councill, and by their direction published the xxix. of Ianuarie. 1584. Anno 27. Elizabet. W. Cobham. Fra. Walsingham. Tho. Randolph.
