8649 99836773 1059
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms ❧ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation againt excesse of Lauish and Licentious Speech of matters of State. ALthough the commixture of Nations, confluence of Ambassadors, and the relation, which the affaires of Our Kingdomes haue had to∣wards the businesse and interests of forraine States, haue caused, during Our Regiment, a greater opennesse, and libertie of discourse, euen con∣cerning matters of State, (which are no Theames, or subiects fit for vulgar persons, or common meetings) then hath been in former times, used or permitted; And although in Our owne Nature, and Iudge∣ment, Wee doe well allow of conuenient freedome of speech, esteeming any ouer curious or restrained hand carried in that kind, rather as a weaknesse, or else ouer much seueritie of Gouernment, then other wise: Yet neuerthelesse, forasmuch as it is come Our eares, by common report, That there is at this time a more licentious passage of lauish discourse, and bold Censure in matters of State, then hath been heretofore, or is fit to be suffered; Wee haue thought it necessary, by the aduice of Our Priuie Councell, to giue forewarning unto Our louing Subiects, of this excesse and pre∣sumption; And straitly to command them and euery of them, from the highest to the lowest, to take heede, how they intermeddle by Penne, or Speech, with causes of State, and secrets of Empire, either at home, or abroad, but containe themselues within that modest and reuerent re∣gard, of matters, aboue their reach and calling, that to good and dutifull Subiects apper∣taineth; As also not to giue attention, or any manner of applause or entertainement to such dis∣course, without acquainting some of Our Priuie Councell, or other principall Officers there with∣all, respectiue to the place where such speeches shall be vsed, within the space of foure and twentie houres, vnder paine of imprisonment, and Our High displeasure. And let no man thinke, after this Our forewarning, to passe away with impunitie, in respect of the multitude and generalitie of Offenders in this kinde; but knowe, that it will light vpon some of the first, or for wardst of them, to be seuerely punished, for example to others. And, if we shalbe sensible of this kind of contempt, euen towards such of Our louing Subiects, as are obedient to Our Lawes, and conformable to Our proceedings in Church, and Common wealth, vnto whom, wee cannot impute it, to proceede otherwise, then out of rashnesse, euill custome, or too much passion: much more, let them looke to it, who in respect, that they are other∣wise liable to Our Lawes, or of suspected affection toward Our Gouernment, may giue vs iust cause to thinke, that it proceedeth from the ouerflowe of a worse, or more corrupt fountaine. Neither let any man mistake Vs so much, as to thinke, that by giuing faire, and specious attributes to Our Person, they can couer the scandalls, which they otherwise lay vpon Our Gouern∣ment, but conceiue, that wee make no other construction of them, but as fine, and artificiall glos∣ses, the better to giue passage to the rest of their imputations, and scandalls. Giuen at White-hall, the 24. of December, in the eighteenth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland. God saue the King. ❧ Imprinted at London by IOHN BILL, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XX.
