B5908 10836083 46078
A SERMON Preached before the KING, At WHITEHALL, On the Second of DECEMBER, 1697. BEING The Day of Thanksgiving For the PEACE. By the Right Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Bishop of SARUM, Published by His MAJESTY'S Special Command. Printed at London, and Re-printed at Edinburgh, by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Excellent Majesty, Anno DOM. 1697.
2 CHRON. IX. 8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee, to set thee on his Throne to be King for the Lord thy God: because thy God loved Israel, to establish them for ever, therefore made he thee King over them, to do judgment and justice. THESE are the words of an Arabian Queen, who was so moved with a Noble Curiosity, raised by the fame of Solomon's Wisdom, that she undertook a Journey from the utmost parts of the earth, furnished herself both with an Equipage and Presents suitable to her Rank, and also with Questions, by which she might judge whether Fame had not too much heightned this great King's Character. She could not believe the half of what she had heard; and having probably a good opinion of her own understanding, she resolved to try His with those Questions that puzzled her self. But when she came, and found that Report, instead of magnifying matters, had been very defective, when she observed the compass of his knowledge, with the depth of his mind, and that he applied his Speculations to the Arts of Government, as well as to the Contemplations of Nature; when she saw his vast Designs of Buildings (his own as well as Gods House) so wonderfully executed; the Treasures he was heaping up, and the Me∣thods of Trade he was setting on, for procuring constant and fresh Supplies; and that he could join the Magnificence that belonged to his Character, with the more real Great∣ness of his own Comprehensive Mind: So that while he employed his Thoughts in the Sublimest Enquiries, he did not neglect even those lesser ones, of External Grandeur, which how inconsiderable soever they may seem, to a Soul capable of vaster things, yet are necessary to maintain those Impressions of Awe and Respect which give Authority to Government▪ When she saw the State in which he was served, the Pomp of his Retinue, and his glorious Processions to the Temple, she was overcome with Wonder; she despi∣sed her own Dignity and Kingdom: And thought that the Subjects and Servants of such a Prince, were happier than the Soveraigns of other Nations. Her admiration of this being above all ordinary Expressions, she vents it in those Rap∣tures that I have read. She adores the Great Jehovah of the Jews, who had taken plea∣sure in advancing One who so well deserved it, and who imployed it so worthily, in rais∣ing the Honour of that God who had so eminently exalted him. From hence she conclu∣ded, That certainly God loved that Nation, whom he had blessed with such a Prince, by whose Wisdom and Conduct they were in all probability to be established on the firmest Basis: The best Principles and Measures of Government, which would make them Sure and Lasting. Establish them for ever. For she could not think but that so extraordinary a Blessing must be designed for great Ends. Such a King would certainly govern them both with Judgment and Justice. Two words that seem to signify the same thing; yet the Ma∣sters of that Language put this difference, that the former relates to the Rewarding, and the latter to the punishing part of Justice▪ So wise a King would maintain a severe Exe∣cution.
of Law against Offenders, and be no less careful to find out the Men of Merit, and to trust, advance, and reward these▪ Certainly such a Prince, and such an Administration are so great Blessings, and so much the greater, because so little Common, so few Instances of them occurring either in the Observation of the present Age, or the Records of past times; that wheresoever we meet them, we ought to acknowledge they are the special Favours of Heaven, and the most di∣stinguishing Marks of God's loving a Nation. The Blessings we now enjoy, and that great One which at this time we do particular∣ly acknowledge, do so naturally carry us to Devotions like those in my Text, that all my Hearers must be beforehand with me in the Application. But in our case there are some Specialities that give it a peculiar Exaltation; Solomon had his Crown, his Treasures and Armies transmitted down to him; Conquests were made for him, he himself had gone through none of those Scenes of Horror, but had an easy Inheritance conveyed from his Father, without Battels or Blood, Fatigue or Danger: He was bred up to the Maxims of Government, and acquinted with all his Fathers Secrets, his Designs as well as his Con∣duct; so that he began upon great Advantages. David's long and glorious Reign before him, had prepared Peoples Hearts to ove and Obey him, who was God's Choice as well as his Father's. The Building so Magnificent a Temple in the beginnings of his Quiet and Auspicious Reign, made him the Delight and Wonder of his People. Thus the Causes of his being so Great and Prosperous, were very visible. If then the Queen of Sheba was so struck with seeing Solomon in all his glory, with how much louer Accents ought we to carry on the Hallelujahs of this Day, who see a Prince Raised and Conducted by such a special Train of Amazing Providences, without any of those Supports, that every Step he has made, carries in it Characters of a particular Di∣rection from Heaven! He has, indeed, the Blood of Soveraigns in im, but his Crowns are the Gifts of Heaven. The two great Heroes of the last Age, the Defenders of Religion, and the Patrons of Liberty, were properWilliam Prince of Orange, Gaspar de Coligny, Admiral of France. Sources to give Life and Descent to One, in whom their Characters were to be Exalted, as well as their Dignity was to be Raised. They were Both of a Race of Sovereigns, One was of the First Form; but what might be wanting in the Extent of their Territories, and the Lustre of their Coronets, was fully made up in those truly Royal Accomplishments of their Minds. They were Capable of the greatest things, and Acted in a Sphere suited to their Capacity: They Talked little, but did Wonders: They had all the Gravity, as well as all the Virtues of Religion in them, without the Affectations of Shew or Hypocrisy: They had none of the Arts of Flattery or Insinuation, yet could bring vast Multitudes to Depend on them, to Trust to them, and to Obey them. They had Souls of so peculiar a Make, that they seemed Born to Animate whole Nations to a pitch of their own Courage, to a like Zeal for Religion, and a like Love of Liberty. They lived Great, but died Greater; the greater for the conjunction of their Descent, the mixing those Noble Qualities of their Minds, as well as their Blood. The Issue of which an Union was designed to Perfect the Work which they had begun▪ That seemed buried with them, but was to have a second and nobler revival in One, whose Composition from such Principles gave a just hope to expect all that we do now see▪ One Character belonged to them both so equally, that no wonder if in the Conjunction it is carried to a further Perfection. They wrestled through great Difficulties, and as great Misfortunes, but with so firm a Constancy, that no cross Adventures could ever damp them, or sink them even to the hearkning to any Propositions, other than what
they had pretended to in their most prosperous Condition. So little power had For∣tune over their Minds, unless it was to animate them with so fresh a Courage, that they rose by Misfortunes: They never had better Armies about them, than soon after they had met with such Checks, that their Enemies look'd on them as lost, without a Possibility af Recovery. The Two greatest Powers then in Europe, after they had found them too hard for them in the Galanter Methods of War, were not ashamed to betake themselves to the Baser ones of Treachery and Assassination. Souls so brave and so Candid as theirs, were not capa∣ble of believing their Enemies so black, as they, or rather as their Friends, felt them to be. But so entire was their Love to Religion and their Countrey, that as they Both perished in the Cause, so One of them in theUna morientis ad Deum vox, Mise∣rere Populi, Grot. Annal. lib. 4. Agony into which the Fatal Bullet put him, having but a Minute for one single Thought, he ended his Life as he had led it; he died praying for that People for whom he had lived so long: Feel∣ing he could live no longer, he expired with this Word in his Mouth, Have Mercy on this People. Yes, Great Soul, thy Prayer was heard; and from thee One springs, in whom God signalizes his Mercy, not to that People only, but to a great many others, who share with them in this Extraordinary Grace; the more extraordinary for this, that it is not restrained to one single Nation, but is a deliverance to Mankind. These Advantages meeting in One Person, set him indeed above the common Level. A Greatness that passed down through Three Successors, who maintained the Lustre of the First Raiser of that Estate, with a Glory suitable to its wonderful Beginnings, was at last brought under a Cloud, that so the Favour of Heaven might shine the brighter on Him in whom it was to be revived The Accession of Royal Blood had indeed exalted the Race, and seemed to bring it nearer to that Imperial Dignity, with which it had shined some Ages ago; but it raised Jealousey, as much as it advanced their Scutcheon. The Ruins of Monarchy here, helped to draw down a Family allied to it; but the Re∣stauration of it did not contribute to its Recovery. That was to be the immediate Care and Work of Heaven. An Inndation of Conquest and Calamity, forced a sinking State to seek for Shelter to the Issue of that Race to which it owed its first Rise. An ordinary Courage would have sunk at the Undertaking. It look'd like the raising one up only to bear the Burthen and Reproach of their Ruin. The Prospect was on all hands so black, that Posterity will reckon their Recovery with that of the Romans after Cannae. If it were proper for this Places, it were easy to shew that theirs was the much more desperate State of the two: The Turn was signal, the Effects of it were soon visible, though the Conclusion may seem to have come on but slowly; for now we see a Career run of almost Six and twenty Years, to which we may challenge the Histories of all Ages to give a Parallel. A Mighty Power, Great Armies, well commanded, an Uncontroul'd Authority, full of Treasure, and accustomed to Victory, was an Enemy, as it were marked out to raise the Character of Him, who with unequal Forces, and feebler Assistances, put a Stop to a Progress that amazed the World; and made the greater part even of Princes to con∣clude, It was in vain to maintain the Struggle any longer; it was better to prevent the Violence of Conquest, by submitting to what Terms could be got, none being thought worse than what was like to be the Issue of the War. No ife could be of more Importance than this, which seemed the Soul of the whole Alliance; and yet none was more freely exposed, not only in the constant Fatigue of
perpetual Journeys and Voyages, in the worst Seasons, with such an uninterrupted Con∣tinuance of lengthen'd Campaigns, that these alone might have worn out the firmest Stock of Health and Strength; but in all the Adventures of War, in the greatest heat of Acti∣on, and in the most desperate Posts. This was a fair offering himself to danger: Gallant Men knew where to find him. In this only he seemed to forget the great Concern that others had in him, and exposed them all too much, while with a Noble Intrepidity, as one insensible of Danger, he past through many new Scenes of them; but in which Heaven shewed so particular a Watchfulness, that the single Relation of them all, with Deliverances out of them, would make a History. The surest as well as the swefted Messenger of Death, attacking him in the View of of Two Armies, and on the Eve of a deciding Day, seemed to be sent on purpose to let so many Witnesses see what an Invisible Guard was about him; and that how near so eyer the greatest of all Dangers might come to him, yet it was to him no other Hurt, than to leave so slight an Impression, as seemed only made to prove the Truth of so unusual an Accident; that without an uncontested Evidence, it could not easily be believed. But whil Angels kept Guard about him on all Honourable Occasions, they were no less watchful in discovering and disappointing Blacker Methods, and Baser Designs. Those who thought not fit to venture on him in the Day of Battel, betook themselves to the most Infamous Practices▪ Designs of Assassination were pursued with such unrelenting Eagerness, that as soon as one failed, another was set on foot. A Mind not capable of these, was al∣most as little capable of believing them in others, as of practising them himself. There was no extraordinary Caution used, neither for penetrating into such Secrets, nor of keeping so strict a Guard, as appeared afterwards was necessary. Discoveries were made by a Particular Hand of Heaven: Men who were thought capable of executing the worst Designs, could not bear the Horror that This gave them. Those who were appointed to be the Instruments of our Ruin, proved the Means of our Preservation: I say, Our Pre∣servation, because we owe it to the Influence of that Sacred Life. And now at last, after so hard a Struggle, such a lengthned War, so vast a Consump∣tion of Men and Treasure, we celebrate the happy Peace and Tranquility that we, and the greatest part of Europe do now enjoy, through his means. Have we not reason to conclude that This is the day which the Lord has made; that this is the man whom he has made strong for himself, whom he has delighted to set on his Throne? It is his doing, and it is wonderful in our eyes. The Characters of Gods Care of his Affairs have been no less Signal, than those relating to his Person. Good Seasons and favourable Winds have attended constantly upon him. The critical Turns of those Winds that brought him first hither, were so amazing, that those who observed them, can never reflect on it without a constant freshness of Admira∣tion. All the many Passages that he and his Forces have since that time made on the Seas, have been not only successful, but smooth and quick. On two great Occasions▪ Nature seemed to go out of its Course to cover us from Inva∣sion. In the first, the calmest Moneth in the year was a coutinued Storm, till we were rea∣dy to make use of fairer Weather, and then we had it; and by a great variety of Circum∣stances, as happy to us as cross to our Enemies, we had the most glorious Day that ever the Channel saw; Beacons of a new form; Fires from the Sea carried the dismal Tidings to the adverse Shores, and scattered the Army lying ready to invade us. That seemed to put an end to all Dangers from that Element; we were restored to our Empire on this Sea, which recovered and established our then sinking Reputation. We found at another time, a no less unusual reversing of Seasons; we had a Winter
that seemed to anticipate the Spring; the Wind stood all the while in the warm Corner, and broke the designs of sending a great part of our Naval Strength from us. We little knew our danger, and that all this was stopt by a watchful Interposition, to cover us from a second Design of Invasion; we were uneasie to see the Season so obstinately good, so con∣trary to our intentions, and to what was to be expected at that time; but we afterwards had large opportunities to observe the kind Direction of Heaven that made the Seasons wait on us, and as it were conspire to break their own Laws, rather than suffer a Breach to be made upon Us. Other favourable Circumstances shewed us also how God delighted to maintain him on the Throne, under whose Shadow we are all to sit safe. Plenty at home made us easie un∣der all the Charge of the War; and while our Neighbours (for we have now no more any Enemies) were much pressed with even the extremities of Want, under those vast Impo∣sitions that lay on them, we had enough and to spare; to furnish the rest of the World, and to supply that great waste of Treasure, which came back in some years faster than it went out. And after all the unconceiveable Expence of the War, with all the Losses we made in it, yet if it had not been for the wicked Practises of those Corrupters of our Coin at home, with all the Train of mischievous Consequences that have followed upon them, which was an Evil of our own growth, and that had no relation to the Affairs abroad, we had gone through it without feeling any uneasie pressure by it. But that we have been able to provide effectual Remedies to the one, while at the same time we have so glori∣ously maintained, and now so happily finished the other, is a secret Indication of the Power and Riches of the Nation, in this Reign, of which perhaps the most Sanguine could not have been convinced, if they had not seen it. Add to all this, the noble Triumphs of Liberty. One of the Common Topicks of the E∣nemies of Publick Liberty, is, That upon great occasions, the Divisions in Councils, and the length of Debates that do naturally arise in Free Assemblies, bring such a backward∣ness and slowness on their Deliberations, that the best Opportunities of acting are lost while they are consulting. Here the Publick Interest was so visible, that a concurrence beyond all former Examples, has appeared in supporting Undertakings that seemed above the Strength and Wealth of the Nation. Nor could such a Treasure have been raised by all the Efforts of Arbitrariness; for nothing but the Certainties of the Faith given by the Body of the Nation, could have created the Credit that was necessary in such unsual Sup∣plies. These went on with that Unanimity and Heartiness, that we have reason to put this among the great Articles of that over ruling Providence that has watched over us. If at any time insuperable Difficulties made the Publick Consultations go heavily, the Season was stopt, the Course of Nature seem'd to stand still, till we were ready for it. So wonder∣full a Conduct has appeared both at home and abroad, and in all the Elements, as if eve∣ry thing had been set at Work, either to do us Good, or at least to shelter us from Evil. I reckon not among the happy Instances of God's Care of us, our being preserved from the restless Attempts of some wretched Incendiaries among our selves, those Betrayers of Religion and their Countrey. They are too inconsiderable, to be ranked among the Oc∣casions for which we do now celebrate the Blessings of Heaven. If their Power and Skill had been equal to their Malice; we should indeed have had great reason to rejoyce that we have been preserved from a Race of Men, whose Tongues have been set on Fire, while the Poyson of Asps seemed to lie under their Lips: but the one has proved as contemptible, as the other was odious. They ought not to be mentioned in a time of rejoycing, in which, Ob∣jects that give Horror, ought to be kept out of sight; yet, how little reason soever we may have either to value, or to love them, we ought still to pity them, and to pray for them,
that if possible, they may be recovered out of the Gall of Bitterness. and the Bond of Iniquity Let us turn to Nobler Objects, and rejoyce in the Glory of God, and in our own Hap∣piness, while we see who is the Man whom God delights to honour. whom by a concurrence of many Providences he first led to his Throne▪ and whom he has hitherto maintain'd on it by as many more: and has now given him as full an Establishment upon it, as Humane things are capable of. He has made his Enemies to be at Peace with him: and while the much greater half of Europe own him to be its Recoverer and Restorer, the rest do now unanimously call him that, which He is, Independent on all Foreign Acknowledgments, THE RIGHTFUL AND LAWFUL KING OF THESE REALMS. And to make the Parallel to my Text run exactly, a much greater King, lying at a vaster Distance, leaves his Throne and Dominions in the midst of War, struck with the Fame, and amazed at the Actions of this Prince. In stead of a little Southern Queen, a mighty Northern Emperour, covered with Laurels, and us'd to Victories, resolving to raise his Nation, and enlarge his Empire, comes to learn the best Methods of doing it, and goes away full of Wonder, possessed with truer Notions of Government: But while we humbly adore those Instances of the good Pleasure of our God towards his Anointed; let us also with the same holy Gratitude observe how he has shewed that he loved us, as well as that he delighted in him, who now sits on the Throne. We are sepa∣rate from the Continent; and were cut off from the great Affairs of the World, till Na∣vigation and Trade brought us into them, with the more advantage; because our Situati∣on keeps us at a Distance from the Confusions of War, and secures us from the Inroads and Depredations of Enemies; while the Sea that covers us, gives us also a Passage to let in their Wealth among us, and to pour out our Force upon them. Our Seas and our Fleets are both our Fences and our Mines: which others seem to work for us, and give us no other trouble about them, but that of a safe Conveyance. All this, how flourishing soever, yet gave us but a melancholy Prospect, while we saw a mighty Rival so near us, rising up to an Equality with us, in that which was our Strength as well as our Glory. The Counsels at home were then employ'd in Designs of another nature: they were laying down Methods to subvert our Constitution, to corrupt our Se∣nate, and destroy such as were above their Practice. The Laws of England, the Charters of our Towns, as well at the Great Charter of the Nation▪ our Religion and Liberty, were all the Conquests that were then projected▪ while the Safety of the Whole at home, and the Security of our Neighbours about us, were abandoned. So the beloved Design pros∣pered, it seemed to be laid down for a Maxim, That it was better to Reign at the Discre∣tion of a mighty Prince, than under the Restraint of Laws, which was called the Reigning at the Discretion of Subjects. So infatuated we were, that a Competition, or rather a Su∣periority, in that which hitherto we claimed as a Property, gave us no Jeulousie; we seemed pleased with it, and were glad to promote it. We had so far retir'd our selves from that Share which we ntaurally ought to have in the Publick Concerns of Europe, that we seemed to forget them: We had so much Work at home, that there was no room for Foreign Speculations. We had been engaged once and again into Wars with those, who as they are our near Neighbours, so have been in all Ages our faithfullest Allies: We fell into Contentions at home, by the Direction of our Enemies, who plaid us so dexterously one against another, that we hoped to have done the best half of their Work, by making us first hate and then destroy one another; while they were ever ready to support those, whose Passions and Circumstances might contribute the most for carrying on their Design. All this seemed too slow, to those who thought they lost time; and therefore began to quicken their Pace, and make a little more haste in destroying us. Then it was fit for
God to interpose, when All was struck at. There was no Prospect of Deliverance, but from one single Corner, and even that seemed doubtful. It was the Reverse of Elijah's Vision▪ one Hand-breadth of a Cloud in a clear Sky gave him the welcome Hopes of the Rain he pray'd for: Here the whole Sky seemed set for Storms and Thunder, while but one Speck of Blue appeared in the whole Horizon: Who could have thought that this should have conquered all the Clouds, and have given the Heavens and the Earth a new Face? All Eyes turned that way, because it was plain there was no other Hope left us: Yet many thought it was too great an Attempt to be expected from the cold and cautions Counsels of a State, naturally slow, and apprehensive of Danger. The Interpositions of Providence were not wanting in this Extremity; many favourable Accidents concurr'd; Popular Assemblies agreed then so unanimoufly together, that there was not Opposition enough made to create Delays. The STATES seemed to rejoyce, that an Opportunity offer'd is self in this Age, for them to repay what they had been ow∣ing to England ever since the last. And they were willing to perish with us, if we could not both flourish together. An advanced Season made the Sea less practicable: All was to be put to hazard; because all lay at stake. A long Course of cross Winds and rough Weather in the beginning, looked like the Frowning of Heaven. The first Attempt was unprosperous: This would have shaken any Mind less firm than that which animated the whole Undertaking. A Constancy was then observed so steady and inflexible, that not so much as an Inequality of Temper could be discovered. The Unsuccessfulness of the first Step would have damped a Mind that was either feeble or superstitious; tho' our return∣ing all safe after three Days tossing in a Strom, was an Earnest of a particular Care even in that seeming Disappointment. But after the Roughness of the Season had continu'd long enough, to teach us all to depend a little more on Providence, and to apply our selves more carnestly to him that rules the Seas, and the Winds at his pleasure, and after there was a full and visible Experiment made of the Steadiness of him, on whose Mind Seas nor Storms could make no Impression, then God commanded the Winds, and rebuked the Seas, and after that first Rub, all our Affairs were so conducted, that every thing succeeded beyond our Hopes, I had almost said, beyond our Wishes. An orderly March of a friendly tho' foreign Army, an unslained Victory, an over∣turning of that which had design'd all our Ruine, by their own Counsels and Practices, a sinking of Heart and a Giddiness of Head among them, made the way smooth. Then we saw that Success, in its turn. had as little power to exalt, as Misfortunes had to depress a Soul, raised above both. An abandon'd Nation sought for shelter to him, to whom the chief of them had before sought for Relief. All Men were left to the Freedom that became such important Deliberations, without any disturbance. Neither Violence nor Threatnings were used, no not so much as the secret Arts of Practice or Insinuation. Some thought there was a Coldness of Behaviour express'd on that occasion, that seemed too indifferent: but the Directions of Providence were depended on; Men were left to themselves, or ra∣ther to that invisible Chain which encompasses and governs all things here below. We pass'd from the Extremities of Danger, to an entire Establishment, without those Intervals of Confusion, that may be well look'd for in so great a Turn. When we reflect on all this, and on what has happened since, which must be too present to our Thoughts to need any further Enlargement, have we not reason to conclude, that God loved our Nation; and that because he has loved us, he has set such a King over us? In∣deed it is much easier to observe, how God has loved us, than to find out the Reason of his doing it. When we look at our selves, at what we were then, and what we have been
ever since, and continue still to be, we can hardly give our selves any good Account of those Distinctions of Providence, in which we have had so large a share. It is true, our Religion, our Doctrines, our Worship▪ and our Constitution are pure; but those we owe to the last Age, and to the Laws then made about them. All that belongs to us from them, is the Reproach of corrupting our selves under such Advantages: and our refining upon the Immoralities that are but too common to Mankind at all times, by the Profanations and Impieties of the present Age. A new Species of Wickedness, that perhaps has never appeared with such Impudence, and in such bold Instances as among us; and yet God has loved this Nation. We must without any Compliment acknowledge, it is not for our sake, for any Worth or previous Merit in us▪ but we may allow our selves to hope, that tho' we have no Title to this Love, and that it did not find us worthy of it, yet it will have those Effects on us, that may engage us to answer its Design, so far at least that we may not quite forfeit it. Who knows the Secrets of Gods Counsels, or what lies hid under all that train of ex∣traordinary Circumstances that we have seen? Whether we are at last to be reformed by them, and to be made the Instruments of spreading the Light of the Gospel in its Puri∣ty, to other Nations, as we have been already honoured to be the Instruments in this Glo∣irous Reign, to give the Affairs of Europe another Face, a truer Balance, and the Prospect of a firmer Establishment? For let the Men of Envy and Ill-nature look thro' our whole History, and see where they can find, in any Age since we were a Nation, that we ap∣pear'd with so much Glory, and made so great a Figure not only over our Neighbourhood, but over the whole World, as we do in this Re'gn. This Disposes a Man to hope, that the whole Designs of Heaven are not yet accomplished: but that what we have seen is a Noble Pledge of somewhat further, that is yet hid in the Counsels of God, but is to break out in due time. There is no need of great Meditation, of much searching into History, and a depth of Thought▪ to comprehend this, That Good and Bad Princes are among the chief Instances, in which the Love or Anger of Heaven do discover themselves. What greater Blessings can be hoped for on Earth, than from the Reign of PRINCES, that have in them the true Elevations of Greatness, tempered with the Bowels and Com∣passions of good Nature; that are faithful Observers of their Promises, and are severe Lovers of Truth; that not only maintain the Sacred Regards that are due to Equity and Justice, but do generously reward those whom Merit distinguishes, how little soever they may press forward themselves, being as modest as they are deserving PRINCE, I say, who treasure up the Services of their People, and surprise them with such rewards as become Royal Minds: So that the Fortunes of their Subjects are owing to the Value they set on them, without those Abatements that will always be made in the Acknowledgments, when Importunity or Intercessions are thought to have a large share in the Success. A PRINCE, who observes well, and thinks much, who descends oft to the Equa∣lities of Friendship with his Subjects; who hears the Petitions of the oppressed, and hearkens to the Suggestions of the wise and good; a PRINCE, who has the Just and Noble Ambition of meriting Fame and Glory, without the troublesome Vanity of shewing it: who deserves all the Returns of Duty and Gratitude from his People, without being fond of hearing or seeing it express'd, tho' in the highest Forms of a Just Magnificence; who is satisfied with this, that it is apparent what all Men most think, tho' it is not easie to them to find out the properest Methods of setting that forth; which sometimes may shew greater, when Surprizes does so fill the Mind, that Men must be silent, because they feel
that Language is not copious enough to furnish suitable Expressions to such an overcom∣ing Joy; such a PRINCE as this, will still be owned as one of the best Gifts of Hea∣ven. Forced Rhetorick, and hired Panegyricks lie thick in the Lives of some Princes who have deserved them the least. Perhaps Commodus had as many Flatterers, as his Incom∣parable Father had silent Admirers. The best Princes are those who feel the pleasure of making their People happy most sensibly and yet are uneasie and in pain, when in com∣pliance with what is not only decent, but almost necessary on Solemn Occasions, they sub∣mit to hear it acknowledged, tho' in Strains far below the Dignity and Majesty of the Subject. But the Happiness of good Government is then best felt, when set in opposition to all that Train of Blood and Cruelty, of Injustice and Rapine, of a dissolution of Morals, and a scorn of Religion that blacken a bad Reign, Princes who have a wrong set of Mind, wrong Notions of Government, and worse of Religion, who are corrupted by their own Principles, and more by the Power that they suffer others to have over them, are apt to grow to Excesses that are as insufferable to Mankind, as they themselves are in∣capable of Cure. Accidents, how unusual soever, cannot reform them, they grow ra∣ther the worse for them. Justinian the second, delivered himself up to Tyranny and to FavouritesRhinotmel to whom he gave up such unbounded Authority, that his nearest Relations felt a large measure of it, and that in barbarous Instances. He was carriedCedrenus, Theopha∣nes. so far, as to deliver Constantinople to them to be a Scene of Horrour and Mas¦sacre. Such a pitch in Cruelty animated the World against him: He was judged incapable of Government. He had a mark set on him indeed, but he was sent to live in Exile, where he continued ten Years. Two Emperours reigned in that Interval; Discontents arose at last, and a proper Season appear'd for him to at∣tempt again. A great Party of Justinianites was formed in Constantinople, who invited him over; when he crossed the Sea, a storm had well nigh saved that effusion of Blood that was occasioned by his Restoration. One about him ventur'd in that Extremity, to suggest to him that he should now, that if God would deliver him from that imminent Danger, he would pardon all his Enemies: But so fierce a thing is a Savage Tyrant, that even under all those Fears, he could not be softned for one single minute, but said, may I perish in this storm, if I ever pardon one of them: He was as good as his Word. After his Party had made him Master of the Empire, he discharged his first Fury on those who had possessed the Throne: He made two of them to be brought to him; he had the Brutality to trample on their Necks, repeating these Words of the Psalmist, Thou shalt tread upon the Lion and the adder: And after some other Inventions of Infamous Usage, he put them cruely to death; tho' they had let him live, when he was in their Power. Next, he gave scope to his Rage against all those who had been concern'd in the Revo∣lution; both they and their Children were destroy'd, without either Mercy or the Forms of Justice: And because he had been ill used in the place of his Exile, the Countrey now Inhabited by the Crim-Tarters, he resolved to destroy, or to use a Modern word, to execute the whole Country. His Army thought they had obeyed his Cruel Commands, when they had Murdered all, both Men and Women: They; indeed spared the Chil∣dren; they thought they could not be within their Orders they might be sold for Slaves, or trained up to War. They were bloody enough, but not to the pitch of a Tyrant's Cruelty. He resolv'd to satiate his Revenge, even with the bood of Innocents; and ordered them all all to be shipt and brough to him. They were upwares o Seventy-Thousand.
A Storm fell upon them, they all perished in the Euxine, where they found a milder Fate than was prepared for them: This gave him great joy, because they had all perished; it had been greater, if he had glutted his own Eyes with so inhmane  sight but the Pleasure lasted not long, he had now raised all Mankind against him his own Army abhorr'd him. The second Revolt ended more Tragically; they were not con∣tented to stigmatize him as before, both he and his Son, were cruely put to death. This Meditation may seem to go too far from the joyfulness of the present Occasion; but perhaps nothing can make us feel it so sensibly, as the remembring that we have been deliver'd from, and the considering what might have been the Consequences of a fatal Relapse. It remains that we look at the Ends of Government as they are expres'd by the Queen in my Text. The two great ones are in these words, with relation to God, to be King for the Lord thy God, and with relation to the People, to establish them for ever: Then follows the standing Maxims of a good King, in the course of his Administration, to do Judgment and Justice; to execute Law, to punish and reward, leaving the severer part to Just and Impartial Judges, and taking the Nobler one of Rewarding, under his own Care and Ma∣nagement. To be King for the Lord his God, is plainly to Govern in God's stead: To consider Power and Authority as a derivation from him, which will be then best applied, when the first and chief of the Princes cares is, to Maintain and raise the Honour of Religion. Solomon began his Reign with the Executing David's Designs, and the employing his Treasures in building a Temple of that Glory and Magnificence, that it may be justly reckoned among the Wonders of the World. This was suitable to Natural Religion, and more particu∣larly to that Dispensation then instituted by God; which was to have its last finishing, in this great Structure, and in the exact Observance of all those Rules and Orders that had been settled by David. In all this, he was to Reign for the Lord his God, to reduce the People that was so fond of outward State and Solemnity, that they were thereby much di∣sposed to Idolatry, and to make them delight the more in the Worship of God, by such a compliance with thir Inclinations. But the chief Instances in which he was to Rule for the Lord hi God, were the recommending Piety and Holiness by his own Example, and the encouraging it by his Authority. His rayer in Dedicating the Temple, gives a Noble In∣stance of the Impressions that Religion had made upon his own Mind. Certainly those who reckon the Title of Defender of the Faith one of the peculiar Glo∣ie of the Crown, will apply their Thoughts with a particular Zeal to every thing that may promoe Religion, both in their own Dominions, and out of them. The Decencies as well as the Solemnities of the Worship of God, will not be thought below their Care But above all things, the Contempt and Scorn of Sacred matters, is that against which they will turn their Indignation with the warmest Zeal, and against those who do, as it were attack Heaven, and make War upon it, who Study to render Religion as Con∣temptible to others, as they have made it to look to themselves. What Prince could suffer a subordinate Magistrate under him, who should bear with all the Affronts put on Majesty, as long as the lower respects due to himself were observed. This may teach them with how just a Zeal they should punish those bold Attempts against Heaven, tho' made by some who pretend to Zeal and Affection to themselves. Such persons instead of Sup porting the Throne, pull it down, by engaging Heaven against all that they undertake It is a degree of Compliance with their wickedness, to be pleased with them to trust them, or to shew them favour. But it is not enough not to seem to be of the side of those who fight against God, or to abett them.
Princes who Rule for God, enter into all the true Concerns of Religion, tho' not indeed into the Passions and Violences of those who espouse it: While they check these, they will promote the other in the most effectual manner. An unblemish't Pattern set by them∣selves in the Purity and Probity of their own Deportment, will give the fullest Authori∣ty to all their other Designs. Next to their Persons, their chief Care will be the reform∣ing of their Court and Houshold, and the letting it appear that Vertue and Religion are reckoned among the first and most indispensible Qualities of those who may pretend to Favour: And that Vice and Impiety are insuperable barrs in the way to it. Princes who Govern so, that they Rule for God, may justly expect that he will watch over them, ane protect them. That he will make their Crown sit sure and easie, and their Thrones safd and fix'd under them. The second Design for which such Kings are raised up, is, because God loves their People that by their means they may be established for ever, that is, in the Jewish Phrase for a long time. A happy tempering of Government at home, a subduing of Enemies abroad, and a ballancing of Neighbours so equally, that none of them may grow beyond their pitch, are the surest Methods for arriving at a fixed Establishment. We were so shaken at Home, that the Foundations of our Government seem'd to be undermined; not only by open and violent Attacks upon Liberty and Property, but likewise by the more cover'd, tho' no less dangerous Invasions, made under the pretences of Law, but against the plainest Intentions of it. Colours were oft given to excuse that, which in it self carried such a Face of Injustice, that without those Masks, i could not have passed upon a free People. Success in some of these Attempts encouraged the Contrivers to a further prossecuting of them; so that there was scarce any part of our Law left, which those Harpie had not touch'd, and by touching defi'd. The happiness of this Reign is that in it all those Attempts made on Law and Liberty, have been stigmatiz'd, as they well deserv'd to be, but with such mildness towards those who had offended, hurried on in the Croud, or betray'd by their Fears, that those who un∣derstand not how boundless a thing Royal Clemency ought to be, have, from thence, pre∣tended to infer, That the not punishing Offenders, was a Confession, that their actings were Legal and Innocent: But a Government that was Merciful as well as Just, was as gentle in punishing past Offences, as it intended to be exact to provide against the like for the future. The Laws have been fortified by new Explanations, which assure us of their true meaning. These have deliver'd us for the future, from the ractices of those Corrupters of Justice, and Enemies to Liberty; nor is this all, but where our Ancient Constitution seem'd defective, and had not guarded enough against the Fraud of Syco∣phants, it has been fortify'd by the addition of further Securities, which as Buttresses were judged necessary to support the Fabrick. The bringing matters on the other side of the Sea, to juster proportions, the raising of some depressed Princes, and the limiting others that were over-grown▪ has laid the Fears that the World had fall'n under, of being over-power'd by a new Monarchy, and has pro∣vided for our own quiet, by stoppng the progress that was made upon our Neighbours, by which we have secured to our selves, all the returns of gratitude, acknowledgment, and dependency, that can be expected in such cases Both Ancient and Modern Writers have thought that Thedsius Conquering Mximus, and Restoring Valentinian the Second, not only his own share of the Empire, but to Gratian's likewise, was a Subject fit for Rhetorick: Yet that cost him but one Campaign, and in it there were only two days of Action, neither the Charge nor the Danger were extraordinary Besides, that it was a just gratitude to Gratns Memory, who had raised him to a Partner∣ship
with him in the Empire, to revenge his Death, and to Restore his Brother. How much  is the Panegyrick! when we see a Prince in a course of many Years carry on a War into infinite Dangers, and at an inestimable Charge, and that only to preserve the States of Neighbouring Princes, without any other Advantage, but the Pleasure of having Protected the Oppressed, and of having secured the Neighbourhood; not reserving any one Place, either as a Pledge upon his Allies, or an encrease of Dominion to himself. In all Ages Princes have been ready to assist their Neighbours with Auxiliary Troops, and sometimes with hired Armies; but it is the peculiar glory of this Age, that we see a King, who has maintain'd a long War, led the Armies, and exposed himself to innumberable hazards, only to maintain others in their Right. If this adds nothing to his Crown, yet as it makes it sit the firmer, so it must be acknowledged, that it makes it shine the brighter: The Gems of it have a peculiar Luster, a Glory of which former Ages cannot boast. This is indeed to answer that Character to which all Princes pretend, how few soever of them study to deserve it, of being God's Representatives, and Vicegerents, who takes pleasure in delivering the Oppressed, setting him at liberty from him that puffeth at him. Thus we see what are the two great Ends of Government, as they are set forth by this Southern Queen: Next let us view the Measures to be kept in the Admistration; to do Judgment and Justice. The Generosities as well as the Severities of Government, are believed to be implyed in these two. The rigour of Punishment being the harder part, not so natural to Minds of the best Mold, is to be left to Persons of that Robe, who ought to be so chosen, that they be Men fearing God, hating Gifts, and eschewing Covetousness. They Minister in the less acceptable part; and to them it ought to be left, except when the in∣terposition of a just Mercy softens the rigour of strict Justice. I say a just Mercy, for there are Mercies that are cruel. When upon false suggestions, Blood is cover'd, or encourage∣ment is given to enormous Criminals, when they have the hopes of Favour, especially when they see that it may be purchased, this will soon dissolve the Strength as well as the Order of Societies. Princes, by so doing, render themselves, in some sort, accessary to all the Crimes that happen to be committed afterwards, by those whom, thro' a feebleness of Grace, they have rescued from deserved Punishment. Judgment is the more acceptable part. The Branches of this are the distributing of Trusts and Rewards, the delivering tho Oppressed, and the relieving the Necessitous, beginning at those who are brought low by a heavy share in common Calamities, especially those of War, which entitle them to more special degrees of the Prince's Favour and Bounty. There is in all this such a shadow of Divinity, that in it lies the Noblest part of a King's Prerogative It is not he, but the Law that punishes the Bad; but the distingushing the employing, the honouring and rewarding of those who deserve well of him and the Publick, is singly in him. All must owe this only to the Bounty of the Prince; yet the whole is a Trust from Heaven; and those who Rule for God and the good of their People, will man∣age this, as knowing that they must answer it to the King of Kings. This Subject is too tender to be enlarged on by any Person below that High Dignity, let us then hear the Resolutions of a Good, as well as a Warlike King, when he found himself setled on the Throne, to which his Son had no doubt, a particular regard. Psalm 101. I will behave my self wisely in a perfect Way: I will walk within my house with a perfect Heart: I will set no wicked Thing before mine Eyes, a froward Heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked Person. Who so privily standereth his Neighbour, him will I cut off, him that hath a high Look, and a proud Heart, will I not suffer: Mine Eyes shall be upon the Faithful in the Land, that they may dwell with me: He that walketh in a perfect way he shall serve me: He that worketh Deceit shall not dwell in my House: He that telleth Lies, shall not tarry in my sight.
I add not the words that follow, for they seem too severe for the milder State of the Go∣spel. I will early destroy all the Wicked of the Land: There would be little occasion for this, if the former Resolutions were exactly maintained: Kings have a Dialect peculiar to them∣selves; they will understand one anothers Language, and penetrate into their Thoughts, therefore I will not presume to add to these Words either Paraphrase or Inferences. But now having looked over all that compass of Thoughts, to which this Noble Devotion of the Royal Traveller led us: It remains that we conclude, in turning the whole to So∣lemn Adorations, and to the Celebrating the goodness of God both to King and Kingdoms. Our Hearts are now so full of Joy, and our Mouths so full of Praise, that these will inflame us to Hallelujahs, equal, if not to the Occasion, for what can rise up to that! yet to our strength, which will naturally carry us to the highest Transports, the loudest Acclamations, and the perfectest Harmony that we are capable of. This will go easily; we can hardly re∣strain our selves from it: Our Thanksgiving must go further. We must study to express them in more valuable, as well as more lasting Instances. Let us remember and pay all the Vows that we made to God in our Days of Fasting and Prayer: Let us now resolve to live as a Nation deliver'd and Redeem'd of God, and bles∣sed with the most special favour of Heaven: Let us walk suitably to that Light, and to those Advantages that we enjoy beyond all other Nations. Under God, the Fountain of our Life, as well as the Giver of our Peace, let us make all the Humblest Returns of Duty and Gratitude, of Fidelity and Zeal, to our Great Deli∣verer: Let us continue our most earnest Prayers, as well as our highest Thanksgiving to God for him. I will not suggest to Melancholly a Thought, as the Change in Solomon's Reign: The difference between its bright Beginning and dark Conclusion. None, how Great, or how Wise soever, are so established in the ways of Vertue, as to be above Prayers, and beyond Temptations. Let us all therefore Pray that God may long Preserve the King whom he hath set over us, and the Peace that by his means is procured to us. May his Reign of Peace be as Glorious, as his Course in War has been, but of a  longer Continuance▪ May he be long the Delight of his People, the Arbiter of Europe, the Patron of Justice, and the Maintainer of Right all the World over. May the Nation still Flourish, and the Church be ever Glorious, by his Conduct and Care: And may he be as Happy in the Love of his Subjects, as he has made them safe under his Protection. To Conclude, in a Devotion Dictated by a Royal, as well as an Inspired Author. The Lord hear thee in the Day of Trouble, Send thee help from his Sanctuary, Grant thee ac∣cording to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy Counsels. The Lord fulfil all thy Pe∣titions.Psal. 21. We will rejoice in thy Salvation. Now we know that the Lord saveth his Anointed: He will hear him from his holy Heaven. And we will remember the name of the Lord our God, for we are risen, and stand upright. O Lord save the King. And Mercifully hear us when we call upon thee. FINIS.
