C1978 R9207 13275753 98719
THE CARACTER OF A Leading Petitioner. HE is an Insect produc'd by the Carrion of a Common∣wealth, and naturally tends to dissolve into his Princi∣pium, and primary constitution: though he be preserv'd by the heat and moisture of serene Majesty, yet like contemptible Vermin, He will with noysome pestilence infect that Ayr, to whose teaming indulgence he owes his original, He's unmannerly and mean, senceless and impertinent, and though, being injoyn'd by duty, and qualyfi'd by education, to shew himself an industrious Terpawlin, when the billows of the troubl'd State furiously heave, yet He'l saucily presume to give directions to his Pilate, and re∣gardless of his own respective Office, will boldly aym at the ma∣nagement of the Healm. He in the repining Ghost of a dissolv'd Parliament, that uneasily stalks about in obscurity and night, abusing popular credulity with the deluding hopes of imaginary Treasure. He has the wit of a Dane, the truth of a French-man, and the conscience of a London Grand-jury-man; And yet this vain and troublesome tool wou'd possess his obsequious rout, that the healing results of a most wise Prince and untainted Councell, are inferiour to the long Muster-Roll and Country Clubs of Richards and Robins, He is that unnatural Greensickness of the Body-Poli∣tick, that wou'd exchange the wholsomer nourishment of a well-order'd Government, for the loathsome Trumpery of odious Trash. Herodotus takes occasion to illustrate the redicu∣lous vanity of a Male-content of this nature in his History about Cambyses, who perceiving some discontent in one of his Officers, that cou'd not without some pretence attempt the traiterous de∣sign of unkinging his Master; The Prince did indulge his Petiti∣oner so far, as cautiously to comply with his unreasonable request; But when the Supplicant perceiv'd the very Grant of his requests. had ruind his design, He condem'd his importunities, and sub∣missively sued to be restor'd to his first condition. How grea∣dily
this Petitional Animal catcheth at the seeming gilded bait of that imaginary Liberty that betrays him; He repines when he's hungry, and murmurs when he's full, no sooner has a Moses redeliver'd him from slavery, and pamper'd him with the Manna of peace and plenty, but the High-fled Blockhead grows senseless of his happiness, and industriously contrives for misery and want. He has the feathers of a Swan, but the stomack of an Ostriche; He pretends innonsence and well-meaning zeal, but can digest a harsher dyet without any offence to his constitution. He is that troublesome Vapour that breaks out of the earth to make a wind, and only sighs himself into a Calm to recover breath and blow again. He is the crudor humors and Itch of a Kingdom, and not only tickels himself into torment, but revengfully infects his Neighbour, and if the wholsom Phebetomy of the Observator, had not fetcht it out of his veins by the timely discovery of his disease, the Infant Itch wou'd have spread into an incurable Scurf. He is the Epitome of all sorts of villanies, and compriseth in his own peculiar Nut-shell the bold contrivances and rediculous at∣tempts of Jack Straw and his successless Gang. Rebellion is his end, but the pretence of good service his means: There's more Loyalty in the very Title Page of one of the Intelligences, then in a thousand advising Sheets of his Petitioning Scrowls. He pre∣tends tis the fear of Popery that alarms him, and to prevent that, He'l pull up the Wheat together with the Tares, and (like the foolish Indian, that despiseth the Pearl because he found it in a puddle) he'l reject the truth of the Religion together with the Errors. He refuseth to come to Church, and comply with the Cerimonies because death upon the Belfry is Popishly affec∣ted, and because the sand in his hour-glass is Jesuits Powder; He contemns the Church Bible because tis corrupted by the evil Councel of the Apocripha, and fancies that Tobith's dog was no∣thing else but the Pope's Cerberus; Addresses he esteems as a sneak∣ing peace of cowardise, and reckons him to be the boldest Cham∣pion of Religion that will strenuously oppose the Defender of it; His Bugbear jealousies are the creatures of his own head. And (like the Artist that made a Devil which terrify'd him) he first creates and then fears them; In a word, he's a desturber of the tranquility of the Nation, and an Enemy to all Loyal Subjects. LONDON, Printed for W. Davis. 1681.
