C2408 R29198 10849329 46120
HIS MAIESTIES LETTER. TO THE LORD MAIOR and ALDERMEN OF The Citie of LONDON, WITH The humble Petition of the Knights, Ministers, Gentry Free-holders, and other inhabitants of the Countie of LEICESTER, To the KING. Also the Resolution of the whole Countie of Essex, Presented to the LORDS and COMMONS assembled In PARLIAMENT: Whereunto is annexed the Answere from the Parlia∣ment, and commanded by the LORDS to be forth∣with Printed and Published. John Browne. Cler. Parliament. LONDON: Printed for Tho. Hewer and W. Moulton, 1642.
CHARLES R. To Our Trusty and Welbeloved, the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Sheriffes of Our Citie of LONDON. TRusty and welbeloved. We greet you well. Whereas We have received severall Informations of great summes of Money endeavoured to be borrowed of Our City of Lon∣don, by some direction proceeding from both Our Houses of Parliament, and likewise that great labour is used to per∣swade Our Subjects to raise Horse, and to furnish money, upon pretence of providing a Guard for our Parliament; These are to let you know, that (notwithstanding any scandalous Votes which have presumed to declare our Intention of levying warre against Our Par∣liament, and to lay other aspersions on Vs, so fully disavowed by us in the presence of Almigty God, by Our severall Answers and Declarati∣ons) all Our desires and purposes are for the publike Peace, and that We have not the least thought of raising or using Force, except We are compelled to it for the defence of Our Person and in Protection of the Law; And therefore We expect, that you suffer, not your selves to be mis-led by such vain and improbable suggestions, and do declare, That if you shall lend any summes of Money towards the reliefe of Ireland (to which VVe have contributed all the assistance could be desired of Us, which way soever Money given and raised to that purpose is desposed) or towards the payment of Our Scots Subjects. VVee shall take it as an acceptable Service at your hands; but if upon generall Pretences con∣trived by a few Factious Persons against the Peace of the Kingdome, you shall give or lend any Money, or provide or raise any Horses or Armes towards the raising such a Guard. VVe shall looke upon it as the raising Force against Us, and to be done in malice and contempt of Us and Our Authority. And VVe do therefore straitly charge & command you to publish this our Letter to the severall Masters & Wardens of the se∣verall Companies, that they may be assured that such Money as they shall lend out of their good affection to the Kingdom may be onely imploy∣ed for Ireland or Scotland, and not towards such Guards▪ which (in truth) are intended by the Contrivers of that Designe (though We beleeve many honest men seduced by them do not yet see their end) to be im∣ployed against Us: And if you and they shall herein fall punctually and
severally to observe Our Command, We shall not onely proceed a∣gainst the severall Companies for deceiving the Trust reposed in them; but against the particular persons, as Contemners and Opposers of Our Authority, and of the Law of the Land, in the most exemplary way the known Law of the Land shall prescribe to Us; And shall be compel∣led to question the Charter of your City, which We are willing yet to beleeve (notwithstanding the barbarous and insolent demeanour of the meaner and baser sort) in a good degree to continue loyall to Us. And of your obedience to these Our commands We do expect and require a full Account, and of the names of such persons who shall oppose the same. Hereof fail you not as you will answer the contrary at you perill. Given at Our Court at York the 14. day of June, in te 18. yeer of Our Reign, 1642. To the Kings most excellent Majestie. The humble Petition of the Knights, Ministers, Gn∣try, Free-holders, and many thousands of the Inhabitants of the County of Leicester, who assembled on Horse-sairlays▪ ready to accompany the Petition, if they shuld bee required. The humble Petition of the Knights, Ministers, &c. MOst humbly sheweth with one unani∣mous consent, that your Petitioners and obedient Servants of Liecestershire; situated in the middest of you King∣dome of England, and in the middest of our great feares and apparant dan∣gers, by your taking up Armes and le∣vying Forces (as it is thought) against your Honourable, royall, and Illustrious Parliament: thereby to cout, to ruine and disappoint their manifest good and godly purposes: and the more fully to effect this designe, never heard of (except in the Reigne of the Eleventh of Richard the Second) you have (as wee right∣ly
conceive) by the ill advise of your pernicious Councell morgaged, pawned or sold the glory of the Land, the Jewels and Treasures of the CROVVN, which ought as highly to be prized as the MILITIA, or any Maga∣zine whatsoever: the one chiefely serves to secure what is Yours in Possession; the other (being so easily parted with) abateth the lustre of your KINGDOME. Therefore may it please your Majestie to hearken to the worthy and well-deserving Men of your Kingdome, your hopefull and our happie Parliament: and become more neere in person, and joyne in affection with your trusty and grave and solid Councell and great Court of Judicature, for surely that high Assembly with Gods Blessing and your assenting unto them can soone procure your and our safety, and annihilate all distractions and distempers. And that you would freely consent or put our County (because we are in such eminent danger, Southward and Northward, having neither Castles or any other places of strength by Sea or Land, or approved friends besides the Parliament) in a posture of defence, and that you would recall your Warrants prohibiting our Trained bands to muster, the rather because we desire to follow the good example of our neighbour Country Men of Lincolneshire and others, and to joyne your selfe with your Parliament. Otherwise when they shall declare and nominate the particular disturbers of Yours and Our peace, the procu∣rers of your and our feares, jealousies and amazements out of their knowne experience, we shall take upon the bold∣nesse to remove from your Majesty such prosecutors as are enemies to the State, and hinderers to the tranquility of the same. Therefore we your dutifull faithfull Subjects and ser∣vants humbly sue, that your Majesty would accord with
your Parliament, and comply with them to restraine the violent malice of the blood-thirsty Rebels in Ireland. To settle a Godly, Learned and Industrious Ministry. To Disarme the Papists seeing they rejoyce in this discord, and insolently speake words full of Arrogancy. To sepa∣rate from you that subverting Councell who dare not stand to the goodnes of their Cause nor can indure the Test. To cashire those Cavaliers and other unnecessary undependants. Fully and cleerely to acquit the Lord Kim∣bolton, and other the worthy Members of the least suspiti∣on of Treason against your Majestie or State, one of them being chiefly intrusted for the good and welfare of our Country. To beleeve in the faithfulnesse and Loyalty of your Parliament, who regulates the oppressions of your Kingdome. And other the premisses. And we with our lives, and Estates, and Fortunes shall be o∣bedient, and loyall unto your Majesty. And pray, &c. Iune the 18.
To the Right Honorable the LORDS and COMMONS assembled in the high Court of PARLIAMENT. The humble Repromission and Resolution, of the Captaines and Souldiers the Trained Bands, and other Inhabitants of the County of ESSEX. With the Answer thereunto annexed, and commanded by the Lords to be forthwith Printed and published. Humbly sheweth; THAT we having with joy and admiration, ob∣served the wise and gracious Passages and Procee∣ding of this Parliament: and the pious, tender, and affectionate care of your Honors, for the preservation of the Peace and Honour of his most excellent Majestie, and these three thrice happily united Kingdoms; repre∣sented to the World in your severall Ordinances, De∣clarations, Votes and Remonstrances, sufficient to stop the mouth (if it were possible) of envy and malignity it self) cannot but with grief and indignation wonder to heare, that there should yet be found, & that even about the Regal Throne, such unnaturall & evil affected spirits, and malignant Councellors, who, desirous to swimme to the haven of their ambitious hopes, in the blood of their dearest Friends and Country-men, doe continually in∣still into his Majesties Royall breast, a sinister conceit, and mis-interpretation of your most Humble and Loyall
Affections, and noble Actions, and Vndertakings. Wherefore we understanding (not by mis-informa∣tion of flying reports, out) by the late Votes and Decla∣rations of both your Honourable Houses. That his Majestie seduced by wicked Councell intends to make Warre against the Parliament: That so to doe is a breach of the trust reposed in him by his People, contrary to his Oath: And that whosoever shall serve or assist him in such Warres, are Traytors by the Fundamentall Laws of this Kingdome. And withal perceiving your most Christian & Heroical Resolutions to persist in your Honourable Endeavours▪ for the publique safety, though you should (which God avert) perish in the worke. Wee thought it our dutie most humbly to represent to your Honours, the aithful affections and inviolable resolutions of our souls to Stand or Fall, Live or Die, together with you: According to our PROTESTATION. Thus with our hands upon our Swords, we stand ready at your command, to performe our Vows to God and Oathes of fidelity to his Majestie, In taking up Arms against those false Flatterers, and Traytors: who abuse his Royall Favour, intending under the glorious Title of his Name and Standard, to fight against the Peace and Honour of their Soveraigne, against Religion, and the Lawes: and to make a prey and spoyle, of three flouri∣shing Kingdoms at once: And to spend our dearest blood in the defence of the lives, & liberties of our Country∣men; the Lawes which are the life of our liberty, and Peace; Religion more precious then both; and the King & Parliament: In whose lives lies bound up the life of all the rest. VVhosoever is otherwise affected, wee hold him not worthy the name of a Souldier but a Prodi∣tor of his King and Country to all Posterity. Lastly, finding a multitude of well affected People, whose hearts are good to joyne with us but want
Arms we most humbly crave, That Restitution may be made of those Armes, which were taken out of their County; either out of the store lately arrived from HVLL; or otherwise as to your most excellent Wisdome shall seem best. And wee shall ever Pray. The Lords Answer to the Essex Petition. MY LORDS have taken your Petition into consi∣deration, and receive much contentment in the good affections you have expressed, and doe give you heartie and extraordinary thanks, thus seasonably and necessarily, for the good of the King and Kingdome, and of their Lordships encouragement in the performance of their duty; and the Lords doe assure you, that God wil∣ling, they resolve to insist in their former declared Reso∣lutions, for the upholding of the true Religion, the Kings Authoritie in the highest Court, which by sundry late Declarations and practises to abuse the people, they find so much vilified and invaded, the priviledges of Par∣liament, free Course of Justice, the Lawes and Peace of this Kingdom, notwithstanding any dangers and hazards that for that cause can befall them. That for the manife∣station of their good affections, and their Lordships kind acceptations thereof, they have commanded your Petit∣on and the Answer, to be forith Printed and publi∣shed. John, Bwne Cleric. Parliament. This Resolution was presented to he Trained Bands, and Companies of Ʋoluntiers, who appeared at Dunmow: Jun. 10. 1642. And was received with universall Ap∣probation, by holding up of Hands, throwing up of Hatts, and Acclamations: professing, That they held them unwor∣thy to live, that should dislike it. And it was within three dayes after, subscribed with ten Thousand Hands. FINIS.
