C4507 09514768 43370
A DESCRIPTION OF THE Seaventeen PROVINCES Commonly called The Low-Countries, (The Present Stage of Action) AS ALSO OF The Rivers, Cities, Com∣modities, Strong Towns, Forts, and other things remar∣kable therein. LONDON, Printed for William Birch at the Blew-Bible at the Corner of the Poul∣trey, at the lower end of Cheapside 1672.
A Table of the seventeen Pro∣vinces, Cities, and Chief Towns which are Described in this Book. A general Description of the LOw-Countries Pag. 1. Of their Commodities p. 2. Of their Rivers and Fish p. 3. Of their Channels, and other Waters p. 4. Of their Forrests and Woods p. 6. Of their Fowl and Birdsp. p. 6. The quallities of the peoplep. p. 6. Of their Arts and Industry p. 7. The Province of Brabant p. 8. The chief Rivers therein p. 8. The Cities and Towns p. 8. The City of Lovain described. p. 9. The City of Bruxels. p. 10. Bolduc described. p. 11. Mastrick described. p. 13. The Province of Lemburg described. p. 15 The Province of Guelders described. p. 17. Ruermond described. p. 18. Zutphen described. p. 19. Arnhem described. p. 19. The Province of Over-Issel. p. 22. Deventer described. p. 23. Swol described. p. 23. Campen described. p. 23.
Vullenhove, described p. 24. The Province of Frisland. p. 24. The Province of Gromingen. p. 25. 29. Leewarden described. p. 28. The Ile of Schellink. p. 28. The Province of Holland p. 32. 59, &c. Holland and Zealand. p. 33. Cities and Towns in Holland. p. 42. Dordrect or Dort described p. 43. Harlem described. p. 43. Delfe described p. 45. Leyden described p. 46. Goud described p. 47. Amsterdam described p. 48. Einchusen described p. 49. Hoorn described p. 49. Alcmair described p. 50. Purmerenden described. p. 51. Edam described. p. 51. Rotterdam Described. p. 54. St. Gertrudenburg. Described. p. 54. Hague described p. 56 Other Villages in Holland p. 56 Isles belonging to Holland p. 58. Of Voorn, Goerde, Somersdike, Gorendike described p. 58, 59. The Province and City of Utrecht de∣scribed p. 61, 62. The Towns belonging to it p. 63.
The Province of Zealand described p. 63. Isles belonging to Zealand p. 64. The Walled Towns in it p. 65. The Isle of Scowve described p. 66. The other Isles described ib. Middlebourg described. ib. Veer or Canfeer described p. 67. Flushing p. 67. Romerswald described p. 68. Ter-Goes described p. 68. The City of Antwerp described p. 69. The Province of Flanders p. 72. Walled Towns in Flanders p. 73. Other Towns p. 74. Flanders Flamigant described p. 75. The City of Gaunt described p. 76. Bruges described p. 78. The City of Ipre described p. 80. Scluse described p. 81. Ostend described p. 82. Neuport described and Dunkirk p. 84. Berg St. Winnock p. 85. Dam described p. 85. Dixmund described p. 86. Wern Described p. 86. Bourburg Described p. 86. Gravling Described p. 86. Cassel Described p. 86. Courtray Described p. 86.
Oudenard Described p. 87. Ardenbourg Described p. 87. Middlebourg Described p. 88. Wervick Described p. 88. Merim Described p. 88. Comines Described p. 88. Flanders Gallicant described p. 89. Lisle described p. 89. Doway described p. 90. Orchies Described p. 91. Lanoy Described p. 91. Espeney Described p. 91. Armentiers Described p. 91. Tournay described p. 92. Mortaign described p. 93. St. Amond Described ib. Flanders Imperial described. ib. Alost Described. p. 94. Country of Waes. Described. p. 94. Hulst Described. p. 94. Denremond Described. p. 94. Mount Gerrard Described. p. 94. Bornhem Described. p. 94. Ruplemond described. p. 95. The Province of Artois described p. 95. Arras described p. 96. St. Omers described p. 97. Beteene Described p. 98. Aire Described p. 98. Bapaulm Described p. 98.
Renty described. p. 99. Heldin described ib: St. Pol described ib. Perue described ib. Lillers described ib. Lens described ib. Cambray described p. 100. The Province of Hanault described p. 102 Mons described p. 104. Valenciennes described p. 106. Bouchain described p. 109. Quesnoy described ib. Conde described ib. Landrecy described ib. Avesnes described ib. Chimay described ib. Mariembourg described p. 110. Philipvil described ib. Beaumont described ib. Mauberg described ib. Bavays Vallone ib. Bins described ib. Reux described ib. Sogny described p. 111. Breinle Comte described ib. Enguien described ib. Halle described ib. Lesny described ib. Cheur described ib:
Ath Described ib. St. Guislem described ib. Leuse Described ib. The Province of Luxenburg described. p. 112. Laxenbourg described p. 114. Arlon described ib. Rodemark described ib. Theonville described ib. Graumackren described ib. Coning-Mackren described ib. Bastonack described ib. Mommedi described p. 115. Neuscastle described ib. Danvillers described ib. Marvil described ib. St. Vit described ib. Sme described ib. Ivoy described ib. Cimay described ib. The Province of Namor described. p. 116.
BELGIA: OR THE LOW-COUNTRIES. DESCRIBED. THE Low-Countries are seated very co∣modiously for all the Provinces of Europe. For North∣ward it is but 5 or 6 dayes journey by Sea from Den∣mark. Southward it consineth with France, and Lorrain. Eastward with Almain, or Germany. Westward with England, and Scotland. It's also com∣modious for Norway, and Sweden: for a Ship went from Holland to Norway in 46 houres. From Lisbon its scarce 10 dayes Voyage. The circuit of the Country is
about a Thousand Italian Miles, or 34 Flemish Leagues. In that part of the Low-Countries that formerly be∣longed to the King of Spain, are contained 208 walled Towns: An hundred and fifty Towns priviledg∣ed, as walled Towns: Six thousand three hundred Villages with Parish Churches, besides a great number of other Villages, and Hamlets. The Beeves of Frisland and Hol∣land, are very great, and weigh some of them sixteen hundred pounds. Yea, one there was presented to the Earl of Hockstrait which weighed two thousand five hundred twenty eight pounds of the Country weight. The Ewes in Holland, Frisland, and part of Flanders bring forth 3 or 4 Lambs at a time, and the Kine often two Calves. The Country brings forth much Mather, where∣with a great part of Europe is furni∣shed? Wood, and Hemp, and Flaxin great abundance.
Five principal Rivers are in these Countries: The Rhine, the Meuse, the Scheld, Haa, and Emms, besides divers smaller. The Muse affords abundance of Sturgeons, so big, that some of them weigh 400, and some 420 pounds, and are 12 Foot long of Antwerp measure. The Muse yeildeth also great store of Salmons, and Salmon Trouts, Lamprayes, Shads, Congers, Mul∣lets, and divers other sorts of Fi∣shes, which coming into fresh Wa∣ter, become fat, and excellent good. The Scheld, by reason of the vi∣cinity it hath with the mouth of the Meuse, hath divers sorts of Fishes that come out of the Sea, as Stur∣geons, Salmons, Salmon Trouts, Lamprayes, Turbots, Congers, Shads, Mullets, Soles, &c. besides which, such an infinite number of frie come out of the Sea, and are taken in this River, that multitudes of People are relieved therewith.
Besides these Rivers, divers Channels are cut out, and made na∣vigable by mans hand, the principal whereof are at Bruxells, Gant, Bruges, and Middlebourg. The Country hath not many Fountains of running wa∣ter, save in the mountainous part: But Lakes, Pools, and Marshes many, which both fortify the Country, and furnish it with Fish. The Sea ariseth at Calais in Flan∣ders, in Zealand, and Holland 18 Foot: but where its pressed into a Straight, as at Bristow, it rises 66 Foot: At St Malo, and Mount St. Michael in Normandy 80 Foot. The depth of the Sea between Calais and Dover is 24 Fathom (every fathom 6 foot) Be∣tween England and Ireland 23. Be∣tween Wight, and Normandy 28. Near to Sylly 60: and so the nearer the Main the deeper. Herrings come out of the Nor∣thern Seas in incredible multitudes into our Seas in August, September,
and mid November: But the best are taken from mid-September, 'till the end of October. The sooner the cold begins, the sooner they come, and in the greater number. They once compass our Isle of Great Bri∣tain, and so pass into the Northern Ocean. Their course is hard by the Shore, and they swim gazing where they see any Light, Fire, or humane Creatures. They have Kings among them, as Bees have, marked on the Head like a Crown, and are somewhat ruddy, especially upon the Head. The Kings goe before them, and they are followed with an infinite number, which in the Night afar off seem like Lightning, by reason that their eyes are bright like fire. They feed upon water only, and dye as soon as they are taken out. Many Cods are taken in the same Months with the Herrings; and some of them are above 50 pound weight.
Of these two kinds of Fishes they yearly make vast summs. Salmons are taken at all times of the year in Holland, and Zealand. These 3 kinds of Fish, yeild yearly to them (the Salt deducted) six hundred thousand pound Sterling. They have divers Forrests, and Woods, well stored with Red and Fallow Deer, Goats, Wild Boars, Hares, Conies, Badgers, Wolves, Foxes, &c. whcth yeild good Furrs. The Fowl in this Country are Partridge, Feasants, Turtle Doves, Quails, Black-birds, and in briefe, all kinds of Fowl, and Birds that be in England, both Water, and Land Fowl, especially water Fowl in Holland. The People are valiant, and very skilful Seamen: their Hoyes are ex∣cellent good to brook the Seas, by reason whereof they dispatch their Voyages sooner than other Nations. They are good Linguists, and very skilful in Merchandise. They excel
in making Woollen cloth, Tapestry, Fustians, Silks, Velvets, &c. They in∣vented the Art of Painting, and the making of Woollen, and Linnen Cloth, and of Dying. The Women govern all, both within doors, and without, and make all bargains, which makes them too too injurious and troublesom. The eldest Daughter is of the greatest re∣putation, yet hath no larger a Porti∣on than the rest. They marry Noble with ignoble, young with old, Ma∣ster and Servant, into strange Towns, and Forrain Countries. There are 17 Provinces, Brabant, Lemburg, Luxenburg, Guilders, which are Dutchies; Flanders, Artois, Hey∣nalt, Holland, Zealand, Namur, and Zutphen, which are Earldoms; The Marquisat of the sacred Empire, Frisland, Malines, Utrecht, Over-Issel, and Groningham, which are Senio∣ries. Lothier is a bare Title, for the Land remaineth in Lorrain.
The Province of Brabant described. Brabant is bounded on the North with the Meuse, which severeth it from Guilderland, and Holland: South with Haynalt, Namurs, and Lieg: East with the Meuse, which severs it from another part of Guelderland: West, with the Scheld, which severs it from Flanders, and the Principa∣lity of Alost. The air is good, and most of the Soil fruitful. The length of it from South to North, from Gem∣blours to St. Gertrudenbers is ▪22 Leagues; The breadth from East to West, from Helmont to Berghes is 20 Leagues. The circuit eighty. The principal Rivers of Brabant are the Meuse, and the Scheld. Towns walled are 26, whereof Lovain, Bruxells, Antwerp, and Bosleduc are the chiefe. Tilmond, Leewe, and Ne∣velle are but small. The rest are Arsh∣cot, Bergh, Meghen, Breda, Diest, Mae∣stricht, Steenberg, Lire, Vilvorden, Gemblours, Joudaign, Hannut, Lam∣den,
Halem, Sichenen, Herentalis, Eindoven, Helmont, and Grave. Smaller Towns unwalled, yet Market Towns, fair built, and en∣joying the Priviledges of Market Towns, are eighteen. Villages with Parish Churches are seven Hundred. The City of Lovain described. Lovain stands by the River of Dele: The air is so temperate that Vines prosper both within, and without the Town. Its 4 miles com∣pass within the Walls, and six with∣out. The buildings are beautiful: the Temples, Monasteries, the Church of St. Peter, and the Publick Pallace, are sumptuously built. Its of a round Figure, and hath many goodly Gardens, Vallyes, Mountains, Med∣dows, and Springs within it. The University was founded Anno Christi 1426. In it are about 20 Colledges, the principal whereof are Lilium, Castrum, Porcus, Falco, and Trilingue.
It hath many lesser Towns under the Jurisdiction of it. The City of Bruxells Described. Bruxells stands upon the little River Sinne: Its of the same big∣ness with Lovain. It hath 2 Walls about it, between which, towards the East, the Court is resident. It's excellently seated for all kind of Commodities, both for Pleasure, and Profit. There is a goodly Channel made by Art from Bruxells into the River of Dele, and thence into the Scheld. There are also 5 no∣table Scluses for the back Water. In it there are 7 Gates, 7 Churches, 7 Noble Houses: And the buildings in general are very sumptuous. Here is made great store of Armor, and excellent Arras, both of Silk, Gold, and Silver. There are in it 52 Oc∣cupations, divided into 9 Members, called the 9 Nations. It hath un∣der
its jurisdiction Nivelle, and Vil∣vorden. Bolduc described. Bolduc stands upon the River of Deese, but 2 Leagues from the Meuse. It's a great Town, strong, well Peo∣pled, rich, and well built. The Ca∣thedral Church is dedicated to St. John, which is a goodly one, and hath a very beautiful Dial upon it. It's the fourth principal Town of Brabant. Under the Jurisdiction of it are 4 Countries, called the four Members, wherein are contained these Towns, Helmont, Eindovers, Meghen, Ravestein, Grave, and divers other Villages. The three small Capitall Towns of Brabant are, Telmont that stands upon the lit∣tle River Geet; but the Town is now decayed.
Leewe, that stands upon the lit∣tle Brook Gheef: It's strong, being a Frontier against Lieg. Nevelle, It stands in a fruitful soil, and is full of Quarries of excellent Stone. Besides these, there are in Bra∣bant Arshcot, which stands upon the little River Demere, made a Dutchy. Bergen op Zoom, seated upon a little Hill, by the River Zoom, which passes through the Town, and half a League thence falls into the Scheld. It's neer to the Seas, and hath a rea∣sonable good Haven, not far from Antwerp. Hoochstrate, not environed with any Wail, Erected into an Earldom by Charles the Fifth. Meghen, stands upon the River of Meuse, An ancient Earldom. Breda, stands upon the River Merck: Its a good, and a pleasant Town, and
in it is a sumptuous Castle, with double Ditches full of Water: It belongs to the Prince of Orange. Diest stands upon the River De∣mere: A good Town, and hath two Colledges of Canons in it. The City of Mastrick described. Mastrick is cut through, not in the midst, but on one side by the Meuse. There is a goodly Bridg of Stone built over the River. The lesser Part of it makes, as it were, an Angle, which is called by the Name of Vich: This part belongs to the Prin∣cipality of Liege: But the chief Bo∣dy of the Town is under the Low-Countries. It's a very fair and strong Town, and hath two Colledges of Canons in it, and in one of them the Duke of Brabant is a Canon. The whole compass thereof is about 4 English miles. Round about the Walls runs a deep Ditch: The Earth
about it is loose, and maniable: yet is it not peopled answerable to the compass of the Walls, but a great part of it is void ground, especially towards the Walls, which notwith∣standing are well provided with Platforms. Steenbergh, is now decayed, but was sometime a Town of great pow∣er and importance, with a goodly Haven. Lire stands upon the little River Nethe. It's a strong Town, both by Nature and Art. Vilvorden stands upon the River Sinne: The Town is strong, and hath a Castle in it. Gemblours, hath an Abby in it, and a famous Library. There are also Jondoign, Hannut, Landen, Halen, which stands upon the little River of Geet: Sichenen▪ upon the River Demere; Hentalls upon the River Nethe: Eindoven upon the Brook Dommele. Helmont
upon the River Ade: And Grave upon the River Meuze: all walled Towns: other Villages are omit∣ted. Ravestien stands on the left side of the River of Maze. Its a good little Town, with a Castle in it. The Province of Lembourg Described. Lembourg stands upon the River of Weser beyond the Meuze, in which is found the Stone called Co∣peras, which being incorporated with Brass maketh Latin. There is also much Iron, and some Lead. Walkenbourg is a reasonable Town, having a large Territory and Juris∣diction: It's 2 Leagues from Ma∣strick. Dalem is a little Town with a Ca∣stle. Rode-le-duc is a little ancient Town with an old Castle.
Carpen is a great Village with a Collegiate Church, and a strong Ca∣stle neer it. Malins stands upon the River of Dele, which passeth through the Town, and ebbs and flowes a League above it. It is a goodly Strong Town, because it may be drowned almost on all sides. In it are 7 Parish Chur∣ches, and a Monastery of about 16 hundred Nuns. Heyst stands on an Hill, and hath 7 Boroughs at the foot of the Hill, all pertaining to this Village. Horne is a Castle neer to the Meuse, not far from Ruermond, and hath a goodly Jurisdiction neer unto the Castle gives Name: And Wiert is a Town belonging to it, beautified with a goodly Castle.
The Province of Guelders described. Guelders is bounded on the North with Friesland, and the Zuiderzee: South with the Meuse (which di∣vides it from Brabant) and with Gu∣lirland: East with the Rhine, and Cleavland: and West with Holland, and the Bishoprick of Utrecht. The Country is flat, having but few Hills, but many pleasant Woods, and store of Corn, and Cattel. It hath two and twenty walled Towns, whereof the cheif are Ni∣megue, Ruermond, Zutphen, and Ar∣nem. The other walled Towns are, Hatten, Elburch, Harderwick, Wag∣heningen, Tiel, Bomel, Bronchorst, Do∣esburg, Doetecum, Isheerenberg, Lo∣chem, Grol, Bredervoerde, Ghelder, Stralen, Venloo, Wachtendonck, and Erkelens. Towns unwalled, yet priviledged as walled Towns are, Kepple, Burg,
Ghent, Batemburg, Montfort, and Echt. In it are above three hundred Vil∣lages with Parish Churches. Nimegue stands upon that branch of the Rhine that is called Whael, where its larg, and deep. Its a fair Town, strong, rich, and well peo∣pled. It hath a very fair, and anci∣ent Castle, with an excellent Pro∣spect round about. Ruermond described. Ruermond stands upon the very point of the River Ruer, where it, and the Maze meet. Its a beautiful, strong, and well-peopled City: The country about it is very fruitful. Under the jurisdiction of it are these Towns; Venloo, a strong Town, Guelder, Stralen, Watchtendonck, and Erkelens, which are all Walled Towns; Montfort, Echt, and Niewer∣stat, Burroughs built like Towns; as also Kessel, Midler, and Criekenbeeck▪
A League from Rucrmond is the fair Village Kessel, with a strong Castle in it. Zutphen described. Zutphen is situate upon that branch of the Rhine that is called Issel, and the River Berkel runs through it, which there empties it self into Issel: Its well built. Its the third principal Town in Guelderland. Under its jurisdiction are Doesbourg, Doeterum, Lochem, Grol, Bredervoerd, and Bronk∣hurst, all walled Towns. Zutphen hath a great Fort on the side oppo∣site to the River, and two lesser ones for the better defence of it. The City of Arnem described. Arnem stands upon the Rhine. Its a well built Town, fair, and larg. Its chiefe Town of Guelders, and the Veluwe, which is but a little
Country, but exceeding fruitfull, especially abounding with Fish, be∣ing compassed about with Zuiderzee, Rhine, and Issel. It abounds also with all kinds of Venison. Under its ju∣risdiction are Wagheninghen: Hattem which is a strong town; Hardwick, and Elbourg, all walled Towns, with divers Villages. Other walled Towns are these. Hattem which stands upon Issel, a great, and strong Town. Elbourg which stands upon Zuiderzee. Hur∣derwick, which also stands upon Zuiderzee: Wagheninghen, which stands upon the Rhine: Tiel, which is a strong Town, and stands upon Whaal: Bomel, which also stands upon Whaal, and is a fair, and strong place: Bronchorst which stands up∣on Issel; Doesbourgh, which stands at the entry of Fossa Brusiana into the River Issel, a good Town and well peopled: Doetecum, which stands upon the old Issel: Tserenberg, a
good Town: Locchem which stands upon Berkel: Groel, &c. Verloo stands upon the Meuze, Its a good, and a strong Town: Wach∣tendonk stands upon the River Ni∣ers: Erkelens is a reasonable good Town. All these are walled, and stand in Guelderland. Towns unwal∣led are, Keppel, and Bourk, both which stand upon the old Issel: Ghend, which is neer to the Whaal: Battenbourg which stands upon the Meuze: Montfort, a very strong Castle: Echt, neer to the pleasant Wood Echterwalt: Culembourg, a good Town standing upon the Leck: Buren is in the midst of Guelderland, hath a strong Castle in it, and un∣der the jurisdiction of it, a great Country, and many Villages; It stands neer to the River Liugh.
The Province of Overissel described. Overissel is bounded on the North with West-Frise, and Groninghen: South with the Country of Zutpheu; East with Westphalia; and West with the Zuiderzee, and the River Issel. The Country is very plain, and without Hills, very fruitful, and abounding with Grain. The River Vidre, or Vecht, runs through it. It hath eight walled Towns, namely. Deventer, Swol, Cumpen, Vallenhove, Steenwick, Hasselt, Oetmarse, and Oldezeel. Other Towns of impor∣tance, though unwalled, are, Mep∣pel, Theelmuyden, Coevorden, Hardem∣berg, Omme, Almeloe▪ Goer, Diepnehem, Delden, and Enseede. There are in it about a hundred Villages.
Deventer described. Deventer stands upon the River Issel: Its a very strong, and well fortified place, larg, fair, well built, and well peopled. Its the Metropo∣litane of the whole Country. Swol described. Swol stands upon a little River that runneth into the Vidre. Its a very strong Town, fortified with a double Ditch, and strong Ram∣pers. Cumpen described. Cumpen stands at the entrance of Issel into Zuiderzee, and is compre∣hended in the Country of Overissel: Its a very fair, and a larg Town.
Vallenhove described. Vallenhove stands upon the Zui∣derzee: Its a good Town, and ser∣ved very well with all sorts of Vi∣ctuals. The other Towns and Vil∣lages are not worth naming, save only Ghelmuyden, which stands upon the very mouth of the Vidre, and hath a strong Castle in it. The Province of Frise-land described. The River Embs divides East-Friesland, which belongs to Upper Germany, from West-Friesland, which appertaineth to the Lower: And as it grows nearer to the Sea, so it en∣largeth it self, that the Mouth there∣of makes a Gulph. Here is the City of Embden seated, one of the most considerable Towns of all the Mari∣tine Parts, by reason of the frequen∣cy
of People, and opportunity of Commerce, which is much holpen by the Haven thereof, being held to be one of the most commodious in all the North. The Flemish-Friesland maketh two Provinces. That which joyns upon Germany is called Groninghen, from the City of the same Name. A City very well Peopled, and suspiciously seated, being the chiefest Key of those Confines. It is seated very low, as is its sister Province, which re∣tains the Name of Friesland. In Winter the Fields stand full of Wa∣ter, and there is no coming to their Habitations but by their Banks. In Summer the Land lyes dry, and yeilds great store of Pasturage. You would say, that in those parts, the Sea is interchangably turned into the Land, and the Land into the Sea. By reason of the low Situation, and great humidity there are no Woods in the Country, nor almost
any sort of Trees that may serve for firing: But where Nature is there∣in wanting, the Inhabitants make it good by their Industry. For they make use of Turfs cut out of the Earth and dryed in the Sun, instead of Wood: These are the Woods of Friesland, and the usual fire of the Inhabitants. In divers other parts of Flanders they suffer the same wants, and with the same industry provide against them. Frise anciently was a Kingdome, and reached from the Mouth of the Rhine into Denmark: but that which we here describe is VVest-Friesland: The other towards the River Vi∣surgis, is called East-Friese. VVest-Friese hath North and West the Ocean Sea: South, Zuiderzee, and the Country of Overissel: East it hath East-Friseland. Under its Sig∣niory are many Isles adjoyning unto it, the principal whereof are Schel∣nick, and Ameland, in which are divers Villages.
There are no Rivers in this Coun∣try save only Ems, and Lauwers, but Issel, and Vidre are neer to it: There are very many great Channels throughout the Country, made as well for transportation, as for dra∣ning of the waters, which otherwise would overflow all. For its a Ma∣rish Country, flat, and full of Waters: the River Ems severs it from VVest∣phalia. They have small store of Grain, but numbers of Cattel, and Turfe is their fewel: but the poorer People burn Cow-dung dried in the Sun. Many of their Kine bring two Calves a piece, and their Ewes two or three Lambs, yea, sometimes four at a fall. They have also store of good Horses. This Country is divided into three principal Counties: The County of Ostergoe, the County of VVestergoe, and the County of the seven For∣rests. All of them contain Walled Towns, and others enjoying the
like priviledges, being Rampered with Trenches and Ditches, eleven namely, Leewarden, Doccum, Frani∣ker, Bolswaerd, Sneck, Ilst, Slotem, Harlinghen with a Castle, VVorkum, Hindelopen, and Straveren. There are in it four hundred and ninety Villages. Leewarden described. Leewarden is seated two Leagues from Doccum: Its a good, and a great Town, having a strong Castle in it. Franiker is a good Town, and a University: Of the rest there is nothing remarkable. The Isle of Schellinck described. In this Island are some Villages abounding with excellent good Pa∣stures, great plenty of Cattel, and very good Fish, especially Dog-fish, which are taken in this strange man∣ner.
The men disguise themselves like Beasts, and so go to the Sea-side, at such times as they know the Fishes use to come forth to refresh themselves with the air upon the shoar. Then these disguised men fall a dancing and leaping; with which sport, the Fishes are so great∣ly delighted, that thereby they are drawn far from the Sea, while, in the mean time Nets are pitched between the Sea and them, which being done, the Dancers throw off their disgui∣sed Apparel, and discover them∣selves, whereupon the Fishes retire towards the Sea, and are taken in the Nets. The Province of Groeninghen de∣scribed with the City. Its a very great, rich, and well∣built City, under the Diocess of the Bishop of Munster. It hath a great and larg Jurisdiction; and through
the City passe divers Rivers, in divers Channels, some made by Art, and some by Nature, which make the Town very strong. Groninghen lyes upon the utmost bounds of that consine which joyns together the upper and the lower Germany. There is not in that part of the Low Countries a more Noble City than this, either for the num∣ber of Inhabitants, for the quallity of the Buildings, or for the frequency of Commerce. It forms the Body of a Province which lyes about this Ci∣ty, and which takes the Name, and almost the whole Government from thence. Its seated low, well provi∣ded of a Wall, and Ditch. It hath some works within the Circuit thereof of the Modern fashion; and the rest, for the most part, are of the ancient. It enjoyes very large Pri∣viledges.
The Province of Holland described. Holland is as much to say, a hollow Land, because the very foun∣dation of it stands upon the Water; so that if you go, or ride, the ground will tremble under you. Its boun∣ded North and West with the Sea: South with the Meuse, and Brabant: East with the Zuiderzee, and Guelder∣land. Through it run many armes of the Rhine, and Meuse, besides a number of Channels made by Art, almost between every Village of moment. It hath in it a number of Islands made by the Sea, the Rhine, and the Meuse, of divers Names, yet all com∣prehended under the name of Hol∣land. The ground is so low that they are fain to Fence it, with Dikes, and Rampers, as well against the Sea, as against almost all the Ri∣vers and Channels into which the
Sea Ebbs and Flows; so that in ma∣ny places you shall see the Sea above the Land, yet kept back by these Banks. This Country hath few Trees in it, because the ground is so spungy, that it is not able to bear the weight of a Tree; and yet lesse quantity of Fruit and Grain grows in it for the same reason. Yet have they such plenty of Grain from the Easterlings, and Denmark, as is not only suffi∣cient for their own use, but liberal∣ly to impart to other Countries. And they have such plenty of Rhe∣nish Wine from Germany that they spend more than in the Country where it grows. Flax they have none growing, and yet make more Linnen Cloth than any Country in the World. Wool also they have none of their own, and yet make an infinite number of Cloths. They have no Timber, and yet spend more in building of Ships, and Fen∣cing
their Dikes then any other Country doth. Their principal home-commodi∣ties consists in breeding of Horses, the Kine in their fat Pastures, and Meddows, and Turfe, whereof they sell an infinite quantity to other Countries. The Butter and Cheese made in a year in Holland amounts to above a Million of Crowns. But their greatest commodity comes by Fishing, and Navigation. Holland and Zealand described more fully. Both these Provinces lye on the North and West side of Flanders. In Holland, the Rhine, and the Meuse; and in Zealand, the Scheld, fall into the Sea, in such larg Channels, as loo∣sing the condition of Rivers, they seem to carry new Seas into the Sea. On the contrary, the Ocean first washing the said two Provinces
for a long tract of ground, and turning then (as it were) from a Sea to a River, it penetrates into each of them by divers Channels, and hides it self there in sundry Gulphs. From hence, joyning with the Ri∣vers, and together with them cut∣ting Zealand thorough in many pla∣ces, it makes thereof many Islands, and reduces Holland into a Peninsu∣la. And together with these three aforenamed Rivers, which are the chiefest of all Flanders, there are in Holland divers other lesser ones: And, as if Art would contend with Nature, there are added thereunto an infinite number of Channels cut out by mans hand, which are made for the greater accommodation of the Country. There are within Holland also a great number of Lakes, and standing waters; so as the situation of both these Provinces being well consi∣dered, it is to be questioned whe∣ther
the space of ground be greater which by the water is won from the Earth, or from the Water by the Earth. Nor is it less disputable, whe∣ther their Country do more abound with, or be more wanting of those commodities which men enjoy in other places. For through the con∣dition of their situation they want both Corn, Wine, Oyle, Wool, Wood, Hemp, Flax, and almost all other commodities and delights which are used in more temperate and dry Climates: And yet again, there is no Country, not only in the Northern nook, even not in any part of Europe, which abounds so much as Holland and Zealand in al∣most all the forenamed commodi∣ties, yea, even of those which are less necessary for the maintenance of humane life: So great is the ad∣vantage which these two Provinces receive by the Sea, and Rivers, whereby their commerce with all
other Countries is made so easie, which since they have introduced, and made so familiar in both the Indies, it cannot be said how much both Merchandizes, and Merchants are increased in both of them. Hence it is that they abound so much with People, and that their Cities, Towns, and Villages are so well inhabited. Yet the Sea like∣wise is as full of Ships, and other Bot∣toms, and all their watry places with other sorts of Boats, which all of them serve for habitations, espe∣cially to Mariners, and Fishers. Great is the number of People that apply themselves to these two Voca∣itons in Holland, and in Zealand. They make houses of their Ships, and of their Houses Schools: Here they are born: Here they are bred up: and here they learn their Professi∣ons. And the Marriners especially, who practising their Callings, in running so oft, and so boldly from
the one Pole to the other, and wheresoever the Sun communicates it self to Mortals, grow so expert therein, as though they may be equalled, yet they cannot be out∣done in this Seafairing Mystery, by any Nation whatsoever. In briefe, these People are generally given to Traffique, and are extraordinary in∣dustrious in Manual, and Mechanical Arts. Their greatest delight lyes in their meat, and in their Feasts, by which they temper the melancholly of their tedious Winters, which are rather long than sharp, the Country abounding much more in Rain than in Frosts. They are generally well shaped in Body; and as candid in nature as in countenance: Pleasant in their leasure times; but fierce in their Warrs, and much better in fighting at Sea than by Land: they feed most upon Fish, and are Whit∣meats, wherein their Country doth
infinitely abound. They have al∣wayes been inclined to a free Go∣vernment, and have ever tenaciously held their ancient Customs. Holland is full of Great Cities, good Towns, and infinite in Villa∣ges. But by reason of the frequency of Forreigners, and multitudes of Natives, Amsterdam hath alwayes been the chiefest City of this Pro∣vince. Even whilst commerce flou∣rished in Antwerp, great was the concourse of Forreigners to Amster∣dam: But Commerce failing in that City, by reason of the Warrs with Spain, it is so mightily encreased in this other, as Amsterdam is at this houre the place of greatest Mer∣chandizing, not only in Holland, but in all the North. In Zealand Middle∣bourg is the Town best peopled, and of greatest Traffick; yet cannot that Province come any thing neer Hol∣land, neither in circuit, people, nor plenty. Its almost impossible to
enter either of these Provinces by force: Becaus not only the chief places but even the commonest Towns are environed, either by the Sea, Rivers, Lakes, or by Earth, than which there can be none more low, nor more miery: So as it is no wonder if these People, being thus favoured by Nature, were both so sierce in taking up Arms against Spain at first, and with the like animosity maintained them till they had pro∣cured their own peace. Bentivog: Hist: of Fland: Pag. 73. Zealand. Where the Scheld falls from the more inward parts of the Land, gliding for a good space along the Confines of Brabant and Flan∣ders, it comes at once out of both those Provinces; and at the coming out, divides it self into two large Branches: the one bends towards the North, and retaines the name of Scheld; the other runs towards the West, and is called Honte. Here, both
of them growing greater, as they draw neerer the Ocean, before they fall thereinto, they joyn together in divers spacious Gulphs; among which the Islands of Zealand are ra∣ther buried than raised up; so low are they seated, and so oft doth the Sea do mischief there. This low si∣tuation is notwithstanding endea∣voured to be remedied by the Inha∣bitants with exceeding high, and firm Banks. But this remedie doth not alwayes give them security, of which the Island of Zuitbevolant hath had sad experience, it having in former time been one of the grea∣test, and best peopled of all the Zea∣land Islands. In the year 1532, the Sea arose with one of the most ter∣rible Tempests that was ever seen in those Parts, and rending the Banks asunder, and bearing down what∣soever withstood it, it overflowed from the one side to the other, and did actually drown a great part of
the Island, to the utter and most horrible destruction both of man and Beast, and a great number of intire Villages, which were misera∣bly swallowed up by that Deluge. This fell out on that side that lies neerest to Brabant and Flanders; this being the first Island that the Scheld, in forming its abovesaid Branches, cuts off, and divides from the Continent: Yet that Angle which lyes neerest to the firm land, remained still unprejudiced, and is yet inhabited. On the West, this Island looks to∣wards Flanders: on the North to∣wards Brabant: and in it stands Ter∣goes, a small Town, better fortified by Nature than by Art, being fenced on the one side by the Scheld, upon whose Banks it is situated: It is en∣vironed on an other part with cer∣tain Marish Grounds: and its forti∣fied by Art on the weakest side, which lies towards the firm land.
Holland is not above 60 Leagues in circuit, and where its broadest a man may ride over it in 6 hours; yet are there in it nine and twenty Wal∣led Towns: namely, Dordrecht, Harlem, Delft, Leyden, Goud, Amster∣dam, Einchusen, Horn, Alkmur, Pur∣merenden, Eadam, Monichedam, Wesp, Naerden, Woerden, Oudewater, Schoon∣hoven, Helstien, Vianen, Leerdam, As∣peren, Hueckelem, Gorichom, Workum, Huesden, Rotterdam, Schiedam, St Ger∣trudenberg, and Sevenbergen. Besides these there are divers little Towns, which have been Wal∣led, and enjoy the Priviledges of Walled Towns: namely, Medem∣blick, Beverwick, Muiden, Neuport, Ulaerdingen, and Gravisand. There are besides above four hundred Villages, some of which are large, and have great immuni∣ties. Holland hath also under it divers Isls: the chief are Vielandt, Texele,
Weringham, Urak, and Ens, where∣in are some Villages: as also Voorn, Goerode, Sommersaike, Corendike, and Pierskille. Dordrecht described. Dordrecht stands upon the Me∣rune, which River is compounded of the Rhine, the Meuse, and the Ling. Its a great, Rich, mighty, and well-peopled Town. The City of Harlem Described. Harlem lyes in a large Plain, divi∣ded every where into lovely Med∣dows; the ground in Holland being usually fitter for Pasture than for Tillage. On the one side it hath a Wood nigh at hand, which is but ve∣ry little, and serves rather for plea∣sure than for fireing. On the other side the River Sparen runs within the Walls, which, washing the Walls
on the outside, with an other Branch, that presently joyns with the for∣mer, makes of that part of the City, an Iland. Towards the South this River communicates with a great Lake called, Harlem Meer; and to∣wards the West, with a larg Gulph, called Tie, which, entring into o∣ther greater▪ Gulphs, falls not into, but is rather enclosed by the Oce∣an. The City is provided of a good Ditch, and good Walls, not flanked according to the Modern fashion, but with great Towers, after the ancient Mode. The circuit of the Walls is great, and the City is ve∣ry well peopled; and to the num∣ber of the Inhabitants, as well in private as in publick, doth the con∣dition of the Buildings answer. Neer this City, almost at an equall distance, within half a dayes journey, lye two of the chiefest Towns in Holland, Amsterdam on the East, and Leyden on the South.
Its a Town very well built, and beautified with goodly Meddows both within and without, but espe∣cially with a most pleasant Forrest, and environed with many goodly Villages, and Fortresses, and is seated in a most wholsom air. Its the grea∣test Town in all Holland. Here Printing was first invented, and after perfected at Mentz, whence some attribute the invention of it to that place. Delfe Described. Its a goodly larg Town well built throughout with broad and plea∣sant Streets, and beautified with sumptuous and stately Churches. It lyes upon a River which joyns up∣on the Mause.
Leyden Described. Its one of the six Capitall Towns of Holland, and chiefe of Rhineland. It hath under it nine and forty Bur∣roughs, and Villages. It abounds with all sorts of Provisions, and with Sea-fish, and fresh-water fish, and of water Foul. Its strengthened with an ancient Castle. Leyden is situate in a flat and low Country, full of Ditches, and Chan∣nels, and is beautified with pleasant Meddows, Gardens, Arbors, and Walks round about it; within it are inclosed one and thirty Islands, from one of which to the other men go in Boats: And over and above these there are nine or ten other Islands, from the one of which to the other, Bridges are built to pass over, so that in that Town are one hundred forty five Bridges, whereof one hundred and four are of Stone,
the rest of Wood. In this Town are yearly made above twelve thou∣sand Cloaths. The Town is well peopled; Her streets are large: Her Buildings well polished: Its well flanked round about: Her Ditches are every where deep, and in sine, she is a very compleat City. The Women are very fair, and the air wholsom. Goud Described. Goud is also one of the six Ca∣pital Towns of Holland. It stands upon the River Issel, not that Issel be∣fore mentioned, but another dif∣ferent from that. For this Issel ari∣seth at Isselstein in Holland, and pas∣sing by Montfort, Oudewater, and Goud: at Isselmond it entreth into the Leek, holding his course from his ri∣sing to his fall between the old Rhine that cometh from Utrecht, and the said River of Leek; and being, as it
were hemm'd in between these two Rivers, it's a strong, rich, and well fortified Town. Amsterdam described. Amsterdam standeth upon the Goulph Tie. Its one of the goodliest Havens in the World; for you have sometimes at once five hundred sail of Ships riding in the Port. The Town is so rich, that though a fleet of three hundred Sail, laden with all kind of Merchandize ar∣rive there, the Citizens within five or six Dayes will buy up all their Wares. In this Town are built year∣ly many Ships, and above twelve thousand Cloths made. Amstordam is built upon Piles under the ground, as Venice is, so that the buildings of these Towns are more chargeable under the ground than above, though the Houses are very sumptuous, and fair.
This Town is very strong, and held to be impregnable, by reason that it may be invironed at pleasure with Water, and is almost in all points like unto Venice, and little inferior to it in any thing. For its the greatest Town in all these parts of the World. Einchuysin Described. It standeth upon the very point of the Gulph Zuidersee, that fronteth Frisland, from whence it is distant not above two Leagues. It's a good Town, and in it are many Ships Built. Hoorn Described. Hoorn stands upon the Zuiderzee. It's a fair, rich, and a reasonable great Town, and hath a good Haven, and is of so great strength, by reason of the multitude of Channels round
about it, that it seems almost im∣pregnable. In this Town there is kept yearly a Mart of Butter, and Cheese, whereunto there is brought so great a quantity, as furnishes, not only these Countries, but Spain and Portugal also. Alcmair Described. Alcmair is a very rich Town, by reason that the Country round a∣bout it yeelds more plenty of Butter and Cheese than any other place in Holland. It's not strong, save only by situation, lying (as do all other Towns in that Country of Water∣lant) drowned amidst Water and Mud. It's within five hours journy of Harlem, and may be said to be the Gate whereby to enter by Land in∣to Waterlant. For that side of the Province, being shut up on one part by the Sea, on an other by the Gulph of Zuiderzee, and almost all the rest
by other waters, and Channels; and making the shape of a Peninsula, it leaves but a very narrow space of entrance by Land; and there, a little within stands Alcmair. Purmerenden Described. Purmerenden is a Town with a good Castle appertaining to the Counts of Egmont. Edan Described. Edan stands neer to the Zuiderzee. It's famous for the great number of Ships of all burdens that are built in it, and the innumerable multi∣tude of excellent good Cheeses that are made in the Country round about it. Monikdam, and Wesp, are two good little Towns, with great store of good Meddows, and Pastures a∣bout them for feeding of Cattel, and
likewise they have a great deal of Fish. Woerden hath a strong Castle in it. Oudewater stands upon the Issel. Neer hereabouts grows great plen∣ty of Hemp, of the which almost all the Cables, Cords, and Nets that the Fisher-men, and Marriners of Hol∣land, and Zealand use, are made, by which many of the Inhabitants grow very rich. Schoonhoven stands upon the Leek. Its a fair Town, and hath a com∣modious Haven, and here so great a∣bundance, and plenty of Salmonds are taken▪ that the Staple of Sal∣monds is kept here. Iselstin: about this Town is great controversie whether it belong to Holland, or to Utrecht. Vianen stands upon the River Leek. Leardam stands upon the River Ling.
Asperen stands also upon the Ri∣ver Ling, which runs through it with a pleasant murmuring noise. Hueclelen stands likewise upon the River Ling, and hath an ancient Castle in it. Gorichom stands upon the Whaal where it meets with the Ling. Its a good Town, and hath in it a strong Castle. From the Church steeple of this Town, you may see two and twenty walled Towns, and an infi∣nite number of Villages, which is a most pleasant sight to behold. Every day there is a Market in this Town of Butter, Cheese, and other Victuals of an incredible quantity brought into this Haven, and from thence transported into other Countries, and places, which makes the Inhabi∣tants here to become very rich. Workum stands upon the Whaal. Huesden hath a fair Castle, and many Villages are under its Juris∣diction.
Rotterdam stands upon the Chan∣nel of Rotter, neer to the Meuse. Its a strong, a fair, and a populous Town. St Gertrudenberg is for situation very strong: It hath the Meuse on the one side with its Name turned into Merwe, and of such a breadth, that it being there ready to fall into the Ocean, the Channel thereof seems to be a Sea rather than a Ri∣ver. There falls also into the Merwe upon another side, another little River of but a short course, called Donge, and it ends its course neer un∣to the Walls of this Town; yet is the bed thereof also so broad and deep, as its capable of any Vessel whatso∣ever. The places thereabout are so low as men walk more upon the tops of Banks, than upon plain ground. The artificial Fortificati∣ons are answerable to the situation of it.
Sevenbergen stands also upon the Merwe: Its a good Town. Unwalled Towns in Holland, and yet enjoying the Priviledges of Walled Towns, are Medemblick, which stands upon the North Sea of Holland, and in the best Country of all Holland for feeding of Cattel. It hath in it a strong Castle. Muyden, which stands by the Gulph Zuiderzee, upon the little Ri∣ver of Weight. Its a good Town, with a strong Castle on the contrary side of the River, and a Bridg to pass be∣tween the Castle and the Town. Nieuport, Ulaerding, which stands neer to the Mouth of the Meuse, a very ancient Town.
Principal Villages in Holland are Hague: Or Haghen: or Lettay stands neer to the West Sea. It is the fairest, the richest, and the grea∣test Village of Europe, containing two thousand Houses, and among them, divers that are very sumptu∣ous ones, especially the beautiful and large Royal Pallace, built like a Castle, and environed with strong and larg Ditches. In this Pallace is a Colledge of Cannons, with a very beautiful Chappel in it, and a gal∣lant Library. They will by no means Wall this Village, accounting it more honour to inhabit the fairest, and mightiest Village of Europe, than a City, which being walled, would be inferiour to many. At the Hague is a goodly Wood stored with all kind of Venison, and beautified with many Antiquities, and Medals graven in fine Marble,
and worthy to be remembred. Its not watered, nor cut through with any River. Halfe a League from the Hague is the Abby of Losdune, in which is the Tomb of Margaret Countess of Hennenberg, with an Epitaph thereon, whereby it's said, that she brought forth as many Children at one bur∣then, as there are dayes in the year. Schaghen is situate in the utmost Northern part of Holland. Its a fair, and large Village with a goodly Castle. Iselmont stands upon the River of Merwe. Its a good Village with a fair Castle. Eghemont stands neer to the West Sea. Its a brave Village with a good∣ly Monastery. Brederode is a Castle whereof the Noble Family of Brederode beareth the Name.
Walkenbourg is a small Burrough, where every September a notable Fair of Horses is kept. Catwiik standeth on the Sea, where the ancient Mouth of the Rhine that came from Utrecht then fell into the Sea. Britania is a Fort that was built by the Romans, since swallowed up by the Sea. Petten stands in the utmost of the North part of Holland, upon the Downes. The Isle that belongs to the Iuris∣diction of Holland described. In the Isle of Voorn is the Briel, which is a good and strong Town, and after it Ulissinghen. In the Ile of Voorn is also the Town Gerulit, which hath divers Villages under its Jurisdiction. The Soil of this Iland is very fat, and fruitful, and bringeth forth abun∣dance
of divers sorts of Grain, as also of the Hearb called Hellem, like to Broom, the great Roots whereof are the principal strength of the Sea banks, and Dikes of Holland and Zeland, which otherwise, being but sandy, would easily be born away with the wind. The second Isle is Goerede. In it is a Town of the same Name, being fair, and great. Somersdike is a third Island, called also Voorn, because it lyes directly against Holland. In it are divers Vil∣lages, but the chief is called So∣mersdike. Gorendike the fourth, and Pier∣schelle the fifth Isle. The Soil of both these is excellent good, and they have divers Villages in them. This Country of Holland is excee∣ding populous: The People are tall, well proportioned, cheerful, and va∣liant, very courteous, and civil. Their Towns are well built, their
Houses wonderfully well furnished, and their furniture exceeding fine, and neat above all the Countries in the World. Their Shops, Buildings, Ships, Dikes, Rampars, Channels, divises to maintain their Banks, and to preserve their Meddowes, and Pastures, by passing the water from one Channel to another, and so into the Sea, and all other works that they take in Hand, are so excellently, and skil∣fully done, that its wonderful to be∣hold them. The Women in Holland are very fair, wise, painful, and so practiced in Worldly affairs, that they imploy themselves in most kind of mens ex∣ercises, especially in Merchandize. By the Peoples industry in Mer∣chandizing, breeding of sheep, and Cattel, Shipping, Fishing &c. this little Province is wonderful Rich; and there is no one foot of it, but yeilds some profit: Yea, the very
Downs, being nothing but Sand-Hills, breed great abundance of Conies: and the very Sea-Rocks afford them great store of Eggs, and infinite number of Fowl, which they sell into divers Countries, both raw and baked, fresh and salt, which turns to their great commodity. To conclude, considering the great Wealth that groweth in this Country by Cheese, Butter, Flesh, Fish, Foul, Chickens, Eggs, Linnen, and Woolen Cloth, Turfe, and Ship∣ping, it may be called a Treasury of all good this. The Province of Utrecht Described. Utrecht hath on the North, West, and South Holland, and on the East Guelderland. It contains the City it self of Utrecht, and four other Wal∣led Towns: namely, Wick at Duer∣stede, Rhenen, Amersfort, and Mont∣fort: and under the Jurisdiction
thereof are about seventy Villages. The Country is dryer than Holland, and so very fruitful of Grain. Utrecht stands upon the Ancient stream of the Rhine, which before it brake into the River Leek, had its course this way into the Sea. Its seated in a Country so miraculously well inhabited, that in one Day you may go from Utrecht to fifty Wal∣led Towns, standing from thence in an equall distance. You may also go from Utrecht in a morning, and dine at whether you please of six and twenty walled Towns, and re∣turn again to Supper at Utrecht in your own House. The Town is larg, mighty, and ve∣ry stately, and sumptuously built, and full of goodly Cellars, and Caves, vaulted, with wonderful Art and skill. In it are many goodly Churches, whereof five are the Prin∣cipal.
Towns of the Jurisdiction of U∣trecht, are First, Week at Duersteed, which is a Town well built, standing upon the Leek, with a good Castle in it. 2. Rhenen stands also upon the Leek. About it is excellent good ground for Turfe. 3. Amesfort stands upon the little River of Eem: Its a fair Town, and well peopled. 4. Montfort, which stands upon the Issel: Its a pleasant, and a strong place. The Province of Zealand described. Zeland is as much as to say, A Land won out of the Sea; under which Name are contained fifteen or six∣teen Islands, which being united to∣gether, make one Body, and have the Title of a County. Zeland is parted Southward from Flanders with the left Arm of the
Scheld, called Hont; Eastward from Brabant, with the right Arm of the Scheld, which retaineth the ancient Name of Scheld; North, it is sever'd from Holland with a Goulph of the Sea called Flack: West it hath the Sea towards England. The Principal Islands of Zealand are seven, which are (by an Arm of the Scheld) neer to the entrance thereof into the Sea) divided into the Oriental, and Occidental. The Oriental Isles are, Schouwe, Dueland, and Tolen. The Occidental are, Wal∣karen, Zuidheveland, Northewland, and Wolfersdike. Towards the Sea these Islands are defended with Hills of Sands, called the Downs, thrown up by the surges of the Sea. Towards the South they are de∣fended with Rampars, and Banks made, and with great pains and charge maintained by the People, being ten Flemish Ells high, and twenty five thick at the bottom.
They are made of the hardest clay that can be gotten: within they are thick built with Wood, and Stone, and covered without with Mats strongly wrought. Zealand is a very fruitful Country, and produces excellent pure and bright Corn; great quantities of Co∣riander, and Bay Trees that bring forth ripe Berries, which grow not in any Province of the Low-Coun∣tries besides: It produces also abun∣dance of good Madder, and diverse other simples. As also of Turfe. It hath great abundance of excellent good Pasturage for the Cattel, and no less plenty of Fish. In this Country are eight Walled Towns: namely, Middlebourg, Si∣rixee, Cunfere, Ulissenghen, Tollai, St Martins-Dike, Romersvale, and Goses: There are diverse other smal places unwalled, and one hundred and two Villages.
The Isle of Schouwe described. This Isle hath been much encroa∣ched upon by the Sea, yet its seven Leagues in Circuit. In it are these Towns: Sirixzee, the ancienst Town in all Zealand, their Traffique is Salt, and Mather, whereof there is great abundance in this Isle. The Isle of Duveland hath its Name of the great abundance of Doves that breed therein. Its in Circuit four Leagues. In it are many Villa∣ges, and Gentlemens Farms. In the Isle of Tolen is the Town of Tolen, which gives Name to the whole Isle; and St. Martins Dike, with divers small Villages. The Occidental Isles are: Walkeren, which is ten Leagues in Circuit. Its a strong and fruitful Island, full of People, and of great wealth. In it are seven good Towns: as First, Middlebourg, so named, because it
stands in the midst of the Isle. Its a very strong Town, well Fortified, Walled, and Diked. The Streets are large, the Houses, Churches, and Monasteries very fair Built. Its a great Town of Traffique of all kinds of Merchandize. It stands not upon the Sea, but upon two Channels, one whereof called the New-Channel, is as strait as a Line, and is made so wide and deep, that a Ship of a hundred Tun may come from the Port of Rumue, even up to the very Town of Middlebourg. The second Walled Town is Veere, or Canfer, standing upon the North Coast. In it is a goodly Arsenal, wherein all furniture for Warre by Sea is used to be kept. Ulussenghen is the third Walled Town. Its the Key of the Sea of these Low-Countries, because all ships that go up to Antwerp must of ne∣cessity passe by this Town. The chiefe Villages of Walkeren are,
VVestcapelle, Dombourg, Ramekins, where standeth the Fort of Zeerbourg to secure the entrance into the Ri∣ver on that side. And Ramue, or Ar∣muyden, which hath the goodliest Haven in all Christendom. Sudbourg: and divers other good Villages are in this Isle. The next of these Iles is Zuidbes∣veland, which is the greatest of all the Isles of Zealand. Much of it was swallowed up by the Sea, Anno Christi 1532. Romerswald is the prin∣cipal Town in it, seated upon the East towards Berghen. Goes, or Ter∣goes is an other Town that stands upon the North coast: Besides there are many good Villages in this Iland: with pleasant Woods, and Thickets, well stored with Fowl, and Wild Beasts, for Hauking and Hunting. Northbeveland is almost wholly swallowed up by the Sea. VVolfers∣dike is the least of all these Islands having only two Villages in it.
The City of Antwerp described. Antwerp lyes on the right side of the Scheld, and extending its Walls for a long space on that side which looks towards the River, it after∣wards makes a great compass to∣wards the other which commands the Fields. That River cannot be mastered by a more Noble City, nor that City be watered by a more no∣ble River. It flourisheth exceeding∣ly in the number of Inhabitants, in beautiful Buildings, and in Merchan∣dizing, which is chiefliest occasioned by the commodiousness of the Scheld, it being a River of so great breadth and depth, and ebbing, and flowing so far into the Sea, as that it is there capable of the greatest Vessels which Sail upon the Sea.
Towards the Field side, the City is environed with one of the state∣lyest Walls that can be seen, as well for the breadth of the Platform within, as for the Noble Bastions without; and the Ditch is every where answerable. On the other side towards the River, the River it self serves for a defence, and there∣fore on that side, there is only a single Wall. The Platform of the Wall to∣wards the Fields is of such a breadth as many Rowes of Trees stand round about it, so as it serves no less for delight than for defence. Antwerp is in, or rather joins upon Brabant, of it self making one of the seventeen ancient Provinces, by the name of The Marquisat of the Sacred Empire. The Province of Flanders joyns upon the contrary side of the River, which place partakes thereby of all the advantages afforded, both by so large a River, and of a City of such Merchandizing.
The Citadel of Antwerp stands upon the Banks of the Scheld, upon the South side of the City. It is a Pentagon, composed of five Royal Bastions. Of all other modern For∣tifications, it hath been esteemed so famous, as it hath served for a Pat∣tern to almost as many Citadels as have been built in any Country since. Some of her Flanks lye to∣wards the City, and the rest lean to∣wards the Champian; respect being here had (as in all other Castles) to be able on one side to command the City, and on the other, to re∣ceive necessary succour upon all oc∣casions from without. There lyes a good space of ground between the Citadel and the City.
The Noble Province of Flanders Described. Flanders is now bounded on the North with the Sea, and the branch of the Scheld that is called Hont: South with Artois, Hainault, and Vermandois. East with the ancient Scheld, and part of Haynault: West partly with the Sea towards England, and partly with the River Au, and part of Artois that borders upon Callice, and Boloign. The length of it from Antwerp to the New-Foss is thirty three Leagues; The breadth from Ni∣noven to Graveling thirty Leagues. The aire is very wholsome, espe∣cially Southward: The Country flat: The Soil fruitful, especially towards the Sea, and towards France. They breed great store of Cattel, especially of good Horses.. Flanders hath divers Rivers run∣ning through it: namely, Scheld, Lis,
and Tender, and many other small streams: the rest is supplied with Channels made by hand to receive in the Sea, It hath many pleasant Hills, especially Flanders Gallicant. There are in Flanders 28 Walled Towns: The three Capitall are Gant, Bruges, and Ipre: the others are Lisle, Douay, Tournay, Courtray, Oudenard, Alost, Hulst, Termond, Bie∣ruliet, Neuport, Scluse, Dunkirk, Grave∣ling, Bourbourg, Damme, Dixmude, Uvern, Ardembourg, Ninove, Berg de St Winoc, Montgerard or Grammont, Gassel, Denise, Orchies, and Lanoy. Towns unwalled, yet rich, fair, and populous, are about thirty, the chief are Ostend (now fortified with Ram∣pars and Ditches) Oudembourg, Mes∣sine, Belle, Poperinge, Toroue, Ostbour, Axsele, Middlebourg, Loo, Werwick, Blonchberg, Houck, Rosselar, Tielt, Ghistell, Eeclo, Lombartside, Steechem, Houscot, Munchereed, Mardike, Mee∣ren, Hallewin, Wastene, Steegberg, Mer∣gen,
Haesbrook, and Armentiers. Be∣sides these there are one thousand one hundred fifty four Villages, many of them as great, rich, and po∣pulous as any in Europe. As also ma∣ny Castles, Fortresses, and Noble∣mens, and Gentlemens Houses, very beautifull to behold. What great alterations the King of France hath made of late, I cannot give an ac∣count. This country is divided into three parts, namely, Flanders Flamigeant, so called, because the Flemish Language is used in it: This is the chief part of the Country. The second is Flan∣ders Gallican, so stiled, because the Walloon Language (which is a ba∣stard French) is used therein. The third is Flanders Imperial, because it was long under the obedience of the Empire. The first lyes towards the Sea, the second towards the Walloon Countries.
Flanders Flamingunt described. Its bounded North with the Sea, South with the River Lie, and Flan∣ders Gallican; East with the Scheld, and the Imperial Flanders; West with the New Foss, and with Artoys. The Soil is all Sand, and naught for Wheat, but produceth plenty of Oats, Beans, Pease, Vetches, Flax, Hemp, and very good Fruits of di∣vers sorts. In this part of Flanders are the three Capitall Towns, namely, Gaunt, Bruges, and Ipre, and Le Franc, which makes a fourth. In it also are the four Parts of the Sea, with Berg de St Winnoc, and many Towns wal∣led and unwalled.
The City of Gaunt described. Gaunt stands about four Leagues from the Sea upon the Rivers, Scheld, Lis, Lieve, besides which, there are a number of Brooks and fine Fountains which come into the City, some by natural course, and some by Art, all which at their issue out of the Town, being received in∣to great Ditches made by hand, pass into the Sea by a great Channel, car∣ried by infinite pains, and charges for the space of four great Leagues into the Sea of Zealand neer to the Gulph called Sass. Not long since also they have opened a certain lit∣tle Island, which before stopped the course of their Ships, so that a reaso∣nable Boat may passe from the Sea to Gaunt, to the inestimable profit of Town and the Country thereabouts. Gaunt is very strong both by Na∣ture and Art, very beautiful, and
one of the greatest Cities in Chri∣stendom. The Walls within are seven miles in Circuit, and without more then ten miles, but it hath many wast places within it. There is a Citadel in it built by Charles 5th 1540. and the buildings in general are ve∣ry stately and magnificent. Within the Walls of Gaunt are six and twenty Isles, made by the Rivers and Channels above men∣tioned; and there are ninety eight Great Bridges, and an infinite num∣ber of smaller, under which great Boats pass with Victuals, and Mer∣chandize. There are six Principal Water Mills, and above one hundred Wind Mills, and of hand and Horse-mills an infinite number. Churches great and small, Mona∣steries, and Hospitals &c. fifty five, as also many goodly Libraries, and its divided into seven Parishes. There are also divers Schools for the bringing up of poor Children at
the Town charges. The Trade of Weavers is of the greatest estimati∣on, by reason of the Linnen and Woollen Cloths, Serges, Tapestry, Fustians, Bucherams, Wosted, and such other stuff, made in this Town and Province. The City of Bruges described. Bruges is so called of the multitude of goodly Bridges about the Town, and stands in a pleasant Plain, three Leagues from the Sea. It hath no Ri∣ver but a Channel made by Art cal∣led the Reye, so large and deep that it seems to be a great River. It's di∣vided into divers Branches, which being navigable, pass to many parts of the Town; and where they issue out, being all united together, they pass to Dam, and from thence to Scluse, where they discharge them∣selves into the Sea. But since by infinite charge, and marveilous in∣dustry
they have cut a larger and deeper Channel, by which a Ship of a Hundred Tun may passe from the Sea up to the very Town. Bruges is a rich, fair, and a mighty Town: the Circuit of the Walls within is four Italian miles and a quarter. It's wonderfully peopled, and the buildings are passing sump∣tuous, the Streets large, and strait, and it hath in it many goodly pla∣ces, especially the Market place, from the which the six principall Streets pass strait to the six Princi∣pall Gates, which is very pleasant to behold. In Bruges are above 60 Churches, the chief whereof is St. Donate. The City is divided into sixty quarters, and into nine Parishes. There is a goodly place in the City called the lodging of the Water, wherein is a wonderful Engine turned by a Horse that draws up water, and disperses it by Pipes all the Town over. Here
are made much Fustian, Serges, Sayes, Buckrams, Woollen Cloth, Tape∣stry, and Silk, the Citizens are ci∣vil and courteous. The Women fair, gratious, and sober in their be∣haviour. The City of Ipre described. It takes its Name of the Brook Hypre which runs through the midst of the Town. Its strongly seated, and hardly can be besieged. Its much fortified by Art, and made al∣most impregnable. Its a fair and rea∣sonable rich Town, and well built, though the houses are most of Tim∣ber. In it are such multitudes of Leaden Pipes to convey Water from the River and Channels into every private House, that its com∣monly said, That the Foundation of Ipre is all Lead. The Hall for the sale of Cloths is ancient and admi∣rable. Here are made many Cloths,
Serges, Sayes, &c. The Jurisdiction of Ipre is very great, and extends over the Country round about it. The Inhabitants are very Civil and peaceable. Scluse described. Scluse is one of the goodliest Ha∣vens in Europe, being able to contain five hundred Ships. The Town is strong, being double-Ditched. It hath a strong Castle, but severd from the Town. Scluse doth not lye altogether upon the Sea-side, as doth Ostend, but a little more within Land. Yet there runs a Channel on the right hand of it, whereinto the Sea enters, and is large enough to receive any Vessel whatsoever. On the other side thereof, some lesser Channels joyn with this greater, so as there is but little mannageable Earth, unless it be upon one side which is towards
Brugus, an Island of about two Leagues about, lyes almost over a∣gainst Sluce, between the bigger Channel, and some others on that part, all which fall into the Sea, and its called Cassante: And Ostend lyes upon the same Sea-coast upon the West, about sive Leagues from Sluce: And Flushing lyes much upon the same distance towards the East. Ostend described. Ostend stands upon the Sea-shoar, in the midst of a Marish ground, and of divers Channels which come from the Continent: But chiefly its en∣vironed almost on all sides by two of the greatest of those Channels by which the Sea enters into the Land, and grows so high, when it is full Sea, as that you would rather think the Town was buried than si∣tuate in the Sea. Formerly it was an open Town, and was rather an
habitation for Shepherds than for Souldiers. But the opportunity of the Seat being afterwards considered, the Houses were enclosed with a Platform instead of a Wall; and from time to time, the Line was so flankt round about, as it proved to be one of the strongest Towns in all Flanders. Its divided into two parts, called The Old Town, and The new Town. The former, which is the lesse, stands towards the Sea: The latter, and greater, lyes towards the Land. The old Town is fenced from the fury of the Sea by great Piles of Wood driven into the ground, and joyned together for the defence of that Part, and there the Waves suf∣ficiently supply the office of a Ditch. The Channels may be said to do the like on the sides, especially at full Sea, when, of Channels, they be∣come Havens, being then capable of any kind of Vessel; and by them, at all times, Barks of a middle size enter
into the Ditches, and by them into divers parts of the Town it self: The Town is but of a small compass, and is ennobled rather by its situa∣tions and fortifications, than by any splendor of the Inhabitants, or Buil∣dings. Nieuport described. Nieuport is a good little Town with a Castle in it. The Haven is good and well frequented. A League and a half from the Town is the fair and famous Abby of St. Ber∣nard, that hath an excellent Library of all sorts of Books belonging to it. Dunkirk described. Dunkirk hath a Haven that is rea∣sonable good, and commodious. Be∣sides the former Fortifications of this Town, our English lately, when
they had taken it, strengthened it very much, and since then the French King hath much enlarged and For∣tified it. Berg St. Winoc described. This Town was so named from a goodly rich Abby, built upon an Hill, together with the Town, to the honour of St Winoc an Englishman, of a Holy Life. It hath a number of good Villages under it. The Coun∣try about it is very fruitfull. In this Town are made many Cloths, and an infinite number of Serges, the best and finest in all Flanders. Damme describe. Damme was sometimes an Haven Town, by reason that the Sea flow∣ed to the Walls thereof, and there∣by made it mighty and rich, but now its in a very poor estate. Here in
May is a great horse Fair kept. Dixmund described. Dixmund is a pretty fine little Town, in which every year in July is a Fair of Horses, and other Mer∣chandize. Wern is a good fair Town, and hath the Title of a Viscounty. Bourbourg is a fine and a strong little Town appertaining to the Kings of France. Graveling stands upon the River of Aa neer to the Sea: Since the recovery of Calais by the French, its made the strongest Fort of the Low-Countries, having five Bulwarks. It appertains to the King of France. Cassel was sometime a mighty and a famous Town. Now its in a reasonable good estate, but its a ve∣ry small Town. Courtray stands upon the River Lis, which passeth through the midst
of it. Its one one of the ancientest Towns in Flanders: Its a good Town, and well built, and hath a strong Castle. Its so fortified that its made almost impregnable. In it are made great quantities of Woo∣len Cloth, and of very fine Linnen. Oudenard is one of the best estee∣med Towns in Flanders, both for its situation, Traffique, and people. It lyes upon the Scheld, almost in the midway, between Turnay and Gaunt. Its begirt with a good Wall, and the Wall with a large Ditch, within the Wall its furnished with good Plat∣forms. It hath on one side an emi∣nent rising ground which commands the Town. In it is made great store of Tapestry and Linnen. Ardenbourg, formerly called R∣dembourg, was once a chiefe Town in Flanders. Its now a good little Town; their Church is one of the fairest in Flanders: These are all walled Towns.
The Unwalled Towns are Middlebourg is environed with Trenches, Banks, and Rampars. Comines stands upon the River Lis, where is a fair Castle, and a rare Library. VVervick also stands upon the River Lis, and hath a very fair Church in it. In this place, not many years since was born Martin Chaste∣lin, who, notwithstanding he was born Blind, yet made all sorts of Tools and Instruments of Musick, and played well on them, and that without any Master, or Instructor. Merim stands upon the River Lis. Its a good Town, well Ditched, with a Draw-bridg, and is made a very strong Fort. The other Towns have little observable in them, and I passe them over.
Flanders Gallicant described. It hath on the North Flanders Fla∣mingant: On the South the Coun∣try of Cambresy. On the East the Scheld; and on the West the River Lis, and the Earldom of Artoys. Its a small Country, but the Soil there∣of is very fat and fruitful of all things, especially of Wheat. It pro∣duceth also Mather, and excellent good Oade. In it are great plenty of excellent Pastures for Cattel. In it are contained the fair Towns of Leisle, Dovay, and Orchies: The great Signiory of Tournay, and the Coun∣try of Tournesy, &c. The Citie of Lisle described. Its so called, because formerly the Country about it was nothing but Ponds, Pools, and Marishes, though now by Art, and industry, they are
dryed up, and made firm Land. Round about the walls of the town, and of the Castle, passeth a small Brook, which, at the Village of Du∣ellesmont, falls into the Lis. In it is a very strong Castle: Its a very good, and ancient Town, well built, and well inhabited by Gentlemen, and Merchants, and Curious Artificers. It hath under it a goodly Signiory, and is the cheife Town in this Flan∣ders. Dovay Described. Dovay is the 2d Town of this Country: It standeth upon the River Scarp. Its a good, and a strong Town, having many Fountains, fair Buildings, and a great number of Churches. It hath Jurisdiction over a great Country, and is a place of great Traffique, and a University.
Orchies described. Orchies is a good and a pleasant Town, wherein are made many Ser∣ges, and such like Stuffs. Lanoy is a strong place, where is made much Linnen and Velvet. Espency is a fair and a famous Vil∣lage, having the Title of a Principa∣lity. Armentiers is so mighty and rich a Village, and so well peopled, that its priviledged as a Walled Town. Between Armentiers and Steeg∣heers is a fruitful and pleasant Coun∣try, called La Love, having in it four great Villages, whereof the chief is Leventis, being priviledged as a Walled Town.
The City of Tourney described. The City of Tournay, together with the Country of Tournesis, hath a particular Government of its own. It lyes in the Gallican Flanders, and may be numbred among the No∣blest Cities of all Flanders, as well for its ancient Foundation, as for being amply furnished, both with People, Traffique, and Buildings. Its on all sides surrounded with fair and fruitful Fields, and through the midst of it (under divers Bridges) runs the Scheld, a River which be∣gins here to ennoble it self; not be∣ing well Navigable before. The English in King Henry the eighth's time, while they held it, built a good Castle therein, which in that Age was esteemed strong, but not to be compared to the later Royal Fortifications. Its only flanked with Towers after the old fashion. On
the lower side of the Scheld joyns the Ditch, which on the upperside is wholly dry. Its a fair, rich, great, and mighty Town. The Houses are beautifully built: The Monasteries, Churches, and Convents are very stately and Magnificent. Mortaign stands in the Country of Tournesis, and upon the River of Scheld. It was once a strong Town, but now is a Village of small ac∣count. St. Amond is also in the Country of Tournesis. Its a goodly Village standing upon the Scarpe with Gates and Ditches like a City. In it is one of the chiefest Abbyes in Flanders. Flanders Imperial described. This Country is very small, being contained between the Rivers of Scheld and Dender, all along upon the Frontires of Brabant. Its now called the County of Alost, of the
Principal Town thereof. Alost stands upon the Dender. Its a good, and a very strong Town, and hath yearly a great Fair of Hops. To this County of Alost is also an∣nexed the little Country of Waes, and divers Villages: As Hulst, which is Walled. Axele, Bouchout, and Assenede, which four Towns have divers Villages under their Jurisdiction. Under it also are two Principalities, namely, Steen∣huyse, which is a very good Village, and Gaur, with a strong Castle in it. Tenremond stands upon the Mouth of the River Denre, where it entreth into the Scheld. Its a rich Town, and strong both by Nature and Art, and a place of great Trading. Montgerhard, in French Grandmont stands upon the Denre. A pretty fine and pleasant Town. Bornhem is a good Village with a strong Castle in it, and hath divers other subject to it.
Rupelmond stands upon the Mouth of the River Rupel, where it entreth into the Scheld. The Soyl through all Flanders Imperial is excellent good and fruitful: Especially it pro∣duces much excellent good Madder. The Province of Artoys described. Artoys is bordered North with the River Lis, and the New Channel which seperates it from Flanders: South with Dourlans, which is the Frontire of Picardy: East with Flan∣ders Gallicant, and the Country of Cambresis: West, towards Monstru∣eil upon the Sea, it borders again upon Picardy. The Soyl is very fruit∣ful, the air wholsome, the Country wants no commodity, but only Wine: It yeilds much Corne wherewith it furnisheth its Neighbours. In Artoys are twelve Walled Towns, and eight hundred fifty four Villages, and many Abbies, Con∣vents, and Monasteries. The chief Towns are, Arras, St. Omers, Betune, Aire, Bapaumes. The lesser are He∣dinsfort,
Renty, St. Pol, Perue, Lillers, La Bassee, and Lens. The City of Arras described. Arras stands within a Bow shot of the Scarpe. Its a very great Town, but divided into two parts, each part having a several Wall; the one named the City, and appertains to the Bishop; the other The Town, and be∣longs to the Prince. The City is little, but faire, and very well Forti∣fied. In it is the sumptuous Church of the Virgin Mary, in which is a rare Library. The Town is very large and wonderful strong, both by Nature and Art. The Streets are fair and broad, and the Market place scarcely to be matched. In the Town are many Cellars and Vaults, very artificially made, and paved, to withdraw their Families into, in case of a Siege. It hath a great Jurisdiction over many places
about it; and in it are made many excellent Serges. St. Omer Described. It hath its name of one St. Omer, who first built a Church of that Name, and stately Abbyes of great Revenues. St. Omer is a Frontire Town a∣gainst France, and stands upon the River Aa. Its a very strong Town, and well peopled, and hath a Coun∣try of very great importance under it, and Jurisdiction over many Vil∣lages. Neer unto it is a goodly Lake of fresh Water, in which are many little Islands (yet not so little but you may put a good number of Cattel to feed in many of them) the which are moveable, and may be drawn with a Cord, fastened to the Rushes that grow in them, which way you will; and under them are multitudes of Fishes, that defend
themselves there from ll Weathers. Betune described. Betune is a good, and a strong Town, where is made great plenty of excellent good Cheese that is sold into divers Countries. Aire described. Aire stands upon the River Lis. Its a good, and a strong Town, with a Castle of great Antiquity. The houses in this Town are very well and orderly built. Bapaulm described. Bapaulm is a little, but a strong Town, because it cannot be besie∣ged for want of fresh Water, which is not to be had within three Leagues thereof. It hath also a very strong Castle, and a large Coun∣try,
and a good Jurisdiction under it. Renty is but a Castle with a good Village standing upon a little Brook; yet its a very strong place. Hesdinfert is marvelously well sea∣ted upon the River Canch. Its one of the most strong and defensible places in all the Low-Countries, and hath many large Priviledges; It's a fair Town, and well Peopled, and is now called Hesdin. St. Pol hath of a long time been honoured with the Title of an Earl∣dom, and hath a goodly Jurisdicti∣on over a large Country, and a great Revenue. Perue is under the Jurisdiction of St. Pol, and is a place of good impor∣tance. Lilliers is a reasonable passable Town. Lens is but a little Town, yet hath a large Territory, and Jurisdi∣ction.
The Villages of Artoys, that be of any importance, having the Pri∣viledges of Markets, and Fairs, are Avennes le Comte, Aschicourt, St Ve∣naut, Courriers, Blangis, Ligny, and Pas. The City of Cambray described. Cambray stands upon the Scheld which runs through the midst of it. Its seated upon the edg of the Fron∣tiers made by the two Provinces of Henault and Artoys, on Flanders side, towards France, opposite to Piccar∣dy. It enjoyes a free Government under the Spiritual and Temporal Dominion of its Arch-Bishoprick. It is endowed with very large Privi∣ledges: Full of Noble Churches, whereof the Cathedral is such as hath not the like in any of the neigh∣bouring Cities. Its sufficiently pro∣vided also of other Edifices both for use and Ornament. Yet the Inhabi∣tants
are not answerable in number to the Houses; many of which being Ecclesiasticks, Forraign Commerce and Merchandizing doth rather lan∣guish than flourish there: Neither doth the Scheld yeild commodity for it. For the River hath its Head but a little above the City, and therefore is hardly Navigable here∣about. The City of Cambray is about a League in Compass, and is enviro∣ned with an Ancient Wall, flankt for the most part after the ancient Mode, but with many Bulwarks al∣so, after the Modern Way of Fortifi∣cation. It hath a Ditch which is very broad and deep on one side, where∣into (for the most part) the Scheld runs: The rest by reason of its height, is dry, but so much the dee∣per. On the East stands a Citadel with four Royal Bulworks, having a great half-Moon between two of them which are next to the Fields,
and divers other defences, for the Custody of the Ditch. Here is made much sine Linnen called Cambrick. Cambray hath under it a goodly Signiory and Jurisdiction, called Cambresis, in which are divers Vil∣lages, and places of importance, and among others, the Castle of Cambre∣sy, six Leagues from the City, in which the Peace between the chief Princes of Christendom was con∣cluded, Anno Christi 1559. The Province of Haynault Described. Haynault is so named of the Ri∣ver Hayne which runs through it. Its bordered North with Brabant, and Flanders; South with Champaign and Picardy; East with the County of Namur, and part of the County of Lieg; West with the Scheld, and part of Flanders Gallicane. Its twenty Leagues long, and sixteen Broad:
The Aire is wholsome, and the Soyl excellent good by reason that the Country is watered with many Ri∣vers, namely, the Scheld, the Sambre, the Tender, and many other small Ri∣volets. There are also in it many Lakes, Marishes, Ponds, Pools, Foun∣tains, goodly Woods, and pleasant Forrests. Haynault aboundeth with fragrant and fair Pastures, and Meddows for all kinds of Cattel; with good fruits, and profitable Trees, especially with great plenty of good Corn. In di∣vers parts of it are Iron Mines, Lead, and quarries of Stone for all kinds of Building, yea, of the Touch-stone. There is also great store of excellent white Lime and Sea-Cole. In Haynault there are twenty four Walled towns, namely, Montz, Valen∣ciennes, Bouchain, Quesnoy, Conat, Lan dresy, Anesnes, Chimay, Mariembourg, Phillips Ville, Beamount, Mauberg, Bovais, Bins, Reux, Segny, Brain le
Comte, Eughien, Halle, Lessme, Cheure, Ath, St Guisline, and Leuze. There are also in it nine hundred and fifty Villages, with many Castles and Sig∣niories: Many of these Villages are great, and fair, and have Titles of Honour annexed unto them, as Pe∣quicourt, Fontayn, Laling, Montigny, Antonig, Barlamon, Barbanson, Aime∣ries, and many others. The City of Montz described. The City of Mons receives its Name from its situation, which in their Language signifies a Mountain or Hill. But the rise of the Earth there is so gentle, as it cannot be said to be Mountainous. Its a very No∣ble City, as well for the concourse of People, as for Commerce. It hath many good Houses in it, and there the King of Spains Counsel used to sit, which administred justice to all the Country. All which Preroga∣tives
gave it the precedency over all other Cities in the Province of He∣nault. It commands large and spa∣cious Fields round about it, which may be questioned, whether they abound more in Pasture or in Til∣lage: Nor is the Territory there of less rich in Woods, nor generally indeed all the rest of that Province of Henault. This City is stronger by its natural situation than by manual industry. It is cut through on the lower side by a little Rivolet called Trulla, which as soon as it goes out of it, falls into another, somewhat bigger called Hain, which crossing through the Province before it be gotten quite out, falls likewise into the Scheld. This Province of He∣nault looks towards the South of Campania and Picardy in France. Mons (saith another) is a Noble City for situation, Inhabitants, and Buildings. Its a very strong Town both by Nature and Art, and may be
environed with Water at pleasure. The City Wall is very strong, and besides its fortified with three large and deep Ditches, and with an an∣cient Castle. The Town is great and fair, and beautified with sumptuous Buildings, both publick, and private, with very clear Fountains, and with Rich Citizens, and Artists. The City of Valenciennes described. Valenciennes stands upon the Scheld, and the little River Rovelle, the which, besides that they make ma∣ny goodly, and strong Isles in the City, pass almost under every par∣ticular mans House, to the great beauty and commodity of the place. The seat of this Town is so strong (besides the Fortifications made by Art) that it may at pleasure be drowned upon one side with water; and its so defended by Hills on the other side, that it can hardly be be∣sieged
but by two Camps, and there∣fore is almost impregnable. In the City is a Store-house, where great store of Artillery, and Ammunition is kept for the defence of the place. Its a very goodly, large, and beau∣tiful City, as well for private, as for publike Buildings, namely, Chur∣ches, Monasteries, &c. Especially our Lady Church is very fair, being built after the ancient Mode, with three Vaults, sumptuous Arches, and goodly Pillars of Marble, and Por∣phyrie. St. John's Church also is a stately building; but the Town House, called La Hall, is the stateliest of all the rest, being built all of square Stone curiously wrought, and of such greatness and magnitude, that it alone were a sufficient Orna∣ment to the whole City. On the left side of this Hall there is an excellent Building of a great heighth, in which is a Clock and a Dial, shewing not only the Hours
of the day and night, but also the course of the Moon, and of all the Planets, and likewise of the Months, and divers other things. Under this Clock-House, and so under Covert, is the Corn-Market, being great and large; and above in the Hall is a place to sell Wool and Cloth: There are also in it Fencing Schools, and places for all Publick Courts, Ma∣gistrates, and Officers of the Town: A Gaol, or common Prison: So that in this one Building is compact to∣gether all Offices, serving for the commodity and glory of the Town. In this City also are divers Mona∣steries, Hospitals, and other Religi∣ous places endowed with good Re∣venues. There is also in it a fair Col∣ledg, and many Schools, for the Edu∣cation of Orphans, and poor Chil∣dren, wherein they are taught di∣vers Arts and Occupations. And in it are Cloths, Woosted, Linnen, as fine as Cambrick, changeable Taf∣faties,
and almost all sorts of Mercery Wares, &c. It hath a great Jurisdi∣ction, and enjoyes great Priviledges, and Franchises, more than any other Town of the Low-Countries. Its ve∣ry well peopled. Its the most Mer∣chantlike Town in all these parts. Bouchain stands upon the River Scheld. The Town is Strong, and the Castle is counted impregnable. Its the Principal County of Osternand. Quesnoy is a strong Townin, which are made Woosteds, and great store of Linnen, by which means there is great Traffique in this Town. Conde also stands upon the Scheld. Its a good little Town. Landrecy stands upon the River Sambre: The Town is little, but very strong. Avesnes stands upon the River Hypre. Its a good and a strong Town. Chimay stands in a Forrest upon the little River Blanche. Its well
built, with a fair Pallace for the Prince, a goodly garden, and a La∣byrinth. Mariembourg stands between the Rivers Blanch and Noire. It's a very strong Town having four great Bul∣warks. Philipvill is so fortified, that it's held to be impregnable. Beaumont is a fine little Town standing upon the knapp of a goodly Hill, whereof it beareth the Name. Maubeug stands upon the River Sambre which passeth through it. It's a good Town of Merchandize. Bavays Vallone is a very small Town. Bins, or Binch stands upon a branch of the River Hayn, and is a good and pleasant Town. Reux is a little Town, but stands very pleasantly in a fruitful Soyle, and hath many Villages under its Jurisdiction.
Soigny stands upon the little Ri∣ver Sein. Breine le Comte is a very ancient Town. Enghien is a good little Town wherein great store of Tapestry of all sorts of prizes is made. Halle stands upon the River Sein which runs through it. Lessny: Through it passeth the Denre; and here great store of Lin∣nen Cloth is made. Cheure stands upon the Little River Hunell: It's a pleasant little Town. Ath hath the Denre running through it. It's a little, but a fair, plea∣sant, and rich Town, because great plenty of Linnen is made in it. St. Guislem taketh its Name from the Abby that stands in it, which is the chiefest Abby in all Haynault. Leuse is a good Town. Among the Villages in Haynault, many of them have strong Castles in them, and though unwalled, enjoy
the Priviledges of Walled Towns. There is nothing else memorable in them. The Province of Luxembourg Described. Luxembourg is a Dutchy. It bea∣reth the Name from the principal Town thereof. Its bounded North with the Countries of Lieg, and Na∣mur: South with Lorrain: East with the River Moselle, and the Bi∣shoprick of Trevir: And West with part of the Forrest of Ardenne. Its replenished with Mountains, and Forrests, and containeth the greatest part of the Forrest of Arden∣ne: Its divided into two Parts; the one called Famenne, which is fruit∣ful of Corn, and many other good things, and hath some Mines, and divers sorts of good Stone, of some of which, excellent good Lime is made. It yeilds also some Wine. The
other part is called Ardenne, which is barren, and produces little Corn; but hath store of Red and Fallow Deer, Goats, Hares, Conies, and ex∣ceeding great plenty of Fowle: As also wild Hens of two Sorts, one as large as Turky Cocks, called Limoges, the other as big as our common Hens, called Bruiers. Many Rivers run through this Country, especially the Moselle. Luxenbourg contains in circuit a∣bout seventy Leagues, and in it are twenty Walled Towns: namely, Luxembourg, Arlon, Rodemark, Theon∣vil, Gravemakre, Coningmakre, Dick∣rich, Vireton, Estewerck, Vandalen, Ba∣stonac, Mommedi, Neuschasteau, Dan∣villers, Marvil, La Roch en Ardenenne, Durby, St. Vite, Marche and Salme. Divers Castles there are in this Country very ancient and Noble, like to little Towns. There are like∣wise in this Dutchy one thousand
one hundred sixty nine Villages, di∣vers of which are fair, and great, as La Rochotte, Avio, and St. Hubert. The City of Luxembourg De∣scribed. Luxembourg hath the River Elze passing through it. Its large, and a very strongly seated City, yet but reasonably built, having been often destroyed by the Warrs. Arlon hath suffered much by the Warrs. Rodemark is a good little Town with a strong Castle. Theonville stands upon the Moselle, having a goodly Bridg over the Ri∣ver. Its a marvelous strong Town. Gravemackren, and Coninkmackren stand both upon the Moselle. Bastonack is a good little Town, and is commonly called Paris en Ar∣denne.
Mommedi stands: upon an high Hill, at the foot whereof runs the River Cluirs. Its a strong Town. Neuscastle is also a strong Town. Danvilliers, is a fair and a strong Town. Marvil stands upon the Chiers. St Vite is a little, but a very plea∣sant and fine Town. Salme is a good and a rich Town. Ivoy, Chimy, and some other Towns have been so often destroy∣ed in the Warrs between France and Spain that there is nothing remar∣kable in them. No Province in all the Low-Countries, is so replenished with No∣bility as this Dutchy of Luxembourg, who govern their Subjects and Te∣nants like to the Peasants of France, or rather like Slaves, contrary to the liberty of the rest of the Provinces of the Low-Countries. Here they hate Laws and Lawyers, and end
their controversies among them∣selves without any Process. The Province of Namur Described. Namur is bounden with Brabant, Haynault, Luxembourg, and Lieg. Its a small Country, and yet a∣bounds with Riches, and many good things. Its stored with Peo∣ple, and those very industrious, and faithful to their Prince. The No∣bles are valiant and well used in Military Discipline. The air is very wholsome, the Country is well watred with many Rivers and Brooks, especially the Mouse, and the Sambre, which besides the be∣nefit of Portage, furnisheth the Country with abundance of Fish. Its well replenished with Woods, and Forrests, the greatest whereof is called Marlaign, which abounds
with all sorts of Venison, and Fowl. The Valleys produce abundance of Corn and Grain: The Hills are full of goodly Woods, excellent cleer Fountains, rich Mines of Iron, and some of Lead, Quarries of fine Stone for Building, as Marble of all sorts and Colours, Black, White, Taw∣ny, and Porphiry, or Jasper, which is red streaked with White, Blew Marble, but mingled with White, which perfects the beauty of it. Besides divers other sorts of fine Stone. They have also excellent Lime, and Sea-coal: Much Salt∣peter is also made in this Country. But especially the Forges of Iron are so many that the whole Country seems to be Vulcans Forge. In the Country of Namur are four Walled Towns; Namely, Na∣mur, which gives name to the whole Country, Bovines, Charlemont, and Valencourt. And there are be∣side
in it one hundred eighty two Villages, and many fair and Rich Abbeys. The City of Namur described. It stands between two Hills, up∣on the River Meuse, and through it passeth the Sambre, which there falleth into the Meuse. Its a fair and a rich Town with a strong Castle in it. Bovines stands upon the Meuse, and is a reasonable good Town. Charlemont is a Town wonderful strong, and of exquisite fortificati∣ons, though but small. Valencourt stands in a very fruit∣ful Country, and is a good little Town.
The Principal Villages in this Country of Namur are Dave, which is a goodly Village, with a strong Castle standing upon the Meuse. It hath also a great juris∣diction, and is honoured with the Title of a Vicounty. Other Villages of note are Floren, Vascy, and Sanson. These are all the Low-Country Provinces: Yet because the Bishop∣rick of Lieg, and the Town of Aquisgrane, are Neighbours, Friends, and in League with them, take this brief Description of them.
The Bishoprick of Liege described. This Country North and West is bordered with Brabant: East with the Meuse and Namur, and South with Luxembourg. The air is very wholsom, the Country pleasant, and abounding with all kind of Grain▪ and Fruits. As for Flesh, Fish, Ve∣nison, and Fowl of all sorts▪ there is great abundance, and of tast excel∣lent good. Mines there are also of Iron, and some of Lead, and veins of Brim∣stone, and a few of Gold that is very fine. Quarries there are also of Stone excellent good, as of Alablaster min∣gled with black; Marble of all sorts, as in Namur; great plenty of Pit-Cole, digged so deep, that some∣times they go under the very Cha∣nel of the Meuse. The Cole of this Country is much sweeter, and ca∣steth
a far greater heat than that of Haynault, or Namur. The Turfe also far suppasseth that of Holland and Brabant, for which cause the Ligeoys, boast, that they have in their Coun∣try three things passing all o∣ther Countries, namely, Bread bet∣ter than Bread, Iron harder than Iron, and Fire hotter than Fire. This Cole is kindled with Water, and quenched with Oile. In this Country also is made great abundance of Salt-Peter. In brief, this Country is so pleasantly seated, the Aire so wholsome, the Soyl so fruitful of all things ser∣ving for the use and delight of Man, to which adde the great free∣dome which the People live in there, that it is not unfitly called, The Paradise of Priests. Under this Bishoprick of Lieg is contained a very large Jurisdiction, of Towns, Castles, Bourgs, and Vil∣lages;
namely, the Dutchy of Buil∣lon, the Marquisat of Francymont: The County of Lotz and Hasbain: Two and fifty Baronies, and many rich Abbeys. There are under its Jurisdiction (besides the half of Mastrieke) twen∣ty four walled Towns, namely, Legi, Buillon, Francimont, Lotz, Bork∣worm, Tongres, Hoey, Asselt, Dinant, Masiek, Stochem, Bilson, St. Trui∣den, Tuin, Viset, Varem, Beringh, Herke, Bree, Per, Hamont, Siney, Foss, and Covines, besides one thou∣sand and eight hundred Parishes with Churches; besides Hamlets, Castles, and Baronies of Noble men.
The City of Liege described. Liege standeth in a Pleasant Val∣ley upon the River Meuse, being environed with Hills on all sides. The Meuse entreth into it with two Branches, and maketh many plea∣sant Isles within the Town. The Ri∣vers that pass through this City are; First, the Meuse, then the little Ri∣ver Lieg, and lastly three little Brooks, Ute, Vese, and Ambluar, all three being stored with excel∣lent good Fish, especially Ute hath one sort of excellent delicate Fish above all the rest called U∣tins. There are also within this City many clear Springs and Fountains, and that in such abundance, that some Houses have two or three of them. It's a very great and a large
City, containing many Hills, Val∣lies, Rivers, and Vine grounds, be∣ing about four Italian Miles in Circuit. The buildings are very Fair, being all of Stone; And a∣bove all, the Bishops Pallace is most stately and Magnificent. But in number of Churches, and beauty and riches of them, in Monasteries and Convents, this Town passeth all the Towns in Lower Germany, yea, of France al∣so. For there are in it eight Col∣legiate Churches, with Canons, who are very Rich, especially the Canon of St. Lambert, the Patron of the Town. In this City of St. Lambert, a∣mong divers old Rich Jewels and Reliques, is a great Image of St. Georg on Horsback, all of pure Gold, which Charles Duke of Burgundy gave, to make amends for his hard
usage of this City when he took it by Storm. There are also in it four Rich Abbeys, having in each of them a goodly Library. There are also three Nunneries, and all the Four Orders of Friers, some of which have two Convents. There are al∣so thirty two Parish Churches; and so many other Churches, Mo∣nasteries, and Hospitals, within and without the Town, that the Chur∣ches are accounted in all a∣bove a Hundred. This City is well replenished with People, ma∣ny of which live very idely, their Language is French. Its an Im∣perial City, but they are only bound to furnish the Emperor with a few men in his Warre against the Turks. Hubert Thomas writeth, that at one time there were students in this City, nine Kings Children,
twenty four Dukes Children, twen∣ty nine Earls Children, besides a number of Barons, and Gentle∣mens Children, the greatest part of which were Canons of the Rich Colledge of St. Lambert aforemen∣tioned. Buillon is a great Castle, stan∣standing very artificially upon the Point of a Hill, with a great Bourg under it. The Castle is larg, and well Fortified, and very strong both by Art and Nature. It hath the Title of a Dutchy, and hath un∣der it a great Country, and a large Jurisdiction. Francimont was sometimes a Wal∣led Town; its now but a Village, yet hath it a strong Fort in it. Neer to this place is a Village called Thou, where are many good Lead Mines, and Quarries of excellent black Marble.
Lootz, or Borchloon is a Coun∣try with a large Territory, and Ju∣risdiction under it. Its a pretty lit∣tle Town. Brockworm stands upon the Jec∣ker. Its a pretty Town and well peopled. Tongres stands also upon the Jecker, which at Mastrick entreth into the Meuse. Here is a marvelous way formerly all paved with goodly Stone, raised up of wondrous heighth between two Walls, which rea∣ched from Tongres to Paris, which is above two hundred Italian Miles, some parts whereof remain unto this Day. Certainly it was an ancient Work of the Romans, who usually imployed their Armies and Sub∣jects in such stupendious works, to keep them from idleness, which is the Mother of Sedition and Civil-Warres.
Eight Leagues from Tongres, and five from Lieg, is the Village of Spa, or Spaw, within half a League whereof is the Fountain, so famous for the virtue that it hath to cure the Tertian Ague, the Dropsie, the Stone, the exulceration of the Lungs, the Sciatique, and all diseases of the Stomack, and the Liver. This Vil∣lage of Spaw stands in a fair Wood, which is part of the Forrest of Ar∣denne, and the Fountain most com∣manded is called La Fountain de Savenier, the water whereof tasteth of Iron, there being many Iron Mines thereabout. The Water is of most virtue in July, when the Weather is hottest. Hoey was sometimes a famous City, bearing the Name of a furi∣ous River that here falls into the Meuse. The Meuse runs through the midst of this Town, over which is built a very stately Bridg. Its now
a reasonable good Town, with a strong Fortress in it. The Country about it abounds with Iron Mines and Cattel. Hasselt stands upon the River De∣mere. Its an indifferent good Town and well Built. Dinan stands upon the Meuse, and is seated in a very good Coun∣try abounding with Black Marble, with Mines of Iron, and Quarries of other very good Stones to build with. It hath a Castle in it. Maiseeck is a reasonable good Town, standing upon the Meuse. Stockhem is a fine little Town, standing also upon the Meuse. Bil∣sen is but a little Town. St. Truden, or Centron is a fair Town, and their Language is Fle∣mish. Tuin, or Tovin stands in Haynault, but is subject to the Bishop of Lieg. Its an indifferent good Town.
The other Towns are Reasona∣nable good, and of some account. As for the Villages there is not much remarkable in them, and therefore I pass them over.
An account of the great difference that is between the Country and People of Lieg, and the Country and Ci∣tizens of Aix, though they be but six Leagues asunder, and both in the same Climate. Lieg is in subjection, Aix in li∣berty, but both under the protecti∣on of the Empire. At Lieg they speak French, at Aix Dutch. The Liegeoys are pleasant, and sociable: They of Aix unsociable, and Me∣lancholly. Yea, the very Air and Soyl retain the same difference: For its Summer at Lieg when its Winter at Aix: Yea, oft its Snow and Ice at Aix, when its warm at Liege.
The City of Aix, or Aquisgrane described. Aix is situated between the Dut∣chy of Brabant, Limbourg, Juliers, and the Bishoprick of Liege. Charle-Main was the Founder of this City, who ordained it to be the chiefe City of the Empire, and that the King of the Romans should receive the Iron Crown at Aix by the Arch-Bishop of Colen, who is the Metropolitan thereof; The Silver Crown at Millan, and the Imperial Crown of Gold at Rome. Here he dyed, and was buried Anno Christi 813. Aix is a goodly City, and the Country about it is very pleasant and fruitful, but the Buildings of the Town do not answer the fame of the Place, saving the hot Baths,
which are very fairly built, and are very wholsome for many Disea∣ses. Aix is an Imperial City, but pay∣eth only a small Tribute to the Em∣perour; otherwise it enjoyes free∣dome, and hath the Duke of Cleves for Protector, next Neighbour and perpetual Confederate. FINIS.
