C6316 11760762 48681
POLYEUCTES, OR THE MARTYR. A TRAGEDY: BY SR. WILLIAM LOWER. LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft for G. Bedell and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop at the Middle-Temple Gate in Fleetstreet, 1655.
THE ARGUMENT: POlyeuctus and Nearchus were two Cavaleirs straightly tyed together in Amity; they lived in the year 250. under the Empire of Deciu; their aboad was in Melitene, Ca∣pital City of Armenia, their Religion different, Near∣chus was a Christian, and Polyeuctus following yet the Sect of the Gentiles; but having all the qualities worthy of a Christian, and a great inclination to be∣come so: The Emperour having caused an Edict to be published very rigorous against the Christi∣ans, this Publication gave a great trouble to Nearchus; not for feare of the punishments wherewith he was threatned, but for the apprehension which he had, that their Amity might fuffer some separation or coldness by this Edict, seeing the punishments that were proposed therin to those of the Religion, and the Honours promised to those of the contrary party; He conceived therat so great a displeasure, that his Friend perceived it, and having obliged him to tell him the cause therof, he took the occasion to open his heart unto him. Fear not, said he, that the Em∣perours
Edict should dis-unite us: I saw this night the CHRIST which you adore, he took from me a filthy Robe, to apparel me with a Luminous one, and made me mount upon a winged Horse to follow him. This Vision hath resolved me wholly to do that which I long time meditated: the name of a CHRISTIAN is only wanting to me, and you your selfe as often as you have spoken unto me of your great MESSIAS, might have observed that I al∣waies hearkned unto you with respect, and when you read unto me his Life and Doctrine, I alwaies admired the Sanctity of his Actions and Discourses. O Nearchus if I thought not my self unworthy to come unto him without being initiated with his Mysteries, and to have received the Grace of his Sacraments, how you should behold the Ardor break forth, which I have to dye for his Glory and the support of his Eternall Truths! Nearchus having cleered him of the scruple wherin he was, by the example of the good Thief, who in a moment meri∣ted Heaven, though he had not received Baptisme; presently our Martyr full of a holy Fervour, took the Emperours Edict, spit upon't, and tore it in peices, which he cast unto the Wind, and seeing the Idols which the people carried upon the Altars to adore them, he snatch'd them away from those that bare them, brake them against the ground, and trod them under his feet, astonishing all the
World, and his friend likewise, by the heat of that Zeal, which he expected not. His Father-in-Law Felix, who had the Empe∣rours Commission to persecute the Christians, ha∣ving seen himself what his Son-in-law had done, seized with grief to see the hope and prop of his Fa∣mily lost, endeavoured to shake his constancy, first by fair words, then by threatnings, lastly by stroaks, which he made his Executioners to give him on the face: But not able to prevail herewith, for a last attempt he sent unto him his Daughter Paulina, to see if her tears had not more power upon the Spirit of a Husband, then the Artifices and Rigours had had: He gained nothing by that, on the contrary, seeing that his firmness had converted many Pagans, he condemned him to loose his head; this Sentence was executed presently, and the holy Martyr with∣out other Baptisme then of his blood, went to take possession of the Glory which God hath promised to those that renounce themselves for the love of him. See in few words the true story of Polyeuctes Mar∣tyrdom; the dream of Paulina, the love of Severus, the effectuall Baptisme of Polyeuctes, the Sacrifice for the Emperours Victory, the dignity of Felix, whom I make Governour of Armenia, the death of Nearchus, the conversion of Felix, and of Paulina, are the Inventions and Embellishments of the Stage, only the Victory of the Emperour against the Persians
hath some foundation in the History, and without seeking for other Authors, it is reported by Monsieur Coëffoteau in his Roman History; but he sayes not, neither that he imposed tribute on them, nor that he sent to make Sacrifices of thanks in Armenia. If I have added these Incidents and Particularities according to Art, or no, the Judicious shall censure it; but my aime is not to justifie them, but only to advertise the Reader of that which he may beleive.
ACTORS. FElix, Roman Senator, Governour of Armenia. Polyeuctes, Lord of Armenia, Son-in-law to Felix. Severus, Roman Knight, Favourite of the Emperour. Nearchus, Armenian Lord, Friend to Polyeuctes. Paulina, Daughter to Felix, and Wife to Polyeuctes. Stratonica, a Lady, friend to Paulina. Albin, Friend to Felix. Fabian, Domestick Servant to Severus. Cleon, Domestick Servant to Felix. Three Guards: The Scene is Miletene, Capitall City of Armenia in the Palace of Felix.
POLYEUCTES, OR, THE MARTYR. A CHRISTIAN TRAGEDY. ACTUS primus, SCENA prima. Polyeuctes, Nearchus. Nearchus. AND what! you stick upon a Womans Dreams? Can such weak Subjects trouble this great Soul? And this heart so approv'd in War, can it Receive Alarum from an idle Fantasie? Pol. I know what a Dream is, and what belief We ought to give to its extravagance, That a confus'd mass of Nocturnall Vapours Formeth vain Objects, which at waking vanish; But you know not, Sir, what a woman is, Nor the just power she takes upon a Soul, When having long time found the art to charm us, Bright Hymens Torches flame about our Beds. Paulina without reason plung'd in grief,
Pol. Fears and believs already that she sees My death, which she hath dream'd; she doth oppose Her tears to my design, and laboureth To hinder me from going forth the pallace; I sleight her fears, but yield unto her tears; And my heart tender, but not terrifi'd. Dares not displease the eys have conquer'd it: Nearchus, is th' occasion so pressing That it may not a little be deferr'd Upon a Lovers sighs? let us a while Wave this designe which burthens her with grief, To morrow we can do't a swel's to day. Nearc: Yes, if you were assur'd to live so long, And to persever in your faith; that God Which houlds our soul, and numbereth our days, Hath not ingag'd himself that you shall see The morning break; he is all just and good, But his effectuall grace descends not always With the same efficacy; after certain moments Which we lose by delays, she quits those darts Which penetrate our souls, the arm that freely Dispensed her unto us, stops his bounty; As being offended, our dull heart is hardened; That holy heat which carrieth us to good, Fals on a Rock, and operates no more. That zeal which pressed you to have recourse To sacred baptism, languishing already, Ceases to be the same; and for some sighs Which you have heard, its flame doth dissipate It self; and is upon the point to vanish. Pol. You know me ill, the self same heat still burns me, And the desire increaseth when th' effect Recoyls; those tears which with a Husbands Eye I look upon, leave me as good a Christian In heart as you; but to receave the seal And sacred character thereof, which washes Our sins in saving water, and in opening Our Eyes with a divine Ray, doth restore us Unto the first right which we had to Heaven, Though I prefer it before all the greatness Of Empires as the supream good, and that Which I alone aspire to, I believe
I may, to satisfie a lawfull love, Defer this sacred baptism for a day. Nearc: Thus the malicious enemy of man Abuseth you, what he can't do by force, He doth attempt by policy, still jealous Of good designs, which he endeavoureth To shake; when he can't break them, he put on With all the power he can to stop their course. With obstacle upon obstacle he is comming To trouble yours, to day by tears, to morrow By something else; this dream so full of horrour Is but the slourish of his first illusions, Pol. He sets all things a work, both prayer and threatning, He assaults always, and is never weary, He thinks to do at last what yet he cannot, And what we do defer, concludes half broken. Destroy his first stroaks, let Paulina weep: God would not have a heart that the world rules; Who looks upon him when his voice doth call him At distance, and as doubtfull in his choice, Hearkens unto another voice then his, Pol. To give our selvs to him, must we love no body? Nearc: We may love all, he suffers, he ordains it; But this great King of Kings, this Lord of Lords Will have the first love and the chiefest honours. As nothing's equall to his supreame Greatnes, So nothing must be lov'd but after him, And in him; we to please him must neglect Wife and wealth, friends and fortunes; for his glory We must not stick t'expose our selves to dangers, Yea, even to death, to pour our bloud forth for him; But how far are you from this perfect love Which I could wish you as so necessary To your salvation, and eternal good? I cannot speak unto you, Polyeuctes, But with tears in mine eyes; now that we are Hated in every place, that all believe They serve the State well when they persecute us, Now that a Christian is expos'd a butt Unto the sharpest torments, how can you Or'ecome the griefe on't, if you can't resist A Womans tears?
Pol. You do'nt astonish me; The Pitty that doth wound me doth proceed From a great courage rather then from weakness; Nearchus, on my equals a faire eye Hath had much force, he feareth to offend it, That dreads not death; and if we must affront The cruel'st punishments, to find delights And pleasures there, your God whom I dare not Yet to call mine, in making me a Christian, Will give me strength enough to undergo them. Nearc. Haste then to be one. Pol. Yes, I fly, Nearchus, I long to bear the glorious mark of it, But my Paulina doth afflict her self, And can't consent, so much this dream doth trouble her, To leave me to go forth. Nearc. Your safe return Will be more pleasing to her; in an hour, Or little more you shall wipe off her tears, The happiness will seem again to see you More sweet, by how much more she hath lamented So dear a Husband. Come, we are expected. Pol. Appease her fear, and calm her sorrow then, She comes again. Nearc. Fly, fly. Pol. Alas! I cannot. Nearc. You must, Sir, to be safe; Oh fly an Enemy That knows your weakness, that doth finde it easily, That woundeth with the eys, whose stroke doth kill And please, because receav'd not 'gainst your will. Scena Secunda. Polyeuctes, Nearchus, Paulina, Stratonica. Polyeuctes. LEt's fly then, since we must, adiew, Paulina, Adiew, within an hour, or little more I will return again here. Paul. What occasion So pressing doth invite you to go forth?
Doth it concern your honour, or your life? Pol. Much more then either. Paul. What's the secret then? Pol: You shall know one day, I am loath to leave you, But yet I must. Paul. D'ee love me? Pol. Witness Heaven A thousand times more then my self I love you, But— Paul. But you care not for my discontent; Should you have Secrets that I may not know? What proof of love is this; ith' name of Himen, Give only to my tears this fatall journey. Pol. A dream makes you afraid! Paul. I know those presages Are vain, but I do love you, and I fear. Pol. For an hours absence fear no hurt; adiew, Your tears prevail too much upon me, and I feel my heart even ready to revolt, There's no resisting her but in my flight.— Exit. Scena Tertia. Paulina, Stratonica. Paulina. GO, and neglect my tears, hast to precipitate thee Before the death, which the Gods have predicted Unto me, follow that same fatall Agent Of thy ill destinies, who, perhaps may give thee Into the hands of murtherers. See, Stratonica In this sad age wherein we live, what Empire▪ We have upon the stubborn Spirits of men; See what is left us, and the ordinary Effect of that love which they offer us, And of the vowes they make us; whilst they are But Lovers, we are Soveraigns; and untill They've gain'd the conquest, we are us'd as Queens, But after Marriage they are Kings by turn. Strat. Sure Polyeuctes, wants no love for you; Though with full confidence he treat you not.
In this affair, though he depart in spight Of all your tears: it is a part of prudence; Without afflicting you presume with me, That it is fit he should conceale the cause, Assure your self he hath just reason for it: A Husband must not tell us every thing, Let him be sometimes free, and not abase him To render us accompt still of his steps. We both have but one heart, which feels the same Traverses, but this heart hath notwithstanding Its divers functions; and the Law of marriage Which holdeth you together, ordains not That he should tremble when you tremble, Madam, What maketh you afrayd, troubles not him, He's an Armenian, and you are a Roman, And you may please to understand that our Two Nations ha'nt the same impressions Upon this subject. A dream psseth with us For a ridiculous phansie, it doth leave us, Nor hope, nor fear, nor scruple; but it carries Authority in Rome, and passeth for A faithfull mirrour of fatality. Paul. Mine's very strange, and though Armenian, I believe that thy fear would equall mine, If by my bare recitall such like horrors Had struck thy Spirit. Strat. To recount our evils, We ease them oftentimes. Paul. Attend me then; But I must tell thee more, and that thou mayst The better comprehend this sad discourse, I will discover unto thee my weakness In the relation of my first amours; A woman that loves honour may confess Without shame those surprizes of the sences Which reason doth or'ecome, chiefly it is In these assaults that vertue doth break forth, We doubt that heart that hath not combated. In Rome where I was born this wretched face Captiv'd the courage of a Roman knight Called Severus. Pray excuse the sighes Which yet a name too dear to my desires,
Snatches out of my bosome. Strat: Was it he That not long since at th'expence of his life Sav'd th'Emperour Decius from his enemies; Who dying drew the victory from the Persians And turn'd the chance upon the Roman Eagles? He that amongst so many bodies sacrific'd Unto his Master, could not be found out, Or at least known, to whom Decius at last Made sumptuous monuments to be rais'd in vain? Paul. Alas! it was the same, and never did Our Rome produce a greater heart, nor saw A braver man since thou hast understood him, Il'e speak no more of him; Statonica, I lov'd him, he deserved well; but whereto Serves merit where blind fortune is defective? The one is great in him, the other weak And common, too invincible obstacle, O're which a vertuous Lover very seldome Triumpheth with a father. Strat. Fair occasion, And worthy a rare constancy! Paul. Rather say An overnice, foolish and base resistance; What ever fruit one might receive from thence, Tis not a vertue but for who would faile: In this great love which I had for Severus, I still expected from my Fathers hand A Husband, and my reason never own'd The amiable Treason of mine eyes. He did possess my heart, my thought, my wishes, I hid not from him how much I was wounded, We sigh'd together and wept our misfortunes, But he in stead of hope had nought but tears, And notwithstanding his sweet sighs and prayers My Father and my duty were inexorable. Lastly I left Rome, and this perfect lover, To follow here my father in his government, And he, even desperate, went unto the Army To seek th' illustrious fame of a fair death. Thou know'st the rest; my comming to this place Made me see Polyeuctes, and I pleas'd
His eyes; My Father finding that he was The chief of the Nobility, was ravish'd With joy that he should take me for his Mistress, And he believ'd himself by his allyance Sure to be more redoubted and considerable. He lik'd his love, and did conclude the marriage. And I seeing me destin'd to his bed Gave unto his affection through duty All what the other had through inclination; If thou canst doubt thereof, judge by the fear Wherewith for him thou seest my soul is troubled. Strat. You love him, I believe, as well as one Can love, but after all what dream could have Disturb'd you? Paul. This last night me thought I saw Th' unfortunate Severus with revenge, In hand, and with an Eye flaming with anger; He was not covered with those sorry rags, A desolate shade doth bring with it from graves, He was not pierced with those glorious strokes Which cutting off his life assure his memory; He seem'd triumphant like unto our Caesar When on his Charriot he victoriously Doth enter Rome; after a little fear Which his sight gave me, carry unto whom Thou wilt the favour that is due to me, Ingratefull, (said he) and this day expir'd, Lament at leisure him thou hast preferr'd Before me. At these words I trembled, My soul was troubled; afterward an impious Assembly of the Christians to advance Th' effect of this fatall and sad discourse. Threw Polyeuctes at his Rivals feet; Forthwith I call'd my Father to his ayd. Alas! 'tis this that most doth trouble me, I saw my Father enter with a Ponyard In hand, and his arm rais'd to pierce his bosom▪ There my grief too strong hath conceiv'd those Images, The bloud of Polyeuctes hath contented Their furies, I know neither how, nor when They kill'd him, but I know that to his death All have contributed. Behold my dream.
Strat. 'Tis true, tis sad, but your soul must resist Those fears, the vision of it self may give Some horror, but no just fear unto you. Should you a death fear from a Father, who Doth love your Husband, and doth honour him. And whose just choice hath given you unto him, To make himselfe thereby here in this Countrey A sure and firm support? Paul. He hath himself Told me as much, and laugh'd at my alarms, But I do fear the Christians plots and charms, And that upon my Husband they'l revenge The bloud my Father hath so freely shed. Strat. Their Sect is mad, impious, and sacrilegious, And in their Sacrifice use sorcery; But this their fury goes no further then To break our Altars, its pursues the Gods, But reacheth not to mortals, whatsoever Severity our anger doth display Upon them, they do suffer without murmur, And die with joy, and since the time they were Treated as criminals of State, one cannot Charge them with any murther. Paul. Peace, my Father. Scena Quarta. Felix, Albin, Paulina, Stratonica. Felix. DAughter, thy dream hath plung'd me in strange fears Since yesterday, I doubt th' effects thereof, Which seem t'approach. Paul. I do beseech you, tell me What ist you feel? Felix. Severus is not dead. Paul. What evil doth his life do unto us? Felix. He is the Favourite Of th' Emperour Decius. Paul. After having saved him From the hands of his Enemies the hope Of such a rank justly might be allow'd him,
Thus Fortune to great hearts so often cruel, Resolvs her self sometimes to do them justice. Felix. He's comming here himself. Paul. What? is he comming? Felix. Thou shalt receive his Visit. Paul: That's too much; But how do you know this? Sir. Felix. Albin met In the adjacent field, a troup of Courtiers Attending him in crouds which shewed plainly His rank and credit, but Albinus tell her That which his People told thee. Albin. You know, Madam, What that great Expedition was, which made us So fortunate by his loss, where th' Emperour A Prisoner, disingaged by his hand, Confirm'd again his almost conquered party; Whilst that his vertue fell amongst the number, You know the honours that he caus'd to be Done to his shadow, when his body could not Be found amongst the dead. The King of Persia Witness of his high acts, though to his damage, Caused him to be carry'd off, and brought Into his Tent, he did desire to know His face though dead, every one did lament him, Covered with wounds, though jealous of his glory. Within a while he shew'd some sign of life: This generous Monarch was o're joy'd therewith, And though o'recome, thought not of his misfortune; To honour vertue in its very Authour, He caus'd that speciall care should be tane of him; His cure was secret, and at a Months end His health was perfect, when the King, to gain him, Offer'd him dignties, allyance, treasures, And us'd a thousand means: when all things fail'd, After high prayse bestow'd on his refusall, He sent to Decius to propose exchange, And presently the Emperour transported With pleasure, offered to the Persian His Brother and a hundred chiefs to chuse. So came unto the Camp the valorous And brave Severus, to receive the recompence
Of his high vertue: Decius favour was The worthy price thereof: we fought again, And were surpris'd, yet this misfortune serv'd T'increase his glory, he alone restablish'd The order, and recovered the victory, So fair and plain, and by such glorious feats, That our stout Enemies offer'd us tribute, And made us peace; The Emperour express'd An infinite love unto him, and being ravish'd With the success, sent him into Armenia; He comes to bring the news into this Countrey, And by a sacrifice to render thanks Unto the Gods, Felix O heaven! to what estate My fortune is reduc'd! Albin. I learned this From one that doth belong unto his train, And hasted here, Sir, to acquaint you with it. Felix. Oh without doubt he comes to marry thee, Daughter, the order of a sacrifice Is a small thing to him, not worth his presence, It is a false pretence, whose cause is love. Paul. It may well be, he lov'd me very dearly. Felix. What will not he allow to his resentment? And to what point will not his anger carry A just revenge with so much power to prop it? He will destroy us, daughter. Paul. He's too generous. Felix. Thou wilt in vain flatter a wretched Father; He will destroy us, daughter. Oh regreet That kils me now, in that I loved not The naked vertue. Oh Paulina really Thou hast too much obeyed me, thy courage Was good, but thy nice duty hath betray'd thee. How thy rebellion had been favourable Unto me, how it would have priviledg'd me From a deplorable condition! If any hope rests with me, it is now No more but in the absolute power which he Gives thee upon him: Husband in my favour The love that doth possess him, and from whence My evill doth proceed, produce the remedy.
Paul. Shall I, Shall I see such a Puissant Conqueror? And expose me unto those eyes that pierce My heart? Father, I am a Woman, and I know my weakness, I perceive my heart Already to be interested for him, And will without doubt in spight of my faith Thrust forth some sigh unworthy both of you And me, I will not see him. Felix. Re-assure Thy soul a little. Paul. He is alwayes lovely, And I am alwayes firm, in the power which His looks have had upon me, I can't answer With all my vertue, therefore I'le not see him. Felix. Daughter you must, or you'l betray your Father▪ And all your Family. Paul. It is my duty T'obey since you command, but see the perills Wherein you hazard me. Felix. I know thy Vertue. Paul. Without doubt it will vanquish, the success Is not the thing that my soul doubts, I fear This stubborn combat, and puissant troubles That makes my senses to revolt already; But since I must combat an Enemy I love, permit me t'arm against my self, And give me some time to prepare to see him. Felix. Without the Ports I'm going to receive him, In the mean time call home your stragling force, And think that in thy hands thou holdst our destinies, Paul. True, I am born to sacrifice me still▪ In serving as a victime to your will. The End of the first Act.
Actus Secundus. Scena Prima. Severus, Fabianus. Severus. WHilst Felix giveth order for the sacrifice, May not I take a time to see Paulina, And render to her fair eyes that high homage Is due unto the Gods? I have not kept From thee, that it is this which brings me hither; For the rest I'm not troubled much, I come To sacrifice, but tis unto your beauties, Whereto I dedicate all my devotions. Fab. Sir, you shall see her. Sev. What joyes do I feel! Doth this adorable object give consent That I shall see her? have I any power Upon her soul yet? hast thou seen in speaking To her of me, that she was troubled, Or what transport my comming causeth her? May I hope all things from this happy sight? For I would rather perish then abuse her With Letters recommendatory, which I have to marry her, they are for Felix, Not to triumph of her, my heart was never Rebellious unto her desires, and if My evill fortune should have changed hers, I would vanquish my self and pretend nothing. Fab. Sir, you shall see her, I can say no more. Sev. How comes it that thou tremblest and sigh'st? Doth she no longer love me? clear this point. Fab. Sir, I could wish you not to see her more, Carry unto some higher place the honour Of your Caresses, you shall find at Rome Ladies enough that will be proud to be Your Mistresses, and in this high degree Of power and glory wherein now you are, The greatest will esteem your love a happiness. Sev. What should my soul stoop to such humble thoughts?
Should I esteem Paulina as inferior Unto my fortune? she hath better used it, I ought to imitate her, I love not My happiness but for to merit her. See, Fabian, thy discourse doth trouble me: Come, let us go to cast this haughty fortune Even at her feet, I found it happily In fights seeking a death worthy her Lover, So then this rank is hers, this favours hers, And I have nothing that I hould not off her. Fab. No, Sir, but once again pray do not see her. Sev. Oh! 'tis too much, at last cleer me this point; Hast thou seen coldness when thou prayd'st access? Fab. I tremble to declare t'ee, she is— Sev. What? Fab. Married. Sev. Sustain me, Fabian, this thunder-clap Is very great, and strikes so much the more, As more it doth surprise me. Fab. What's become, Sir, Of that brave generous courage? Sev. Constancy Is here of little use, when such displeasures Burthen a great heart, the most masculine vertue Soon loseth all its vigour, and when souls Are taken with so glittering a fire, Death troubles them far less then such surprises. I can scarce yet believe thy sad discourse. Fab. Paulina's married; fifteen days have pass'd Since Hymen did appear in saffron robes To solemnize the nuptials; Polyeuctes, One of the chiefest of th' Armenian Lords Doth taste the infinite sweetness of her bed. Sev. I cannot blame her of an evill choice, The name of Polyeuctes is esteem'd, As being descended from the bloud of Kings. Weak comfort for a cureless misery! Paulina, I shall see thee by another Possess'd! Oh Heaven! that spight of me didst send me Unto the light again! Oh fate! that gav'st me A new hope of my love, take back the favours Which you have lent me, and restore me death
Which you have taken from me; yet let's see her, And in this sad place make an end to die In bidding her adiew, that my heart carrying Her Image to the dead, where I do go, With its last sigh to her may homage do. Fab. Consider, Sir. Sev. All is considered. What inconvenience fears a desperate heart? Consents she not? Fab. Yes, Sir, but—— Sev. 'Tis no matter. Fab. This lively grief will thereby become stronger. Sev. 'Tis not an evil I intend to cure, I only will but see her, sigh, and dye. Fab. You will break forth without doubt in her presence; A Lover that doth lose all hath no more Complacence, but in such despaire he follows His passion which doth thrust him on to injury, And imprecation. Sev. Judge otherwise Of me, my respect doth continue yet; My despair, violent as 'tis, adores her;. What reason have I to reproach this Lady? Wherewith can I accuse her who hath promised Me nothing; she's not perjur'd, she's not light; Her duty hath betrayd me, her Father, And my misfortune; but her duty was Just, and her Fathers reason guided him; I impute all the treason unto my Misfortune; somewhat less of prosperous hap, And arriv'd sooner, would have gained one By th'other, and conserved me; too happy, But too late, I could not have gain'd her, I, Leave me to see her, then to sigh and dye. Fab. Yes, I will go t'assure her that you are In this extream misfortune strong enough To overcome your selfe, she fears like me Those first provoked motions which a sudden And unexpected loss raiseth in Lovers, The violence whereof excites much trouble Without the presence of the object to▪ Redouble it.
Sev. I see her, Fabian. Fab. Remember, Sir— Sev. Another is her Husband, Alas, my sad fate! she doth love another; It is impossible my grief to smother. Scena Secunda. Severus, Paulina, Stratonica, Fabian. Paulina. TIs true, Severus, I do love another, And plead not here for't, every one Except my self do flatter and abuse you; Paulina hath a noble soul, and speaks With open heart, the report of your death Is not that which destroys you, if just heaven Had put my marriage to my choice, I should To your sole vertues, Sir, have given my self, And all the rigour of our former fate Against your merit had made vain attempts; I saw in you Illustrious marks enough To give you worthy preferrence even before The happiest Monarchs; but since other Laws My duty did impose, what ever Lover My Father had assign'd me, though your valour Had added to this greatness which it gave you, The splendor of a Crown, though I lov'd you And hated him, I should have sighed at it, But yet I should obey, and o're my passions, My reason being Soveraign, should have blam'd My sighs, and dissipated all my hatred. Sev. How happie are you that a sigh or two Can easily acquit you of your troubles! So always absolute Queen of your desires, The greatest changes find you still resolv'd; Your spirit is carried in the strongest love Unto indifference, and perhaps to scorn, And your stout firmness without trouble makes Favour succeed contempt, and love disdain. Oh how a little of your humour, or
Rather your vertue would comfort the evils Of this dejected heart! a sigh, a tear Shed with regret, would have already cur'd me Of losing you, my reason would prevail Upon enfeebled love, and from indifference Would go even to oblivion, and my fire Henceforth commanding over yours, I should Esteem me happy in anothers arms. O too too lovely object, that hast charm'd me! Must we thus love? is't so that you have lov'd me? Paul. I loved thee Severus, and if I Could smother in my soul the flame remains there, What rigorous torments, Gods, should I avoid! 'Tis true, my reason tames my passions, But whatsoe're Authority she hath taken Upon them, she raigns not, but tyrannizeth; And though the outside be without commotion, The inside is but trouble and sedition. A certain charm, I know not what, inclines me Towards you yet, your merit sure is great, Although my reason's strong, I see it still, Such as it lights my fires, so much more strongly To work on my affections, as it is Environed with puissance and glory; I see that in all places after you It draws triumphant victory, that I Best know the price on't, and that it hath not Deceiv'd the generous hope I conceiv'd of it. But that same duty which in Rome subdu'd it, And makes me subject to the Law of Man here, Repulseth still so strongly the assault Of so many allurements, that it tears My soul, but doth not shake it; 'tis that vertue Even cruel to our own desires, which you Should praise when you blaspheam it; if you please You may complain on't, but yet praise its rigour That triumpheth o're you and or'e my heart At one time, lower thoughts could not have merited That perfect love which you have born unto me. Sev. O sweet Paulina, pardon a blind grief, Which knoweth nothing but excess of misery. I named it inconstancy, and took
For crimes th'indeavours of a vertuous duty. I do beseech you shew less to my senses The greatness of my Loss, and of your worth, And so through pitty hiding this rare vertue, That feeds my fires even when she separates us, Make some defects appear that may successively Weaken my grief together with my love. Paul. Alas! this vertue, though invincible still, Makes but appear a soul too sensible, These tears are witnesses thereof, and these Effeminate sighs which stir up the remembrance Of our first fires, too rigorous effects Of a beloved presence, against which My duty hath too little of defence. But if you do esteem this vertuous duty, keep me the glory on't, and cease to see me, Spare me those tears that trickle to my shame, Spare me those tears that with grief I or'ecome, Lastly spare me those sad discourses which Do but stir up your torments and mine own. Sev. So shall I rob my self of the sole good That remains to me. Paul. Save you from a sight Fatall unto us both. Sev. What recompense Of all my love? what fruit of my devotions? Paul. That's the sole remedy that can cure our evils. Sev. I'le die of mine, Oh love my memory. Paul. I'le cure mine, they would sully my fair glory. Sev. Oh! since your glory doth pronounce the sentence, My griefe must yield unto its interest, From such a heart as mine what is't that it Cannot obtain? you do awake the cares Which I owe to my glory; farewell, Madam, I go to seek in honourable combats That immortality which a fair death Doth give, if I after this mortall stroak Of fate, have life enough to seek a death. Paul. And I, whose punishment your sight increases, Intend to avoid it even in Sacrifice, And alone in my Chamber shutting up My sorrows, I will make my secret Orisons
Unto the Gods for you. Sev. May righteous Heaven Contented with my ruine heap up happiness On Polyeuctes and Paulina's heads. Paul. May brave Severus find after so much Disaster, a felicity that may be Worthy his valour. Sev. In you he could find it. Paul. I depend of a Father and a Husband. Sev. Oh duty that destroys, and makes me desperate! Adiew too vertuous and too charming object. Paul. Adiew, adiew, thou too unfortunate And faithfull lover. Scena Tertia. Paulina, Stratonica. Stratonica. I Have bewail'd you both, and cannot chuse But shed tears, yet your spirit, I do believe, Is free of fear now, for you plainly see Your dream is vain, Severus commeth not With revenge in his hand. Paul. Leave me to breath, At least if thou hast (as thou sayst) lamented me, Thou call'st again my fear unto the Fort Of all my grief, suffer my troubled spirits To take a little rest, and lead me not By those redoubled evils. Strat. What! fear you yet? Paul. Stratonica, I tremble, And though I am apaid with little justice, This unjust fear continually produceth The Image of the sad misfortunes which I saw last night. Strat. Severus is most generous. Paul. Notwithstanding His staydness, Polyeuctes all in bloud Strikes still my sight. Strat. You are your self a witness Of his devotions for him. Paul. I believe
He would be his support upon occasion, But whether this belief be false or true, His abode in this place doth make me fear, To whatsoe're his vertue may dispose him, He's strong, he loves, and comes here to espouse me. Scena Quarta. Polyeuctes, Nearchus, Paulina, Stratonica. Polyeuctes. YOu shed too many tears, 'tis time to dry them, Let your grief cease, and your vain fears fly hence, You see me living. Madam, in despight Of the false intimation of your gods. Paul. The day is long yet, and what most affrights me Is, that the half of the Advertisement Is found already true, I did believe Severus dead, but he was here just now. Pol. I know it, and am nothing troubled at it; I am in Militene, and let Severus Be what he will, your Father doth command here, And I'm considerable. Besides I'm confident That from a heart so generous as his A Treason cannot spring, I was inform'd He gave a visit to you, and I'm come To render him an honour he deserves. Paul. He is gone very sad, and much confounded, But I've prevailed with him that he will See me no more. Pol. How! Madam, d'ee suspect me Of jealousie already? Paul. I should do Unto all three too sensible an injury, I assure my repose which his looks trouble; The firmest vertue still avoideth hazards Wo doth expose himself to danger, would Meet with his ruine, and to speak to you With open soul of him, since a true merit Could have inflamed us, his presence alwaies Hath right to charm us. Besides that one must▪
Be out of countenance to leave ones self To be surpris'd, one suffers to resist, One suffers to defend, and although vertue Triumpheth o're these fires, the victory Is painfull and the fight dishonourable. Pol. Oh Vertue, if 'twere possible, too perfect, And duty too sincere! what sad regrets 'Cost you Severus! how at the expence Of a fair fire you render me most happy! And to my Amorous heart how sweet are you! The more I see mine own defects, and do Contemplate your perfections, the more I do admire.— Polyeuctes, Paulina, Nearchus, Stratonica,Cleon. Cle. My Lord and Master Felix Hath sent me to desire you to make hast Unto the Temple, for the Victime's chosen, And all the People on their knees; there wants But you, Sir, to begin the Sacrifice. Pol. Go, we will follow thee, will you along, Madam? Paul. Severus fears my sight, it stirs his flame, I'le keep my word with him, and will not see him; Adiew, you'l find him there, think of his power, And the great favour that he hath. Pol. I fear not His credit nor his power, and as I know His generosity, we shall encounter Each other onely in civility. Polyeuctes, Nearchus. Nearc. Where do you think to go? Pol. Unto the Temple, Where I am called. Nearc. What, to joyn your self To the Devotions of a company Of Infidels, have you forgot already That you are Christian?
Pol. You by whom I am so, Do you remember it. Nearc: I hate false Gods. Pol. And I detest them. Nearc. I do hold their worship Most impious. Pol. And I take it for abominable. Nearc. Fly then their Altars. Pol. I will overthrow them, And in their Temple die, or drive them thence. My dear Nearchus, come, lets brave Idolatry Before the eys of men, and shew us Christians; Heaven doth expect it, and we must perform it: For my part I do promise, and am going T'accomplish it: I thank God that hath given me This opportunity to express my zeal, Wherein his goodness ready even to crown me, Deigns to approve the faith that he will give me. Nearc: This zeal, Sir, is too ardent, moderate it. Pol. We cannot have too much on't for the God Which we adore. Nearc. It will procure your death. Pol. I seek it for him. Nearc. If this heart should shake? Pol. He will be my support. Nearc. Tis not his pleasure, We should precipitate our selves therein. Pol. If we die willingly, the more's our merit. Nearc. To wait and suffer is sufficient, We need not seek out danger. Pol. We suffer with regret when we dare not Offer our selves. Nearc. But in this Temple Death Is most assured. Pol. But in Heaven the Palme Already is prepar'd. Nearc. A holy life Must merit it. Pol. Living, perhaps, my crimes May take it from me, wherefore should we hazzard What death assures us? When she opens heaven, Can she seem hard? I am a Christian,
Nearchus, and I am so altogether; The pure faith which I have receiv'd, aspires To its effect; who flies believeth faintly, And hath but a dead faith. Nearc. Know that your life Importeth God himself, live to protect The Christians in this place. Pol. Th' example of my death will better fortifie them. Nearc. You will die then? Pol. And you desire to live? Nearc. To tell you truly, I've no mind to follow you. I fear to fall under the horrour of The Torments which they will inflict upon us. Pol. Who goes on boldly needs not fear to sall, God doth impart at need his infinite force; Who thinks he shall denie him, in his soul He doth deny him, he believs to do't, And doubteth of his faith. Nearc. Who feareth nothing Presumes too much upon himself. Pol. I expect all things from his grace and mercy, And nothing from my weakness; but in stead Of pressing me, t'is fit that I press you, Whence doth proceed this coldness? Nearc. God himself Hath feared death. Pol. He offered himself; Let's follow this divine instinct, and raise Altars unto him on the heaps of Idols; We must not (I do remember yet your words) Neglect to please him; wife, and wealth, and rank, We must not stick t' expose our selves to dangers, Yea even to death, to pour our blood forth for him; Alas! where is that perfect love which you Wished to me, and which I now wish you? If it remains yet with you, are you not Jealous that I scarce Christian yet, should shew it Stronger then you? Nearc. You come immediatly From baptism, and the thing that animates you, It is his grace, which yet no crime in you, Hath weakened, yet it acteth fully in you.
And to its vehement fire all things seem possible; But this same grace in me diminished, And by a thousand sins continually Extenuated acteth with such faintness In hazardous attempts, that all things seem Impossible unto its little vigour; This base effeminacy, and cowardly Evasions are the punishments which my Offences do draw on me, but our God, Whom we must ne'r distrust, gives your Example To fortifie me; Come, dear Polyeuctes, Let us go 'fore the eyes of men to brave Idolatry, and to shew who we are; May I to suffer give you the Example, As you have given me that of offering you? Pol. By this most happy transport which Heaven sends you, Again I know Nearchus, and I weep For joy on't, come, let us not lose more time, The Sacrifice is ready, let's uphold Th' interest of the true God, lets tread Under our feet this feigned Thunderbolt, With which th'abused and too credulous people Arm a corrupted piece of wood; let's go To make this fatall blindness manifest, Those gods of stone and mettall, let us break In pieces, and lets dedicate our days To this coelestiall heat, and so let's offer A triumph unto God; let him dispose The rest. Nearc. Come let us make his glory to break forth Unto the eyes of all, and for him dye, Who for us suffer'd death and infamy. The End of the second Act.
Actus Tertius. Scena Prima. Paulina alone. WHat floating cares! what confused clouds Present inconstant images to mine eyes! Sweet rest, which I dare not so much as hope, Send thy divine Ray speedily to clear them; A thousand diverse thoughts which my sad troubles Produce in my uncertain heart, are lost In wishes; no hope flatters me, not where I dare persist, no fear affrights me not Where I dare fix my self, my spirit imbracing All what it doth imagine, would sometimes My happiness, and sometimes my destruction; Both one and tother strike it with so little Effect, that it can neither hope nor fear. Continually Severus troubleth My fantasie, my hope is in his vertue, I fear his jealousie; and I cannot think That Polyeuctes with an equal eye Can see his Rivall heer; as between such The hate is natural, the interview Soon endeth in a quarrel; the one sees In the hands of the other what he thinks He meriteth, the other sees a desperate Would take it from him; whatsoe'r high reason Raignsin their courage, th'one conceiveth envy, The other jealousie: the shame of an Affront, which each of them feareth to see, Either receiv'd of old, or at this present, Destroying all their patience from the first, Forms choler and distrust, and seising on The Husband and the Lover both together, Whether they will or no delivers them Over to their resentment, and their passion: But what a strange Chymera do I fancy Unto my self! and what an injury Do I to Polyeuctes and Severus?
As if the vertue of these famous Rivals Could not triumph over those common evils. The minds of both, Mistresses to themselves Are of too high an order for such baseness; They shall see one another in the Temple Like generous men; but alas, still I fear: What is th'advantage that my Husband hath To be in Militene, if Severus arm The Roman Eagle 'gainst him, if my Father Command here, and doth fear this Favorite, And doth repent already of his choice? The little hope I have is with constraint, And born it is abortive, and gives place To fear; what ought to fix it, doth but serve To dissipate it. Gods! grant that my fear Be false, and my sad fancy, a Chimere. Scena Secunda. Paulina, Stratonica. Paulina. BUt let us understand the Issue on't. Now my Stratonica what's the conclusion Of this great Sacrifice. Strat. Alas Paulina! Paul. Have my Prayers and Devotions been frustrate: I see an ill sign of it in thy face, Have they unfortunately quarrelled? Strat. Nearchus, Polyeuctes, and the Christians— Paul. Speak then, the Christians. Strat. I cannot speak. Paul. Thou dost prepare my soul for strange afflictions. Strat. You ne'r could have a juster cause of grief. Paul. What have they murthered him? Strat. That had been nothing Your dream is all true, Polyeuctes is No more. Paul. What is he dead? Strat. No, he lives, but (O fate to be lamented!) this great courage, This divine soul is no more worthy of
The light, nor of Paulina, he is no more That Spouse so charming to your eyes, he is The common enemy of the gods, and State, An infamous, a Rebel, a perfidious, A Traytor, Villain; a base Particide, An execrable plague to all good men, An impious and a sacrilegious Wretch, In a word, Madam, he's a Christian. Paul. This word would have suffic'd without that torrent Of Injuries. Strat. Can there be any titles bad enough For Christians? Paul. He is what thou sayst, if he Imbrace their faith, but he's my Husband, and Thou speak'st to me; Strat. Consider him no more Then the God he adoreth. Paul. I have lov'd him With duty, and this duty still continues. Strat. At present he doth give you cause to hate him Who doth betray the gods, would make no scruple To betray you. Paul. Although he should betray me, Yet I should love him. And if thou, Stratonica, Dost wonder at this love, know, that my duty Dependeth not of his, let him fall in it, (If he be so dispos'd) I will do mine. What if he lov'd elsewhere, should his example Perswade me to imbrace unlawfull heats? Let him be Christian, I'm not troubled at it. I love his Person, and I hate his errour. But what resentment hath my Father of it? Strat. A secret rage, and an excess of choler Possesseth him, though yet for Polyeuctes He shews some; he'll not let his justice Fall upon him before the punishment Of false Nearchus be presented to him To see how that will work upon his spirits. Paul. What is Nearchus Christian too? Strat. 'Twas he Seduced him; see the unworthy fruit. Of their old amity; this perfidious
Taking him lately from us 'gainst his will, Drew him to baptism: now you have the secret That seemed so mysterious, which your love Could not draw from him. Paul. Thou didst blame me then For being too unfortunate. Strat. I foresaw not Such a misfortune. Paul. Ere I will give up My soul unto my griefs, I'le try the force Of my laments, in quality of Wife And Daughter, I hope to perswade a huband, And pacifie a Father: if I fail With both of them, I'le take no other Counsel But what despair shall give me: tell me now What did they in the Temple? Strat. The impiety They acted there was such as 'tis without Example, I can't think on't without trembling: And fear, I should commit a crime but in Relating it; in few words understand Their beastly insolence. Scarce had the Priest Obtained silence, and towards the East Setled his countenance, but their small respect Appeared plainly, both of them express'd Their madness at the ceremony, they mock'd Aloud the sacred mysteries, and despis'd The gods that were invoked; all the people Murmur'd thereat, and Felix was offended; But both of them carrying themselves with more▪ Irreverence, what, said Polyeuctes, raising His voice, adore you gods of stone or wood? Dispence me from recital of the blasphemies They vomited' gainst Iupiter himself. Adultery and Incest were the least Crimes they objected to him. Hearken Felix. Pursued he, and hearken all ye people; The God of Polyeuctes and Nearchus Is absolute Monarch both of heaven and earth, Of Destiny sole Master, and the only Being that's independent, substance which Never receiveth change; it is the God
The Christians adore that we must thank For victories he gave the Emperour Decius; He in his hands holds the success of battels, With him are (saith the sacred Text) the issues Of life and death, his power, his infinit goodness, His justice is immense, 'tis he alone That punisheth, alone that recompenceth; You vainly do adore inpuissant Monsters. Casting themselves at these words on the wine And Incense, after they had thrown against The earth the holy vessels without fear Of Felix, or of Thunder, with like fury They ran unto the Altar. Heavens! was ever The like seen? there you might behold the statue Of the chief god o'rethrown by impious hands▪ Lye at their feet, the mysteries disturb'd, The Temple sacrilegionsly profan'd, The flght and clamours of a mutinous people, That fear' the anger of offended heaven▪ Felix.—but here he comes; the rest he'll tell you▪ Paul. How sullen is his countenance and full Of trouble! he expresseth much of sadness And indignation. Scena Tertia. Felix, Paulina, Stratonica. Felix. DUrst such an insolence appear! in publick too, and in my sight? He shall die for't, the Traytor. Paul. Suffer me T'embrace your knees. Fel. I speak not of your Husband, But of Nearchus, Polyeuctes hath Too near relation to me, though his crime▪ Deserves no favour, to be banished My love for ever. Paul. I cou'd not expect Less from a Fathers goodness. Fel. I could sacrifice him▪
To my just anger, for you are not ignorant To what a height of horror the blind fury Of his impiety hath boldly mounted, You might have understood it from Stratonica. Paul. I know tis fit he see Nearchus punish'd. Felix. Hereafter he shall better be instructed In taking Counsell, when he shall behold Him punish'd that seduc'd him to this evill; The bloudy spectacle of a friend, whom he Must follow, will so work upon his soul That he'l repent his wickedness, and renounce His new faith, an example more prevails Then Threatning; this mad heat will suddenly Turn into ice, cheer up your drooping spirits. Paul. You hope then that his courage will come down? Felix. He should be wise, sure, at Nearchus cost. Paul. He should be so, but alas! I do fear There must be time to work it, may I hope T' obtain this favour from your goodness, Sir? Felix. I do him too much favour in consenting That he shall lie upon a quick repentance: Like punishment is due to like offences, Yet I have put a difference between These two equally guilty, and thereby Betrayed Justice to paternall love, I've made my self a Criminall for him, And did expect from you more thanks then plaints. Paul. First give me, then I'le thank you; I know well The honour, and the spirit of a Christian; He doth continue obstinate to the end, He'l dye before he will repent. Felix. His pardon Is in his hand, let him consider on't. Paul. Give it him fully. Felix. He may finish it. Paul. Give him not over to the furies of His sect. Felix. I'le give him up unto the Laws, Which I ought to respect. Paul. Is this all the support a Son-in-Law May hope for from the Father of his Wife? Felix. Let him do for himself as much as I
Have done for him. Paul. Alas! Sir, he is blind. Felix. It pleaseth him to be so, he that cherisheth His errour never will acknowledge it. Paul. In the name of the gods.— Felix. Invoke them not. The interest of the gods requires his death. Paul. They hear our prayers. Felix. Well then, Petition them. Paul. In the name of the Emperour whose place You hold. Felix. 'Tis true, his power is in my hand, But if he hath committed it unto me 'Tis to display it 'gainst his enemies. Paul. Is Polyeuctes so? Felix. All Christians are Rebels. Paul. Hear not these cruel maximes for him. In marrying Paulina he's become Part of your bloud. Felix. I look upon his fault, Not on his quality, where a crime against The State, is mingled with black sacriledge, No amity nor blood have any priviledge. Paul. Excess of rigour! Felix. Less then his offence. Paul. Oh effect too true of my fearfull dream! Know, that with him, Sir, you destroy your daughter. Felix. My Family is not so dear to me As the gods and the Emperour, are honour'd. Paul. Cannot the ruine of us both arrest you? Felix. I fear the gds add Decius both together; But we need doubt no sad thing yet; think you He will persist in his blind error? if He seemed to us to run to his misfortune, It was but the first heat of a new Christian. Paul. If yet you love him, have not that opinion That he will change belief twice in a day: The Christians are more constant, you expect, I doubt too much Legerity from him; 'Tis not an errour suck'd in with the milk, That his soul hath imbrac'd without examining:
No, Polyeuctes is a Christian, Because he would be so, and brought with him Unto the Temple a resolved spirit. You may presume of him as of the rest, Death's neither fatal to them, nor dishonorable. They seek for glory in despising of The gods, for earth blind, they aspire to heaven; And thinking that death opens them the gate, Torment, dismember, murther them, they care not; Tortures and racks are the same unto them That pleasures are to us, and bring them to The Butt where their desires and wishes tend; They call the cruel'st and most infamous death Sweet Martyrdome. Felix. Well, Polyeuctes then Shall have what he desires, no more of him. Paul. My Father. Scena Quarta. Felix, Albin, Paulina, Stratonica. Felix. I Sit done, Albin? Alb. Yes Sir, and Nearchus Hath paid for his fault. Fel. And Polyeuctes Hath seen him? Alb. Yes, but with an envious eye; He was on fire to follow him, far from Retreating, and his heart was firmly fix'd, In stead of being shaken. Paul. Oh! my Father, I told you so; once more I do beseech you, If ever my respects gave you content If you esteem'd them, if you ever lov'd them.— Fel. Paulina, you love an unworthy husband Too much. Paul. I had him from your hand, my love Is without crime, he was your worthy choice, And for him I have quench'd the fairest fires That e're were kindled in a heart; I beg In the name of that blind and quick obedience,
Which I have always rendred to my duty, Since you had all power on me and my love, That I at my turn now may prevail with you. By this just power too much now to be fear'd, By those fair sentiments which I must smother, Take not your presents from me, they are dear Unto mine eyes, and have cost me too much Not to be precious to me. Fel. You are troublesome. Paul. Good gods! what do I hear! Fel. I love not pitty But at the rate I would receive thereof, To touch me with't whether I will or no By so many vain trials, is to lose Time and your tears, only to anger me: You gave it me, but you must understand I disavow it when you snatch it from me: Prepare to see this miserable Christian, And use your best endeavour to perswade him, When I have used mine; go, and no more Provoke a Father that doth love you tenderly: See if you can by your perswasion gain Your Husband to himself, presently I'le cause hm to come hither, in the mean time Leave us, I'le try what my discourse can do. Paul. Suffer, I do beseech you.— Fel. Once again Leave me alone your grief offendeth me Asmuch as it afflicts me, all your industry Must be apply'd to gain you Polyeuctes, The less you do importune me, the more You shall advance. Scena Quinta. Felix, Albin. Felix. ALbin, how died he? Alb. Like a Beast, like an impious desperate wretc In braving torments▪ in despising death, Without regret, astonishment, or murmur, In obstination, and insensibility;
Lastly, he dyed like a Christian With blasphemy in's mouth. Fel. What did the other? Alb. I have told you already, nothing touch'd him, So far was he from being dejected at it, That his heart grew more lofty: they enforc'd him To quit the Scaffold: he is now in Prison. Where I saw him conducted; are you ready To entertain discourse with him a litte? Fel. Oh! how unfortunate am I? Alb. You are Lamented every where. Fel. None know the evils Wherewith my heart's oppress'd, thoughts upon thoughts Trouble my soul, cares upon cares disturb it: I find that love and hate, that fear and hope, That joy and grief by turns, presse and provoke it. I enter into sentiments that pass Belief, I have some that are violent, And others that are pitifull, some generous Which dare not act, and likewise some ignoble Which make me blush. I love that wretched man. Whom I chose for my Son-in-Law, I hate The blind and dangerous error he is in; I do deplore his loss, and being willing To save him, I must look too on the gods, Whose injur'd glory I must vindicate: I fear their thunderbolts and Decius wrath; It is my charge, my life depends upon it. Thus sometimes for him I expose my self To death, and other times I expose him To save my self. Alb. Sure Decius will excuse A Fathers amity, besides Polyeuctes Is of a bloood that should be reverenc'd. Fel. His order for the punishment o' th' Christians Is very rigorous, and the more th' example Is great, the more 'tis dangerous and dreadfull. There's no distinction when th' offence is publick; When we connive at a domestick crime, By what authority, by what Law can we Punish that in another which we suffer
Amongst our selves? Alb. If you dare not to have Regard unto his person, write to Decius That he ordain his pardon. Fel. Should I do so, Severus would destroy me, tis his hate And power that make my greatest care, if I Should but defer to punish such a crime, Though he be generous, though he be magnanimous▪ He is a man, and sensible, and I Disdain'd him formerly, his spirit offended With those receiv'd contempts, and desperate Through th' unexpected marriage of Paulina, Will from the anger of the Emperour Obtain my ruine. Every thing seems lawfull To revenge an affront, and opportunity Tempteth the most remiss, perhaps (and this Suspition is not without some apparence) He in his heart conceives again some hope, And thinking to see Polyeuctes punish'd Recals a love with much pain banished: Judge if his anger in this case implacable Would hould me innocent to save a Criminal, And if he'd spare me, seeing his designes Twice made abortive by me. Shall I tell hee A base, unworthy, and low spirited thought? I smother it, it springs up again, it flatters, And angers me, ambition still presents it Unto me, and all that I can do is But to detest it; Polyeuctes here Is the prop of my Family, but if The other by his death espouse my daughter, I should acquire greater advantages, Which would raise me a thousand times more high Then now I am. My heart thereat by force Takes a malignant joy, but rather let Heaven strike me with a Thunder-bolt, then that I should consent unto so base a thought, Which hitherto my glory hath bely'd. Alb. Your heart is too good, and your soul too high; But d'ee resolve to punish this offence? Fel. I'le use all my endeavour to subdue
His errour by the fear of death, but if I can't prevail, then I will afterward Imploy Paulina's power. Alb. What wll you do At last, if he continue obstinate? Fel. Press me not on that point in such displeasure, I can't resolve, and know not what to chuse. Alb. Sir, like a faithfull servant I am bound T' advertise you that the Town murmureth In his behalfe already, and is even Upon the point to mutiny, if you Proceed against him further, I perceive Th' Inhabitants are all resolv'd t' oppose you, And will not see their last hope, and the blood Of their Kings pass the rigour o the Laws: Besides his prson is not very safe. I left about it but a pittifull troop▪ I fear they will be forc'd▪ Fel. Then take him thence, And bring him here, where we'l be sure of him. Alb. Then take him thence your self, and with a hope Of pardon, pacifie the fury of The multitude. Fel Come let us go, and if He still persist to remain Christian, We will dispose of him, and carry't so That what's resolv'd upon, they shall not know. The End of the third Act. Actus Quartus. Scena Prima. Polyeuctes, Cleon▪ three other Guards. Polyeuctes. WHat would you with me, Guards? Cle. Paulina, Sir, Would speak with you. Pol. Oh how I dread her presence! This combat will be hard; Felix▪ o'e thee I triumphed in Prison, and despis'd
Thy threatning, I beheld thee without fear, I see, that to revenge thy self thou tak'st Stronger a mes then thine own her tears do terrifie Moe then thy Executionrs; O Lord, Thou seest here the danger that I run, In this my pressing need double thy force; And thou my dear Nearchus, comming forth Lately from a Triumphant victory, Look on my travel, from thy glorious residence, Lend me thy hand from Heaven to overcome So strong an Enemy. Guards, dae you doo me One civil office? Cle. Sir, we have strict order To render you no service. Pol You mistake me, I have no purpose to apply my self Unto you as a means for my escape, But I desire that one of you (three being Sufficient to guard me) would oblige me To seek Severus, and intreat him here; This might be done with safety, I presume. If I could tell him an important secret, He would injoy more happiness, and I Should dye content. Cle. Since it is for Severus, I will dispence with all things. Pol. He himself Will recompence thy pains, if I should fail. The sooner that thou go'st, the better 'tis, Dispatch. Cle I fly, and you shall have me here In less time then a moment.— Exit Cleon. Scena Secunda. Polyeuctes alone, his Guards being retired to the corners of the Stage. DElicious Spring of love, yet fruitfull still In misery, of me what is your will? Y flattering pleasures, bats of flesh and blood, Why fly you not, since I esteem you mud?
Vanish vain honours, worldly glory pass, Which shines, and is as brittle too as glass: Hope not that I'le sigh after you at all, It is in vain your weak charms to estall. Why shew you me Gods enemies in state And flourishing? he doth reserve a fate That shall confound those great ones, and the sword Suspended o're their heads, at his least word Shall fall on them, so much more heavily, As that they dream't not of their misery. Thou cruel Tiger Decius that dost thirst For blood, thou shalt be glutted till thou burst: That God, which we adore, hath for a while Permitted thee, wild forrest Boar, to spoil His lovely Vineyard, but thy fearfull fate Draws near which will thy glory terminate. The Scythian comes like an impetuous flood, To revenge Christian and Persian blood: A little yet, and then thy hour is come, When thou shalt sleep until the day of doom In body, not in mind, out of the name Of Christian, that is fed still with a flame, Which never dies. Nothing can warrant thee, The thunder's ready in the cloud, I see; And will no longer hold in expectation Of thy repentance, wretch in obstination! In the mean time let Felix sacrifice Me to thy rage, my Rivall blind his eyes, And make himself his Son-in-Law, I yield Unto my loss, rather I win the field: Vain baits, I slight you and despise your art, For in this Christian and Regenerate heart, I feel a divine flame, whose Ray will dim Paulina's beauty in her brightest trim. I look upon her now but as a toy That would detain me from my heavenly joy. Adoreable Idea's, sweets above You fill a heart that's capable to love; The souls Possessed with your sacred fire Fix there, and firmly settle their desire Never to change; you promise, and give more, Your benefits do still increase your store:
The happy death which I expect, to me Is a sweet passage to eternity. 'Tis you, O divine flame, which nothing can Extinguish, that make me more then a man Look on Paulina's face, and never fear; Her assaults and temptations I can hear; I see her, but my heart inflamed now With holy zeal, to her charms cannot how, And my eyes cleared with celestiall light, Hers appear clouded in a vail of night. Scena Tertia. Polyeuctes, Paulina, Guards. Polyeuctes. MAdam, what's the design that brings you hither? Is it to fight me, or to second me? And the fair proffer of this perfect love Comes it to aid me, or to overthrow me? Bring you here with you hate, or amity As enemy, or as my dearest moyety? Paul. You have no enemy here, Sir, but yourself Every one loves you, none but Polyeuctes Hateth your vertue, it is he alone That executes my dream, do not destroy Your self, and you are safe; how great soe'r Your crime be, you are innocent, if you grant A pardon to your self; deign to consider The blood from whence y'are sprung, your noble actions, Your rare endowments; think, Sir, that you are Belov'd by all the people, favoured of The Prince, and Son-in-law unto the Governour Of the whole Province, the name of my Husband. I reckon t'ee as nothing, that's a happiness Onely for me, which is not great for you; But after your exploits, after your birth, After your power, look upon our hope, And give not up unto the hangmans hand▪ What to our just desires so fair a fortune Doth promise. Pol. I consider more, and know
My advantages, and the hope which on them Great courages do frame, they aspire not But unto transitory good, which cares Disurb, which dangs follow, and which death Take from us, fortune makes her sport with them, To day ith' throne, to morrow in the dirt. Their greatest glory never is without Some discontent, few of our Caesars have Injoy'd it long, this greatness perisheth; I have ambition too, but mine's more fair And noble, for I seek immortall glory, A happiness assur'd that hath no end Nor measure, far above the reach of envy, O destiny; and is a sorry life Too der a purchase for it which immediatly May be tane from me, which makes me injoy But even the flying instant, end's not able T'assure me that which follows? Paul. See the dotage, And the ridiculous dreams of you fond Christians; Behold how their lies have seduced you! You think that all your blood is not enough For a felicity so sweet; but, Sir, This blood is not yours to dispose of it; You have not life as an inheritance, The day that gives it you at the same time Engageth it, you owe it to the Prince, Unto the Publick, to the State. Pol. I would Lose it for them in honourable fight, I know what is the happiness thereof, And what's the glory, you do boast the memory Of Decius Ancestors, and this name yet precious Unto you Romans, put into his hands At the end of six hundred years the Empire. I owe my life unto the peoples good, To the Prince and his crown, but I do owe it Much more unto the God that gave it me: If to dye for ones Prince be held to be A glorious fate, when one dies for his God How shall his death be crown'd? Paul. What God?
Pol. Peace, Paulina, He hears your words, for he is not a God Like your false gods, insensible and deaf, Weak, made of wood, of marble, or of gold, Even as you please: he is the God o'th' Christians, He is mine, he is yours, the heaven and earth Acknowledge him, who made both them and us. Paul. Adore him then in mind, and outwardly Express it not. Pol. Oh no! I should be then Idolater, and Christian both together. Paul. Dissemble for a moment till Severus Be gone, and let my Fathers goodness work. Pol. The goodness of my God is to be cherish'd Much more, he doth remove me from the dangers I would have run into, and without suffering Me to look back, his Favour crowneth me Entring in the career, with the first wind He brings me to the Port, and comming forth From baptism, he doth send me unto death. If you could comprehend the little worth Of this frail life, and the eternal sweets That follow after death—But to what end Is it to speak of those concealed treasures To souls whom God hath not inspired yet: Paul. Cruel! for it is time my grief break forth, And that a just reproach oppress a soul Ingratefull; Is this that fair fire thou boasts of? Are these thy oaths? expressest thou for me The smallest sentiments? I speak not to thee Of that deplorable estate, wherein Thy death will leave thy poor disconsolate Wife, I think that love should speak enough of that: But that love so firm and so well deserv'd Which thou didst promise me, and I bare thee, When thou wilt leave me, when thou mak'st me dye, Can it not draw one sigh, one tear from thee? Ingratefull, thou dost quit me, yea, with joy, Thou hid'st it not, but wilt that I should see it, And thy hard heart insensible to my sad Attractions, figureth unto it self, A happiness that I shall never see;
Is it then the disgust that Marriage brings? Am I grown odious after having given My self unto you? Pol. Alas! Paul. How that alas came hardly forth! Yet if it happily shew'd any sign Of a repentance, Oh how charming were it Although inforc'd! but courage, he is mov'd, I see he sheds tears. Pol. True, I weep, Paulina, And would to God that therewith this heard heart Might happily be pierc'd, the sad estate Wherein I leave you doth deserve the plaints My love doth give me, and if one can carry Griefs unto Heaven, I carry them to see The excess of your misfortunes; but if in This luminous abode of highest glory, This God all just and good, allow my Prayer, If He vouchsafe to lend an ear unto Conjugall love, He will display his light Upon your blindness; Lord, I do beseech thee Let me obtain this of thy goodness, she Hath too much vertue not to be a Christian, It pleased thee to give her too much merit, Not to know Thee, and to adhere unto Thee, To live still an unfortunate Slave of hell, And to die as she's born under that yoak. Paul. What say'st thou, miserable, what dar'st thou wish? Pol. That which with all my blood I fain would purchase. Paul. That rather.— Pol. Tis in vain to make resistance, This God toucheth the heart when least we think on't; That happy moment is not yet arriv'd, It will come, but the time's not known unto me. Paul. Leave this Chymera, come and love me still. Pol. I love you much more then my self, but, pardon me, Less then my God. Paul. In the name of that love, Forsake me not. Pol. In the name of that love, Follow my steps. Paul. Dost thou not eare to quit me, wilt thou then
Seduce me? Pol. Car'st thou not to go to Heaven? I will conduct you there. Paul. Imaginations! Pol. Coelestiall truths. Paul. Strange blindness. Pol. Rather everlasting lights. Paul. Thou prefer'st death before Paulina's love. Pol. You the base world before the divine goodness. Paul. Go, cruell, go and die, thou never lov'dst me. Pol. Live happy in the World, and suffer me To die in peace. Paul. Yes, I will leave thee, trouble not thy self, I go— Scena Quarta. Polyeuctes, Paulina, Severus, Fabian,Guards. Paulina. BUt what design Severus brings you here? Is this done like a generous Cavaleer To come to brave here one in misery? Pol. Paulina, you treat ill so rare a merit, At my sole prayer he renders me this visit. I have committed incivility, Noble Severus, which I know you'l pardon, And impute to my want of liberty. Being possessor of a Treasure which I was not worthy of, before I die Suffer me to resign it unto you, And to leave the rar'st vertue that a Woman Could e're receive from heaven unto the hands Of the most valiant and accomplish'd man The earth hath honour'd, or Rome hath produc'd. Y'are worthy of her, she is worthy you: Refuse her not, Sir, from a Husbands hand; If he hath dis-united you, his death Will make amends, and joyn you both again: Let not a fire which sometimes was so fair, Become less now, give her your heart, and take Her faith to you, live happily together,
And dye like me, it is the glorious good Which Polyeuctes wisheth to you both: Guards, lead me to my death, I've nothing more To say; come, all is finish'd. Scena Quinta. Severus, Paulina, Fabian. Severus. I Am confounded In my astonishment to see his blindness; His resolution's so unparalel'd, That scarce can I believe mine ears; a heart That holds you dear, (but what heart is so low That could have known you, and not cherish'd you?) A man belov'd by you, assoon as lie Possesseth you, without regret he leaves you, Nay he doth more, he doth resign you over; And as if your fires were a fatall present, He himself makes a gift on't to his Rivall: Surely the Christians either have strange whimsies, Or their felicities must be infinite, Since to pretend thereto they dare reject What one should purchase at an Empires price. For my part, if my destiny a little Sooner propitious, had been pleas'd to honour me With your fair Nuptials, I should have ador'd No glory but the lustre of your eyes; I would have made of them my Kings and gods. They should have first reduced me to dust, Before that— Paul. Sir, no more of this discourse, I fear I've heard too much, and that this heat▪ Should thrust forth some unseemly consequence Unworthy of us both. Severus, know My Polyeuctes wholy doth take up Paulina's thoughts, he hath but a short moment▪ To live, you are the innocent cause thereof: I know not if your soul might have presum'd To frame some hope to your desires upon His ruine, but assure your self, there is▪
No death so cruel whereunto I would not With fearless steps address, nor in Hell horrors So dreadfull which I would not rather suffer, Then fully my fame to espouse a man, After his sad fate, who in any kind Might cause his death, and if you should believe me Of so unsound a mind, the Love I bear you Would turn all into hatred; you are generous, Be so unto the end; My Father is In a condition to deny you nothing; He fears you, and I will be bold to adde This word, that if he doth destroy my Husband, It is to you he sacrificeth him; Save this unfortunate, use your interest for him, Indeavour, pray, to serve him as a Prop; I know tis much what I demand of you, But how much greater the indeavour is, So much more is the glory on't, preserve A Rivall that you'r jealous of, it is A tract of vertue which belongeth not But unto you; if this be not sufficient Renown unto you, tis much that a woman Sometimes belov'd, and yet perhaps whose love May touch you, should owe that to your great heart Which she esteems most dear. Lastly, remember You are Severus, after this Petition I'le go without an Answer, and if you Be not the same which Ile presume to vaunt, To prize you still, I will be ignorant.— Exit. Scena Sexta. Severus, Fabian. Severus. FAbian, What feel I? what new clap of Thunder Falls on my fortune, and reduceth it To dust? the more I do esteem it near The farther 'tis, I find all lost, when I Think all is gain'd, and envious Destiny Resolv'd to hurt me still, cuts off my hope▪ As soon as it is born. Before I offer
My fair devotions, I receive refusals, Sad alwaies and asham'd to see that basely It durst spring up again, that yet more basely It durst appear, and lastly that a Woman In an afflicted state should give me lessons Of generosity. Your fair soul, Paulina, Is as high as it is unfortunate, But tis as cruel too as generous, And your griefs tyrann ze with too much rigour Upon a Lovers heart that's wholely yours. Tis not enough to lose you then, unless I give you, I must serve a Rivall when He doth abandon you, and by a cruell And generous triall, to give you unto him, Must snatch him from his death. Fab. Leave this ingratefull family to their fate, Let it accord the father with the Daughter, The Husband with the Wife, and Polyeuctes, With Felix; What reward hope you to have For such a cruel triall? Sev. Only Fabian, The glory to shew to this beauteous soul, Severus equals her, and doth deserve her, That she was due unto me, and that Heaven, In taking her from me was too injurious. Fab. Without accusing Heaven, or Destiny Think on the danger you draw on upon you By such an Act, you hazard very much; Consider well, you enterprise to save A Christian, you cannot be ignorant What is, and always was the hate of Decius Unto that impious Sect; tis unto him A crime so great, so capitall, that even To you his only Favourite may be fatall. Sev. This were good counsel for some common soul, Though he hold in his hand my life and fortune, I am Severus still, and all this great And mighty power can nothing on my glory, Nothing upon my duty; honour here Obligeth me and I will satisfie it; Let fortune afterward shew her self kind Or cruel, as her nature's still inconstant,
Dying in glory I shall dye content: I'le tell thee more, but with some confidence, The Christian Sect is not the same we take it, We hate them, and the reason for't I know not, And I can see Decius unjust in nothing But in this point; for curiosity I fain would know them; they are held for Sorcerers, Whose Master Hell is, and on this belief The secret mysteries, which we are not able To understand, are punished with death: But Ceres, Eleusina, and the goddess Bonna at Rome, and in Greece have their secrets Like them; we suffer likewise in all places All kind of gods, their God only excepted: All the Aegyptian Monsters haue their Temple In Rome; our predecessors, as they lik'd, Made a god of a man, and their blood with us Retaining still their errors, we fill Heaven With all our Emperors; but to speak truly Of so much Apothaesis, the effect Is very doubtfull of these Metamorphoses: The Christians have but one God, absolute Master Of all, whose only will doth execute What he resolves, but if I durst to speake Between us what I think, ours very often, Me thinks, agree together very ill, And should their anger crush me 'fore thine eyes, I must speak this, we have too many of them To be true gods. Perhaps these publick faiths Are but inventions of wise Polyticks, To keep the People under, and to awe them, And to establish their power on their weakness. Lastly the manners of the Christians Are innocent, vertues do flourish with them, Vices appear not; never an Adulterer, A Traytor, Drunkard, Murtherer, or Thief Is seen amongst them, there is nothing else But love and charity, they live together Like Brothers, they pray for us that do persecute them; And have we ever since the time we first Tormented them, seen them in mutiny? Have we seen them rebellious! have our Princes
Had Souldiers more faithfull; fierce in war They suffer our tormentors patiently; Lions in fight, they dy as meek as Lambs. I've too much pitty for them not to help them: Come, let us find out Felix presently, And so by one sole action satisfie Paulina, my compassion, and my glory. The End of the fourth Act. Actus Quintus. Scena Prima. Felix, Albin, Cleon. Felix. ALbin, perceiv'st thou Severus plot? Seest thou his hate, and my sad misery? Alb. I see nought in him but a generous Rivall, And in you nothing but a rigorous Father. Fel. How ill thou know'st him? all he doth's but shew, In heart he hates me, and disdains Paulina, And though he sometime lov'd her he esteemes now A Rivals Relique too unworthy of him. He speaks in his behalf, prays, threatens me, And sayes he will destroy me, if I grant not Pardon unto him, pssing from generous He thinks to fear me, but the Artifice Is too gross not to be discovered: I know the Court, and all its subtle windings Before him, I'm acquainted with its plots, And all its practises, it is in vain For him to storm, and faign to be in fury, I see what he intendeth to the Emperor, Of that which he requests me, he'd accuse me, Sparing his Rivall, I should be his Victime; And if he had to do with some young Novice, The plot is wel laid, without doubt he would Destroy him easily, but an old Courtier Is not so credulous, he seeth well When one's in jeast, and when he is in earnest;
And for my part, I've seen so many of them Of all kinds, that if need were, I could give Lessons even unto him. Alb. Gods! how you torture Your self by this distrust? Fel. To stand in Court It is the highest skill; when once a man Hath cause to hate us, we ought to presume That he seeks all the wayes he can to ruine us; Then all his friendship is to be suspected; If Polyeuctes forsakes not his Sect, What ever his Protector intends for him I'le boldly follow th' order is prescrib'd me. Alb. Pardon, Sir, pardon, let Paulina's prayers And tears obtain it. Fel. Th' Emperours pardon, Albin, Shall not come after mine, and so far am I From drawing him out of this perilous pass, As not to do what will destroy us both. Alb. But Sir, Severus promiseth— Fel. I mistrust him, And know better then he the hate of Decius, In favour of the Christians if he should Oppose his anger without doubt he would Ruine himself with us, I will try yet Another way.—Bring Polyeuctes here,—— to Cleon. And if I send him back again, if he Remain insensible of this last attempt,— Cleon returns. At his departure hence he surely dies. Alb. Your order is too rigorous. Fel. I must follow it, If I'le prevent disorder which may happen; I see the People mov'd to take his part, And thou thy self lately advertis'd me; In the zeal which they do express for him, I know not how long he may be within My power; perhaps this evening to night, To morow I may see th' effects I fear; And suddenly Severus flying to His vengeance, may go to calumniate me With some intelligence, I must break this stroak, That would be fatall to me.
Alb. What a strange evil is this diffidence? Every thing hurts and ruines you, gives you shadows, But see you not, Sir, that his death will put This people into rage? tis a wrong way To cure them, for to make them desperate. Fel. After his death it is in vain to murmur, And if they dare proceed to any violence, Tis but to give way for a day or two Unto the insolence, I shall have done My duty whatsoever may arrive; But Polyeuctes comes, let us indeavour To save him, retire Souldiers, and guard The port well.— Polyeuctes comes with the Guards, who retire suddenly. Scena Secunda. Felix, Polyeuctes, Albin. Felix. HAst thou then such a hate to life, unfortunate And wretched Polyeuctes, and the Law Of Christians? doth it thus injoyn thee to Forsake thy friends? Pol. I hate not life, and love The lawfull use of it, but without dotage, Which savoureth of slavery, always ready To render it to God▪ from whom I hold it, Reason ordains it and the Christian Law, And thereby I instruct you how to live, If you have but the heart to follow me. Fel. To follow thee into the Gulph, where thou Wilt cast thy self? Pol. Rather unto the glory Where I am going to ascend. Fel. At least Let me have time to know't, to make me Christian, Be thou my guide, and be not scrupulous T'instruct me in thy faith, if thou refusest, Tis thou shalt answer't to thy God for me. Pol. Felix, Jeast not, tis he shall be your Judge, There is no flying from him, Kings and Shepheards
Are of one rank with him, he will revenge The blood of his upon you. Fel. I'le shed no more, And come what will on't, in the Christian faith I'le suffer them to live and will protect them. Pol. No, no, proceed to persecute, and be The Instrument of our felicities; A Christian is at best, when he doth suffer; The cruel'st torments are but recompences Unto us; God that rendereth the Centuple Unto good actions giveth persecutions To make up the full measure, but these Secrets Are very hard for you to comprehend, Tis but to his Elect that God reveals them. Fel. I speak to thee unfaignedly, and would Be a true Christian. Pol. Who can then retard Th'effect of such a great and signall happiness? Fel. The presence— Pol. Of whom? of Severus? Fel. Only For him I've feigned so much anger 'gainst thee. Dissemble for a while, till he be gone. Pol. Is it thus, Felix, that you speak unfeignedly? Bear to your Pagans, carry to your Idols The impoysoned honey which your words powr forth: A Christian feareth nothing, knoweth not How to dissemble, to the eyes of all The world, he's still a Christian. Fel. This zeal Of thy faith serveth thee but to seduce thee, If thou run to thy death before thou dost Instruct me. Pol. I should speak unto you here Unseasonably, it is a gift of Heaven, And not of reason, there it is that I Seeing God face to face shall obtain for you This Grace more easily. Fel. In the mean time Thy loss will make me desperate. Pol. You can Repair it; free of one Son, you may have
Another when you please, whose quality Answereth yours better; my loss, Sir, would be But a change advantagious unto you. Fel. For bear to injure me with this discourse, I have esteem'd thee more then thou deserv'st, Bt in spight of my goodness which increaseth When thou provok'st it, in the end this insolence Would make thee odious and revenge mee on thee Aswell as our gods. Pol. How? d'ee change so soon Honour and Language? doth the zeal of your gods Enter again into you? and to be A Christian vanisheth? was it by chance That you said you would speak unfeignedly? Fel. Go to, presume not, whatsoe'r I swear Unto thee, that I'le follow the imposture Of thy new Doctors, I but flattered Thy madness, to the end to snatch thee from The fearfull precipice whereinto thou art Ready to fall, I would gain time to Husband Thy life after that Decius Favourite Were with-drawn hence, but I have done too great An injury to our omnipotent gods. Chuse whether thou wilt give thy blood unto them. Or incense? Pol. I'm not doubtfull in my choise, But, O heaven! see Paulina. Scena Tertia. Felix, Polyeuctes, Paulina, Albin, Paulina. WHich of you two do murther me to day? Is't both together, or each at his turn? What? can I neither bend nature, nor love? And shall I obtain nothing either from A Husband, or a Father? Fel. Speak to your Husbond, Paul. Live with Severus. Paul. Tiger, murther me Without this injury.
Pol. My pitty seeks As much as possible it may, to comfort you. Our love doth carry you to such true griefs, That nothing but another love can cure Those wounds; since then so great a merit could Inflame you, his fair presence hath a right To charm you, you did love him, he doth love you, And his augmented glory.— Paul. Cruel, What have I done unto thee that Thou treat'st me thus, as to reproach me with, In contempt of my faith, so great a love Which I've subdu'd for thee? see now, to make thee Vanquish so strong an adversary, what attempts I was to make against my self, what combats I had to give to thee a heart, so justly Due to its first subduer; if ingratitude Sway not my heart, make some attempt upon thee To give thee to Paulina; learn of her To force thy proper sentiment, take her vertue For guide unto thy blindness, suffer her T'obtain thy life from thee thy self, to live Still subject to thy laws; but if thou canst Reject such just desires, at least regard Her tears, attend her sighs, and make not desperate A soul that doth adore thee. Pol. I've said to you already, and Paulina, I say again to you, live with Severus, Or die with me, I despise not your tears, Nor yet your faith, but henceforth I must have No commerce with you, nor know you no more Unless you be a Christian. Felix, 'tis Enough on't, take again your anger to you, And on this insolent revenge your gods And you. Paul. Oh Father! I confess, his crime's Scarce pardonable, but if he distracted, You, Sir, are reasonable; nature is too strong, And its fair characters imprinted in The blood are ne'r defac'd, a Father is Always a Father, and on this assurance I dare hald up some small remains of hope: Cast a paternall look upon your daughter,
It is decreed my death shall forthwith follow The death or this dear Criminall, and the gods Will find her punishment unlawfull, since She'le mingle innocence and crime together, And so by this redoublement will change Into an unjust rigour, a just chastisement. Our destinies made by your hands inseperable, We ought to make happy or miserable Together, and you should be cruell even Unto the extreamest point to dis-unite What you have joyned, one heart to another United once, never retires it self, You cannot seperate them unless you tear them; But you are sensible of my just griefs, And with a Fathers eye behold my tears. Fel. Yes, Daughter, it is true, a Father is Always a Father, nothing can raze out The sacred character thereof, I carry A sensible heart, and you have pierced it, I joyn me with you against this distracted. Unfortunate, and wretched Polyeuctes, Art thou alone insensible, and wilt Thou only make thy crime unpardonable? Canst thou hear so many heart-breaking sighs From such a tender breast? canst thou behold So much love, and be nothing touched with it? Acknowledgest thou neither Father-in-Law Nor Wife, without amity for the one, Or love for th' other? to resume the names Of Son and Husband, wilt thou see us both Fall at thy feet, and so imbrace thy knees? Pol. Oh! how unhandsome is this artifice, After twice having tryed threatning, After making me see Nearchus dying, After imploying love, and its effort, After declaring to me that great thirst Of baptism to oppose to God the interest Of God himself. You joyn your selves together? Oh policy of Hell! must we o'recome So many times before we triumph? sure Your resolutions are so slow, take yours At last, since, I've already taken mine.
I adore but one God, the Master of The Universe, under whose feet, the Heaven, The Earth, and Hell doth tremble, one God which Loving us with an infinite love, dy'd for us With ignominy, and which by an excess Of that same love will every day be offer'd As Victim for us; But I am too blame To speak of this to those can't understand me: See the blind error that you dare defend; You defile all your gods with foulest crimes, You punish not one sin whose Master's not I'th' heaven by your accompt, Adultery, Incest, Prostitution, Theft, Murther, and what ever we detest, It is the example which your Deities Give you to follow; I've profan'd their Temple, And broken down their Altars, I would do it Again, if I could reach them, even before The eyes of Felix, yea, before Severus, And more, even in the presence of the Senate, Or of the Emperour himself. Fel. At last My goodness giveth place to my just fury, Adore them, or thou dy'st. Pol. I am a Christian. Fel. Thou impious wretch, I say again, adore them, Or renounce life. Pol. I am a Christian. Fel. Art thou? O heart too obstinate! Souldiers, execute The order that I gave,— Cleon and the other Guards take Polyeuctes away, Paulina fol∣lows him. Paul. Where lead you him? Fel. To death. Pol. To glory. Adiew my dear Paulina, love my memory. Paul. I'le follow thee throughout, and even to death. Pol. Forsake your errour, or not follow me. Fel. Take him away, and see I be obey'd, Since he desires to dye, 'tis fit he perish.
Scena Quarta. Felix, Albin. Felix. ALbin, I do me violence, but I must, My gentle nature would have easily Dest oy'd me, let the peoples rage at present Display it self, and let Severus thunder, And fet with fury having performed this I am secure; but art not thou surpriz'd With this unshaken constancy? seeth thou Impenetrable hearts like his, or such Horrid impieties? I have satisfied My grieved heart, and have neglected nothing To make his soft and yielding; I have feigned Before thy eyes base wickedness, and surely Had it not been for his last blasphemies, Which fill'd me suddenly with fear and anger, I should have scarce triumphed o'r my self. Alb. You'l one day curse perhaps this victory, Which savoureth of I know not what an action Too black, unworthy Felix, and a Roman, Shedding your blood thus by your proper hand. Fel. So sometime Brutus, and stout Manlius shed it, Which added to their glory, far from lessening it; Never have our old Hero's had ill blood, But they have opened their proper bowels To let it out. Alb. Your hea seduceth you; But whatsoe'r it tell you, when you once Shall find it cold, when you shall see Paulina, And that her sad despair expressed by Her crys and waylings shall come forth to move you.— Fel. Thou mak'st me to remember that she follow'd That Traytor, This despair which she will shew, May interrupt the effect of my command; Go therefore, and giue order it be done, See what he doth, break any obstacle Her griefs may give unto it, and withdraw her From that sad spectacle, if thou canst indeavour
To comfort her; go then, who holdeth thee? Alb. There is no need, Sir, she returns her self. Scena Quinta. Felix, Paulina, Albin. Paulina. BArbarous Father, finish thy black work, This second sacrifice is worth thy rage, Joyn thy sad Daughter to thy Son-in-Law, Why tarry'st thou? thou seest here the same crime, Or the same vertue; thy barbarity In her hath the same matter; my dear Husband Left me his lights in dying, his just blood, With which his Executioners are comming To cover me, hath opened mine eyes: I see, I know, I do believe, and am Free of mine error, I am undeceiv'd, Thou seest me baptis'd with that blest blood; Lastly, I am a Christian, have I not Spoken enough? keep in destroying me, Thy rank and credit, fear the Emperour. And doubt Severus, if thou wilt not perish, My death is necessary, Polyeuctes cals me Unto his happy death, I see Nearchus And he both stretching forth their hands unto me: Bring me to see thy gods which I detest, They broke but one, I will break all the rest, There you shall see me brave all that you fear, Those silly Thunder-bolts which you depaint Within their hands, and holily rebellious Unto the Laws of birth, thou once shalt see me Fail in obedience to thee; it is not My grief that I do make appear therein, Tis grace within me speaks, and not despair. May I say it again? Felix, I am A Christian, settle by my death thy fortune And mine, the stroke to both on's will be precious, Since it assureth the one earth, and lifts me Unto the Heavens.
Scena Ultima. Felix, Severus, Paulina, Albin, Fabian. Severus. UNnaturall Father, wretched Polititian, Ambitious slave to a Chymerick fear, Is Polyeuctes dead then by your cruelties, And think you to conserve your sorry dignities? The favour which for him I offer'd you, Instead of saving him, hasted his death; I prayed, threatned, but I could not move you; You thought me false, or but of little power, But you shall know at your cost that Severus Boasts not of any thing but what he can Perform and by your ruine he will make you To judge that he who can destroy you, could Have protected you; continue to The gods this faithfull service▪ by such horrors Shew them your zeal, adiew, but when the storm Shall break upon you, doubt not of the arm From whence the strokes shall come. Fel. Severus, stay, And with a quiet mind suffer that I Give you an easie vengeance, by my cruelties Cease to reproach me more, I do indeavour To keep my sorry dignities, I dispose Their false deceitfull lustre to your feet; That glory whereunto I dare t'aspire Is a rank more Illustrious, I do find My self forc'd to it by a secret bait, I yield to those transports I do not know, And by a woking which I understand not, I from my fury pass unto the zeal Of my blest Son-in-law; tis he no doubt, Whose innocent blood prays an Almighty God For me his Persecutor, his love spred On all the Family, draws after him As well the Father as the Daughter, I Have made a Martyr of him, and his death Hath made me Christian, I procur'd his bliss, He will work mine, so is it that a Christian
Is angry and revengeth, happy cruelty Whose event is so sweet! Paulina, give me Thy hand, bring fetters here, and sacrifice Unto your gods these two new Christians I am one, She is so, observe your anger. Paul. How happily at last I find my Father! This blessed change maketh my joy compleat. Fel. Daughter, it doth belong but to the hand That doth it. Sev. Who would not be touch'd with A spectacle so tender? I believe Such changes come not without miracle, Your Christians without doubt, which we in vain Do persecute, have something in them which Surpasseth humane, they do lead a life With so much innocence, that Heaven doth owe them Some great acknowledgement; to shew themselves More strong the more they are oppress'd, is not Th' effect of common vertues; I still lov'd them, What ever might be said on't, I ne'r saw them To dye, but this heart sighed for't, and perhaps, I shall one day be better known unto them: In the mean time I like that every one Should have his own gods, and that he should serve them After his own way without fear of punishment, If you are Christians, fear no more my hate, I love them, Felix, and from their Protector, I will not make a Persecutor of them In you: guard well your power, take it again, Serve your God, serve your Monarch, I will lose My credit with his Majesty, or he Shall shake off this severity, by his Unjust hate he doth too much wrong himself. Fel. Daign gracious Heaven to end his work in you, And one day to give you what you deserve, T'inspire into you all his sacred Truths: For us we blesse this fortunate adventure, Come, let us go to give our Martyrs buriall, To kiss their precious bodies, and to put them In holy place, in consecrated ground, Then let us make the name of God resound. FINIS.
