F2324 R7232 12251576 57118
A FULL and TRUE RELATION OF THE Great and Wonderful REVOLƲTION That hapned lately in the KINGDOM of SIAM In the East-Indies. Giving a particular Account of the Seizing and Death of the Late King, and of the Setting up of a New One. AS ALSO Of the putting to Death of the King's only Daughter, His Adopted Son who was a Christian, his two Brothers; And of Monsieur Constance, his great Minister of State, and Favourer of the FRENCH. AND Of the Expulsion of all the Jesuits, Missionary Priests, Officers and Soldiers of the FRENCH Nation out of that Kingdom, that endeavoured to bring it under the FRENCH Domination. Being the Substance of several Letters writ in Octob. 1688. and Febr. 1689. From SIAM, and the Coast of Cormandel. Never before publisht in any Language, and now Translated into English. LONDON, Printed for Randal Taylor near Stationers-Hall. 16.
The Preface to the Reader. FOR the better understanding of the following Relation, I Think it not amiss to acquaint the Reader, That the first Solemn Embassy that the French King sent to the late King of SIAM, was in the Year 1685, by Monsieur de Chaumont, who went in Quality of Ambassador Extraordinary, whereof there are two Relations publisht; One, of the Embassy done by the Ambassador himself; The other, of the Voyage done by Father Tachard, one of the six Jesuits that accompany'd Monsieur de Chaumont in that Voyage, by the French King's particular Command. Both are Translated into English, Illustrated with Sculptures, and Printed about two Years ago. The second Embassy was performed in the Year 1687, when the SIAM Ambassadors that came into France the Year be∣fore with Monsieur de Chaumont, return'd back again into SIAM, by Messieurs de la Louberc and Ceberet, who carry'd over with them twelve French Jesuits, all Mathematicians, to teach the Christian Religion, and the Mathematical Sciences in the two Royal Cities of SIAM and LOUVO, and a con∣siderable Body of Officers and Soldiers that the French King sent to the King of SIAM. The Relation of this second Voy∣age is publisht only in French about six Months ago, by the same Father Tachard, who went back into SIAM with the SIAM Ambassadors, and return'd from Thence into France with the Character of the King of SIAM's Envoy Extraordinary to the French King, and to the Pope. He arrived at Paris in No∣vember, 1688. and had an Audience of the French King: And in January, 1689. he came to Rome, and had his Au∣dience
of the Pope. In March following he was to have Em∣barqued the third time for SIAM; but what is become of him since, is not yet known. In all these three Relations there is mention made of a young Princess, Daughter to the late King of SIAM, that was then alive, whereof there is no Notice taken in the following Ac∣count of the late Revolution; but in other Letters that are come into France from other hands, we find a no less Tragical Account of her Death, than that of her Ʋnkles, and adopted Brother, the manner whereof they say was this: Opra Pitra∣chard having dispatched the King's two Brothers, and adopted Son, who were the only Princes that stood in his way to the Crown, caused the young Princess, the King's only Daughter, to be taken and thrust into a large velvet Sack, and her Brains to be knockt out with great Bars of the sweet and so much esteem'd Wood in all the Indies call'd Aquila and Calamboar; and then thrown into the River, it being accounted a prophane thing, and a violation of the Sacred Respect due to a Princess of the Royal Blood of SIAM, to be put to Death in the usual manner that others are; and therefore they did it with great Deference and distinguishing Ceremonies becoming her Quali∣ty, not suffering her Royal Person to be polluted with the touch of any vulgar Hand, or Instrument of Mortality. The King of SIAM that died lately was about 59 years of Age; the Character that is given of him in all the printed Re∣lations of the French is very advantageous: They say he was, without Contradiction, the greatest Prince that ever Reign'd in SIAM. He was of stature somewhat under the middle size, but strait and well shap'd. He had an engaging Air, a sweet and obliging Carriage, especially to Strangers. He was active and brisk, an Enemy of Idleness and Laziness, which seems to be so natural to the Eastern Princes, and is accounted by them as the Noblest Prerogative of their Crown. This Prince, on the
contrary, was always either in the Woods a hunting of Ele∣phants, or in his Palace minding the Affairs of his Kingdom. He was no Lover of War, because it ruin'd his People, whom he tenderly lov'd; but when his Subjects rebell'd, or his neigh∣bouring Princes offer'd him the least Affront, or violated that Respect that was due to him, there was no King in all the East that took a more conspicuous Revenge, nor appeared more pas∣sionate for Glory. He was desirous of knowing every thing, and having a pregnant and piercing Wit, he easily became Master of what he had a mind to learn. He was magnificent, gene∣rous, and as true a Friend as could be desired. These were the Illustrious Qualities which acquired him the Respect of his Neighbours, the Fear of his Enemies, the Esteem and Love of his Subjects, that was nothing short of Adoration. He was never addicted to those Vices which so commonly reign amongst the Princes of the East; nay, he did often severely punish the most considerable Mandarins, and principal Officers of the Crown, for being too much given to their Pleasures: So that the most unconquerable Obstacle to the Conversion of those In∣dian and Idolatrous Princes, was not to be found in him, name∣ly, the immoderate Love of Women. By the sharpness of his Wit he had discovered the Erro∣neousness of the Religion of his Ancestors. And he did not believe an Annihilated God, according to the popular Opinion; or as some of their Doctors say, A God, who weary of govern∣ing the Heavens, plunges himself in Repose, and for ever buries himself in the forgetfulness of what passes in the world; Nor a Thousand other Superstitions preached by the Talopins, who are the Preachers and Priests of the Kingdom. On the contrary, He believ'd that God is Eternal; that his Providence continually governs the World, and disposes of all things. To the same Immortal God he often made his Prayers, and implo∣red his Divine Assistance with most profound Reverence at least
twice a day, for two hours time, in the Morning after he was up, and at Night before he went to rest. Of the truth of this, there is a most Illustrious Monument in that Never-enough to be admired Speech of his to Monsieur Constance, in Answer to the French Ambassador's Memorial, when he press'd him much to declare himself a Christian; which, because of its singular worth, I think it not amiss to insert it here, as Father Tachard has deliver'd it to us in the 5th Book of his first Voyage to SIAM, pag. 309. of the Paris Edition, in Quarto, which runs thus in English: IN Answer to the French Ambassador, you shall tell him from me, That I think my Self extremely obliged to the King of France his Master, finding in his Memorial the marks of his most Christian Majesties Royal Friendship; And since the Honour that great Prince hath done me, is already made Publick all over the East, I cannot sufficient∣ly acknowledge his Civility: But that I am extremely troubled that the King of France, my good Friend, should propose so difficult a thing unto me, wherewith I am not in the least acquainted; that I refer my Self to the Wisdom of the most Christian King, that he himself may judge of the Importance and Difficulty that occur in so nice a mat∣ter, as the Change of a Religion receiv'd and follow'd throughout my whole Kingdom, without Interruption, du∣ring the space of Two thousand two hundred and twenty nine years. Besides, it is a matter of Astonishment to me, that the King of France, my good Friend, should so much concern himself in an Affair that relates to God, wherein it would seem God do's not at all interest himself, but leaves it whol∣ly to our discretion; For could not the true God, that crea∣ted the Heavens and the Earth, and all things that are
therein, and hath given them so different Natures and In∣clinations, when he gave to Men like Bodies and Souls, if he had pleased, have also inspired into them the same Sen∣timents for that Religion they ought to follow, and for that Worship which was most acceptable to him, and make all Nations live and die in the same Laws? That Order amongst Men, and that Unity in Religion de∣pending absolutely on Divine Providence, who could as easily introduce it into the World, as the diversity of Sects that in all times have been establisht in it; Ought not one to think, that the true God takes as great pleasure to be ho∣noured by different Worships and Ceremonies, as to be glo∣rify'd by a prodigious number of Creatures, that praise him every one in their own way? Would that Beauty and Va∣riety which we admire in the Order of Nature, be less admi∣rable in the supernatural Order, or less beseeming the Wis∣dom of God? However it be, continued he, since we know that God is the absolute Master of the World, and that we are persua∣ded that nothing comes to pass contrary to his Will, I whol∣ly resign my Person and Dominions into the Arms of the Divine Mercy and Providence, and with all my Heart be∣seech his Eternal Wisdom to dispose thereof according to his good Will and Pleasure. But after all this Character and Account of his Person and Humour, I cannot learn what his Name was, unless by the In∣scription of the Letters he sent to the Pope, and to the French King in the Year 1688, mentioned in the second Voyage of Father Tachard: In his Letter to the French King he writes himself thus: SOM DET PRATCHAO CRUNG THEP PRAMHA ANA CON PUJAI.
To the Pope thus: SOM DET PRATCHAO SIA JOV THIA PUJAI. He never signs his Name in any Letters he writes; the Metal on which his Letters are writ, and which none else in his King∣dom is allow'd to use but himself, is accounted an authentick and unquestionable Proof that the Letters are the Kings. He writes on a Plate of Gold only when he sends Letters to great Kings; and when he writes to inferior and private Persons, it is com∣monly on Paper, to which his Seal is annex'd, which is of dif∣ferent bigness, according to the quality of the Person to whom be writes. And as for Monsieur Constance, besides what is said of him in the following Discourse, I will add some few things taken of other Authors, that are entertaining enough, and deserve to be inserted here. Whil'st he was in England, and a good while after he had been setled in SIAM, he was a good Protestant, but when he fell into the Jesuits hands, they soon perverted him, and made him embrace the Roman Catholick Religion, and espouse the French Interest, to that degree of Zeal that proved so Fatal to him at last. He lived some Years in the Family and Service of one Mr. White, a considerable East-India Merchant at SIAM, who is now in London, and continued his Factor when he left SIAM; by which means he gather'd some mony, and then set up for himself: The first step he made, was to buy a Ship, and to put to Sea, but had the misfortune to be beat back by bad Weather, and was twice cast away in the Mouth of the River of SIAM. Putting to Sea once more, he was shipwrackt the third time, and much more unfortunately, upon the Coast of Malabar;
there he was in danger of perishing, and could not save, of all he had, above Two thousand Crowns. In this sad Condition, being opprest with grief, weariness and sleep, a remarkable thing hapned to him: He had laid himself down upon the shore, when, whether he was asleep, or awake, he could not tell himself, he fan∣cied he saw a person full of Majesty, who looking upon him with a smiling Countenance, most obligingly said to him, Return, Return, from whence you came. Which words so wrought upon him, as he did often protest to several of his Acquaintance since, That it was impossible for him to sleep all the rest of the Night, his Thoughts being wholly taken up about finding away how to return to SIAM. Next Day, whil'st he walked by the Sea-side, reflecting on what he had seen in the Night-time, and uncertain what to think of it, he saw a Man coming towards him dropping wet, with a sad and dejected Countenance: It was an Ambassador of the King of SIAM, who, upon his Return from Persia, had been Cast away, without saving any thing but his Life; both of them speaking the Siamese Tongue, they became soon acquainted with one anothers Adventures. The Ambassador discover'd himself, and told what extreme Necessity he was reduced to. Monsieur Constance condoling his Misfortune, offered to carry him back to SIAM, and with the 2000 Crowns that he had saved, he bought a small Barque, Cloaths and Provision for their passage. This so obliging a Behaviour charmed the Ambassador of SIAM, who, from that time forward, endeavour'd all he could how he might testifie his Gratitude to him. When they arrived at SIAM, and the Ambassador had given an Account of his Ne∣gotiation and Shipwrack to the chief Minister, he told him all the good Offices which he had receiv'd from Monsieur Constance, with so great Applause to his Merit, that the Minister had a mind to know him. He entertain'd him in Discourse, and liked him so well, that he resolved to keep him about him, in which Post
he soon gain'd the Esteem and Confidence of his Master. This chief Mi∣nister was a Man of Wit, and well versid in Business; but he avoided Trouble as much as he could, and loved his pleasure. It was matter of ex∣ceeding Joy to him, to have found an able, faithful, and industrious Person, on whom he might repose the Cares of his place. The Barcalon dying not long after, he King, would needs put Monsieur Constance in his place, but he declin'd it, and told his Majesty, That that Post would create to him the Envy of all the great Men, and therefore besought him not to raise him higher than he was, for that was the utmost Boundary of his Ambition, accounting himself happy enough, in that he stood fair in his Favours. His Modesty, his Skill and Diligence in dispatching Affairs; his Fidelity in managing the publick Revenue, and his Disinterestedness in refusing both the Appointments of his Office, and all Presents from private People, did more and more increase the King's Confidence in him. He was very Civil to the English on all Occasions, and did them all the friendly Offices that lay in his power. He was very desirous of setling a Trade betwixt that Nation and them, but it was obstructed. About two Years ago he sent a very considerable Present to King James II. of all the Rarities and valuable Things that the East-Indies do produce, estimated to be worth about Six thousand pounds. Now that I am talking of Presents, nothing could be more Magnificent, than those that the King of SIAM sent to the French King in the Year 1685, valued at above Sixty thousand pounds: And, in Requital, the French King sent to the King of SIAM of the Manufacture of France, in Rich Brocards, Looking-Glasses, Watches, Cloaks, and other valuable Things, to the value of above 300000 Crowns; yet nothing was lookt on as a greater Compliment to the King of SIAM, than a very fine Caparason of Velvet all richly Embroydered with Silver, Gold, and Pearls, all the Buckles and Rings whereof were of Massy Gold that was sent for the White Elephant, the Palladiam, or Tutelar Deity of that Country.
A RELATION OF THE Late Great Revolution IN SIAM, And of the Driving out of the FRENCH. BY the various Relations, Embassies and Voyages of Siam that have been publisht within these last Four Years, the World has been sufficiently informed of the Intrigues of the Jesuits in that Kingdom, which was begun and managed by the means of a certain Greek Chri∣stian call'd Constantin Faulcon, whom the French have qua∣lified with the Title and Dignity of his Excellency my Lord
Constance. He was born in Cephalonia, a Greek Island be∣longing to the Venetians, of a Noble Venetian, and of a young Lady of the ancientest Family of the Country; and about the Year 1660, being but Ten Years of Age, he had Sense and Understanding enough to discern the ill Condi∣tion that his Parents Negligence and ill Management had brought their Domestick Affairs into, which put him upon the Resolution of seeking his Fortune abroad, since he could not maintain it according to his Quality at home. The first Adventure he made was into England, where he lived some Years, and then went into the East-Indies, and was employ'd by some English Merchants as their Factor at Siam. He continued some time in that Service, and had the good For∣tune to be known to the chief Minister of State, who in that Country is call'd Barcalon, who finding him to be diligent, laborious, and capable of doing Business, brought him into the management of publick Affairs under him; by which means he came to be not only acceptable, but very necessary to the King in the dispatch of several impor∣tant Matters. The Advantage of his European Education, and the great Knowledge he had acquired in Trade and Commerce both there and in the Indies, making him very considerable, help'd to insinuate him so far into the Favour and good Opinion of the King of Siam, that at last, after the death of the Barcalon, he was advanced to be one of his chief Ministers, especially for the management of Foreign Affairs. The Intrigue was carry'd on at Court, under the plausible Pretext of freeing the Golph of Siam from the Dutch Yoke, who having Malacca, a strong Fort at the En∣try of it, in their hands, had imposed a Toll and Duty on all the Indian Ships that traded or came into that Bay; but the true Design that (as was believed) lay at the bottom,
was first to bring the Kingdom under the French Domina∣tion, and then to change the establisht Religion of the Country; towards the attainment of which Ends, the said Greek had so far prevailed on the King, who having no Sons of his own to succeed him, but two Brothers, as to get him to adopt a young Nobleman that had been bred up in that Christian Religion that the Jesuits teach and propagate in the Indies, to be his Heir and Successor. It was under this Successor that the Conspiracy was to take Effect. The French were already become Masters, and in possession of the two chief places that open a passage into that King∣dom; the one is call'd Bancock, which is a great and strong Fortress on the Mouth of the River of Siam; Margen is the other place situated on the Frontiers: And as if this had not been enough to please and oblige them, the King allow'd them to have a Command in the Guards about his own Person. It was with much Impatience and Resentment that the Officers of State, and the great Men of the Kingdom suf∣fered those pernicious Intrigues to be carry'd on. They could not but well observe, that those great French Squa∣drons, so fill'd with Numbers of Men, and so plentifully provided with Ammunition, and all Warlike Preparations, aimed at something else, besides the securing of the Trade and Commerce of the French Company of Merchants, all whose Stock was not of that Importance, as to occasion the Charges and necessary Expence of one of those Squa∣drons; neither were they so filly, or unacquainted with the Affairs abroad, as to believe that those mighty and rich Present that came so frequently from France, were sent for no other End, than to make and preserve a strict Friendship and Amity betwixt the Kings of both Nations. They could
not, without some Indignation, bear the specious Discour∣ses of the Jesuits, who would persuade those Oriental Peo∣ple, that all the Pains they took, the Fatigues and Dangers they had endur'd in coming so far to live amongst them, proceed from no other Principle, but the strong desire they had of doing them good, which was pretended to be the Motive that induced them to come and exercise amongst them those Arts and Sciences that are best understood and practised in Europe, such as Physick, Surgery, Astronomy, and the Mathematicks, by the means whereof they hoped to render them capable of being taught the way to Hea∣ven. On the contrary, they saw that those Missioners had fallen upon the same treacherous and intriguing Methods to over∣turn their Government, that they had formerly practised in Japan, where they made it more their Business to subject that Kingdom to the Spanish Domination, (which was then the most potent, and furthest extended in the World) than to bring it under the Obedience of Jesus Christ his Laws. Notwithstanding that the Doctrin of the Gospel had made so great a progress in that vast Empire, that some Princes of the Blood, several of the chief Nobility, and some hun∣dreds of thousands of the People had declared for the Chri∣stian Religion, and enroll'd themselves amongst the Pro∣fessors of it. These were the Reflections that the Grandees of Siam entertain'd themselves with on this Occasion, but they were willing to stay till the death of the King, before they at∣tempted the shaking off this Foreign Yoke.
In the Month of May 1688, the King happened to fall Sick at his Royal Palace at Louvo, the report whereof was no sooner spread abroad, than the Conspiracy broke out, which was contrived by one of the Chief Ministers of State, Pitrachard by Name; who, besides his Quality of Great Man∣darin, was Governor of the Palaces of Siam and Louvo, and dignified with the Honourable Title of Opra, which is one of the most Illustrious and distinguishing Marks of Ho∣nour that one is capable of in Siam. The discovery of this Plot, the progress it made, and the consequences of it, be∣ing the substance of several Letters writ from Siam in Octo∣ber 1688, are as follow: On the 26th of May at Night, Opra Pitrachard caused a great many Troops to enter the Castle of Louvo, whereby he made himself presently Master of the Person of the King, seized his Adopted Son, and on his two Bro∣thers, giving it out, and making every one of them in parti∣cular believe, it was to secure the King's Life from a desperate Conspiracy that lately had been discovered against him; but to the three young Princes he further said to every one of them apart, That the King was so ill that he was past all hopes of Recovery, and that he would make it his business to set the Crown on their Heads. This was done on pur∣pose that they might let him go on, and not interrupt him in the execution of so plausible a Design; and it had all the success that he could have wished or hoped. Monsieur Constance was no sooner acquainted with what had past, and was a carrying on in the Castle, but he went immediately thither, accompanied with a numerous Train of his Friends, and particularly of the French, amongst whom
were these Officers of note, Messieurs de Beauchamp, de Fretteville; the Chevalier des Fourbin, Monsieur Vandrille, and de Luisse, as he was entring the Castle he told those that were posted round about it, that he was going to see the King; but he did scarcely come within the Gates when they seized on him, and on the French Officers, who were all secured and kept together in one of the Apartments of the Palace. The next day Opra Pitrachard sent for Monsieur Constance to come to him, and ordered him to go and tell the French Officers that there was no design of keeping them Prisoners, that what was done was occasioned by a most dangerous Plot that they had lately discovered against the Life of the King, but that all the Parties concern'd in it not being as yet fully known, they were under the necessity of securing all Persons of Note, until a clearer discovery should be made; And as for you Monsieur Constance (said he, with a certain Air of Authority) I charge you that you say this, and no more to those French Officers; and know, that you shall be narrowly watched and overheard. This Complemental Visit was only an Artifice that Opra Pitrachard used to moderate the Re∣sentments of the French, and to hinder them from taking of measures for their common Defence and Security. Monsieur Constance went and delievered the Message precisely in the terms he was ordered. The King of Siam had several Troops of Guards about his Person, whereof one was made up of Europeans of different Nations, but especially of the French. The Siams's Troop of Guards, consisting of 150 Men, was Commanded by French Officers; these were sent to Thalapson, a House of Pleasure the King had at some distance from Louvo, whither Opra Pitra∣chard
had sent a great Body of the Forces to Encamp, and be in a readiness as occasion should present. Two days after the French Officers that had been taken into Custody, and secured at Louvo, together with Monsieur Constance, were sent thither also under a Strong Guard. When matters had thus far proceeded, Opra Pitrachard sent again for Monsieur Constance to have him brought be∣fore him, and severely reproached him, charging him with Treachery and Perfidiousness against the King and Govern∣ment of Siam, and then caused him to be put to the ordinary and extraordinary Torture, to force him to discover and declare who were his Accomplices in the Management of the Intreague for making the King a Christian, and subje∣cting the Kingdom to the French Power: And when he had continued him several hours in the Torture, he order∣ed the King's Adopted Son to be brought to the place, and caused his Head to be cut off immediately, and a string to be run through it, and then to be hung about Monsieur Constance his Neck, in the manner of European Cravats. This Tragedy was Acted on the 28th of May, the follow∣ing 29 and 30, Monsieur Constance was again appli'd to the Torture, in the cruellest manner that could be devised, ha∣ving the young Prince's Head always hanging on his Breast Night and Day. Thus they continued to Torment him till the 4th of June, that he expired under the violence of the Torture. His Goods, Family, and all his Effects were also seiz'd every where, and his Family carried into Prison. His La∣dy, after having undergone a severe Examination, and se∣veral Interrogatories put to her, without declaring or con∣fessing
what they expected or desired, was at last appli'd to the Torture, which she endured several days together; af∣ter which they threw her into Prison, where she was kept three Months with Iron Chains on her Hands, and Fetters on her Feet; at the end whereof they made her and all her Fa∣mily Slaves, in which disgraceful Quality they took off her Irons, open'd the Prison Doors, and turn'd her out. Opra Pitrachard who had determin'd with himself to set the Crown on his own Head, after he had once dispatched the King's Adopted Son, and Monsieur Constance out of the way, began now to consider how to get rid of the two Princes the King's Brothers, that seem'd to obstruct the ex∣ecution of his Design; and this was the Expedient he made use of to bring it about. He made each of them in particular, and severally believe, that what he had acted in all this Revolution, was in order to the bringing and set∣ling them on the Throne; but in regard Affairs were not yet in a peaceable and regular Posture, there was a necessi∣ty for their retiring for some time to Thalapsan, until he should use his utmost endeavour to appease them: These poor unfortunate Princes suffered themselves easily to be persuaded by the Magick of those cunning Insinuations and plausible Pretences to go thither; but they never rea∣ched it, being Murthered in the way by a party that was appointed to do that Execution. Then they fell upon all the most considerable Persons that were their Friends and intimate Acquaintance, and caused them to be put to Death in like manner, or imprison'd. The next step that Opra Pitrachard made, was to set him∣self against the Christians, whom he was resolved to drive out of the Kingdom; and to facilitate it the more, he com∣manded
that all the Portuguese Christians should meet toge∣ther and retire into a little Island near Siam, threatning to put all those to Death that should attempt to make their escape out of it. The English had the Misfortune also to feel the Effects of his Indignation and Rage, for they were first Plundered of all they had, and then thrown into Prison. As for the French that were at Siam and Louvo, he made no open Assault upon them at first, because their numbers were too considerable to be treated as the rest were; and besides he was willing rather to sursprize those that were at Bancock and at Morgen, then openly to attack them. The most considerable Persons of the French Nation that were at Tha∣lapson, were the Chevaliers de Cargis, and de Fretteville, Mon∣sieur de Vandrille, Mounsieur de Laisse, Mounsieur Bresley, the Ingineer, and another Inginner; and it was not possible for them to make their escape from Louvo as yet: but in conclu∣sion, fearing lest in the progress of these Tragical Revolutions, they should meet with the same fate, that the other Christi∣ans dispersed up and down the Kingdom, had found; they made an escape, and fled towards Siam, to the Quarters of the French Company, and when they should have the good luck to get thither, their purpose was to have seized on some Ship or other to carry them to the French Garison at Bancock, where Monsieur des Farges, General of the French Forces Commanded, and to inform him what had past: But Opra Pitrachard being advertised of their flight, early enough to prevent what might follow upon it, sent immediately a detach'd Body of 6 or 7000 Men, Arm'd as if they were ready to give Battel. These few Officers, tho' the bravest and most determin'd Men of their Nation, were much sur∣priz'd to see so early in the Morning, and within two
Leagues of Siam; so great a Detachment of the Army before and behind them, to hinder their getting into the Town; and making a vertue of necessity, they put them∣selves into a poisture of Defence, resolving to sell their Lives at as dear a rate as they could; but some Mandarins coming up to them, told them they were in no danger, in re∣gard they assur'd them, they were come, not only to do them no harm themselves, but to prevent their receiving any from others and their business was to bring them back to Louvo, as the King had expresly commanded them: The French Gentlemen were soon overcome by the power of so fine and obliging Expressions, and presently surrendred themselves into their hands; for to do otherwise was not possible for them, there being no proportion betwixt the fewness of their number, and so great a Body as they had to dispute with. And the truth on't is, they were treated the first day with kindness and civility enough; but it was not so the next, for they strip'd them of all, and ti'd them to Horse-Tails, in which miserable condition they forc'd them to march, and in great Ceremony brought them back to Lou∣vo, treating them most outragiously all along as they went, in so much that Monsieur Bresley the Ingineer dy'd soon after, and the rest had much ado to outlive the Miseries and In∣dignities they suffered. They no sooner arriv'd at Louvo, but they were Chain'd two and two together, by the Neck, and so thrown into Prison; all their Domesticks were treated in like manner, as well as all the other French that staid at Louvo. All this was contrived and executed with that diligence and secrecy, that may seem very surprizing and unaccoun∣table to those that hear it: For the French that were at Ban∣cock and Morgen, had not the least knowledge of what had
been done in the two Cities of Siam and Louvo, which was like to have lost them all. Opra Pitrachard having now taken his measures, and de∣termined to destroy the French one way or other, and since he would not venture upon the doing of it by open force, was resolved to try what Cunning and Surprize could do. Wherefore he sent one Manpai, who had been the year be∣fore in France, in Quality of first Ambassador, and since his return was honour'd with the title of Barcalon, or Chief Minister of State, to Bancock, to perswade Monsieur des Farges General of the French to come to him, and to tell him that it was the King's express pleasure that he should immediately come and confer with him about some Affairs of the last importance, and make what haste he possibly could to be at Louvo. The General, that was altogether ignorant of what had been done in all this great and sudden Revolution, and sus∣pecting no fraud, believed very readily what the Barca∣lon had told him, and that the King had sent for him, as on other occasions he had often done before; set out from Bancock the 7th of June, and went by Water; but he had hardly gone two Leagues from the place, when he perceived that some extraordinary business was in agitati∣on, and apprehended there might be some design of putting some indignity upon him: For he could not imagine why he was surrounded with such a great number of Barges and Galleys, Arm'd with Stones and Field-Pieces, that perpe∣tually accompani'd him till he came to Siam; where he no sooner arriv'd, but he was immediately taken out, and put into a Palanquin or close Litter, and carried to Louvo, be∣ing Guarded by several Troops of Armed Men; all this
still encreased his astonishment, and the more, because he was not wont to be hurri'd nor conducted in so Military a manner, when the King wanted him, or ordered him to come to him, but he had always the priviledge of going with great freedom, and less attended. When he came to Louvo, he was straight led to the King's Palace, without allowing him the liberty of going first to the Jesuits House to Repose and Refresh himself, as he desired, tho' his intention was rather to be somewhat in∣form'd, and know the posture of present Affairs, which he thought were much altered. The same day of his arri∣val he received several Visits from the Mandarins, and af∣ter Supper he had one from Opra Pitrachard, with whom he discoursed some time, and, amongst other things, the Opra told him, with an unusual Air of Pride and Haughti∣ness, That the King had caused Monsieur Constance to be put to Death for many hainous Crimes and Faults he had been found guilty of, in the management of those Employments he was entrusted with; and that the King would give him his Place, knowing him to be a Man of great Integrity, Faithfulness, and good Ʋnderstanding in the management of Affairs, and in whom he reposed great Confidence and Trust. He further told him, That the King was engaged in a War against the Cochinchinois, and the People of Laos; That there was a necessity of sending for all the French Forces to joyn in a Body, and march against the Enemy, to hinder the Invasion that the Kingdom was threatened with; and that he had also writ to Monsieur Bruham, Governour of Morgen, to the same purpose, to hasten to Louvo, with all his Troops:
Monsieur des Farges saw plainly now that these Propo∣sals were nothing but a meer Contrivance, and like so ma∣ny Snares that they had laid to catch him; which he was fully convinc'd of in a very little time afterwards, as well by the distinct Information he receiv'd from several of his Friends, that by Opra Pitrachard's express Order, had leave to make him a Visit, as by Letters that came to him from his Officers: And began not to consider with himself, what he must do to get out of the Danger that his good Nature and Fidelity to the King had so unluckily brought him into; and the best Expedient he could think of, was to send this Answer to Opra Pitrachard: That the King of France, his Master, had sent him to serve the King of SIAM, and that he was now ready to obey his Commands: But that he thought it highly ne∣cessary to go himself in person to Bancock, to bring the Sol∣diers with him, in regard that the Officers that commanded in his Absence, would not quit the Fortress upon a bare Let∣ter. This seem'd so reasonable, and to carry so much proba∣bility with it, that he presently obtain'd leave to return to the Fort; but on condition to leave his two Sons that came along with him, as Hostages for the performance of his promise. But before he left Louvo, he was much press'd by the Opra to write to Monsieur de Bruham, and fain would he have been excused from complying with him in it: And told him, That unless he sent an Officer of his own to carry the Letter, it would signifie nothing, nor be re∣garded.
But it was to no purpose to insist on such a Condition, for it was positively deny'd him, and yet write he must, be∣ing under an unavoidable necessity of doing it; yet in writing, he did so disguise his Hand and Stile, by chusing such extravagant Terms and unusual Expressions, as that Monsieur Braham might know, in case the Letter came to his hands, there was some further Mystery in it, and that he was not to give Credit to it; and, by good Providence, it fell out just as he could have wished, the Letter be∣ing received and understood in the Sense it was de∣signed. Monsieur des Farges return'd no sooner to Bancock, but he abandon'd the Little Fort, and drew off all the French into the Great Fort, not having Men enough to hold out in both places. All the Houses that were near to it, he cau∣sed to be pillag'd, and then burnt; and all the Cannon that he could not carry away or use, to be nail'd or broken. And because he had not time enough to demolish or raze the Fort, by reason of the great number of Forces that Opra Pitrachard sent after him, and follow'd him to take posses∣sion of the place; he did what was possible to ruin it all to pieces with his Cannon. Opra Pitrachard perceiving by this, that Monsieur des Farges had discover'd his Rebellious Designs and Practices, and that there was no prospect or hopes of his Return with his Soldiers to SIAM, he sent down an Army of about Threescore thousand Men, made up of Mahumetans, Chi∣neses, and Malayans, against the Fort of Bancock, to besiege the French in't, with Orders to cut all their Throats. But such was the Resolution and Bravery wherewithal they de∣sended themselves, that this open Investing and Attacking
of them, proved as Unsuccessful, as the Artifices that were used to Trepan them to come to SIAM were in∣effectual: For when so vast an Army had endeavoured all they could, during two Months close Siege, by frequent Attacks and Storming, to force their Entry into the place, and had been always beat off with great Loss, by the hand∣ful of French, who were not in all above Three hundred, he saw himself obliged, at last, to send to the General, and ask Conditions of Peace. During this Siege, all the French who were at Siam and Louvo were made close Prisoners, and treated with the greatest extremity of Rigor and Severity, without consi∣deration of Quality or Age. Nor could the Bishop of Me∣tellopolis, who had lived long amongst them, and was the Apostolick Vicar in the greatest part of of the East-Indies, be exempted from his share of the common Calamity that fell upon his Profession and Countrey-Men: For when Opra Pitrachard saw he could not recover Bancock out of the hands of the French by force, he caus'd the old Bishop to be sent for, and conducted to the Fort-and there to be strip'd and ti'd to a Gibbet, with a Halter about his Neck, and fastned at the place where the French Cannon were most levell'd, and did most execution, hoping that the sight of so moving a Spectacle, and the consideration they had of the Person of their Bishop, should prevail with them to mode∣rate the fury of their Guns, intermit their Firing, and hearken to a Treaty of Peace. All the French Jesuits and Missionary Priests that were any where in the Kingdom, were seiz'd, and carri'd Pri∣soners to Louvo, being Accused of Sedition and Treason against the Government; all their Goods, Furniture, and Effects were likewise seiz'd and confiscated.
All this could not be acted without coming to the know∣ledge of Monsieur de Bruham, Governor of Morgen, having now been fully inform'd from several hands of what had past both at Louvo and Siam, he began to consider how to extricate himself out of the great and iminent danger he was every where surrounded with; for he had but fifty two Souldiers, three Captains, three Lieutenants, and three Ensigns in all, to Guard a large Fortress that was open on all sides. The best thing he could think of in that ex∣tremity, was to seize a small Frigat of 26 Guns, belong∣ing to the King of Siam, to save himself and his Men upon, when he should be driven to his last shifts: This he hap∣pily executed towards the end of June, and it was of great use to him in the conclusion of the Affair: For when he had been Besieged and closely Attack'd for seventeen days together, by an Army of Twelve thousand Men, assaulting them often, and as often repulsed; and wanting Water and other necessary Provisions, without any possible hopes of being relieved or refreshed, he was constrain'd, at last, to abandon the place, and carry all his Men, and what conve∣niently else he could, on Board the Frigat, and so got safe off. On the 25th of July, the Bishop of Metellopolis being released out of the miserable and dangerous Circumstan∣ces he was put into, before Bancock was sent into the place, to obtain a Commission and full Power from the General Mon∣sieur des Forges, to negotiate a Treaty of Peace with such persons as Opra Pitrachard should appoint for that purpose; which was soon granted him, and next day he return'd to SIAM to conclude it.
A Little time after, News was brought that the King of Siam was dead, without telling either the day or man∣ner of his Death: Whereupon Opra Pitrachard began to prepare for his Coronation, and about five days after he set out from Louvo in great State and Magnificence, and came to Siam, where he had himself Crown'd King with∣out any Dispute or Opposition, about the beginning of Au∣gust 1688. September 30. News was brought that a Peace was con∣cluded and sign'd betwixt the new King and the French, on the following Conditions. That the French should surrender the Fort of Bancock. That all the French should have leave to depart the King∣dom. That they should have two Frigats belonging to the French Company; a Ship of the French King's called the Auriflame, and a fourth of 74 Guns that the King of Siam was to give to Monsieur des Farges to Embarque on, and Transport them out of the King of Siam's Dominions. This is the substance of what is contain'd in the several Letters dated from Siam, October last was twelve-moneth; and by the Relation we have, by Advice from the Coast of Coramandel of the 20th of February last, we are further inform'd, That Monsieur des Farges was arrived on that Coast with the four Ships, having all the French as well Se∣cular and Military, as the Ecclesiasticks on board them, that were any where to be heard of or known to be in the
Kingdom of Siam, and that the King had publisht a De∣claration, severely prohibiting any French to stay in the Kingdom; and threatning that if any one of them should be found to stay behind, they should be immediately upon discovery put to Death; and all the Europeans that should harbour or conceal them, should be treated with the same rigor. Other Letters do further add, That Monsieur des Farges had before his departure from Bancock, deliver'd up into the hands of the present King of Siam, the Unfortunate Widow of Monsieur Constance, upon a fancy that the Jesu∣its had put into his head; That she being a Christian, and extreamly beloved by the King's Son, will marry him, and contribute her endeavours to make him a Christian; with which plaufible Imaginations those good Fathers flatter themselves, and hope once more to be re-established in that Kingdom with no less Advantages of Power, Credit and Fortune than they had before. And, that when the Treaty was sign'd betwixt the King of Siam and the French General, all the French and English that were made Prisoners at Louvo, were the next day af∣ter Conducted to Siam, and set at Liberty.
A DIARY of one of the French Officers that served at Morgen un∣der the Command of Monsieur de Bru∣ham, containing several particulars relating to the former Discourse. ON the 25th of June 1688, being upon Duty, and Commanding a Company of fifty Siamese Soldiers in the little Fort of Morgen, I was seized on by my own Men, and made Prisoner, and for four days together was fastened to a Stake, with Iron Chains about my Body, on my Hands and Feet. On the 29th I was carried out to see if I could know and discover some French Men that had been killed during the vigorous Defence that Monsieur de Bruham made in the Fort, and whilst he was drawing off his Men out of it, and retiring into the Frigat, upon which he made his escape; for there were about thirteen dead Bodies lying upon the place. And when I had told them all that I thought proper for them to know upon that matter, the Mandarins that Commanded in the Army that besieged the Fort, gave or∣ders to put me to the Torture, to force me to declare and make information, that I had often heard Monsieur de Bru∣ham say, That his being and commanding at Morgen was al∣together unknown to the King of Siam, and by the order of Monsieur Constance only, on purpose to make himself Master of the Countrey; and that Monsieur de Bruham expected seve∣ral Ships with Men, Arms, and Ammunition from France,
to enable him to carry on that Design more effectually. I was appli'd to, and kept in the torture four hours toge∣ther. On the 7th of July, the Mandarins made me go for Siam in the company of a French Soldier call'd Picquard, who had the misfortune to be made a Prisoner the same day that Monsieur de Bruham made his Retreat from Morgen; and tho' we were but two Men, and both in Chains, yet such was the mistrust they entertain'd of us, that they would needs send above Sixty Soldiers to guard us thither. On the 17th I came to Siam, and on the 19th was brought to Louvo. The first place they brought me into, was the great Hall where the Barcalon was sitting with many Man∣darins about him. who commanded me to be Interrogated very strictly upon several Matters relating to Monsieur Bruham. Next Morning I was informed by a Missionary Priest, who accidentally discovered the place where I was kept Prisoner, that the Bishop of Metellopolis was gone to Ban∣cock, by the express command of Opra Pitrachard, to nego∣tiate a Treaty of Peace with Monsieur des Farges our Gene∣ral, and that they were in daily expectation of hearing of the conclusion of it. This was the first time that I had any tolerable ground to entertain my self with the hopes of Life, since my falling into their hands; for 'till now I gave all for lost. On the 25th the Bishop return'd to Louvo with full power from Monsieur des Farges, to Treat about a Peace;
and from that time forward Opra Pitrachard began to desist from his cruel Treatment of the French, and other Christi∣ans that were in his power. In the Month of July, the King of Siam hapned to die, but the manner of it, nor the certain day, being as yet un¦known, Opra Pitrac set out from Louvo on the last day of the Month to Siam, where he was Crown'd with great Ceremony, and without any opposition. Next day after the Coronation, he order'd all the French and English that were at Siam and Louvo to be set at li∣berty. On the 3d of August I arrived at Siam, with four other French Officers, namely Messieurs de Fretteville, de Van∣drille, des Carges, and de Laisse. On the 9th Opra Pitrachard now King of Siam, sent us all five to Bancock, not to our own General, as we hoped, but to his General that Commanded the Malayans, who kept us Prisoners almost a Month; and all the French that were left at Siam were delivered into the Custody of the Jesuits, and of the Chief Factor of the French Company of Merchants, to be reponsible for them. The King being resolved to have a Peace concluded at any Rate, sent us at last to Monsieur des Farges, who would hearken to no Treaty, without allowing us the benefit of being comprehended in it, by which means our liberty was obtain'd. On the 30th of September the Peace was concluded and sign'd. Two days after Monsieur des Farges, our General,
sent me from Bancock to Morgen, to see what was become of Monsieur de Bruham, and to acquaint him that the Peace was concluded. The King of SIAM gave me a Mandarin to accompany me, and to provide for me such things as were necessary during my Journey. On the 12th of October I arriv'  orgen, where I stay'd not long, because I could learn nothing about Monsieur de Bruham. On the First of November I Embarqued on a small Frigat of the King of SIAM's, and went upon the Rivers of Tanay, Musavan, and Sorian, in the Kingdom of Pegu, thinking to have found him in some of those places: But missing of him there, I was obliged to pass by the Islands of Rey, and to go on shore at Seroide, where, by some cer∣tain marks, I knew that Monsieur Bruham had touch'd, and especially by some pieces of the French Soldiers Cloaths that seem'd to have been left there on purpose to give us notice of their passage that way. On the 12th of November I return'd again to Morgen, where finding a Ship belonging to the Royal French Com∣pany, call'd The Cocq, commanded by Monsieur Darmagnan, I Embarqued thereupon two days after, to go to Pondichery, where I was ordered to wait for Monsieur des Farges, ac∣oording to the Instructions he gave me at parting from Bancock. FINIS.
