H1733 99830464 34916
A SECOND, But more Perfect RELATION OF The great Victory obtai∣ned by Sir RALPH HOPTON, neare Bodmin, in the County of Cornwall, on thursday Ian. 19. Ann. Dom. 1642. Together with his no lesse eminent successe at Saltash, the Sunday following being the 22th. Printed by H. Hall for W. Webb. M.DC.XLII.
A second, but more perfect Relati∣on of the great Victory obtained by Sir RALPH HOPTON. UPon the 18 of Ianuary being Wednes∣day, His Majesties forces in Cornwall drew out of Bodmin with a resolution to fall upon the enemy in Lescand. That night they lay abroad in Bocon∣nocke parke▪ the next morning as they were advancing towards the Towne, the enemy leaving that advantage, which the dangerous and difficult avenues unto the place through deepe and narrow lanes did give them, came forth into the field. They were about 20 foot Colours, and be∣tweene 4 and 500 horse. They faced us at Hilsborough, them∣selves being planted upon a little hill encompased with a Bogge. There were but two passages (and those but wide enough to receive ten or twelve men in breast) over it. His Majesties Army tooke no feare for all that, their joy to see their enemy, above either their expectation or their hope fairely in the field, drowning all apprehensions of that disadvantage, wherefore after prayers upon the place (which the Rebels, as was afterwards confessed by the prisoners, scoffingly termed masse) we advanced bold∣ly forwards. Ere wee came neare them, they gave us two or three volees in vaine, hurt none of us: but so soone as we were got within distance of them, and had saluted them
with one volee, they turned about and fled, Our soldiers were eager to pursue thē. but by the industrie of their Com∣maunders, were kept still in good order. This providence diverted a mischeife from us, which▪ as it seemes, the enemie had intended us. For on a suddaine the whole body of their horse turn'd backe upon us. But finding us in our rankes, and unbroken, they utterly lost their courage, and ran away, as if some tempest had driven them, even over their owne men▪ The soldiers brke now forth with all violence into the chase (they could not any longer be possibly withheld) we followed it at least five miles, even to the townes end. There we were a litttle stayed by a volee, which a compa∣ny of the enemies, that had not that day marched forth, gave us from their barricadoes. It did noe hurt; onely shot a horse of Captaine Digbies through the legg. The volee ended, they all ran presently away; and we enterd the Towne. Wee found there good store of Ammunition, and five excellent brasse gunnes, and one iron. This day there were slaine in the pursuit 200 of the Rebells and 700 we tooke prisoners; among them Sir Shilston Colmadee; and 8 colours; and all this with the losse but of one common souldier, what became of the rest of their colours we know not, but for certaine they brought backe onely one into the Towne. The next day, which was Friday, we rested there. On Saturday wee advanced yet farther Eastward. In the meane while a fresh regiment of the Earle of Stamford under the command of Lieutenant Colonell Colmadee had entred Launcestan; but upon our approach that way fled thence to Plymouth. This evening the one halfe of our Army was quartered about Calstecke and Cutteale; the other marched with Sir Ralph Hopton towards Saltash, where the enemy had rallyed and made head against us. On the morrow about 4 in the evening Sir Ralph assaul∣ted the Towne. Ruthen, Crocher, Strode, Pyne, and divers o∣thers of the enemies Chiefes were there. and they had 10 peeces of ordinance with them. 3 howres they held out; but
at last we forced the place (lost but one man in this service) seized on their artillery, and so dispers'd the very men them∣selves, that they could have but little time, lesse opportunity to escape. yet it being darke, wee could not for the present know either how many of them, or whom we had taken. the morning was likely to yeild some better account of them, but this Relator was dispatch'd for Oxford before it was day. Ere he came away, one boate full of them putting over for Plymmouth, suncke in the passage. perhaps there were of their Chiefes in that. As he passed Devon, he heard it every where, it was almost every mans discourse, how that Ruthen himselfe and Stroud and the rest had miscarried in the busi∣nesse. Neither of these successes did the Kings Commanders attribute to their owne strength or policy. they gave the glory to him, whose worke alone it was, causing a Chaplaine of the Army to draw a forme of thankes-giving, to goe throughout Cornwall for those great deliverances. Since this Relaters arrivall at Oxford, His Majestie hath received a more full information of Sir Ralph Hoptons suc∣cesse at Saltash where hee hath taken (besides those 10 pei∣ces of ordinance allready mentioned) 700 prisoners more, and armes for 4000 men, and a shippe with 16 peeces of or∣dinance in it, formerly brought up to batter the Towne. It pleasing God, contrary to their expectation, to give it up a prey to that power, which it came thither to suppresse. FINIS.
February 3. 1642. SIR, HAving newly entred Cyrencester, I thought good to impart some passages of our siege and enter∣tainment there, but time will not permit a full Relation; wherefore I here give you onely a briefe, which is as followeth: viz. slaine and wounded of the Kings Forces seven and thirty slain and wounded of the Rebels foure hundred ninety seven; Taken Colonell Fetiplace, Governour of the Towne; Lieutenant Colo∣nell Carre, Sergeant Major Ashton, and one George a Parliament man: sixe peeces of Canon, and all their Gunners; two thousand Armes, one thousand Prisoners, and the Towne Plundered, which their owne base be∣haviour was the cause of; for after we entred the Town they shot out of their windowes at us, and killed one of our men: what favour such desperate Rebels deserve, let all the world judge. Your friend T. B.
