h3378 17151726 105944
The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Archbishop, the Bishops, AND The rest of the Clergy of the Province of CANTERBURY, In CONVOCATION Assembled; Presented to HIS MAJESTY At KENSINGTON, On MƲNDAY the Tenth Day of MARCH, 1700. Together with His Majesties MOST GRACIOUS ANSWER. LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb, deceas'd; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1700.
The Humble ADDRESS OF THE Archbishop, Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, in Con∣vocation assembled. May it please your Majesty, WE Your Majesties most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects, the Arch∣bishop, and Bishops, and the rest of the Clergy of the Pro∣vince of Canterbury, being, in obedience to Your Majesties Summons, assembled in Con∣vocation, do take this opportunity to present our humble Thanks to Your Majesty, for the constant Protection and Favour which the Church of England, by Law established, hath re∣ceived from You ever since Your Happy Ac∣cession to the Crown. We do also thankfully acknowledge Your Majesties Pious Concern for the Reformed Churches in General; beseeching Almighty God, that, as He hath made Your Majesty His chief Instrument in the Preservation of them hitherto, so He would still bless Your Maje∣sties endeavours for their further Security a∣gainst the imminent Dangers wherewith they are threatned at this time. And We humbly crave leave to give Your Majesty all possible assurance of our stedfast
Fidelity and Affection to Your Sacred Person and Government; which we shall always te∣stify, by maintaining Your Supremacy, as Established by the Laws of this Realm, and the Articles and Canons of our Church; by pro∣moting true Religion and Loyalty among Your People committed to our Charge; and by our earnest Prayers to God for Your Majesties Long Life and Prosperous Reign over us. His Majesties most Gracious Answer. My Lords, and the rest of the Clergy, I Am very well pleased with the Affectionate Sense you express, of the constant Protection I have shewn to the Church of England, as by Law Established. I assure you I shall always continue to deserve your Thanks in this particular. Your Good will to the Reformed Churches abroad, and Tenderness for such of them as may be in Danger, is also very Agreeable to Me. I likewise thank you for your promises of maintaining My Supremacy, according to Law, beyond which I will never extend it. I never doubted of the Fidelity and Loyalty of the Church of England to Me. I make no Question of your Zealous Endeavours to promote Religion, Virtue, and Piety, among the People committed to your Charge; and I shall be ever ready to contribute what is proper to be done on My Part, to make your good intentions, in that Kind, more Successful; as being the great Concern of us all. FINIS.
