i977 16170209 104966
DIEV ET MON DROIT HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE royal blazon or coat of arms BY THE Lord Lieutenant AND COUNCIL. ORMONDE. WHereas We are informed by the Earl of Rane∣lagh, and his Partners, That several She∣riffs and Collectors within the respective Coun∣ties of this Kingdom, have received by ver∣tue of His Majesties Process, divers conside∣rable summs of money due to His Majestie, and which do belong to the Earl of Ranelagh and Partners undertaking, some of whom have accompted lately in the Exchequer, but not paid in the money due from them; and others have not as yet accompted▪ Upon consideration whereof, We think fit by this our Proclamation, to re∣quire such of the said Sheriffs and Collectors who have accompted and not paid what remains due from them, that they do with all convenient speed, & at farthest by the Twenty ninth day of April next, pay the money in their respective hands into his Majesties Treasurie, and such of them as have not accompted, that they do by the Twelth day of May next make up their Accounts: and pay such money as they have received into his Majesties said Treasury: To the end the same may be applied to the Uses of the said un∣dertaking. And if they fail herein, they shall be Proceeded against with the utmost Severity. And We do also hereby require all Colle∣ctors of the monies Applotted within this Kingdom for the supply of the Deficiencie of the years Value, who have not accompted for, and paid the moneys by them Collected, that they do at or before the said twenty ninth of April next, Account for, and pay in the monies by them Collected into His Majesties said Treasurie, As they will answer the contrary at their perils. Given at the Council-Chamber in Dublin the 24th, day of March 1679. Mich: Armach. C. Jo: Dublin. Blesinton. Lanesbrough. Hen. Midensis. Ro: Fitz-Gerald. Ca: Dillon. Char: Meredith. Ro: Booth. Jo: Davys. John Cole. Theo: Jones. God save the King. DƲBLIN, Printed by Benjamin Tookand John Crook, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majestie; And are to be sold by Mary Crook, at His Majesties Printing-House in  Skinner-row. 1680.
