J786 12576815 63611
THE SCHOLARS GUIDE From the ACCIDENCE to the UNIVERSITY. OR, Short, Plain, and Easie Rules for per∣forming all manner of Exercise in the Grammar School, viz. RULES for Spelling, Orthography, Pointing, Construing, Parsing, making Latine, placing Latine, Variation, Amplifica∣tion, Allusion, Imitation, Observation, Moving-passion. AS ALSO RULES for making Colloquys, Essays, Fables, Prosopo∣paeia's, Characters, Themes, Epistles, Orations, Declama∣tions of all sorts. TOGETHER WITH RULES for Translation, Variation, Imitation, Carmen, Epi∣grams, Dialogues, Eccho's, Epitaphs, Hymnes, Anagrams, Acrostichs, Chronostichs, &c. By Ra. Johnson Schoolmaster. Etsi omnia à veteribus inventa essent; hoc tamen semper novum erit usus &c inventorum ab aliis scientia & dispositio. Seneca. LONDON, Printed for The Pierrepont at the Sun in St Paul's Church-yard. 1665
To the Reader. READER, THou mayst justly wonder, that after so many elaborate Pieces written by the most Learned and Experienced Pens (both in Latine and English) upon this Subject, I should suffer these Childish and Unpolished lines to see the light: But who so looketh into our Grammar-schools, may more justly wonder to see so little improvement of those worthy means which this age enjoys. Many who take in hand to instruct Youth, requiring no Exercise at all, or how∣ever no way sutable to the Books that are read in their Schools: others exacting brick but affording no straw, charging Exercise upon their Scholars, yet neither shewing how it may, nor (which is worse) observing that it be per∣formed. I have for some years, and not without profit made use of these short Rules, each evening examining, ex∣plaining, enlarging upon them, and propounding examples thereof. And now to save the labour of transcribing, I have caused them to be Printed. The Rules are not mine, save some few which in teaching I have observed, The most of them I gathered from Vossius, Macropedius, Clark,
Aphthonius, Buchlerus, Horn and others: I onely have for memories sake brought them into this method, and which none ever yet would stoop to do, have expressed them in a low and familiar language, such as a Child doth readilyest ap∣prehend. If any one (who is not better provided) please with me to make use of them, I fear not he shall complain of his labour lost: — Si quid novisti rectius istis, Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum. Lincensed according to Order.
RƲLES of Spelling. I. EVery Syllable must have a Vowel (a, e, i, o, u, y,) for without one of these there can be no sound. II. The Consonant must be taken to the following Syllable, as A-dam, a-men, not Ad-am, am-en. III. If there be two Consonants together, the one goes to the for∣mer Syllable, the other to the latter, as, mel-lis, fol-lie, for-mer, ab-sent. IV. Two Consonants in the middle of a word may not be parted, if in that language they may begin a word, as, a-stray, e-spy, can-cri, a-tlas. V. Compound words are commonly resolved into their parts, as, trans-co, per-ago, sus-tuli, up-on, ad-ore RƲLES of Orthographie. 1. Accustom your selves to pronounce the words as you read them, very distinctly, or by Syllables, for as you use to pro∣nounce them so will they settle in your memories. 2. Observe the Radix of words, and the Supines of Verbs, and they will direct to write right, thus you may know that Man∣sion is written with (s) station with (t) Schism with (sch) because they come from Mansum, Statum, . 3. (s) must not be written after (x) as, excribo, not exscribo, exul, not exsul, yet in compound words sometimes, Autl ours use it. 4. The first letter in a Sentence, all Proper Names, remark∣able Appellatives, and (I) per se, must be written with great letters, as, Thomas, London, Colonel, Parlament, President. 5. These terminations are Latine, not English, us, ans, ens, ons, am, n, u, i.
6. These terminations of the same sound as English not Latine, ous, ance, ence once, ome, ay, ve, or ew, y, or ie. 7. Some English words are not pronounced as they are writ, or have redundant Letters, as, people, reign, raz'd, tongue, debt, rogue, beauty, publique, goal, isle. 8. Some words are pronounced alike, but writ diversly, as, hair, hare; bear, beer, bier: rain, reign: their, there. 9. When a word is pronounced flatly or long, it must have an (e) at the end, but when sharply, or short, it must have none, as, non, none, quite, quit, stat, state, us, use, writ, write. 10. Write not (e) after (g) in the end of a word, unless when (g) hath the sound of (j) Consonant, as, strante, change. RULES for Pointing. 1. A Comma (,) used at the end of every sentence, and in verse, when words are displaced. 2. A Colon (:) used in the middle of a period consisting of two equal parts. 3. A Period (.) used at the end of perfect sentence, viz. when the sence is finished. 4. A Parenthesis ( ) used when a sentence is put within another, which yet may be left out, and the Sence not destroyed, as, Parve (nec invideo) sine me liber ibis in urbem. 5. A note of Interrogation (?) used when a question is asked, as, Cujum pecus, and Melibai? 6. A note of Exclamation (!) used when we express any thing with wonder, as, heu pietas! 7. A Subunio (-) used 1. when two whole words are united, as, pale-faced. 2. when one part of the word is writ at the end of the line, and the other at the beginning of the next. 8. A Dialysis (¨) used when a diphthong is parted into two Syllables, as. pictäi, aquäi, poëma. 9. An Induction (⁁) used to bring in a word interlined. 10. An Apostrophus (’) used when a letter is cast out, as, dix’ tin’ for dixistine. 11. A note of Quotation (”) used in the Margin, when we quote a Sentence out of an Authour.
12. An Acute tone (´) used to distinguish doubtfull quan∣titys, as, cécidit, cecídit. 13. A Grave tone (`) used to distinguish adverbs from other words, as, stultè, unà, seriò, palàm. 14. A Circumflex tone, (^) used 1. over Ablative cases of the first, 2. Genitive cases of the fourth Declension, 3. Words Syncopated and contracted, as, musâ, manûs, amâsti, tibîcen. RƲLES for construing Grammatically. Praecognita. 1. Read over the Sentence of a period, observing the general scope of the matter. 2. Find the principal Verb, viz. the first which is not the Infinitive Mood, nor hath a Relative or Conjunction before it. 3. By asking the question who, or what? find out the Nominative case. This done; Rule. 1. Take the Vocative case, or what supplies the place thereof, as, Adverb, Conjunct. Interject. 2. Take the Nominative case, and what depends thereon, as, Ad∣jective, Genitive case, Gerund. 3. Take the Verb with what depends thereon, as, Adverb, Infi∣nitive mood, Participle, Supine. 4. Take casuall words in this order, 1. Thing, 2. Person, 3. The rest in order of cases, as, 1 dedit 3 mihi 2 vestem 4 pignori 6 te-praesente 5 propriâ-manu. 2 Jupiter 1 O 5 mibi 1 si 4 ju∣veniles 3 redderet 4 annos. 5. When any casual word hath much depending on it cast it back to the last place, as, 3 vitam-tuam-suppliciis-justis-debitis{que}-ere-ptam 2 fugae 1 mandato. 6. Relatives and Interrogatives cross this order, being taken be∣fore the Verb which they should follow, as, 1 Quantum 1 quis{que} 4 suâ 1 nummorum 3 servat 4 in-arcâ, &c. 7. A Parenthesis, or Subjunctive sentence must be construed alone, and taken where the sence gives best room, sometimes in the be∣ginning, but most usually after the Nominative case. 8. Be sure in construing ever to avoid non-sence, and breach of Grammar rule.
RƲLes for construing Rhetorically. 1. Give every Phrase or Proverb a suitable English one, and con∣strue the whole Phrase or Proverb together, as, Sator hominum at{que} deorum, Jupiter. Ad graecas calendas, at latter Lammas. 2. When a word hath various significations, chuse that which may best express the sence, as, colere Deum, to worship God: colere parentes, to honour ones parents: colere sylvas, to haunt the woods: colere agros, to till the fields, &c. 3. Be carefull to express terms of Art by proper English terms, as, —viscera nudant, they panch, vela dabant ventis, they hoised up sails. 4. Resolve Infinitive moods, and words put absolute, as, te ve∣nisse, that thon art come: Me duce, when I am Caplain: in∣terjecto tempore, after a certain time: Saturno rege, while Saturn ruled. 5. Express Impersonals, and Passives with their casual words Personally and Actively, as, tibi licet, thou mayest: vivitur ex rapto, men live by plunder. 6. Always endeavour to carry on a proper English style, chusing such expressions as may best fit the matter in hand. RƲLES for parsing. 1. Read over the sentence distinctly, find the Verb, and so the Nominative case. 2. Enquire by your Rules what Declension, Number, Gender, Per∣son, Species, Figure your Nominat. is of. 3. Enquire of what Conjugation the Verb is, what it maketh in the Perfect tense, what in the Supine, what Mood, Tense, Number, Person, as also what kind, Species, and Figure. 4. Take next the casual word of the thing, govern it on the next word before which cannot be lest out, but destroy the sence. 5. Do the like in order with the other casual words according to their nature, and rule. 6. When you have a Relative, put ille in the same case and you may see its Government by construing the Sentence, as, cui similem non vidi, non vidi similem illi. 7. When you have an Adjective, search what Declensions it is
of, what Species, what Degree of Comparison, and what is its Substantive, unless it be put absolute in the neuter Gender, for then it hath none. 8. In Parsing all words be sure to enquire for the Radix, whether it be Latine or Greek. RƲLES for making Latine Grammatically. Praecognita. 1. Learn to know of what parts any Sentence propounded doth consist, viz. the Nominat. Verb, and casual words, with what depends on them. 2. Learn to know and distinguish by the sence and signs all sort of casual words, viz. of the thing, person, place, time, cause, crime, space, instrument, price, &c. and what case they are used in, with the Exceptions. Rule. 1. Read over the Sentence, and if there be a Vocative case, or any thing in stead thereof, make that first. 2. Find out the Nominative, see what number it is of, put it in that number, and write it down. 3. If any thing depend on the Nominat. as Gen. case, Adjective, Gerund, or Subjunctive sentence, make that first. Then, 4. Come to the Verb, finde what mood and tense it is, from it in that mood and tense according to its Conjugation, and put it in the same Number and person the Nominative case is. 5. Make next the Infinitive mood, Gerund, Supine, Adverb or what else doth depend on the Verb. 6. Put the casual word of the thing in the Accusat. case, the person in the Dat. the rest according to your Rules. 7. If you have a Verb, or Adjective which will properly Go∣vern a case, such as, satago, memini, opus, utor, natus, &c. be carefull to put the right case after it. 8. When you doubt what case any Noune or Verb will go∣vern, if Grammar will not determine, consult with some Author, or the Dictionary, Cowper, Thomas, &c. 9. When you have a relative, ask the question who, or what? and thereby find the antecedent, and therewith make it agree in Gender, and Number; and if it be not the Nominat. to the
Verb, make it such case as the Verb, or other word whereof it doth depend, will govern. RƲLES for making Latine Rhetorically. 1. In reading Authors, mark out and remember all Latine Phra∣ses, that so when you meet with any English Phrase, you may render it in proper Latine. 2. When you have an English Phrase, and know not a Latine one for it, turn your phrase into Latine according to the sence, not the words; as, I will not deal doubly, say, Non utar fraude malâ, not, non agam dupliciter. 3. Care not to render a sentence word by word, but change it so as the Latine may be handsomest, and most agreeable to a Latine style, as, he must needs grieve that's wrong'd, non potest non do∣lere qui laesus est, or fieri non potest quin doleat cui fit injuria. 4. The Latine tongue loves Verbals, Participials, Gerundives, and Participles of the future in rus. Est mihi oblectamento, Rather than Me oblectat. Ad emendas merces, Ʋt emeret merces. Redempturus filiam, Ʋt redimeret filium. 5. When the English sets the Preposition at the end of the sen∣tence, or after the Verb, in Latine set it in composition before the Verb, as, pull me out, Eripe me: get thee away, Eripe re cast thy eye back, retorque oculum. 6. Remember to cast away quòd or ut, turning the Verb into the Infinitive mood: to make Ablative cases absolute by casting away Dum, cùm, quando, si, postquam, quanquam: to express Actives sometimes by Passives, and Personals by Impersonals: to make have by est or suppetit: and to observe such other Grammar rules as have most Elegancy, as, Gaudeo te venisse, Rather than Gaudeo quòd venisti. Appetente hieme, Cùm appeteret hiems. Laudatur ab omnibus, Omnes laudant. Miserè vivitur, Miserè vivunt. Rerum suppetit usus. Habet usum rerum.
RULES for placing Latine. 1. Read the best Authors by periods, vivâ voce, thereby their stile will be secretly instilled into your minds. 2. Avoid the craggy concourse of many Consonants, and the ga∣ping of many Vowels, temper one with the other, so as a Vowel ending, the next word may begin with a Consonant, & vice versâ, as, Quous{que} tandem abutere patientiâ nostrâ Catilina? 3. Place the word last wherein the Emphasis of the sentence doth lie, as, — Caesare fortiorem legimus neminem. So in the Example next above. — Where these Rules permit, 4. Place the casual word first, the Nominat. in the middle, and the verb last: as, Galliam Caesar occupavit, Religionem pauci colunt. 5. Between the Adjective and his Substantive, likewise between the Praeposition and his case put a Genitive case or other Par∣ticle, as, Innumeras hostium copias Caesar fudit: omnis enim perturbatio, &c. 6. Comparatives, Superlatives, and Nounes of multitude must be set after their Substantives, as, sceleratos omnes Catilina unus superavit. 7. Polysyllable Ajectives elegantly begin and end sentences, as, Miserrimi sunt omnes inglorii. RƲLES of Variation. 1. Express your sentence in proper, choice, and purely Latine words, without barbarism or Solaecism, as, fecit mihi potestatem abeundi, not dedit mihi licentiam. 2. By Synonyma's or words signifying the same thing, as, Literae tuae magnopere me delectârunt: Epistola tua fuit mihi oblecta∣mento: fuit mihi voluptati. 3. By tropes or figures, viz. 1. Periphrasis, as, homo sapientiae studiosus, pro Philosopho: cubito se emungit, pro salsumentario: ars bene dicendi, pro rhetorica. 2. Metaphora, as, fluit oratio: buccinare laudes: 3. Allegoria, as, flamma fumo proxima. 4. Mi∣tonymia, as, Bacchus, provino; Ʋcalegon pro Domo: ferrum pro gladio. 5. Synecdoche, as, capus, pro homine: Hanibal: Adria. 4. Express the Active by the Pastive, Or Personal by Impersonal:
& contura, as, Virgilius legitur à me: ego lego, &c. Starur ab illis: illi stant. 5. Change the Verbs into Verbals or Participles, as quae nocent, docent; nocumenta, documenta: ut emerem libros: empturus libros: 6. Express the sentence by the contrary or negative, as, semper, dum vivam, tui meminero: nunquam dum vivam tui non me∣minero. 7. Express the sentence by Interrogation, Admiration, or Aporia, or Ironia, as, Num tui me unquam qucat capere oblivio? 8. Vary the sentence by the rules in Grammar, viz. Est pro habeo: The English of the Infinitive mood: Gerunds turned into adjectives, &c. as, habeo pecuniam est mihi pecunia; suppetit mihi pecunia. Huc veni ad emendum: emptum: empturus; ut emerem: causâ emendi: ad emendos libros. RƲLES of Amplification. 1. A sentence is amplyfied by reckoning up all the parts inclu∣ded within the General heads of the Theam. ex. gr. love con∣quers all men: here amplifie men, by reckoning up all there un∣der included, as, poor, rich: wise, foolish: young, old: Prince, peasant, &c. 2. By handling the Antecedents, concomitants, and consequents of things ex. gr. theft, the Anteced. crafty looks and gestures. Concom. fear. Conseq. shame, fear, &c. 3. By shewing the causes, grounds, or occasions of the matter in hand. 4. By Diatypósis or a perticuler discription of each circumstance ex. gr. if we describe the ransacking of a City, we shall men∣tion, houses burned, virgins ravished, temples ruined, young men murthered, &c. 5. By digressions, or stepping aside to other matters, which not∣witstanding bring light to the subject in hand, especially from the Hypothesis to the Thesis. 6. By Comparisons or Simile's illustrating the argument; taken from things artificial or natural, from things in heaven, carth, or sea. 7. By Congeries, or heaping up many sentence signifying all the
same thing in substance: ex. gr. we must all die, Calcanda lethi semel via: nullum saeva caput Proserpina fugit: Seriùs aut citiùs sedem properamus ad unam. 8. By Definitions or Descriptions various in words but one in Sub∣stance, as, mare est fons imbrium, hospitium fluviorum, Inventio commeatuum, it incrum compendium, &c. 9. By Rhetoricall figures, as, Prosopopeia, Apostrophe, periphrasis, correctio, Aporia, &c. 10. By shewing the good or evill of the contrary. ex. gr. if we treat of Sobriety, shew the evill effects of drunkenness, it wasts the estate, consumes the body, &c. 11. By producing examples, Apothegmes and Testimonies out of Authors, viz. Poets or Historians. RULES of Allusion. 1. It is hand some to allude to the various significations, or near∣ness in sound of Hebrew, Greek, Italian, Saxon words, or of any other Language, as what we call a Grave the Welch call a bed, so near a kin are death and sleep. 2. We may allude to Sentences of Authors, applying them to another matter. ex. gr. de amore dicere possumus, quod olim Se∣neca de ira, furor brevis est. We may say of drunkenness as the Poët did of love, raptam tollit de cardine mentem. 3. We may allude to persons, as, alter Hercules, alia Minerva: a second Alexander: Ʋs{que} adeo Demeae: Si fueris Thraso nus∣quam decrit tibi Gnatho. Thus persons notable for any vertues or vices may be used as Appellatives. 4. We may allude to memorable actions, ex. gr. he consumes his estate. In exstruendo mari, & montibus coaequandis. Alluding to Xerxes. 5. We may allude to the manners or customs of Nations, ex. gr. The Baeotians used to burn the Axle-tree of the Coach that brought home a Bride: intimating that she being once married, might never return from her husband: We worship the ri∣sing Sun. 6. We allude to places, as, Qui sub zonâ torridâ persecution de∣gunt: quasi in insulis Fortunatis natus. Thus, Psittacorum regio, Terra del fogo, Mare Pacificum, and the like may be alluded to.
7. We may allude to occasions of Proverbs, as, His plots are as undiscoverable, as if he had Gyges ring. 8. We may allude to any observable thing in nature or Art, Viz. Stars, Meteors, Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Plants, Stones, &c. He is the rising Sun. Thus, Stella cadens, ignis fatuus, the Stork, the Panther, the Remora, the Turn-sol, the Magnet, and a thousand such may be alluded to. RƲLES of Imitation. 1. Observe the parts of such Sentences as you would imitate. 2. Take another subject and make your sentences of the same parts, putting Noune for Noune, Verb for Verb, Adverb for Adverb, &c. as, The love of money is the root of evil: The fear of God is the spring of Wisdom. 3. When you would imitate a whole speech, strive to make like style, phrase, and length of Periods. 4. Where the Author useth any interrogations, Admirations, Epiphonema's, Simile's, Examples, Allusions, digressions, do you the like. 5. Observe from what heads your Author fetcheth his Argu∣ments, as, cause, effect, subject, Adjunct, à pari, à minore, à ma∣jore, à simili, à contrario, &c. and fetch yours thence also, if the matter will permit. See Examples hereof in Hornes Manuduct. pag. 88. The fountains of Eloquence whence Scholars must draw forth, and lay up matter for Exercises. 1. Histories, remarkable and applicable, See Plutarch, Florus, Justin, Pliny, Livy, Tacitus, Salust, &c. 2. Fables choice and witty. See Ovids Metam. Aesop. 1. Natal. Comes, Rosse's. Mystag. Poeticus. 3. Proverbs witty and best known. See Erasmus Chil. Clarks Pro∣verbs. 4. Hierogliyphicks, most significant and apposite. See Nich. Cau∣sinas, Pierius. Clem. Alexandrinus. 5. Emblems, Symhols, Impresses, upon the Coyns or Arms of Em∣perors or other great Person, Pictures of the Heathens Gods, Geaces, Furys, Fates, Vertues, &c. See Rousner, Quarles, Al∣ciat, Cambden.
6. Laws and Customs of the Jews, Greeks, Romans, Egyptians, Saxons, &c. See Godwins Antiq. Leo Modena, Plutarch, Ver∣stegan, Olaus Magnus. 7. Neat and Significant Sentences, and Apothegms, out of Tacitus, Salust, Livy, Tully, Licosthones, and the Poets. 8. Rhetoricall sigures especially such as adorn an Oration, or move the Passions. See Vessius, Faruaby, Vicars, Butler. 9. Topicks of Logick, or heads from whence arguments are drawn, viz. Causes, Effects, Subjects, Adjuncts, Contraries. 10. The whole Series of Naturall and Artificiall things, especially Pyramids, Labyrinths, Temples, Palaces, Shops of Artists, Meats, Merchandise, Stones, Plants, Fish, Fowls, Stars, &c. Collections out of choice Authors under these heads, will serve in all manner of Exercise, for Exordiums, Simile's, Testi∣monies, Allusions, and other Ornaments. RƲLES of Observation. In reading Authors (besides the above recited perticulers) Scholars must diligently observe, and treasure up in memory. 1. All choice single words, especially, such as agree in sound with the thing signified, as, Boatus, mugitus, ululatus, lugubris, vortex, tinnio, clangor, stridor, fragor, &c. 2. Such as both by use and Etymology appositely express the thing signified, as, philomela, sacro-sanctus, sartus-tectus, praeter-propter. 3. Such whose signification is very large, or hardly to be expressed in other words, as, colo, sringo, mereor, tenor, Idea, tinctura. 2. All choice Phrases or Idiotisms of the tongue whether Poeticall, Historicall, or Oratoricall; together with Congruous and Signi∣ficant Epithets, Neat Periphrases, and Descriptions. 3. All choice strains of Eloquence fit to be imitated, such be, Non feram, non patiar, non sinam: pleni sunt omnes librí, plenae sapientium voces, plena exemplorum vetustas: nullo possessio firmior constantior nulla: Obsequium amicos, veritac odium parit. 4. The Rhetoricall Analysis, viz. the parts of which any Oration doth consift, the heads from whence the Arguments are drawn,
as also, what passions are moved and from what heads. 5. , or the heights of Eloquence, viz. when an Author doth express a passion, , or other Action to the life, so that nothing can be said further. Such be, Seneca. Med. Mens intus agitat vulnera, & caedem, & vagum Funus per artus, levia memoravi cinnis: Haec virgo feci, gravior exurgat dolor. Majora jam me scelera post partus decent. Ja. Infesta memet perime. Med. misereri jubes. RƲLES for moving the Passions. 1. Fear is moved, 1. By setting forth the greatness of the ap∣proaching evill. 2. By shewing that it is near at hand. 3. By producing examples in like cases, or prodigies. 2. Confidence and hope are moved, 1. By shewing that the Dan∣gers or evils may be or have been escaped by us or others. 2. By reckoning up the convenient means, or helps, which we have and others want. 3. By perswasion of Divine favour from prodigys, prophesies, or common voice of the people. 3. Shame is moved, 1. By setting forth the baseness of the fact, 2 Or the signs of baseness in the parties or their relations. 4. Joy is moved, 1. By recounting our former miseries, 2. By exaggerating our present happiness. 5. Anger is moved, 1. By shewing the hainousness and indigni∣ty of the fact, 2. The Innocency, vertue, dignity of the person injured, 3. The vices and contemptible condition of the person injuring, 4. That the injury extends not onely to the present, but to posterity. 6. Lenity is moved, 1. By shewing that the offence was not com∣mitted through wilfulness or disrespect, but through passion, rashness, &c. 2. That the former good deeds exceeded this of∣fence, 3. By testifying our unfeigned sorrow, 4. By setting forth the glory and benefits of lenity. 7. Love is moved, by expressing our willingness to do good to others or their relations especially under the notion of good men, without respect to our own advantage. 8. Hatred is moved by relating and exaggerating the offences
enviously committed against what is dealt to us. 9. Indignation is moved, by comparing the former baseness of a person with his present undeserved honour, or plenty. 10. Envy is moved, 1. By shewing that the honour, or riches gotten, were not obtained by vertue, but basely, 2. By exag∣gerating the persons insolency. shewint that it exceeds his merits. 11. Pitty is moved, by exaggerating the misery, from the ad∣juncts of time, place, person, end, manner, 2. By comparing our former felicity with our present misery. . OR, Short and plain directions for the making of all manner of School-Exercises in Prose, or Verse. A Colloquie. A Colloquie is a feigned discourse betwixt two or more Persons. RƲLES for making it. 1. Imagine some discourse betwixt two or more persons, concern∣ing some matter daily hapning among people, as about the School, House, Church, Market, Fields, Woods, or something done therein: or about News, Travels, Games, Imployments, Trades, &c. 2. Express your thoughts in choice and good phrase, such as you have collected out of approved Authors. 3. Let not one word or phrase be said oft over, but if you must use the same Sence, vary the Phrase. 4. Indeavour to make your Colloquy pleasant, with witty jerks, quibbles and fancies (such as you shall often find in Erasmus) joking upon a name, action, proverb or the like. 5. In larger Colloquies upon any perticular Subject, as, Foot-ball, Hand-ball, Hunting, Hawking, Fishing, Swiming, Shuting, Musick, Dancing, Feasts, Souldiery, Law, Heraldry, &c. Indea∣vour to apply as many of the terms belonging to that exercise as may be. An Essay. An Essay is a short discourse about any vertue, vice, or other common-place. Such be Learning, Ignorance, Justice, Temper∣ance, Fortitude, Prudence, Drunkenness, Usury, Love, Joy, Fear,
Hope, Sorrow, Anger, Covetousness, Contentation, Labour, Idleness, Riches, Poverty, Pride, Humility, Virginity, &c. RƲLES for making it. 1. Having chosen a Subject, express the nature of it in two or three short Definitions, or Descriptions. 2. Shew the severall sorts or kinds of it, with their distinctions. 3. Shew the several causes, adjuncts, and effects of each sort or kinde. 4. Be carefull to do this briefly, without tautology or superfluous words, in good and choice language. 5. Metaphors, Allegories, Antithetons, and Paranomasia's do greatly adorn this kind of exercise. 6. In larger and compleat Essays (such as Bacon's, Feltham's, &c.) we must labour compendiously to express the whole nature of, with all observables about our subject. A Fable. A Fable is a facetious discourse false in it self yet secretly inti∣mating a truth. RƲLES for making it. 1. Chuse some Subject which you intend for your morall, as, Learning, Arts, Cowardise, Courage, Fraud, Patience, Envy, In∣gratitude, &c. 2. Pitch upon some living creatures for your speakers, which may fitly resemble the vertue or vice chosen, as the Hieroglyphick thereof, as for Corwardise the Hare, or Dere: for subtilty, the Fox: for courage, the Lion: for dulness, the Ass: for Hypo∣crisie, the Crocodile: for Chastity, the Turtle: for naturall af∣fection, the Stork: for cruelty the Tyger. 3. Let the Stile of your Fable be very short, and quick, the matter witty and facetious, the phrase choice and good. 4. If the conclusion of the Fable fall in with something remark∣able in nature, it adds a singuler grace to the Fable, such be these of Daphne, the Bar, Battus, &c. 4. For inlarging a Fable, (according to the Rules of amplification) express the perticulers contained in the generals, and seign speeches to the persons in the Fable.
A Prosopopaeia. A Prosopopaeia is a discourse, pathetically, and livelily setting forth what we conceive a person might say in such or such a case. RƲLES for making it. 1. Consider the case and condition of the person you represent, and imagine your self in such a place, so qualified. 2. Observe what passions the person is most affected with, as, love, joy, sorrow, fear, hatred, anger, despair; also what vertues or vices he is inclined to, and by the Rules of moving passions, make use of those sigures and arguments which best suit the purpose. 3. Consider the time, place, condition, age, sex, religion, and for∣mer estate of the person, that all things may be done ad deco∣rum, not unsutably in any circumstance. 4. Consider the endowments, and office of the person, let an old Patriot speak gravely, a King majestically, a Souldier resolutely, a young novice headily, all men altogether . A Character. A Character is a witty and facetious description of the nature and qualities of some person, or sort of people. RƲLEs for making it. 1. Chuse a Subject, viz. such a sort of men as will admit of va∣riety of observation, such be, drunkards, usurers, lyars, taylors, excise-men, travellers, pedlars, merchants, tapsters, lawyers, an upstart gentleman, a young Justice, a Constable, an Alderman, and the like. 2. Express their natures, qualities, conditions, practices, tools, desires, aims, or ends, by witty Allegories, or Allusions, to things or terms in nature, or art, of like nature and resemblance, still striving for wit and pleasantness, together with tart nipping jerks about their vices or miscarriages. 3. Conclude with some witty and near passage, leavig them to the effect of their follies or studies. A Theme. A Theme is a discourse amplifying a subject, by shewing the meaning and proving the truth thereof.
It hath eight parts. 1. Exordium, wherein we praise the Author of the Theme, by set∣ting forth his wit, learning, eloquence, or other excellency above others. 2. Narratio, wherein we shew the meaning of the Theme, by Periphrasing and opening the same. 3. Causa, wherein we shew the cause or reason of the Theme, how it comes to be so true. 4. Coutrarium, wherein we treat of the contrary to our Theme, shewing how ill, if a vice, how good, if a vertue. 5. Simile, wherein we bring in something in nature or art like to what is said in our Theme, for illustrating the truth thereof. 6. Exemplum, wherein we bring one or more examples out of history, of persons that have done or suffered as our Theme says. 7. Testimonium, wherein we bring sentences out of Authors, pro∣ving the truth of the Theme. 8. Epilogus, wherein we briefly conclude with the praise of the Author. Generall Rules for making a Theme. 1. When you are to make a Theme, run thorow these eight parts in your mind, and observe what variety of matter you can, out of which gather the choicest and best. 2. Strive to adorn your Theme with flowers of Rherorick, Gnome's, Proverbs, Allusions, Epiphonema's, and the like. 3. For bringing in any part neatly, at first make use of Clarks For∣mulae: for Simile's, Examples and Testimonies, See Licosthenes, Reusner, and the Poets. An Epistle. An Epistle is a Discourse wherein we talk with an absent friend, as if we were with him. Generall Rules for all Epistles. 1. All Epistles. have these four Accidents, or parts, 1. A Super∣scription, 2. A compellation, 3. A Subscription, and 4. A Date. 2. All Epistles must be written in a low, short, and pithy style, without affection, periphrase or garrulity. 3. In all Epistles shun Tauntologies, by varying the phrase, when the same sence is repeated.
Epistles are either of the Demonstrative, Deliberative, or Ju∣diciall kinde. Demonstrative Epistles are such as respect praise, or dis∣praise —Such be, 1. Narrative, wherein 1. We declare some matter to our friend, setting it forth as livelily as we can, 2. We desire out friends ad∣vice, or assistance. 2. Lamentatory, wherein 1. We bemoan our own or friends cala∣mity, 2. We propound our resolution, 3. We give, or ask advice. 3. Eucharistical. wherein, we praise the courtesie receive 1. because done voluntarily, ur expectedly, undeservedly, opportunely, 2. We promise requitall in deeds or thankfulness. 4. Gratulatorie, wherein 1. We express our joy for the good be∣faln our friend, 2. We extoll the benefit our friend hath gotten, 3. We pray that it may have good effect, and be a favour indeed. 5. Officious, wherein 1. We offer our service to our friend in any business unrequested, 2. We desire him to take our service in good part. 6. Disputatorie, wherein we propound, 1. The Occasion, 2. The Question, 3. The opinion of others, 4. Our own opinion, 5. We ask our friends judgement. 7. Laudatory, wherein we praise a person, action, or thing. See Orations of the Demonstrative kinde. 8. Deprecatorie, wherein 1. We confess our fault, 2. We exte∣nuate it from our age, heedlesness, or the kind of the offence, 3. We express our sorrow for the miscarriage, 4. We praise our friends clemency. 5. We testifie our better resolution for the future. Deliberative Epistles are such as tend to perswade or disswade. Such be, 1. Suasorie, wherein we perswade our friend to any thing in a case doubtfull, 1. Shewing him that it will be honest, profitable, ne∣cessary, pleasant, easie, 2. We amplifie the reasons ab exemple, à majori, à minori, à simili, à contrario. In disswasory, we use contrary arguments. 2. Hortatorie, wherein we exhort our friend, and four him up to a known duty, 1. From the hope of reward, 2. From the fear of disprofit, 3. From the hatted, emulation, expectation, of our adversaries, 4. From the love, commiseration, and expectation of our friends, 5. From Examples.
Dehortatory from the Contrary. 3. Petitorie, wherein 1. We insinuate into our friends favour, 2. We tell our request, 3. We shew it to be godly, just, honest, necessary, facile, honourable, 4. We promise requitall. 4. Commendatitious, wherein we recommend our Friend to ano∣ther, 1. Shewing him to be our dear friend, 2. Worthy our commendations, 3. That he hath done like courtesies for others, 4. We tell our request, and shew it to be just and facile, 5 We promise our thankfulness. 5. Consolatorie, wherein we shew, 1. That our friend in that case ought not to mourn at all, or however not so much, 2. We lessen the evill, 3. We bring examples of brave men that have not sor∣rowed in that case, 4. We acknowledge Gods providence in or∣dering all things, 5. We proffer our assistance or help. 6. Responsatorie to Consolatorie Epistles, wherein 1. We give thanks for the good advice, 2. We mention the comfort we eaped there∣from, 3. We mention other Arguments: whereby we comfort our selves. 7. Monitorie, wherein 1. We advise our friend what to do, 2. What to shun, 3. We shew the Authority we have to do thus, from our age, relation, experience, former intimacy, or the like. 8. Convitiatorie, wherein 1. We express our own, and others sor∣row for the offence committed, 2. We reprehend the fact, 3. We admonish our friend to take better courses. 9. Conciliatorie, wherein we desire acquaintance with one, 1. Ex∣pressing his vertues and indowments which make us love him, 2. We modestly desire to be reckoned as a friend, 3. If there be any thing which may make him love us, we modestly mention it, however we promise faithfulness and integrity. Judiciall Epistles are such as accuse or defend, viz. 1. Criminatorie, wherein we accuse a Person, 1. By shewing our sorrow for the offence, 2. By setting forth the hainousness of the crime, 3. By reckoning up the evill effects thereof. 2. Difensorie. wherein we defend our selves from a crime imputed, 1. Either by plainly denying it, 2. Or by shewing that it was done otherwise then was objected. 3. Expostulaterie, wherein 1. We express our complaint, 2. We
mitigate the crime with fair interpretation, of the Action, 3. We admonish our freind to walk more cautiously hereafter. 4. Exprobratorie, where we upbraid the ingratitude of a friend by shewing that we deserved better things at his hands. 5. Purgatorie, wherein we shew, 1. That we are not offended but delighted with the reproof of a friend, 2. We remove the suspit∣tion objected against us, 3. We prove our own innocency. ORATIONS. AN Oration is a Discourse wherein we praise, or dispraise; perswade, or diswade; prove, or disprove. there be three sorts of Orations. Demonstrative, Deliberative, Judiciall. Orations of the Demonstrative kinde. A Panagyrick ancient, used at generall assemblies, to see pub∣lick games, wherein they used, 1. To praise the God or man that instituted the games, 2. The Nation or City where they were used, 3. The games themselves, 4. The prize played for. 5. The master of the play, 6. They exhorted the gamesters to behave themselves bravely, and leave an example of vertue to be imitated. 2. A Panegyrick modern, used at any publick assembly, as the In∣auguration, or Coronation of a Prince, or the yearly Solemnity thereof, or at the well-come of some Commander to his Office, or Trust; wherein 1. We shew the difficulty of the task, or other cause which makes us undertake it, 2. We praise the Prince from his Countrey, Kindred, Nature, Education, Studies, At∣cheivements in Peace or War, vertues, Fortune, Children, Citi∣zens-love; and lastly by comparing him with some other, 3. We set forth the happiness of the times having such a Prince, affirm∣ing that nothing is so much to be prayed for as his long Life, and his Children and Grand-children to Rule after him, 4. We con∣clude with an exhortation to obedience and concord. 3. Nuptiall, used at Marriages; wherein 1. We treat of the first
institution of Marriage, and of natures Prolifick force in all crea∣tures, 2. We shew the preheminence of humane propagation above other creatures, 3. We shew the profits of Marriage, as credit or good name, procreation of children, honour, mutuall comfort in prosperity, and help in adversity, increase of society and civility, affinity with forreigners, 4. We pray for the feli∣city of the Bridegroom and Bride, 5. By Hypotypôsis we feign their children before them playing, pratling, singing, waxing, &c. 6. We may bring examples of what Children have done for their Parents, 7. We praise the Bridegroom and Bride from the likeness or distlikeness of their countrey, nation, age, faculties, &c. 4. Epithalamium, used at the marriage bed, wherein we treat of 1. The necessity of Marriage, 2. The praise of the Married eouple, 3. We exhort to mutuall concord, shewing what joy this will be to their friends, what sorrow to their enemies, 4. We wish they may soon see their Children. 5. Natalitiall, at or in honour of ones birth-day; wherein, 1. We creat of the time of the Nacivity, year, moneth, day, hour if any of them afford observation, 2. The place, nation, or City, 3. The vertue of the Parents, and Predecessors, 4. The hope we conceive of the Childe from his Kindred, Face, future Education, 5. We pray for long life and prosperity to the Childe. 6. Funerall, used at Burials, wherein 1. We express our present sorrow, and the sad cause of our meeting, 2. We set forth the worth and vertue of the deceased, 3. The hope we had of him whereof now berest, 4. An exhortation to imitate his vertues. 7. Eucharisticall, when we give thanks for a courtesie received, wherein 1. We express our joy for the benefit received, 2. We exaggerate the courtesie, from its greatness, opportuneness, &c. 3. We promise thankfulness in heart, word, or deed, 4. We pray sometimes that God may requite, where we cannot. 8. Gratulatorie, used when we rejoyce with our friends in some good event; wherein 1. We signifie how joyfull we were to hear of the good success, 2. We augment the benefit acquired by shewing its excellency, and use, 3. We pray that like success may be perpetuall. 9. Lawtutatorie, wherein 1. We shew into what evill we are fal∣ling, aggtavating it, 2. We exclaim against the Authors, 3. We
tell others that it may be their case, and move pity. 10 Valedictorie, used when we leave a town or Countrey; wherein, 1. We express our sorrow to leave our Friends and Country, 2. We praise the peoples fidelity, clemency, piety, &c. The City or Countreys situation and excellencys, 3. We promise our mind∣sulness of the courtesies received, and our study to express our thankfulness. 11. Propempticall, used when we take our leave of a departing Friend; wherein 1. We complain of fortune, or other cause of this seperation, 2. We mention our former familiarity, mutuall studies, recreations, &c. 3. We express the want and loss of our friend, 4. We set forth his praise, 5. We pray him to be mind∣full of us while absent, 6. We pray for a good journey. Orations of the Deliberative kinde. 1. Monitorie, when we reprove persons, yet so as not to offend; wherein, 1. we set forth the parts and good qualities of them we admonish, and our love to them, 2. we shew that nothing is so perfect but hath some stain or vice, 3. we mention the fault, or offence, withall telling them that true love causeth us to mention it, and grant the like liberty to them of reproving us when we of∣fend, 4. Sometimes we lay the blame upon age, nation, so cie∣ty, &c. 5. we perswade to amendment, ab honesto, utili, glo∣rioso, &c. 2. Conciliatorie, used when we desire friendship, favour or ac∣quaintance, wherein 1. we tell the causes of our request, speak∣ing well of the person according to nis place, 2. we modestly shew that we are not altogether unworthy of friendship, or league, but may be serviceable to him. 3. Hortatorie, wherein we inflame the minde in  known duty, by moving the passions. 4. Swasorie, wherein we perswade by argument in a case doubt∣full. In both which 1. we commend the former vertues of the persons we exhort, 2. we bring in arguments à jucundo, honesto, utili, sacili, 3 we excite love of the thing we perswade to, and love or pitty of the person for whom we move, with hatred to his enemies, 4. we
stir up emulation, by the good examples of others, 5. we shew the hope of good if done, the fear of evill if neglected. 5. Dehortatorie, wherein 1. we shew the matter to be ill, vile, laborious, impossible, uncertain, not worth the pains, 2. we jeer it as a babble, 3. we blame the auditors as over-credulous, 4. we shew the great dangers likely to accompany or ensue the undertaking. 6. Consolatorie, used when we comfort mourners; wherein 1. we shew the causes of our undertaking, as kindred, friendship, pitty, &c. 2. we confess a true cause of mourning, and that we Sym∣pathize, but that nothing should make men so exceed, 3. we shew that misfortunes are common to all, 4. That effeminate mourning becomes not a man, 5. That what we have is but lent, 6. That we must shew good examples to others, of pati∣ence, courage, &c. 7. Petitorie, when we beg any thing; wherein, 1. when occasion serves we use insinuation, 2. we shew our business to be in the power of the Auditors, 3. That our request is just, honest, and facile, 4. we declare the manner how to perform it, 5. we promise requitall. Orations of the Judiciall kinde. 1. Invective, used against an enemy, wherein 1. Either we be∣gin at his birth and exaggerate his vices to that time, 2. Or we insist on the severall heads of vices whereto he is inclined, 3. The possions we excite are shame, fear, and sometimes anger, hatred, envy. 2. Objurgatorie, wherein we chide inferiours, in which 1. we lay the crime before their eyes, 2. we exnggerate it from the circumstances of time, place, person, manner, or by comparison with others, 3. we expostulate and threaten more or less, ac∣cording to the ingenuity or stubbornness of the offen∣der, 4. Sometimes we bemoan their miscarriage, and give cantions. 3. Expostulatorie, when we complain of an injury from others; wherein, 1. Relating the injury we exaggerate it, yet intimating that we have suffered more than we speak of, 2. That we con∣cealed
as long as we could, now necessity makes us speak, we searing worse things, 3. If the injury be of small moment, we onely jeast it out, excusing their will, and laying the blame some∣where else, 4. we admonish future heed and diligence. 4. Exprobratorie, when we upbraid unthankfulness in others, wherein 1. we relate and exaggerate our former favours, yet with excuse as done unwillingly, as forced thereto by them, 2. we declare and amplyfie the others injurys, 3. we may run out into the common place of Ingratitude. 5. Deprecatorie, when we plead for others about to be punished; wherein, 1. we shew that the fault was not committed of malice, but if it were, we ingenously confess it, 2. we treat of the excel∣lency of clemency, 3. If the cause permit we fetch arguments of pardon, from the offenders: Nobility, Learning, former In∣nocency, well-deserving of the Common-wealth; or least this Sentence though just, prove a bad precedent, 4. we shew that his pardon will be no damage, 5. we add an Aporia what shall he or his do. DECLAMATIONS. A Declamation is a kinde of exercise wherein we plead for, or against, or moderate in a cause propounded. There be four sorts of Declamations (according to the four States, 1. Conjecturall, 2. Finitive, 3. Qualitative, 4. Quantitative. Generall Rules for Declamations. 1. In Declamations (as in Orations) the Exordium may be taken, 1. Ex visceribus materia, 2. à personâ Oratoris, audi∣torum, Judicis, adversarii, vel rei, 3. à generali pronunciato, fabulâ, proverbio, simili, Historiâ, vel Lege.
2. Not onely in the Exordium, but elswhere in the Declamation, we must labour for attention, and good will of the Auditors, by plausible compellations, fair intreaties, and promises of our can∣dor and faithfulness. 3. Sometimes we must use insiouation, plausibly yet subtilly steal∣ing into our cause and the Auditors affection, viz. in re turpi, ancipiti, vel paradoxâ. 4. If our adversaries cause be bad we insult over him, jeer his ab∣surdities, and the weakness of his arguments with Ironia's, Sarcasmus, Epitropt's, Exclamatio's, &c. Especially near the conclusion. 5. It is frequent and laudable in Declamations, by Prosopopaeia to seign speeches to the persons most concerned, and therein live∣lily to move the passions of sorrow, love, envy, pitty, &c. as our cause requires. 6. We must place strong Arguments in the beginning, weaker in the middle, and the strongest of all last. 7. In the conclusion we briefly repeat our strongest Arguments, and strongly moving the passions requisite, we triumph over our adversary. 8. In Academicall Declamations where the question is propound∣ed in a short history, either party after the Exoraium, briefly runs thorow the parts of the story, hinting what observations make for him, or against his adversary, and aster insists largly upon the weightiest Arguments. 9. In this kinde of exercise there be three parties, Actor, Reus, Judex: Plaintiff, Defendant, Moderator, who weighs the Argu∣ments and decides. 1. Declamations Conjecturall. 1. A Conjecturall Declamation is, when we enquire whether or by whom a fact was committed, as, An Roscius occiderit patrem? An Clodius occiderit Milonem? We prove a person to have committed a fact, by arguments taken from these heads.
1. A velle, shewing that the Person had a will to do it, and that either 1. From Impulsive causes, as anger, hatred, love, enmity, envy, &c. or 2. From Ratiocinative, as hope of pro∣fit, hope of escaping unpunished, having nothing to loose, &c. 3. From the dispositions of the parties, as nation, kindred, sex, education, habit of body, former life, age, friends, study, &c. 4. From former words or deeds. 2. A posse, shewing that the person had ability to do it, from the Circumstances, 1. Of the person, as that he had strength of body, wit, means, friends, weapons, &c. 2. Of the thing, as conveniency of time, and place. 3. A Signis facti, from the signs fore going, accompanying, or sol∣lowing an Action. 4. A testibus, from witnesses, rumors, or reports. We disprove by Arguments taken from centrary heads, and by shewing the incredibles of what is alledged. 2. Declamations Finitive. 2. A Finitive Declamation is, when we enquire whether the crime imputed be such as it is deemed; as if a person be slain, whether the fact be murther, man-slaughter, chance-medley, or se de∣fendendo. We prove a crime to be such as is objected, by Arguments drawn from these heads. 1. A Definitione, by laying down a Desinition of the crime ob∣jected, and shewing there is par ratio in the offence com∣mitted. A Lege, by a Law or custom, either from the letter or the sence of the Law. 3. A Quantitate, by exaggerating the offence committed. 4. A Comparato, by comparing what was committed with what was omitted, and shewing the hainousness of the one above the other.
We disprove by the same heads, viz. Defining otherwise, Inter∣preting the Law otherwise, exaggerating the requisite omit∣ted, &c. 3. Declamations Qualitative. 3. A Declamation Qualitative is, when we enquire concerning the quality of an Action, whether profitable or unprofitable, just, or unjust, &c. These are 1. Negotiall, 2. Juridiciall, 3. Legall. 1. Negotiall, wherein we deliberate concerning matters pub∣lick, or private. We perswade to any enterprize from these heads. 1. A legitimo, from Law, or Custom Humane, or Divine. 2. Ab aquo, from what may advantage Divine Worship, Pa∣rents, Citizens, &c. 3. Ab utili, from getting or keeping what is good or shuning what is evil; or on the contrary, loss or damage if we neglect. 4. A necessario, when the matter is such that we cannot be without it. 5. A jucundo, from what may bring pleasure, delight, and con∣tentment. 6. A possibili, whence we prove the thing possible, and facile, or excuse the difficulty, from the advantage to be got thereby. 7. A glorioso, whence we shew, what glory and honour we shall thereby get or keep. 8. Ab eventu, whence we shew, that however the matter fall out, the end will be profitable or honourable. 2. Juridiciall, wherein we plead the lawfulness or justice of a past action, viz. 1. A naturâ, that it is according to the Law of Nature. 2. A Lege, that it is agreeable to the Laws of God or men.
3. A consuetudine, that it is according to the custom of men, or nations. 4. A judicato, that there have been former precedents of like nature. 5. Ab aequitate, that it is according to equity, or equall dealing. 6. A pacto, that it is according to covenant, or former agreement. But if the cause cannot be defended from these heads, then we must make use of Colours, viz. 1. A comparatione, wherein we compare the fact with a worse, whereunto we should otherwise have been necessitated. 2. A relatione, wherein we lay the blame upon the person inju∣red, aggravating the provocation. 3. A remotione, wherein we lay the blame upon some other per∣son or thing, commanding, provoking, or forcing us. 4. A purgatione, wherein we do not defend the fact, but excuse our will, laying the blame upon necessity, fortune, or igno∣rance, bringing instances of like offences excused. 3. Legall, wherein the state or cause especially consists in the meaning of a Law: here are four cases considerable. 1. De scripto & sententiâ, when the one party stands upon the words, the other upon the Sence, of the Law or contract. In this case, The former shall alledge, 1. How dangerous it is to depart from the letter of the Law, 2. That we ought to follow what is briefly and plainly written, and that if the Law-giver meant any thing further he would have added it. 3. He shall bring a reason to prove that no further was meant, 4. He shall add like examples, or adjudged cases. The other party shall alledge, 1. That the Law-giver thought not needfull to write what every one did of himself see, 2. That it is a cavillers part to stand upon the Apices of the letter and neglect the sence, 3. He shall confute the other opinion from some other clause of this Law, or from some other Law, 4. He shall shew that his opinion is accord∣ing to nature, and Law, 5. He shall bring examples of
Laws where the Sence, not the words have prevailed. 2. Contrariarum legum, when two Laws or two Clauses of one Law seem contrary, in this Case if the Laws cannot be re∣conciled, then the less must yield to the greater, 1. Humane Laws yield to Divine, 2. Old Laws to new, 3. Permissive to Preceptive, 3. Generall to perticuler, 4. Private to Publick. 3. Ratiocinationis, when there is no perticuler Law in the Case, but we gather the cause by likeness from some other Law, Here the one party will alledge, that the matter is either virtually contained in the Law, or that which is less neces∣sary, The other party shall shew that there is not par ratio, and bring a reason why, and where they are unlike. 4. Ex ambiguo, when the question is with what Accent a word is to be read, or whither a word is to be referred, or in what signification to be taken; In this case both the parties shall indeavour to prove, that his cause is manifest, or at least not absurd, that it is equall and good, agreeable to Law or custom, and refute the other opinion. 4: Declamations Quantitative. 4. A Quantitative Declamation is, wherein we enquire of the hainousness of an offence, viz. Whether of two crimes is the greater; and this is proved, 1. Ratione animi depravati, when the offence is committed up∣on light eauses. 2. Ratione noxae, when the Damage is greater, as to kill, is more then to rob, or defame. 3. Ratione patientis, when the injured person cannot have ju∣stice, or hath therefore grievously punished himself, as Lucretia. 4. Ratione agentis, as if one offended alone, or first, or with few, or often, or occasioned a new Law, or Punishment. 5. Ratione adjunctorum, as if one commie an offence on set purpose, or ungratesully, or if many injuries be involved in one.
6. Ratione violati juris, as when the written Law is violated, we shall alledge that he who transgresseth Laws which are punishable, how much rather would he if there were no Law, or punishment, so when an unwritten Law is trans∣gressed, we shall say it is a token of a worse disposition. POETICAL EXERCISES. RƲLES for making a Verse. 1. When you can perfectly scan and proove a Verse, learn to put in meeter any Verse displaced, the same words being retained. 2. Upon any common place, as Vertue, Learning, Love, War, &c. bethink a Sentence consisting of three or four words, for each word write down what Synonyma's you know, out of which cull out a Verse; Or seeking the principall words in Thesaurus Poeticus, from thence piece up a Verse. 3. If a word at any time be awanting to make up the measure, chuse out of Textors Epithets a proper and sutable Adjective. 4. Be carefull to express your sentence in a Poetical manner, using much the Tropes, especially Metonymia, Metaphora, and Peri∣phrasis. The vertues and vices of a Verse. 1. The greatest excellency of a Verse is, when the sound of the words or letters doth resemble the thing signifyed, as vordt aequore vertex. Multum ille & terris jactatus & alto. Ʋna Eurus{que} Notus{que} ruunt creber{que} procellis, &c. Insequitur clamor{que} virum stridor{que} rudentum. 2. Gravity, Majesty, Slowness, require Spondees, Lightness and Swiftness are expressed by Dactyls, otherwise let the feet be mixed, as,
Olli subridens respendit ore Latinus. — Ea lapsa repente ruinam Cum soritu trahit & Danaum super agnima, &c. 3. Use a Sponde in the first place seldom, and a Monosyllable in the last place never, unless to express Gravity, Majesty, or Wonder, as, — Magnum Jovis Incrementum. Parturiunt Montes, nascetur ridiculus mus. 4. Verses run most pleasantly when no seet end a word, as, Infandum regina jubes renovare dolorem. 5. Let no verse end in a Fentasyllable, nor three Dissyllables, such as, Ambubaiarum collegia Pharmacopolae. Semper ut inducar, blandos offers mibi vultus. 6. Shun too many Collisions or Elisions, such as, Belli ferratos postes, portas{que} refregit. Monstrum horrendum informe ingens cui lumen ademptum. 7. Versus leonimi, viz. such as Rhime one part to another are absurd, as, O fortunatam natam me consule Romam. E re terrenâ premanant mille venena. 8. In a Pentameter never suffer an Elision betwixt the Penthimi∣mers: Nor end otherwise then in a Monosyllable. And let the former Penthimimer end a word. For these are absurd. Non desistere am are omnia si facias. Deliciae populi qui fuerint Domini. Hac quo{que} nostra sententia mentis erat. 1. TRANSLATION. Translation is when we turn Latine Verse into English or Greek, & contra: one sort of Verse into another: or Prose into Verse. RƲLES. 1. In all sorts of Translation be carefull to express the Sence clear∣ly and intelligibly. 2. Ty not your self to the words, but take liberty to vary the ex∣pression so, as may best accord with the Phrase and terms of the Language into which you translate.
3. Where the Poet is obscure, you may enlarge, where he is prolix, you may contract, so will your Translation be concise and easily understood. 4. Endeavour as much as may be, to apply the proper terms of Art belonging to any Subject you Translate. 2. VARIATION. Variation is when we express the same thing divers ways, either in the same or divers kinds of Verse. See above Rules of Variation. 3. IMITATION. Imitation is when we take some choice passage of a Poet, and endeavour to imitate it in all the Excellencies of matter, arguments, order, parts, phrase, style, flowers, &c. See the Rules of Imitation. See also Hornes Manuduct. pag. 105. 4. CARMEN. Carmen is a Paper of Verses made upon some common place, and hath like parts with a Theme, ut supra, onely you must be carefull to express the matter in a Poeticall manner and dress: using much the Tropes and Figures, especially Perl∣phrasis, Metonymia, Metaphora, Exclamatio, &c. 5. EPIGRAM. An Epigram is a short but witty Poëm, facetiously expressing the nature or quality of an action, thing or person. RƲLES for making Epigrams. 1. An Epigram must be short, comprized within a Distich or two, or three at most. 2. Every Epigram must have a fancy, which is as it were its soul, the deeper or richer this fancy is, the worthier is the Epigram.
The heads from whence the fancy of Epigrams is fetched, are these and the like. 1. A comparatione, when comparing one thing with another, we do wittily, suddainly, unexpectedly, & with admiration con∣clude, 1. A greater from a less, 2. A less from a greater, 3. Equall from Equall, 4. Divers from Divers, 5. Con∣trary from Contrary, 6. Like from Like, &c. Exempla Epigrammatum ubi concluditur. 1. Majus— Ad Trajanum. Tanta tibi est recti reverentia Caesar & aequi Quanta Numae fuerat sed Numa pauper erat. Ardua res haec est opibus non tradere mores Et cum tot Craesos viceris esse Numam. 2. Minus— De Julio Caesare. Spectat Alexandri picta ut certamina Caesar Ast ego nondum aliquid gessi ait illacrymans: Quod si & Alexander spectasset Caesaris acta Dixisset, Persas vincere pigritia est. 3. Aequale— Columba, Columbus. Primus aquis terram refluis emergere pinguem Nuntius apperiens ipsa columba fuit, Lapsis qui primus tellurem comperit undis Nuncius apperiens ipse Columbus erat. 4. Diversum— Quid novi. Nil ait esse novum Salamon sub sole: Columbus In veteri mundum repperit esse novum: 5. Contrarium— In Haereticos. Aurùm Virgilius è stercore colligit Ennî: Ex auro stercus colligit Haereticus.
6. Simile,— Eclipsiis animae. Ʋt solem tellus lunam{que} stat inter opacam: Stat peccatum inter me{que} deum{que} meum. 1. Ab allusione: when we allude, 1, To some History, 2. Pro∣verb, 3. Gnome, 4. Maxime, 5. Term of Art, 6. Custom of a Person or Nation. 1. Historia— Ulysses & Penelope. Mors nobis, velut Ʋxori subrepsit Ʋlysses, Vivimus ut telam texuit ille suam. 2. Proverbium— Spiritus Sanctus. Ʋt semper veniunt ad candida tecta Columbae: Ingreditur Sanctus candida corda Deus. 3. Gnome— Medicus & Juris consultus. Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus honores: Dum ne sit patiens iste, nec ille cliens. 4. Axiôma— Generatio unius est corruptio alterius. Ut genereut unam confuso semine prolem, Corpora corrumpunt vir mulier{que} duo. 5. Vox artis— A centro ad circumferentiam. A centro ad circum non unica binea ducit, A terra ad Caelum fert tamen una via. 3. A Paranomasiâ, 1. When we play upon the Etymology of a Proper name, 2. When the proper name is the same with a common or Appellative, whence we observe some likeness, or unlikeness, 3. When by a small change of a letter, or Syllable the Sence is changed, 4. When a word is taken in divers Sences. Examples, 1. Etymologia— Erasmus. Quaritur unde tibi sit nomen Erasmus? er as-mus. Sin sum Musego te judice summus ero.
2. Proprium Appellat. — Gallus. Ex gallo capo fit, fierent sl qui{que} capones Galli, nonne foret Gallica rara lues. 3. Mutatio Syll.— Podagra, Chiragra. Litigat & podagra Diodorus Flacce laborat, Sed nil patrono porrigit haec Chiragra est. 4. Diversi sensus.— Sanguine non virtute. Antiquum est virtute decet non sangnine niti, Non meritis tamen, at sanguine nitar ego. Non inquam virtute decet sed sanguine niti, Non virtute me â, sanguine Christe tuo. 3. Those Epigrams are the richest which have a double or triple fansie, as, Opto, poto Anagramma. Opto tibi multam, nullam tibi poto salutem, Est potior pot â sicca salute salus. 6. DIALOUE. A Dialogue is a short, pithy, and witty Discourse betwixt two or more persons. RƲLES for making Dialogues. 1. In all Dialogues we must especially observe the  or deco∣rum of the speakers, viz. When, what, how much; How or af∣ter what manner they ought to speak. 2. The choicest Dialogues are those which are framed upon the Pictures or Statues of the Gods, Goddesses, vertues, vices, as oc∣casion, repentance, justice, fortune, the fates, the furies, the gra∣ces, &c. Briefly demanding, and wittily rendring the reason of what Poets or Paintets have fansied concerning them, as,
Cum aquilâ portante Jovem Dialogismus. Dic mibi quem portes volucrum regina? tonantem. Nulla manu quare fulmina gestat? amat. Que calet igne Deus? pueri, cur mit is operto Respicis ore Jovem? de Granymede loquor. Dialogus in Justitiam. Quae dea? Justitia, quid torvo lumine? flecti Nescia sum, & Lacrhymis, & precio, & precibus. Quod genus? à superis, ex quo genitore? modo, ex quâ Matre? fide. Nutrix quae tua? pauperies. Quis Deus infantem fovit? prudentia, quonam Freta duce agnoscis crimina? judicio. Cur gladium tua dextra gerit, cur laeva bilancem? Ponderat haec causas, percutit illa reos. Quid rari assistunt? quòd copia rara bonorum est. Quae comes assidua est? caudida simplicitas. Aurium aperta tibi cur altera, & altera clausa? Haec surda injustis, panditur illa bonis. Paupere cur semper cultu? justissimus esse qui cupit, exiguas semper habebit opes. 7. ECHO. An Echo is a facetious kind of Poëm imitating the resounding Rocks, wherein the last Syllables of a Sentence repeated, give answer to a question in the same, or a divers, and sometime a contrary Sence. RULES for making an Echo. 1. The answer or repetition must be made at the end of every sen∣tence, whether it be at the end or in the middle of the verse. 2. The answer sometimes onely affirms the same thing with the question, sometimes it doth contain something divers, contra∣ry, like, greater, or lesser than the question, and the more un∣expected the better. 3. The Persons speaking are sometimes onely the querent and Echo, sometimes the Poet historically relates the passage.
4. The same letters are not necessary in Echo, so the sound be the same, or near it: the first Consonant may be changed, aspiration added, or taken away. 5. The repetition is most elegant in Dissyllables, as nearest a natu∣rall Echo, yet Trissyllables or Monosyllables may be used. Example. Dic mihi quae gelidis habitas convallibus Echo Cur populus pacem sic modo clamat? amat. Ad divam pacem precibus concurpitur? itur. Ʋt damnum fugiat triste colonus? onus. Rusticus ergo iterum campos reparabit? arabit. Et tuto curret remige navita? ita: Omnia{que} evenient in mundo prospera? spera. Largaq, nec rerum copia deerit? erit. Si retulisti Echo mihi vera relata, voleto. Donec nostra iterum verba novabis, abis. 8. EPITAPH. An Epitaph is a Poém writ upon the Herse, or Tombe of a decea∣sed person, expressing the name, age, merits, state, dignity, praises, studies, kind of death or the like, in way of commise∣ration or sorrow. RƲLES for making Epitaphs. 1. In the Epitaphs of Kings Princes, Nobles, &c. 1. We briefly recite their Praises, viz. Felicity, Wisdom, Justice in Govern∣ment, Clemency in pardoning their Subjects offences, affability, valour, Piety in building Churches or Schools, or in Defending Religion, or other their peculier vertues. 2. We take notice of any thing new, admirable, or wofull in Life or Death. 3. We conclude with a grave Gnome or Epiphonéma. Tumulus Caroli quinti.— Europae domuit tollentes cornua reges, Carolus, at{que} Asiae terror & horror erat. Et pedibus Libyam calcavit victor, & illi Innumeras victus praebuit Indus opes. Deinde sibi fraenum injecit, fratri{que} regendum Imperium, & nato caetera regna dedit.
At{que} ait è nobis & honores temnere, & unum hoc Discite mortales, pulvis & umbrasumus. 2. In the Epitaphs of Generals, Captains, or Souldiers, 1. We mention their skill in Military affairs, valour, authority, good fortune, prudence, victories, trophies, love to their Countrey, 2. We compare them with former Worthies, and Out-vies them, 3. We bemoan the Countries loss, and want of them. Tumulus Hectoris. Defensor patriae, juvenum fortissimus Hector qui murus miseris civibus alter erat. Occubit telo violenti victus Achillis Occubuere simul spes{que} salus{que} Phrygum. Hunc feras Aeacides circumsua maenia traxit, Quae juvenis manibus texerat ante suis. Heu quantos Priamo lux attulit illa doleres Quos flet us Hecubae, quos dedit Andromachae. Sed raptum pater infoelix auro{que} repensum condidit & maerens hâc tumulavit humo. 3. In the Epitaphs of Learned men, 1. We recount their peculier vertues: in Divines piety: in Philosophers, quicksightedness: in Physitians, diligence: in Lawyers, integrity: in Orators, ele∣gancy: in Poets, sweetness: in Grammarians, much reading, &c. 2. We Allegorically hold on in a strain of Terms proper to their Art, 3. We compare and prefer them before the Ancients Re∣nowned for those Arts, 3. We praise their Works. Epitaphium Paridis Pantoninni. Quisquis Flaminiam teris viator, Noli nobile praeterire marmor. Vebis deliciae, sales{que} Nili, Ars, & gratia, lusus, & voluptas, Romani decus, & dolor theatri, At{que} omnes Veneres Cupidines{que} Hoc sunt condita quo, Paris, sepulchre.
Tumulus Andreae Vesalii Medici.— Quo non arte prior fuit medendi Aut Asclepius, aut Senex Machaon Aut magnus Podalarius, medensum Princeps Vesalius celebriorum, Dum morbis bonus artifex medetur Cunctis, tam sibi non medetur ipse Summus paeoniae magister artis, Fato mortuus heu nimis maligno. 4. In the Epitaphs of friends, or relations, 1. We mournfully ex∣press our loss, and hopes frustrated, 2. We complain of Deaths cruelty, 3. We use Simile's of flowers cropt, and withered with heat, or wind, 4. We set forth their remarkable praises. Lachryma Rabirii in funere Parentum. Quisquis laeta tuis & sera parentibus optas fata, brevem titulum marmoris hujus ama: Condidit hâc charas tellure Rabirius umbras nulli sorte jacent candidiore senes. Bis sex lustratori nox mit is & ultima clusit, arserunt uno funera bina roge. Tumulus Astyanactis.— Flos Asia, tantâ{que} unus de gente superstes, Parvulus, Argivis sed jam de patre timendus, Hic jacto Astyanax Scaeis dejectus ab altis, Proh dolor! Iliaci Neptunia maenia muri Viderant aliquid crudelius Hectore tracto. Tumulus Filii.— Non lachrymis-indigne meis nec honore sepulchri rapte mihi ante diem dulcis alumne jaces. Intra bis denos te ostendit & abstulit annos parca ferox, vot is inficiata mcis. Nec potuit probit as, nec amaeni gratia vultus flectere, nec arae, nec piaturba deûm. Spes hominum stolidas! tumulavi maestus Ephsbum, qui me debuerat laetus humâsse senem.
5. In feigned Epitaphs, or upon vitious persons, 1. We merrily and wittily play upon the name, manners, lineaments, manner of death, or other memorable events affording matter of witty conceit. Ad Henricum Good-year Kal. Jan. Quid tibi prostren â mittam Goodyere, precabor ut possis nomen multiplicare tuum. Tres dimensiones—in Battologum. Vox tua mensuris desiderat è tribus unam, lata satis, nimium longa, profunda parum. In Vesbiamiracundam faeminem. Tres habuit furias quondam, sed Vesbia manes ut petiit, furias quatuor orcus habet. 9. HYMNE. An Hymne is a divine Poëm made in honour of the Gods. RƲLES. 1. In an Hymne to the true God; we recount his glorious attri∣butes, and wondrous works done for his Church. 2. In Hymnes to the heathen Gods, the Poets used to set forth their Pedigree, Inventions, and Memorable Actions. 3. In Hymnes to Saints or Martyrs, Poets use to set forth their vertues and graces, with what is memorable in their lives, or deaths. Hymnus ad Deum. Laus tibi coeli pater at{que} princeps Omninm rector simul & creator, Quem fides veri studiosa trinum credit & unum. Hymnus Eulaliae Virgini. Germine nobilis nobilis Eulalia Mortis & indole nobilior Emerilāsacra virgo suam Cujus ab ubere progenita est Offibus ornat, amore colit, &c. See Prudentius.
10. ANAGRAM. An Anagram is, when the letters of a proper Name, or other Title are made into a Sentence, which expresses the quality of the Person. RƲLES. 1. Write the Letters of the Name in dinstinct squares of Paper, which joyn severall ways till you light upon a fit Sentence. 2. When you have found an Anagram, make it up into a Distich, explaining the Sence thereof. 3. In Anagrams some liberty of taking in or leaving out a letter is indulged, so it be not Essentiall to the Name. Galenus, Angelus. Anag. Angelus es bonus an malus Galene? salutis Humanae custos, angelus ergo bonus. — So Maria Novila — Anagr. — Alia Minerva. Terra — Anagr. errat, terar. Mobile non errat coelum stat terra sed errat, Funditus in varias undi{que} secta vias. Errantum pedibus calcabor humallima tellus Vomere proscindar, dum{que} ero terra, terar. 11. ACROSTICH. An Acrostich is a Poëm wherein the Initiall Letters of the Lines, make up ths Name or Title of a Person, or some other plea∣sant Device. Sometimes the Name, Motto, or Devise goeth crossways from Angle to Angle, writ in a larger Character. An Alphabetical Acrostich on Dr Ailmer. A — sk you why so many a tear B — ursts forth, I'le tell you in your ear: C — ompell me not to speak aloud, D — eath would then be too too proud.
E — yes that cannot vie a tear F — orbear to ask you may not hear G — entle hearts that overflow H — ave onely priviledge to know. I — n these sacred ashes then K — now reader that a man of men L — yes covered, &c. See Quarls Div. Poems, pag. ult. 12. CHRONOSTICH. A Chronostich is a Verse, or other Sentence whose Numerall Let∣ters contain the time of some Memorable Action. On him who slew his Father. 1568. Filius ante Diem patrios inquirit in annos. MDLVVIIIIIIII. — 1568. On Owens Epigrams finished 1612. Si Deus nobiscum. MDCVVII. 13. Epithalamium, or Verses upon a Marriage. 14. Genethliacum, upon ones Nativity. 15. Panegyricum, used at solemne assemblies. 16. Encharisticon, wherein wee give thanks. 17. Encomiasticon, wherein wee praise. 18. Apobaterion, when wee depart from any place. 19. Proseucticon, when wee beg any thing. 20. Dirae, when wee curse an enemy. 21. Palinodia, when wee recant an error, &c. All these are made according to the Rules of Orations or Epi∣pistles of the same kinde; onely in a phrase, slyle and dresse poëticall. An Ode, Satry, Bucolick, Elegie, Emblem, Comedie, Trage∣die, are above the reach of the Grammer School; onely Schollers may observe that the chief grace of an Ode is Ele∣gantea: of a Satyr. Acrimonia: of a Bucolick, Simplici∣tas: of an Elegy, Mollities: of an Emblem, witty device: of a Comedie, joci & lepôres: of a Tragedy, , & .
CONCLUSION. Chuse always a kinde of Verse sutable to your matter. For Heroick matter, Hexameter. For Mournfull, Elegiac. For Light and Merry, Lyric. Eor Invective, Iambic. Though Examples for all the fore-mentioned Exercises, he obvious in those Books which are usually read in Schools, yet the young Scholler for his direction, may take notice of these that follow. 1. For Variation, see Erasm. Copiae verborum. 2. For Amplification, see Erasm. Copia rerum. 3. For Allusions, see Horn. Manuduct. pag. 117. See also the wri∣tings of Mr Fuller. 4. For moving the passions, see Vossius Rhetor. lib. 2. 5. For Colloquys. see Erasm. Coll. Helvicus, &c. 6. For Essays, see Halls Essays, Bacons Essays, Felthams Resolves. 7. For Fables, see Aesops Fables, Ovids Metamorph. Aphthon. Progymn. 8. For Prosopopaeia's, see Aphthon. Progym. 9. For Characters, see Blunts Charact Overburys Charact. Bp Halls Charact. 10. For Themes, see Aphthon. Progym. 11. For Epistles, see Tullys Epistles; Textors Epist. Politians Epist. Macropedius. Plinys Epist. 12. For Orations, see Isocrates Orat. Tullys Orat. Livys select Orat. 13. For Declamations, see Clarks Formulae: Quintilians Declamat. Seneca's Contravers. Poeticall Exercises. 1. For Translatinos, see the Poets, Ovid, Virgill, Seneca, &c. transla∣ted by Sands, Oglby, &c. See also Strada's prolus. pag. 185. Herns Manuduct. pag. 115. 2. For Variation. see Virgil de 12 Signis: de Iride: de amne con∣creto: de 4 anni temp. de ortu Solis. 3. For Imitation, see Horns Manuduct. pag. 105.
4. For Carmen, see Virg. de livere, de fortunâ: Seneca's Trag. the Chorus. Clarks formulae, last edit. 5. For Epigrams, see Owens, Martials, Textors Epigr. Johnsons Epigr. Ausonius Epigr. 6. For Dialogues, see Textors Dialog. Ausonius. 7. For Echo's, se Thesaurus Poet. Ovid, lib. 3. Erasm. Echo. 8. For Epitaphs, see Auson. Epitaph. Heroum. Martials Epigr. lib. 10, & 11. Virg. Epigr. 9. For Hymns. see Prudent. Peristeph. Sen. Agam. 310. Barcl. Arg. 1. Met. 6. Hor. Od. 11.19.111.25.1.10. 10. For Anagrams, Acrost. and Chronost. you may find Examples here and there in the Epigrammatists, and in the Encomiasticks prefixed before Books. 11. For Epithalamium, see Sen. Med. 56. Mart. 4.13. Auson. Eidyl. 13. Barcl. Argenis, 5.2. For Genethliaeum, see Virg. Eclog. 4. Mart. 6.4. Auson. Eidyl. 5. Sannazarius 1. Eleg. 4. 2 Eleg 8. 12. For Panegyricum, see Tibul. 4.1. Casim. Lyr. Barlaeus de Fred. Henrici Praefect. 13. For Eucharisticon, see Virgil. 1 Aeneid. Aenaeas ad Didonem. Sidon. 16. Barclaii Coridon. Barl. ad Pen. 14. For Encomiasticon, see the Laudatory Verses of Friends upon the Authors worthy Books. See Horat, Od. 2.1. Od. 2.6. Epod. 2. 15. For Proseucticon, see Virg. Aeneid. 1. Juno ad Aeolum. Venus ad Jovem. Horat. Od. lib. 1.35. 16. For Dirae, see Virg. Dirae. Casim. 2.24. Horat. Epod. 10. Sen. Med. 20.531. Ovid. in Ibin. 17. For Palinodia, see Hor. lib. 1. Od. 16. Od. 34. FINIS.
