K434 12425692 61838
blazon or coat of arms Vera Effigies Richardi Kilburne Armigeri Topographiae Cantianae Authoris Aetatis suae 52. 24. Septemb 1657 J. Crose sculp
A TOPOGRAPHIE, OR SURVEY OF THE COUNTY OF KENT. With some Chronological, Histori∣call, and other matters touching the same: And the several Parishes and Places therein. By Richard Kilburne of Hawk∣herst, Esquire. Nascimur partim Patriae. LONDON, Printed by Thomas Mabb for Henry Atkinson, and are to be sold at his Shop at Staple-Inn-gate in Holborne, 1659.
TO THE NOBILITY, GEN∣TRY and COMMONALTY OF KENT. Right Honourable, &c. YOu are now presented with my larger Survey of Kent (pro∣mised in my Epistle to my late brief Survey of the same) wherein (among severall things) (I hope conducible to the service of that Coun∣ty) you will finde mention of some memorable acts done, and offices of emi∣nent
trust borne, by severall of your Ancestors, other remarkeable matters touching them, and the Places of Habitation, and Interment of ma∣ny of them. For the ready finding whereof, I have added an Alphabeticall Table at the end of this Tract. My Obligation of Gratitude to that County (wherein I have had a comfortable sub∣sistence for above Thirty five years last past, and for some of them had the Honour to serve the same) pressed me to this Taske (which be∣ing finished) If it (in any sort) prove servicea∣ble thereunto, I have what I aimed at; My humble request is; That if herein any thing be found (either by omission or alteration) substantially or otherwise different from my a∣foresaid former Survey, you would be pleased to be informed, that the same happened by reason of further or better information (tend∣ing to more certaine truths) than formerly I had. Those differencies, and the rectifying of the same, are contained in a parcell of this Tract (towards the end thereof) which I now added; That thereby Correction may be made of my for∣mer Survey, which will be more conveniently portable (for ordinary use) than this. What is found defective herein, be pleased not to im∣pute to wilfull errour; But either to misappre∣hension, or misinformation (both which I en∣deavoured to avoid) And as to the distances of Parishes (herein specified) be pleased to know
that I meane the same by a straight line from Church to Church, taking the Station for the view at Newenden, being the middle of the South-side of the County, as they stand in that best Map thereof extant, made by Ma∣ster Phillip Symonson (sometime Resident there∣in) which I the rather doubt not to call the best for that (by comparing the same with o∣thers) I finde it so to be; and the like Cha∣racter (in effect) was long since set upon the same, by that Learned, Judicious and Laborious Gentleman, William Lambard, Esquire, whose Monument of Piety and Charity, in this County Directory to the peaceable Government of the same, and painfull and able performance of his Perambulation thereof, have rendred and will perpetuate his Memory Famous. The last whereof hath left very little matter of addition (but much of imitation) both for my self, and all others that shall succeed him in works of this nature, which was the principall cause that I endeavoured brevity herein, being unwilling too far to lengthen this Tract with repetition of what hath been better set forth by others, though in works of this nature all ingenuous persons know, much use must be made of the la∣bours of our Predecessors. (There being no o∣ther way to enable treating of matters long be∣fore our being) Now that the Errata's of the Presse may first be corrected by what is at the end
of this Tract (for that purpose) prepared, before the Tract be read, and that (in reading the same) other smaller errours of the Presse may also be corrected, and that the passages herein may be well weighed, before censured, and the veile of love cast over what is (either in truth or in the Readers conceit) defective, or mistaken, is the humble desire of. His Countries and your Servant, Richard Kilburne.
The Contents of this Book. A Generall description of Kent. page 1. A particular description of the severall Pa∣rishes therein Alphabetically. page 8. A description of Canterbury. page 300 The two divisions of Kent, and how to divide each of them from the other in any Map of the County page 303. The five Laths and severall divisions of Iustices in the same, viz. Sutton at Hone. page 304 Aylesford. page 307 Scray. page 310 St. Augustine. page 313 Shipway. page 315 The Bailiwicks and extents of the same Alphabeti∣cally. page 319 The hundreds and extents of the same Alphabeti∣cally. page 330 Townes (not being hundreds) having Constables of themselves, and the extents of the same Alphabe∣tically. page 348 The Liberties in Kent, and extents of the same, and directions of writs of Habeas Corpus & Sheriffs
Warants to the same Alphabetically. page 351 The direction of Writs of Habeas Corpus to the City of Canterbury. page 357 The Principall Rivers in Kent, and the courses of them. page 366 The Corporations in Kent. page 369 The Market Townes, and dayes of the Markets. page 370 The Months and dayes of the same when the Fairs are kept. page 371 The Attendants at the Assises. page 373 The dayes of the Quarter Sessions and Attendants at the same, viz. The West division page 375 The East division. page 376 The Diocess of Canterbury, and the Deanrie and Parishes in the same Alphabetically. page 377 The Dicess of Rochester, and the Dearies and Parishes in the same Alphabetically page 380 The Saints to whom the Churches were dedicated Alphabetically. page 382 Parishes ending in one termination Alphabeti∣cally. page 386 The Sheriffs of Kent in the last five Centuries. page 388 The Iudges, dayes and places of Assises in the last Century. page 398 Directions to amend my former Brief Survey of Kent. page 415
A TOPOGRAPHIE: OR, Survey of the County of KENT. THis County of Kent is scituate at the South East part or corner of England, and is bounded to the River of Thames towards the North, to the German Ocean to∣wards the North and East, to the narrow Seas toward the East and South, to the County of Sussex towards the South and West, and to the County of Surrey towards the West. The length thereof (in a straight line) from the West
part of Leusham to the East part of Saint Peters in Thonet is about 52. miles. But in the middle length thereof from the West part of Braed to the East part of Ringwold; it is but about 47. miles. And through the middle of this County from Newen∣den-Bridge in the South, to the furthest part of the Isle of Gean in the North, the breadth is about 27. miles. The circumserence of the County is thus, viz. from the West and of Depford, to the East end of the North Foreland in the Isle of Thanet, (round by the river of Thames and the Sea) (being the North side of the Coun∣ty) is about 61. miles, but in a straight line, the same is but about 51: miles. From thence about to the corner of Dengenesse (being the East side) is about 38. miles, But (in a straight line) the same is but about 31. miles. From tence about to th' end of Cowden (being the south side) is about 39. miles, but in a straight line, it is but about 33. miles. And from thence about to the aforesaid end of Dep∣ford (being the west side) is about 24. miles, but in a straight line the same is but about 21. miles. So the whole circumerence (round about this Coun∣ty) is about 162. miles, but in the straight lines aforesaid, the same is but about 136. miles. I finde severall derivations of the names of this Coun∣ty, viz. of the antient name Cantium, and the now name Kent, but (with submission to better judgments) I ra∣ther adhere to their opinion, that conceive the names to be derived from the scituation of the place (viz. in a nook or corner of England, antiently called a Kant or Gantel.) The Inhabitants of this County were sometimes cal∣led Eskins, which name arose by Eske (second King of Kent) raigning over them many yeers, but (his memory vanishing) the name also vanished.
The aire of this County (other than the weald, and the marshes and places adiacent thereunto) is accounted very healthy; but the marshes, for the most part unheal∣thy, and the weald, and places adjoyning to the marshes not generally so healthy as the most part of the rest of the County. The commodious scituation of this County may justly compare with (if not exceed) any other part of the Na∣tion (the same being scituate neer) (but some little distance from) London (the chief City) and the Thames (that Soveraign River of Britaine) watering the North side thereof about 33. miles in length: The German and narrow Seas, watering the North East, and South sides thereof about 73. miles in length, and the River of Ro∣ther likewise watering the South side thereof about 11. miles in length. It also having severall good rivers and rivules in the bowels of the same, and more especially (towards the West parts thereof) Ravensborne watering the same 9. miles, Cray 8. miles, and Darent 16. miles; famous Med∣way towards the middle (spreading it self into severall branches) watereth the same about 85. miles, and Stoure towards the East parts thereof (likewise spread∣ing it self into severall branches) watereth the same a∣bout 60. miles; By which Rivers most of the most emi∣nent places of this County are watered, and navigation maintained to the principall of them. How far this County is otherwise equall to (if not excelling) any other County of this Nation, I shall offer to the Readers judgement these considerations. First, Concerning Religion, I know that Glastenbury in the County of Somerset doth pretend (and not pretend only) that about the 31th. year after the death of Christ, 12. of the Disciples of the Apostle Philip (of which Ioseph of Arimathea was cheif) came into this Nation, and ten∣dred the knowledge of Christian Religion to Arviragus
then King thereof) (which though he consented not to embrace) yet he permitted them to have a Church at this Glastenbury, and there began the plantation of Christian Religion in this land (which being admitted) yet it like∣wise appeareth▪ That (for many years) the same had but little successe of enale and no King of this Nation em∣braced the same, till King Lucius (who raigned about 150. years afterwards, and built a Church in Dover Ca∣stle in this County, for the exercise of Christian Religion, from whence may be inferred, that that Religion was the embraced here, But most part of the Nation revolt∣ing fom that Religion, and becoming Pagans till the year 596. (In the time of the Heptarchy) Augustine the Monk was sent from Pope Gregory, to convert this Naion to the Christian faith, and first landed in this County, and converted and baptised many of the people of the same, and likewise converted Ethelbert, (then King thereof) who upon Whitsunday in the year 597. was by him here baptised, was the first Christian Saxon King, and this County was the first County that generally received the Christian faith; afterwards Edwin (King of the Northum∣bers Marrying from hence Edelburg (Daughter of the said King Ethelbert) Paulinus (afterwards Bishop of Rochester) went from hence with her into her husbands Kingdome (for the conversion of the people thereof) where in some part he prevailed, but in the year 633. (Edwin being slain) that people revolted from that Religion, and Paulinus was forced to returne again hither, and Christian Religion was again (as it were) confined to this County, Nor were succession of Christian Bishops in this Nation (other than of Canterbury and Rochester (both in this County) for many years afterwards, and instrumentally from thence sprang the after-conversion of the rest of the Nation to the Christian faith; But the cōversion of the West Saxons (with in whose Dominion Glastenbury was) was not till about 40. years after the conversion of this County (At which
time Kingils their King was converted and baptised by Byrinus an Italian Bishop. This County (as before appeareth) had in it two Bishops Seas (one whereof, viz. Canterbury, was the Pri∣mate and Metropolitan of all England: And his Church very anciently called the Nurse and Metropolis of the same) By which, and by what is hereafter said, may be collected tht the rise of that common proverbe (Kent and Christendome) was not (as vulgarly mistaken) that Kent was conceived diffinct from Christendome, but that it was famous as Kent, and famous as Christendome. Secondly, Concerning the ancient dignity and con∣siderableness of this County: In the time of Iulius Caesar (about 1700. years since) it was in Four petty King∣domes, governed by Four Kings (viz. Cingetorix, Cavi∣lius, Taximagulus, and Segonax.) Afterwards King Vortigern (about 1200. years since) set over the same a Guorong or Vice-Roy. Afterwards, this was the first of the Kingdomes of the Heptarchy, and no one County of England had a King of it self but this (whose Kingdome began about the year 455. and continued about 372. years, in the succession of 17. Kings.) By that learned Antiquary Mr. Camden, it is called the key of England, and in it is Four of the Cinque portes of this Nation (viz. Sandwich, Dover, New Romney, and Hith) as also that famous Castle of Dover, the confide∣rableness whereof Phillip King of France well weighing, when (in the time of King Hen. 3.) Lewes his son, had took divers townes and fortes in England, and hearing that he could not take this Castle (the same being vali∣antly defended by Hubert de Burgh) protested that then his son had not one foot of land in England. Thirdly, The civility of the people (still treading in the steps of their Ancestors) who in the time of the aforesaid Iulius Caesar were by him accounted, and so stiled, the most civilized people of all this Nation:
Fourthly, For the ancient valour of the people of this County, they claime, and are allowed the front in Bat∣tailes. And they onely of all England obteyned and re∣teyne the name of VNCONQVERED: For (as if all the antient English valour were remaining in them) they only resisted King William the Conquerour, (when all other Counties submitted) and (caplulating with him) reserved to themselves and their posterity, their anti∣ent Customes and Liberties. Fifthly, Which is the next confideration offered, viz. Generally the tenures of the lands in this County, are (if not the freest) yet as free tenures as any in England. Sixthly, The royal Navy usually riding in the Downes of this County, in which County also are those three fa∣mous Shipdocks of Deptford, Woolwich, and Chetham; in the two first whereof, the principall part of the Royall Navy is usually repaired, and in the last, the same is usu∣ally also repaired, and laid up. Seventhly, Four houses lately belonging to the Kings of England, viz. East Greenwich, Eltham, Otford, and Dartford. Eighthly, The severall good commodities for the use of man, with which it is richly furnished and famous for, viz. 1. Plenty of Fowl and Fish of all sorts (by advantage of the aforesaid Seas and fresh Rivers.) 2. Fertil lands, for feeding cattle of all sorts (and more especially those famous levels of Romney, and Wal∣land Marsh.) 3. The Drapery of this County, which hath here con∣tinued for above three hundred and twenty years; to∣wards which the bowels of this County are well stored with Fullers earth, and many fulling mills not far distant from the same. 4. The Fruit (plentifully sent from hence to the chief City, London, and places adjacent.)
5. The great plenty of grain (of all sorts) growing therein, and more especially in the North, and East parts of the same. 6. The Plenty of wood, but more especially in the Weald, wherein also are many Iron mills, floring with Iron London, and the other places adjacent Some Chronologers affirm that King Alfred divided this Nation (and among the rest this part thereof) into Shires, Counties, or Provinces; but that is controverted by others, and alledged that it was so divided short∣ly after the inhabiting of this Island, and in the tra of the time of King Ina (which was above 180. years be∣fore King Alsred) there is ntion of Shires, and so that of King Alfred may (as to this purpose) be only some plaine deription of the former division; And for this County, it appeareth (by what is before) That the same was a distinct Province many hundred years before King Alfred was borne (ut his subdividing the same into hun∣dreds, and them into Boroughs or  is not de∣nied. (Before the time of this King Alfred) about 1000. years since (In the time of Ecomber the 7th. King of Kent) Ho∣norius Archoshop of Cantrbury divided that ingdome into Parishes. And 45. Edward the 3. (upon occasion of raising a great summe of money for aid of the King for the wars in France, by a Parochiall tax throughout Eng∣land) the number of the Parishes therein were examined, and in this County sound to be 393. Of so many where∣of as are now extant, as also of those which have been since added (being in all 404.) I shall now proceed to treate Alphabetically.
ACRYSE. LIeth towards the South-East part of the County, by the River Soure, about one mile and a half (towards the South-East) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the Coun∣ty, and division of Justices in that Lath; It was in the Dean∣ry of Eleham, and Diocess of Canterbury; The liberty of Eleham claymeth over so much thereof as is in the upper half hundred of Loningborough, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth over the Mannor of Brandred in this Parish; Part thereof is in the hundred of Folkstone, and the residue in the hundred of Loningborough; The Church standeth in the hundred of Loningborough, and was called Saint Martin. ADDINGTON. LIeth towards the middle of the West part of the Coun∣ty by the river Medway about one mile and a half (towards the North West) distant from West Malling, In the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkfeild, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rothester, and the Church was called Saint Mar∣garet.
ADISHAM. ADesham, Eadesham, Edesham. Lieth towards the East end of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the East) distant from Canterbury; In the Bai∣liwick of Bridge and Peham, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath: It was in the Deanry of Bridge, & Diocess of Canter∣bury; The Mannor of Adisham was in the year 616. given by Ethelbald (son of King Ethelbert to Christ-Church Can∣terbury, was antiently a hundred of it self, and (after∣wards comming to King Henry the 8.) he 33. of his Raigne gave the same to that Church, and the liberty of the late Dean of the Church aforesaid claymeth over the same but the liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth over the whole Parish (the same being in the hundred of Down∣hamford, which belongeth to that Abbey) and the Church was called Saint Innocents. ALCHAM. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, a∣bout 3. miles (towards the West) distant from Davr, in the Bailiwick of Stowing, Hundre of Folkstone, Lath of Shipway East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Dovar, and Diocess of Canterbury, the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there, and the church was called Saint Authony.
ALDINGTON. ALdintune, lieth towards the South-East part of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the South-East) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, East Division of the County, and Divi∣sion of Justces in that ath, it was in the Deanry of Lim∣pne, and Diocess of Canterbury, the liberty of the late Arch∣bishop of Canterbury claymeth there. But I finde not this Aldington among the Nomina villaram of that liberty; But do find that Thomas (Archbishop of Canterbury) 2•. Mar∣tij 31•. Henry the 8. by deed (inrolled in the Office of augmentations 32. Hen, 8. fol. 10) granted that Mannor to that King, and King Charles granted the Mannor house and farme lands thereunto to hold of his Mannor of East-Greenwich in free Soccage. Part of this Parish is in the hun∣dred of Bircholt Franchise, and the residue in the hundred of Strete, the Church standeth in the hundred of Strete, and was, called Saint Martin. In the time of King Hen. 8. There were two Parsons of this Parish much different for repute. Erasmus of Rote∣rodame, most eminent for Learning, and Richard Master, in∣famous for adhering to Elizabeth Barton (of this Parish) called the holy Maid of Kent) in treasonable practises, for which they two, and five others, were (by Parliament 25. Hen. 8. Cap. 12) attainted of Treason, and executed at Tiburne in Aprill in that year, and six others attainted of misprison of Treason. The Archbishops of Canterbury had here a faire seat, up∣on repairing and augmenting whereof, Iohn Morton Arch∣Bishop (in the time of King Henry the 7.) bestowed much money. In this Parish also was a Chappell (dedicated to the
Virgin Mary) and called the Chappell of our Lady of Court at Strete. ALL HOLLOWES. ALl Saints lieth at the North side of the County, neere the Isle of Greane, in the Bailiwick, and hun∣dred of Hoo, Lath of Aylssord, West Division of the County, and North Division of Justices in that Lath, it, was in the Deanry, and Diocess of Rochester, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claymeth there, and the Church was called All Saints. ALLINGTON. ASlington, lieth towards the middle of the Coun∣ty, by the River Medway, about one mile (towards the North) distant from Maidstone, in the Baili∣wick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefeild, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and South Division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of Maidstone claymeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, there are ruines of an old Castle (where Sir Thomas Wyat Thelder, built a faire house) The Castle was antiently built by the Noble Family of Columbarij: (in the time of the Saxons) afterwards razed by the Dnes, and (after the conquest) rebuilded by Earle Warren, from whom it came to the Lord Fitz-Hughes, and by his Daughter and heire to Sir Giles Astington (of whom both it and the Pa∣rish took the Name) but before it was called the Castle of Medway; Sir Stephen of Penchester (Constable of Dovor Ca∣stle in the time of King Edward .) was (for some time)
owner of this Castle, and built there a faie Tower cal∣led Solomen's Tower. St. ALPHAGE. PArt of this Parish (viz. the Borough of Staplgate otherwise Stablegate) is in the County of Kent, Bai∣liwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine; East division of the County, Division of Justices in that Lath, and liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, but the Church is in the County of the Ci∣ty of Canterbury, and the whole Parish was in the Deany and Diocess of Canterbury. APLEDORE. APuldore, Apuldre, Apultree, Apeldre, lieth at the South-side of the County, by the River Rother, a∣bout four miles & a half (toward the South-east) distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the seven hun∣dreds, part thereof (viz. upon the Ree wall to Red hill) is in the liberty of the Town and Port of New Romney, and division of Justices of that Town and Port, and the residue is in the hundred of Blackborne, some small part whereof is in the liberty of Romny Marsh, and division of the Justices of that Corporation, but the residue of this Parish is in the lower division of Justices in the Lath of Scray, in which Lath all the faid Parish is: it likewise is all in the West division of the County, was in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul.
A Fare is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Barnaby (being the Eleventh day of Iune.) The Liberty of the I to Dean of Cunterbury claimeth over the Mannor of Apledore, which was given to that Church (as some affirm) by Edsinus Arch-Deacon there in the year 1032. in the time of King Canutus, but others affirm, that that King gave the same to that Edsinus to the use of the said Church; and the same (afterwards com∣ing to King Hen 8.) he (33. of his Raigne) again gave the same to that Church. This Liberty claimeth over all the parish (except so much thereof as is in the Borough of great Kenarton) and hath in it at Court Leet, extending it self, over two Borought (viz. Town-borough and Hoth-borough) the Borsholders thereof are there chosen, (& not at the Court Leet holden for the Hunderd of Blockborn) nor do the in∣habitants of these Boroughs ow any service to the Court Leet of the said Hundred (onely at that Court a Constable may be chosen out of either of those Boroughs for that hundred) in this parish stood a small Castle, which in the year 892. (in the time of King Alfred) was taken and demolished by the Danes, and  thereof, they there built and fortified a bigger, but what became of the same afterwards, I finde not, onely it is probable that the same was ruined by the French, who 10th. August 130. burnt the Town and (by tradition) upon the ruines of that Castle the present Church was builded (the scitua∣tion whereof rendreth the same probable.) The Liberty of St. Augustine claymeth in this Parish, and the Marshes, about the Town were inned in the year 1349.
ASH neer SANDWICH. LIeth towards the East-end of the County, about two miles (towards the West) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wingham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath; the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth there; it was the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas, which Church (untill the year 1282) was a Chappel to Wingham, and Richborough was anciently a Chappel to this. In this Church are, or lately were many antient mo∣numents, and memorials of the interment of severall an∣tient Families (viz Goshall and Liverick Knights, Sept∣vans, St. Nicholas, Harfleet, Clitherow, and Kiriell. ASH neer WROTHAM. LIeth towards the West side of the County, about three miles (towards the North) distant from Wro∣tham, in the Bayliwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath; it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester; the Church was called St. Peter and Paul, and the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claymeth in this Parish.
ASHERST. LIeth at the South-west edge of the County, (ad∣joyning to Sussex) about five miles (towards the South west) distant from Tunbridge, in the Bai∣liwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of Wach∣lingstone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the Coun∣ty, and South division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, and the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth at Chaford in this Parish. The Church was once famous for a Rood or Cruci∣fix miraculously growing (as was pretended) of which who so desires to read more, I refer him to Mr. Lamberts Perambulation in Ashyrst. ASHFORD. EShetisford, Echetiford, Etishford, Eshford, lieth towards the South-east part of the County, by the River (an∣tiently called Eshe or Eshet) now Stoure, about three miles and a half (towards the South) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway. In this Parish is a pretty Town, wherein a Market is kept upon every Saturday, and two Faires yearly, viz. one upon the day of St. Iohn Port Latin (being the sixth day of May) granted by King Edw. 4. in the fifth year of his Raigne, to the Dean and Chanons of St. Stephens West∣minster (then owners of the Mannor of Ashford) and the other upon the day of the Decollation of St. Iohn Baptist being the nine and twentith day of August.)
In this Town also is kept a Court of Record (upon every Tuesday three weekes) sonactions, wherein the debt or damages exceed not twenty markes: the jurisdiction of which Court extendeth it self over the Towne, and all the Parish. (except the Borough of Henwood, alias Hew∣et, over which the Liberty of Wye claymeth) And the Borough of Rudlow (over which the Liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claymeth.) The aforesaid Towne and Liberty of Ashford, have a Constable of their own, but the rest of the Parish is in the hundred of Chart and Longbridge. This Parish was in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Town, was called Saint Maries, and was a Collegiate Church founded by Sir Ro∣bert Fogg (a Knight of this County) who also founded a Colledge there (consisting of a Prebnd and Priests) and in this Church are interred severall Knights, and others, of that antient Family: In the same also was interred the Countesse of Atholl (about. 282. yeares since, The monu∣ment whereof is or latly was there remaining.) The Lord of the Mannor of Ashford, ought antiently to have repaired the house in the corner of Dvor Castle, to∣wards the long wall, next the Posterne. In the night of the first of May 1580. here hapned a great Earth quake, which much affighted many of the in∣habitants, and caused them to arise out of thi beds. AYLESFORD. EIlesford Ailesford, Ailsford, , Episford, Anglesford Aeglestorpe Eglesford. And in the British Langua , Lieth towards the middle of the County by the River Medway about three miles (towards the North West) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick
of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and South Division of Justices in that Lath. That part of this Parish which lieth at the North-side of the said River, is in antient Demesne, and hath a Con∣stable of it self, But the South side of the Parish at the o∣ther side of the River (viz. the Mannour of Preston and Milhale) is in the hundred of Larkfield, the Church stand∣eth in antient Demesne, was called Saint Peter, and given by King Henry 1. to the Church of Rochester. This Parish was in the Deanry, and Diocess of Rochester, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claymeth in the same, the liberty of Maidstone claymeth over Milhale a∣foresaid; and a Fare is kept yearly in this Parish, upon Saint Peters day (being the 29th. day of Iune.) The Mannor of Aylesford is by some said to have been given by King Henry 3. to Richard Lord Gray of Codnor, but I finde that it was allened from the Crowne before the time of that King, for that in the time of King Iohn, Osbert Gipford was owner thereof; however it was once parcell of the Demesnes of the Crowne, Is to this day cal∣led antient Demesne, and that Lord Gray in the year 1240. founded there a house of White Friers Carmelites, to the honour of Saint Mary; Which afterwards came to be the habitation of Sir William Sidley) (who about the year, 1607 (partly as executor to his brother Iohn, and partly at his own charge) erected an Hospitall in this Parish for six poor people (each to have 10l. per. annum) the building whereof and the lands thereunto is said to have cost 1800l. he likewise bestowed much charge upon the Bridge there. In this Parish Vortimer King of Britain (about the year 454.) fought the Saxons, and in that battail Catigern (brother of the said Vortimer) and Horsa (brother of Hengist the Saxon Commander) in single fight sleweah other, in memory of which Catigern, a Monument of stones was there erected by the Britains, and is now vul∣garly
called Kits, Cothouse: And in the year 892. King Elfred fought and routed the Danes at Fernham in this Parish. BADLESMER. LIeth towards the North-east side of the County, a∣bout three miles and a half (towards the South) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of St. Augustine over the fame (for that it is in the hundred of Fever∣sham which belonged to that Abbey) A Fare is held here yearly upon the day of St. Leonard (being the sixth day of November) this Parish was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Leonard. Sir Hugh Crequer was (in the time of the Conquerour) Lord of Badlesmer, and one of the eight chief Captains, or Lievetenant Governours of Dovor Castle (under Iohn Lord Fynes.) BAPCHILD. LIeth towards the North-side of the County, a∣ebout one mile and a half (towards the South-ast) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Seray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Sitingborne, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Laurence.
BAREFRISTON. LIeth in the East-part of the County, about five miles (towards the South-West) distant from Sand∣wich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Sand∣wieh, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was cal∣led St. Maries. East BARMING. LIeth towards the middle of the County, by the Ri∣ver Medway, about two miles and a half (towards the South-West) distant from Maidstone, in the Bai∣liwick of Eyhorn, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, the liberty of Maidstone claim∣eth over the same, and the Church was called St. Mar∣garet. West BARMING. LIeth towards the middle of the County, by the Ri∣ver Medway, about three miles (towards the South-West) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhore, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West Di∣vision of the County, and East Division of Justices in that
Lath, it was in the Deanry of Malling, and Dioeess of Ro∣chester, the liberty of Maidstone claymeth over the same, and some part only of the ruines of the Church is remain∣ing, but that there was such a Church and a Churchyard to the same (neer the Court-lodge there) is yet visible. BEAKESBORNE. LIeth towards the East part of the County, by the Ri∣ver Stoure. About two miles and a halfe (towards the East) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of Saint Augustine, and East Division of the County, it is a member of the Towne, and Port of Hasting (and so was in the time of King Richard 2. and it is in the Division of the Justices of that Towne and Port (the liberty whereof, and of the Cinque Ports clayme over the same) it was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Peter. BECKENHAM. LIeth at the West part of the County adjoyning to Surrey by the River Ravensborne, about two miles (towards the West) distant from Bromley, a small part thereof is in Surrey, and so much thereof as is in Kent, is in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, hundred of Bromley and Beckenham, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claymeth there, and the Church was called Saint George.
BENENDEN. LIeth towards the Middle of the South-side of the County, about three miles (towards the South-east distant from Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the Se∣ven hundreds, Laths of Scray, West Division of the Coun∣ty, and lower division of Justices in that Lath, so much thereof as is in the Borough of Benenden is in the hun∣dred of Rolvenden, so much thereof as is in either of the Boroughs of Hevenden or Ibornden is in the hundred of Barckley, so much thereof as is in the North Borough, is in the hundred of Selbrittenden, and so much thereof as is in the Borough of Crothall is in the hundred of Cranbrook, it was all in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Canter∣bury; The Liberties of the late Dean of Canterbury, and Saint Augustine clayme in the same; The Church stand∣eth in the hundred of Rolvenden, and was called Saint George, in which is a monument of the antient and e∣minent Family of Guldeford of Hempsted (neer unto the foundation of whose house here (viz. at a place called the Merry-tree) is reputed the highest place of any in that part of the Weald of Kent) and in this Church is likewise a memoriall of the interment of Moore (sometimes Lord of the Mannor of Benenden) The Steeple of this Church standeth off from the same, and is of rare and remarka∣ble workemanship in the inside thereof, The same stand∣ing very high, having a long spire or shaft, and the foun∣dation thereof (for a small part only of the height of the same) being of stone, and all the rest to the top of Tim∣ber of exceeding great bigness, very full, and rarely com∣pacted.
BERHAM. BEreham, Barham. Lieth towards the middle of the East part of the County, by the River Stoure, about three miles and a halfe (towards the North-east) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath; the liberty of the late Arch∣bishop of Canterbury claimeth there, it was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist (in which are interred a Knight, and severall others of the Family of Diggs, a Family of great esteem in this County.) Berham was antiently a Hundred, but is now in the Hundred of Kinghamford. Iulius Caesar about 54. years before the birth of our Saviour (after his conflict with the Britaines upon their opposition of his landing) incamped at Berham Down; here also (in the year 1212.) King Iohn incamped with 60000, men in opposition of the French (who prepared to land nere that part of the County) where also (most unworthily) he then consented to resigne his Crown to Pandulphus the Popes Legate, likewise here (in the time of King Hen. 3.) Simon Earle of Leicester (Generall of the Barons Army) prepared a very numerous Army a∣gainst that King. In the year 809. King Kenulphus gave to the Archbi∣shop and Church of Canterbury 7. plough-lands in Berham, afterwards (in the year 824.) Wulfred the Archbishop gave to the said Church two Mannors, in exchange for the same, and (in the year 830.) Werhard (a powerfull Priest) gave to that Church 36. plough-lands here (for∣merly taken from the same.)
BERSTED. LIeth neer the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles and a half (towards the East) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorne, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath; part thereof is in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and the residue in the Hundred of Maidstone, it was all in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church was called Holy-Cross, & star∣eth in the Hundred of Eyhorne▪ A Fare is kept there yearly upon the day of the Exaltation of the Holy Cross (called holy Rd day) being the fourteenth day of September. BETHERISDEN. BEatriciden, lieth towards the South-side of the Coun∣ty, about four miles and a half (towards the South-west) distant from Ashford; so much thereof as is in the Boroughs of Hales, Bridge, Engham, or , is in the Hundred of Blackborne, Bailiwick of the seven Hun∣dreds, & West division of the County, & the residue there∣of (being part in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and part in the Hundred of Calehill) is in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, and East division of the County, it is all in the Lath of Scray, division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and was in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church standeth in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and was called St. Bearice, In which are the armes of Surenden (a principal inhabitant in this Parish in the time of King Edw. 2.) and
owner of the seat there, called Surenden (now the habi∣tation of Chute, a Family of good esteem in this County) the liberties of St. Augustine, and the late Dean of Canter∣bury do claim in this Parish, the liberty of Wye claimeth over the Borough of Snodehill in the same, and a Fare is kept yearly in this Parish upon St. Margarets day (being the twentieth day of Iuly.) BETSHANGER. LIeth at the East-side of the County, about two miles and a halfe (towards the South) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick, and hundred of Eastry, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices, in that Lath, the liberty of Saint Au∣gustine claymeth there, it was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Canterbury, and Sir Robert Potch. (one of the eight cheife Captaines or Lieutenant Governours of Dovor Castle, under Iohn Lord Fynes, in the time of the Conquerour) was then Lord of the same, BEWSFEILD otherwise WHITFEILD. LIeth at the East part of the County; about three miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, hundred of Beusborough, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath, the li∣berties of Saint Augustine, and the late Arch-Bishop of Canterbury clayme there; It was in the Deanry of Dovor,
and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter. BEXLEY. LIeth towards the North-west part of the County, by the River Cray, about two miles (towards the south-west) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Ju∣stices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Arch Bishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester, in the time of King Iames that fa∣mous and learned Chorographicall describer of Britain William Camden, Clarenceux King of Armes, Founded an History Professor in Oxford, to which he gave the Manno of Bexley. BICKNOR. LIeth towards the north part of the County, about four miles (towards the North-west) distant from Leneham; part thereof is in the Bailiwick and hundred of Eyborne, Lath of Aylesford, and West Division of the County, and the residue is in the Bailiwick and hun∣dred of Milton, Lath of Scray, and East Division of the County; it is all in the East Division of Justices, in the Lath of Aylesford, was in the Deanry of Sittingburne, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church standeth in the hundred of Eyhorne.
BIDBOROUGH. LIeth towards the South-west part of the County, a∣bout two miles (towards the South west distant from Tunbridge, in the Baliwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, hun∣dred of Wachlingstone, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and South Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Laurence. BIDDENDEN. LIeth towards the South part of the County, about four miles and a halfe (towards the North-East) istant from Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the seven hundreds, Lath of Scray, West Division of the County, and lower Division of Justices in that Lath, So much thereof as is in the Boroughs of Ibornden, Worsenden, He∣veaden, Omenden Stepherst, or Wachinden, is in the hundred of Barckley and the residue thereof (being in the Borough of the outbounds of Smiths Ditch) is in the hundred of Cranbrook. the Borsholder of the aforesaid Borough of Worsenden, is chosen at the Court Leet holden at Boreham in this County, and the Borough of Wachinden hath a Court Leet of it self holden in this Parish, at which the Borsholder to that borough is chosen; So that nei∣ther of these two last Borsholders are chosen at the Court Leete holden for the said hundred of Barckley, Nor do the inhabitants of these boroughs attend at that Court, but at that Court Leete may be chosen a Constable of that hundred, out either of those boroughs?
The Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth in this Pa∣rish. The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clay∣meth over the Denns of Biddenden, and Spelherst (as held of the Mannour of Sherland. The Liberty of Wye claymeth over the aforesaid bor∣ough of Wachinden. And the Liberty of the late Deane of Canterbury clay∣meth over so much of this Parish as is in the Mannor of Godmersham. This Parish was in the Deanry of Charing and Diocess of Canterbury. A Fare is here kept yearly upon the day of Simon and Iude (being the eight and twentieth day of October. The Church standeth in the hundred of Barckley, was called all Saints, and the North Chancell thereof is reputed to have antiently belonged to the Family of Mainey (owner of the house in the twne called the place) and afterwards to Henden (owner of that house from Mainey;) at the North side of that Chancell, is a very an∣tient monument of Iohn Mianey Esquire, but it appeareth not there when he died; at the South-side of that Chan∣cell is a monument of Iohn Mainey Esquire (who died high Sheriff of this County the 21th of May, 1566. and of Wildegos, who died the first of September. 1541. In the middle, or great Chancell, are memorials of the interment of Evernden, Allard, and severall Randolphs, and in the wall of the great window there (towards the South) is a monument of one other of that Family of Randolph. In the South Chancell are memorials of the interment of, Fleete, Boddenden, and Seyliard. And in the East window of that Chancell are the armes of Moyle (sometimes one of the Justices of the Common pleas, the Free-schoole in this towne was foun∣ded by Mainey about the year, 1522.
BILSINGTON. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, neer Romney Marsh, about foure miles and a halfe (to∣wards the South East) distant from Ashford, in the Bail∣wick and Lath of Shipway, hundred of Newechurch, and East division of the County: the liberties of the late Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, and Romney Marsh, claime there; so much thereof as is not in the liberty of Romney Marsh, is in the Division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and the rest is in the Division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh; It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury; a Fare is kept here yearly upon the feast of the Nativity of Saint Iohn Baptist called Midsommer day (being the 24th. day of Iune) and is vulgarly called Woodcock Fare. The Church standeth out of the liberty of Romney Marsh, and was called Saint Peter and Paul. A Priory (of Black Canons of the order of St. Au∣gustine, and dedicated to the Virgin Mary) was in the 31th. year of King Hen. 3. here advanced by Sir Iohn Maunsell (Chief Justice and Lord Keeper of the great Seal in the time of that King) of which Maunsell I finde that he was Treasurer of the Church of York, Provost of Be∣verley, Chaplain to the said King, and (by reason of his spiritual promotions) could dispend yearly 18000. markes. This Priory was (in the 26th. year of King Hen. 8.) valued at 81l. 1s. 6d. per annum, Edmund Staplegate (Lord of the Mannor of Bilsington did (by reason of his tenure of the same) stand in competition with Richard Earle of A undel and Surrey, for the office of chief Butler, at the Coronation of King Rich. 3.
BIRCHINTON. BIrchingstone, lieth at the North east side of the Coun∣ty nere the Sea, in the Isle of Thaner, about six miles (towards the North) distant from Sandwich, in the Bai∣liwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the County, it is a member of the Town and Port of Dovor, and within the division of the Justices of the same, the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over so much thereof as is in the Mannour of Brokesend (being given to that Church by King Hen. 8. in the 33th. year of his Raigne) but the liberty of the Cinque Ports, and of the aforesaid Town and Port, claim over the same; it was in the Deanry of west Beere, and Diocess of Canterbury. In the time of King Hen. 8. it was questioned to be as∣sessed to the Subsidies (as lying in the forraign) but (to take away the question) that King, by letters patents u∣nited the same to Dovor. Gorend is in this Parish, and antiently had a Church standing at the Sea side, but the decay of the Cliffe nere thereunto ruinated the same, and forced the inhabitants to build the Church now standing (which was call'd All-Saints. Antiently this Parish was called sometimes Birchington in Gorend, and at other times Gorend in Birchington, but now they are all one, and most usually called Birching∣ton. This Gorend is conceived to have been the first place that was united to Dover, and hath so been ever since the time of King Edw. 1.
BIRLING. BEarlinges, Berlinges, lieth towards the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles and a half (towards the North) distant from west Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called All Saiuts. Here is a fair seat anciently belonging to the Lord A∣burgaveney, and formerly to the Lord Say, and this Parish ought antiently to have joyned in reparation of the ninth Pere or Arch of Rochester bridge. BISHOPSBOURN. LIeth towards the East part of the County by the Ri∣ver Stoure, about three miles (towards the South-east) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham (antiently in the Hundred of Berham) but now in the Hundred of Kinghamford, Lath of St. Augustin, East division of the County and division of the Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church was called St. Maries, and the li∣berty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Bishopbourn.
BLACKMANSTONE. LIeth towards the South-east side of the County, in Romney Marsh, about three miles (towards the North) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Worth, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh (the liberty whereof claimeth over the same) it was in the Deanty of Limpne, and Diocess of Conterbury, but the Church is demolished. BOBBING. LIeth towards the North-side of the County, about one mile and a half (towards the West) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Leth of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of St. Au∣gustine claimeth there, it was in the Deanry of Sitting∣borne, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was cal∣led St. Bartholomew (which Church was by King Hen. 3. in the 18th. year of his Raigne, granted to the Monaste∣ry of St. Mary, and St. Sexburgh in Sheppey, and confirmed by King Hen. 4. in the first year of his Raign. In this Church were interred an Esquire of the Fami∣ly of Clifford, and several Knights of the Family of Sa∣vage (most of which persons were so interred above 200. years fince) and a Fare is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Bartholomew (being the 24th. day of August.)
BONNINGTON. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, neer Romney Marsh, about five miles (towards the South-east) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Strete, and East division of the County, the liberty of Romney Marsh claimeth there, and so much thereof as is in that liberty, is in the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, an the rest is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, it was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, the Church standeth out of the liberty of Romney Marsh, and was called St. Romwald. Here was a Court Leet usually holden for the Boroughs of Bonington and Hamme (at which the Borsholdes of those Boroughs were elected) but the same hath been dis∣continued for about 77. years last past, only the memory thereof is continued, by a great old Oak standing in the high-way (at the place where that Court was usually kept) and called the Lawday Oak. BORDEN. LIeth towards the North-side of the middle of the County, about two miles (towards the South-west) distant from Milton, in the Balliwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul.
BOREHAM. BVrham, lieth towards the Middle of the County, by the River Medway, about three miles and a half (to∣wards the South) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West di∣vision of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Maries. BOUGHTON ALUPH. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, by the River Stoure, about one mile and a half (towards the North-west) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Wye, Lath of Scray, East di∣vision of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, the liberty of Wye claimeth over the same, it was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints. BOUGHTON under the BLEAN. BOctune, lieth towards the North-east part of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the South-east) istant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick & Lath of Scray, Hundred of Boughton under the Blean, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lah, it was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Dioces of Canter∣bury,
and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul, in which Church are, or lately were memorials of the inter∣ment of Colkins and Best (all about 200. years since) and the liberty o the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Boughton under the Blean. BOUGHTON-MAL∣HERBE. BOcton Malherbe (conceived to be so called from the bad herbage proper to the place) lieth very neer the middle of the County  one mile and a half (to∣wards the South)  eneham, in the Baili∣wick and hundred  of Aylesford, West di∣vision of the Couny, and East division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deary of Charing, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas. Here is, and for long time hath been, the seat of the noble Family of Wootton, many of which were interred in the said Church, and one of them so interred (viz. Sir Nicholas Wootton) was twice in sixteen years Lord Major of London (viz. in the years 1416 and 1431.) Neer unto the aforesaid seat, the Castle of Colbridge, was (in the time of King Edw 3.) founded by one Col∣bridge (a person then of eminency in this County, and in the time of King Edw. 4. the same was given to Saint Stephens Westminster, and the Archbishop of Canterbury was sometimes owner of the Mannour of Boughton Ml∣berbe.
BOVGHTON-MON∣CHELSEA. VVlgarly called Boughton Quarry (in respect of the good Free-stone there digged and wrought) lieth towards the middle of the County, about three miles (towards the South) distant from Maidstone, in the Bai∣liwick and Hundred of Eyborn, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath, the liberties of St. Augustine, and late Dean of Canterbury claim there, it was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter. BOXLEY. BOxle, Boxele, lieth neer the middle of the County, about two miles (towards the Noth) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn, Hundred of Maid∣stone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of Maidstone claimeth over the same, it was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church was cal∣led All Saints, and the same was (by King Henry the first) given to the Church of Rochester. In this Parish upon Penenden (vulgrly Pickenden) Hoth is the Court-House where usually the County Court is holden. In the year 1144. William of Ipre (Earle of Kent) founded here an Abbey (to the honour of the Virgin Mary) for white Monkes (of the Cistercian order) brought from Claverail in Burgundy, and King Richard the
first (in the first year of his Raigne) gave the Mannour of Boxley to that Abbey (which Abbey (at the suppres∣ion) was valued at 204l. 4s. 11d. per annum) the Lord of the Mannour of Boxley antently repaired the house in Dovor Castle next to the old gate, or Port. Those that desire to read the story of the Rood of grace, and of St. Rumwald, in this Abbey; I refer them to Mr. Lomber's Perambulation in Boxley (where the same is declared at lage.) This Rood, and the falsity thereof was (upon Sunday 24th. Febr. 1538.) shewed openly at Paul's Cross London, and then, and there broken, and pulled in pieces. BRABORNE. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County about foure miles and a half (towards the East) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick of Chrt and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and Division of Justi∣ces in the Lath of Shipway, part thereof is in the Hundred of Bircholt Barony, and the residue (viz. the Borough of Cocklescomb) is in the Hundred of Wye, and the liberty of Wye claimeth over the same, it was all in the Deanry of E∣lebam, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church standeth in the hundred of Bircholt Barony, and was called St. Mories, in which are interred several of the antient and eminent Family of Scot (one whereof was Controller of the hous∣hold of King Edw. 4. and another was a Knight buried about 300. years since) there also was intered Sir Ro∣bert Gower, and one Pashley (of a Family of great Anti∣quity at Tiseherst in Sussex.)
BRASTED. BRadestede, lieth at the West-side of the County, ner Surrey, about one mile and a half (towards the North-east) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hoe, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof (viz the Ville of Brasted) hath a Constable of it self, & the residue is in the Hundred of Westram & Eatonbridge, it was all in the Deany of Shorebam (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Dioces of Rochester, the Church standeth in the Ville aforesaid an a Faire is kept here yearly upon Ascention day, called Holy Thurs∣day (being the Thursday sevenight before Whit sunday.) BREDGATE. BRadgate, Bredgar, lieth towards the North part of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the South-west) distant from Miltoit, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Dio∣cess of Canterbury, the Church was caled St. Iohn Baptist, and was made Collegiate about 250. years since (at which time a Colledge was there founded by Robert of Bredgar, Thomas Ioseline, and Iohn at Vies.
BREDHERST. LIeth towards the middle of the North part of the County, about four miles (towards the South-east) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorne, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claims over so much thereof, as is in the Mannour of Hollingborne, it was in the Dean∣ry of Sutlon, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter. BRENEHLEY. LIeth towards the South-west part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the North-west) distant from Goudherst, in the Bailiwick of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South Division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof is in the Hundred of Benhley and Hosmanden, other part thereof is in the Hundred of Twyford, and the residue (viz. the Borough of Rugmerhill) is in antient Demesne of Aylesford; It was all in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, the Church standeth in the hundred of Brenchley and Horsmanden, and was called All Saints.
BRENZET. LIeth towards the South-east side of the County in Romney Marsh, about foure miles (towards the North-west) distant from New Romney, in the Bai∣liwick and Lath of Shipway, and East Division of the County, part thereof (viz. upon the Reewall is in the li∣berty of the Towne and Port of New Romney, and Division of Justices of the Corporation of that Towne and Port (the Liberty whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claymeth over the same) & the residue is in the Hundred of Ayloesbridge (over part of which residue the Liberty of Romney Marsh claymeth, and that part is in the Division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, and the other part of that residue is in the Division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, the Liberty of the Late Dean of Canterbury also claymth in this Parish, it was all in the Deanry of Limpe and Diocess of Canterbury, The Church standeth in the Liberty of Romney Marsh, and was called Saint Eanswyth. BRIDGE. BRegg, Lieth towards the East part of the County, by the River Stoure, about two miles and a half (towards the South-east) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petha, Lath of Saint Au∣gustine, East Division of the County, and division of Justi∣ces in that Lath, the Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth there, it was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called Saint. Peter.
BROMFIELD. LIeth very neere the middle of the County about two miles & a half (towards the West) distant from Leneam, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyborne, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and East Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Margaret. BROMHILL otherwise PROMHILL. LIeth at the South part of the County, adjoyning to the sea, about three miles (towards the South-west) distant from Lid, most part thereof is in the County of Sussex, but so much of the same as is in the County of Kent, is in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, and liber∣ty of the Cinque Ports, by the late Charter of those Ports, it is said to be a member of the Towne and Port of New Rom∣ney, but is claymed by the Corporation of id to belong to them, it is in the East Division of the County, and di∣vision of the Justices of that of the two Townes of New Romney or Lid, that hath right to the same, the Church is demolished But stood in Sussex; it was antiently a prety Towne and much resorted unto, but (about 370. yeers since in the raigne of King Edward the first) the sea drow∣ned the same.
BROMLEY. BRomlege, Lieth at the West part of the County, neer urrey, by the River Raventhorne, about eight miles (towards the South) distant from London, in the Baili∣wick of Sutton Bromley, Hudred of Bromley and Beckenham, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, nd upper Division of Justices in that Lath, the Liberty of the Late Bishop of Rochester claymeth over the same, it was in the Deny of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called Saint Peter and Paul, a Market is kept here upon every Thursday, and two Faires yeerly, viz. one upon the day of Saint Blase (being the third day of Februa∣ry) and the oher upon the day of Saint Iames (being the five and twentieth of Iuly.) King Edgar (about 700. yeers since) gave Bromley to the Church of Rochester, and here was a Mansion house of the Bishops of that Sea. BROOKE. BRoe, Lieth towards the South-east part of the Coun∣ty about two miles towards the South) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge Hundred of Wye, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and i∣vision of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, it was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Maries, the Liberty of Wye claymeth over the same, and the liberty of the late Dene of Can∣erbury claymeth over so much thereof as is in the Man∣nour
of Brooke (which Mannour was antiently a hundred of it self, & conerred on that Church by King Henry the first (having been formerly given thereunto by Karlemane a Priest) and the same was afterwards confirmed to the said Church by King Henry 2 and afterwards (comming to King Hen. 8.) hee 33•. of his Raigne, againe gave it to that Church. BRUCKLAND. BRookland, leth at the South-east part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the West) di∣stant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Aloebridge, East division of the Coun∣ty, and division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Augustine, the liberty of the late Deane of Canterbury claymeth there, and the liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth over the Rectory of the same, a Faire is kept in this Parish yearly upon the day of Saint Peter ad vincula, called Lammas day (being the first day of August.) BUCKLAND neer DOVOR. LIeth at the East part of the County, by a River arising neer thereunto, about one mile and a half (towards the North-west) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, ath of Saint Augustine, Hundred of Besbor∣ough, East Division of the County, & division of Justices
in that Lath, the liberties of the late Archbishop of Canter∣bury and Saint Augustine claym there, it was in the Deanry of Dovor and Diocess of Canterbury, & the Church was called Saint Andrew, a Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of Saint Bartholomew (being the 24th. day of Au∣gust) & the Parsonage was about 300. years since appro∣priated to the Priory of Dovor (with the conen of Simon Isip then Archbishop of Canterbury.) BUCKLAND neer FE∣VERSHAM. LIeth towards the North part of the County, about three miles (towards the West) distant from Fe∣versham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East di∣vision of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of Saint Augustine, claymeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham which belonged to that Abbey) and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claymeth over so much thereof as is within the Mannour of Copton; it was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Canterbury. BVRMARSH. BOroughmarsh, lieth at the South-east part of the Coun∣ty, in Romney Marsh, about three miles (towards the South-west) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Worth, East division of the Coun∣ty, and division of the Justices of the corporation of Romney Marsh, (the liberty whereof, claymeth over the
same) and the Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth over the Mannour of Burmarsh, This Parish was in the Deanry of Limpue and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints. CAPELL neer FOLK∣STONE. CApell Ferne, lieth towards the South-East part of the County, neer the Sea, about two miles, and a half (towards the North-east) distant from Folkstone, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Folkstone, Lath of Ship∣way, East Division of the County, and Division of Justi∣ices in that Lath; the Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, claymeth there, it was in the Deanry of Do∣vor, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Maries. CAPELL neer TVN∣BRIDG. LIeth towards the South-West part of the County, a∣bout three miles (towards the East) distant from Tunbridge, Part thereof is in the aliwick, and Hundred of Twysord, and the residue in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, in the Hundred of Wahlingstone, and Hadlow Brough; It is all in the Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, South Division of Justices in that Lath, and was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Roche∣ster; The Church standeth in Hadlow-borrough, and was called Saint Thmas the Martry.
CHALKE. CHealkes, lieth at the North part of the County, neer the River of Thames, about two miles and a halfe (towards the East) distant from Gravesend, in the Baili∣wick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Maries (in which William Martin Esquire (a good Benefactor to the same) was buried about 240. years since) and the Tythes of this Parish were given to the Church of Rochester by King Heny the first. CHALLOCK. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, a∣bout two miles (towards the North-west) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Felborough, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, the liberties of Wye, and the late Death of Canterbury so claim there, that what thereof is not in the one Liberty is in the other, the Leeze is in the liberty of the said late Dean, and the Church-yard is part in that liberty, and part in the liberty of Wye, all this Parish was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church was called St. Cosmus, and Dami∣anus, and founded by one Apuldorefeild (whose armes are, or lately were in the windowes of the same) a Faire is kept here yearly (within the liberty of Wye) upon the day of St. Cosmus and Damianus (being the seven and twentieth day of September.)
CHARING. CHerring, Cerringes, lieth towards the South-east part of the County, about four miles (towards the South-east) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Caleill, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Gharing, this Parish was in the Deanry of Charing, and Dioces of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul (which Church about the year 1590.) was much impai∣red by fire, and the monuments of Brent (an antient Fa∣mily here) desaced, but the armes of Hugh Brent Esquire (of that Family) do, or lately did remain carved in the stones of the Belfree (which in the time of King Edward 4.) he founded (the same being before of wood) Amy Brent (about the time of King Rich. 3.) built the Chap∣pel at the South-side of the Chancel there (which Chap∣pell likewise was much impaired by the said fire) but the same (with the antient house of the Brents in this Parish) coming afterwards to the Family of Deering, it was by them repaired. Charing was very antiently belonging to the Arch-bi∣shops of Canterbury, and taken from Iannibert (Arch-bi∣shop there) by King Offa (about 880. years since) and about the year 789. (at the request of Aethelward the Arch-bishop) was restored again by King Kenulphus, and Arch-bishop Morton (about 160. years since) much re∣paired and augmented the house here, belonging to that Sea Two Faires are yearly holden in this Parish, viz one upon the day of St. George (being the 23. day of Aprill)
and the other upon the day of St. Luke (being the 18. day of October.) CHARLTON neer DOVOR. LIeth at the South east side of the County (by a Rivu∣let arising neer thereunto) about one mile (towards the North) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stow∣ting, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the Coun∣ty, part thereof is within the liberties of the Cinqu-Ports, and Town and Port of Dovor, and division of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the residue is in the Hundred of Bewsborough, and division of Justices in the Lath of St. Augustine, the liberty of the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury claimeth in this Parish, it was all in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church standeth in the hundred of Beusborough, and was called S. Peter. CHARLTON neer GREENWICH. LIeth at the North-west part of the County, neer the River of Thames, about two miles (towards the West) distant from Woolwich, in the Bailiwick of Sutton-Brom∣ley, Hundred of Black-heath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Luke, a Faire is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Luke (being the eighteenth day of October) and vulgarly called Horn Faire.
GREAT CHART. CErt, lieth towards the South-east part of the County, about two miles (towards the South-west) distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick of Chart & Longbridge, Lath f Scray, East division of the County, & division of Justces in the Lath of Shipway, it was antiently a Hunred of it self, but now part thereof is in the Hunded of Chart & Long∣bridge, nd the residue in the Hundred of Calehill, the li∣bety of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over Chelmanton Borough, and the liberty of the late Dean of Cterbury claymeth over the Mannou of Great Chart (being given to the same by King Hen. 8. 33• of is Raigne) This Parish was all in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church andeth in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and was called St. Ma∣ries, in which is, or lately was, a memoriall of the in∣terment of Iohn Toke of Goddinton in this Parish Esquire (there buried above 140. years since) The Family of Engeham (of Singleton in this Parish) was of good repute in these parts (four of which, viz. Allen, Richard, Robert, and Moses) I finde succeeded one another as heires, and lived 329. years (viz. the two first each 79. years, Robert 85. years, and Moses 86. years) In this Church also are, or lately were, memorials of the interment of severall Goldwells (there buried about 200. years since) by one of which (viz Iames Goldwell Bishop of Norwich) the South Chappel of this Church was founded (in the year 1477.) and of the interment of Thomas Twisden Gentleman, and William Sharp (both above 150. years since) also in the North Chappel of this Church were the portraitures and names of 16 men in glass, which (by tradition) were the builders of this Church.
Chart was very antiently belonging to the Archbishops of Caerbury, and taken from Ianniber (Archbishop) by King Offa about 880. years since, and about the year 78. (at the request of Aethelward the Archbishop) restored a∣gain by King Kenulphus, afterwards it again went from that See, and in the year 839. Celothus Archbishop bought the same of one Halethe a Noble man (with the conent of King Aethelwolf) and gave it to Christ Church, Canterbury, and the same again going from that Church, and coming to one Egelrick Bigge, he in the year 1044. again gave the same thereunto. A Faire is kept in this Parish yearly upon our Lady day (caled the Annunciation of our Lady) being the five and twentith ay of March. The Archbishop of Canterbury had antiently a mansi∣on huse in ths Parish, and neere a place in this Parish called Goldwell ariseth one of the heads of the River Med∣way. In the night of the first of May 1580. there happened a great Earthquake in this Parish, which much affright∣ed many of the inhbiants, and caused them to a rise out of their beds. LITTLE CHART. CErt, lieth towards the South-east part of the Coun∣ty, by the River Stoure, about four miles (towards the South-east) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Lougbridge, Hundred of Calehill, Lath of Seray, East division of the County, and division of Justi∣ces in the Lath of Shipway, the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Little Chart (being given to that Church by King Henry 8 33•. of is Raigne) this Parish was in the Deanry of Charing, and
Diocess of Canterbury, the Church was called St. Maries, and buil (or at least well repaired) by Stephen Norton Esquire (who was buried there.) CHART next SVTTON VALLANCE. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about foure miles (towards the South-east) distant from Maid∣stone, In the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorne, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Michaell. CHARTHAM. CHertham, Certeham, Certaham, lieth towards the East part of the County, by the River Stoure, about two miles and a half (towards the Southwest) distant from Canterbury, in the East division of the County, part there∣of is in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, and Hundred of Felborough, and the residue is in the Bailiwick, and Hun∣dred of Bridge and Petham, and Lath of St. Augustine, it is all in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, the Church standeth in the hundred of Felborough, and was called St. Maries. The liberty of the late Dean of Canerbury claimeth o∣ver the Mannour of Chartham, which (in the year 871.) was given to that Church by Duke Elfred, and confirmed
by King Edward the Confessor, in the year 1052. and the same afterwards coming to King Hen. 8. he the 33•. of of his Raigne gave it again to that Church. In this Parish was a Mansion-house of the late Arch-Bishops of Canterbury. CHELSFIELD. LIeth towards the West-end of the County, about two miles (towards the South) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of utton at Hone, West division of the Coun∣ty, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liber∣ty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claymeth over the Man∣nours of Chelfield and Goddington, Wood-lands called Charm-wood, and the Rectory of Chelsfield, this Parish was all in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Maries. CHERITON. LIeth at the South-east part of the County, neer the Sea, about one mile and a half (towards the North-East) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Folkstone, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Martin.
CHESILHERST. LIeth towards the West end of the County, about three miles (towards the East) distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justi∣ces in that Lath, a small part thereof (lying towards Foots Cray) is in the Hundred of Black-heath, and the re∣sidue is in the Hundred of Ruxley, it was all in the Dean∣ry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, the Church standeth in the Hundred of Ruxley, was called St Nicho∣las, and the same was by King Henry the first, given to the Church of Rochester, and in this Church of Chesilherst is the burial place of the Family of Walsingham, CHETHAM. CHatham, lieth at the North-side of the County, by the River Medway (at the North-east side and very neer unto the City of Rochester) in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Chetham, and Gillingham, Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the County, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there, and the liberty of the City of Rochester claimeth, from the high street of that City to the Hospital of St. Bartholomew, and from thence cross the high way all along the fields to the Farm called Horsted, so much thereof as is in the liberty of the City of Rochester, is in the division of the Justices of the Corpo∣ration of that City, and the residue is in the North divi∣sion of Justices of that Lath, it was all in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Ma∣rier
A Faire is kept here yearly upon our Lady day (called the Nativity of the Virgin Mary) being the eighth day of September. Richard of Lucy gave Chetham to the Abbey of Fever∣sham, and King Hen. 2. confirmed it, as also did King Iohn in the sixteenth year of his Raigne. An Hospitall called the Hospitall of St. Bartholomew (but since decayed) was built here (or relief of Lepers) by Gundulphus Bishop of Rochester (in the time of the Conquerour) and confirmed by King Hen. 3. but the Hospitall builded here by Sir Iohn Hawkins, and confir∣med by Queen Elizabeth in the 36 year of her Raigne, is still in being. Chetham is famous for the Royall Navy using to ride, be repalred, and laid up there. But as to the story of our Lady of Chetham, and the Clerke of that parish (for which this place was once also famous, I referre him that desireth to read the same, to Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Chetham (where he may find the same at large.) At Horsted in this Parish (as is reported) was a Monu∣ment (long since defaced) of Hors (brother of Hegest the Saxon) who in the time of Vortimer (King of Bri∣taine) was (at Aylesford in this County) slaine in single combat by Caigern (Brother of the said King.) CHEVENING. LIeth towards the West end of the County about three miles (towards the North-west) distant from Seve∣nock in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and lower Division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof is in the Hundred of Codsheath, and the residue in the Hundred of Sommer∣den
The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth in this parish, as also doth the Liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster at Morants Court otherwise Madams Court (likewise in this Parish) it was all in the Deany of Shorham (a peculiar to the late Arch Bishop of Canter∣bury) but in the Diocess of Rochester, the Church standeth in the Hundred of Godsheath, and a Far is kept yearly at Chepsted in this Parish, upon Tuesday in Whitsonweek. CHIDINGSTONE. LIeth towards the South-west part of the County, by the River Medway, about foure miles (towards the South-west) distant from Tunbridge, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and lower Division of Justices in that Lath so much thereof as is in the Borough of Linckhill is in the Hundred of Ruxley, and the residue is in the Hundred of Summerden, the Liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster clay∣meth in this Parish; it was all in the Deanry of Shore∣ham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester, and the Church standeth in the Hundred of Somerden (in which Churh about 110. years since was intered Sir Thomas Willoughby (one of the Justices of the common Pleas in the time of King Henry 8. and owner of Boreplace in this Parish (built by one Alphegh, and inlarged by Reade, severall of whose Fami∣ly are there also interred) one whereof, viz. Sir Robert Reade (cheif Justice of the common Pleas in the time of King Henry 7.) did in the year, 1516. build the North Chappell in this Church, and dedicated the same to St. Katherine.
CHILHAM. IVlham, Lieth towards the East part of the County, By the River Stoure, about three miles (towards the North) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Felborough, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway; the liberty of Wye claymeth there, it was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was cal∣led St. Maries. In the year, 182. (where Chilham Castle now stands) was the seat of King Lucius, (and afterwards by the Saxon Kings of Kent, but more especially by King Withred) above 950. years since made a Fort and (the Danes afterwards shaking the same) it lay desolate till the time of King William the Conquerour (who gave the Lordship of Chilham to one Fulbert (one of the eight cheif Captaines or Lieutenent Governours of Dovor Castle under Iohn Lord Fines) and the said Fulbert then built the Castle (which continued in his heires males till the time of King Henry 1.) At which time the heire Female of his Family married Badlesmer (who builded a good seate in the midst of the Castle) and the same continued in his name, and Family, till the time of King Richard the 2. at which time it came to the Earle of Rutland, and re∣mained in his Family till the time of King Henry 8. and then it was sould to Sir Thomas Cheney (who defaced and carried away part thereof, and afterwards his son sold the same to Sir Thomas Kempe (the aforesaid discent from Fulbert to Badlesmer I dare not avouch for certaine (the same being controverted by Mr. Camden in his Britania fo. 335.) But (being by me so found in an ancient Manu∣script, and seeming specious) I thought fit here to in∣sert
it (Leaving the Reader to judge as he seeth cause) The parsonage of Chilham belonged antiently to the Priory of Throwleigh, and as concerning the campe of Iu∣lius Caesar here pitched, and the place and derivation of the name of Iullaberies grave (neer this place, I refer them that desire further satisfaction therein to Mr. Camdens Britania, Fol. 336. Onely I do elsewhere find, that Quin∣tus Laberus (a military Tribune to Iulius Caesar) was there slaine, and buried, and the place thereby called Iulaber. A Faire is kept in this Parish yearly upon the day of Simon and Iude (being the 28th. day of October. CHILLENDEN. LIeth towards the East end of the County, about four miles (towards the South-West) distant from Sand∣wich, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eastry, Lth of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath, the Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth over the same, it was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints. CHISLET. LIeth towards the North-East side of the County, by the River Stoure about five miles (towards the north East) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Divi∣sion of the Connty, and Division of Justices in that Lath,
the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mnnour and Park of Chislet, but it claimeth more largely over all this parish (for that it is in the hunred of Blengae, which belonged to that Abbey) the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claimeth in this Parish, it was all in the Deanry of West Beere, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. CHRIST-CHVRCH CANTERBURY. THe name of the place sheweth in what part of the County it lieth, it is in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham (if in any.) The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth there, It is in the hundred of Westgate (if in any) in the Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the County. It is claimed by the Justices of the City of Canterbury, and also by the Justices of the county of Kent, in the Lath aforesaid, to be in their division, but (though it be ra∣ther reputed, and the usage in the Precincts of this Church in matters criminal and civil, do seem to make good, that the same is in the division of the Justices, in the Lath aforesaid) I shal forbear to write any thing positively therein. Here are held yearly three Faires, viz. one on the feast day of the Translation of Thomas Becket (being the se∣venth day of Iuly, and called Becket Faire; another on Michaelmass day (being the twentie nineth day of Septem∣ber;) and the other on the day of the Passion of Thomas Becket (being the twenty nineth day of December) and every of these Faires continue nine daies.
This place was in the Diocess of Canterbury, in the year 600. Pope Gregory sent Augustine the Monk, and other Monks with him into Brittain, to convert the Nation to Christianity, who converted King Ethelbert, and thou∣sands of people; That King gave them a House in Can∣terbury to Preach and Baptize in, with liberty to convert whom they could; And Augustine (being consecrated by Bishop Elutherius) buil this Church (upon the founda∣on of an old Church, formerly built by believing Ro∣mans) and dedicated the same to our Saviour: And the people flocked to him, and liberally contributed to the work. I shall forbear further inlargement ouching this Church: the same having been fully written of by seve∣rall Persons already; and more especially by Mr. William Somner, in his Survey of Canterbury, Printed 1640. (wherein he hath most methodically and largely written touching the same) and therefore thereunto I refer the Reader:) Onely this I adde, that the Revenues of this Church were so great, that at the suppression of Mona∣steries (in the time of King Hen. 8.) they were valued at 4838s. 3f 9d. ob. per annum. CLIF neer DOVOR VVEst Cliff, West Clive, lieth at the East end of the County, about three miles (towards the North east) distant from Dovor; in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East divi∣sion of the County, and division of Justices in that ath; the Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth there; It was in the Deanry of Door, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter, (the Ad∣vowson whereof Eleanor (Daughter of Fardinando the 3d. King of Spain, and Wife of King Edward the first) gave to
Christ-church Canterbury (which gift the said King Ed∣ward confirmed) and afterwards (in the year 1327.) The Parsonage was assigned to the Almnery of Canter∣bury. CLIF neere Gravesend. CLive, Cliffe at Hoo, Cloveshoo; lieth at the North side of the county, neer the River of Thames, about five miles (towards the North-east) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamel, Lath of Ay∣lesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath; the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there; it was in the Deanry of Shere∣ham (a Peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was cal∣led St. Helen. A Faire is kept here yearly upon Pelagius day (being the eighth day of October.) The Mannour of Cliff did antiently belong to Christ∣church Canterbury; The Church and Town are large, And took the name from the Cliffe upon which the Town is scituate. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the nineth Peere, or Arch of Rochester bridge. COBHAM. LIeth towards the North part of the county, about three miles and a half (towards the South-east) di∣stant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of
Aylesford, West division of the County, and North di∣vision of Justices in that Lath; part thereof is in the Hundred of Shamell, and the residue in the hundred of Hoo, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, claimeth at the Stone-house, and Church-yard in this Parish; It was all in the Deanry, and Diocess of Rochester, the Church standeth in the hundred of Shamell, was a Colle∣giate Church, called St. Mary Magdalen; in the same are very antient Monuments of the Honourable Families of Cobham and Brook (but much defaced) many whereof are neer 300. years old; and in this Parish for some hundred of years was the habitation of those families; Iohn Lord Cobham (the last of that name) Son and Heir of Henry (Deputy of King Edward 1. whilest in his Fathers life time, he was Constable of Dovor Castle) in the year 1362. founded here a Colledge (which at the suppression was valued at 128l. 1s. 9. ob. per annum.) And the aforesaid Lord Cobham dying without issue male) the Honour and Seat came to the Family of Brook (Lords Cobham.) COLDRED. LIeth towards the East end of the County about foure miles and a half (towards the North-west) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Pancras.
COOK STONE. CVcklestan, Culestan, Cuokstane, Lieth towards the North side of the County, by the River Medway, a∣bout two miles and a half (towards the South west) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hun∣dred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath, the Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claymeth over the same, it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester and the Church was called Saint Michael (which above 800. years since was given by King Aethelwolf to the Church of Rochester. This Parish ought Antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repaire of the first Peere or Arch of Rochester Bridge. COSMUS BLEANE. LIeth at the North side of the County, about three miles (towards the North) distant from Can∣terbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Whitstaple, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath? The Liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and Saint Augustine clayme there, it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Cosmus and Damianus (which Church was (about 530. years since appropriated to the Hospitall (of Saint Thomas the Marty) of Eastbrigge, and the Vicarage was
afterwards founded, and endowed, in the year 1375. by Simon Sudbury (Archbishop of Canterbury.) In the year 1189. The Blean was (by King Richard first) granted to Christs-Church Canterbury, and in the year 1270. The Nuns of Saint Sepulchers Canterbury had 90. Acres thereof granted to them (which is called Minchen∣wood) the like quantity also was granted to the Priory of Saint Gregories Canterbury, and to the Hospitall of Herbaldowne (the last whereof was in that part which is called Shoorth.) COWDEN. LIeth at the South-West corner of the County, by the River Medway (adjoyning to Surrey and Sus∣sex, about seven miles and a half towards the South-West) distant from Tunbridge, In the Lath of Sut∣ton at Hone, West Division of the County, and lower Division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof is in the Hundred of Somerden, other part thereof in the Hundred of Westram and Eaton-Bridge (and both in the Baili∣wick of Sutton Bromley) and the residue (viz. two hou∣ses and some small quality of land) is in the Hundred of Axstone, and Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford; It was all in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, the Church standeth in the Hundred of Somerden, was called Saint Mary Magdalen, and a Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of Saint Mary Magdalen (being the 22th. day of Iuly.
COWLING. COulings, Lieth at the North side of the County to∣wards the River of Thames about four miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and North Division of Ju∣stices in that Lath; the Liberty of the Bishop of Rochester claymeth there, it was in the Deanry, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called Saint Iames the Apostle (which Church Queen Ediva otherwise Edgiva (Daughter and heire of Earle Sigeline Lord of Cow∣ling) in the year 960. gave to the Church of Roche∣ster.) Iohn Lord Cobham (about 300. yeeres since) built the Castle (which in the yeere 1553. was assaulted by Sir Thomas Wyat, and the gate broke open with his Or∣dinance, but defended by the Lord Cobham (owner thereof.) CRAFORD. CReyford, Crecanford, Eade, lieth at the North side of the County, towards the River of Thames, by the River Cray, about one mile and a half (towards the West) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Little and Lesness, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester.
In the Church are, (or lately were) monuments of the interment of Apleton (above 200. years since) Wood∣ford (above 160. years since) and two Elhams (above 170. years since.) Touching the famous Battaile fought here (about 1200. years since) between Vortimer King of Britaine, and Heugist the Saxon, and the admirable Chalke caves in this place, I refer the Reader to Mr. Lambards Peram∣bulation in Crayforde. CRANBROOKE. LIeth at the South-side of the County, about three miles (towards the South-east) distant from Goud∣herst, in the Bailwick of the seven Hundred, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, & lower division of Justices in that Lath, a little part thereof is in the North Borough of the Hundred of Great Barnfield, another little part thereof is in the Borough of Iornden, in the Hundred of Barckley, & all the residue is in the hundred of Cranbrook. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Towne and all the Denn of Cranbrook (as parcell of the Mannour of Godmersham) except the George Inne with the appurtenances (which is out of that liberty and held of the late King by Knights service) the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the mannour of Sissingherst, and the liberty of Wye claimeth over the Borough of Frechisley, otherwise Ab∣bot's Franchise (which Borough hath a Court Leet of it self) the Borsholder thereof is chosen there, and the in∣habitants of the same owe no service to the Court Leet holden for the Hundred (onely at this Court a Cons∣ble (for the Hundred) may be chosen out of that Bo∣rough.
This Parish was all in the Deanry of Chring, and Di∣ocess of Canterbury, the Church standeth in the Hundred of Cranbrook, and was called St. Dnstan (in which Church are monuments of the Bakers of Sissgherst (one whereof is 100. years old) and of Roberts of Glassenbury (a very antient Family there) upon the West head of the Steeple are the armes of three Families (antiently eminent in this Parish) viz. Berham, sometimes owner of Sissinghest aforesaid, Bettenham (sometimes owner of Bettenham house) and Wilford (sometime owner of Hartredge (all in this Parish.) In Milkhousestreet in this parish (not long before the sup∣pression of Abbeyes) was built a Chappell Dedicated to the holy Trinity (which at the suppression aforesaid was likewise suppressed, and onely the ruines thereof now remaining. The Parsonage was antiently appropriate, and belong∣ing to the Archbishops of Canterbury till Thomas Arch∣bishop there 2•. Martij. 31•. Hen. 8. by grant inrol∣led in the Office of Augmentation 32•. Hen. 8. so. 10•. granted the same to that King, afterwards 23•. Maij. 33•. Hen. 8. That King granted this Parsonage to the Deane and Chapter of Canterbury. A market is kept in this Towne upon every Saturday, and is the greatest Market in these parts, and two Fairs are kept there yearly (viz. one upon Saint Dunstans day (being the nineteenth day of May) and the other upon the day of Giles Abbot (being the first day of September. But a little part only of the Towne being formerly paved, and the rest (especially in Winter) very foule, worne low, and inconvenient for passage (more especi∣ally upon the Market dayes) the same was begun to be paved, in the year 1654. And by continuance thereof in the years 1655. 1566. and 1657. The same was height∣ned and paved, from the Market crosse to a little below the turning from the Towne towards Wisley (which hath
given advantage to the standings in the Market to leng∣then themselves almost as much more as formerly, and the pavement is not onely an ornament to the Towne, but also of much conveniency to it and the Countrey. FOOTES CRAY VOtes Crey, lieth towards the West side of the County, by the River Cray about three miles (towards the South-West) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and Upper division of Justi∣ces in that Lath, The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claymeth there, it was in the Deanry of Dart∣ford, and Diocess of Rchester, and the Church was cal∣led All Saints. Saint MARY CRAY. CRey, Lieth towards the West side of the County, by the River Cray, about five miles (towards the South-East) distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and Upper Division of Ju∣stices in that Lath, the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claymeth there, it was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called Saint Maries. A Market is kept here upon every Wednesday, and a Fair kept yearly upon the feast of the purification of the Vir∣gin Mary (called Candlemas day) being the second day of February.
North CRAY. CRey, Lieth towards the West end of the County, by the River Cray about two miles and a half (towards he South-west) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called Saint Iames. Robert Poynings (carver and Sword-bearer to Iack Cade in his Rebellion, after his pardon for the same) made an insurrection here in the, 32th. year of King Hen. 6. And Sir Richard Rooksley was sometimes owner of Rooksley house in or neer this Parish. PAULS CRAY. CRey, Lieth towards the West end of the County, by the River Cray, about foure miles (towards the South-West) distan from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton a Hone, West Division of the County, and Upper Division of Justices in that Lah, the liberty of the Dutchy of L∣caster claymeth over the Mannour of Pauls Cray, this Pa∣rish was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Dioces of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called Saint Paulinus.
CRUNDALL. LIeth towards the East part of the County, about two miles (towards the North East) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Wye, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and Division of the justices, in the Lath of Shipway, The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth there, but the liberty of Wye clay∣meth over the same; It was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Mries. CVDHAM. LIeth neer the West end of the County, about five miles and a half (towards the North-West) distant from Sevenock, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hun∣dred of Ruxley, Lat of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath, It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester and the Church was called Saint Peter and Paul (in which is or lately was a memoriall of the interment of Walleys above 150. years ince.)
DARENT. DErente, Dairent, Dorquent, lieth towards the North-side of the County, by the River Darent, about two, miles (towards the South-east) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath▪ The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth o∣ver the same. It was in the Deanry of Shoram (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Margaret. Lands here were given to the Church of Rochester by one Birtrick and Elfswith his wife (neer 700. years since) and the like was given to the same by Gefferey of Haden∣ham very many years since. The Mannour of Darent did sometime belong to the Archbishop of Canterbury, DARTFORD. TArenteford, Darentford, Dorquentford, lieth at the North-side of the County, neer the River of Thames, and by the Rivers Darent, and Cray, about six miles (to∣wards the West) distant from Gravesend, in the Baili∣wick of Sutton-Dartford, Hundred of Dartford, and Wil∣mington, Lath of Ston at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, claimeth all the Market place, from the running stream to the Market
house, and most of that side of the Street where the Cock Inne is, and the Mill (but not the Mill-land.) This Parish was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, the Church was called Holy Trinity, and was given to the Church of Rochester by one Hamo (servant to King William the Conquerour) confirmed by the said King (who was then owner of the Mannour of Dartford) and the same was afterwards also confirmed by King Henry the 1. In this Church are or lately were memori∣als of the interment of Hornley and Burlion, (each above 150. years since) The Benefice was Appropriated about 400. years since. A Market is kept here upon every Saturday. And a Faire yearly upon the day of St. Mary Magdalen (being the two and twentieth day of Iuly. The House of the late King here was (by King Hen. 8.) converted thereunto from a Nunnery (which was foun∣ded for White Nuns, of the order of St. Augustine) by King Edward 3. in the year 1355. And dedicated to St. Mary and St. Margaret; and that foundation was in∣larged by King Rich. 2. Bridget (fourth Daughter of King Edward the 4.) was Prioresse there; So also were the Daughters of the Lords Scroop and Beumount: This Nunnery at the suppression was valued at 380l. 9f. . ob per annum. In the year 1330. King Edw. 3. held a Turnament at this Towne. In the year 1381. (In the time of King Richard the .) Tilers horrid Rebellion began here, upon abuse of the daughter of Iohn Tiler (a Tiler of this Town) by a Collector of Pole-money; But others averre it to be at Deptford. In the year 1452. Edward (then Duke of Yorke (after King Edward the 4.) incamped at Brentheath, otherwise Darford Brent neer this Town (against King Hen. 6.
DEALE. DOle, Lieth at the East end of the County, adjoyning to the Sea, about three miles and a half (towards the South-East) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the County; The liberty of the late Arch-bishop of Canter∣bury claimeth there (the same being given to that Sea by King Aethelwlf in the year 839. It is a member of the Town and Port of Sandwich, within the division of Justices of that Town and Port, and the Liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports, claim over the same. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocsse of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Leonard. This Parish (in the time of King Henry the 8. was questioned to be assessed to the Subsidies (as lying in the forraigne) but to take away that question) that King by Letters Patens, united the same to Sandwich; which King also built the Castle there about 120. years since; as he likewise did the Castle of Sandown, (about one mile and a half, (towards the North) distant from the same.) At this Deale Iulius Caesar landed 54. years before the birth of Christ (where he had feirce resistance from the Britains) of which who desireth further to read, I referre him to Cambdens Britannia fol. 343. Here also 3. of Iuly 1495. Perkin Warbiek arrived with his forces against King Hen. 7.
DENTON neer ELEHAM. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, a∣bout two miles and a halfe (towards the North-east) distant from Eleham, in the Hundred of Kinghamford, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, & division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Eastry, and the residue in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Pe∣tham, the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth there, it was all in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church was called St. Mary Magdelen, and standeth in the Bailiwick of Eastry. DENTON neer GRAVESEND. LIeth at the North-side of the County, neer the River of Thames, about two miles (towards the East) di∣stant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the Coun∣ty, and North division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Maries. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there. A Nobleman called Birtrick or Brichrich and Elswith or Easwith his wife (neer 700. years since) gave Denton to the Church of Rochester, afterwards it was unjustly taken
from that Church, and Odo (Earle of Kent) deteining the same, King William the Conquerour (after three dayes debate touching this and others of the like nature) restored the same, and it was afterwards confirmed to that Church by King Hen. 1. This Parish ought anently to have contributed to the repaire of the nineth Peere or Arch of Rochester bridge. DEPTFORD. WEst Greenwich, Deptford Strand, lieth at the North-west side of the County (adjoyning to Surrey) by the Rivers Ravenborne and Thames: About four miles (towards the South-east) distant from London. Part thereof is in the County of Surrey, and so much thereof as is in the County of Kent, is in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Black heath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, the Church standeth in the County of Kent, was called St. Nicholas, and in the same is (or lately was) a memorial of the interment there, of one Weaver (long since Mayor of the Staple.) At the time of the Conquest one Cislebert Mamignot had Deptford for his share. Here the Rebels under the conduct of Flammock and Ioseph (in the time of King Hen. 7.) were overthrown, and above 2000. of them slain. In a Dock (neer this place) the small Ship (in which Captain Drake sailed about the World) was in the year 1580. (by the command of Queen Elizabeth) laid up as a monument. This place is also famous for the Shipdock, Storehouse
and Corporation there for the Navy (erected in the time of King Hen. 8.) DETLING. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about two miles and a halfe (towards the North-east) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyborne, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Ayleford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth there, it was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Martin. The Archbishop of Canterbury was antiently owner of Detling, but  (Earle of Kent in the time of King Wil∣liam the Conquerour) withheld the same from him, and (after three dayes publique debate touching this and other lands so withholden) the Archbishop was resto∣red to the same. DEVINGTON. DAvington, Daunton, lieth at the North-side of the County (towards the  of Sheppey) about one mile (towards the West) distan from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the Coun∣ty, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, the liberty of St. Augusti claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham which belonged to that Ab∣bey) and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterby claim∣eth over so much thereof as is in the Mannour of Copon▪ it was in the Deanry of Osprige, and Diocess of Canter∣bury,
and the Church was called Saint Mary Mag∣dal. Here was a Nunnery of black Nus (of the order of Saint Benedict) founded by King Hen. 2. (about the se∣cond year of his Raigne) dedicated to St. Mary Magda∣le, and confirmed by King Hen. 3. in the 39. year of hi Raigne, the Nuns are conceived to have been French∣women, and had orders prescribed them in French, by Walter Reyold (Archbishop of Canterbury) above 340. years since. DIMCHURCH. DEmechurch,  at the South-east side of the Coun∣ty, in Romney Marsh, adjoyning to the sea, about three miles and a half (towards the North-East) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Worth, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh (the liberty whereof claimeth over the same) The liberty of St. Augustine also claimeth there; It was in the Deany of Limpue, and Diocess of Canter∣bury; and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. At this Parish the Courts for the Corporation of Marsh; as also the Court (called the Lath) for the Lords of Romney Marsh, are usually holden (in the meeting place of the aforesaid Corporation (which about 100. years since, and called New-Hall.) Romney Marsh is reputed to contain (of it self) 24000. Acres, but that with Walland, and Guldford Marshes are reputed to contain 44200. Acres. Laws (for Government of Romney Marsh) were made by (that Venerable Judge) Henry of Bath (Associating to him Nicholas of Handl and Aldred of Dene) upon Sa∣turday
next after the Navity of St. Mary, in the 42th. year of King Henry the third; (the Sheriff of Kent assisting) from which laws all England receive directions for Sewers. In the time of that King, it was governed by men (called the Twenty foure Jurors of Romney Marsh (cho∣sen by the commonaly there) which was confirmed 2•. Septemb. 36•. of that King at Romney.) The admeasurement was taken 42•. Hen. 3. and Iohn of Lovett, and Henry of Apledoreseild (by Commission of 15•. Novemb. 16•. Edward 1.) did 5•. December follow∣ing sit (as Justices of Sewers) there; but were opposed by the 24. Jurors, the opposition allowed by those Ju∣stices, and a common Bailiffe agreed to be chosen. William of Walleyns and his Fllows (upon Monday after St. Mildred, 2•. Edw. 2. (at Newchurch) made Ordi∣nances of Sewers (saving the former so made by Bath and Lovetot) Thomas of Lodelowe, Robert Belknap and Tho. Culpeper, 33•, Edw. 3. were Commissioners by a Commission of 7• Fe∣bruary that year, and the meeting of the Lords of Romney Marsh (by themselves or their Atturneyes) was ordained, to be here, or at Newchurch, or other meet place, fifteen dayes after Michaelmass yearly; and it was called the Principall assembly; but the same is now usually here, yearly upon Thursday in Whitson week. King Edward the 4. (at the beginning of his Raigne) granted a Charter to Romney Marsh, to be a Corporation of Bailiff, Jurats and Commonalty (of which you may read more in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Romney.
DITTON. DIctone, Dictum, lyeth towards the middle of the County, about two miles and a half, (towards the Northeast) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkfeild, Lath of Aylesford, West di∣vision of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Mlling and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Peter. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the fifth Peere or Arch of Rochester Bridge. DODDINGTON. LIeth towards the middle of the North side of the County, about foure miles (towards the North-east) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Tenham, East division of the County, and Up∣per division of Justices in that Lath; the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Ospring and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist.
DOVOR. THis in one of the Cinque Ports, and lieth at the east part of the County, adjoyning to the Sea, about five miles (towards the North-east) distant from Folkstone, in the Bailiwick of Stowing, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the county; Incorporated by the name of Mayor, Jurats and Commonalty of the Town and Port of Dovor (and before that by the name of Barons of the Town and Port of Dovor) and in the division of the Justices of that Town and Port (the liberties of which Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports claime over the same.) There have been seven Churches in this Town (all which were in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Can∣terbury) And five of them (viz. St. Iohn, St. Nicholas, St. Peter, St. Martins Le Grand & St. Martins the lesse) are demo∣lished; So that at this present, there are but two Parishes & Churches here (viz. one which is called St. Maries) and the other St. Iames the Apostle (otherwise St. Iames of Warden-down (which Church of St. Maries was built by the Prior and Covent of St. Martins, and by them given to the Town, but the Advowson thereof was given to Hubert de Burgh (founder of the Meason de Dieu) to which he afterwards gave the same. The said Church of St. Iames was antiently belong∣ing to the Castle of Dovor, and in the same the Courts of Chancery, and Admiralty for the Cinque Ports, the two antient Townes and their members are still usually holden. A Market is kept in this Town every Wednesday and Saturday; and a Faire yearly upon St. Martins day (be∣ing the eleventh day of November) which holdeth nine dayes.
Now in respect that several others (and more especi∣ally Mr. Camden in his Britnia fol. 344. And Mr. in his Perambulation in Dovor) have written so largely of this Town, and of the Churches, and old Religious Hou∣ses therein; and of the Castle lying above the same; I had thoughts of forbearing inlargement thereupon; yet (for that I find not severall things touching the same, there fully set down, & find also some other things omit∣ted) I shall therefore therein give the Reader some further account. And first touching that which is of most dignity (the Castle) The same in the time of Cassibelanus, Governour of Britain (about 1700. years since) was (by the com∣mand of Iulius Caesar) built according to the Romane or∣der (to keep the Britains in subjection) and thereupon was called Caesars Castle, and the Romans Court, and so continued for about 80. years; at which time (the same being in decay) Arviragus (King of Britain) having posses∣sed it, reedified & inlarged the same, & fortified it against the Romanes (calling it Ledonnegio) and he stopped the an∣tient Haven (whereby the name of the place was after∣wards called De à Fore, or stopt before, or stop out; and since (by contraction) Dovor; yet I finde by others the name to be derived from the British word Dufyrrae (signifying a place steep and upright) as the cituation of the same is) and by others, Dur or Dour the common name (among the Britains) for all Waters (touching which, I leave the Reader to his election.) This Castle after falling to decay, was repaired by Withred King of Kent (about 950. years since) and at the coming in of King William the Conquerour was (on the behalf of King Harold) kept against him by Stephen Ash∣borneham (a Baron) and Alan of Evering his Lieurenant, but (the same being taken by the Conquerour) they were both beheaded, and afterwards that King made Iohn Lord Fynes (his kinsman) Constable thereof by in∣heritance,
gave him very many Knights fees, for his bet∣ter mainteyning of the same, and the said Constable af∣terwards made the work on the hanger of the hill there, and also made eight chief Captains or Lieutenant Go∣vernours of this Castle whose names do follow) and to them such Knights fees were assigned, and for the same they warded in this Castle yearly as followeth, viz. Sir William of Albrance, otherwise Albrank had one and twenty Knights fees, and warded twenty eight weeks. Sir William of Arsick had eighteen Knights fees, and warded twenty four weeks. Sir Fulbert of Dovor had fifteen Knights fees, and war∣ded twenty weeks. Sir Iefferey Peverell had fourteen Knights fees, and war∣ded twenty weeks. Sir William Mamouth had twenty foure Knights fees, and warded thirty two weeks. Sir Robert Porth had twelve Knights fees, and warded twenty four weeks. Sir Hugh Crevequer had five Knights fees, and warded twenty foure weeks. And Sir Adam Fitzwilllams had six Knights fees, and warded twenty four weeks. And by this means there were alwayes 1000. men in the same for the Guard thereof (which Guard was so kept for fear of the Danes, and by reason of the distrust which that King had of the men of this County) and these Cap∣tains built and repaired their severall Towers in this Castle. King Iohn afterwards recompenced the heire of Fynes for the same, and took it into his hands, and afterwards (in the time of King Hen. 3.) this personall service of Castle-guard was turned into a contributory payment of money (towards guarding the Castle) and sworne War∣ders were appointed for that service, and in those dayes there belonged to the same many Souldiers (both Horse
and foot) and therefore the Arches, Vaults, and Barbi∣cans were made there for them to issue out at. This Castle afterwards fell again to decay, but (in the times of King Hen. 4. King Edw. 4. and Queen Elizabeth) much cost was bestowed in repair thereof (and more es∣pecially in the time of King Edw. 4. In the same is a Church, founded by King Lucius (o∣therwise Lucius Coilus) above 1400 years since, in which Sir Robert Asheton (who was a person of great honour, Constable of this Castle, and gave the best Bell of that Church to the same) was above 270. years since inter∣red, as was also Henry Earle of Northampton (Lord War∣den of the Cinque Pots above forty years since.) In this Castle were also antiently two Chappels, a Colledge of Chanons, severall streets of houses and Markets kept. The Colledge aforesaid is said to have been begun in the time of the said King Lucius, but more certain it is that Eadbald (King of Kent) erected the same, and it was afterwards removed from thence by King Withred into the Towne, There were antiently in this Castle a Commissary (who held his Court there) and these other Officers, viz. a Lieutenant, Marshall, learned Steward, Clerke of the Exchequer, Gentleman Porter, four Yeomen Porters, a Serjant at armes, Boder, Serjant of the Admiralty (be∣ing antiently the Marshal's Deputy) Serjants to arrest, a Serjant of the Artillery, a Serjant to serve process from the Castle-gate Court, an Armorer, Smith, Plummer, Carpenter, two Warrenners, and a Priest (whose house there was called Cocklecoe) all which had particular sa∣laries, and in the same also was an Exchecquer Office. In this Castle likewise antiently was to be seen, a Tow∣er (called Caesar's Tower) afterwards the Kings lodg∣ings (excellent for workmanship, and very high) a spa∣ious Hall (called King Arthur's Hall) with a faire gal∣lery
or entry, great Pipes and Cakes (bound with iron hoopes) wherein was liquor (supposed to be wine) which by long lying became as thick as Treackle, and would cleave like Bird-lime; Salt congealed together as hard as stone, Cross-Bowes, long Bowes, and Arrowes to the same (to which was fastened Brass in stead of fea∣thers) and the same were of such bigness, a not fit to be used by any men of this or late ages; severall deep wells, sounding places, and vaults under ground, and a curi∣ously engraven brass peece of Ordnance eer twenty four foot long (called the Basilisco) reported to be given to King Hen. 8. by the Emperour. This Castle (esteemed the most important Castle of England, and key of the same) was valiantly defended by Hubert de Burgh (Constable thereof) against Lewes sonne of Phillip King of France (who besieged the same 22•. Iulij 1216. and continued the siege  Octob. following (about which  the same was raised) and 6. Aprill 1580. (by reason of an  hap∣pening) a peece of the  Castle standeth) and a peece of the wall of the  the Sea. Now as touching the Town (which shortly after the coming of King William the Conquerour was much de∣faced by fire, and afterwards in the year 1295. was again spoyled, and part thereof burned by the French) I find that (in the time of King Edward the Confessor) the Townesmen were called Burgesses, and it is conceived that they were antiently incorporated by the name of Mayor and Commonalty (out of which Commonalty the Mayor was chosen) and then the Mayor (out of the Commonalty) chose Assistants for his year (who were sworne for that purpose) and that from thence the word Iurat (now common to the Magistrates in the Cinque Ports) was derived, and in the Raigne of King Edward the first this Corporation was stiled Mayor and Commo∣nalty.
The antient (and yet) time of election of the Mayor was, and is, yearly in the afternoon of the ninth day of September (being the next day after the day of the Nati∣vity of St. Mary) antiently in St. Peter's Church, but (that Church decaying) it was afterwards, and still is, in St. Maries Church. The Towne (at the first beginning of the same to flourish) began to be much builded on the South-west∣side thereof, whereas before the stopping of the haven by King Arviagus (as is before set forth) the Towne was under the Castle, the Market at a place called Vpmarket, and the houss were where the closes of a house called the Horse shoo, the Garnet-close, Pigeon-house, and gardens late wee. Towne was walle I and gated as foloweth, viz. fro  place called Maunsfield's corner to Peer gate, from the  to Vpall, from thence to Cow-gate, from thence and from thence (along St. Maries Church∣yard) to the River. The gtes were in number ten (the names whereof were,) 1. Et-Brook gate (which stood neer Maunsfield's cor∣ner, unde the Est Cliff.) 2. St. Hel gate (next to the former, towards the South-west,  Copthall (otherwise Moorehall) and St. Hllen Cross.) 3. The Postern, otherwise Fisher's gate (next to the last, neer the Bridge made by Mr. Garret in his Majoral∣ty.) 4. Butchery gate (which opened towards the South, and by which (in antient time) the fith was carried to the Sea.) 5. Snar gate (which was towards the South west) where sometimes was Pennile's bench, and is still so called, but is now made like a Platforme paved with stone, where Merchants usually resort each day between eleven & one,
and (over the entry into the same) the Custome house is built. 6. Severus gate (South west towards the Peer (built by one Severus a Romane 1450. years since.) 7. Adrians gate (afterwards called Vpwall) at the hanger of the Hill, on the West part above the other gate. 8. Common gate (being large, and going out to the then Common) which (by usage of driving Cows out of the Town through the same) was afterwards called Cow gate. 9. St. Martins gate (otherwise Monks gate, otherwise Postern gate) towards the Hill. 10. Biggin gate (taking the name of the street neere thereunto) but antienly called North gate. The Colledge (before mentioned) to be in the Castle was (above 950. years since) removed thence (by Withed King of Kent) into this Town, called St. Martins le grand, and dedicated to St. Mary and St. Martin; and a Church was there also founded (which Church King Hen. 1. (in the year 1130.) gave to Christ-church Canterbury; It was the Mother Church, and had to it three other Churches, viz. St. Martins, the lesse, St. Nicholas and St. Peter; It had in it Cannons and 22 Prebends and the now Market∣place was the Church-yard to the same. This Church, being forsaken by the Monks, King Hen. 2. founded another House in this Town, called St. Martins Hospitall; but afterwards commonly called the New-warke. At the end of this Town, in the time of King Henry the 3. a large House was founded by Hubert de Burgh, Earl of Kent, for an Hospitall, called, Meson de Dieu; de∣dicated to the honour of St. Mary, and by the said Hu∣bert, afterwards given to that King. After the suppression, this Hospital was (by King Hen. 8. and Queen Mary appointed for the Victualng of the Navy, and Offices there built accordingly.
At the Peer was a small Chappel, builded by a Noble∣man, whose life, after shipwrack, was there preserved, which Chappell was by him dedicated to the honour of St. Mary, and afterwards called the Lady of Pities Chap∣pell. This Peer (at very great charges) was made by King Hen. 8. And aterwards repaired by Queen Elizabeth (In whose raigne severall acts of Parliament were made towards the reparations thereof, and of the harbour there, and one act was (for that purpose also made) in the time of King Iames (who incorporated the Govern∣ours thereof by the name of the Warden and assistants of the Harbour of Dovr (which Warden is the Lord War∣den of the Cinque Ports (for the time being) and his Lieu∣tenant, and nine others are Assistants; there are but two of the Quorum (viz. the Lord Warden and his Lieute∣nant, the assistants are ten in number (whereof the Major of Dovor (for the time being) is one, So the Number is in all eleaven, six make a Session, and (in vacancy of assist∣ants) they new elect at a Session. At the West part of the Peee is a fot called Archliffe Fort (where antiently was a house of Knights Templers (long since demolished.) And in the Cliffe (under the Castle) is a fort called Motes Bulwarke (Both which Forts are under the Govern∣ment of the Castle. The Eale of Northmpton (late Lord Warden of the Cique Ports) had (granted to him by the King) all the Lands from the Peeregate to the Peere) and he gave the same to the harbour of Dovor; most part thereof was then wast, but is since built upon, and the builders thereof pay small rents for the same to the Peer. A Tower was long since made (at the other side of the Cstle hill) for a light for direction of Ships, which Tower was by some called Breden stone, and by others (but vainely) the divels drop of Moter.
About two miles (towards the North-west) distant from this Towne (upon the hill) was a lttle Monastery (called the Abbey of Badsole) founded by Hugh the first Abbot for White Chanons Premonstraenses, and dedica∣ted to St. Radigund (which at the suppression was valued at 142l. 8s. 9d. per annum. DOWNE. LIeth at the West end of the County, towards Surrey; about four miles (towards the North West) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwick of Sutton, Bromley, Hun∣dred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath, and was in the Diocess of Rchester. In this Church are, or lately were, memorials of the interment of Down Esabque; of Bederenden, buried above 200 years since, and of Philip, and severall Petlies. Saint DUNSTANS. LIeth towards the North-East side of the County, by the River Stoure, within one mile, towards the West distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Pe∣tham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of Saint Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Arch Bishop of Canterbury clay∣meth over so much thereof as is in the Mannour of West∣gate. It was in the Deanry, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Dunstan  side Chap∣pell
or Chancel whereof, belonging to the Ropers, are interred severall of that Family, one above. 200. years since and others about 100. years since. At the North side of this Church, is a little Chappel oun∣ded by one Henry of Canterbury, in the year, 1330. and de∣dicated to the Holy Trinity. The Church was appropriated to the Prior and Covent of Saint Gregory, and the Vicarage endowed by Walter Reynold, Archbishop of Canterbury 1322. and afterwards, in the year, 1342. augmented by Iohn of Stratford, like∣wise Archbishop. EARITH. EArd, Earhede, Lesnes alià Erith, Lieth at the North side of the County, adjoyning to the River of Thames about two miles towards the North-West, distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Durtford, Hundred of Little and Lesness, Lath of Sutton at Hoe, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanty of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was caled Saint Iohn Baptist, in the South Isle whereof is, or lately was, a fair monu∣ment of Elizabeth Countesse of Shrewsbury, daughter and heir of Sir Richard Walden Knight Lord of this Towne, as also memorials of the interment of severall of that fa∣mily of Walden, and of Stone, Criell, and Senteler, there buried, 00. years since, the Mannour was antiently be∣longing to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and whoso de∣fireth to read an antient way of Triall of right of Land, may in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Eareth, read of such a Tiall at this place. At Lesnes, otherwise Westwood, in this Parish; was an Abbey founded, in the year 1178. by Richard Lucy, Chief Justice, and sometimes Protector of England, in the ab∣sence
of King Henry the 2. dedicated to St. Thomas the Martyr, for black Cannons of the Order of St. Augustine, and at the suppression, 17. Hen. 8. valued at 186l. 9s. 0d. per annum, The foresaid Founder forsook his honours, and became a Canon regular in this House, and there died, in the year 1179. and was sumptuusly intombed in the Quire of the Church of the said House; and to this Abbey, Godfrey Lucy, son of the said Richard and Bishop of Winchester, was a great Benefactor. Two Faies are yearly kept in this Parish, one upon Ascension day, called Holy Thursday, being the Thursday seven night before Whitsunday, and the other upon Mi∣chaelmass day being the 29th. day of September. EAST-BRIDGE. LIeth at the South-east part of the County in Romney Marsh, about four miles, towards the North, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Worth, East division of the County, and di∣vision of Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claimeth over the same; it was in the Deanry of Limpue, and diocess of Canterbury, but the Church is demolished. EAST-CHURCH. LIeth at the Northside of the County, towards the Sea, in the Isle of Sheppey, about foure miles, towards the east, distant from Queenborough, in the Bailiwick of Mil∣ton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of Sray, Est di∣vision
of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Dio∣cess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints. Sir Robert Sherland, a man of a great power in this County, was owner of Sherland, in this Parish. EASELING. LIeth towards the middle of the County, towards the East part thereof, about foure miles and a half (to∣wards the North-east) distant from Leeham, in the Bai∣liwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belong∣ed to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanry of Ospringe and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. EASTRY. EStrey, Eastrege (called Eastry, to distinguish the same from Rye, otherwise West Rye, in Sussex) lieth at the East part of the County, about two miles, towards the South-west, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Eastry, which was given to that Church by King Egelred, otherwise Ethelred, in the year 979. And afterwards coming to King Hen. 8. He (33• of his raign) again gave it to that Church. This Parish
was in the Deanry of Sandwich and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries (which Church was, about 480. years since) appropriated to Christchurch Canterbury (to the use of the Almnery there) by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury; but was taken away by Arch∣bishop Baldwin, his Successor; and afterwards, in the year 1365. again appropriated to that Church by Archbi∣shop Simon Islip. And if any desire to read of the cruell Murder of two Noble Youths (at this Town of Eastry) the miraculous discovery thereof, and other miracles subsequent there∣unto; I refer them (for that purpose) to Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Eastry. A Fair is kept yearly in this Parish upon St. Matthews day being the 21. day of September. EASTWELL. LIeth towards the middle of the County (towards the South-east part of the same) by the River Soure, a∣bout two miles, towards the South-west, distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Wye, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and di∣vision of Justices in the Lath of Shipway, the Liberty of Wye claimeth over the same; It was in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. In this Parish is the seat of the honourable Family of Finch.
EATON-Bridge. EDen-bridge, lyeth at the South-west side of the Coun∣ty, by the river Medway, adjoyning to Surrey, about foure miles (towards the south) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower division of Justi∣ces in that Lath. Part thereof is in the hundred of Westram and Eaton∣bridge, and the residue in the hundred of Somerden. It was all in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester, the Church standeth in the hundred of Westram and Eaton-bridge, and was called St. Peter and Paul. A Faire is kept yearly in this Parish, upon the day of St. Mark, being the 25. day of April. EBENEY. LIeth at the South part of the County, by the River Rother, about three miles, towards the South east, distant from Tenterden, part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred and Isle of Oxney, East di∣vision of the County, division of Justices in that Lath, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury, claimeth there: And the residue thereof is in the Borough of Reading, Bailiwick of the seven hundreds, Hundred of Tenterden, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and Division of Justices of the Corporation of Tenterden, the Liberties whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same. This Parish was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Dio∣cess of Canterbury; the Church standeth in the Hundred
of Oxney, and was called St. Maries (which Church was an∣tiently far larger than now it is; the foundation where∣of is yet discernable. But, about 100. years since, it was burned by Lightning, and instead thereof, the little Church, now standing, was built upon part of the for∣mer foundation. In the year, 832. King Aethulphus (otherwise Aethel∣wolfe) gave Ebeney to Christ-church Canterbury; and in this Parish antiently was a Priory, long since demolished. EGERTON. LIeth about the middle of the County, by the river Stoure, about three miles (towards the south east) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Long∣bridge, Hundred of Caleill, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Ship∣way. The liberty of the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Charing and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. ELEHAM. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, by the River Stoure, about five miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick of Stow∣ting, Hundred of Loningborough, Lath of Shipway, East-division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Eleham claimeth over the same.
It was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries. The Mannour of Eleham was the inheritance of the Honourable Lady Iulian Leyborn (wife of William Clin∣ton, Earle of Huntington. A Market is here kept upon every Monday, and foure Faires yearly, viz. one upon Palm Monday, being the Monday before Easter; another upon Easter Monday; an∣other upon Whiton Monday, and the other upon the day of St. Dionyse, being the nineth day of October. ELMSTED. EAlmstede, Lieth towards the South-East part of the County, about three miles (towards the South-west) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick and Hun∣dred of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, & St Augustine claime there, and the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claymeth over so much thereof as is in the Man∣nour of Hastingligh, it was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church was called Saint Iames, and a Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of Saint Iames (being the five and twenty day of Iuly.) In the year 811. Wolfred (Archbishop of Canterbury) bought Elmsted of King Kenulphus (to the use of his Church.)
ELMSTONE. LIeth towards the East end of the County, by the ri∣ver Stour, about foure miles (towards the north-west) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, hundred of Preston, Lath of Saint Au∣gustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of Saint Augustine claymeth over the Man∣nour of Elmstone. This parish was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury. ELTHAM. LIeth towards the North-West side of the County a∣bout two miles and a half (towards the South) di∣stant from Woolwich, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromly, Hundred of Blackheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West divi∣sion of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, it was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, And the Church was called Saint Iohn Baptist (wherein are (or lately were) memorials of the inter∣ment of Roper, Morton, Pierle, and Pashey Here is a house which belonged to the late Kings of England (built by Anthony Bck Patriarch of Ierusalem, and by him given to Queen Eleanor (wife to King Ed. the 1.) But antiently the inhertance of the Veseyes. I refer him that desireth to read more touching this house to Mr. Lambards Perambulation, in Eltham, where he may be satisfied at large, onely I shall adde, that Iohn,
second sonne of King Edw. 2. was borne there (in the year, 1315. So also was Bridget. the 4th. Daughter of King Edward the 4. In the year 1480. Leo (King of Armenia) came thither to the Court of King Richard. 2. And was there nobly entertained. King Hen. the 6. (in the yeere 1429.) kept a royall Christmas there, As also did King Edw. the 4. (in the year 1482.) where 2000. persons were served each day. Likewise King Hen. the 8. here also kept his Christmas (in the year 1527) EMLEY. LIeth towards the North side of the County, adjoyn∣ing to the Isle of Sheppey, about two miles (towards the North-east) distant from Milton; It is an Island of it self, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborne, and Diocess of Canterbury. EWELL. LIeth towards the South-east part of the County, by a Rivolet arising neere thereunto, about two miles and a half, towards the North-west, distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same: It was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul.
EYNSFORD. EInesford, Aynsford, lieth towards the middle of the West part of the County, by the River Darent, about foure miles, towards the East, distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the Coun∣ty, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Eynsford: This Parish was in the Deanry of Shoram (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury: But in the Diocess of Rochester: The Church was (about 480. years since) appropriated to Christ∣church Canterbury, to the use of the Almnery there, by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury: and in the same are, or lately were, memorials of the Interment of Donat, and Eckisford (many years since.) EYTHORN. EYhelthorne, lieth towards the East-side of the County abou five miles (towards the South-west) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury and St: Augustine claim there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth in the upper part thereof. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. In the year 824 Wolfred Archbishop of Canterbury gave
Eythorn to Christchurch Canterbury, (In exchange for Ber¦ham▪) FAIREFIELD. LIeth at the South part of the County, about four miles and a halfe (towards the West) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hun∣dred of Aloesbridg, East division of the County, and divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver the Mannour of Fairefield (being given to that Church by King Hen. 8. 33• of his Raigne.) It was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Thomas the Martyr (which Church Edmund of Abingdom (Archbishop of Can∣terbury) above 420. years since) gave to Christ Church Canterbury. FANT. ONely a small part thereof is in Kent, and the residue is in Sussex. That part thereof which is in Kent, lieth towards the South part of the County, about foure miles (towards the South) distant from Tunbridge, in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of Wachlingstone, Lath of Ayleford, West division of the County, and South divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath (but the Church standeth in Sussex.)
EAST-FARLEY. FEarnge, Fernlege, Farnleigh, lieth towards the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles (towards the South-west) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorne, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and East division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberty of Maidstone claimeth over the same, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of East-Farley. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester. In the year 960. Queen Ediva, otherwise Edgiva, gave this Farley to Christ Church Canterbury. WEST-FARLEY. LIeth towards the middle of the County, by the River Mdway, about three miles (towards the South-west) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the  Dn of Canterbury, claimeth o∣ver the Mannour of West-Farley. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Curch was called All Saints. In the year 960. Queen Ediva, otherwise Edgiva, gave this Farley to Christ Church Canterbury, and Queen Eleanor wife of King Edward the first gave the Mannour of West-Farley to Christ Church aforesaid.
The Borsholder of the Borough of West-Farley is chosen at a Court Leet holden for that Mannour, and doth not ow service to the Court Leet holden for the Hundred, nor do the inhabitants of that Borough ow any service to that Court, but at that Court may be chosen a Consta∣ble of the said Hundred out of this Borough. FARN BOROUGH. LIeth towards the West end of the County, about two miles and a halfe (towards the South-west) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton romley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth over the Rectory of Farnborough. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Gyles. A Faire is kept here yearly upon the day of Giles ▪ (being the first day of September.) FARNINGHAM. FRemingham, Fermingham, lieth towards the West-part of the County, by the river of Drent, about four miles (towards the East) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bayliwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County▪ and upper division of the Justices in that Lath. The Liberties of the Dutchy of Lancaster, and late Dean of Canterbury claime there. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the
late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester. I the year 1010. Elphege (Archbishop) gave the same to Christ church Canterbury. In the year 1225. Stephen (Archbishop of Canterbury) gave the Church of Farmingham to Christ Church afore∣said (to the use of the Almnery there) and the Mannour of Farmingham belonged to that Church. Robert Poynings (that had bee Sword-beare▪ & Cavr to Iack Cade in his rebellion, and wa pardoned for the same, afterwards (in the 23th, yeare of King Hen. the 6th.) made an Insurrection at this place. FAWKEHAM. FAlcheham, Falcham, Falkenham, lieth towards the North West part of the County, about four miles (towards the South west) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Maries: (in the Church-yard whereof the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claim∣eth.) Brichrich (otherwise Birtrick) a Nobleman, and E∣with (otherwise Elfswith) his wife gave Faukeham to the Church of Rochester, and the same being taken from that Church, King William the Conquerour restored it thre∣unto. This Parish antiently ought to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the third Arch or Peere of Rochester bridge.
FEVERSHAM. FAveresham, Faureshame, Fefresham, Lieth at the North side of the County (towards the sea) about six miles (towards the South East) distant from Miltn, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, and east division of the County. The Towne of Feversham, is a member of the Towne and Port of Dovor (incorporated by the Name of Major, Jurats and Commonalty of the Towne of Feversham▪ and before that, by the name of Major, and Commonalty of the town of Feversham, and before that, by the name of Barons of the Towne of Feversham.) The liberties of that Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports, clayme over the same, and it is in the Division of the Justices of that Corpration, also the liberty of St. Augustine claymeth over the Rectory there. The residue of this Parish is in the upper division of Justices in the Lath of Scray, and the liberty of Saint Au∣gustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hun∣dred of Fevrsham which belonged to that Abbey.) All this Parish was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Di∣ocess of Canterbury, the Church standeth in the Towne and was called St. Maries (in which are, or lately were) antient memorials of interments, viz. of Thorne (about 250. years since) Tong (above 240. years since) Fever∣sham (230 years since) Vpton (above 220. years since) Rust, and Norton (about 190. years since) Wigmore (a∣bove 160 years since) Norton, Hatcher, and Read (above 150. years since) Colwell (above 120. years since) and Finch (many years, but no certainty how many years since.) The Advowson of this Church was given to the Abbey
of St. Augustine by King William the Conquerour, and the Church was appropriated to that Abbey by Pope A∣lexander, about the year 1168. A Market is kept in this Towne upon every Wednesday and Saturday, and two Faires yearly (viz. one upon St. Valentine's day (being the 14. day of February) the other upon the day of St. Peter ad Vincula, called Lammas day (being the first day of August) and each of these Faires last ten dayes. A Parliament was held in this Towne (in the year 903.) by King Athelstan. William of Ipre (Lord of the Mannour of Feversham) granted the same (in exchange for other lands) to King Stephen, who afterwards (in the year 1148.) founded an Abbey thereupon, and gave the Mannour to the same (which Abbey was dedicated to the honour of our Savi∣our) and one Clarenbald (Prior of Bermondsey in Surrey) and twelve other Monkes all of that Priory, & all of the order of Clunias, were taken out of that Priory, and pla∣ced in this Abbey, and the said Clarenbald became the first Abbot thereof, and he, and the Monkes, became Bene∣dictines. This foundation was afterwards confirmed by King Henry the second, King Iohn, and several other succee∣ding Kings, and King Henry the second granted thereun∣to the aforesaid Faire (still holden at this Towne on the first day of August) to continue yearly eight dayes. The aforesaid King Stephen, Matilda his wife, and Eu∣stace his sonne, were all buried in this Abbey (which at the suppression was valued at 2861. 12. 6d. ob. q per. annum.) but the body of the said King, (for Lucre of the Lead wherein it was coffined) was taken out of the same, and cast into the River.
FOLKESTON. LIeth at the South-East side of the County, adjoyning to the Sea, about five miles (toward the South-west) distant from Dovor; in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, and East Division of the county. The Towne of Folkstone is a member of the Town and Port of Dovor, and incorporated by the name of Major, Jurats, and Commonalty of the Town of Folkstone, and before that by the name of Barons of the Towne of Folk∣stone, the Mayor was antiently elected yearly upon the day of the Nativity of our Lady (being the 8. day of September. The liberties of that Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports, claime over the same; and it is in the division of the Justices of that Corporation, the residue of this Pa∣rish is in the Hundred of Folkstone, and division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway. All this Parish was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Dio∣cess of Canterbury. There were antiently five Churches in the same (in one of which) Iohn Lord Fynes (Constable of Dovor Castle, in the time of King William the Conquerour) was buri∣ed. The names of three (of these five Churches) were St. Peter, St. Mary, and St. Paul (all which, and one more (whose name I find not) are long since demolished) and onely one of the said five is now remaining, which was founded in the said Towne by one Nigellus of Munevile (Lord of the same) in the year 1095. and dedicated to St Mary and St. Eanswith. A Market is kept in this Towne upon every Thursday. The aforesaid St. Eanswith was Daughter of
(King of Kent) and (from her inany renouncing the world, her father did here build a Nunnery for her (con∣sisting of black Nuns) and deicated the same to the ho∣nour of Saint Peter (which Nunnery was sctuated about 28. rods from the sea, and she became the first Proesse thereof, and so continued many years, and about the year 673. died, and was there buried. The Pagans afterwards much ruinated this Nunnery, and the sea beginning to swallow up the remaines (as afterwards it totally did) Iohn Segrave, and Iulian his wife (daughter, and heir of Iohn Sandwich (Lord of this Towne) and Iohn Lord Clinton (in the time of King Hen. the 3d.) built a Priory here, and dedicated the same to the honour of Saint Peter, and Saint Eanswith, and translated her reliques to this Prioy (which was a cel to the Abbey of Lolley in Normandy, was of the order of Benedictines, and suppressed in the second year of King Hen. 5th.) The Town was antiently a flourishing place, and in the year. 927. was given (by King Athelstan (to Christ Church Canterbury (but being afterwards taken from the same) King Knute (in the year 1038▪) restored it to that Church. William of Albrance (a Norman) one of the eight Captaines, or Lieutenant Governours of Dovor Castle in the time of King William the Conquerour) was then Lord of this towne, (which hath had severall misfortunes, but more especially the spoiling thereof by Earle Goodwin (about 600. years since) at which time foure (of the a∣foresaid five) Churches were ruined) and the burning of the same by the French. In the time of King Edw. 3. The aforesaid King Eadald (about 1000. years since) built a Castle at the South part of this Towne, which fal∣ling into decay, the aforesaid William of Albrance, about the year. 1068. built a fort, upon the foundation of the decayed Castle, and upon the hill here, called Castle∣hill,
was antiently a watch tower, but now ruinated, and in this Parish King Hen. 8. about 120. years since, built the Fort called Sandgate Castle. FORDWICH. FOrdwi, Fordich, or the Town upon the Ford, lieth to∣wards the North-east part of the County, by the Ri∣ver Stoure, about two miles and a halfe (towards the North east) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East divisi∣on of the County, It is a member of the Town and Port of Sandwich, in∣corporated by the name of Mayor, Jurats and Commo∣nalty of the Town of Fordwich, and before that by the name of Barons of the town of Fordwich, The Mayor was antiently elected yearly upon the Mon∣day after St. Andrew, The liberties of that Corporation, and of the Cinque Ports claime over the same, and it is in the division of the Justices of that Corporation, The liberty of St. Augustine also claimeth over the Mannour of Fordwich (which was given to that Abbey by King Edward the Confessor) it was in the Deanry and Di∣ocesse of Canterbury, & the Church was called St. Maries, this town is famous for excellent good trouts there taken. FRINDSBURY. FRendesbery, Frendsbyry, Freondesbiry, (antiently Aeing∣ham) lyeth towards the North side of the County, by the River Medway, about one mile towards the North, di∣stant
from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth o∣ver the same. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called All Saints. In the year 764. Offa King of the Mercians, by the con∣sent, and license of Erbert (King of Kent) and Sigered also King of Kent▪ gave Frindsbury to the Church of Rochester, and King Hen. 1. afterwards confirmed it, & Laurence of St. Martin (Bishop of Rochester) about 400. years since, by license of the Pope, appropriated this Church. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the first land Peere or Arch of Roche∣ster bridge. Queen Elizabeth, (in the third year of her raign) built here the Fort called Vpno Castle. Frinsbury Clubs is an antient by-word, the reason and story whereof, who so desireth to read, may finde the same in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Frendsbury. FRINSTED. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about three miles towards the North, distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick, and hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Dunstan.
FRITTENDEN LIeth towards the South part of the County, about three miles and a half, towards the North-east) di∣stant from Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hun∣dreds, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. So much thereof as is in the Borough of Stepherst, is in the Hundred of Barkley, and the residue is in the hun∣dred of Cranbrook. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over so much thereof, as is within the Mannour of Hol∣lingborne. It was all in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Cranbrook, and was called St. Maries. GILLINGHAM. GEldingeham, Gelingham, lieth towards the North part of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles, towards the North-east, distant from Roche∣ster, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the County. Part thereof, viz. the Grange, otherwise Grench, is a member of the Town and Port of Hasting, in the Division of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports, claim over the same. And the residue is in the hundred of Chetham and Gil∣lingham, and North division of Justices in the Lath of Ay∣lesford.
The liberty of the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Gillingham. This Parish was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a Peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Chetham and Gillingham, and was called St. Maries (which Church King Hen. 1. gave to the Monastery of Sheppey) And in this Church are (or lately were) divers monuments of the family of Beaufits (whoe seat was Grange Court in this Parish) some whereof were there buried, 250. years since, others 230. years since; and others above 220. years since; and of Bamme, also above 220 years since. This Parish is famous for the Navy royall riding in the same, and was antiently also amous for a Rood there, the story whereof, who so desieth to read, may finde the same at large in Mr. Lambards Perambulation in Chetham. GODMERSHAM. GOdmeresham, lieth about the middle of the East end of the County▪ by the River Stoure, about two miles towards the North, distant from Wye, in the Baili∣wick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Felborough, East di∣vision of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The Liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Godmersham, the liberty of Wye also claimeth there. This Parish was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury; and the Church was called St. Laurence, which Church Archbishop Thomas Arundell (in the year 1397.) by license of King Richard the second, and of the
Pope) appropriated to Christ-church Canterbury. In the year 822. King Kenulphus gave Godmersham to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and in the year 1036. Egel∣nothus, the Archbishop, gave the same to Christ-church Canterbury. GOODNESTON neer FEVERSHAM. GOodwineston, lieth at the North side of the County, towards the Sea, about one mile (towards the ) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justice in that Lath. The Liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the hundred of Feversham, which belong∣ed to that Abbey) it was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Bartholomew. GOONESTON neer SANDWICH. LIeth towards the East end of the County, about four miles, towards the South west, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wing∣ham, Lath of St. Augustine, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canter∣bury,
and the Church was called Holy Cross, This Church was antiently a Chappel to Wingham, which in the year 1282 was divided into four Parishes, where∣of this is one. A Faire is kept here yearly upon Holy Rood day, being the 14th. day of September. GOUDHERST. LIeth at the South side of the County, adjoynng to Sussex, about three miles (towards the West) distant from Cranbrook, in the West Division of the County, and lower Division of Justices in the Lath of Scray. So much thereof as is in the Borough of Fairecrouch, is in the Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds, Hundred of Cranbrook, and Lath of Scray. So much thereof as is in the Boroughs of Pattenden, Lilsden, Combwell, Chingley, or Bromley, is in the Baili∣wick, of Twyford, Hundred of little Barnefield (otherwise West Barnefield) and Lath of Aylesford, and the resi∣due is in the said Bailiwick of Twyford, Hundred of Marden, and Lath of Scray. The Borsholder of the aforesaid Borough of Pattenden is chosen at the Court Leet holden at Loose, and the Borsholder of the aforesaid Borough of Lilsden, is cho∣sen at the Court Leet holden at East Farley, & the inhabi∣tants of neither of these two Boroughs ow service to the Court Leet holden for the said Hundred of little Barne∣field, onely at that Court may be chosen a Constable of that Hundred out of either of these Boroughs. The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth at Winchet Hill and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth, over the aforesaid boroughs of Pattenden, and Lilsden.
It was all in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Marden, & was called St. Maries, (which Church is very large, standeth up∣on avery highhill, and had to the same a very large, & tall spire or shaft; but upon Wednesday the 23. day of August 1637 (about eleven of the clock at night) there happened a most fierce, and sudden storme of thunder, and light∣ning, which set on fire the said steeple, and broke, and melted five great bels in the same, and burnt, and con∣sumed foure lofts, and all the timber and woodwork of the steeple, and the stonework of the same was thereby so shaken and rent, that it was faine afterwards to be pul∣led down, and the Church, and leads, by fall of the tim∣ber, was much impaired. In the year following a collection (by way of Brief) was in this, and severall other Counties (for repaire of this mishap) and a parish tax also made for that purpose, and the foundation of the steeple begun anew of stone (almost up to the Roofe of the Church) but (by the falsity of the Collectors abroad, and dissention of the inhabitants at home) the worke went no further (onely a small low wooden top is set upon the stone-work, and one great Bell onely hung there, and so it now remaineth. In this Church is a memoriall of the interment of Iohn (Sonne of Iohn of Begebure) above 230. years since, his daughter, and here (by marriage with one of the an∣tient family of Colepepyr) brought her inheritance (called Begebure) in this parish to that family, and in this Church are also severall monuments of that family of Colepepyr (neer 200. years old) as also a Monument of Campion of Combwell (herein after mentioned) and (in the East wall of the North Chancell) is a memoriall of the interment of Roberts.
A market is kept in this Town upon every Wednesday, and the market place was (about, 7. years since) remo∣ved from the flat place in the Towne (a little below the place where now it is) unto that place (viz) at the top of the hill adjoyning to the Church yard. And one Fair is there yearly holden upon the day of the Assumption of our Lady (being the fifteenth day of August.) Another Fair is also holden yearly at Combwell in this parish upon the day of St. Mary Magdalen (being the two and twentith day of Iuly) Neer whereunto Robert of Thuruam, in the time of King Hen. 2. founded a Prio∣ry (called Combwell) for black Chanons of the order of St. Augustine, and dedicated the same to the honour of St. Mary Magdalen (which King Hen. 3. afterwards con∣firmed, and granted the Fair last before mentioned to be there yearly kept, upon the day aforesaid, and the day following (The value of which Priory at the suppression was 80l. 17•. 5d. q. per. annum. GRAVENEY. GRavene, Lieth at the North side of the County, neer the sea, about two miles (towards the North east distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Boughton under the Blean, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clai∣meth over the Mamour of Graveny, it was in the Deanry of Ospring and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints, in which are, or lately were, antient memorials of the interment of the Fevershams (some∣times Lords of Graveney) of Beteler, almost, 250. years since, Borgeris (above 200. years since) and of severall
of the Martins (about 200. years since) one whereof was one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, in the time of King Henry 6. In the year 811. Archbishop Wolfred bought Graveney of King Kenulphus, for the use of Christchurch Canterbury, but (it being afterwards taken from the same) Werhar∣dus a potent Priest withholding it, in the year 830 he by the command of Archbishop Fegeldus, restore the same, and it was afterwards in the year 941 confirmed there∣unto by King Edmund, Edred his brother, and Edwin his son, and Sir Adam Fitz-Williams (one of the eight chief Captaines, or Lieutenant Governours of Dovor Castle, in the time of King William the Conquerour) was then Lord thereof. GRAVESEND. LIeth at the North side of the County, adjoyning to the River of Thames, about six miles (towards the North-east) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West divi∣sion of the County, and division of Justices of the Corpo∣ration of Gravesend and Milton (the liberty whereof claim∣eth over the same) It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Maries. A Market is kept here upon every Wednesday and Satur∣day, and a Fair yearly upon the day of the Translation of St. Edward, being the thirteenth day of October, and hold∣eth a week. In the year 1380. the French and Spanish Gallies burnt most of this Town, and carried away many of the inha∣bitants prisoners. Also in the time of King Richard the third, divers of the
Gentry of this County (with 5000. men) attempted great matters here, but dispersed without action. At this place also the seventh of October 1552. three great Fishes (called Whirlepooles) were taken, and drawn upto Westminster bridge. EAST-GREENWICH. LIeth at the North-west side of the County, adjoyning to the River of Thames, about four miles (towards the South-east) distant from London, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Black heath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called Saint Alphage (which Alphage was Archbishop of Canterbury) and taken by the Danish Pagans, and afterwards brought hither, and the nineteenth of Aprill 1012. (after cruell handling) was by them stoned to death, at, or very neer the place where this Church standeth, wherefore he was afterwards Ca∣nonized a Saint, and this Church dedicated to him. King Edward the third here founded a Monastery of Friers Minorites, Aliens, belonging to the Abbey of Gaunt in Flanders (which was suppressed in the second year of King Hen. 5.) Here was also a Chauntry called Holy Cross, of obser∣vant Friers, founded by King Edward the fourth, for which Friers King Henry the seventh builed a house ad∣joyning to his Stately Palace here (which Palace was built by Humphrey Duke of Glocester, and namd Placentia; and afterwards magnificently inlarged by King Hen. 7. and King Henry 8. And rendred famous for the birth there of severall great Princes, viz. King Hen. 8. Queen Mary
and Queen Elizabeth; and for the deaths there, of others viz. King Edward 6. and Thomas Beaufort (son of Iohn of Gaunt, and Duke of Exceter) King Hen. 8. at Christmass (as well as other times also) kept Court here, and more par∣ticularly in the year 1511. He kept here a royall Christ∣mass, as also he did in the year 1543. At which time he royally feasted, and delivered (without ransome) 21. of the Scotch Nobility, whom he took Prisoners 24•. No∣vember before, in a battalle at Salom Mosse beyond Carlile. Here also on Shrove Twesday 1526. and 1•. May 1536. That King held severall solemn Justs. 11. August 1534. The aforesaid observant Friers here were suppressed, and for the present Augustine Friers put in their places (who being also suppressed) Queen Mary put others in their room. But 1•. Eliz they also were sup∣pressed. King Henry 8. (in the year 1515.) much inlarged the Town, and King Iames walled the Park with Brick. That famous learned and charitable William Lambard Esquie (mentioned in my Epistle to this Book) about the year 1560. here ercted an Almeshouse or Colledge for 20. poore people (with allowance of 18d. per week to each) which was named the Colledge of Queen Elizabeths poore people. West Greenwich See Deptford. GUSTON. LIeth at the South-east end of the County, about two miles, towards the North, distant from Dovor, in the Baliwick of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Ju∣stices in that Lath.
The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clai∣meth there, and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannor of Guston. It was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Martin. HACKINGTON otherwise St. STEPHENS. LIeth towards the East part of the Couny, by the River Stoure, about one mile (towards the North distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clay∣meth there. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Bridge and Petham, other part (viz. the Borough of Shourt) is in the Hun∣dred of Downhamford, and the residue is in the hundred of Westgate, it was all in the Deanry, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, the Church formerly a poor Chapell, standeth in the Hundred of Westgate, was called St. Stephens, and begun by Baldwyn (Archbishop of Canterbury) about. 470. years since, to the honour of St. Stephen, and St. Thomas of Canterbury, But he was inhibited by the Pope to pro∣ceed therein. In this Church are fair monuments of Sir Christopher Hales and Sir Roger Manwood, persons of great account in their times, the last whereof built 7. Almeshouses in this Parish (in the year, 1573.) and endowed the same. The Parsonage was annexed, and united, to the Arch∣deaconry of Canterbury (In the year, 1227) the seate of the Archdeacon of Canterbury was here, and Lord An∣domar
de Rupy an Alien was Archdeacon, and held the same then valued at 20▪ marks per annum. The image of St. Stephen standing in this parish, where the garden of the said Sir Roger Manwood was) and being much sought to by Pilgrim, occasioned this Parish to be also called St. Stephens. HADLOW. HAudelo, lieth towards the South-West part of the County, by the River Medway, about three miles towards the North-west, distant from Tunbridge, in the Lath of Aylesfrrd, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Twyford, and Hundred of Littlefeild, and the residue is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, and Hadlow Borough. It was all in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, the Church standeth in Hadlow Borough, and was called St. Maries. A Faire is kept here yearly upon Whitson monday. Hadlow came under the custody of the Archbishop of Canterbury, in the time of Boniface Archbishop there (about 400. years since.)
HALDEN otherwise HIGH HALDEN. LIeth towards the South side of the County, about two miles and a halfe (towards the North) distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. So much thereof as is in the Borough of Omenden, is in the Hundred of Barckley, and the residue is in the Hun∣dred of Blackborne. The liberties of the late Dean of Canterbury, and St. Augustine claime there, and the liberty of Wye also clai∣meth there over the Denn of Romden. It was all in the Deanry of Charing and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Blackborne, and was called St. Maries. HALLING. HEallinge, lieth towards the middle of the North side of the County, by the river Medway, about three miles (towards the South west) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Ay∣lesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath, The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, claimeth o∣ver the same. It was in the Deanry, and Diocess of Rochester, and the
Church was called St. Iohn Baptist. In the year, 838. Ec∣bert (King of Kent) gave the Mannour of Halling to the Church of Rochester, and Hamo of Hith Bishop there, and Confessor to King Edw. 2. about 340. years since, built a house here, for himself, and his successors, which house was afterwards the habitation of that Pious, and William Lambard Esquire, before mentioned. This parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repaire of the third peere, or Arch of Rochester Bridge. HALSTED. LIeth about the middle of the West end of the County, about three miles (towards the South) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hun∣dred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hon, West division of the County, and Lower division of Justices in that Lath. The lberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculia to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester. Thomas Watson Esquire (sometimes of this Parish) in the time of King Iames (in the year 1609) new built a faire Chappel of Free-stone from the ground on the North∣side of the Church here, and adorned the East end thereof with a very faire and curious glasse window, wrought in rich colours, he likewise new builded the Steeple of the said Church, with stone from the ground, repaired and new tiled both the said Church and the Chan∣ell thereof, built a Porch to the said Church, gave to the same four faire new Bells, a Reading-Desk and a Pulpit, and made a wall from the North side of the Church-yard to the West side thereof.
HALSTOW. HAlegestow, lieth towards the North-side of the County, about three miles (towards the North-west) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Deane of Canterbury claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborne, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Saint Margaret, which Church Hubert Archbishop (about 450 years since) gave to Christchurch Canterbury (towards the repair of the Library thereof) and endowed the Vicarage with 3l. 6•. 8d. yearly stipend, all which Boniface the Archbi∣shop (about 50. years afterwards) confirmed. HIGH-HALSTOW. LIeth at the North-side of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester▪ and the Church was called St. Margaret.
HAM. LIeth neer the East end of the County, about two miles (towards the South) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. George. In the year, 934. Aelfled gave Ham to Christ-church Canterbury. HARBLEDOWNE. HErbaldon, Lieth towards the North side of the Coun∣ty by the River Stoure, about one mile and a half (towards the West) distant from Canterbury, in the Bai∣liwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clai∣meth there. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Michael. Lanfranck (Archbishop of Canterbury) about the year 1089▪ founded here an Hospitall for Lepers (which was afterwards used for the aged poor, and (in the year, 1371.) William Whittlesey (likewise Archbishop founded a Chauntrey in the same (to the honour of St. Nicholas) which Thomas Arundell (also Archbishop) afterwards (in
the year 1402.) confirmed, which Hospitall at the sup∣pression was valued at 109l. 7s. 2d.. per. annum. But touching the story of a shoe offered usually by the Hospitallers to be kissed by Passengers that way, I refer the reader to what is written by Mr. Lambard touching the same in his perambulation (in Harbaldowne.) Upper HARDRES. GReat Hardress, Lieth about the middle of the East side of the County, about three miles and a half (to∣wards the North-West) distant from Eleham, in the East division of the County, and division of the Justices in the Lath of St. Augustine. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, and Lath of St. Augustine, and the residue is in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Lonningborough and Lath of Shipway. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth there, and the liberty of Eleham claimeth over so much thereof as is in the Hundred of Loningborough. It was all in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the hundred of Bridge and Pe∣tham, and was called St. Peter and Paul, here is the seat of that antient, and eminent family of Hardress, who held the Mannour of Hardress, by Knights service of the Castle of Tunbridge.
Nether HARDRES. LIttle Hardres, lieth about the middle of the East side of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the South) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. HARIETSHAM. LIeth very neer the middle of the County, about one mile and a half (towards the Northwest) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver so much thereof as is within the Mannour of Holling∣born. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist. A Fair is kept here yearly upon the Feast of the Nativi∣ty of St. Iohn Baptist, called Midsommer-day being the 24, day of June.
HARTLEY. LIeth towards the North-west end of the County, about foure miles (towards the South) distant from Graves∣end, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Ax∣stone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath: it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was cal∣led All-Saints. HARTLIP. LIeth at the Northside of the middle of the County, about foure miles (towards the West) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Michael. HARTY. LIeth at the North side of the County, in the Isle of Harry, adjoyneth to the Isle of Sheppey, and is about two miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East divisi∣on of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same,
for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham; which belong∣ed to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Thomas the Apo∣stle. A Battle in a Writ of Right for a messuage, and 190. acres of land in this Parish (wherein Simon Lowe and Iohn Keyme were demandants, against Thomas Paramore) Henry Naylor (Champion for the demandants) and George Thorne (Champion for the tenant) was appoynted to be fought (before the Justices of the Common-Pleas) at Tut∣hill neer Westminster, 18o. Iunij in Trinity Terme 1571. and the Court being there set, and the Champions ap∣pearing ready to fight, in the presence of at least 4000. persons, the demandants were non suit, and so the Battle was spared. Who so desireth to read the record hereof, and the so∣lemnity of preparation to the Battle, and oath of the Combatants, I refer him to Coke's Entries fol. 182. A. the Lord Dier's Reports fol. 301. pl. 40. Speed's Chronicle fol. 878. A. or How's Chronicle fol. 669. A. and the last leaf of Crompton's Iustice of the Peace (where he may be fully satisfied.) This case happening in this County, I have the rather here inserted, for the rarity thereof. HASTINGLIGH. LIeth towards the South-East) part of the County, about three miles (towards the South-East) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway.
Somuch thereof as is in Town Borough is in the Hun∣dred of Wye, and the liberty of Wye claimeth over the same, and the residue thereof is in the Hundred of Bircholt Barony. The liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth over the Mannour of Hastingligh. This Parish was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Bircholt Baro∣ny, and was called St. Maries. HAWKEHERST. IN respect I finde not any description of this Parish, or other matter concerning the same, offered to the pub∣lique, and it having been the place of my habitation for above twenty eight years last past (Gods Providence ha∣ving also there lent me an inheritance) I thought fit to enlarge my selfe upon this place, thereby to preserve the memory of some things which may be usefull, at least for the Owners and Inhabitants in the same. It lieth at the South side of the County, by a Rivulet running into the River of Rother, about three miles and a halfe (towards the South) distant from Cranbrook. A small part thereof (caled Haselden, viz. two houses, and a small quantity of land to each) is in the Hundred of Shoyswell, and County of Sussex, and the residue there∣of lieth in Kent, in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and lower di∣vision of Justices in that Lath. So much thereof as is either in the Borough of Hawke∣herst, otherwise South Borough, antiently called the halfe
of Barnfield (and lately, but without ground, the whole Hundred) or in the North Borough (truly called the half Hundred) is in the Hundred of great Barnfield (where the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Denns of Ockley, Cillenden and Parock, in that North Borough.) So much thereof as is in the West Borough, is in the Hundred of Selbrittenden, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Denns of Foxhole, Little Hensell, Pipsden, Congherst, and Little Riseden in the same. And the residue, viz. so much thereof as is in the Bo∣rough of Crothal (which is but a very small part) is in the hundred of Cranbrook. The aforesaid Borough of Hawkherst hath a court Leet of it self (where the Barsholder of that Borough is chosen, and the inhabitants of the same owe no service to the Court Leet holden for the Hundred of great Barnfeild, but at that Court an inhabitant of this Borough may be chosen Constable of that Hundred, and the liberty of Wye claimeth over this Borough. This Parish was in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of great Barn∣feild, and was called St. Laurence. This Parish is very populous, and one of the greatest Parishes in the County (not having a Town therein) and it so appeared to be, for that antiently upon Collection of the number of Communicants in every parish in the County (onely foure Parishes in the same) viz. Maidstone Cranbrooke, Feversham, and Goudherst (all which have Townes in them) were found to have more Commu∣nicants in them than this, and the same had (within 20. years last past) at the least, 1400. Communicants, but it hath very many poor therein (the charge where∣of in the year, 1653. was 209l. 9s. 3d. whereas in the year 1549.) it was but, 7s. 2d. and although the parso∣nage
of the same be of very good yearly value, yet it hath for many years past been, and for the future will be a great cause of sadnesse to the place, that the allowance for the maintenance of the Minister thereof is very small, which thus happened. The Abbot of Battel was Patron of the Church, and (till the dissolution, or surrender of that Abbey) there was always a Rector incumbent, of one of which number (viz. Iohn Crane) a monument in brasse (mentioning the same) was till of late times, upon a faire tombe-stone, in the great Chancell of this Church, and one Henry Simons (at the time of the appropriation herein after men∣tioned) was Parson incumbent there, But (Trint. 30. Hen. 8. The Abbey being surrendred to the King) be 19. Marij that year granted the Patronage and Presentation of the Rectory to Charles Brandon (Duke of Suffolk) and that King (11. December. 38. of his raigne) granted the Parsonage to the Dean, and Chapter of Christ-church Ox∣ford, and appropriated the same thereunto (immediate∣ly after the death of the said Simons the incumbent) and appointed that the said Dean and Chapter should pre∣sent an able Clarke to the Ordinary (who should be na∣med perpetuall Vicar of this Church) and should bear all charges (except reparation of the Chancell) and should have a dwelling, 12l. 10s 10d. yearly pension, and should pay the King yearly, for his tenths, 258. 1d. and be charged with first-fruits (which being done with∣out the consent of the said Duke, and no act done by him therein (that appeareth, no Vicar was endowed) but the Office of Curate, was (ever since) given by the said Dean and Chapter as a Donative, and no first-fruits were paid, but onely 118. 8d. as a stipendiary. Afterwards the said Dean, and Chapter (10. Febura 2. and 3. of King Phillip, and Queen Mary) granted to Sir. William Peter, 81 per. annum. out of the Parso∣nage (so to be imployed) that the Church-Wardens of
this Parish might receive, and pay it to the Vicar) But Edward Godwin (the late Stipendary incumbent) had of the said Dean and Chapter (for his Salary) 20l. per. annum, the profits of the Easter book (which then was of some value) some roomes in the Parsonage house (cal∣led the Vicarage roomes) a small croft (called the vicarage croft) and the herbage of the Church∣yard (all which was of so inconsiderable value, that upon his being sequestred about 13. years since) no other would accept of the place, but the Parish was destitute of a mi∣nister by the space of 14. months following, and then the Paishioners were inforced (to their great charge) to provide a Minister: But (not being able to bear that charge longer) an augmentation was procured from the state (which in few years afterwards was taken away) and the former allowance left to the Minister for his mainte∣nance, which (by reason that the Easter book is become of no value) is but 24l. per. annum. (at the most) where∣upon how this Parish hath since been supplyed with a Minister, and is like to be for the future) the Reader may judge. The Church was founded by the Abbot of Battle (in the raigne of King Edw. 3.) whose armes, and his sonns are at the top of the furthest of the three North windows in the North chappell or chancell there, and the armes of the Abbey of Battle; and of Etchingham, and Pashley, two antient (and then eminent familie▪) in the Parishes adjoyning (viz Etchingham, and Tiseherst) are in glasse at the top of the fist of the said three windowes, and upon the great beam, at the top of the said Chancell, was carved the armes of Congherst (a very antient family in this Parish) whose house, of that name, and inheritance in this Parish (a∣bout 100. years since) came to the family of Scot, by the mariage of Thomas Scot with Mildred (daughter and heir of Thomas Congherst) and is still remaining in that family, But e more antient seat of that family of Cong∣herst,
was at a place, in this Parish (neer the County of Sussex) yet called old Congherst (which was burned by the Danes) and the Mote and manner of scituation of the house is still there extant. In this Chappell also (in the North Windowes of the same) are the pictures in glasse, of twelve men and their wives kneeling. viz. three at the bottom of each of the said three Windowes, and three at the top of the middle of the said three windowes. These windowes having been broken, and more espe∣cially of late, what was written under most of them is not legible, only it appeareth; that the Christian name of the first was Robert, and that the second of them was Ioane, wife of the said Robert, and Simon their son, prin∣cipall Founder of that Chappell, who the third was, is not legible, the fourth was Ockley, the fifth was Delmynden, the sixth was Siesley, the seventh was Cockshot, the eighth was Badcock, and the ninth was Bartilt, but who the o∣ther three were, viz. those at the top of the middle window, is not legible; By tradition, these twelve are reported to be owners of the twelve Denns, which are held of Wye, but that cannot be, for that onely seven of the said twelve, are in this Parish, and it is (as afore∣said) yet discernable, That three of them were Ockley, Cockshot and Badcock, none of which were of the said twelve Denns (though very antient inhabitants in this Parish) but I rather conceive them to be twelve principal inhabitants in this Parish, at the time of the foundati∣on of that Church. In the great Window of the middle Chancell, were lately the pictures (well made in glasse) of the good Kings of Israel, and of the Prophets in their times (but lately spoiled, and defaced.) There is also in this Church, a memoriall of the in∣terment there of the family of Boys, a family of cheif esteem in this Parish, both at present, and for severall di∣scents
before, whose ancestor (about 88. years since) came into this Parish to a fair seat (neer this Church) by him purchased of Edmund Roberts (whose father Iohn Roberts was above 100. years since) buried at the foot of the rea∣ding deske in this Church, with an effigies, and inscrip∣tion of brasse upon him lately taken away. In the South Chancell of this Church was antiently the image of the Virgin Mary, and severall tapers or lights were also in this Church (called the beam light, the pas∣chall light, Iudas candles, St. Iames light, and Saint Laurence light, over the North Porch of this Church, is a roome (antiently called the Treasury) wherein were and still are (laid up in a chest) severall antient wri∣tings concerning the tenants of the twelve Dens (in and neer this Parish) in Wye liberty, and concerning lands and other rights, belonging particularly to this Parish. The Chest aforesaid had antiently three locks, and the keyes of the doore of the roome, and of two of the said three locks, were kept by three Parishioners (tants of Wye liberty) and the other key of the chest, was kept by one of the Churchwardens. In this Church also is a box fastned upon a post, and called the Poor mans box, which antiently had four lock thereunto (the key of one of which was kept by the pre∣sent Minister, the keyes of two other of them by the two Church wardens, and the key of the other by one of the Parishoners) and in this box were kept the moneys given to the use of the poor, and securities taken for moneys lent thereof by the Parish to poor Parishoners. In this Parish (among other customes, or manners of tything) there is a custome to pay to the Parson yearly (by the acre) for Tythe of grass (cut in the lands at, or neer the Moore) and for sore-Pasture, and after-Pasture of the same, two pence; and for the like in all other pla∣ces of the Parish, three half pence by the acre.
Also three half pence for the Tyhe of every ten bushels of Apples. For the profit of each Milch-Cow (besides the Calfe) a penny, and a halfe penny for every Calfe; all payable yary at Easter. And Suite being between Sir Iohn Wildegos (Farmer of the Parsonage) and Iohn Gibbon (Parishoner of this Pa∣rish) in the Ecclesiasticall Court, (touching this manner of Tything) Gibbon, in Michaelmas Terme 5•. Iacobi Re∣gis 1607. obteyned a prohibition thereupon (out of the then Kings-Bench) which was tried at the Assies holden at Rochester, upon Thursday in the second week in Lent that year, before Justice Waimsley and Justice Croke (then Judges) and the verdict passed for the said Gibbon, and in Easter Terme following judgement was given accor∣dingly in the Kings-Bench. The suggestion, and deposiions are entred in that Court, Trin 4•. of King Iames, Roll 692. Most of the lands in this Parish are within the liberty of Wye (antiently belonging to the Abbey of Battle in Suss∣ex) and Od Abbot of Battle, & the Covent there, by Charter without date, granted to the owners of the said lands (by the name of his men of Hawkeher) & their heirs, the Vie of Hawkeherst paying yearly ten Pounds, twenty Hennes, and two hundred and fifty Eggs, with divers restrictions. But afterwards 5•. Decemb, 14. Edw. 1. Henry, Abbot of Battle, and the Covent there, gated to them and their heirs (by the name of their tenants of Hawkeherst) all the tenements there, which they held of his fee, viz. in the Denns of Hawkeherst, Amboldesses, Delmden, Sessele, Be∣tylts, Fissendenne, Markdenne, Freehele, Wynesle, Wynhinden, Chittenden, and Witheringhope; in Houses, Gardens, Lands and Woods, Plaines, Meadowes, and Pstures, Waters, and Mills, with the appurtenances (to hold freely, and in peace) paying yearly ten Pounds, twenty five Hens, and two hundred and fifty Eggs: And reserved suite to his
Court of Wye, from three weeks to three weeks, by two men onely, and for that the Abbot took into his hands Anglingle, which formerly was parcell of this tenacy, he by composition abated the tenants forty shillings per an∣num of the ten pounds, and (for the Hennes and Eggs so reserved) they compounded to pay him yearly eight shil∣lings, and for the said suit of Court six shillings eight pence; So the moneys by them paid yearly ever since (to to the Abbey, and the since owners of Wye) is eight pounds fourteen shillings eight pence. And the Tenants usually kept here a three weeks Court (called Slipmill, otherwise Moorhouse Court) for determination of matters under forty shillings, and ac∣cordingly such a Court was (in my memory) there kept, though now discontinued. They also had power by the grant last before mention∣ed, to have a Reve of their own, and they had at least once in every year a Court (which was also called by the name aforesaid) where they did apportion the rent aforesaid payable to the Abbey, and chuse their Reve, which Court is still there kept (usually once in the year, about Easter) but for sixty years last past, was stiled the Court Baron of the Lord, and there they presented the al∣terations of tenancies, and elected two Bedels to gather the rent. 3•. Iunij, 33•. Hen. 8•. that King granted the Royalty and Rents at Hawkherst belonging to Wye, to Sir Iohn Baker, and 20•. Martij 1•. Elez. she granted Wye to Hen∣ry Lord Hunsdon. Afterwards controversy arose between the tenants at Hawkeherst and Sir Richad Baker (heire of the said Sir Iohn) touching the validity of their former grants, and 31•. Ian. 10•. Eliz. the tenants obteyned a decree a∣gainst the said Sir Rihard, for quiet enjoying their tene∣ments aforesaid, as formerly, and 12•. Febr. following, the said Sir Richard released his claim to them, and after
suites between the heire of the said Sir Iohn, and the heire of the said Lord Hunsdon (touching the Royalties and rent aforesaid) the said heire of Baker, 10o. Novemb. 17o. Iacobi Regis, granted his right in the same to the said heire of the said Lord Hunsdon, so that now the Lord of Wye is owner of the said Royalties and rent there: This parish hath severall lands belonging thereunto, to be imployed to pious uses, viz. Henry Parson, and Wil∣liam his sonne, 13o. Iunij 22o. Edw. 4. conveyed (to their use for ever) a messuage and acre of land (which messu∣age was of late times called the Church house, and adjoyn∣eth to the Church-yard) the rent thereof, and of the land thereunto, is imployed towards reparation of the Church, and upon part of the land was erected an Almeshouse (which is imployed to the use of the poore of this Pa∣rish) and in the close of the said messuage, is another house, usually called the Sexton's house, the same having been, for about sixty years past, used for the habitation of the Sexton of this Parish, and these messuages and lands are enjoyed accordingly. Likewise Thomas Iddenden 3. Aprill 1556. willed seve∣rall messuages and lands (lying at and neer a place in this Parish called High-street) to be for ever imployed for Pi∣ous uses, in that Parish (and the same being deteyned from the Parish severall years) at length, upon an in∣quisition taken before Commissioners for charitable uses, 12. Decemb. 14. King Iames, the aforesaid Will, and cha∣ritable uses were found, and the said messuages and lands (by those Commissioners 29. Aprill following) decreed to be enjoyed, and imployed accordingly, the trustees, and manner of imployment thereby settled, and the same are enjoyed accordingly. Also Thomas Gibbon, 3o. Decemb. 15o. Eliz. granted to trustees for ever, an annuity of forty three shillings four pence per annum, out of his messuage and three peices of land, upon Amboldesherst in that Parish, containing seven a∣acres,
which annuity was purchased from him by the Parishoners, to be imployed towards the maintenace of the said Church, and the same is enjoyed and imployed accordingly, A Market (by the grant of King Edw. 1. 5. of his Raigne, to the Abbey of Battle) was antiently kept in this Parish upon every Tuesday (upon the greene at the Moore, against the mansion house now of William Boys Esquire) but (for many years past) the same hath been discontinued, yet within the memory of men lately living a Market crosse stood there, and very lately there also stood a little house (called St. Margarets cross) since quite demolished, wherein when the Market was in being, the corne unsold was usually put, and the memory of that Market is partly reteyned by the name of a place neer thereunto (yet called the Market place) and old shops there yet standing. A air is kept yearly in this Parish (neer the Church upon the day of St Laurence (being the tenth day of Au∣gust) and was granted by the aforesaid King Edw. 1. (3. Marij. 5. of his raigne) to the Abbey of Battle, to hold for three dayes (viz. in the Vigill, day, and morrow of St. Laurence aforesaid) but the same now usually begin∣neth upon the aforesaid day of St. Laurence, and lasteth one day following. There was also in this parish another fair kept yearly upon St. Valentines day (being the 14th, day of February) in the field, at the next gate beyond Moore house (at a place where lately stood a pound) but for many years past, this fair hath been discontinued. In this Parish also antiently stood five crosses, or watch-houses, one upon Badcocks green, (called Badcocks Crosse, (long since fallen down, another in the high way, between High-gate, and High-street aforesaid, at the West corner of the turning towards Slipmill antiently called Cooks Crosse, but lately Philpots Crosse, part
whereof was lately standing there, another at Skelcrouch (lately standing at the turning there from the highway from Kentbridge, to Hawkherst Church) called Skelcrouch Crosse; another at High-gate aforesaid called Highgate Crosse yet standing, and the other at four Trowes (called four Trowes) otherwise Pipsden-crosse (yet also standing.) The place aforesaid called Highgate, took its name in respect, that severall gates antiently stood at severall places in this Parsh to inclose the commons belonging to the aforesaid Tenants of Wye; and one of the said gates standing at this place (being upon a high hill in respect of the rest) he same was called High-Gate. This Parish was (within memory) divided from Sale∣herst in Sussex, by a bridge, called Kentbridge, under which the river ran, about ix rods at the Narrow entring into the way beyond the now bridge, which old bridge be∣ing taken away, and the river turned to run under the now bridge, the broad place (between the now bidge, and that narrow place) seemeth to be in Saleherst in Sussex, But in truth is in Hawkherst in Kent. In the west hedge  field (called Beacon field) neer the highway (called Beacon lane) leading between Four Trowes aforesaid, and Foxhole, lately stood a Beacon and Watch house, both since down. I beg pardon for so long insisting upon the matters in this Parish (which I did for the reasons aforesaid) and now further proceed as before.
HAWKING. LIeth at the South East part of the County, neer the sea, about four miles and a halfe (towards the North East) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick of Stouting, Hunred of Folkstone, Lath of Shepway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clay∣meth there. It was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Michael. HAYES. Hese, Lieth at the West end of the County, neer Surrey by the River Ravensborne, about one mile and a half (towards the South-West) distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Shoram (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester.
HEDCORNE. LIeth towards the middle of the County, by the River Meway, about five miles (towards the South-West) distant from Leneham, so much theeof as is in the Bor∣ough of Stepherst, is in the Hundred of Barckley, and Bai∣liwick of the Seven hundreds. So much thereof as is in the North Borough, is in the Hundred of Cranbrook, and Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds. Part also of this Parish is in the Hundred, and Bailiwick of Eyhorne. Other part thereof is in the Hundred of Tenhm, and Bailiwick of Scray. And the residue is in the Hundred of Calehill, and Bai∣liwick of Chart and Longbridge. So much thereof as is in the Hundreds of Barckley, or Cranbrook, is in the Lath of Scray, in the West division of the County, So much thereof as is in the Hundred of Eyhorne is in the Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the Coun∣ty. And so much thereof as is in the Hundreds of Tenham, or Calehill, is also in the Lath of Scray, But in the East division of the County This Parish is in the East division of the Justices in he Lath of Aylesford, and the liberty of the late Dean of Can∣terbury claymeth over the Den of Habenbury in the same. It was all in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Eyhorne, was called St. Peter and Paul, and founed by one Culpeper
(whose monument, and armes, are in the South wall of the same, and his armes also over the West door of the Belfree there.) A Fair is kept yearly in this Parish upon St. Peters day (being the nine and twentith day of Iune.) And in this Parish was a Relgious house called Motin∣den (otherwise Moden, otherwise Mtynden) dedica∣ted to the hoy Tnity (founded by Sir Robert Rookesley (In the year 12 4.) Consisting of Crouched Friers (the cheife wereof was called Minister, and the Friers were called Brethren of the redemption o Captives imprisoned by Pagans for the truth of Christ) This house was at the suppression valued at 60l. 13s. 0d. 0b. per annum. And he that desireth to read touching the yearly put∣ting the Devill to flight (by the men of this house) upon their festivall day (called Trinity Sunday) I refer him to Mr. Lambards per ambulation (in Motindene.) HERNE. LIeth at the North side of the County, neer the Sea, about foure miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Pe∣tham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, clay∣meth there, but the liberty of St. Augustine claymeth not, onely particularly neer the Church there, but generally over the whole Parish, the same being in the hundred of Blengate, which belonged to that Abbey It was in the Deanry of West Beere, and diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Martin, which Church was antiently a Chappell to Reculver, and Robert
of Winchelsey (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 350. years since, erected, and endowed, a perpetuall Vicarage in the same. In this Church are (or lately were) memorials of the interments of Phillips (above 180. years since) severall Fineuxes (above 150. years since) and Loverick, above 140. years since. HERNEHILL. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, about two miles and a half, towards the Southeast, distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Sray, Hundred of Boughton under the Blean, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clai∣meth there. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Michael. HERST. LIeth towards the Southeast part of the County, about four miles (towards the West) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, hundred of Strete, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claim∣eth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Leonard, but is demo∣lished.
HEVER. LIeth towards the Southwest part of the County, by the River Medway, about five miles (towards the Southeast) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwick of Sut∣ton Bromley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. Most part thereof is in the hundred of Somerden, and the residue viz. the Borough of Linckhill, is in the hun∣dred of Ruxley. It was all in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester, & the Church standeth in the hundred of Somerden. Here was a Castle, of which Sir Thomas Boleyn (Sheriff of Kent 3. Hen. 8.) was owner. HIGHAM. HEigham, Heaham, Heyham, Lieth at the Northside of the County, neer the River of Thames, about foure miles, (towards the Northwest) distant from Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamel, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath. The liberties of the late Bishop of Rochester, and late Dean of Canterbury claim there. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Maries. A Fair is kept here yearly upon Michaelmass day (being the 29. day of September) In this Parish was a Nunnery of Black Veyled Nuns, Founded by King Stephen) and this Parish ought antiently to have contributed towards the
repaire of the ninth Peere or Arch of Rochester Bridge. HINCKSELL. HInxhill, lieth towards the Southeast part of the County, about two miles, towards the Northeast, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. It was in the Deanry of Limpne▪ and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Mries, in which is a moument of Sir Robert Edolph, sometimes owner of the Mannour of Hinxhill. HITH. HEth, Hede, This is one of the Cinque Ports, lyeth at the Southeast part of the County, neer the Sea, about three miles and a half (towards the Southwest) distant from Folkestone, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Ship∣way, and East division of the County (incorporated by the name of Mayor, Jurats and Commonalty of the Town and Port of Hith; before that, by the name of Ju∣rats, and Commonalty of the Town and Port of Hith, and before that, by the Name of Barons of the Town and Port of Hith. It is in the division of the Justices of that Corporation, The Liberties whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim o∣ver the same. The Liberty of the late Achbishop of Can∣terbury also claimeth there, and it was antiently a Hun∣dred of it self. It was all in the Deanry of Eleam, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Leonard (which Church was antiently a Chappel to Saltwood.
There were also formerly four other Churches in this Town (viz. St. Mary, St. Nicholas, St. Michael, and St. Bernard, all demolished. Among other losses which this Town suffered, the principall were, the Sea forsaking the same, and a very great losse by pestilence and Fire about 250. years since. In the year 849. King Aelfred, gave Hith to Christchurch Canterbury, but afterwards is came into other hands. For in the year 1036. one Halden, a Prince, gave the same a∣gain to that Church, and afterwards (in the time of King Henry 2.) it was in that Kings hands. Here are two Hospitals (both under the government of the Majors and Jurats of this Town (the one called St. Iohns, & the other St. Bartholomews) the last whereof was founded (about 300 years since) by Haymo of Hith (born in this Town, and sometimes Bishop of Rochester) for ten poore men. Antiently the Archbishop of Canterbury did yearly ap∣point to this Town, a Bailiff, to govern with their Jurats, and afterwards the Town obtaining a Charter to chuse a Mayor; He was (and still is) chosen yearly upon Candle∣mass day, being the second day of February, and antiently the Eection was in St. Bernards Church. Upon Wednesday in Easter week (being the sixth day of April 1580.) was so great an Earthquake in this Town tht it caused the Bels of he Church to sound. A Market is kept in this Town upon every Saturday, and two Faires are kept thee yearly (viz. one upon St. Peters day, being the 29. day of Iune, and the other upon the day of St. Edmund the King, being the 20. day of No∣vember.
West HITH. LIeth at the Southest part of the County, near the Sea, about one mile and a half, towards the West, distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shepway, and East division of the County. Part thereof is a member of the Town and Port of Hith, in the division of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same, which in truth was (of it self) once a Port, till the Sea fell from it, and caused the rise of the before mentioned Port of Hith. The residue is in the Hundred of Worth, and division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The Liberty of Wye also claimeth in this Parish. All this Parish was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Dio∣cess of Canterbury. The Church stood in the Hundred of Worth, and was called St. Maries, but is demolished. In or very neer this Parish, is Shipway (a place antient∣ly famous for the great Court there kept, by the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports (of which Court, I red, that the same could be holden but once in every year; And that then the Lord Warden also must be personally present. At this place also the said Lord Warden did antietly take his Oath (for execution of his Office, which was not taken upon a Book (as is usuall) but upon his Allegiance and Honour.
HOLLIN GBORNE. HOlingeburn, lyeth about the middle of the County, about three miles, towards the Northwest, distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Eyhorne, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the county, and East division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Hollingborn. This Parish was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All Saints. In the year 980. or (as another reporteth) 1015. one Athelstan, gave Hollingborn to Christchurch Canterbury, and afterwards King Henry 2. gave to the same lands upon the Hill in this Parish. HOO. ST. Warburgh, lyeth towards the Northside of the County, by the River Medway, about three miles, to∣wards the Northeast distant from Rochester, in the Baili∣wick and hundred of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the county, and North division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Warburgh.
HOPE. HOpe All Saints, lyeth at the Southeast part of the County, in Romney Marsh, about one mile and a half, towards the Northwest distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and East division of the county. Part thereof is in the Hundred of St. Martin, and the residue in the hundred of Langport. It is all in the division of the Justices of the Corpora∣tion of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claimeth over the same; the liberty also of Saint Augustine claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canter∣bury. The Church standeth in the hundred of Langport, and was called, All Saints. HORSMANDEN. LIeth towards the Southside of the County, by the Ri∣ver Medway, about one mile and a half, towards the Northwest, distant from Goudherst, in the Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. So much thereof as is in the hun∣dred of Brenchley and Horsmanden, is in the Bailiwick of Twyford. Other part thereof is in the hundred of Larkefeild, and Bailiwick of Hoo. And the residue, viz. the Borough of Rugmerhill is in antient Demesne of Aylesford, and aforesaid Bailiwick of
Hoo: It was all in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester. The Church standeth in the hundred of Brenchley and Horsmanen, and was called St. Margaret: A Faire is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Swithin, being the fifteenth day of July. HORTON-KIRBY. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, by the River Darent, about three miles, towards the South∣east, distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and Upper division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The Liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth there, and the liberty of the ate Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the lands, late of S. Anthony Roper in this Parish. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Maries. One William Kirby, was sometimes owner of Horton-Kirby, which occasioned the addition of Kirby to Horton, the antient name of this Parish, to distinguish the same from the other Horton in this County, next following. MONKS-HORTON. LIeth towards the Southeast part of the County, by the River Stoure, about three miles towards the North∣west, distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.
The liberty of the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury clai∣meth there. It was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Peter. In this Pa∣rish was a Priory (a Cell to Lewes) consisting of black Monks of the order of Cluniacs (founded by Robert Ver Constable of England, son of Bernard Ver) to the honour of God, the blessed Mary, St. Iohn the Evangelist, and St. Pancras, the Charter of the Foundation is without date; but I conceive the same to be in the time of King Hen. 2. The Priory (at the suppression 26. Hen. 8.) was valued at 95l. 12s. 2d. per annum, and the Mannour belonged to the same. This Priory occasioned the addition of the word Monkes to Horton, (the antient name of this Parish) to di∣stinguish the same from the Horton last before mentioned. HOTH. LIeth at the Northside of the County, near the sea, a∣bout five miles and a half, towards the Northeast, di∣stant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Pe∣tham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same, for that it is in the Hundred of Blengate (which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanry of West Beere, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mary Holy Crosse.
HOTHFEILD. LIeth towards the middle of the Southeast part of the County, by the River Stoure, about two miles and a half, towards the Northwest) distant from Ashford. In the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. Part thereof is in the hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and the residue in the hundred of Calhill. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there; It was in the Deanry of Chaing, and Diocess of Canterbury; the Church standeth in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and was called St. Maries. Alexander Eden (a Gentleman of this county) here took and killed that execrable Rebell Iack Cade, in the year 1450. For which he had 1000. Marks reward from the then King Hen. 6. HOUGHAM. LIeth at the southeast side of the county, adjoyning to the sea, about two miles and a half (towards the southwest) distant from Dovor. In the Bailiwick of Stow∣ting, and East division of the County. Part thereof is in the liberty of the Cinque Ports, and of the Town and Port of Dovor, and in the Lath of St. Augustine. Othr part thereof is in the Hundred of Bewsborough, and Lath of St. Augustine. And the residue is in the hundred of Folkestone, and Lath of Shipway.
All this Parish, other than what is (as before) in the liberty of the Cinque Ports is in the division of the Justi∣ces in the Lath of St. Augustin, nd that is in the division of the Justices of the Town and Port of Dovor. The Li∣berty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claimeth in this Parish. It was in the Deanry of Dovo, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and Robert of Hougham, was sometimes Owner of the same. The Church standeth in the hundred of Bewsborough, and was called St. Laurence. HUCKING. LIeth towards the North part of the middle of the County, about foure miles and a hlf, toward the Northeast, distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick, and hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the ae Dean of Canterbury claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Margaret. HUNTON. HVntington, Huntindune, lieth towards the middle of the County, by the river Medway, about foure miles towards the southwest, distant from Maidstone, in the Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath.
So much thereof as is either in the hundred of Lark∣feild, or Antient Demesne of Aylesford, is in the Bailiwick of Hoo. So much thereof as is in the Hundred of Maidstone, is in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn, and the residue, being in the Borough of Hunton, is in the Bailiwick and hundred of Twyford, which Borough hath a Court Leet of it self, where the Botsholder is chosen; and the Inhbitants thereof, owno service to the Court Leet of the Hundred: Onely, at that court a Constable of that hundred may be chosen out of this Borough. This Parish was in the Deanry of Shoreham, a peculiar to the late Achbishop of Canterbury, but in the Diocess of Rocheste. The Church standeth in the hundred of Twy∣fod; at the Northside of the Chancel of the same, is a Fa monument of Fane of Buston (otherwise Burrie∣stune, otherwise Brgericestune) in this Parish. At the southsie of that chancell, is a memoriall of the Interment of Clinton (a noble Family, and Lord of Hun∣ton (whose seat▪ called the Courtldge, neer this Church, is ruinated, but the cite thereof and Mote to the same are yet visible) and in the south Isle of this Church is a me∣moriall of the Interment of Head, sometimes owner of Buston aforesaid. The Mannour of Hunton was antiently belonging to Christ church Canterbury. St. IAMES. LIeth at the Northside of the county, n the Isle of Greane, adjoyning to the sea, about three miles, to∣wards the Northwest, distant from Queenborough, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of Chetham and Gillingham, Lah of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath: It was in the Deanry
of Shoreham (a peculiar) the late Archbishop of Canter∣bury) but in the Dioese of Rochester. ICKHAM. Iham, Iiecham, Yecham, Ikham, Iecham, lieth towards the east end of the county, by the River Stoure, about three miles and a half towards the East, distant from Can∣trbury, in the Bailwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The libety of the late Dean of Can∣terbury claimeth over the Mannour, of Ickham and Bram∣pling in Ickham, being granted to that Church by King Hen. 8. 33. of his raign. But the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Parish (the same being in the hundred of Downhamford, which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Iohn Evangelist, in which Church is, or lately was, a memoriall of the Interment of Ba, a Knight, very antient. In the year 791. Offa, King of the Mercians, gave Ick∣ham to Christchurch Canterbury, but the same afterwards coming to other hands, in the year 958. Aethelward gave the same again to that Church. IFIELD. LIeth towards the Northside of the county, about two miles towards the southeast, distant from Grvesend, In the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath.
The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clai∣meth there. It wa in the Deanry of Shoreham, (a pecu∣liar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Dio∣cesse of Rochester. IGHTHAM. EIghtham, Itham, Igtham, Lieth towards the middle of the West part of the County, about one mile and a half, towards the southwest, distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of Wrotham claimeth over the same, it was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Arch∣bishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester. In this Church is, or lately was, a very antient monu∣ment of Marble, reputed by some to be the Monu∣ment of Hawe, a knight, sometimes Owner of the Moe; and by others of one Cawne, but the certainty of which of them I finde not.) There also are, or lately were, me∣morials of the Interment of Clement, a Knight, about 130 years since; and of Astall, above 110. years since. A Faire is kept here yearly upon Wednesday in Whit∣sonweek, and vulgarly called Coxcombe Fair. St. IOHNS. LIeth at the Northeast end of the County, in the Isle of Thnet, adjoyning to the Sea, about six miles, to∣wards the North, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East di∣vision of the County. It is a member of the Town and
Port of Dovr, within the division of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Pots claime over the same. The liberty of St. Augustine also claimeth over the Vi∣arage of St. Iohns and Mrgate. It was in the Deany of West Beer, and Diocess of Can∣terbury; and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist. Two Fairs are kept here yearly, one upon the Feast of the Ntivity of St. Iohn Baptist, called Midsummer day, be∣ing the 24 day of Iune, and the other upon Bartholomew day, being the 24. day of August. Mergate is in this Parish, and was the antient entrance from the sea there; a member of Dovor in the time of King Edw. 1. And the Justices of the County taking up∣on them to assesse the rest of this Parish, as lying in the Forraigne, King Hen. 8. to put the same out of question, by letters Patents united it to Dovor. IVECHURCH. LIeth towards the Southeast part of the County, about two miles, towards the Northwest, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, and East division of the County. Part thereof (viz. that upon Ree wall) is in the liberty of the Town and Port of New Romney; other part there∣of is in the hundred of Aloesbridge, and the residue in the hundred of St. Martins, and that part thereof is in the di∣vision of te Justices in the Lath of Shipway, and the re∣sidue is in the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claimeth over the same; the liberty of St. Augustine also claimeth in this Parish, and the liberty of the late Dean of Can∣terbury claimeth over so much thereof as is within the Mannour of Ikham.
It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the hundred of St. Martin, within the Liberty of Romney Marsh, and was called St. George. In which are (or lately were) Memorials of the interment of At Capels (otherwise Cpels) Knights, very antient. IWADE. LIeth at the Northside of the County, about two miles towards the Northwest, distant from Milton, in the Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper di∣vision of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, and the residue is in the Hundred of Tenham, and Bili∣wick of Scray. The liberty of the late Dean of Canter∣bury claimeth in this Parish It was all in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the hundred of Mil∣ton, and was called, All Saints. KEMSING. LIeth about the middle of the West part of the County, about three miles, towards the North, distant from Sevenoke, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Sevenoke claimeth there. And the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth over the Mannour of Kem∣sing, of which Fulk of Brent, was antiently owne.
It was in the Deanry of Shoreham, (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Eadith. By the grant of King Hen. 3. a Market was antiently kept here, upon every Monday, and long since disconti∣nued; but a Fair is kept here upon every Easter Monday. Who so desireth to read touching the frequenting the Image of St. Eadith, in this Church-yard, I refer him to Mr Lmbad, Perambulation in Kemsing. KENARTON. KEnardington, lyeth towards the Southeast side of the County, about five miles, towards the Southeast, di∣stant from Tenterden. Most part thereof is in the hundred of Blackborn, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, lower division of Ju∣stices in that Lath, and the liberty of St. Augustine claim∣eth in the same; and the residue is in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shepway, Hundred of Ham, East division of the County, and division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh (the liberty whereof claimeth over the same:) Also the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over so much of this Parish as is within the Mannour of Apledore. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury, the Church standeth in the hundred of Black∣born, and was called St. Maries, which Church was anti∣ently far larger than now it is. The foundation whereof still appeareth, but the same was fired by lightning, about one hundred years since, after which the now little Church was builded, whereunto one Horn, a principall owner in this Parish, was a good benefactor.
KENNINGTON. LIeth towards the southeast part of the county, by the river Stoure, about one mile and a half, towards the North, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and hun∣dred of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Sray, East division of the county, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Man∣nour and Rectory of Kennington. It was in the Deanry of Charing and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries. In which are or lately were, memorials of the Interment of Brent, an Esquire, and Walkesley a Knight very antient. KESTON. LIeth towards the West part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the Southwest) di∣stant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Brom∣ley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West di∣vision of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham, a peculiar to the late Arch-bishop of Canterbury, but in the Diocess of Rochester.
KINGSDOWN neer Sittingborne. LIeth towards the middle of the Northside of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the southeast) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hun∣dred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Can∣terbury; and the Church was called St. Katherine, which Church was founded by Roger of Chichester, the 51. Ab∣bot of St. Augustines, about 380. years since. KINGSDOWN. neer Wrotham. LIeth towards the middle of the Northside of the County, about three miles, towards the Northwest, distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West divi∣sion of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Edmund the King, which Church was antiently a Chappel, and given by King Hen. 1. 10 the Church of Rochester.
KINGSNOTH. LIeth towards the Southwest part of the County, about one mile and a half, towards the south, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Sray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The liberty of Wye claimeth over the same: It was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Michael. KINGSTONE. LIeth towards the middle of the East part of the County, by the river Stoure, about three miles and a half, towards the Northeast, distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Kingham∣ford, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same, It was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Giles. KNOWLTON LIeth towards the East end of the County, about three miles (towards the Southwest) distant from Sand∣wich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.
The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church is supposed to have been founded, or at least reedified, by one Langley (of an antient family in this place) and in the same are (or lately were) very an∣tient memorials of the interment of the Family of Ringley. LABORNE. LEyborne, Leibourn, lieth towards the middle of the West part of the County, by the river Medway, about one mile towards the North, distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefeild, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. Sr. William of Arsick (one of the eight chief Captains, or Lieutenant Governours of Dovor Castle, in the time of King William the Conquerour) was then owner of Lybourn, and in the same was a Castle, of which the Lord Leybourn, an antient and eminent Family there, was ow∣ner. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed towards the repair of the fifth Arch or Pere of Rochester bridge. LAMBERHERST. LIeth at the Southside of the County, adjoyning to Sussex, and a great part of the same, viz. from the
River Medway, at Lamberherst bridge in the Town (to∣wards the Southeast) to the river at Beulbridge, is in Sussex, and the residue is in Kent, about two miles and a half (to∣wards the Southwest) distant from Goudherst. So much thereof as is in Kent, is in the Bailiwick of Twyford, Hundred of Brenchley and Horsnden, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Ro∣chester. The Church standeth in Kent and was called St. Maries. A Faire is kept here yearly, upon our Lady day, being the five and twentieth day of March. East LANGDON. LIeth towards the East end of the County, about three miles, towards the Northeast, distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Cornilo, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour of East Langdon. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Augustine. West LANGDON. LIeth towards the east end of the County, about three miles and a half, towards the North, distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowing, Hundred of Bewsho∣rough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County,
and division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. Here was an Abbey founded by Sir William Aberfeild, Knight dedicated to St. Thomas the Martyr, consisting of Whie Channons, Premonstratenses, which at the surren∣der was valued at 56l. 6s. 9d. per annum. LANGLEY. LIeth neere the middle of the County about three miles, towards the Southeast, distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorne, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries. In the year 1472. in the Park in this Parish did newly break out the Bourn or Spring there. St. LAURENCE. LIeth at the Northeast side of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, about four miles and a half, towards the Northeast, distant from Sandwich, in the Baiiwick of Bidge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East divisi∣on of the County. Part thereof viz. Ramsgate, (otherwise Romans gate) adjoyning to the Sea, is a member of the Town and Port of Sandwich, within the division of the Justices thereof, and the Liberties of that Town and Port, and of the Cinque Prts claim over the same.
And the residue is in the division of the Justices of the Lath of St. Augustine, and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is the hundred of Ringslow, which belonged to that Abbey.) It was all in the Deanry of West Bear, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the hundred of Ring∣flow and was called St. Laurence, which Church is con∣ceived to have been founded by the Family of Mauston (many of which Family lie interred in the same:) And severall of the Family of St. Nicholas are there likewise interred. The Justices of the County taking upon them to assess Ramsgate aforesaid, as lying in the Forraigne, King Hen. the 8. to put it out of question, united the same by Let∣ters patents to Sandwich. LAYSDOWN. LIeth at the Northwest side of the County, in the Isle of Sheppey, adjoyning to the Sea, about foure miles and a half, towards the North, distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick of Milton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper di∣vision of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver the Mannours of Laysdown and Boyeton, in and neer this Parish, being given to the same by King Henry 8. 33. of his raigne. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Cle∣ment.
LEEDS. LIeth neer the middle of the County, by the river Med∣way, about three miles and a half, towards the South∣east, distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Fyorn, Lath of Ayleford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver so much thereof, as is within the Mannour of Holling∣born. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas. In this Parish is part of a Castle (viz. the Outmost gates, and the old Mill.) But the rest of the same is in Bromfield: Touching the foundation of which Castle, I finde, That one Ledian (a chief Councellour of King Ethelbert the se∣cond) about 800. years since, raised there a Pile or Fort for his safety (which was afterwards wasted by the Danes) and so continued till the time of King William the Con∣querour; and then Sir Hugh Crevequer (a Norman Noble∣man, and one of the eight chief Captains or Lievtenant Govenours of Dovor Castle) having that place allotted to him (about the year 1071.) began the building thereof the Castle, and called it, by the old name, Leeds. At the Northwest part thereof, he built a Chappel; in which he put three Channons, which afterwards were (by Sr. Robert Crevenquer his son) removed into the Pri∣ory in this Parish: And Adam Crevequer (son of the said Sir Robert) finished that Castle (which flourished till the time of King Edward the second) who took the same from Bartholomew Lord Badlesmer (to whom he had formerly given it, in exchange for other lands) which taking a∣way thus happened. In the year 1321. about Michaelmas, Queen Isabell (wife of King Edw. 2.) in her journey in
this County, personally desired lodging in this Castle; but in the absence of the Lord Badlesmer, Owner thereof; then being in Arms for the Barons against that King, she was, by the then present Governour) denyed entrance, at which that King, hearing thereof, was incensed, and laying siege thereunto (about the end of October follow∣ing) took it: And therein Thomas Culpeper (the Gover∣nour) whom he hanged, with five more of the chief per∣sons which he found therein; and the Lord Badlesmers Wife and Children he sent to the Tower, and seized his Estate; and it continued in the Crown till the time of King Hen. 8. (at which time it being run to ruine) Sr. Henry Guldeford, at that Kings charge, reedified the same; and it came afterwards to be the possession of St. Leger (by grant from the Crown) in the year, 1417. Queene Dowager Ioane (second wife of King Hen 4. was (upon a charge of Treason) committed to this Castle; And King Rich. 2. (after resignation of his Crown) was first committed hither, before he was sent to Pomfret. A Priory was built and endowed in this Parish by the aforesaid Sir Robert Crevequer, and Adam his son, about 550. years since, who dedicated the same to the honour of our Saviour and St. Nicholas, and placed therein black Channons regular, of the Order of St. Augustine, (which at the suppression was valued at 362l. 7s. 7d. per annum. And Thomas Haselwood (one of the Channons of this Prio∣ry) was famous for the Chronicle written by him. LEE. LIeth neer the Northwest end of the County, about three miles, towards the Southwest, distant from Woolwich, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Blackheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the
County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath: It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Margaret. In the morning of the 4. Aug. 1585. the ground sud∣denly did sink so much, in a Lane at Nottingham in this Parish, that three great Elms (the tops falling down∣wards) sunk out of sight; the whole was 80. yards a∣bout, and above 50. Fahoms deep. LENEHAM. LEanham, Lenham, lieth very neer the middle of the County, about seven miles, towards the southeast, distant from Maidstone, in the East division of Justices, in the Lath of Aylesford, part thereof is in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the County; and the residue (called East Leneham) is in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Caleill, Lath of Scray, and East division of the County. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there; and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour of Leneham (which was given to that Abbey by Kenwulfe King of Mercia, and Cuthred King of Ken, in the year 804.) It was all in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and was called St. Maries. In which Church are, or lately were) memorials of the interment of Apuldorfield (about 460. years since) and of Barret, Maries and Horn (all a∣bout 200. years since.) A Market is kept here upon every Twesday, a Faire yearly upon the day of the translation of St. Augustine (being the six and twentieth day of May) and a Market for Bullocks at Sandway in this Parish, upon
every Twesday after All-Hollanday, being the fist day of November, untill Christmass. LEVELAND. LIveland, lieth towards the East side of the middle of the County, about foure miles, towards the South, di∣stant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Ju∣stices in that Lath The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Leveland, but the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Parish (for that it is in the hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Laurence. LEUSHAM. LEvesham, lieth at the Northwest side of the County (adjoyning to Surrey) by the river Ravensborne, about three miles and a half, towards the Northwest, distant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hun∣dred of Blackheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Maries, in which Church is (or lately was) a memoriall of the interment of Hatecliffe (Lord Treasurer of Ireland) about 140. years since. Sir Iohn Merbury, Knight, founded a Priory in this Pa∣rish (consisting of black Monks Aliens) belonging to the
Abbey of Gaunt in Flaunders; King Hen. 3. confirmed the same: And it was suppressed 2. Hen. 5. The Mannour of Leusham belonged to this Priory. At this Parish (in the year 1472.) a great Spring new∣ly brake out of the earth. At Black-eath (in or neer this Parish) are many Trenches, and other signes of Campes (atiently pitched there) is in truth there were (viz. up∣on Wednesday after Whitson week) in the year 1381. here appeared 40000. Horsemen for King Richard the second, against Wa Tyler, Iack Straw, and their adherents. In the year 1451. Iack Cade, that grand Rebell against King Hen. 6. incamped here by the space of a moneth; and from hence sent his Traiterous demands (or rather commands) to that King. Here also in the year 1452. King Hen. 6. pitched his Royall Pavillion, in his prepa∣ration against his Cosen Edward Duke of Yorke (afterwards King Edward the 4.) Here likewise the Bastard Faulconbridge incamped three dayes against King Edward the 4. And here also in the year 1496. incamped the Lord Audley, Flammock and Ioseph the Blacksmith, and their adherents in their Rebellion against King Hen. 7. (where the King fought and overthrew them, slew above 2000. of their companions, and took 1500. prisoners, and a∣mong them the aforesaid Lord Audley, Flammock, and Ioseph, who were all three executed. This place hath also antiently been famous for several great and solemn meeting, viz. 21. Decemb. 1411. The Emperour of Constantinople was here magnificently met by King Hen. 4. In the year 1415. The Mayor and Aldermen of Ln∣don, and 400. Citizens in red (with red and whe hoods) here me King Hen 5. at his return out of France (after his great Battle at Agincourt,) and from hence conducted him to London.
Likewise 7. May 1416. The Mayor, Aldermen, and Citizens of London, here met the Emperour Sigismund, and conducted him to their King Hen. 5. Also the 28. of Septemb. 1474. The Mayor and Alder∣men of London, in Scarlet, and 500. Citizens in Murrey, here met King Edward the 4. at his return from France. Upon Monday 27. Septem. 1518. The Lord Admirall of France, and the Bishop of Paris (Embassadours from the King of France) with above 1200. Attendants, were here met by the Lord Admiral of England, from King Hen. 8. with above 500. Gentlemen. In the year 1519. Cardinal Campeius (Legate from Rome to King Hen. 8.) was brought hither by the Gen∣try of this County; and here met and received by the Duke of Norfolk, and many of the Gentry and Prelates, where (in a Tent of cloth of Gold) he shifted himself into his Cardinals Robes (edged about with most rich Ermin) and from hence rode to London. And 3. of Ianua. 1539. The Lady Anne Cleave was here met (with great state) from King Hen. 8. In this Parish of Leusham Abraham Colf (late Minister of the same) in his life time founded two Free-Schools (The one for teaching of youth English, and the other for tea∣ching them Latine) with severall yeerly allowances to the Schoolmasters of the same. And also yearly allowance towards the maintenance of some of the said Schollers at the Universities, whensoever they should become fit for those places: the oversight and government whereof he committed to the Company of Leather-sellers, London.
LID. LIeth at the Southside of the County, adjoyning to the Sea, about two miles and a half (towards the southwest) distant from new Romney. It is a member of the Town and Port of new Romney, and incorporated by the name of Bailiff, Jurats, and Comonalty of the Town of Lid; and before that by the name of Barons of the Town of Lid: the election of which Bailiff was antient∣ly (and still is) upon St. Mary Magdalens day, being the two and twentieth day of Iuly. The liberties of this Town, and of the Cinque Ports, claim over the same The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claimeth there. And the liberty of Wye claimeth over the Borough of Dengemarsh there (which was a member of Wye in the time of King William the conquerour) It is all in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Lang∣port, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation aforesaid. It was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called All Saints (in which is (or lately was) a memoriall of the interment of the Deerings, about 270. years since, and of Godfrey above 220. years since. A Market is kept here upon every Thursday, and a Faire yearly upon the day of St. Analetus, being the thir∣teenth day of Iuly. In the Beach (neer Stone end) at the East side of this Parish, is to be seen a great heap of stones, which the In∣habitants call the Tombe of St. Crespin and Crispianus, sup∣posed to be buried there. Neer the Sea also (at the southside of this Parish) is a
place called Holmestone, consisting of Beach and Pibble stones, yet Holme trees grow plentifully upon the same. LIDDON. LIeth towards the East part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the Northwest) di∣stant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, East di∣vision of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Bewborough and Lath of St. Augustine, and the residue in the Hundred of Folkstone and Lath of Shipway. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was all in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Folkestone, and was called St. Maries. LIMINGE. LImege, lieth towards the southeast part of the County, about two miles (towards the south) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Loning∣borough, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Liminge claimeth over so much thereof as is in the lower half Hundred of Loningborough; The liberty of Eleham clai∣meth over the residue of the same, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Man∣nour of Liminge. It was in the Deanry of Eleham and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Mary and St. Ead∣burgh (which Church in the 25. year of King Edw. 3. was
held by the Lord Andomar de Rupy (Archdeacon of Canter∣bury, and valued at 20l. per annum. King Eadbald gave to Eadburgh his sister (sirnamed Tace) second wife and widdow of Edwin (King of the Northum∣be) Liminge, where she built a Monastery (of the Order of St Benedict) and there died and was buried. LIMPNE. LImeane, Limen, Leman, Lime, lieth towards the south east side of the County, about two miles (towards the West) distant from Hith, in the Lath of Shipway, and East division of the County. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Stowting, and Hun∣dred of Heane, other part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Shipway and Hundred of Strete, and the residue is in the Bailiwick of Shipway and Hundred of Worth. The liberty of Romney Marsh claimeth there, and so much thereof as it so claimeth, is in the division of Ju∣stices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, and the residue is in the division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, the Church standeth in the Hundred of Strete (out of the liberty of Romney Marsh) and was called St. Ste∣phen. In, or neer this Parish was an antient Castle, called Stufall, built by the Romans, but long fince ruinated.
LINSTED. LIeth towards the North part of the County, about three miles (towards the southeast distant from Mil∣ton, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Ten∣ham, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. LINTON. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about three miles and a half, towards the south) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn, Hundred of Maid∣stone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Maid∣stone claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Sut∣ton, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas. LITTLEBORNE. LIeth towards the East part of the County, by the Ri∣ver Stoure, about three miles (towards the northeast) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and tham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the Coun∣ty, and division of Justices in that Lath.
The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there, but the Liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour of Littleborn (given to that Abbey by King Withered, above 950. years since) and likewise claimeth over all this Parish, for that it is the Hundred of Down∣hamford (which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canterbu∣ry, and the Church was called St. Vincent. LONGFIELD. LAngefield, lieth towards the north-side of the County, about three miles (towards the southwest) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hun∣dred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth o∣ver part thereof, which was given to that Church by a Nobleman, called Birtrich, and Easwith his wife (above 650. years since) it was in the Deanry and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Mary Magdalen. LOOSE. LOse, Hlose, lieth towards the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles (towards the south) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn, Hundred of Maidstone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of Maidstone claimeth over the same, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Loose, given to the same by one Suet, a
Widow, and her daughter, who had the same of King Aethelwulfe (above 800. years since) and the same af∣terwards coming to King Henry the eighth, he the 33. of his Raigne did again give it to that Church. It was in the Deanry of Sutton and Diocess of Canter∣bury. LUDDENHAM. LIeth towards the north-side of the County neer the Isle of Sheppey, about two miles and a halfe (towards the northwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham which belonged to that Abbey) It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries. LUDDESDON. LVdsdowne, Hludesdun, lieth towards the north part of the County, about four miles (towards the south west) distant from Rocheher, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and north division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the nineth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge.
LULLINGSTONE. LIeth towards (the middle of the West part of the County, by the River Darent, about three Miles and a half (towards the South-East) distant from St. Mary Cray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper divisio of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the Dutchy of Lanchaster claymeth over the Mannour of Lullingstone. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Buttolph. In this Parish was antiently a Castle (the seat of a Fa∣mily of that name) but since of the family of Hart. LYGHE neer TUN∣BRIDGE. LIeth towards the South-West part of the County about two miles (towards the West) distant from Tunbridge, in the West Division of the County, and lower Division of Justices in the Lath of Sutton at Hone. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of Wachlingstone, and Lath of Aylesford, and the residue, (part whereof is in the Hundred of Codsheath, and other part in the Hundred of Somerden) is in the Baili∣wick of Sutton Bromley, and Lath of Sutton at Hone. The Liberty of Sevenoke claymeth there, it was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Rochester. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Codsheath, and was called St. Maries.
MAIDSTONE. MEdwayes Towne, Meidestane, Medestane, Medwegston, Caer, Megwag, Madus Towne, Lieth towards the Middle of the County, by the Riverr Medway, about foure miles and a half (towards the East) distant from West Malling, in the Bayliwick of Eyhorne, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West Division of the County, and division of the Justices of the Corporation of Maidstone. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the antient Parish Church was called St. Faith, But is now disused, other than by the Dutch Inhabitants (who make use thereof for their Congregationall meet∣ing) And the Church (now reputed the Parish Church) was a Collegiate Church, called All-Saints, and standeth neer the Colledge there. In this Parish is a sweet, large and populous Towne which (with the whole Parish) is incorporated. The Town is accounted the Shire Town, And the Assises for the County, have (in the time of the late King Charles and since) been holden here above ten times oft∣ner, and (in the time of the late King Iames.) three times ofter then in all other places of the County, But (in the time of Queen Elizabeth) the same were holden, almost twice as often in other places of the County, as here, and oftner at Rochester, than in this Towne. The Town, and Parish have a Constable of their own. And the liberty of the aforesaid Corporation claymeth o∣ver the same. But the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury like∣wise claymeth over the Mannour of Maidstone (which Mannour was antiertly a hundred of it self). A Market is kept here upon every Thursday, and foure
Faires yearly (viz. One upon Candlemas day) being the second day of February, another upon the feast of Philip and Iacob (being the first day of May) Another upon the day of St Edmund the King (being the ninth day of Iune) and called Garlick Fair: And the other upon St. Faiths day (being the sixth day of October.) Boniface of Savoy (Archbishop of Canterbury) about, 400. yeares since) built here an Hospitall (then called the New Worke) To the honour of St Peter, and Paul, and Thomas the Martyr, which hospitall William Courtney, likewise Archbishop (about 130. yeares afterwards) pulled down, and erected there a colledge (for secular Preists) to the Honour of All-Saints, And also erected the Collegiate Church aforesaid (in which he was in∣tombed) and this Colledge (at the suppression) was va∣lued at, 159l. 7s. 10d. per. annum. Iohn Vfford (otherwise Offord) also Archbishop (about 300. yeares since) began the foundation of the Palace here (but dying before he finished the same) Simon Islip (his Successor) finished it, and the same being (about, 130. years afterwards) out of repair, Iohn Morton (like∣wise Archbishop) repaired, and augmented it. Thomas Arundell (also Archbishop) about 240. yeres since, built here a Chaunty for the Brothers of Corpus Chrisli (now used for a Free-School) To which School William Lamb (Cloathworker of London) was a good be∣nefactor. This Town was governed by a Portreve, untill the time of King Edward the 6. (By whose incorporation the same became Governed by a Mayor) which priviledge being lost (by adhearing to the Rebellion of Sir Thomas Wyat (in the time of Queen Mary) Queen Elizabeth afterwards restred the same, and (for further addition of honour) made it a Borough. The Town in respect of the scituation, and conveni∣ency of receipt, hath been accounted the fittest place for
publique meeting of the County; And that this part of the County was long since accounted the most convenient place for the whol County to assemble at, appeareth by the County Court, most usually kept at Penenden, otherwise Pickenden Hoth (about one mile distant from this Town) where also the Knights of the Shie (to serve in Parlia∣ment) have been usually elected (as is before set forth in Boxley) which Hoth was also (in the time of King William the Conquerour) esteemed the most indifferent place of assembly of the Inhabitants of the County, for dispatch of publique business, as may appear by the great assembly there in his dayes for debate of the Controversy between Odo Earle of Kent, and the Bishops of Canterbury and Rochester. This Town (as an indifferent place of the County) hath the custody of the publique Standards committed to it, by the Statute 11•. Hen. 7•. Ca. 4• and one of the two Counnty Gaoles is here kept, and although (as I have before set forth) the Assises were in the time of Queen Elizabeth, very often holden out of this Town; yet I also observe that in those dayes the same were here holden much oftner than in all the places of the County, (Roche∣ster excepted) where the truth is, the same were in those dayes holden two or three times at the most oftner than here: But for how much the same were oftner here, than at any other place in the County, since the death of that Queen, which is above fifty five years since, I referre the Reader to what I have before set forth. The whole building, where the Court for trials of Ni∣si Prius is kept, was raised from the ground about fifty years since, there being no building at that place before, but that Court kept neer that place under a shed, for that purpose, from time to time set up. The Archbishops of Canterbury were great Benefactors to the Stone Bridge here. Wat Tiler (that Idol of Clownes, and famous Rebell,
in the time of King Richard the second) was of this Town and in the year 1206. about this Town was a Monster ound stricken with lightning (with a head like an Asse, a belly like a man, and all other parts far different from any known creature (but not approachable nigh unto, by reason of the stench thereof.) This Town ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the fifth Arch or Pere of Rochester bridge East MALLING. ESt Mallinges, lieth towards the middle of the County by a little Rivulet running into the River Medway about one mile and a half (towards the East) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Lark∣feild, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Maidstone claimeth over new Hith, in this Parish. It was all in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Maries (which Church King Iohn 5. April 7. of his raign, gave to West Malling Abbey: And in the same are or lately were me∣morials of the interment of the Ereies, about 180. years since. A Faire is kept yearly at Larkefield in this Parish, upon the day of St. Iames, being the five and twentieth day of Iuly. West MALLING TOwn Malling, Malinge, Mealling, lyeth towards the middle of the County, by a small Rivulet, running
into the River Medway, about three miles and a half (to∣wards the Southeast) distant from Wrotham, in the Bai∣liwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. The Town and all the Parish (except St. Leonards Bo∣rough) hath two Constables of it self; and that Borough is in the Hundred of Larkefield. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Roche∣ster. The Church standeth in the Town, and was called St. Maries. A Market is here kept upon every Saturday, and three Faires yearly (viz. one upon Lammas day, being the first day of August; another upon St. Matthew's day, being the one and twentieth day of September; and the other upon St. Leonard's day, being the sixth day of November. King Edmund, about 710. years since, gave this Malling to the Church of Rochester, and afterwards, in the time of King William the Conquerour, in the year 1078. Gundul∣phus (Bishop there) founded here an Abbey for black Nuns, of the order of St. Benedict (to the honour of the Virgin Mary) which was confirmed by the same King, and afterwards by King Henry the first: And at the suppression was valued at 218l. 4s. 2d. ob. per annum, and about 31. Hen. 8. was by that King granted to the Archbishop of Canterbury. This Nunnery, together with the Town, was burnt in the time of King Rich. 1. Francis Tresse of this Town, about twenty six years since, Willed 40l. for building a Free-School here (which was afterwards built) and he also willed 13s. 4d. per annum for ever, towards repairing of that School. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the third Arch or Pere of Rochester Bridge.
MARDEN. LIeth towards the South part f the County, by the ri∣ver Medway, about four miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Goudherst. In the West division of the County and lower division of Justices in the Lath of Scray. So much thereof as is holden of the Mannour of Hunton, is in the Borough of Hunton, Bailiwick and Hun∣dred of Twyford, and Lath of Aylesford; A small part thereof (called Tilden) is in the Hundred of Maidstone, an∣other small part is in the Hundred of Eyhorne; and both these last, in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn and said Lath of Ay∣lesford; and the residue is in the said Bailiwick of Twy∣ford, Hundred of Marden, and Lath of Scray. The liberties of St. Augustine, and late Dean of Canter∣bury claim there. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Marden, and was called St. Michael; and a Faire is kept here yearly upon Michaelmass day (being the nine and twentieth day of September.) St. MARGARETS neer Dovor. ST. Margrets at Cliff, lyeth at the East side of the Coun∣ty, adjoyning to the sea, about three miles and a half (towards the Northeast) distant from Dovor, in the Bai∣liwick
of Stowting, Hundred of Bewsborough, Lath of St. Au∣gustine, East division of the County, and division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Margaret. A Faire is kept here yearly, upon the day of Rufine and Iustin, being the nineteenth day of July. St. MARGARETS neer Rochester. LIeth towards the North part of the County (adjoyn∣ing to the City of Rochester) in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and divi∣sion of Justices of the Corporation of that City, (the li∣berty whereof claimeth here from Horsted Farme, crosse the woods, to the high way leading from Rochester to Maidstone, and from thence, crosse the Lands to Wind∣mill hill neer Massenden Farme, and from thence, over the Feilds, crosse the way between this Parish, and Ayles∣ford, down to a farme called, Rings, and from thence into the River Medway. The Liberty of the late Bishop of Ro∣chester, claimeth also in this Parish. It was all in the Dean∣ry of and Diocess of Rochester. And the Church was cal∣ed St. Margaret.
St. MARIES neer New Romney. LIeth neer the South-East side of the County, about two miles (towards the North) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, East di∣vision of the County, and division of Justices of the corpo∣ration of Romney Marsh, The liberty whereof claymeth over the same. Part thereof is in the Hundred of New-church, and the residue in the Hundred of St. Martin▪ It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of St, Martin, and was called St. Maries. Saint MARIES neer Rochester. LIeth at the North side of the County, about five miles (towards the North-East) distant from Rochester, In the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, west Division of the County, and North Division of Justices in that Lath. The Liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there. It was in the Deanry, ad Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Maries.
MEOPHAM. MEpeham, Mepham, Meapeham, Mepaham▪ lyeth towards the Northside of the County, about foure miles (towards the South) distant from Gravesend, in the Bai∣liwick of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver the Mannour of Meopham (which in the year 940.) was given by Duke Eadulph to that Church, and is like∣wise said to be given to that Church by Queen Ediva (o∣therwise Edgiva) Mother of King Edmund, and Daughter and Heir of Earle Sigeline, (Lord of Meopham) in the year 960. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocesse of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St Iohn Baptist, which was built, or at least much repaired by Simon Mepham (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 320. years since. And in the year 1385. repaired by William Courtney (likewise Archbishop) and by him appropriated to Christchurch Can∣terbury. But I elsewhere finde, That the same was appro∣priated to the Almnery of that Church, by Richard Arch∣bishop of Canterbury about 480. years since. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the nineth Peere or Arch of Rochester Bridge. And a Faire is kept here yearly upon St. Peters day, being the 29th. day of Iune.
MEREWORTH. LIeth towards the middle of the County, by a Rivulet running into the River Medway, about one mile and a half, towards the South, distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Twyford, Hundred of Littlefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Laurence. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the fifth Arch, or Peere of Rochester Bridge; and here is a faire Seate of the honourable Fa∣mily of Fane. MERSHAM. MErseham, lyeth towards the Southeast part of the County, by the River Stoure, about two miles and a half (towards the Southeast) distant from Ashford, in the East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and Hundred of Bircholt franchise, and the residue is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and Lath of Scray. The liberty of Wye claimeth there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Mersham, which was given to that Church, in the year 1051. by one Siward and Matilda his wife, and the then King Edward the Confessor, confirmed the same; and
afterwards it coming to King Hen. 8. He 33. of his raign, gave the same again to that Church. It was in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Canter∣bury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, and was called St. Iohn Baptist. MERSTON. LIeth at the Northside of the County, about three miles (towards the Northwest) distant from Roche∣ster, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury.) But in the Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Giles, but is demo∣lished. MIDLEY. LIeth at the Southeast side of the County, about two miles (towards the Northwest) distant from Lid, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of St. Mar∣tin, East Division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver so much thereof, as is parcell of the Mannour of Aghne (otherwise Agonhee) which was given to that Church by Offa (King of Mercia) in the year 791. And
afterwards coming to King Hen. 8. He 33. of his raigne gave the same again to that Church. It was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, but the Church is demolished. MILSTED. LIeth towards the North part of the County, about three miles (towards the South) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick & hundred of Mlton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Mary & Holy Crosse. MILTON neer Canterbury. MIddletone, Miletune, lyeth towards the East part of the County, by the River Stoure, about one mile and a half (towards the Southwest) distant from Canter∣bury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the Coun∣ty, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there, and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour and Rectory of Milton, which Mannour was the Seat and Inheritance of Brown, and the said Rectory ws appropriated to that Abbey by Pope Alexander, above 450. years since. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury, and one Lyschild (in the year 822.) gave this Milton to Christ∣church
Canterbury, and King Kenulphus confirmed the same. I finde likewise that one Egelick Bigg gave the same to that Church, in the year 1044. MILTON neer Gravesend. MElton, Meletun, lyeth at the Northside of the County, adjoyning to the River of Thames, about one mile (towards the East) distant from Gravesend, in the Baili∣wick of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation of Milton, and Gravesend, the liberty whereof claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. A Faire is kept here yearely upon the day of the Con∣version of St. Paul (being the five and twentieth day of Ianuary) and it holdeth a week. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the nineth Peere or Arch of Rochester Bridge. Here King Hen. 8. raised a Platform or Block-house for the Defence of this Town and Gravesend, and Com∣mand of the River.
MILTON neer Sittingborne. MIddleton, Lieth at the North part of the County, nere the Isle of Sheppey, about six miles (towards the North-West) distant from Feversham, In the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborne and Diocess of Canterbury, And the Church was called Holy Trinity. In this Church are or lately were memorials of the inter∣ment of the Family of Norwood of Norwood in this Parish (one above 250. years since, and another above 160. years since) of Norton (to whom Norwood aforesaid came by ma∣riage) above 120. years since, And of Alefe (likewise almost 120. years since.) Hasting, the Danish Prat, (in the year 893.) fortified a Castle at Kemsley Down, in this Parish (long since demo∣lished.) This Town was antiently called the Kings Towne, where they had a house which (in the time of King Ed∣ward the Confessor) was burned by Earle Goodwins par∣ty: A Market is here kept upon every Saturday.
MINSTER in Sheppey. LIeth at the north side of the County, In the Isle of Sheppey, Adjoyning to the sea, about foure miles (to∣wards the North East distant from Queenborough, In the Bailiwick of Milton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of Scray, East Division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborne, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mary, and St. Sexburgh (which Church was above 450. years since ap∣propriated to the Abbey of St. Augustine) And in the same is (or lately was) a memoriall of the interment of Nor∣wood (before the Conquest) of Shurland, of Shurland; neer this place (very antient,) of Soole, and Ware (above 130. years since) And of Sir Thowas Cheney, Knight o the Garter (about a 100. years since.) The Liberty of St. Augustine claimeth there, And a Fair is kept here yearly upon Palme Monday (being the Monday before Easter) Sexburgh (widow of Ercombert, King of Kent, (about, 950. years since) Founded here a Moa∣stery for Nuns, of the order of St. Benedict, which about 120. years afterwards was burnt by the Danes, and 60. years afterwards, reedified by William of Corveil Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, And (in the raigne of King Henry, 1. it was dedicated to the Honour of St. Mary, and St. Sex∣burgh, (which was afterwards confirmed by King Henry the 4.) At the suppression, it was valued at, 129l. 7s, 10d. ob. per. annum.
MINSTER in Thanet. MEnre, Lieth towards the North-East side of the County, In the Isle of Thanet about three miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East Division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Ringslow, which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanry of West Beer, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries (the foundation whereof herein after appeareth) and in the same is (or lately was) a very antient monument of one Thorne or Shorne. Domneva, Daughter of Ermered, Sonn of King Eadbald, had issue by Mervald (sonn of Peud, King of ercia) a Daughter named Mildred (which she placed in a Monastery in France.) And (above 950. years since) obtained of Egbert (King of Kent) as much ground in Thanet, as a tame Doe (which she had) would run over at a course, which was granted, and the course (accord∣ing to the description of the same which I have seen the originall whereof is said to remaine in Trinity Colledge in Cambridge was thus. The Deere was put out, at about the middle of the North side of the Isle at a place called Westgate Bay, and after a straight course of a bout a quarter of a mile, she made dowe towards Birchingto, almost half a mile, but then went with some Windings, southwards again, about three quarters of a mile, and with severall wind∣dings)
went upwards, and beyond Woodchurch (at the Northside thereof) about two miles and a half, and then made down again (towards the Southwest) about a mile and a quarter, and went again, with severall windings (towards the West) about two miles and a haf, and then went (with some windings) to the Southside of the Isle, to a place lying between Serreves Hope, and Dockwerd Hope, so that this course included (of the East and South∣sides of the Isle) the now Parishes of St. Iohn, St. Peter, St. Laurence, Stonar, and this Parish of Minster (In which Pa∣rish the said Domneva built a Monastery for Nuns (to the honour of the Virgin Mary) and called her said Daghter out of France, and made her Abbess thereof (wh dying Abbess, was there interred) and Eadburgh (the succeeding Abbess (after Mildreds death) built another Monastery (of the order of St. Benedict) neer to the former, to the honour of St. Peter and Paul; And translated the body of Mildred thither. And after her death, in the time of Sige∣bert, who was the succeeding Abbess (about the year 751) Danish Pirates spoiled the Monastery so built by Domneva. And afterwards (in the time of Leofrina, Abbess of the said new Monastery, in the year 1011. the Danes by fire, destroyed both that Monastery and the Nuns therein: (But the monument of the said Mildred escaped their fu∣ry.) And the ruines of the Monastery was cnverted to the now Parish Church. And afterwards King Canutus (in the year 1033. translated the ashes of this Mildred, to the Abbey of St. Augustine. At Ippersfleet (nw Ebsfleet) in this Parish 9000 Saxons (under the Conduct of Hengist, and Horsa) landed about the year 447. (in aide of Vortiger King of Brittain against the forces of Valentinian the Roman Emperour. King Hen. 1. granted a Market to be holden in this Parish, but the same was long since discontinued.
MOLASH. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the Northwest) distant from Wye, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Felborough, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The liberty of Wye claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Bridge▪ and Diocess of Canterbu∣ry, and the Church was called St. Peter. Great MONGEHAM. LIeth at the East side of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the Southeast) distant frm San∣wich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Cornilo, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was caled St. Martin. A Fair is kept here yearly upon St. Lukes day (being the 18th. day of October.
Little MONGEHAM. LIeth at the East side of the County, about three miles and a half, towards the South, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Handred of Cornilo, Lth of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was in the Deary of Sandwich and Diocess of Can∣terbury: but the Church is demolished. MONKTON. MVnbetun, Munketue, lyeth at the Northside of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, about foure miles and a hf, towards the Northwet, distant from Sand∣wich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, Ea division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Manour of Monkton, being given thereunto y King Hen. 8. (33. of his raigne) And the iberty of st. Augustine claimeth over this Parish, for that it is in the Hundred of ▪ which  that Abbey. It was in the Denry of West Br, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was  St. Mary Mag∣dalen, which Church  ( 480 years ) ap∣propriated to the  by Richard Archbishop there away  the said Ri∣chard) And so  time of Archbishop Si∣mon
Isp, He (39. Edw. 3.) restored the same. And in this Church are (or lately were) memorials of the interment of the Families of Blenchenden and Crispe, very antient. A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Apolina∣is, being the 23. day of July. Queen Ediva, otherwise Edgiva, widdow of King Edward (surnamed the elder) about the year 960. gave Monkon to Christhurch Canter∣bury. MURSTON. MVnston, lieth towards the Northside of the County, about one mile, towards the East, distant from Mil∣ton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Sray, East division of the County, and upper division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sitingborn, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called Al-saints. NAKINTON. LIeth towards the East part of the County, about one mile and a half, towards the southeast, distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Bridge and Petha, and the residue in the Hundred of Whitestaple. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there: And the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour of Nakinton. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury: The Church standeth in the Hundred of Bridge and Petham. And was called St. Maries.
NETTLESTED. NEitherlestede, lyeth towrds the middle of the Coun∣ty, by the River Medway, about three miles towards the south, distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocesse of R∣chester, and the Church was called St. Maries▪ This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the fifth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge. NEWCHURCH. LIeth towards the southeast side of the County, about three miles and a hal (towards the North) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, (the liberty where∣of claimeth over the same. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Aloesbridge, other part in the Hundred of Newchurch, other part in the hun∣dred of St. Martin, and the residue in the Hundred of Worth. It was al in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Newchurch, and was called St. Peter and Paul.
NEWENDEN. ANdreds Chester, Anderida, Lyeth at the southside of the County, by the river Rother, adjoyning to Sus∣sex, about foure miles towards the southeast distant from Cranbrock, in the Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds, Lath of Scray, West divisin of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Slbrittenden, and the residue is in the Township of Newenden, which Town∣ship hath an Officer of  (called the Bailiffe) Who is in this place as a Constable is in other parts of the Coun∣ty, and this Bailiffe hath also under him an Officer (cal∣led the under Bailiffe) who is likewise in this place as a Bosholder is in other parts of te County. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clay∣meth over the Mannour of Newenden (But I finde not the same in the Nomina Villarum of that liberty, and do finde that Thomas (Arcbishop of Canterbury) 2o. Marti. 31o. Hen 8. by grant inrolled in the Augmentation Office 32. Henry 8. granted the same to that King. It was all in the Deanry of Charing, and Dicess of Canterbury. The Chdeth in the Township of Newenden, and  called St. Peter. The house of Friars Carmilities in England, was at a place called Lossenham in this Parish where Sir Tho∣mas Aller (in the year 1241.) Founded for them a Pri∣ory, and dedicated the same to the Virgin Mary. In the Parish, neer the Priory, stood a Castle, which by the Danes (in the year  Ad not thereof are extant. Onely the me∣mory is preserved, by a place there, stll cal∣led Castle T.
This Towne was antienly a famous City, accounted the chief defensible place in all this Southerne part, but Aella (the first King of the South Saxons) about the year 488. beseiged the Britans here, & (after long fiee) entring by assault, put all to the sword, raced the City to the ground, and the place continued desolae, till the found∣tion of the aforesaid Priory, at which time it began a lit∣tle to revive, but at present is, and for many years past, hath been very meane. NEWINGTON, neer Hith. LIeth at the southeast part of the County, about two miles (towards the northeast) distant from Hith in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Folktone, Lath of Shipway, eat division of the County, and division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canterbu∣ry, and the Church was called St. Nicolas. NEWINGTON besides Sittingborn. NEwenton, Lieth towards the North side of the Coun∣y, about two miles and a half (towards the west, distant from Milon, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Milto, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour of Newington.
It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries (All the Customes in which Church, belonging to the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, were by King William the Conquer∣our (in the year 1073.) confirmed to Lanranck then Arch∣bishop. NEWNHAM. LIeth towards the North part of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the southwest) di∣stant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and Upper division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same, for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belong∣ed to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. St. NICHOLAS. LIeth at the Northeast ide of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, about five miles and a half, towards the Northwest, distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge ad Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, and East divisi∣on of the County. Sarre was antiently in the decayed Parish of St. Giles, but is now reputed to be in this Parish; And is a mem∣ber of the Town and Port of Sandwich, within the divi∣sion of the Justices of that Town and Port, and the li∣berties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports, claime over the same.
The residue of this Parish is within the Division of the Justices in the Lath of St. Augustine, and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same, for that it is in the Hundred of Ringslow, which belonged to that Abbey. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claimeth in this Parish. It was all in the Deanry of West Beere and Diocess of Canterbury, and one St. Nicholas was antiently Owner of the same. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Ringslow, was called St. Nicholas, was antiently a Chappel to Reculver, and Robert of Winchelsea (Archbishop of Canterbury) a∣bout 350. years since erected and endowed a perpetuall Vicarage in the same. In the time of King Hen. 8. (controversie arising touching assessing Sarr aforesaid, as lying in the Forraign) That King to put an end thereunto, by Letters Patents, united the same to Sandwich. NOCKHOLT. LIeth towards the middle of the West part of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the Northwest) distant from Sevnock, in the Baliwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hoe, West division of the County, and Upper division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Shorham (a peculiar to the ate Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester.
NONINTON. LIeth about the middle of the East part of the County, about five miles (towards the southwest) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Eastry, and the resi| due in the Hundred of Wingham. The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury and St. Augustine claim there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over so much thereof as is within the Mannour of Eastry. It was all in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Wingham, was called St. Maries, and was antiently a Chappel to Wing∣ham, But in the year 1282. (upon dividing of Wingham into foure Parishes) this was one of them. NORBURN. LIeth neer the East end of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the south) distaut from Sand∣wich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Cornilo, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there, and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over
the Mannour of Norburn (which about 1000. years since, was given to that Abbey by Eadbald, King of Kent. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Augustine. NORTON. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, about three miles (towards the southwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East divi∣vision of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey.) It was in the Deanry of Ospringe and Dio∣cess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. NORTHFLEET. LIeth at the Northside of the County, adjoyning to the River of Thames, about one mile (towards the West) distant from Graesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingtrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Boolph. In the Church-yard whereof the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester doth claim: And in this Church are (or lately
were) memorials of the interment of Lacy, above 280. years since: Of the Rikhils (one above 250. years since, and another above 220. years since) Of Lye above 260. years since Of Wangdeford (above 230. years since) Of Hsilt, a Baron of the Exchequer of King Hen. 6.▪ about 230. years since. Of the Dayes, above 160. years since. Of Bredon, a boe 140. years since. And of Hunt, about 140. years since. A Market is kept here upon every Tuesday after Easter Tuesday, till Whitson Tuesday; and three Fairs yearly, viz. one upon St. Botolphs day, being the 24▪ day of March, another upon Easter Tuesday, and the other upon Whit∣son Tuesday. The Mannour of North Fleet, was antiently belonging to the Archbishop of Canterbury, and this Parish ought an∣tiently to have contributed towards the repair of the nineth Peer or Arch of Rochester Bridge. St. Mary NORTHGATE. LIeth towards the East part of the County, and is in, and adjoyning to the City of Canterbury, part thereof viz. the Borough of Staplegate, (otherwise Stablegate) is in the Conty of Kent, Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, division of Justices in that Lath; and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver the same. It was all in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the County of the City of Can∣terbury, and was called St. Mary of Northgate.
NUTSTED. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, about three miles (towards the South) distant from Graves∣end, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Toltingrow, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North di∣vision of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Mildred. OFHAM. OFfeham, lyeth towards the middle of the County, a∣bout one mile and a half (towards the West) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefeild, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Michael. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. ORE. LIeth towards the north side of the County, about one mile and a half (towards the northwest) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East divi∣sion of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath.
The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belong∣ed to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Peter. ORGARSWICK. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, abou three miles and a half (towards the northeast) distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Worth▪ East division of the County; and divi∣sion of Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, The liberty whereof claymeth over the same, but the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury also claymeth there. (The sae being given to that Church by King Hen. 8.) 33. of his raigne) It was in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Canter∣bury, (But the Church is demolished.) ORLESTONE. ORalanston, Lieth towards the southeast part of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the south) distant from Ashford, In the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Ham, & east division of the County. Part thereof is in the Division of the Justices of the Coporation of Romney Marsh (The liberty whereof clay∣meth over the same) and the residue is in the division of the Justifies in the Lath of Shipway.
It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury. Sir Robert Orlanson, was sometimes owner thereof. The Church standeth out of the liberty of Marsh, and was called St. Maries. ORPINGTON. ORpintone, Dpendun, Orpinun, Lieth towards the West end of the County, about one mile (towards the South) distant from St. Mary ray, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West Division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Roche∣ster. The liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claymeth there, also the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clai∣meth over the Mannor of Orpington (which was given to that Church by Edsin (Arch Deacon of Canterbury) in the year 1032. in the tme of King Canuus: At Newell in this Parish ariseth the head of the River Cray. OSPRINGE. LIeth towards the north side of the County about two miles (towards the southwest) distant from Fever∣sham, in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, The Towne of Ospringe hath a Constable of it self, and the liberty of St. Augustine claymeth over the residue of the Parish (the same being in the Hundred of Feversham)
which belonged to that Abbey.) It was all in the Dean∣ry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Town of Ospringe, and was called St. Peter and Paul. OTFORD. O Tanford, Oteford, lyeth towards the middle of the West part of the County, by the River Darent, about three miles, towards the North, distant from Sevenoke. In the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth there, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Otford. It was in the Deanry of Soreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of R∣chester. The Church was called St. Bartholomew, and was an∣tiently a Chappel to Shoreham. Offa King of the Mercians (in the year 791. gave Otford to Christchurch Canterbury (which being afterwards taken away) Wehard (a potent Prelate) by command of Feo∣lagildus, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the year 830. re∣stored the same to that Church. Here was a sumouous building, raised by William Warham, (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 150. yeers since: Bt Thomas Cranmer (his Successor) passed away the ame▪ by exchange to King Hen. 8. A Faire is kept here early, upon the day of St. Bar∣tholomew, being the 24. day of August, which Saint was here holden in great Veneration: The offerings unto whom
here, and the pretended successes thereof, you may read in Mr. Lambards perambulation in Otford. In the year 1016. at this place, Canutus the Dane pitch∣ed his tents, where King Edmund fought him, and put him to flight (with losse of 4500. Danes. Here also (about the year 793. was a cruell battle fought between Offa (King of Mercia) and Alrick (King of Kent) wherein Offo prevailed, and himself slew the said Alrick. OTHAM. OTeham, Lieth towards the middle of the County a∣bout two miles (towards the South-east) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Eyorne, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and East Division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth there, and the liberty of Maidstone claymeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Sutton and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas: In which is or lately was a memorial of the interment of Consten∣ton, above 230. years since. Ralph of Dene founded a Monastery here of Chanons Regular (to the honour of St. Laurence) but they growing weary of the place, pretended great & intolerable scarities of provision for susenance there: And thereupon were by Aela (daughter and heir of the said Dene) removed to Begham (otherwise Bayham, otherwise Beulin) in Fant in Sussex (neer Lamberherst) where (upon land given for that purpose by Sir Robert of Thurnham, in the time of King Rih. 2.) a Priory was built to the honour of the Virgin Mary.
OTTERDEN. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about three miles, towards the Northeast, distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, West Division of the County, and East division of Justi∣ces in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbuy, and the Church was called St. Laurence. PADLESWORTH neer Eleham. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, about three miles (towards the southeast) distant from Ele∣ham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Loningbo∣rough, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Eleham claimeth over of much thereof as is in the upper half Hundred of Loningborough: The liberty of Liminge claimeth over so much thereof as is in the loer half Hunred of Loningborough; and the liberty of the late Archbishp of Canterbury also claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Eeham and Diocess of Canter∣bury: And the Church was called St. Oswald.
PADLESWORTH neer Snodland. PEadlesworthe, lyeth towards the Northside of the County, by the river Medway, about three miles, towards the North, distant from West Malling, in the of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Ayles∣ford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Ro∣cheer: but the Church is ruinated. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the nineth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. PATRICKSBORN. LIeth towards the East part of the County, by the i∣ver Stoure, about two miles and a half (towards the southeast) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries. The Mannour of Patriksborn did in the sixth year of King Edward the 3. belong to the Abbey of Bello loco in
Normandy, by the gift of Iohn of Pratellis, made to the same in the time of King Iohn. And confirmed by that King; As also did the Priory sometimes standing here, but suppressed in the second year of King Hen. 5. St. PAUL. THe Borough of Longport in this Parish, is in the Coun∣ty of Kent, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. It hth a Constable of it self, And the liberty of St. Au∣gustine claimeth over the same: But the Church and re∣idue of this Parish, is in the County of the City of Can∣terbury; and it was all in the Deanry and Diocess of Can∣terbury. East PECKHAM. GReat Peckham, Pecham, lieth towards the middle of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the south) distant from West Mlling, in the Baliwick of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the Coun∣ty, and south division of Justices in that Lah Pt there∣of is in the Hundred of Twyford, and the residue in the Hundred of Littlefield. It was all in the Deanry of Shoreham (a pecular to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Twyford, and was called St. Michael. This Parish ought antiently to
have contributed towards the repair of the fith Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. West PECKHAM. LIttle Peckham, Pecham, lyeth towards the middle of the county, about three miles towards the southwest, distant from West Malling, in the Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. So much thereof as is in the Borough of Oxenoth, is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Hoo, and the resiue is in the Bailiwick of Twyford, and Hundred of Littlefield. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Roche∣ster, the Church standeth in the Hundred of Littlefield, and was called St. Dunstan. In the year 960. Edgiva (widdow of King Edward, sur∣named the elder) gave this Peckham to Christchurch Can∣terbury▪ Iohn Peckham, 1. King Henry 3: was Lord of Peck∣ham. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. And here was a Preceptory or Free-Schoole founded (in the year 1408.) by Iohn Culpeper (one of the Justices of the Common Pleas in the time of King Hen. 4.) And by him endowed with 63l. 6s. 8d. per annum.
PEMBURY. Ppingbury, Lieth neer the South side of the County, about three miles (towards the South East) distant from Tunbidg, in the Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath, part thereof is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, and Hunded of Wachlingstone, and the residue is in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Twyford. It was all in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Ro∣chester. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Wachlingstone, and was called St. Peter. PENSHERST. PEnchester, Lieth towards the South-west side of the Couny, by the river Medway, about three miles (to∣wards the South-west) distant from Tunbridge, in the West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in the Lath of Suttn at Hone. Part thereof (viz. Hall Borough) is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Hundred of Wachlingstone and Lath of Aylesford, and the residue is in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Sommerden, and Lath of Sutton at Hone. The liberty of the Dutchy of Lanchaster claymeth at Chaford in this Parish. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham and (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rohster. The Church staneth in the Hundred of Sommerden.
In this Church are or latey were monuments of Sir Steven Pensherst (otherwise Pencherster) Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports in the times of the Kings Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. And of several of the Noble Family of Sidney, who have a fair seat in this Parish. Saint PETERS. LIeth at the North-east side of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, adjoyning to the Sea, about six miles (towards the North-east) distant fro Sandwih, in the Bailiwick of Bridg and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Towne and Port of Dovor, (of which it is a member) and the lier∣ties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports clayme over the same. It was in the Deanry of West Beer, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Peter. Two Fairs are kept here yearly (one upon our Lady day (being the 25th. day of March) and the other upon St. Peters day, being the 29th day of Iune. And question arising, between the Justices of the Coun∣ty and this Parish, touching assessing the same (as lying in the oraigne) King Hen. 8. took that question away by uniting the same (by Letters Patents) to Dovor. The Ninth of Iuly 1574. In this Parish (under the Cliff, a monstrous fish shot himself on shore, whee (for want of water) he died, the next day, before which time his roar∣ing was heard above a mile; his length was 22. yards long, the neher Jaw opening 12. foot, one of is eyes was more than a car, with six horses, could draw, a man stood upright in the place from whence his eye was , the thicknesse from his back to the top of his lly (which lay upward) was 14. foot, hs taile of the
breath, between his eyes 12. foot: three men stood up∣right in his mouth, some of his ribs were sixteen foot long, his tongue fifteen fot long, his Liver two Cart loads, and a man might creep into his nostrils. PETHAM. PEteham, lyeth towards the middle of the East part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the south) distant from Canterbury, In the Bailiwck and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and Division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Petham. It was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called All-Saints. PLAXTOOLE. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about three miles (towards the southwest) distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south Divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Wrotham claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester, and was antiently part of the Parish of Wrotham. But (about thirteen yeers since) taken off from the same, and made a Parish by Parliament.
PLUCKLEY. Pckele, Plokele, Leth towars the middle of the , about  and a haf towards the , in the Bailiwick of Chart ad Longbrid,  of Calhill, Lah of Sra, East divi∣sion of he Couny, and Division of  in the Lath of Shipway. The liber of he ate Archbishop of Canterbury clay∣meth over the Man  Pukly and Sherland, and the Liberty of We clymeth over the Borough of West Kingsnoth. It was in the Deanry of Chring and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was caled St. Nicholas (in which are) or latel wee memorals of the inerment of Male∣mans ( 220. yers since) also neere or Ladyes Chppell, funded by Richard Deering Esquire (in the time of King Hen. 6.) are emorial o the interment of severall of the anient, and eminent Family f Deering, (wo of them about 130. years since, and another of them 10. years since) and in that Chppell likewise ae (or lately were) memorls of he intermen of everall others of that family (one above 230 years since another about 200. years since, and another above 100. years since. Lanfranck (Archbisho of Canterbury) in the time of King William the Conquerour, gave Pluckley to ne Iohn of Cobham, whose postety (assuming their Surname of the place) flourshed there 200 years, tll Sir William Puckey left oney issue  married to Iohn of Surren∣dn (who unded a faire seat there (called Surrenden) upon he ld Foundation of the Mnnou house) fom that Faly it came (by Marriage) to Haue, and from
him (by Marriage) to the aforesaid Family of Deering, (where it still remaines, and is called Surenden Deer∣ing. At Pevington in this Parish was a Chappell, dedicated to the Virgn Mary (now ruinated) and a Fair is kept in this Parish yearly upon the day of St. Nicholas (being the sixth day of December.) PLUMSTED. LIeth t the North-west side of the County, adjoyning to the River of Thames, about one mile (towards the North east) distant from Woolwich, in th Bailiwick of Suton Dartford, Hundred of Little and Lesnes, Lath of utton at Hone, West division of the County, and up∣per Division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour of Pumsted given to that Abbey by King Edgar (about 690 years since) but taken away by Earl Godwin, and restored by King William the Conquerour. It was in th Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Nicholas. POSTLING. LIeth towards the southeast side of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Hih, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Heane, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries, at which Church ariseth one of the heads of the River Stoure.
PRESTON neer Feversham. PRestetune, Prestan, lieth towards the North side of the County, about one  (towards te loth) di∣stant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lah f Sray, East division of the County, and upper division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberty o the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Preon, and so much of the Parish as is withi the Manors of Cpton, Hammemash, or Selgrae (they being given to that Churh by King Hen. 8. 33. of his raign.) And the  of St. Augustine claimeth over the Parsh (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to tat Abbey.) It was in the Deary of Ospinge, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Katherine. PRESTON neer Fordwich. LIeth towards the East end of the County, by the Ri∣ver Stoure, about two miles and a half (towards the East) distan from Fordwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Preston, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth there: And the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over
the Mnnour , which antiently elonged to but bein, taken away) was in the year 941 King Emnd: And aterwards the same be∣ing, in the time o King William the Coquerur) (Eare of Kent, and Brother of tha Kng) ws restored to the same. It was in the Dery of Bridge and Diocess of Canter∣terbury: And the Church was caled St. Mildred. Promhill see Bromhill. QUEEN BOROUGH. LIeth at the Nrth side of the County, in the Isle of Shppy abot foure miles (towards the North di∣stant from Milton, in the Biliwick of Milton, ath of Scray, and East division of the County. It is a Corporation, and within the division of the Ju∣stices thereof (the liberty of which Corporation claim∣eth over the same) It was made a Borough by King Edward the 3. in the honour of Philip his wife. And was in the Deanry of Sittingborn▪ and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called Holy Trinty. A Castle was here of an antient foundaton (but be∣coming ruinous) 42. of Edw. 3. that King redified and inlarged the same. The fortifiation whereof was (by the appointment of King Hen. 4) srveyed, and repaired by William Wikham (aferwards Bishop of Wincheste) And the same afterwards becoming ruinous was again repaired by King Hen. 8, but was laely demolished.
RAINHAM. LIeth towards the North sie of the County, about ore miles (towards the Est) In the Bailiwick and Hunre o Milton, ath o Sray, East  of the County, and upe division of Just∣ces in that Lath. It was in te Deanry of Stingborn and Docess of Cn∣trbury, and the Church ws  St. Margaret: In the Chappel of which Church is or latey was, a memoriall of the interet there of Blor (founer of that Chp∣pel) above 130. yeas since: And in that Church like∣wie are or lately were memorias of the Interent of Donet, I ost 250. years since. And of aier above 110. years since. RECULVER. REculure, Racui, Raculfre, Raculfe, Reclife, Racuulf, Lieth at the North sie of the County, neer the Isle of Thanet, adjoyig to the ea, about seven miles to∣wards the Northeast, distant from Canterbury, in the Bai∣liwick of Bridge and Petham, ath of S. Augustine, East division of the County. And division of Justices in that Lat. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Reculver, and the liberty of St. Augustine clameth over the Parish (for that it is in the Hundred of lengate, which belonge to that Abbey. But antiently Reculver was a Hundre of it self. It was in the Deanry of West Beer, and Diocess of Can∣terbury,
and the Church was called St. Maries, (which Church was a Cllegiate Church: Hath been famous for te two lofty spired Steeples thereof, (serving for Sea marks.) And at the upper end of the south Isle of the same Church, is (or lately was) an antique Monument (mounted with two spires) of Ethelbert the thirteenth King of Kent, about 900. years since. There likewise is (or lately was a memoriall of the interment of Sandwey 220 years since. The Parsonage was about 380 years since appropria∣ted by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop to the Hospitals of Herbaldown, and St. Iohns without Northgate; and af∣terwards Iohn of Stratford upon Avon, Archbishop, got the same appropriated by King Edw. 3. to the Archbi∣shoprick of Canterbury. Robert of Winchelsey (likewise Archbishop having before (about the year 1294) erected here a perpetual Vicarage. Severus Emperour of Rome, about the year 205 built here a Castle, which he fortified against the Britains; af∣terwards Ethelbert (the first Christian King of Kent) a∣bout 1060 years since, built a Palace here for himsel and his successors: And Eelbert King of Kent, about 860 years since, built here a Colledge (to the honour of the Virgin Mary) and was there buried under an Arch in the North wall thereof. Egbert King of Kent (about 960. years since, gave to one Bassa an English Saxon, land in this Parish, where∣upon he built a Monastery, to the honour of the Virgin Mary, and replenished it with Monks, of the order of St. Benedict. Afterwards, in the year 949. King Eadred (in the fourth year of his raign) gave this Monastery to Christchurch Can∣terbury; notwithstanding which, it continued a Mona∣stery to the time of Aegelnothus Archbishop of Canterbury, which was about the year 1020. And the name of the
Governour (from the name Abbot) was altered to a Dean. A Faire is here kept upon the day of Giles Abbot, be∣ing the first day of September. REVER. LIeth neer the South-east side of the County, by a Ri∣vulet arising neer the same, about two miles and a half (towards the North-west) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Busborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of ustices in that Lath. The liberty of St Augustine claymeh there. I was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. RIDLEY. LIeth towards the West side of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartfrrd, Hun∣dred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, and was in the Deary and Diocess of Rochester. RINGWOLD. LIeth at the Est side of he County, djoyning to the sea, about five miles (towards the Northeast) distant
of Kig Hen. 8.)  this Parish wth Kingsdown the sme) s lying in the that King (to tke awa te questin) y Lettes a∣tens, unte the  Dovor, as the  to have been  formerly, in the times of the Kigs. Hen. 7. and Edw. 1. RIPPLE. LIeth neer the East end of the County, about foure mies and a half (towards the South) distant rom Sandwich, in the Biliwick  Eastry. Hundred of Cornl, ath of St Augustine, Est division of the County, and di∣vision of Justces in that Lath. The liberty o the te Archbishop of Canterbury clam∣eth there, nd he lerty of St. Augustine claimeth over te Mannor of Rpole. It was in te Deary of Sandwich and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. ROCHESTER. THis is a City incorporated, and lyeth towards the Nth side of the County, by the river Medway, about
six miles and a half, towards the North, distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and division of the Justices of that City (The liberty whereof claimeth over the same:) And the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester also claimeth o∣ver the Precincts of the late Catedral there. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Parish Church was called St. Nicholas. A Market is kept here upon every Fryday: And two Fairs yearly (one upon St. Dunstans day being the 19th. day of May▪) and the other upon St. Andrews day, being the 30th▪ day of November. Here are several things worthy to be inlarged upon, viz. the Castle, the City, the Cathedral and Priory, and the Bridge; of all which in order. And first of the Castle, Iulius Caesar about 1700. years since, in the time of Cassibelanus Governour of Britain, commanded the same to be built (according to the Romane order) to awe the Bri∣tains, and the same was called the Castle of Medway, but time and tempests utterly decaying the same; Oes or Vske, King of Kent, about 1150. years since, caused Hroff one of his chief Councellours, and Lord of this place) to build a new Castle upon the old foundation, and here∣upon it took the name of Hroffes Cester. About 350 years afterwards Hasting the Dane besieged, and much impaired the same: And it afterwards lay de∣solate, till the time of King William the Conquerour (who caused it to be new built, and put 500. souldiers (for a guard) therein: To which work Odo (Earle of Kent, and brother of that King) was a great Beneactor. Afterwards, in the year 1088. in the time of King W. Rufus, That Odo and other Barous held this Castle against him: (the same being then accounted the strongest, and most important Castle of England.) And his subjects be∣ing
backward to assist him: He proclaimed him to be accounted a Niding (which was then a word of high re∣proach) that came not to his assistance: whereupon mul∣titudes came▪ and the resistants were forced to yeeld the same to the King: And Gunulphus, a Norman, then Bi∣shop of Rohester, repaired and fortified the same, and built the great Tower therein. Afterwards in the 17. year of King Iohn the Barons held this Castle against him, but he took the same: And in the year following Lewes (son of Philip King of France) likewise took the same: And King Hen. 3. afterwards gave it to Guy of Rochford (a Pictovin) who was after∣wards banished, and thereby lost the same. Afterwards (in the year 1264.) Simon Earle of Leicester besiedged the same, and won the Bridge and fist gate, and then left the siege. Afterwards 5. Rich. 2. the Commons of this County strongly besieged this Castle, and by force took a prisoner out of the same: And thus this Castle ran to decay, and (the old walls afterwards flling) King Edw. 4. repaired both the same and the Castle. As concerning the City. I find it to have been of very great Antiquity, but hath had several great misfortunes; for about 980. years since, the same was wasted by Ethelred, King of the Mercians. About 200. years afterwards, it was assaulted by the Danes (who made a stong Castle before the gate thereof, but were chased away by the then King Aelfred. About 10. years afterwards, it was assaulted, and sub∣dued by King Ethelred, the West Saxon King. Afterwards 7. May 1130. the same was much defaced by fire (King Hen. 1. and many of his Nobles then being present at the Consecration of the Cathedral Church there.) 3. Iune 1137. the same was again (almost all) consu∣med with fire.
The like againe happened there 3. April. 1177. So that It continued desolate till the time of King Hen. 3. at which time it was again repaired. I finde but one Parish and Church to have been here, more than now is, and that was called St. Clement, which in the time of King Edw. 6. was, by Parliament, united unto the aforesaid Parish of St. Nicholas. I finde also three Mint Houses, to have been granted by King Ethelstan, about the year 930. to be in this City, viz two for the King, and one for the Bishop. And 8. Decemb. 1251. King Hen. 3. held a Just here. As concerning the Cathedral and Priory. The same were built by King Ethelbert (in the year 600.) and dedicated to the honour of God, and St. An∣drew, Endowed with lands called Priest Feilds, and Channons were put into the same. But the severall de∣vastations aforesaid of the City, by the Mercians, Danes, and West Saxons, also caused the decay both of this Church and Priory, both which were new builded by the aforesaid Gundulphus (being Bishop there) about the year 1080. And instead of six Priests (at his coming found therein) he placed there 60 black Monks (of the ord∣ of St. Benedict.) And translted into the new Church the bodies of Paulinus (a Romane by Birth) and others his Predecessors Bishops of that Sea) which were buried in the former (to which new Church Earnulphus Bishop there in the time of King Hen. 1. was a great Benefactor.) And to make this Church more famous (about the year 1087) The aforesaid Paulinus (who had been dead 440. years before) was Canonized for a Saint, and inshrined in Silver by Lanfranck (then Archbishop of Canterbury) and many Devotions and Oblations were made to the same. But by the aforesaid seveall fires, Siege of King Iohn, and long contentions and suits beween Gilbert Glanvill Bishop there, and the Monks of the same (wherein the
Monks were driven to such necessity, that they made out the aforesaid Shrine into moey,) The aforesaid Church and Priory fell into great decay and diesteem, and ran much in deb. Aterwards, in the year 1250 Laurence of St. Martin, becoming Bishop of that Sea, one William of Hoo (being keeer of the Treasury of the Church) built  whole Quire thereof. Richard Walden (a Monk there) built the south Isle. Richard Eastgate (another Mok) began the North Isle, And  William of Axenhm almost finished the same. Iefry of (Haddenham Prio thee) paid most of the debts and built the Dorter of the Piory, and St. Edmunds Altar in the Church; and thus it was again reedified an began to come into esteem, and (the more to increase the repute thereof) whereas one William (a Scot) was murdered neer this City (in his jouney towards the Holy Land) and buried in that Church, he was by the aforesaid Bi∣shop Laurence (about the year 1256.) procured to be Canonized for a Saint (to whose Shrine, was great resort and gifts) and the wealth, and repute of this Church was much encreased, so that (at the suppression of Mona∣steries) This Priory was valued at 486l. 11s. 5d. per an. and (in stead of a Prior, and Covent) was placed in this Church, a Dean, and six Prebends. The aforesaid Bishops Gundulphus, and Gilbert, were buried in this Church, as was also Haymo of Hith, Iohn of Shppey, and Iohn Low (all Bishops of that Sea) and likewise Walter of Merton, Bishop there, and Lord Chan∣cellour to King Hen. 3. (Who 27•. Octob. 1277.) assing over the River of Medway here in a boat (there then be∣ing no Bridg) was unfortunately drowned, and (to whose memory, Merton Colledg in Oxford, where he was Founder) did about 60. years since set up a monument in his Church.
And as concerning the Bridge. There was antiently a very strong Timber Bridge (with nine Arches) over the River of Medway, a little di∣stant (towards the North) from the plae where the Stne-bride now is to the maitenance whereof severall Persons, Parishes, and Tenements wee liable, Some of which Parishes are (in this tract) named to be for that purpose chargeable. That Bridge al hd a Tower of timer standing up∣on the same, but (about the year 1264) boh of them were in the Barons wars, spile by fire (as King Iohn, in the year 1215. had attempted to spoil the same.) Afterward in the year 1281., there hapning o great, and so long, a Frost, and Snow, that people passed on foot over this River from Rochester to Stroud, and that Frost suddenly breaking, the remaines of the aforesaid old bridge was borne down, and carried away, with the stream. Afterwards another bridge was builded, which 10. Rich. 2. upon rumour of the coming of the French, was beaten down. Afterwards (in the time of that King) Sir Robert Knoes built the Faire Stone Bridge now here, and Sir Iohn Cobham, and divers Lords, Bishops, and Genle∣men of great quality, whose names Antently hung in a table in the Chappell, founded by the said Sir Robert, as some relate, but as others, and that more probably, by Iohn Coham (about the yer 1394) at the east end of the said Bridg, called Trinity Chapell, contributed money and lands, towards the same, and the maintennce thereof, also William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, about 150▪ years since made the iron work upon the coping thereof. Afterwards much of the revenue belonging o the maintenance thereof, being either concealed, or deteined, and the work decaying: A Commission from Queen El∣zabeth)
for inquiry thereof, was executed, much of the discovered, and by twoActs of Parliament subse∣quent thereunto, viz. 18. Eliz. ca 17. and 27. Eliz. ca. 25. good lawes and provisions were mae for the perpe∣tuall maintenance of this Bridge. In this City also is an Alms house (for relief of poore Travellers) founded by one Wats about 80. years since, and without te East gate of this City (which in some Records is called Cheham.) In the year 1078. was an Hospitall founded by the aforesaid Gundulphus (Bishop of Rochster) and dedicated to the honour of St. Brtholomew for Leers, which was aftewards confirmed by King Hen 3 and King Edw. 3. discharged the same of Taxes, Tallages, &c. RODMERSHAM. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, about two miles (towards the southeast) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas. ROLVENDEN. LIeth at the south side of the County, by the river Ro∣thr, about two miles (towards the southwest) di∣stant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the seven Hun∣dreds, Hundred of Rolvenden, Lath of Scray, West divisi∣on of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lah.
The liberty of the late Den of Canterbury claimeth there, and the lberty of the la Bishop of Rochester claim∣eth over the Retory of Rolvnden. It was in the Deanry of Charing and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was caled St. Maries. In the first of the five Windows n the great Chancel of which Church, is the Effigies of Caw Eqire, in the se∣cond, the Effigies of Sir Iohn Guldeford, wht was n the third, is quite defaced, in the fourth is the Effigies of Au∣cher, and in the fith of Moore, all formerly geat owners in this Parish. The Heir of Halden of Halden, in this Parish married Guldeford, by which mach, that Seat came into that Fa∣mily, one whereof, viz Edward Guldeford Esquire after∣wards upon the day of St. Tiburtius and Valerianus Mar∣tyrs, being the fourteenth day of April, in the year 1444. founded the South Chappel of this Church, and dedica∣ted the same to the honour of St. Anne and St. Katherine, (which appeared so to be founded and dedicated, by a memoriall of the same ingraven in brass, fastned to the south wall of the said Chappel, but latey taken away from that place. At Forsham (in this Parish) are the ruines of an anti∣ent stone structure, of the shape of a little Chppel: And supposed so to have been, to an antient Seat, near there∣unto (called Forsham) lng since dilapidated; but the scite thereof, and how the same was moted, is yet visible. New ROMNEY. RVmen, Romenal, lieth at the southeast side of the Coun∣ty, ajoyning to the sea, about two miles and a half towards the Northeast, distant from Lid, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and East division of the County.
The Town of New Romney, is one of the Cinque Ports, and corporated by the name of Mayo, Jurats and Com∣mnaly of the Town and Port of New Romney, before that, by the name of Jurats and Commonalty of the Town and Port of New Romney▪ before that by the name of Iurats and comonalty of the Town an Port of Romney, and before that by the name of Barons of the Town and Port of Romney. It is win the division of the Justices of that Corpo∣ration, and the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same. The residue of this parish is in the Hundred of St. Mar∣tins, and part thereof in the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh (the liberty whereof clai∣meth over that part) And the residue is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Can∣terbury; and here were antiently five Churches (called St. Laurence, St. Martin, St. Iohn Baptist, one other whose name I finde not; and St. Nicholas) of all which onely the last is now in being, is the Parish Church, and standeth in the Town. This Town (at the time of the Conquest) was in a flourishing condition (having in it twelve Wards, five Parishes, a Priory (of Priors Aliens) and a Hospital, and Sir Rbert of Romney was then owner of the same. It had also a good Haven, at the West side thereof, but (about the fifteenth year of King Edw. 1. the Sea breaking in upon the same, made a great destruction both of man and Beast, spoiled the Haven, and afterwards (by degrees) forsook the same, whereby the repute, and profit of this Town, beca is decayed. Two great meetings of the Cinque Ports, called the Gelling, for all the Ports, and the two antient Towns of Rye and Winchelsea, and their members; and the Brother∣hood or Brother yeld for the five Ports and the said antient Towns onely, are usually (once in the year) held at this
Town upon Tuesday after St. Margaret, which St. Mar∣garet is the twentieth day of Iuly. The Mayor of this Town was antiently (and still is) Elected upon our Lady day (being the five and twentieth day of March.) And the Priory aforesaid was (in the year 1257.) ounded by Sir Iohn Mansell (a Privy Coun∣cellour to King Henry the 3.) for Chanons regular, Ali∣ens: And suppressed in the second year of King Henry the 5. A Market is kept in this Town upon every Saturday, & a Faire yearly upon the day of St. Laurence, being the 10. day of August. Old ROMNEY. LIeth at the southeast side of the County, about one mile and a half (towards the West) distant from new Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, and East division of the County. It was anciently a principall Port: and its antiquity gave occasion of giving the ad∣dition of the word New to the other Port of Romney. And that this was such a Port, in the time of King Edw. the Confessor (above 600. years since) appeareth, for that Earle Goodwin came then, into the Harbour here, and seised and carried away divers ships there riding: And in the time of King Hen. 2. Thomas Becket (Archbi∣shop of Canterbury) upon his endeavour of flight to Rome, took Boat here. But by the seas withdrawing it self from hence, and a fearfull Tempest happening in the night of St. Clements day (being the 23. day of November) in the year 1334. This town was very much impaired, and im∣poverished, and as to any of the purposes aforesaid, is ob∣scure. So much thereof as is in the liberty of the Cinque Ports, is a member of the Town and Port of New Romney,
in the division of the Justices of the same (onely the Boogh of Orelston) in this Parish, is within the liber∣ty of the Cinque Ports, and claimed to belong to the Corporation of Lid, (though reputed a member of the Town and Port of New Romney, and is in the Hundred of Langport, and division of the Justices of that of the Corprations aforesaid, which ath right to the same. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver so much of this Parish as is in the Mannor of Agne, (otherwise Agnee) which was granted to that Church by King Offa (in the year 791. And the same afterwards to King Hn 8. e 33. of this raign) did again give the same to that Church. The liberty also of Romney Marsh claimth over part of this Parish: and that part is in the division of the Ju∣ices of the Corporation of Rome Marsh. And the residue of this Parish (which is our of all the Cororations aforesaid) is part in the Hundred of Lang∣port, & part in the Hundred of St. Martins. And this residue is all in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway. It was in all the Deanry of Limpne, and Dcess of Canterbury, the Church was caled St. Clement, and is with∣in the aforesaid liberty of New Romney, as are also the Houses and street adjacent. RUCKING. ROcinges, Roing, Lieth towards the southeast side of the County, about five miles towards the Northwest, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shwey, and East division of the County. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Ham, and the residue in the Hundred of Newchurch. The liberties of Romney Marsh, and Wye, claim there;
and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claieth over so much thereof as is in the Mannours of Ickham or Rucking, the same being given to that Church by King Hen 8. 33. of his raign. So much thereof as is in the liberty of Romney Marsh, is in the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, and the residue is in the division of the Ju∣stices in the Lath of Shipway. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the hundred of Newchurch, (out of the liberty of Romney Marsh) and was called St. Mary Magdalen. In the year 791. Offa King of Mercia) gave Rucking to Christchurch Canterbury. RYARSH. LIeth towards the middle of the County, by the river Medway, about one mile (towards the North) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Ro∣chester: And the Church was called St. Martin. SALTWOOD. LIeth neer the southeast side of the County, about one mile towards the Northwest distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Heane, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.
The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Saltwood (being given to that Church by a Prince, called Halden, in the year. 1036. It was in the Deanry of Eleham and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. Oesc (otherwise Vske) sonne of Hengist King of Kent, built here a Castle (which was called the Honour of Salt∣wood, and held of the Archbishop of Canterbury by Henry Essex (who by Treason forfeited the same to King▪ Hen. 2. And it was thereupon seised by that King.) But King Iohn afterwards restored the same to the said Church. Henry Mountford (Constable of Dovor Castle) about 430 years, since repaired it. William Courtney (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 270. years since much repaired and inlarged the same. And 6. April 1580. (by reason of an earthquake then happening) part of this Castle fell down. SANDHERST. LIeth at the middle of the southside of the County, by the river Rother, adjoyning to Sussex, about foure miles towards the southeast) distant from Cranbrook, in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred of Selbrit∣tenden, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Betherinden, (otherwise Sand∣herst) in this Parish, being given to that Church, by Offa King of Mercia, in the year 791. It was in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas, in the East window o the North Chappel or Chancell of which Church, was the Picture and Arms of Betherinden, Owner
of the principal Seat in this Parish, antiently called by his name; before Sanaherst, and now Sandherst Place, which Picture and Arms wee lately defaced. A Faire is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Nicho∣las, being the sixth day o December. SANDWICH. SAndwic, This is one of the Cinque Ports, and so was at the time of the Conquest, and lieth at the East side of the County, neer the Isle of Thanet, very neer the Sea, about eight miles and a hal (towards the East) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County and division of the Justices of the Corporation of the Town and Port of Sandwich: The liberties whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same: The liberty of St. Augustine also claimeth there. It was antiently a Hundred of it self, and (in the time of King Edward the Confessor) there were 307. houses in the same. It now is, and for many years past, hath been a Corpo∣ration, Incorporated by the name of the Mayor, Jurats; and Commonalty of the Town and Port of Sandwich; And before that, by the name of Barons of the Town and Port of Sandwich. It was in the Deanry of Sandwish and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and there were antiently foure Churches in this Town, called St. Iames, St. Clement, St Peter▪ and St. Ma∣ry; of which the first is demolished, and the other three are yet standing. The Lord Andomar de Rupy, an Alien, in the time of King Edward the 3. was Archdeacon of Caterbury, and held the aforesaid Church of St. Clement, (then valued at
eight Marks per annum.) And the aforesaid Church of St. Mary (then valued at eight pounds per annum) both which Churches then belonged to tha Archdeaconry In the year 851. Ethelstane the younger (son of King Egbert) at this place gave a memorable overthrow to the Danes, and took nine of their ships. In the year 959. King Egelred gave Sandwich to Christ∣church Canterbury, and (Stonar and Richborough being ru∣iated) the foundation of this Town was begun (in the time of Swanus the Dane) from whom some would have the name of the same to be Swanes ditch or Port: But more probably the name was derived from the Salt Sands or Sandwyke. Here Canuus the Dane (son of the said Swanus) in the year 1015. acted in inhumane Tragedy upon King E∣thelreds friends, by slitting their Noses, and cutting off their Hands and so leaving them: but he (afterwards obtaining the Kingdome) finished this Town: And gave thereunto a Charter (with many Priviledges.) And in the year 1023. gave the Port thereof, and Royalties be∣longing thereunto to Christchurch aforesaid, all which King Hen. 2. afterwards renewed and inlarged. But in the year 1290. the Monks of Christchurch sur∣rendred all their right in this Town (except some houses, and the Kyes) to King Edw. 1. And afterwards all (by way of exchange, for a Mannour in Essex) was in the year 1364 conveyed by the Monks of that Church to King Edw 3. At his place (in the time of the Kenish Saxons) a no∣ble Lady (named Domneva, above 900. years since (by the help o Egbert then King) founded a Monastery (neer a place, afterwards called Canterbury Gate) and dedica∣ted the same to the honour of the Virin Mary (which Monastery was afterwards wasted by the Danes, after∣wards by Queen Emma, and afterwards destroy∣ed by the French) and in the twentith year of King Hen 18
A Sanctimonial or Anchorisse was ounded, neer the place where the old Monastery stood, and out of the ruines of that Monastery was the aforesaid Church of St Mary Builed. Henry Cowfeild (An Anaigne) in the year 1272. foun∣ded here a house of White Fries Carmelites, and dedi∣cated it to St. Mary, in which were buried Iohn of Sand∣wich (sometimes Prior there) above 250. years since; Thomas Legat (a out 250. years since) Thomas Hadlow (about 240. years since) William Beklee (about 220. years since) and Dionyle Plumcooper (about 170. years since) all Friers of that huse. There are also in this Town three Hospitals, viz. St. Brtholomew (ounded by Sir Simon of Sandwich) and St. Iohn, and St. Thomas, founded by one Ellis (above 250 years since) which Ellis, and his Wife, ly buried in the North  of St. Peters Church afresaid, he also appoin∣ted three Preists, viz. two  his said two Hospitls, and one for a common School, founded there by him, and atiently called St. Peters School. Sir Roger Manwood, late Lord chief Baron of the Ex∣chequer, about the year 1563 new built a Free-schoole in this town; And for incouragement of Scholars of that School, Robert Trapes, and his wife, gave mainte∣nance for two Schollers to be sent out of the same to Lin∣coine Colledge in Oxford. An Hoptal  to St. Thomas, was also oun∣ded in this Town by Thomas Rabing, William Swan, Iohn Goddard, and Richard Lo. This Town hath had several misfortnes, viz. in the year 1048. the Danish  entred and spoiled the same. Afterwards, in the year 1217. Lewes son of the King of France, landed here with 600. saile of ships, and burnt the Town And afterwards about the year 1457. In the time of King Hen. 6. 15000. Frenchmen, under the Conduct of
Sir Peter Bressy, landed here, killed the Mayor and other Officers, and robbed, burnt and spoiled the Town. In that Kings time also the Earle of Warwick ransackt the same. And 6. of April 1580. here happened a great Earth∣quake, and the Sea so foamed therewith, that the ships here totered. The Mayor of this Town was antiently (and still is) elected yearly upon the Monday after St. Andrews day, in St. Clements Church: And a Bell was there antiently, (but now in St. Peters Church) rung for summons to the, Election: A Market is kept in this Town, upon every Wednesday and Saturday, and a Fair kept yearly upon St. Clements day (being the 23. day of November) and by the space of three dayes in all. Neer this Town (towards the North) are the ruines of Richborough (alias Richberge, alias Repisborow, alias Rop∣cester) a famous City in the time of the Romanes Go∣vernment here; where they had a Garison, and it was the common Port of arrivall out of France. This place flourished after the coming of the English Saxons: And King Ethelbert the first Christian Saxon King of Kent, had here a Palace Royall. To which at the coming of Augustine the Monk, above 1050. years since, he removed from Canterbury) for his better confe∣rence with the said Augustine (who then lay at Stonar neer thereunto. But this City and the Castle there (hereafter mentioned) were above 650. years since destroyed by the Danes; So that now, where the City stood, is a plain field (yet some ruines of the Castle, of rough Flint are still standing. In this City were buried two Presidents or Provost Governours of the Britains, under the Romane Emperors, viz. Claudius Contentus (above 1450. years since) And Fla∣ius Sanctius (about 50. years afterwards.)
In the year. 991. Ashwin (a Bishop) gave this Richborough to Christ-church Canterbury. About 1600. years since, Arvirdgus (being King of Britain) denied subjection to the Romanes, and thereupon Claudius (the Emperour) sent Vespatian (one of his Councel∣lours) to reduce him, who indeavouring to land at this place, Arviragus resisted him for the present, and began to build the Castle here which afterwards was finished at the charge of Soverianus (or Severus) Affri. (who as a Consul governed Britain for the Romans. And King Arthur (above 1100. years since) at this Richborough fought Mordred (who usurped his Kingdome, in his ab∣sence beyond the sea.) SEALE. LIeth towards the middle of the West part of the County, about two miles (towards the North) di∣stant from Sevenoke, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West divi∣sion of the County, and lower division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Sevenoke claymeth there, and the li∣berty of the Dutchy of Lncaster claimeth over the Man∣nour of Seale. It was in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Peter (which was some∣times a Chappel to Kemsing) And in the same is or lately was) a memorial of the interment of Thomas Breuton (Bi∣shop of Rochester and Confessor to King Rich. 2.) And of Bryene (a Knight) both above 260. years since.
SEASALTER. SEsaltre, lieth at the North side of the County adjoyn∣ing to the Sea, about four miles (towards the north∣east) distant frm Feversham, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Peham, Lath of St. Augustine, East Division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. It is in no Hundred, but hath a Constable of it self. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver the Mannour of Seasalter (being given to the same by King Hen. 8. 33. of his raign.) It was in the Deanry of West Beer, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Alphage (which Church was appropriated to Christchurch Canterbury, by Pope Gregory in the year 1234.) Here are kept yearly four fairs, one upon our Lady day, being the five and twentieth day of March) another upon Midsummer day (being the foure and twentieth day of Iune) another upon Michaelmus day (being the nine and twentieth day of September) and the other upon Christmas day, being the five and twentieth day of December. SELLINDGE. LIeth towards the southeast side of the County, by the river Stoure, about three miles and a half (towards the Northwest) distant from Hith. In the Lath of Shipway, East division of the County and division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Stow∣ting; and the residue is in the Bailiwick of Shipway, and Hundred of Strete.
It was all in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Strete, and was called St. Maries. SELLING. LIeth towards the North part of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the southeast) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Feversham; and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (because that Hundred belonged to that Abbey.) That liberty also claimeth over the Mannour of Selling▪ and the residue of this Parish is in the Hundred of Boughton under the Blean. It was all in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Boughton un∣der the Blean: and was called St. Maries. SEVENOKE. SEnnok, lieth towards the middle of the West part of the County, about four miles and a half (towards the Northeast) distant from Westram, in the Bailiwik of Sut∣ton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower division of Justi∣ces in that Lath. The liberty of Sevenoke claimeth over the same, and the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth at Brad∣bourn in this Parish.
It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Nicholas (in which are, or lately were, memorials of the interment of Law (above 250 years since) of Haymund above 180. years since: of Bourchier above 160. yeas since: of Potkins a∣bove 150. years since: of Brooke, Totleherst, and Gregby, above 140. years since: And of Yardley above 130. years sine. In this Church also is a Chappel, which was dedicated to the Virgin Mary. A Market is kept in this Town, upon every Saturday, And two Faires yearly (viz. one upon St. Peters day, be∣ing the nine and twentieth day of Iune, and the other up∣on the day of St. Nicholas, being the sixth day of December. Towards the end of the raign of King Edw. 3. A Childe being found in this Parish, and the Parents not known, It was named William Sevenoke: Afterwards (in the year 1418. he becoming Lord Mayor of London, founded the Hospitall and Free-schoole, in this Town: To which School, Iohn Potkins in the time of King Hen. 8. was a liberal Benefactor. And the same, and the revenue there∣of being (about the beginning of the raign of Queen Eli∣zabeth) settled and encreased, it became to be called, as now it is, The Free-Schoole of Queen Elizabeth. Thomas Burchier (Archbishop of Canterbury) about 200. years since, bought Knoll, in this Parish of the Lord Say and Seal, and there built a faire House, which Iohn Mor∣ton (his ext successor in that Sea, much inlarged; As al∣so did William Warham (another successor in that Sea) a∣bout twenty years afterwards; and it was afterwards more enlarged, and beautified by the Lord Treasurer Dorset. In this Parish also (about the year 1450. Iack Cade af∣ter long fight, slew Sir Humphrey Stafford, William Staf∣ord,
Esquire, and other Gentlemen (sent by King Henry the sixth to suppresse his Rebellion.) SEVINGTON. LIeth towards the Southeast side of the County, by the river Stoure, about two miles (towards the southeast) from Asford, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of the Chart & Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The liberty of Wye claimeth over the same, by the name of the Yoke of Deland. It was in the Deanry of Limpe and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries, in which are or lately were, severall memorials of the interment of the Family of Barry (of the Mote, in this Parish) some of them Knights; Most whereof are about 250. years since, and of Finch above 210. years since. SHADOXHERST. LIeth towards the southeast side of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the South) distant from Asbford, in the lower division of Justices, in the Lath of Scray: so much thereof as is in the Borough of old Herlackenden, is in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred of Blackborn, Lath of Scray, and West division of the County. Other part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, and East division of the County.
And the residue thereof is in the Bailiwick, and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Ham, and East division of the County. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Blackborne, and was called St. Peter and St. Paul. SHEBBERTSWOLD. SYbertsweld Sibbertswood, Lieth towards the east end of the County, about four miles and a half (towards the North east) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Beusborough, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberties of St. Augustine, and late Archbishop of Canterbury clayme there. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Andrew, in which Church are or lately were antient memorials of the inter∣ment of the family of Philipots of Vpton Court in this Parish. SHELDWICH. SCheldwihe, Shelwich, Lieth towards the North side of the Couny, about three miles towards the South, distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth over the same, for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belon∣ged to that Abbey.
It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Augustine James (in which are or lately were memorials of the interment of At Leese, a Knight (above 260. years since) of Cely a∣bove 230. years since, and of Lisle, and Deyre very anti∣ent. SHIPBORNE. LIeth towards the middle of the West side of the Coun∣ty, about three miles and a half towards the South-West distant from Wotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Aylesford, West di∣vision of the Covnty, and South division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Wrotham claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Giles. A Fair is kept here yearly upon the day of Giles Abbot, being the first day of September. SHOLDON. LIeth the East side of the County, adjoyning to the sea, about three miles towards the South-east distant from Sandwich; in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Cornilo, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberties of St. Augustine, and late Archbishop of Canterbury, claime there. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas.
SHORAM. SHorham, lieth towards the middle of the West side of the County, by the river Darent, about foure miles towards the Northwest) distant from Sevenoke, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Codsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and lower division of justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was in the Deanry of Shoram (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester. Thomas Buckland, founded a Chappel in this Church, and was interred in the same. SHORNE. LIeth towards the North side of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the southeast) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamel, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. Neer the place of the High Altar,  which Church is, or ltely was, a mo∣nument of the iterment of Sir Henry Cobham (Lord of the Mannour of Roundall in this Parish) very antient: And in this Church likewise are, or lately were, memo∣rials
of the interment of two of the Family of Smith, one of them 230. years since; and the other 200. years since; of Sharpe above 160. years since. And of Hernden 130. years since. Shorne was antiently holden by Sir Roger Norwood. SITTINGBORNE. LIeth at the middle of the Northside of the County, about one mile (towards the south) distat from Milton, In the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborne and Diocess of Canterbury; and the Church was called St. Michael. In which are or lately were, memorials of the interment of Bourne above 250. years since: of Septvans 200. years since: of several of the Family of Garrard (one of them 170. years since; another above 160. years since, ano∣ther above 120. years since: of Crowmer (almost 120. years since; and of Poode very antient. Two Faires are kept here yearly (one upon Whitson∣monday (which lasteth three dayes.) And the other upon Michalmass day, (being the nine and twentieth day of September) and lasteth five dayes. SMARDEN. LIeth towards the middle of the County, by the river Medway, about five miles, towards the South, distant from Leneham, in the Lath of Scray, and division of Ju∣stices in the Lath of Shipway.
Such part hereof as is in the Borough of Povenden, is in the Hundred of Backborn,; and such part thereof as is ei∣ther in the Boroughs of Omenden, or Stepherst, is in the Hundred of Bckley; and both the said parts in the Bai∣liwick of the seven Hundreds and West division of the County. And the residue of the said Parish is in the Bai∣liwck of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Calhill, and Est division of the Couny. The liberties of the late Dean of Canterbury and St. Au∣gustine claime there; and the liberty of the late Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, claimeth over the Den of Holnherst, in this Parish, as held of the Mannour of Sherland. It was all in the Deanry of Charing, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Calehill, and was called St Michael. In which Church was a Rood loft: and in the year 1558 (one Drainer of this Parish, being a Justice of the Peace) to get advantage of his Neighbours, made in that Lot nine holes (through which he looked into the Church, and saw who observed not the Popish Ceremonies at Masse there; and them he afterwards punished, whereby he got the name of Iustice nine Holes (which name is yet in memory thereabouts:) who so desireth to read the fur∣ther story hereof, may finde the same at large, in the third part of the Acts and Monuments of the Church, fol. 971. A. A Market is kept here upon every Friday, and a Faire yearly upon Michaelmass day, being the nine and twenti∣eth day of September. SMEETH. SMede, lyeth towards the southeast part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the southeast)
distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway. Hundred of Bircholt Franchise, East division of the Coun∣ty, and division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. SNARGATE. LIeth towards the southeast side of the County, about foure miles, towards the Northwest, distant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hun∣dred of Aloesbridge, and East division of the County. Part thereof is within the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, and the liberty there∣of claimeth over the same. Other part thereof, viz. upon the Ree wall, is in the li∣berty of the Town and Port of New Romney, and division of Justices of that Town and Port. And the residue is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The liberty also of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth in this Parish. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in Romney Marsh, and was called St. Dunstan. SNAVE. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the Northwest) di∣stant from New Romney, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of the
Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh, the liberty whereof claimeth over the same. Te liberty of St Augustine claimeth over the Mannour of Snave, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over so much of this Parish as is within the Man∣nour of Ickham. Part thereof is in the hundred of Aloesbridge, other part in the hundred of Ham, and the residue in the Hundred of New Church. It was in all in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Aloesbridge, and was called St. Augustine. SNODLAND. SNodiland, Snodesland, lyeth towards the North side of the County, by the river Medway, about foure miles and a half towards the Northwest) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth o∣ver the same (it being given to that Church by King Ec∣bet, in the year 838. It is said also to be given to the same by one Birtrick and his Wife, above 700. years since. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called All-saints: in the Porch whereof is or lately was, a Memorial of the interment of William A∣lisander (who gave a weekly stipend of Bread to the Poore here for ever: And died above 180. years since. And in that Church likewise are or lately were memorials of the interment of Palmer 250. years since, and of Pole 170. years since.
This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the nineth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. SOUTHFLET. SVthflete, Suthflet, lyeth at the North side of the Coun∣y, about two miles (towards the south) distant from Gravesend, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Suon at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, claimeth o∣ver the same: It being given to that Church by Gundul∣phus, Bishop of that Sea, about 550. years since; and con∣firmed thereunto by King Hen. 1. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester; and the Church was called St. Nicholas. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the third Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. SPELDHERST. LIeth at the southwest side of the County, adjoyning to Sussex, about three miles (towards the southwest) distant from Tunbridge. In the West division of the Coun∣ty, and lower division of Justices in the Lath of Sutton at Hone. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tun∣bridge, Hundred of Wachlingstone, and Lath of Aylesford. And the residue is in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundreds of Codsheath and Somerden, and Lath at Sutton at Hone.
The liberty of Sevenoke claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Roche∣ster. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Somerden, and was called St. Maries. In this Parish are those famous Waters (called by some Fnt Wlls, and by others Tunbridge Wells) so much re∣sorted unto, and drunk of by the Nobilty and Gentry of ths Nation: coming thither for that purpose from seve∣rall parts yearly in the Summer, and more especially in the months of Iuly and August. At Grombridge (in this Parish) is a Chappell called St. Charls: And there is also a Fair yearly, upon the day of St. Iohn Port Latin, being the sixth day of May. STALISFEILD. LIeth toward the middle of the County, about foure miles (towards the Northeast) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the Couny, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. STANFORD. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the Northwest) distant from Hith, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath.
It was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called All-saints. Brtram of Cryoll, was antienly Ownr of Ostenhanger, (otherwise Westenhanger) in this Parish, which building was beautified by Sir Edward Poinings. Some suppose the name to have been Oesinghangar, and to have been first builded by Oesc (son and successo of Hengist, first Saxon King of Kent) and to have afterwards come to the said Bertram Cryoll (but of this I find no cer∣tanty) This Ostenhanger, is said to have been antien∣ly a Parish of it self: but is now reputed to be (as afore∣said) in this Parish of Stanford. STANSTED. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, about two miles, towards the Northwest, distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Ay∣lesford, West division of the County and south division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Wrotham claimeth over the same. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester. This Parish was formerly parcell of the Parish of Wre∣tham: and the now Church here a Chappel to that Parish Church: But (about thirteen years since) this Stansted was made a Parish by Parliament. STAPLE. LIeth towards the East end of the County, about three miles (towards the southwest) distant from Sandwich,
in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augu∣stine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and late Dean of Canterbury claim there. But the liberty of St Augustine claimeth over the same for that it is in the Hundred of Downhamford, which belonged to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canter∣bury; and the Church was called St. Iames. A Faire is kept here yearly upon the day of St. Iames, being the five and twentieth day of July. STAPLEHERST. LIeth towards he Southside of the County, about four miles, towards the North) distant from Cranbrooke, in the West division of the County, and lower division of Justices in the Lath of Scray. So much thereof as is in the Northborough, Boroughs of Kings Franchise, Fairerouh, or Loveherst, is in the Bai∣liwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred of Cranbrooke, and Lath of Scray. Other part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Twford, Hundred of Marden, and Lath of Scray. And the residue is in the Bailiwick of Eyhorn and Lath of Aylesford (viz. part thereof in the Hundred of Eyhorne, and the other part called Detling Borough) in the Hun∣dred of Maidstone. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth in this Prish It was ll in the Deanry of Sutton and Diocess of Can∣trbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Cranbrook and was called All-saints.
The aforesaid Borough of Loveherst, hath a Court Leet of it sel (holden at the Mannour of Loveherst:) And the inhabitant thereof ow no service to the Cout eet hol∣den for the Hundred of Cranbrooke: but at that Court a Constable for that Hundred may be chosen out of that Borough. STELLING. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the Northwest) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Lath of Ship∣way, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Loningborough, and the residue in the Hundred of Stowting. The libery of Eleham climeth over so much thereof as is in the upper half Hundred of Loningborough, and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth also in this Parish. It was all in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. Two Faires are kept here yearly, one upon Ascention day (being the Thursday seven nigh before Whitsunday,) and the other upon Alollanday, being the first day of No∣vember. St. Stephens, see Hackington. STOCKBURY. LIeth towards the Northside of the County about four miles (towads the southwest) istant from Mlton, in the East division of Justices in the Lath of Aylesfo.
Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Mil∣ton, ath of Sray, and East division of the County and the residue is in the Baliwick and Hundred of Eyhorne, Lath of Alesford, and West division of the County. It was all in the Deanry of Sittingborne and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church stande  the Hundred of Eyhorn, and was called St. Mary Magdalen: And a Faire is here kept yeary, upon the day of St. Mary Magdalen, being the two and twentieth day of Iuly. TODMARSH. LIeth towards the Northeast side of the County, by the River Stoure, about foure miles (towards the North∣east) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Downhmford, which belonged to that Abbey:) It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Dio∣cess of Canterbury: and the Church was called St. Maries, (which Church, about 400. yeas since was (by the then Abbo of St. Augustine) given to the late Hospitall of poor Priests in Canterbury.) STOKE. STokes, Stoches, Andschohesham, li that the North ide of the County, neer the Isle o Grea, about five miles and a half (towards the Noheast  fom Rochester, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and North divisio of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Hundred of Hoo, and the residue in the Hundred of Shamell.
The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth o∣ver the same; which was given to that Church by King Eadbert (in the year 738.) And being afterwards taken away, was restored by King William the Conquerour, and confirmed by King Henry the first. It was in the Deanry and Docess of Rchester, the Church standeh in the Hundred of Hoo, and was called St. Pter. A Fair is kept here yearly upon our Lady day (being the five and twentith day of ) This Parish ought antinly to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the first Arch or Peer of Rochester bridg. STONAR. STonore, Stonhor, Lapis Tiuli, Lieth at the East sie of the County, in the Isle of Thant, near the sea, at the other side of the River, from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridg and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine; East division of the County, and division of the Justices of the Town and Port of Sandwich (whereof it is a member) and the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports claime over the same. It was (as I conceive) in the Deanry of West Beer, and Dioces of Canterbury, but the Church is demolished. This was an antient Town, and Haven (made deso∣late by the Danes) and here Augutine the Monke, in the time of Eelbert (King of Kent) anded, and staid, tl that King sent hither to him, and treated with him; touching converting his people to the Christian faith. Hre also ∣bout 640 years since) landed Canuus the Dane, an af∣terwards (21•, Maij. 1215.) Lewes sonne of the King
of France when they severaly came to invade this Nati∣on. It was antiently compassed with the water, then called Stner, and by the Brains the Dowe It belonged atiently, to the Abbey of St Augustine, whichy the rant of King Hen. 1. had a Fair here hol∣den yerly, five dayes before, and ater the translation of S Augustine (being the 26th day of May) but long since icontinued. Votimer King of Britaine (about 1200. years since) after his great victory over the Saxons, At this place cau∣sed his Monument to be erected, and commanded his o∣dy to be buried in the same, for a future terrour to the Saxons; but he failed in his end therein, dying shortly afterwards, and buried elsewhere. STONE neer Dartford. LIeth at the Northside of the County, adjoyning to he river of Thames, about two miles and a half (to∣wards the Northeast) distant from Dartford, in the Bai∣liwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper divsin of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth o∣ver the same. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was caled St. Maries. In which are o lately were memorials of the intermet of  (almost 260. years ) Of Lumbard and Lakn (both almost 250. years since) Of Soewell, neer 220 years since: Of Bonfant Owner of Stonehouse (otherwise Stone Castle) in this Pa∣rish almost 200. years since: Of Payname neer 120. years Of dives of the Family of Chapman (sometimes owners
of Stonehouse aforesaid) and of Dew (all very antien) And in a Chppel there, founded by Sir Iohn Wilshire Knight (likewise Owner of Stone-house a foresaid) is or lately was a memoriall of the interment there of the said Sir Iohn Wilshire and his Wife, above 130. years since. STONE neer Feversham. LIeth neer the North side of the County, about two miles (towards the southwest) distant rom Fever∣sham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the Couny, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over so much thereof as is in the Mannours of Copton, Sel∣grave, or Hamme Marsh. The same being given to that Church by King Hen. 8. 33. of his raign.) But the liber∣ty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same. For that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belonged to that Abbey. It was in the Diocess of Canterbury; the Church is de∣molished, But in what Deanry this Parish was, or by what name that Church was called, I finde not. STONE in Oxney. LIeth at the Southside of the County, adjoyning to Sussex, by the river of Rother, in the Isle of Oxney a∣bout four miles (towards the southeast) distant from Ten∣terden, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Oxney, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury eth
there; and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over t Rectory and Vicarage of Stone. It was in the Deanry of Limpn, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St Maries (which Church belonged to the Abbey of St. Augustine, and the Vicarage was endowed 29 of April 1360. in the time of Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury: About the year 994. this place was burnt and spoiled by the Danes. Neer the side of the Marsh here, at a place called Ab∣dale (alias Ape) are the ruines of a geat structure of Stone, supposed by some to have ee a Castle, but re∣ported by others (and that more probably) to have been onely store-houses for Merchants, when the sea came neer the same (as antiently it did) A Faire is kept here yearly upon Ascention day, (being the Thursday seven night before Whitsunday.) STOWTING. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the southwest) distant from Eleham, in the Bailiwick, and Hundred of Stowting, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries. In the year 1044. Egelricus Big, gave Stowting to Christ∣church Canterbury.
STROVD. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, adjoyning to Rochester Bridge, by the River Medway, in the Ba∣liwick of Hoo, Hundred of Shamell, Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the County. Part thereof is in the division of the Justices of the City of Rochester, and the liberty of that City claimeth over the same, viz. from the High-street of Rochester over the Bridge to the Mill, called Stroud Mill (including the Mll, and from thence all along the High-street) at the right hand side thereof to the signe of the Angell, and all Little Borough; and so beyond the Church, to the way between Friendsbury and Cookestone, and up the way lead∣ing to Friendsbury, to the House called the Ship (inclu∣ding the Church of Stroud. And the residue is in the North division of Justices in the Lath of Aylesford. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester also claimeth there, and the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claim∣eth over the Mannour of Godington in this Parish. It was in the Deanry and Dioess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Nicholas. A Faire is kept here yearly upon the day of the Assump∣tion of our Lady (being the fifteenth day of August.) Gilbert Glanvill, Bishop of Rochester, about 450. years since, founded here an Hospital, (to the honour of the Virgin Mary: but as others report, to the honour of St. Andrew, which at the suppression, was valued at 52l. 9s. 10d. ob. per annum.
STURMOUTH. LIeth towards the Northeast part of the County, by the river Sure, about foure miles, (towards the North∣west) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there; but the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that it is in the Hundred of Blngate, which belonged to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All-saints. STURREY. LIeth towards the North side of the County, by the river Stoure, about two miles towards the North-east ditant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petam, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same (for that is is in the Hundred of Blengate,) which belong∣ed to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Nicholas.
SUNDRISH. SVndriche, Sunderhrsce, lyeth towards the West end of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the Northeast) distant from West, in the Bailiwick of Sut∣ton Brley, Hundred of odsheath, Lath of Sutton at Hoe, West division of the County, and lower division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Sundrish. It was in the Deanry of Shoreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury,) but in the Diocess of Ro∣chester. SUTTON neer Dovor. LIeth at the East side of the County, about five miles (towards the Northeast) distant from Dovor, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Corlo, Lath of St. Au∣gustine, East division of the County, and division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberties of the late Archbishop of Canterbury and St. Augustine claime there. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury; and by an Earthquake happening 6. April 1580. a piece of this Parish Church fell down. SUTTON at Hone. SVttune, lyeth towards the Northside of the County, by the river Darent, about two miles towards the
southeast, distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sut∣ton Dartford, Hundred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there; and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury, claimeth over the lands late of Sir Anthony Roper in this Parish. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester: And the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist, which Church was given to the Church of Rochester by Kng Hen. 1. East SUTTON. LIeth about the middle of the County, about foure miles towards the southwest, distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices i that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. SUTTON VALLENCE. LIeth about the middle of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the southeast) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, west division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries
A Faire is kept here yearly, upon the day of St. Ed∣mund the King, being the twentieth day of November. William Lambe, Clothworker of London, erected a Free-Schoole here, with allowance to the Master of 20l. per annum, and of 8l. per annum to the Usher, and he also built here 6. Alns-houses, with allowance of 10l. per annum to the same. Here also are the ruines of an antient Castle, built (as is conceived) when the Sea came up the Valley under the same; which that it so did, appeareth by an Anchor there found (not far from the Castle) in the memory of men lately living: but when, or by whom this Castle was built, or how ruinated, I finde not. SWANSCOMBE. LIeth at the Northside of the Couny, neer the River of Thames, about two miles towards the West distant from Gravesend; In the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford Hun∣dred of Axstone, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and uper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul, in which are (or lately were) memorials of the interment of Thomas, above 160. ears since: and of Bonevant, above 140. years since. This place is famous, for that here the men of this County with boughs in their hands (like a moving wood) inclosed King William the Conquerour: and (casting down their boughs) prepared for battle, demanding the enjoyment of their antient Customs and Franchises, which he thereupon granted. The antient and noble Family of Mneusies were an∣tienty Owners hereof; and (as is conceived) this place
took its name from the Campe of  the Dane, pit∣ched neer this place. But who so desireth to be satisfied touching St. Hilde∣ferth, sometimes famous here for Curing Mad-men: I re∣fer him to Mr. Lamberts Perambulation in Swanscombe. SWAYCLIFFE. LIeth at the Northside of the County (adjoyning to the Sea) about five miles towards the North) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hun∣dred of Whitstaple, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Man∣nour of Swaycliffe, and the liberty of the late Deane of Canterbury claimeth over so much of this Parish, as is with∣in the Mannour of Shourt. It was in the Deanry of West Beere and Dioces of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist: SWINGFEILD. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, abou three miles (towards the southeast) distant from Ele∣ham, in the Bailiwick of Stowting, Hundred of Folkone, Lath of Shipway, East division of the County, and divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Dovor, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, an the Church was called St. Peter: in which is, or lately was a memoriall of the interment of Tong (who made one of the Windows thereof.
Here also was a religious Foundation (called a Precep∣tory) valued at the suppression at 87l. 38. 3d. ob per annum. Robert Fineux was Lord of Swingfield at the time of the Conquest. TENHAM. TEneham, lyeth towards the Northside of the County (neer the Isle of Sheppey) about two miles and a half (towards the East) distant from Mn, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, Hundred of Tenham, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Tenham (which was given to that Church by King , in the year 791. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries (which Church was in the year 1227. annexed and united to the Archdeaconry of Canterbury, and 35. Ed. 3. The Lord Andomar de Rupy (an alien) was Archdeacon there, and held this Church then valued at 130l. 6. 8d. per annum. And in the same are or lately were, memorial of the in∣terment of Frogell (above 210. years since, and of Ma∣reys, very antient. TENTERDEN. LIeth towards the south side of the County, by the ri∣ver Rother, about six miles (towards the East) distant from Cranbrooke, in the Bailiwick of the seven Hundreds, Hundred of Tenterden, Lath of Scray, West division of the County, & division of the Justices of the Corporation of
Tenteden (he liberties whereof, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same; The liberty of St. Augustine clai∣meth over the Rectory of Tenterden: And the liberty of Wye claimeth over the Den of Chepredge in this Parish (which Parish and the aforesaid Hundred are incorpo∣rated by the name of Mayor, Jurats and Commonaly of the Town and Hundred of Tenterden) before that, by the name of Bailiffe and Commonalty of the Town and Hundred of Tenterden, and before that, by the name of Barons o the Town, and Hundred of Teuterden. It is a member of the antient Town of Rye, and was annexed to the same in the time of King Hen. 6. (in whose time this Town and Hundred was first incorporated.) The Election of the Bailiffe, and afterwards of the Mayor antiently was (and still is) in the Town Hall on the day of the Decollation of St. Iohn Baptist (being the nine and twentieth day of August.) This Parish was in the Deanry of Charing, and Dio∣cess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Mildred (in which was antiently an Altar to St. Iohn Baptist) and there is yet in the same a faire monument of Whitfield (an antient Family in that Parish.) And memorials of the interment of Austen and Shorte (likewise two antient Families there.) In this Church were likewise laely memorials of the interment of Phillips and Curtis (also antient families) here (But the inscription of the first is defaced, and the other gone) The steeple of this Church is famous for the faire, loty, and well building of the same (out of which formerly hung  a Beacon) there are severall relations touchng the rise of that common report that this steple was the cause of Goodwin Sands (some whereof are ridicu∣lous, and impossible) but the most probable relation of the rise of the same is thus. Goodwin Earl of this County, and father of King Ha∣rold) was in the time of King Edward the Confessor ow∣ner of a great quantity of flat Lands in this County (neer
the Isle of Thane) defended from the sea by a great wall, which lands afterwards (in the year 1099.) was parcell of the possessions of the Abbot of St. Augustine (but re∣teyned the name of Goodwin, formerly owner thereof) and that Abbot, being then also owner of the Rectory of Ten∣terden, and having begun the building of this steeple and the tme of year for such purpose being much spent, the thoughts, and actions, of him, and his agents were so set upon the finishing of that work, that they neglected te care of watching, and preserving the aforesaid wall, and (3. of November in that year) the sea broke over, and ruined the same, and drowned the aforesaid lands (over∣whelming the same) with a light sand, (there stll remain∣ing) and the place thereby obteyned the name of Goodwin Sands, and became (as still it is) dreadfull, an dan∣gerous to Navigators, and thus (accidentially) this Ten∣terden steeple is said to be the cause of Goodwin sands. One Heyman (Ancestor of the late Sir Peter Heyman) ve∣ry antiently founded the Free-School of this Town, and William Marshall Clerke about the year 1521. gave ten pound per. annum, out of lands in this parish (towards the maintenance of the School-Master there. In this parish at Smalhith, is a Chapell (still used, and maintained) and (by Tradition) is said to have been founded by one Shepherd. A Market is kept in this town of Tenterden, upon every Friday, and a Fair yearly upon the day of St Marke (be∣ing the five and twentieth day of Aprill.) TESTON. TErstane, Lieth towards the middle of the County, by the River Medway, about two miles and a half towards the South-east) distant from West Malling, in
the Bailiwick and Hundred of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford West division of the County, and South division of Justi∣ces in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Rochester, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. The Mannour of Teston, was given by Elianor (Wife of King Edward thei.) to Christ-church Canterbury (which gift was confirmed by that King. This parish is a Borough, and hath a Court Leet of it self (where the Borsholder is chosen) and the inhabitants thereof owe no service to the Court Leet holden for the Hundred of Twyford, but at that Court, may be chosen a Constable for that Hundred out of this Borough. THANINGTON. LIeth towards the Northside of the County by the Ri∣ver Stoure, about one mile (towards the South-west distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Westgate, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clay∣meth there. It was in the Deanry, and Diocess of Canterbury and the Church was called St. Nicholas. THROWLEY. THroughley, Trewligh, Lieth towards the North part of the County, About four miles towards the South distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick and Lath of
Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same, for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belong∣ed to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Ospringe, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was caled St. Michael. Sir William of Dene, was (at the time of the Conquest) owner of Throwley, and here antiently was a Priory of Priors Aliens (a Cell to St. Bertins) and suppressed 2. Hen. 5. THURNHAM. LIeth towards the middle of the County, about two miles and a half (towards the Northeast) distant from Maidstone, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhone, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries. Here was a Castle founded (in the time of King Ste∣phen) by Sir Leonard Goddard. TILNESTONE. TIlemannestune, Tilesmannestune, Lieth towards the East side of the County, about foure mile (twads the South) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwik, and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustin, East vsion of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth
there, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Tilnestone. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Andrew. TONG. THong, lyeth towards the Northside of the County, about one mile and a half (towards the East) distant fom Milton in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper divisi∣on of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St Giles (which Church was by King Edw. 1. appropriated to West Langdon Ab∣bey.) Neer the Mill here (about a quarter of a mile di∣stant from this Church) are the ruines of an old Castle, built by Hengist the Saxon (about 1200. years since, upon this occasion, viz. This Hengist being sent for by Vortiger (King of Britain) to assist him against his Northern ene∣mies, and giving them the overthrow, obtained of that King so much ground as might be enlosed with a Bls Hide (to build him a Seat upon) which Hide he cut in∣to very small Thongs (left fast one unto the other.) And within the compass thereof, built that Castle (which he called Thong Castle) from whence also this Parish after∣wards took its name. In this Caste he afterwards feasted that King, who (in drinking of a Wassaile, in a Cup of Gold, presented then and there, to him at Supper, by the Lady Rowen (ther∣wise Rxina) daughter, or as others more credibly report, Neece of the said Hengist (he being then too young to have such a daugher) was so surprised and besotted, with her beauty and behaviour, that (to the great dison∣tent,
and prejudice of the Nation) he divorced himself from his then lawfull Wife, and married this Lady: And (upon that marriage) Hengist got the government of this County (which afterwards gave advantage to him to e∣rect a Kingdome here) and to other Saxons to erect other Kingdomes in this Nation, whereby the Heptarchy was framed. This Castle afterwards and since the Conquest, became the Seat of the noble Family of Badlesmer. TROTTISCLIFFE. TRosclif, Trottesclive, lieth towards the middle of the West part of the County, about two miles (to∣wards the Northeast) distant from Wrotham, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefeild, Lath of Ay∣lesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth over the same, being given to that Church by Offa (King of Mercia) in the year 764. It was in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the third Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. TUDELEY. LIeth towards the southwest part of the County, about two miles (towards the southeast) distant from Tun∣bridge, in the Lath of Aylesford, West division of the Coun∣ty, and south division of Justices in that Lath.
Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Twy∣ford, and the residue in the Bailiwick of the Lowy of Tun∣bridge, and Hundred of Wachlingstone. It was all in the Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Ro∣chester. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Wachlingstone, and was called All-saints. TUNBRIDGE. TOwn of Bridges, lyeth towards the southwest part of the County, by the river Medway, about five miles (towards the southeast) distant from Sevenoke, in the Bai∣liwick of the Lowy of Tunbridge, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Tunbridge, which (in the time of Boniface, Archbishop of Canterbury, about 310. years since, came to that Sea. Part thereof is in Southborough, other part in the Town of Tunbridge, and the residue in Helden Borough (every of which hath a severall Constable of it self.) It was i th Deanry of Malling and Diocess of Roche∣ster. The Church standeth in Tunbridge Town, was called St. Peter and Paul and bulded by Richard o Clare (Earle of Hertford and Glcester) in the time of King Hen. 3. And was appropriaed to the Knights of St. Iohn of Ierusalem. In this Church are (or ately were) memorials of the interent of he Lords Stafford and Audley (sometimes Lords of that Mannour) about 300. years since. A Market is kept here upon every Fryday, and three Fairs yearly (one upon Ashwednesday, (being the Wednes∣day after Shrovesunday) another upon Midsummerday, be∣ing
the foure and twentieth day of Iune; and the other upon St. Lukes day, being the eighteenth day of October. In the time of King William Rufus, Richard (beir of the Lords of the Seigniory of Briony in Normandy) had (in ex∣change for the same) this Town, and the Lowy about it, (containing by measure, three miles every way from the Center, answerable to that Seigniory) and at this Town he built the Castle (holding the same of the Archbishop of Canterbury, by a Knights Fee, and the Office of Steward, at his Inthronization, and had within the same reurn of Writs, creation of Offcers, and especiall Sessions in Eyre (long since discontinued) His Posterity (surnamed of Clare) were Earls of Glo∣cester and Stafford, and Dukes of Buckingham, and made this Castle their chiefe residence; but by attainder of Treason (in the year 1520.) lost the same. King Stephen (in the Year 1088.) took this Castle, as also did King Iohn. King Hen. 3 granted to Richard of Clare (Earle of Glo∣cester) license to wll and embattaile this Town, but that King afterwards (in the year 1264. seised this Castle, and therein the Countesse of Glocester, which he let go, but garisoned the Castle. The aforesaid Richard of Clare, about the year 1241. neer this Castle founded a Priory of black Channons (of the order of St. Augustine. To the honour of St. Mary Magdalen, which at the suppression 17. Hen. 8. was valued at 169l 10s. 3d. per annum. Sir Andrew Iud Lord Mayor of London in the year 1550 and son of Iohn Iud of this Town, Founded here a Free∣school, in the year 1551. with allowance to the School∣master of 20l per annum, and to the Usher of 8l. per an∣num (The oversight and government whereof, he com∣mitted to the Company of Skinners, London, (of which Company himself was Fee.) And as is reported, that
Company (in faithfull discharge of that trust) expended 4000l. for defence and maintenance of this Schoole. TUNSTALL. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, about two miles (towards the south) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper division of Justi∣ces in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist (the Patronage of which Church was about 450. years since) granted by Hubert de Burgh Earle of Kent, to the Archbi∣shop of Canterbury, and in this Church is (or lately was) a memoriall of the interment of Crowmer, above 160. years since. ULCOMB. HVlecombe, Olecombe, Wolecumbe, Lieth neer the middle of the County, about two miles and a half (to∣wards the southwest) distant from Leneham, in the East division of Justices, in the Lath of Aylesford. Part thereof viz. (the Borough of Kingsnode) is in the Bailiwick and Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same, (for that it is in the Hundred of Feversham, which belong∣ed to that Abbey. And the residue is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Ey∣horne, Lath of Aylesford, and West division of the County. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury also claimeth there.
It was all in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Eyhorn, and was called All-saints, it belonged antiently to Christ-church Canterbury, and being taken from the same; It was (in the year 941.) restored by King Edmund: And (about 430. years since) made a Collegiate Church (by Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury) and the head thereof was called Arch Presbyter. In this Church are (or lately were) memorials of the interment of several of that antient and eminent Family of St. Leger, whose antient Seat was in this Parish, one of them above 210. years since, and another above 180. years since. UPCHURCH. LIeth towards the Northside of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the Northwest) distant from Milton, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Milton, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper di∣vision of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. In the wall of which Church (as is reported) was long since inter∣red one Woodokes. WALDERSHARE. LIeth neer the East side of the County, about four miles and a half (towards the south) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Au∣gustine,
East division of the County, and division of Ju∣stices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called All-saints (which Church was about 340. years since, appropriated to West Langdon Abbey, by Walter Reynolds (Archbishop of Can∣terbury. Sir William Mamouth was at (the time of the Con∣quest) Lord of Waldershare. WALMER. LIeth at the East side of the County, adjoyning to the Sea, about foure miles and a half (towards the south-east) dstant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Corporation of the Town and Port of Sandwich, (whereof it is a member, and the liber∣ties of that Town and Port, and of the Cinque Ports claim over the same. It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Maries. Here King Hen. 8. about 120. years since, built a Castle, and (in his time) question arising between the Justies of the County, and this Parish (touching assessing thereof.) That King took away the question, by uniting the same by Letters Patents to Sandwich. WALTHAM. LIeh towards the middle of the East part of the Coun∣ty, about three miles (towards the East) distant
from Wye, in the East division of the County, and divi∣sion of Justices in the Lath of St. Augustine. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Bridge and Petham, and Lath of St. Augustine. Other part thereof (viz. so much as is in Townbo∣rough) is in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hun∣red of Wye, and Lath of Scray, and the liberty of Wye, claimeth over the same. And the residue is in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Stowting, and Lath of Shipway. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. It was all in the Deanry of Bridge, and Docess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Bridge and Pe∣tham, and was called St. Bartholomew. St. Warburgh see Hoo. WARDEN. LIeth at the Northside of the County, in the Isle of Sheppey, adjoyning to the sea, about five miles and a hlf (towrds the North) distant from Feversham, in the Bailiwick of Milton, Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and upper Division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Can∣terbury.
WAREHORNE. VVErehorne, lyeth towards the southeast part of the County, about five miles and a half, towards the south) distant from Ashford. So much thereof as is in the Boroughs of great Kennar∣ton, or old Herlackenden; is in the Bailiwick of the se∣ven Hundreds, Hundred of Blackborn, Lath of Scray, and West division of the County. And the residue is in the Bailiwick of Shipway, Hun∣dred of Ham, Lath of Shipway, and East division of the County. The liberty of Romney Marsh doth claim over part thereof, and that part is in the division of the Justices of the Corporation of Romney Marsh. And the residue of this Parish is in the division of the Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The liberties of Wye, and the late Dean of Canterbury, claim in this Parish. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Ham, and was called St. Matthew. In the year 1010. Aelphege Archbishop of Canterbury, adjoyned Warehorne to his Church. Two Faires are kept here yearly (one at Ham, upon the day of finding of the Holy Cross, being the thrid day of May) and the other neer the Church, upon St. Mathews day, being the one and twentieth day of September.
WATRINGBVRY. WOtringbery, Wateringbyrie, Oteringaberig, Lyeth to∣wards the middle of the County, about two miles (towards the south) distant from West Malling, in the Bai∣liwick and Hundred of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist. This Parish ought antiently to have contributed to∣wards the repair of the fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester Bridge. WEST BEERE LIeth towards the Northeast side of the County, by the river Stoure, about three miles (towards the Northeast) distant from Canterbury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury clai∣meth there▪ but the liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same. For that it is in the Hundred of Blengat, which belonged to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of West Beer, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called All-saints.
WESTGATE. IS part n the County of the City of Canterbury, and the residue in the County of Kent, (adjoyning to the said City) in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hun∣dred of Westgate▪ Lath of St. Augustine▪ East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lah. The liberty of the lae Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Westgate. The whole Parish was in the Deanry and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in that City, and was called Ho∣ly Cross. WESTRAM. WEsterham, lieth at the West side of the County, ad∣joyning to Surrey, about five miles (towards the West) distant from Sevenoke, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bomly, Hundred of Westram and Eaonbridge, Lath of Sut∣ton at one, West division of the County, and lower divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. It was i the Deanry of Malling, and Diocess of Ro∣chester▪ and he Church was called St. Maries, the Advow∣son whereof was by Elianor (wife of King Edward the first) gve to Christchurch Canterbury, and that King confirmed the me. A Maket is kep here upon every Wednesday: And a Fare yearly upon our Lady day, (beig the eighth day of Spmber) This Parish ought antiently t have contibuted to∣wards the  of the fifh Arch or Pee of Rochester Bridge.
At Squirryes in this Parish, ariseth the Head of the river Darent. About a mile and a half, from this Town, towards the south, not far from the side of the High-way, called Oake∣ham, Two Closes lying together, separated with a hedge, of Hollow Ashes, 18. Decemb 1596. Part thereof, 12. rods long sunk, six foot and a half deep: the next morning 15. foot more, and the third morning 80. foot more, and (so from day to day for eleven days) that great Trench of ground (in length about 80. rods, and in breadth 28. rods, moved, slid and shot southwards. And the whole measure of the breaking ground, was at least nine acres. WESTWELL. LIeth about the middle of the County, towards the southeast part thereof; about three miles towards the Norh, distant from Ashford, in the Bailiwick of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the Coun∣ty a division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The  of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth o∣ver he Mannour of Westwell. The  of the lte Archbishop of Canterbury also claimeth  Perish. The  and Dean, are in the Hun∣dred of Wye, and the  of Wye claimeth over the same. And the  Prish is in the Hundred of Cul-ill. It was all in the Deanry of Charing and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Calehill, and
was called St. Maries, which Church was in the year 1397. (by license of the then King and Pope) appropriated to Christchurch Canterbury, by Thomas Arundell (Archbishop of that Sea) But I finde elswhere that the same was so ap∣propriated in the year, 1400. Whitfeild see Bewfeild. WHITSTAPLE. LIeth at the Northside of the County, adjoyning to the Sea, about five miles (towards the North) distant from Cantebury, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Hundred of Whitstaple, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Borough of Tankerton in this Parish; and the liberty of St Augustine claimeth over the residue of the same. It was all in the Deanry of West Beer, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called All-saints. A Faire s kept here yearly upon Goodfriday, being the Friday before Easter. WICHLING. LIeth about the middle of the County, about two miles (towards the North) distant from Leneham, in the Bailiwick and Hundred of Eyhorn, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath.
It was in the Deanry of Sittingborn, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called St. Margaret. WICKHAM neere Fordwich. WIckham Breaux, lieth towards the Northeast part of the County, by the River Stoure (about one mile towards the East) distant from Fordwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East divisi∣on the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the same, for that it is in the Hundred of Downhamford, which belonged to that Abbey. It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Andrew. East WICKHAM. LIeth at the Northwest side of the County, neere the river of Thames, about two miles and a half (towards the southeast) distant from Woolwich, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Little and Lesnes, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Ro∣chester, and the Church was called St. Michael.
West WICKHAM. LIeth at the West end of the County, adjoyning to Surrey, about hree miles (towards the southwest) di∣stant from Bromley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Ruxley, Lath of Sutton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper division of Justices in that Lath. The lberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster claimeth over the Mannour of West Wickham, and the Messuage and Lands called Spring Parke, Old Parkes, Friths Wood, and Chamkers Grove. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist. WILLESBOROVGH. WIvelisbergh, lieth towards the southeast part of the County, by the river Stoure, about a mile and a half (towards the southeast) distant from Ashford, in the Baili∣wick and Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justices in the Lath of Shipway. The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Mannour and Rectory of Willesborough, and the liberty of Wye claimeth over the Borough of Henwood. It was in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Maries, in which Church are or lately were memorials of the interment of Barry (above 190. years since) and of Ellis, very antient.
WILMINGTON. WILMVNTVNE, lieth towards the Northwest part of the County, about one mile (towards the south-west) distant from Dartford, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Dartford, Hundred of Dartford and Wilmington, Lath of Sut∣ton at Hone, West division of the County, and upper di∣vision of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth there. It was in the Deanry of Dartford, and Diocess of Roche∣ster, and the Church was called St. Michael (which Church, was by King Hen. 1. given to the Church of Rochester.) WIMLINGSWOLD. WOmens Wold, lyeth towards the middle of the East part of the County, about foure miles and a half (towards the Northeast) distant from Eleham, in the Bai∣liwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wingham, Lath of St. Augu∣stine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canter∣bury. The Church was antiently a Chappel to Nonington, and called St. Margaret.
WINGHAM. WEngam, Wingeham, lyeth towards the Northside o the County, by the river Stoure, about three miles (towards the southeast) distant from Fordwich, in the Bailiwick of Eastry, Hundred of Wingham, Lath of St. Au∣gustine, East division of the County, and division of Justi∣ces in that Lath. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth over the Mannour of Wingham, (being antiently be∣longing to that Church) And afterwards taken away from the same: but restored by King Edmund (in the year 941.) The liberty of St. Augustine claimeth over the Rectory of Wingham. This Parish was in the Deanry of Bridge, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Maries, which was made Collegiate, and a Colledge founded thereun∣to, in the year 1282. by Iohn Peckham Archbishop of Can∣terbury, wherein he placed 6. Prebends (Secular Chan∣nons) the Governour whereof was called a Provost. This Colledge at the suppression was valued at 84l. per annum. WITTERSHAM. WHitrischeham, lyeth at the southside of the County, in the Isle of Oxney, by the river Rother, adjoyning to Sussex, about three miles (towards the south) distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick and Lath of Shipway, Hundred of Oxney, East division of the County, and divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath.
The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there, and the liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannours of Palster, and Wittersham, in this Parish. It was in the Deanry of Limpne and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Iohn Baptist (which Church is reputed to have been a Collegiate Church, and neer the same was a Colledge (the foundation or suppres∣sion whereof I finde not.) Onely the memory of the same is reteined, by the Mannour house of Wittersham, being yet called the Colledge of Wittersham. In the East Window of the North Chancel, or Chappel of this Church (called Acton Chancel, but more truly Palster Chancel) is the arms of Watton, (sometimes Owner of the said Mannour of Palster.) In the first of the three of the North windows in this Chappel also is a memoriall of Petlesden (an antient fa∣mily in those parts:) and neere unto the going into that Chappel from the Church, is a memoriall of the inter∣ment of Audyan (but more truly Odiarne) sometimes Owner of Acton, and of a very antient Family in this Pa∣rish (there buried above 130 years since.) In the year 1032. Edsin (Archdeacon of Canterbury) with the consent of King Canuus, gave Wittersham, and the aforesaid Mannour of Palster (otherwise Palstre) to Christchurch Canterbury, but elswhere I finde that (in the year 1035.) King Canutus gave the same to the said Ed∣sin, (to the use of that Church.) A Far is kept here yearly upon the day of Philip and Iacob (being the first day of May.
WOLDHAM. WLdeham, Vldeham, lieth towards the North part of the County, by the river Medway, about two miles and a half (towards the southwest) distant from Roche∣ster, in the Bailiwick, of Hoo, Hundred of Larkefield, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south di∣vision of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester claimeth o∣ver the same. (It being given to that Church by King Ethelred about 900. years since) and confirmed by King Hen. 1. It was in the Deanry and Diocess of Rochester and the Church was called All Saints. WOODE otherwise Woodchurch. LIeth at the Northeast side of the County, in the Isle of Thanet, neer the Sea, about five miles (towards the North) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices of the Town and Port of Dovor (of which it is a Member) and the liberties thereof, and of the Cque Ports, claim over the same. This Parish was in the Deary of West Beer, and Dio∣cess of Canterbury, but the Church is demolished, and the Parish laid to Bichinton. Controversie arising (in the time of King Hen. 8.) be∣tween the Justices of the County, and this Parish of Wood∣church, touching assessing the same. That King took away the question, by uniting the same (by Letters Patents to Dovor.
WOODCHURCH. LIeth towards the southeast part of the County, about three miles (towards the East) distant from Tenterden, in the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds, Hundred of Blackborn, Lath of Scray. West division of the County▪ and lower division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Wye, claimeth over the Den of Pluren∣den in this Parish, and the liberty of the late Dean of Can∣terbury claimeth over so much of this Parish as is within the Mannour of Apledore. It was all in the Deanry of Limpne, and Diocess of Can∣terbury, and the Church was called All-saints. The south Chappel or Chancel of which Church, was founded by Herlackenden (a very antient family in this Parish) whose antient seat is still here (called Old Herlackenden) and held by Thomas Herlackenden Esquire. In that Chappel is a memorial of the Interment of William Herlackenden Esquire, in the year 1081. Of Mar∣garet Herlackenden (Daughter and Heir of Guy Ellis) in the year 1479. Of Roger Herlackenden Esquire in the yeare 1523. And of Martin Herlackenden Esquire, in the yeare 1584. In the same is also a Monument of Sir Edward Water∣house, there buried (in the year 1591.) And in the East Window of that Chappel is the Arms of Ellis. At the North wall of the great Chancel in this Church, is a monument of Thomas Herlackenden Esquire there bu∣ried in the year 1554. In the East Window of the North Chancel there, are severall effigies of the Clerkes: And in the North Win∣dow of that Chancel, is the Effigies of William Harey.
WOODNESBOROUGH. LIeth at the East side of the County, about one mile and a half (towards the southwest) distant from Sand∣wich, In the Bailiwick of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, and East division of the County. The liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claim∣eth there. Part thereof (viz. the lands heretofore parcell of the Mannour of Boxley) is within the division of the Justices of the Town and Port of Sandwich. And the liberties thereof, and of the Cinque Ports, and St. Augustine claim over the same. And the residue is in the Hundred of Eastry, and divisi∣on of Justices in the Lath of St. Augustine. It was all in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Canterbury. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Eastry, and was called St. Maries. This Parish is conceived (by Verstegan) to take its name from the worshipping there of Wooden the Pagan Saxons Cod. WOOLWICH. WLewich, lyeth at the Northwest part of the Coun∣ty, adjoyning to the river of Thames, about five miles and a half (towards the North) distant from Brom∣ley, in the Bailiwick of Sutton Bromley, Hundred of Black∣heath, Lath of Sutton at Hone, Wet division of the Coun∣ty, and upper division of Justices in that Lath, part there∣of
lieth at the other side of the river of Thames, at Essex shore, but is in Kent. It was all in the Deanry of Dartord and Diocess of Ro∣chester, And the Church was called St. Maries, which Church was given to the Church of Rochester by King H. 1.) and in the same one William Prene founded a Chap∣pell, and was there interred (above 190. years since) he also founded the Belfree of the said Church. In this Church also is (or lately was) a monument of the interment of Colin (260. years since.) A market is kept here upon every Friday. 13th August 1627. a fish (called a Grampas of 10. yards long, about five foot high and of the like breath, was shot with Mus∣kets and taken neer this Town. And in this Parish is one of the famous Ship-docks for the royall navy. WOOTTON. VVOdetone, lieth towards the middle of the East side of the County, about three miles (towards the Northeast) distant from Eleham, in the hundred of Kinghamford, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County, and division of Justices in that Lath. Part thereof is in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, and the residue in the Bailiwick of Eastry. The liberties of the late Archbishop, and late Dean of Canterbury claime there. It was in the Deanry of Eleham, and Diocess of Can∣terbury. The Church standeth in the Bailiwick of Bridge and Petham, and was called St. Martin. In the year 687. King Cedwald, gave Wooton to the Archbishoprick of Canterbury, and Alpheg (Archbishop
of Canterbury) in the year 1010. adjoyned the same to Christchurch there. WORDE. VVOrth, Lieth at the East end of the County, neer the Sea about one mile (towards the South) distant from Sandwich, in the Bailiwick, and hundred of Eastry, Lath of St. Augustine, East division of the County and division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury, claimeth o∣ver so much thereof, as is in the Mannour of Lydecourt (the same being given to that Church by King Hen. 8. 33. of his raigne.) It was in the Deanry of Sandwich, and Diocess of Canterbury, and the Church was called St. Peter and Paul. WORMSELL. LIeth neer the middle of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the northwest) distant from Le∣neham, in the Bailiwick and hundred of Eyborne, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and East division of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of St. Augustine claymeth there. It was in the Deanry of Sutton, and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Giles
WROTHAM. VVRoteham, Wirtham, Lieth towards the middle of the West part of the County, about three miles and a half (towards the west) distant from West Malling, in the Bailiwick of Hoo, hundred of Wrotham, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and South divi∣sion of Justices in that Lath. The liberty of Wrotham claimeth over the same, and the liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth over the Mannour of Wrtham. It was in the Deanry of Shreham (a peculiar to the late Archbishop of Canterbury) but in the Diocess of Rochester. In the Churchyard here is or lately was, an antient mo∣nument of Peckam, and in the Church several memorials of the interment of that Family, one above 160. years since; another above 150. years since; another above 140. years since; another above 130. years since: and another above 120. years since. Also of Ieames (a good benefactor to this Church) above 150. years since. And of Statton, Burgony, and Gawge, very antient. A Market is kept here upon every Tuesday, and a Faire yearly upon the day of St. George, being the 23. day of Aprill. In this Parish was antiently a Mansior-house of the Archbishops of Canterbury, which Simon Isp Archbishop about 300. years since, pulled down, and carried to Maid∣stone, towards building of the Palace there. This Parish ought antiently to have contribued to∣wards the repair of the fifth Arch or Peer of Rochester bridge. In the year 1572. was a very great and long frost and Snows; so that the arms and boughs of Trees in and neer this Parish, being over-charged with Ice, brake off, and
fell from the stocks (but more remarkably in this Pa∣rish.) WYE. WI Lieth towards the southeast part of the County, by the river Stoure, about three mlies and a halfe (towards the Northeast) distant from Ashford, in the Bai∣liwick of Chart and Longbridge, Hundred of Wye, Lath of Scray, East division of the County, and division of Justi∣ces in the Lath of Shipway. The libery of the late Archbishop of Canterbury claimeth there, but the liberty of Wye claimeth over the same (where is hld a Court of Record, upon every Monday three weeks, for determining all actions, both reall, personal & mixt. It was in the Deanry of Bridge and Diocess of Canter∣bury, and the Church was called St. Gregory and St. Mar∣tin, which Church was Collegiate, so made by Archbi∣shop Iohn Kempe (herein after mentioned) about 210. years since; And in the same is, or lately was, a memo∣riall of the interment of Thomas Kempe, and Beatrice his wife (Father and Mother of the said Archbishop) about 230. years since. And of one Andrew very antient. The Steeple of this Church, had antiently a long spire, which was fired by lightning to the stone-work. King William the Conquerour, having otained victo∣ry over King Harold (at a place then called Herst in Sussex) founded there a Monastery, which (upon that occasion) he named (as still it is called) Battle. And to the same he gave the Mannour of Wye aforesaid, by the name of his Royall Mannur o Wye, which then had 22. hundred and a half, subject to the same, and royall liberties and cu∣stoms. And his grant mentioneth the same to have been of the Demesnes of his Crown (which gift King Hen. 1.
confirmed.) And at this Mannour house King Edw. 2. in the first year of his raign, kept a royall Christmass. The aforesaid Iohn Kempe, born in this Parish, whose Father was mean (though descended from a younger bro∣ther of a good Family) became Doctor of the Laws, Archdeacon of Durham, Dean of the Arches, Vicar gene∣rall to Archbishop Stafford (his predecessor in the Sea of Canterbury) Bishop of Rochester, afterwards of Chichestr, afterwards of London, and afterwards Archbishop of York; twice Lord Chancellour of England, and Cardinal of St. Balbin, afterwards 11. of Decemb. 1452. Archbishop of Canterbury, and Cardinal of St. Rufine; and in the time of King Hen. 6. founded here a Colledge of Secular Priests (the head whereof was a Prebend) These he ap∣pointed for divine Service, and to teach the youth of that Parish, which Colledge at the surrender thereof 36. Hen. 8. was valued at 93l. 2s. 0d. ob. per annum. Much hath formerly been boasted of a precious foun∣tain in this Parish (working miracles) touching which I refer them that desire further satisfaction to Mr. Cam∣dens Britannia fol. 335. A Market is kept in this Town, upon every Thursday, and a faire yearly upon the day of St. Gregory, being the 12. day of March. YALDING. LIeth towards the middle of the West part of the County, by the river Medway, about foue miles, to∣wards the south, distant from West Malling, in the Baili∣wick of Twyford, Lath of Aylesford, West division of the County, and south division of Justices in that Lath. Most part thereof is in the Hundred of Tyford, and the residue (viz. the Borough of Rugmerhill) is in the antient of Ayleford.
So much of this Parish as is held of the Mannour of West Farley, is in the Borough of West Farley: The Bor∣sholder whereof is chosen at the Court Leet there; and so much thereof as is held of the Mannour of Hunton, is within the Borough of Hunton, and the Bohlder there f is chsen at the Court Leet there; and the inhabitants of neither of these Boroughs, ow service to the Court Leet holden for the Hundred of Twyford, (within which Hunded they both are:) But at that Court a Constable for that Hundred, may be chosen out of either of these Boroghs. This Parish was all in the Deanry of Malling, and Dio∣cess of Rochester. The Church standeth in the Hundred of Twyford, and was called St. Peter and Paul. A Faire is kept here yearly upon Easter Tuesday; And thus having treated of the aforesaid severall Pa∣rishes, and places in this County of Kent, and considering that the City of Canterbury, and the County thereof, is compassed about with the County of Kent, and was for∣merly parcell of the same (as still the Castle there is) I though fit likewise to treat something thereof. But in respect so much, and so fully, hth been formerly writ∣ten of the same, and of the said Castle, and more especi¦ally by the aforesaid Mr. Lambard, in his peramulation of Kent, and Mr. William Somner, in his antiquities of Can∣terbury (printed in the year 1640.) the last whereof hath so elaborately, judiciously & fully wrote of the same That there is lest but little (if anything observable) that I know of not there set down, I shall therefore only brief∣ly touch upon the same. And first of the City, which lyeth towards the North∣east part of Kent, by the river Soure, about seven miles towards the East, distant from Feversham: And doubtless
is one of the most antient Cities, now in the Nation, and atiently called Caergant, or the Court of Kenish-men. It is reported by some to have been founded (with Winchester in Hampshire, and Shatsbury in Dorsesire) by (otherwise ) King of Britain, almost 2500. years since. The truth whereof may be question∣able, for that it is believed for certain, that Shafbuy was founded by King Alfred many hundred years after∣wards; But as certain as it is that this City of Canterbu∣ry, was famous in the time of the Roane Government here: and in the time of Ethelbert King of Ken, above 1050. years since: This was his chiefe City, and place of residence, which afterwards was by Aethelstan, inrich∣ed with seven Mints viz. foure for himself, two for the Archbishop, and one for the Abbot. And for divers Centuries afterwards) this City was the chief place of Kent, (governed by a Paeect, Porreve, Bailiffe, or Provest, untill that (in the year 1449.) it came to be governed by a Mayor, and so hath ver since continued: And in the year 1461. it was made a Coun∣ty of it self. It is an antient Corporation (antiently a Hundred) and within the division of the Justices of the same: A Market is kept here upon every Wednesday and Sa∣terday. Twenty Churches were anciently in this City and the Suburbs thereof; seventeen whereof, viz. St. Alphage, St. Andrew, St. Mary Bredman, St. Mary Breeden, Holy Cross Westgate, t George, St. Margaret, St. Mary Magdalen, St. Mary Nohgte, St. Mildred, St. Peter, All-saints, St. Mary Castle, St. Edmund, St. Iohn, St. Mary Queeningate and St. Michael, were in the City. And the other three, viz. St. Dunstan, St. Martin, and St. Paul, were in the Suburbs. All which Parishes were in the Denry and Diocess of Canterbury, and are still in being, except, St. Mary Castle,
St. Edmund, St. Iohn, St. Mary Queeningate and St. Mi∣chael, which are demolished. The liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury claimeth i the said Parish of St. Martin. This City hath had several disaster, viz. by Fire above 900. years since, the like about 740. years since. By Burnings by the Danes (above 640. years since) by burning again about 150. years afterwards. But that which is conceived to have added to the decay thereof (of latter times) was the suppression of the famous Mona∣strie of Christ-church, and St. Augustie, and the other religious houses there (which occasioned much frequent∣ing of the same.) To which also may be added, the late ruine of the Ca∣thedral, and other apptenances thereof, which (as is to be feared) will more eclipse the glory, and wellfare of the same. And touching the Castle here, which is, and alwayes hath been (without scruple) in the County of Kent, ma∣ny questions have been made touching the foundation thereof, but I shall onely briefly touch thereupon. I find it was by (the command of Iulius Caesar the Ro∣mane Emperour) at his coming into this Nation (about 1700 years since) built according to the Romane order) and Hengist (King of Kent) about 200. years since, com∣mitted the Goverment thereof to one Ldias (a Saxon) who governing the same many years, it gained the name of Lodias Castle, (which name it retained untill, and in the time of King Ethelbert, who, (about 150. years after∣wards) upon his conversion to the Christian faith, giving to Augustine (the Monk) his cheif seate at Canterbury, reserved (by name) Lodias Castle. Afterwards the Danes (as aforesaid) burning this City, also raced this Castle, which continued ruined, till the coing of King William the Conqueror (who built, and for∣tified a Castle, upon the old foundation, called the same
the New Castle, and garisoned therein 700. men. Afterwards King Stephen, committed the custody there∣of to William of Ipre (Earle of Kent) and since (by length and changes of times, and by tempests) the same is be∣come much ruined, yet the generall Sessions of the peace for the County, is here usually holden, twice in the year (viz in Iuly, and Ianuary.) The place is reported to be in the aforesaid Parish of St Mildred (but in no hundred) and now (for the reasons aforesaid) I forbear further inlargement, either touch∣ing this City, or Castle. By what is before written, it appeareth that this County of Kent, is divided into two divisions (viz. West, and East.) Which West division abutteth to the river of Thames towards the North, to the County of Surrey towards the West, to the County of Sussex towards the West and South, and to the East division towards the East. It containeth both the Laths of Sutton at Hone, and Ay∣lesford, and the lower division of the Lath of Scray. The East division doth abut to the German Ocean towards the North, and East to the narrow Seas towards the East and South, to the County of Sussex towards the South, and to the West division towards the West. And conteineth the upper division of the Lath of Scray, and both the Laths of St. Augustine and Shipway. These two Divisions may in any Map of the County, be divided each from other, by pricking a line from the Top of the East side of the Isle of Greane, down to the Channell; and excue from the West division the Churches of Queenborough, Iwade, Halstoe, Vpchurch, Rain∣ham, and . Then prick the line down the East heads of the Chur∣hes of Stockbury and Bicknor. Then prick the line from the bottom of Bicknor Church Eastward over the Churches of Wmsell and Frindsted,
and under the Churches of Milsted, Kingsdown, Dodington, and Newynham. Then between the Churches of Easeling and Orynden, and at the East side of the Church of Otrynden, and un∣der that Church Westward to the top of the East head of the Church of Leneham, and down the East head of that Church, by the East side of the Church of Boghton, Mal∣herbe, To the East head of the Church of Hedcorne, and down that East head, and Eastward to the West head of the Church of Smarden, and down that West head, and East∣ward to the West head of the Church of Betherisden, and down that West head, and Eastward to the top of the East head of the Church of Shadoxherst, and down that East head, to the West head of the Curch of Warehorne, and down that West head to the Westside of the Church of Snargate, and then Westward under the Church of Aple∣dore, and from thence along the Channel over the Church of Ebeney, and down as the river goeth to the East side of the Church of Newenden, and so into the Channel. Note, That in all places where the line to part the Di∣visions or Laths, i by this Book directed to be drawn down the head of any Church (either East or West) that there that Parish, is in bth the Divisions or Laths; but the Church is in that Division or Lath, where the body of the same is. This County hath in it five Laths, viz Sutton at Hone, Aylesford, Scray, St. Augustine and Shipway, which do se∣verally contain, and may be divided each from other as followeth. The Lath of Sutton at Hone. LIeth at the West side of the County, and abutteth to the River of Thames, towards the North, To the County of
Surrey, towards the West, to the County of Sussex towards the South; and to the Lath of Aylesford, towards the East. From which Lath of Aylesford, it may be divided in any Map of the County, by drawing a line from the ri∣ver of Thames, between the Chrches of Swanscombe and Northfleet, and between the Churches of Southfleet and Ifeild, and down between the Churches of Fawkham and , and between the Churches of Hartley and Me∣p, from thence down the Eastsides of the Churches of an Ash, then between the Churches of Kings∣ ad  then dow by the East-side of the Curch of , from thence down, between the hurches  and Ightham, and between the Churches and  from thence down to the top of East head of the Church of Lyghe, from thence to the the Church of Pensherst, and down that Ea head, to the top of the East head of the Church and down that East-head, and under that Church  over the Church of Asherst, to the point a litte above the eeple of the ame Church. This Lath hath in it two divisions of Iustices of the Peace, of the County of Kent. I. The Upper Division, having in it these Parishes, viz. Charleton neer Greenwich, Deptford, Eltham East Green∣ich, Lee, Leusham and Woolwich, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Backheath. Craford, Earith, Plumsted, an East Wickham, To sum∣mon which they command the Constable of the Hundred of Little and Lenes.
Dartford and Wilmington, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Dartford and Wilmington. Bromley and Beckenham, To summon which they com∣mand the Constable of the Hundred of Bromley and Beck∣enham. Bexley, Chesilherst, Chelsfeild, Foots Cray, St. Mary Cray, North Cray, Pauls Cray, Cudham, Down. Farnborough, Hayes, eston, Nockbolt, Orpington and West Wickingham, To sum∣mon which they command the Constable of the Hundred of Ruxley. Ash neer Wrotham, Darent, Eynsford, Farningham, Fawke∣ham, Hartley, Horton Kirby, Kingsdown neer Wrotham, Long∣field, Lullenstone, Ridley, Southfleet, Stone neer Dartford, Sutton at Hone and Swanscombe. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Axstone. II. The Lower Division, having in it these Parishes, viz. Brasted, To summon which, they command the Con∣stable of the Ville of Brasted. Chevening, Halsted, Kensing, Lyghe, Otford, Seale, Seve∣noke, Shorom and Sundrish. To summon which, they com∣mand the Constbles of the Hundred of Codsheath. Eatonbridge and Westm▪ To Summon which, they command the Constable of the Hunred of Westram and Eatonbridge. Chidingstone. Cowden, Hever,  To summon whih  the Constables of the Hundred of Somerden.
The Lath of Aylesford. A Butteth to the River of Toames towards the North, to the Lath of Sutton at Hone, towards the West; To the County of Sussx, towards the south, and to the Lath of Scray towards the East. The dividing of the same from the Lath of Sutto at Hone, is already described in that Lath. And this Lath of Aylesford may (in any Map of the County) be divided from the Lath of Scray, By drawing a line from the top of the East side of the Isle of Greane, down to the Channel, and exclude from this last of Aylesford, the Churches of Queenborough, Iwade, Halste, Vpchurch, Rainam: and Hartlip: Then draw the line down the East heads of the Churches of Stockbury and : Then draw the line from the bottome of Bick∣nor Church, Eastward, over the Churches of Wrmell, and Frinsted, and under the Churches of Mlsted, Kings∣down, Doddington, and Newynham: then between the Churches of Eseling and Ottrynden, and under the Church of Orynden, westward to the top of the East head of the Church of Leneham, and down the East head of that Church, by the East side of the Church of Boughton Mal∣bebe, to the East head of the Church of Hedcorn, and down that East head, under that Church westward to the top of the West head of the Church of Stpeerst, and down that West head to the top o the West head of the Church of den, and down that West head, to te top of the West head of the Church o Goudhert, and down that Westhea to the  t Flimweil, about half way between the Churches of Lambertherst and .
This Lath hath in it three Division of Iustices of the Peace of the County of Kent: I. The South Division, having in it these Parishes, viz. Addington, Allington neer Maidstone, Birling, Boreham, Ditton, Laborne, East Malling, Osham, Padlesworth neer Snodland, Ryarsh, Snodland, Trottiscliffe and Woldham. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Larkefield. Aylesford. To summon which, they command the Con∣stable of the Town of Aylesford. Ightham, Plaxtoole, Shipborne, Stansted and Wrotham. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Wrotham: West Malling, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Town of West Malling. Mereworth and West Peckham, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Littlefield. Copell neer Tunbridge and Halow, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Borough of Hadlow. Tunbridge, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Town of Tunbridge. Asherst, Bidborough, so much of Fant as is in Kent, Pembury and Tudley, To summon which, they command the Con∣stables of the Hundred of Wachlingstone. West Faley, Hunton, Nettlested, East Peckham, Teston, Watringbury and Yalding, To summon which, they com∣mand the Constable of the Hundred of Twyford. Brenchley, Horsmanden and Lamberherst, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Brencley and Horsmden.
II. The North division, having in it these Parishes, viz. Ifield, Luddesdon, Meopham, Northfleet, Nuted, To sum∣mon which, they command the Constables of the Hun∣dred of Toltingtrow. Alhollowes, High Halstow, Hoo, St. Maries and Stoke, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Hoo. Chalke, Cliffe neer Gravesend, Cobham, Cookstone, Cowling, Deton neer Gravesend, Frindsbury, Halling, Higham, Mer∣ston, Shorne, and part of Stroud, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Shamell. Part of Chetham, part of Gillingham, St. Iames in Greane, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Chetham and Gillingham. III. The East division, having in it these Parishes, viz. East Barming, West Barming, Boxley, Detling East Farley, Linton and Loose, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Maidstone. Bersted, Bicknor, Boughton Malherbe, Boughton Monhelse, Bredherst, Bromfield, Chart next Sutton Vallance, Frinsted, Harietsham, Hedcorne, Hollingborne, Hucking, Langley, Leeds, Leneham, Otham, Otterden, Stockbury, East Sutton, Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, Vlcombe, Wichling and Wormsell. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Eyborne. This Lath hath also in it these divisions of Iustices, exempt from the divisions aforesaid, viz. The Corporation of Gravesend and Milton, which hath in it Gravesend and Milton.
The City of Rochester, which hath in it the City of Ro∣chester, part of Chetham, St. Margarets, part of Stroud. The Corporation of Maidstone, which hath in it Maid∣stone. The Corporation of Hasting, which hath in it part of Gillingham. The Lath of Scray, otherwise Sherwinhope, otherwise Show∣inghope. A Butteh to the German Ocean, towards the North; To the Lath of Aylesford, towards the West, To the County of Sussex, towards the South; And to the Laths of St. Augustine and Shipway, towards the East and South. The dividing of the same from the Lath of Aylesford, is already described in that Lath, and this Lath of Scray, may be divided (in any Map of the County) from the Laths of St. Augustine and Shipway, by drawing a lie, from the Sea between Graveney and Seaalter, and from thence, downe at the East sides of the Churches of Hene∣ll, and Boughton Blean, and from thence to the top of the East head of he Chrch of , and downe that East head, by the West side of the Church of Petham, to the top of the West head of the Church of Waltham, and downe that West head, between the Churches of Hostingligh and lmsted, and between the Churches of Baborne and Stow∣g, and under the  of , towards the West over the Church of ee, to the top of the West head of the Chrch of ersham, and downe that West head, to the tp of the East head of the Church of , and downe that East head (by the West  of the Church of Olston) to the top of the West head of the Church of
Warehorne, and down that West head, to the West side of the Church of Snargate, and then Westward under the Church of Apledore, and from thence (along the chan∣nell) over the Church of Ebeney, and down (as the chn∣nell goeth) to the East side of the Church of Newenden, and so into the channell. This Lath hath in it two divisions of Iustices of the Peace of the County of Kent, viz. I. The lower division, having in it these Parishes viz. Goudhest and Marden, To summon which, they com∣mand the Constable of the Hundred of Marden. Part of Apledore, Halden, part of Kenaron, Shodoxhorst and Woodchurch, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Blackorn. Cranbrook, Frittenden and Stapleerst, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Cranbrooke. Biddenden, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Barckley. Hawkeherst, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Great Barnefield Benenden and Rolvenden, To summon which, they command the Constable of Rolvenden. Sandherst, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Selbrittenden. Nwenden, To summon which, they command the Bai∣liffe of the Towship of Newenden. II. The upper division having in it these Parishes, viz. Bapchild, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, Emley, Halw, Hartlip, Iwade, Kingsdowne neer Sittingbrn, Milsted, Mon neer bor Murston, Newington neer Sittingorne, Ranham,
Rodmersham, Sittinghorn, Tong, Tunstall and Vpchurch. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Milton. Eastchurch, Laysdown, Minster in Sheppey and Warden, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of the Isle of Sheppey. Doddington, Linsted and Tenham. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Tenham. Boughton under the Blean, Graveney, Hernehill and Sel∣ling. To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Boughton under the Bleae. Badlesmer, Buckland neer Feuersham, Dvington, Ease∣ling, part of Feversham, Goodnoston neer Feversham, Hary, Lveland, Luddenham Newnham, Norton, Ore, Prston neer Feversham, Sheldich, Stalisfield Stone neer Feversham and Throwleigh, To sum mon which, hey command the Consta∣bles of the Hundred of Feversham. Ospringe. To summon which, they command the Con∣stable of the Town of Ospringe. This Lath hath also in it these divisions of Iustices, exempt from the divisions aforesaid, viz. The Corporation of Tenterden, which hath in it Ten∣terden and part of Ebeney. The Corporation of Feversham, which hath in it so much of Feversham as is within the liberty of that Corpo∣ration. The Corporation of Queenborough, which hath in it Queenborough. The Corporation of New Romney, which hath in it part of Apledore. The Corporation of Romney Marsh, which hath also in it part of Apledore. And the Hundreds of Felborough, Calehill, Wye, Birchlt Barony, and Chart and Longbridge, and the Town of Ash∣ford being all in this Lath, are now used as within the di∣vision
of the Justices of the Lath of Shipway (as I shall further shew, when I come to that Lath.) The Lath of St. Augustine, otherwise Hedelinth. AButteth to the German Ocean towards the North and East, to the Lath of Shipway, towards the West and South, and to the Lath of Scray, towards the West. The dividing the same from the Lath of Scray, is al∣ready described in that Lath, by the dividing line, that cometh down from the Sea (between Gravaney and Sea∣salter) to the top of the west head of the Church of Walt∣tham. And this Lath of St. Augustine may be divided from the Lath of Shipway (in any Map of the County) by draw∣ing a line, from the line aforesaid, from the aforesaid top of the West head of the Church of Walham, upwards, be∣tween Petham, and upper Hardresse, and from thnce to the top of the West head of the Church of upper Hardress, and downe that West head a little short of the top of the Church of Stelling, and so Eastward, over the Church of Eleham (between Acryse, and Denton) and so upwards between Wootton, and Liddon, and upwards to the top of the East head of the Church of Liddon, and downe that East head, by the West side of the Church of Ewell, and from thence by the East sides of the Churches of Swingfeild, Alkham, to the top of the West head of the Church of Hougham, and downe that VVest head to the Sea. This Lath hath in it onely one division of the Justices of the Peace of the County of Kent (having in it these Pa∣rishes.
Seasalter, To summon which, they command the Con∣stable of the Town of Seasalter. Part of St. Laurence, Minster in Thanet, Monkton and part of St. Nicholas, To summon which, they command the Constable of the Hundred of Ringslow. Cosmus Bleane, Swaycliffe and Whitstaple, To summon which, they command the Constables of the Hundred of Whitstaple. Chiset, Herne, Hoth, Reculver, Sturmouth, Sturrey and West Beer, To summon which, they command the Con∣stables of the Hundred of Blengate. Elmstone, and Preston neer Fordwich, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of Preston. Part of St. Alphage, St. Dunstans, Hackington, Harbledown, Melton neer Canterbury, part of St. Mary Northgate, Tha∣nington, and part of Westgate also Christ-church Canterbury, is claimed, To summon which they command the Con∣stables of the hundred of Westgate. Adisham, Ikham, Littleborne, Staple, Stodmarsh, and Wickham Breaux, To summon which they command the Constables of the hundred of Downhamford. Part of St. Paul, To summon which they command the Constable of the Borough of Longport. Ash neer Sandwich, Goodnestone neer Sandwich, Nonington, Wimlingswold and VVingham, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Wingham. Barefriston, Batshanger, Chillenden, Eastry, Eythorne, Ham, Knowlton, Tilnestone, VValdershare, part of Woodnesborough and Worth, To summon which they command the Con∣stables of the hundred of Eastry. Bridge, upper Hardress, nether Hardress, Nackington, Patricksborne, Petham and Wltham, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Bridge and Petham. Berham, Bishopsborne, Denton neer Eleham, Kingstone and Wootton, To summon which they command the Consta∣bles of the Hundred of Kinghamsord.
East Langdon, Great Mngeham, Little Mngeham, Northborne, Ripple, Sholdon and Sutton next Dovor, To sum∣mon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Cornilo. Bewfield, Buckland neer Dovor, Part of Charlton next Dovor, Cliffe neer Dovor, Coldred, Ewell, Guston, part of Hougham, West Langdon, St. Margarets neer Dovor, Rever and Sheertstwold, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Beusborough. This Lath hath also in it these divisions of Iustices, exempt from the divisions aforesaid, viz. The Corporation of Sandwich, which hath in it Sand∣wich, Ramsgate in St. Laurence, Sar in St. Nicholas, Wal∣mer, part of Woodnesborough, Deale and Stonr. The Corporation of Fordwich which hath in it Ford∣wich. The Corporation of Dovor, which hath in it Dovor, Bir∣chington, part of Charlton neer Dovor, part of Hougham, St. Iohns, St. Peters, Ringwold and Woodchurch in Thanet. The Corporation of Hasting, which hath in it Beakes∣borne. The Lath of Shipway, otherwise Shepway. AButteth to the German Ocean towards the East; To the narrow Seas towards the East and South; To the County of Sussex towards the South; To the Lath of Scray towards the West and North; And to the Lath of St. Augustine towards the North and East. The division of the same from the Lath of Scray is al∣ready described in that Lath, by the dividing line that
cometh to the top of the West head of the Church of Waltham, and so goeth into the channell at Newenden, and the division of this Lath of Shipway, from the Lath of St. Augustine, is already described in that Lath. This Lath of Shipway, hath in it onely one division of Justices of the peace of the County of Kent, to which di∣vision is also added five hundreds, and one Towne in the Lath of Scray (as is hereafter mentioned) so this division of Justices hath in it these Parishes, viz. In the Lath of Shipway. Acrise, Eleham, Liminge, Padlesworth, neer Eleham and Selling, To summon which they command the Constables of the Hundred of Lonningborough. Elmsted, Monkes Horton, Stanford, and Stowling, To summon which they command the Constables of the hundred of Stowling. Postling, and Saltwood, To summon which they com∣mand the Constable of the hundred of Heane. Alcham, apell-neer Folkstone, Cheriton, part of Folkston, Hawking, Liddon; Newington neer Hith and Swingfeild, To summon which they command the Constables of the hun∣dred of Folkstone. Hastingligh & Smeeh, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of Bircholt Franchise. Aldington, part of Bonington, part of Limpne and Sel∣indge, To summon which they command the Constables of the hundred of Stree. Part of Orlestone and Part of Warehorne, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of Ham. Part of West Hith, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of Worth. Part of Bilsington and part of Rucking, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of Newurch▪
Part of Ivechurch, Midley, and part of New Romney, To summon which they command the Constable of the Hun∣dred of St. Martins Pountney. Part of Brenze, Brookland, Fairefeild, and part of Snar∣gate, To summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of Alosbridge. Part of Ebeney, Stone, and Wittersham, to summon which they command the Constable of the hundred of Oxney. In the Lath of Scray. Challock, Chartham, Chilham, Godmersham, and Mo∣lash, To summon which they command the Constables of of the hundred of Felborough. Charing, Little Chart, Egeron, Pluckley, Smarden and West∣well, To summon which they command the Constables of the hundred of Calehill. Boughton, Aluph, Brook, Crundall, Eastwell and Wye, To summon which they command the Constables of the hundred of Wye. Ashford, To summon which they command the Con∣stable of the Town of Ashford. Braorne, To summon which they command the Con∣stable of the hundred of Bircholt Barony. Betherisden, Great Chart, Hinxhill, Hothfeild, Kenning∣ton, Kingsnoth, Mersham, Sevington and Willesborough, To summon which they command the Constables of the hun∣dred of Chart and Longbridge. This Lath of Shipway hath also in it these divisions of Iu∣stices (exempt from the division aforesaid.) viz. The Corporation of Romney Marsh, Which hath in it Part of Bilsington, Blackmanstone, part of Banington, part of Brenzet, Burmarsh; Dimchurch, Eastbridge, Herst, Hope, part
of Ivechurch, part of Kenerton, part of Limpne, St. Maries, Newchurch, Orgarswick, part of Orlestone, part of New Romney, part of Old Romney, part of Rucking, part of Snar∣gate, Snave, and part of Wareborne The Corporation of Folkstone, which hath in it, so much of Folkstone, as is within the liberty of that Corpo∣ration. The Corporation of Lid, which hath in it, Lid, and clai∣meth part of Old Romney, and so much of Promhill as is in Kent. The Corporation of New Romney, which hath in it so much of New Romney as is within the liberty of New Rom∣ney, and part of Old Romney (and the same claimeth also those parts of Old Romney, which are so claimed by the Corporation of Lid) part of Brenzet, part of Ivechurch, part of Snargate: The Corporation of Hith, which hath in it Hith, and part of West Hith. Note, that where a Parish is in two Hundreds, the Iustices of the County of Kent do usually take that Parish into their di∣vision by the Hundred where the Church of that Parish stand∣eth. This County hath in It 14. Bailiwicks, viz. 1. Sutton Bromley, and 2. Sutton Dartford, in the Lath of Sutton at Hone, 3. Hoo 4. Eyhorne, 5. Lowy of Tunbridge, in the Lath of Aylesford, 6. Twyford, part in the Lath of Aylesford, and part in the Lath of Scray, 7. Seaven Hun∣dreds, in the Lath of Scray: All these in the West division of the County. 8. Milton, 9. Scray, 10. Chart and Longbridge, In the Lath of Scray, 11. Bridge and Petha, 12. Eastry, in the Lath of St. Augustine, 13. Stowting, part in the Lath of St. Augustine, and part in the Lath of Shipway, 14. Shipway, in the Lath of Shipway. All these in the East division of the County.
Of all which Bailiwicks and the extents of the same, I shall now treat Alphabetically. Bridge and Petham. HAth in it Adisham, Part of St. Alphage, viz. the Bor∣ough of Staplegate, Beakesborne, Berham, Birchington, Bishopsborne, Bridge, part of Chartham, Chislet, Christ church Canterbury, Cosmus Blean, Part of Denton neer Eleham, St. Dunstans, Elmstone, Fordwich, Hackinton, Harbledowne, part of upper Hardress, nether Hardress, Herne, Hoth, Ick∣ham, St. Iohns, Kingstone, St. Laurence, Littleborne, Milton neer Canterbury, Minister in Thanet, Monkton, Nackington, St. Nicholas, part of St. Mary Northgate, viz. the Borough of Staplegate, Patricksborne, part of St. Paul, viz. the Bo∣rough of Longport, St. Peters, Petham, Preston neer Fordwich, Reculver, Seasalter, Staple, Stodarsh, Stonar, Sturmouth, Stur∣rey, Swaycliffe, Thamington, part of Waltham, West Beer, part of Westgate, Whitstaple, Wickham Breaux, Woodchurch in Thanet, part of Wootton. And the Churches of, Adisham, Beakesborne, Beram, Birchington, Bishopsbourne, Bridge, Chislet, Christchurch Canterbury, Cosmus Bleane, Dn∣ton neer Eleham, St. Dunstans, Elmston, Fordwich, Hackinton, Harbledowne, upper Hardress, nether Hardress, Herne, Hoth, Ickham, St Iohns, Kingstone, St. Laurence, Littleborn, Milton neer Canterbury, Minster in Thanet, Monkton, Nack∣inton, St. Nicholas, Patricksborne, St. Peters, Petham, Preston neer Fordwich, Reculver, Seasalter, Staple, Stodmarsh, Stur∣mouth, Sturrey, Swaycliffe, Thanington, Waltham, West Beer, Whitstaple, Wickham Breaux and Wootton. But as to the acting of the Bailiffe of the said Balliwick, these Churches following (being in the Cinque Ports) are exempted, viz. Beakesborne, Birchington, Fordwich, St. Iohns, St. Peters.
As were likewise Stonar and Woodchurch whilst they were standing. This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. Bridge and Petham, Blengate, Downhamford, all Kingham∣ford (except part of Wootton) Preston, Ringslow, Westgate and Whitstaple: And these places and Townes having Constables, viz. Longport Borough and Seasalter. It hath also in it these Townes and places having Con∣stables, viz. Beakesborne, Birchington, Fordwich, St. Iohns, Ramsgate in St. Laurence, Sar in St. Nicholas, St. Peters, Stonar and Woodchurch. But they all being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports, are exempted from the acting of the Bailiffe of that Baili∣wick. Chart and Longbridge. HAth in it Ashford, part of Betherisden, Bougton Aluph, Braborne, Brooke, Charing, Great Chart, Little Chart, Crundall, Eastwell, Egerton, Hastingligh, part of Hedeorne, Hincksell, Hothfield, Kennington, Kingsnoth, part of Lene∣ham, part of Mersham, Pluckley, Sevington, part of Shadox∣herst, part of Smarden, Westwell, Willesborough and Wye. And the Churches of, Ashford, Betherisden, Boughton Aluph, Braborne, Brooke, Cha∣ting, Great Chart, Little Chart, Crundall, Eastwell, Egerton, Hastingligh, Hincksell, Hothfield, Kennington, Kingsnoth, Mrsham, Pluckley, Sevington, Smarden, Westwell, Willisbo∣rough, Wye.
This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. Bircholt Barony, Calehill, Chart and Longbridge and Wye. As also the Town of Ashford (which hath a Consta∣ble of it self.) Eastry. HAth in it Ash neer Sandwich, Barefriston, Betshanger, Chillenden, Deale, part of Denton neer Eleham, Eastry, Eythorne, Goodnestone neer Sandwich, Ham, Knowlton, East Langdon, Great Mongeham, Little Mongeham, Nonington, Norburne, Ringwold, Ripple, Sandwich, Sholdon, Sutton next Dovor, Tilnestone, Waldershare, Walmer, Wimlingswold, Wing∣ham, Woodnesborough and Worth. And all the Churches of these Parishes (except Little Mongeham, which is demolished.) But as to the acting of the Bailiffe of the said Baili∣wick, these Churches following (being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted, viz. Deale, Ringwold, Sandwich and Walmer. This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. Cornlo, Eastry, so much of Kinghamford as is in Wootton-Wingham. And these Townes following (which are in the liber∣ty of the Cinque Ports) and have Constables of them∣selves, viz. Deal, Ringwold, Sandwich, Walmer. All which (as also so much of Woodesbury as is in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted from the act∣ing of the Bailiffe of this Bailiwick.
Eyhorn. HAth in it East Barming, West Barming, Bersted, part of Bicknor, Boughton Malherbe, Boughton Monchelsea, Boxley, Bredherst, Bromfield, Chart next Sutton Vallance, Det∣ing, East Farley, Frinsted, Harietsham, part of Hedcorne, Hollingborne, Hucking, part of Hunton, Langley, Leeds, part of Leneham, Linton, Loose, Maidstone, part of Marden, O∣tham, Oerden, part of Stapleherst, part of Stockbury, East Sutton, Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, Vlcomb, Wichling and Wormsell. And all the Churches of these Parishes except, Hunton, Marden and Stapleherst. And except West Barming, which is demolished. This Bailiwick hath also in it the Hundreds of Eyhorn and Maidstone, As also the Town of Maidstone, which hath a Consta∣ble of it self. Hoo. HAth in it Addington, Allhollowes, Allington, Aylesford, Birling, Boreham, Chalke, Chetham, Cliffe neer Graves∣end, Cobham, Cookstone, Cowling, Denton neer Gravesend, Dit∣ton, Frindsbury, Gillingham, Gravesend, Halling, high Hal∣stow, Higham, Hoo, part of Horsmanden, part of Hunton, St. Iames, Ightham; I field, Laborne, Luddesdon, East Malling, West Malling, St. Maries, St. Margarets neer Rchester, Meopham, Merston, Milton neer Gravesend, Northfleet, Nutsted, Osham, Padlesworth neer Snodland, part of West Peckham, Plaxtoole, Rochester, Ryarsh, Shipborne, Shorne, Sodland, Stansted,
Stoke, Stroud, Trottiscliffe, Woldham and Wrotham. And all the Churches of those Parishes except, Horsmanden, Hunton and West Peckham. This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. Chetham and Gillingham, Hoo, Larkefield, Shamell, Tol∣tingtrow and Wrotham. And the City, Townes and places following, which have Constables of themselves, viz. Aylesford Towne, the Grange in Gillingham, West Mal∣ling Town, and the City of Rochester. And as to the acting of the Baliffe of this Bailiwick, the Grange aforesaid (being in the liberty of the Cinque ports) is exempted. Lowy of Tunbridge. HAth in it Asherst, Bidborough, part of Capell neer Tun∣bridge, so much of Fant as is in Kent, part of Hadlow, part of Lighe neer Tunbridge, part of Pembury, part of Pen∣sherst, part of Speldeherst, part of Tudeley, Tunbridge. And the Churches of, Ashrst, Bidborough, Capell neer Tunbridge, Hadlow Pembury, Tudeley, Tunbridge. This Bailiwick hath in it onely one Hundred, viz. Wachlingstone. And the Town and places following having Consta∣bles of themselves, viz Hadlow Borough, Helden Borough, South Borough, and Tunbridge Bridge Town.
Milton. HAth in it, Bapchild, part of Bicknor, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, East Church, Emley Halstow, Hartlip, part of Iwade, Kingdowne neer Sittingborne, Laysdown, Mil∣sted, Milton neer Sittingborne, Minster in Sheppey, Murston, Newington besides Sittingborne, Queenborough, Rainham, Rodmersham, Sittingborne, part of Stockbury, Tong, Tunstall, Vpchurch, and Warden. And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Bicknor and Stockbury. It hath also in it the Hundreds of Milton and the Isle of Sheppey, over both which i a Court Biron. And the Town of Queenborough (which hath a Con∣stable of it self) Scray. HAth in it Badlesmer, Boughton Bleane, Buckland neer Fe∣versham, Challock, part of Chartham, Chilham Devington, Doddington, Easeling, Feversham, Godmersham, Goodnestone neer Feversham, Graveney, Hartye, part of Hedcorne, Herne∣hill, part of Iwade, Leveland, Linsted, Luddenham, Molash, Newnham, Norton, Ore, Ospringe, Preston neer Feversham, Selling, Sheldwich, Stalisfeeld, Stone neer Feversham, Tenham and Throwley. And all the Churches of those Parishes, except,
Hedcorne, and Iwade. But the Church of Feversham (standing in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) is exempted from the acting of the Bailiff of this Bailiwick. This Bailiwick hath also in it these hundreds, viz. Boughton under the lean, Felborough, Feversham, and Tenham. It hath also in it these Towns of, Feversham and Ospringe, which have Constables of them∣selves. And as to the acting of the Bailiffe of this Bailiwick, the Towne of Feversham, being in the liberty of the Cin∣que Ports is exempted. The Seven Hundreds. HAth in it Apledore, Benenden, part of Betherisden, Bid∣denden, Cranbrook, part of Ebeny, Frittenden, part of Gondherst, Halden, Hawkherst, part of Hedcorne, part of Kenarton, Newenden, Rolvenden, Sandherst, part of Shadox∣herst, part of Smarden, part of Stapleherst, Tenterden, part of Warehorne, Woodchurch. And the Churches of, Appledore, Benenden, Biddenden, Cranbrook, Frittenden, Halden, Hawkherst, Kenarton, Newenden, Rolvenden, Sand∣herst, Shadoxherst, Stapleherst, Tenterden and Woodchurch. But the Church of Tenterden, (standing in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) is exempted from the acting of the Bailiff of this Bailiwick. This Bailiwick hath also in it these hundreds, viz.
Barckley, great Barnefield Blackborne, Cranbrooke, Rol∣vendn, Selbrittenden, Tenterden. And the Township of Newenden, which hath an Officer of it self (in the nature of a Constable, but called a Bai∣liffe.) And (as to the acting of the Bailiffe of the Bailiwick of the Seven Hundreds) so much of Apledore upon the Ree Wall, as is within the liberty of New Romney, and the whole Town and Hundred of Tenterden (being within the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted. Shipway. HAth in it Aldington, Blsington, Blackmanstone, Bou∣nington, Brenzet, so much of Bromhill as is in Kent, Bruckland, Burmarsh, Dimchurch, Eastbridge, part of Ebeney, Fairefield, Herst, Hith, West Hith, Hope, Ivechurch, part of Kenarton, Lid, part of Limpney, St. Maries neer New Romney, part of Mersham, Midley, Newchurch, Orgarswick, Olestone, New Romney, Old Romney, Rucking, part of Sellindge, part of Shadoxherst, Smeeth, Snargate, Snave, Stone in Oxney, part of Warehorne, Wittersham. And the Churches of, Aldington, Bilsington, Bonnington, Brenze, Buckland, Burmarsh, Dimchurch, Ebeney, Fairefield, Hith, Hope, Ivechurch, id, Limpney, St Maries neer New Romney, New∣church, Orlestone, New Romney, Old Romney, Rucking, Sel∣linge, Smeeth, Snargate, Snave, Stone in Oxney, Warehorne and Wiersham. But the Churches of, Blackmanstone, Eastbridge, Herst, West Hith, Midley and Orgarswick are demolished. And (as to the acting of the Bailiffe of this Bailiwick) these Churches following (being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted, viz. Hith, Lid, New Romney and Old Romney.
This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. Aloesbridge, Bircholt Franchise. Ham, Langport, St. Mar∣tins Pountney, Newchurch, Oxney, Strete and Worth. And the Townes of Hith, Lid and New Romney, which have Constables of themselves. And these three last Towns and the places within their liberties, viz. So much of Brenzet, Ivechurch and Snargate upon the Ree Wall, as is in the liberty of New Romney. So much of Bromhill and Old Romney, as is either in the liberty of Lid, or New Romney. And so much of West Hith as is within the liberty of Hith (being all within the liberty of the Cinque Ports) are exempted from the acting of the Bailiffe of this Baili∣wick. Stowting. HAth in it, Acryse, Alcham, Bewsfeild, Buckland neer Do∣vor, Capell neer Folkstone, Charlton neer Dovor, Cheri∣ton, Cliffe neer Dover, Coldred, Dovor, Eleham, Elmsted, Ewell, Folkstone, Guston, part of upper Hardresse, Haw∣king, Monkes Horton, Hougham, West Langdon, Liddon, Liminge, part of Limpne, St. Margarets neer Dover, New∣ington besides Hith, Padlesworth neer Eleham, Postling, Re∣ver, Saltwoood, part of Sellinge, Shebbertswold, Stanford, Stelling, Stowting, Swingfeild and part of Waltham, And the Churches of, Acryse, Alcham, Bewsfeild, Buckland neer Dovor, Capell neer Folkstone, Charlton neer Dover, Cheriton, Cliffe neer Dovor, Coldred, Dovor, Eleham, Elmsted, Ewell, Folkestone, Guston, Hawking, Monkes Horton, Hougham, Wes Langdon,
Liddon, Liminge, St. Margarets neer Dovor, Newington besides Hith, Padlesworth neer Eleham, Postling, Rever, Saltwood, Shebbertswold, Standford, Stelling, Stowting and Swingfield. But as to the acting of the Bailiff of the said Bailiwick, these Churches following, being in the liberty of the Cinque Ports, are exempted, viz. Dovor, and Folkstone. This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. Beusborough, Folkston, Heane, Lonningborough and Stowting. And these Towns following (which are in the liber∣ty of the Cinque Ports) and have Constables of them∣selves, viz. Dovor and Folkstone. Both which, as also so much of Charlton neer Dovor, and Hougham, as are in the like liberty of the Cinque Ports, are likewise exempted from the acting of the Bailiffe of this Bailiwick. Sutton Bromley. HAth in it so much of Beckenham as is in Kent, Brasted, Bromley, Charlton neer Greenwich, Chesilherst, Chelsfield, Chevening, Chidingstone, part of Cowden, Cudham, so much of Deptford as is in Kent, Downe, Eatonbridge, Eltham, Farn∣borough, East Greenwich, Halsted, Hayes, Hever, Kemsing, Keston, Lee, Leusham, part of Lighe next Tunbridge, Nock∣holt, Orpington, Oford, part of Pensherst, Seale, Sevenoke, Shoram, part of Speldherst, Sundrish, Westram, West Wick∣ham and Woolwich. And all the Churches of these Parishes. This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz.
Blackheath, Bromley and Beckenham, Codsheath, Somer∣den and Westram, and Eatonbridge. And part of the Hundred of Ruxley. It hath also the Ville of Brasted, which hath a Constable of it self. Sutton Dartford. HAth in it Ash neer Wrotham, Bexley, part of Cowden, Crayford, Foots Cray, St. Mary Cray, North Cray, Paul's Cray, Darent, Dartford, Earith, Eynsford, Farningham, Fawkeham, Hartley, Horton Kirby, Kingsdowne neer W∣tham, Longfield, Lullingstone, Plumsted, Ridley, Southfleet, Stone neer Dartford, Sutton at Hone, Swanscomb, East Wick∣ham and Wilmington. And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Cowden. This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. Axstone, Dartford and Wilmington, Little and Lesnes. And part of the Hundred of Ruxley. Twyford. HAth in it Brenchley, part of Capell neer Tunbridge, West Farley, part of Goudhurst, part of Hadlow, part of Hors∣manden, part of Hunton, Lamberherst, part of Marden, Mere∣worth, Nettlested, East Peckham, part of West Peckham, part of Pembury, part of Stapleherst, Teston, part of Tudeley, Wa∣tringbury and Yalding. And the Churches of, Brenchley, West Farley, Goudherst, Horsmanden, Hunton, Lamberherst, Marden, Mereworth, Nettlested, East Peckham, West Peckham, Teston, Watringbury and Yalding.
This Bailiwick hath also in it these Hundreds, viz. West Barnfield, Brenchley and Horsmanden, Littlefield, Marden and Twyford. This County hath also in it sixty four Hundreds. Of all which and the extents of the same, I shall also treat Alphabetically; 1. Aloesbridge. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Brenzet, Brookland, Fairfield, part of Ivechurch, part of Newchurch, Snargate, part of Snave, And the Churches of, Brenzet, Brookland, Fairfield, Snargate and Snave, 2. Axstone. OTherwise Claestone, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Ash neer Wrotham, part of Cowden, Darent, Eynsford, Farningham, Fawkeham, Hartley, Horton Kirby, Kingsdowne neer Wrotham, Longfield, Lullingstone, Ridley, Southfleet, Stone neer Dartford, Sutton at Hone and Swanscombe. And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Cow∣den.)
3. Great Barnefield. OTherwise East Barnefield, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his Liberty, Part of Cranbrooke, and part of Hawkeherst, and the Church of Haukeherst. 4. West Barnefield. OTherwise Little Barnefield, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Goudherst, But not the Church. 5. Barckley. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Benenden, part of Biddenden, part of Cranbroke, part of Frittenden, part of Halden, part of Hedcorne, part of Smarden. And onely the Church of Biddenden. 6. Beusborough. HAth in it two Constables, Who have in their liberty, Bewsfield, Buckland neer Dovor, part of Charlton next Do∣vor, Cliffe neer Dovor, Coldred, Ewell, Guston, part of Hougham, West Langdon, part of Liddon, St. Margarets neer Dovor, Rever and Shebbertswold.
And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Liddon.) 7. Bircholt Barony. OTherwise Bilisholt, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Braborne, and part of Hastingligh, And both those Churches. 8. Bircholt Franchise. OTherwise Bilisholt, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Aldington, Smeeth, and part of Mersham. And onely the Church of Smeeth. 9. Blackborne. OTherwise Blacetune, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Apledore, part of Betherisden, part of Halden, part of Kenarton, part of Shadoxherst, part of Smarden, part of Warehorne, Woodchurch. And the Churches of, Apledore, Halden, Kenarton, Shadoxherst, Woodchurch, 10. Blengate. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Chislet, Herne, Hoth, Rculver, Sturmouth, Sturrey, West Beer, and all the Churches of those Parishes.
11. Blackheath. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Charlton neer Greenwich, part of Chesilherst, so much of Deptford as is in Kent, Eltham, East Greenwich, Lee, Leu∣sham, Woolwich. And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Chesil∣herst. 12. Boughton under the Blean. OTherwise Boctune, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Boughton under the Blean, Graveney, Hernehill, part of Selling. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 13. Bridge and Petham. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of St. Alphage, Bridge, part of Chartham, part of Hackinton, part of upper Hardress, nether Hardress, part of Nakinton, Patricksborne, Petham, and part of Waltham. And the Churches of, Bridge, upper Hardress, nether Hardress, Nakinton, Pa∣tricksborne, Petham, Waltham.
14. Brenchlen and Horsmanden. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Brenchley, part of Horsmanden, Lamberherst, And all the Churches of those Parishes. 15. Bromley and Beckenham. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, So much of Beckenham as is in Kent and Bromley. And the Churches of both those Parishes. 16. Calehill. OTherwise Calehele, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Betherisden, Charing, part of great Chart, little Chart, Egerton, part of Hedcorn, part of Hothfield, part of eneham, Pluckley, part of Smarden and part of Westwell. And the Churches of, Chaing, little Chart, Egerton, Pluckley, Smarden, West∣well. 17. Chart and Longbridge. OTherwise Langebrige, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Ashford, part of Betherisden, part of great Chart,
Hincksell, part of Hothfield, Kennington, Kingsnoth, part of Mersham, Sevington, part of Shadoxherst and Willesborough. And the Churches of, Betherisden, great Chart, Hincksell, Hothfield, Kenning∣ton, Kingsnoth, Mersham Sevington and Willesborough. 18. Chetham and Gillingham. OTherwise Certham, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Chetham, part of Gillingham, St. Iames in Grean. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 19. Codsheath. OTherwise Codesede, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Chevening, Halsted, Kemsing, part of Lighe, Ot∣ford, Seale, Sevenoke, Shoram, part of Speldherst, Sundrish. And all the Churches of those Parishes (except Speld∣herst.) 20. Cornilo. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, East Langdon, great Mongeham, little Mongeham, North∣borne, Ripple, Sholden, Sutton next Dovor. And all the Churches of those Parishes (except little Mongeham, which is demolished.)
21. Cranbrook. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Benenden, part of Biddenden, part of Cranbrook, part of Frittenden, part of Goudherst, part of Haukeherst, part of Hedcorne, part of Stapleherst. And the Churches of, Cranbrook, Frittenden, Stapleherst. 22. Dartford and Wilmington. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Dartford and Wilmington. And the Churches of both those Parishes. 23. Downhamford. OTherwise Dounahamford, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Adisham, the Borough of Shourt in Hackington, Ickham, Littleborne, Staple, Stodmarsh, Wickham Breaux. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 24. Eastry. OTherwise Estrege, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Barefriston, Betshanger, Chillenden, Eastry, Eythorn, Ham,
Knowlton, part of Nonington, Tilnestone, Waldershare, part of Woodnesborough, Worth. And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Noning∣ton. 25. Eyhorne. OTherwise Hahorne, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Bersted, part of Bicknor, Boughton Malherbe, Boughton Monchelsea, Bredherst, Bromfield, Chart next Sutton Vallance, Frinsted, Harietsham, part of Hedcorne, Holling∣borne, Hcking, Langley, Leeds, part of Leneham, part of Marden, Otham, Otterden, part of Stapleherst, part of Stock∣bury, East Sutton, Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, part of Vl∣comb, Wichling and Wormsell. And all the Chuches of those Parishes, except Marden and Stapleherst. 26. Felborough. OTherwise Felebergh, oherwise Feleberg, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Challck, part of Chartham, Chilham, Godmersham, Mlash. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 27. Feversham. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Badlesmer, Buckland neer Feversham, Devington, Ease∣ling, part of Feversham, Goodneston neer Feversham, Hartye, Leveland, Luddenham, Newnham, Norton, Ore, part of Os∣pringe,
Preston neer Feversham, part of Selling, Sheldwich, Stalfield, Stone neer Feversham, Throwley and part of Vl∣comb. And the Churches of, Badlesmer, Buckland neer Feversham, Devington, Easeling, Goodnestone neer Feversham, Harty, Leveland, Luddenham, Newnham, Norton, Ore, Preston neer Feversham, Sheldwich, Stafield and Throwley. 28. Folkestone. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Acrise, Alcham, Capell neer Folkestoné, Cheri∣ton, part of Folkestone, Hawking, part of Hougham, part of Liddon, Newington neer Hih, Swingfield. And the Churches of, Alcham, Capell neer Folkestone, Cheriton, Hawking, Liddon, Newington neer Hith, and Swingfield. 29. Ham. HAmme, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his li∣berty, Part of Kenarton, Orlestone, part of Rucking, part of Sha∣doxherst, part of Snav, part of Warehorne. And the Churches of, Orlestone and Warehorne. 30. Heane. HAth in it wo Constables, who have in their liberty, Part o impne, Postling and Saltwood. And the Churches of, Pastling and Saltwood.
31. Hoo. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Alhollowes, part of Cobham, high Halstow, Hoo, St. Ma∣ries, part of West Peckham, part of Stoke. And the Churches of, Alhollowes, high Halstow, Hoo, St. Maries, Stoke. 32. Kinghamford. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Berham, Bishopsborne, Denton neer Eleham, Kingston, Wooon. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 33. Langport. OTherwise Langeport, hath in it one Constable, who hath n hs liberty, Part of Hope, Lid, and part of Old Romney. And the Churches of, Hope and Lid. 34. Larkefield. OTherwise Lavercefield, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Addington, Allington neer Maidstone, part of Aylesford, Birling, Boreham, Ditton, part of Horsmanden, part of Hun∣ton,
Laborne, East Malling, part of West Malling, Ofham, Padlesworth neer Snodland, Ryarsh, Snodland, Trottiscliffe and Woldham. And the Churches of, Addington, Allington neer Maidstone, Birling, Boreham, Ditton, Laborne, East Malling, Ofham, Paddlesworth neer Snodland, Ryarsh, Snodland, Trottiscliffe and Woldham. 35. Littlefield. OTherwise Litelfeld, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Hadlow, Mereworth, part of East Peckham, part of West Peckham. And the Churches of Mereworth and West Peckham. 36. Little and Lesnes. OTherwise Litlelet, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Craford, Earith, Plumsted and East Wickham. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 37. Loningborough. OTherwise Noniberge, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Acrise, Eleham, part of upper Hardress, Liminge, Padlesworth neer Eleham, Stelling. And the Churches of, Acrise, Eleham, Liminge, Padlesworth neer Eleham, Stel∣ling.
38. Maidstone. OTherwise Medestone, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, East Barming, West Barming, part of Bersted, Boxley, Detling, East Farley, part of Hunton, Linton, Loose, part of Marden and part of Stapleherst. And the Churches of, East Barming, Boxley, Detling, East Farley, Linton and Loose. 38. Marden. HAth in it one Constable who hath in his liberty, Part of Goudherst, part of Marden and part of Sta∣pleherst. And the Churches of, Goudherst and Marden, 39. Milton. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Bapchild, part of Bicknor, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, Emley, Halstow, Hartlip, part of Iwade, Kingsdowne neer Sittingborne, Milsted, Milton neer Sittingborne, Murston, New∣ington besides Sittingborne, Rainham, Rodmersham, Sitting∣borne, part of Stockbury, Tong, Tunstall and Vpchurch. And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Bicknor and Stockbury.
40. St. Martins Pountney. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Hope, part of Ivechurch, part of St. Maries, Midley, part of Newchurch, part of New Romney, part of Old Romney. And the Churches of, Ivechurch, St Maries, Midley. 41. Newchurch. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Bilsington, part of St Maries, part of Newchurch, part of Rucking and part of Snave. And the Churches of, Bilsington, Newchurch, Rucking. 42. Oxney. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Eeney, Stone, Wtrsham. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 43. Preston. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Elmstone and Preston neer Fordwich. And the Churches of both those Parishes.
44. Ringslow. Otherwise Tenet, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of St. Laurence, Minster in Thanet, Monkton, part of St. Nicholas. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 45. Ruxley. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Bexley, part of Chesilherst, Chelsfield, part of Chi∣dingstone, Foots Cray, St. Mary Cray, North Cray, Pauls Cray, Cudham, Downe, Farnborough, Hayes, part of Hever, Keston, Nockhol, Orpington and West Wickham. And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Chidingstone and Hever, 46. Rolvenden. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Benenden and Rolvenden. And the Churches of both those Parishes. 47. Selbrittenden. OTherwise Selebrichtindene, hath in it one Constable, wo hath in his liberty, Part of Benenden, part of Hawkeherst, part of Newen∣den, Sandherst. And onely the Church of Sandherst.
48. Shamel. OTherwise Scamele, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Chalke, Cliffe neer Gravesend, part of Cobham, Cookstone, Cowling, Denton neer Gravesend, Frinsbury, Halling, Higham Merston, Shorne, part of Stoke, Stroud. And all the Churches of those Parishes, except Stoke. 49. Isle of Sheppey. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Eastchurch, Layesdowne, Minster in Sheppey and War∣den. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 50. Somerden. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Chevening, part of Chidingstone, part of Cow∣den, part of Eatonbridge, part of Hever, part of Lighe, part of Pensherst, and part of Speldherst. And the Churches of, Chidingstone, Cowden, Hever, Pensherst, Speldherst. 51. Stowting. HAth in it two Constables, & they have in their liberty, Elmsted, Munkes Horton, part of Sellindge, part of Stelling, Stanford, Stowting, part of Waltham.
And the Churches of Elmsted, Monkes Horton, Stanford and Stowting. 52. Strete. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Aldington, Boington, Herst, part of Limp∣ne, part of Sellindge, And all the Churches of those Parishes. 53. Tenham. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Doddington, part of Hedorne, part of wade, Linsted, Tenham. And the Churches of, Doddington, Linsted, Tenham. 54. Toltingtrow. OTherwise Toltetem, otherwise Tollentr, hath in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Graveend, Ifield, Eddesdon, Meopham, Milton neer Gravesnd, Northleet and Nutsted. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 55. Twyford. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Brenchley, part of Capell neer Tunbridge, West
Farley, part of Hunton, part of Marden, Nettlested, part of East Peckham, part of Pembury, Teston, part of Tudeley, Watringbury, part of Yalding, And the Churches of, West Farley, Hunton, Nettlested, East Peckham, Teston, Watringbury, Yalding. 56. Tenterden. HAth no Constable, the Mayor is Mayor of the Town and Hundred, which hundred hath in it, Part of Ebeney, Tenterden, and the Church of Tenter∣den. 57. Wachlingstone. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Asherst, Bidborough, part of Capell neer Tunbridge, so much of Fant as is in Kent, part of Lighe, part of Pem∣bury, part of Pensherst, part of Speldherst, part of Tudeley. And the Churches of, Asherst, Bidborough, Pembury and Tudeley. 58. Westram and Eatonbridge. OTherwise Hostream, hath in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Part of Brasted, part of Cowden, part of Eatonbridge, Westram. And the Churches of, Eatonbridge and Westram.
59. Westgate. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of St. Alphage, St Dunstan, part of Hackington, Harbledowne, Milton neer Canterbury, part of St. Mary North∣gate, Thanington and part of Westgate. And the Churches of, St Dunstan, Hackington, Harbledowne, Milton neer Can∣terbury, Thanington. Alo Christchurch Canterbury is claimed to be in this Hundred. 60. Whitstaple. HAth in it two Constables, who have in theor libety, Cosmus Bleane, Swaycliffe, Whitstaple, and part of Nakington. And the Churches of, Cosmus Bleane, Swaycliffe, Whitstaple. 61. Wingham. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Ah neer Sandwich, Goodnestone neer Sandwich, part of Nonington, Wimlingswold, Wingham. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 62. Worth. HAth in it one Constable, who hath in his liberty, Blackmanstone, Burmarsh, Dimchurch, Eastbridge, part
of West Hith, part of Limpne, part of Newchurch, Or∣garswick. And the Churches of, Burwarsh and Dimchurch. 63. Wrotham. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Ightham, Plaxtoole, Shipborne, Stansted, Wrotham. And all the Churches of those Parishes. 64. Wye. HAth in it two Constables, who have in their liberty, Part of Barborne, Boughton Aluph, Brooke, Crundall, Eastwell, part of Walthm, Wye. And the Churches of, Boughton Aluph, Brooke, Crundall, Eastwell and Wye. There are also severall other Townes and places in this County, which have Constables or other Officers (of that nature) of themselves, and are not subject to the Constable of any Hun∣dred, some of which Townes and places, are in the Forraigne, and others in the liberty of the Cinque Ports (of all which in order Alphabetically. In the Forraigne. Ashford TOwn hath one Constable, who hath in his liberty that Town, and the Church therein, and so much of the Parish as is within the liberty of Ashford.
Aylesford Town, hath one Constable, it is an antient demesne, and to the same belong part of Brenchley, part of Horsman∣den, part of Hunton and part of Yalding; and no other Church but Aylesford is within that liberty. Brasted Ville, hath one Constable, whose liberty is the Ville of Brasted onely, and the Church is in the same. Hadlow Borough, hath one Constable, who hath in his liberty, part of Capell neer Tunbridge, and part of Hadlow, and the Churches of both those Parishes. Helden Borough, hath one Constable, who hath in his liberty, part of Tunbridge, but not the Church. Longport Borough, hath one Constable, who hath in his liber∣ty, part of the Parish of St. Paul, but not the Church. Maidstone Town, and Parish, hath one Constable, whose liberty extendeth over the same. West Malling Town, hath two Constables, whose liberty extendeth over all the Parish (except the Borough of St. Leonard) and it hath the Church in the same. Newenden Township, hath no Constable, but hath an Officer (in the nature of a Constable) called the Bailiffe, whose li∣berty extendeth onely over this Township, and not over any part of the rest of the Parish, but it hath the Church in the same. Ospringe Town, hath one Constable, whose liberty extendeth over the Town, but not over the Parish.
Queenborough Corporation, hath Officers of its own, whose liberty ex∣tendeth over the Parish. Rochester City, hath Officers of its own, whose liberty extend∣eth over the Parish. Seasalter Is no Hundred, but a Constable of it self, whose liber∣ty extendeth over the Parish. South Borough, hath a Constable, who hath in his liberty, part of the Parish of Tunbridge, but not the Church. Tunbridge Town, hath a Constable of it self, whose liberty ex∣teneth over all the Parish, that is not in the aforesaid Helden Borough, or South Borouh. In the liberty of the Cinque Ports. The Towns and places there have Constables and Officers of their own, the names of which Towns and places, and which of them have Churches therein follow Alphabetically. PArt of Apledore, but not the Church. Beakesborne, with the Church. Birchington, with the Church. Part of Brenzet, but not the Church. So much of Bomhill as is in Kent (the Church was in Sussex.) Part of Charlton▪ but not the Church. Deale, with the Church. Dovor, with the two Church∣es in the same. Part of Feversham (viz. the Town) wih the Church. Part of Folkstone (viz. the Town) with the Church. Fdwich, with the Church.
The Grange in Gillingham, but not the Church. Hith, with the Church. Part of West Hith, but not the Church. Part of Hugham, but not the Church. St. Iohn's, with the Church. Part of Ivechurch, but not the Church▪ Ramsgate in St. Laurence, but not the Church. St. Nicholos, but not the Church. St. Peters, with the Church. Ringwold, with the Church. Part of New Romney (viz. the Town) with the Church. Part of Old Romney, with the Church. Sandwich, with the three Churches in the same. Part of Snargate, but not the Church. Stonar, the Church is demolished. Walmer, with the Church. Woode, otherwise Wood church, the Church is demolished. Part of Woodneborough, but not the Church. Seventeen severall Franchises and Liberties do also claim in this County, some whereof have Courts of Record in the same, of all which, and of direction of Writs of Habeas Corpus, to remove Persons or Causes out of such of them as have Courts of Record, and direction of Sheriffs Warrants to arrest in those liberties: I shall now likewise proceed to treat Alphale∣tically. 1. The Liberty of the late Archbishop of Canterbury. THis Liberty hath in it a Court of Record, to hold plea of all Actions, reall, personall and mixt. And claimeth the Mannour of Brandred in Acrise, part of Alcham, the Borough of Staplegate in St. Alphage and St. Mary Northgate, part of Ash neer Sandwich, part of Berham,
the Denns of Biddenden and Spelherst in Biddenden, part of Bilsington, the Mannour of Bishopshorne, the Mannour of Boughton under the Bleane, part of Buckland neer Dovor, part of Capell neer Folkstone, the Mannour of Charing, part of Charlton neer Dovor, the Borough of Chelmanton in great Chart, part of Chevening, part of Chislet, part of Clff neer Dovor, part of Cosmus Bleane, the Mannour of Sissing∣herst in Cranbrooke, part of Footes Cray, part of Deale, part of Denton neer Eleham, part of Deling, part of Dodding∣ton, so much of the Mannour of Westgate as is in St. Dun∣stans, part of Egerton, part of Elmsted, part of Eythorne, the Mannour of Gillingham, part of Goodnestone neer Sand∣wich, the Mannour of Graveney, part of Guston, part of Hackington, part of Halsted, part of Harbledowne, part of Hawking, part of Herne, part of Herneill, part of Hith, part of Monkes Horton, part of Hothfield, part of Houghom, part of Ifield, part of Leneham, the Mannour of Leveland, part of Lid, part of Liddon, the Mannour of Liminge, part of Linsted, part of Littleborne, the Mannour of Maidstone, part of St Margarets neer Dovor, part of Merston, part of Milton neer Canterbury, part of little Mongeham, part of Nakinton, part of St Nicholas in Thanet, part of Nonington, part of Norburne, the Mannour of Orpington, the Mannour of Oford, part of Padlesworth neer Eleham, the Mannor of Petham, the Mannours of Pluckley and Sherland in Pluck∣ley, the Mannour of Preston neer Fordwich, the Mannour of Reculver, part of Repple, the Mannour of Bedderinden in Sandherst, the Mannour of Saltwood, part of Shebbertswold, part of Sholdn, part of Shoram, the Denn of Holnherst in Smarden, prt of Snargate, part of Staple, part of Stouting, part of Sturouth the Mannour of Sundrish, part of Suon neer Dovor, the Mannour of Tenham, part of Thamington, the Mannour of Tilnestone, the Mannour of Tbridge, part of Vlcombe, part of Waltham, part of West Beer, the Man∣nour of Westgate, the mannour of Westwell, part of Whit∣field, otherwise Beusfield, the Borough of Tankeron in Whitstaple, the Mannour of Wingham, part of Wiersham,
part of Woodnesborough, part of Wootton, the Mannour of Wrotham, part of Wye. The direction of a Habe as Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the Defendant be out of custody, Thus, To the Steward of the Court of Record for the liberties of the late Archbishoprick of Canterbury. But if the Defendant be i custody, then thus, To the Steward and Bliffe of the Court of Record for the libertes of  late Archbishoprick of Canterbury, and to either of them. The Sheffe ths directs his Warrants upon process to that lberty vz. To the Baliffe of the liberties of the late Archbishoprick of Canterbury. 2. The Liberty of Ashford. THis Liberty hath in it a Court of Record to hold pleas for all actins, the debt or damages not xceeding twenty marks. Which lierty claimeth over the Town of Ashford, and all the Parish, exept the Borougs of Henwood, otherwise Hewet, and Rudlow. The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the Defenant e out of custoy, thus, To the Steward of the Court of Record of the liberty of Ash∣ford. But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus, To the Steward and Bailiffe of the Court of Record of the li∣berty of Ashord, and to either of them.
The Shiffe thus directeh his Warrants upon process to that liberty, viz. To the Bailffe of the liberty of Ashord. 3. The Liberty of St. Au∣gustine. THis Liberty hath a Court of Record, to hold plea of a ctions, reall, personall and mixt. And claimeth all Adsham, part of Apledore, all Badles∣mere, part of Benenden, part of Betherisden, part of Bet∣shanger, part of Biddenden, part of Brchington part of Bob∣bing, part of Boughton Monchelsea, part of Bridge, the Re∣ctory of Bruckland, part of Buckland neer Dovor, all Buck∣land neer Feversham, the Mannour of Burmarsh, all Chellen∣den, the Mannour, Park and Parish of Cislet, part of Cos∣mus Bleane, part of Crundall, all Devington, part of Dim∣church, all Easeing, part of Elmsted, the Mannour of Elm∣stone, all Ewell, part of Eythorne, the Retory and so much as is out of the Ports in Feversham, te Mnnour of Ford∣wich, all Goodneston neer Feversham, all Winchet Hill in Goudherst, the Mannour of Guston, part of Halden, part of upper Hardress, all nether Hardress, all Hartye, the Denns of Ockley, Gillenden and Parocke in Hawkeherst, neer the Church and all the Parish of Herne, part of Hope, all Hoth, all Ickham, the Vicarage of, and at Mergate in St. Iohns, part of lverburch, part of Kenarton, the Mannour and Rectory of Kennington, al Kingstone, all Knowlton, he Mannour of East Langdon, so much as is out of the Ports in St. aurence, the Mannour of Leneham, all eveland, the Mannour and all the Parish of Littleborne, all Luddenham, part of Marden, the Mannour and Rectory o Milton neer
Canterbury, part of Minster in Sheppey, all Minster in Thnet, all Monkton, the Mannour of Nackington, the Mannour of Newington besides Sittinghorne, all Newnham, so much as is not in the Cinque Ports, in St. Nicholas in Thanet, part of Nouington, the Mannour of Norbrne, all Norton, all Ore, so much as is in the Hundred of Feversham in Ospring, part of Otham, all Patrickshone, the Borough of Longpar in St. Paul, the Mannour of Plumsted, all Preston neer Fe∣versham, part of Preston neer Fordwich, ll Reculver, part of Rever, the Mannour of Ripple, part of Sandwich, the Man∣nour and so much as is in the Hundred of Feversham in Steling, part of Shebetward, all Sheldwich, part of Sholdon, pat of Smarden, the Mannour f Snave, all Stalisfield, all Staple, part of , all Stodmarsh, all Stone neer Fever∣sham, the Rectory an Vcarge of Stone in Oxney all Stumuth, all  pa f Sutton neer Dovor, the Man∣nour o waycliffe, the Rectory of Tentrden all Throwley, the Brough o Kinsnode i Vlcombe, all West Beer, part of Whitfield, otherwise Busfild, ll, exet he Brugh of Tankerton in Whistple, all Wikham Beaux, the Man∣nour an Rectory of Willesborough, the Rectory of Wing∣am, part of Wodnesborough, part of Wormsell. The irection of a Haba Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the Defendant be out of custody thus, To the Steward of the Court of Record of the liberties of th late dissolved Mnaery of St. Augustine, neer h City of Canterbury in the County of Kent. But if the Defendant be in cstoy then thu, To the Stoward and Bailiffe of the Cut of Record of the li∣berties of the late dissolved Mnastery of St Augustine, the City of Canterbury in the County of Kent, and to either of them. The Sheriffe thus directs his Warrants upon process to that liberty, viz To the Bailiffe of the liberties of the late dissolved Monestery of St. Augustine neer Canterbury.
4. The Liberty of the Cinque Ports. THis Liberty hath in it (extending over all the same) a Court of Chancery, and a Court of Admiralty, and anti∣ently had a Court called the Castlegate Court (for determining pleas touching guarding that Castle.) And within this liberty are several Ports and Townes in this County, every of which hath a chief Magistrate and Jurats, and every of them is a Justice of the Peace within the lierties of that Town. Evey of the laid Port and Towns hath lso a Session of the Peace, and a Court o Record for all pleas, reall, per∣sonal and mixt. This Liberty of the Cinque Ports extendet it sel o∣ver all the said Ports and Townes, and the several places within their Jursictions, viz. The Town and Port of Sandwich with the Parishes and places within the jurisiction of the same, viz. Deale, Stonar, Walmer, Ramsgat in St. Laurence, Sar in St. Nicholas, an Lands (sometimes parcell of the Man∣nour of Boxley) in Woodnesborough. The Town and Port of Dovor, with the Parishes and places within the jurisdiction of the same, viz. Birchington, part of Charlton neer Dovor, part of Hougham, St. Iohns, St. Peters, Ringwold, Woodchurch in Thanet. The Town and Port of New Romney, with the places within the jurisdiction of the same, viz. Part of Old Romney Bomill, part of Iechurch, part of Brenzet, part of Snargate, part of Apledore. The Town and Prt of Hith, with part of West Hith, within the jurisdiction of the same the Town of Fever∣sham, and part of that Parish; the Town of Folkstone and part of that Parish; the Town and Parish of Fordwich;
the Town and Parish of Lid; the Town and Parish of Tenterden, with the Borough of Reading in Eeney (with∣in the Jurisdiction of the same) the Parish of Beakesborne and the Grange in Gillingham, within the jurisdiction of the Town and Port of Hasting. The Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports is the immedi∣ate Officer (for the whole liberty of the same) to the Courts at Westminster, and the direction of Writs to him is thus To our Constable of our Castle of Dovor, and to the Warden of our Cinque Ports or to his Lieutenant there. Here also I thought fit to set down the direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of the liberty of the City of Canterbury (which is tus, whethr the Defen∣dant be in custody or not) viz. To the Mayor of the City of Canterbury. 5. The Liberty of the late Dean of Canterbury. THis Liberty hath in it a Curt of Record, for pleas in all actions, reall, personall and mixt. And this liberty claimeth, the Mannour of Adisham, the Mannour of Apledore, the Borough of Rudlow in Ash∣ford, part of Benenden, part of Betherisden, so much as is in the Mannour of Godmersham in Biddenden, so much as is in the Mannour of Brokefend in Birchington, part of Boughton Monchesea, so much as is in the Mannour of Hollinghorn, in Bredherst, part of Brenze, the Mannour of Brook, art of Brookland, so much as is in the Mannour of Copton, in Buck∣land neer Feversham, the Leeze, & part of the Churchyard, & what is not in the liberty of Wye, in Challock, the Mannour of great Chart, the Mannour of little Chart, the Mannour of Chartham, the precincts of Christchurch Canterbury, all the Town and Denn of Cranbrooke (except the George Inn with the appurtenances) in Cranbrooke, so much as
is in te Mannour o Copton, in Devington, the Mannour of Eastry, part of Ebeney, the Mannur of Eynsford, the up∣per part of Eyorne, the Mannour of Fairefield, the Man∣nour of East Farley, the Mannour of West Farley, part of Farningham, so much as is in the Mannour of Hollinghorne in Frittenden, the Mannour of Godmersham, the Boroughs of Pattenden and Lilsden in Goudherst, part of Halden, part of Haow, so much as is in the Manour of Hollingbone, in Hariesham, the Denns of Foxhole, little Hensell, Pipfden, Cogherst and lttle Riseden in Hawkcherst, the Den of Habenbury in Hedcorn, pat of Higham, the Mannour of Hollingborne, the Lands late of S. Anthony Roper in Hor∣ton Kirby, part of Hucking, the Mnnours of Ikham an Brampling in Ickhm, so much as is in the Mannour of Ick∣ham in Ivechurch, part of Iwade, so much as is in the Man∣nour of Apledore in Kenaton the Mannours of Laysdown and Boyeton, in & neer Laysdown so much as is in te Man∣nour of Hollingbrne in Leeds, the Mannour of Lofe, part of Marden, the Mnnor of Mephm, the Mannour of Mrsham, so much as is in the Mannour of  in Mdley, part of great Mongeham, the Mnnour of , so much as s in the Mnnour of Eastry, in  part of West Pack∣um, the Manour of Prestou neer Fevrsham, part of Rol∣venden, so much as is in the Mannour of Agne in Old Romney, the Mannour of  and so much as is in te Mannour of Ickham, in Rucking, the Mannour of part of Smarden, so much as is in the Mannour o , in Snave, part of Staple,  of Stapleherst, so much as is in any ofhe  of Copton, Selgrave or Hamme marsh, in  neer  part of Stone in Oxney, the late of S. Anthny Roper, in Sutton at Hone, so much as is in the manour of Shourt in Swaycliffe, pat of part of , the mannour of Westwell, the man∣nours of Palster and Wittersham in Wittersham, so much as is in the mannur of Apledore in Woodchurch, part of , so much as is in the mannour of , in Worde,
The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a cause out of this liberty, if the Deendant be out of custody, thus, To the Steward of the High Court of Record of the liberties of the late Dn and Chapter of the late Cathdrall and Mero political Church of Christ Canterbury. But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus, To the Steward and Bailiffe of the High Court of Record of the liberties of the late Dean and Chapter of the late Cathedrall and Mtropoliticall Church of Christ Canterbury, and to ei∣ther of them. The Sheriffe thus directs his Warrants upon process to that liberty, viz. To the Bailiffe of the liberties of the late Dean and Chapter of Chsthuch Canterbury. 6. The Liberty of Eleham. THis Liberty hath no Court of Record for pleas, But claimeth so much as is in the upper half Hun∣dred of Loningborough, in Acrise, uppr Hardress, Padles∣worth neer Eleham, Stelling, and al Eleam. The Sheriffe thus directs his Warrats upon pocess to that liberty, viz. To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Eleam. 7. The Liberty of Gravesend and Milton. THis Liberty hath in it a Corporation and Court of Record, And claimeth al Gravesend, and Milton neer Graves∣nd. The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cue out of this Liberty (whether the Defendant be in custo∣dy or not) is thus,
To the Mayor, Iurs and Inhabitants of the Townes and Parishes of Gravsend and Milton. The Sheriffe directs his Warrants upon process to this Lierty thus, viz. To the Mayor of the Townes of Gravesend and Milton, and to his Ministers. 8. The Liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster. THis Liberty hath no Court of Record for pleas in this Coun∣ty, But claimeth part of Ash neer Wrham, at Chaod in Asherst, the anors of  and Goddington, Wood∣lands called Charm wood, and the Rectory o Celsfild, in Chelsfield, at Morants Court in Chevening. part of Chiding∣stone, part of St. Mry Cray, the manur of Pau Cray, so much as is in the mannour of Hastingligh, in Elmted, the Rectoy of  part of Farningham, the man∣nour o Hastingligh, part of Horton Kirby, the mannour of Kensing, part of Keston, the mannour of Lullingstone, part of Oford, part of Orpington, at Chaford in Pensherst, the mannour of eale, at Badborne in Sevenoke the mannour of Goddington in Stroud, the mannour of West Wickham, and the messuage and lands called Spring Parkes, Old Parkes, Frith's Wood and Chamk's Grove, in West Wick∣ham. The Sheriffe directs his Warrants upon process to the Bailiffe of this liberty thus, viz. To the Biliffe of the liberty of the Dutchy of Lancaster.
9. The Liberty of Liminge. THis Liberty hath no Court of Record for pleas, But claimeth so much as is in the lower half Hun∣dred of Loningborough in Liminge so much as is in that half Hundred, in Paddlesworth neer Eham. The Sheriffe directs his Warans upon process to the Bailiffe of this liberty thus viz. To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Liminge. 10. The Liberty of Maidstone. THis Liberty hath a Corporation in it, and a Court of Re∣cord, theuri diction whereof extendeth (as to all actions re∣all, personall and mixt,) over all the Town and Parish of Maid∣stone, and as to personall actions, onely under the value of five pounds, It extendeth over East Farley, East Berming, West Bar∣ming, Loose, Boxley, Allington, Mylale in Aylesford, new Hith in East Malling, Linton and Otham. And upon the River of Medway, from East Farley bridge to a peece of land called Hawkewood in Boreham. The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty (whether the Defendant be in Custo∣dy or not) i thus, To the Mayor of the Kings Town and Parish of Maidstone. The Sheriffe directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz. To the Mayor of the Kings Town and Parish of Maidstone, and to his Ministers.
11. The Liberty of Queenbo∣rough. THis Liberty hath a Corporation, and Court of Re∣cord, and claimeth over the Towne and Parish of Queenborough. The direction of a Habeas Corpus, to remove a Cause out of this Liberty (whether the Defendant be in Custody or not) is thus: To the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Town of Queen∣borough. The Sherff directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz. To the Mayor, Bailiffs and Burgesses of the Town of Queen∣borough, and to their Officer. 12. The Liberty of the late Bi∣shop of Rochester. THis Liberty hath a Court of Record for Pleas, in all Actions, (Reall, Personal and mixt) and claimeth, Part of Allhollowes, part of Aylesford, part of Beckenham, all Bromley, part of Chetham, part of Cliffe neer Gravesend, at the stone house and Churchyard in Cobham, all Cook∣stone, part of Cowling, all Darent, all the Market-place, from the running stream to the Market-house, and most of that side of the street where the Cook Inn is, and the Mill (but not the Mill-land) in Dartford, part of Den∣ton neer Gravesend, in the Churchyard of Fawkeham, all Frindsbury, all Halling, part of Higham, part of Hoo, part of Longfield, part of West Malling, part of St. Margarets
neer Rochester, part of St. Maries neer Rochester, in the Churchyard of Northfleet, part of Padlesworth neer Snod∣land, the precincts of the late Cathedrall Church of Ro∣chester, the Rectory of Rolvenden, part of Shorne, all Snod∣land, all Southfleet, all Stoke, all Stone neer Dartford, part of Stroud, part of Sutton at Hone, all Trottiscliffe, part of Wilmington and all Woldham. The direction of a Hobeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the Defendant be out of custody, is thus, To the Steward of the Court of the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester. But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus, To the Steward and Bailiffe of the Court of the liberty of the late Bishop of Rochester, and to either of them. The Sheriffe directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz. To the Bailiffe of the liberty of the late Bishop of Roche∣ster. 13. The Liberty of the City of Rochester. THis Liberty hath in it a Corporation and Court of Record, for pleas in all actions, reall, personall and mixt, and claimeth, All the City of Rochester, from the high street of that City to St. Bartholomew's Hospitall, and from thence cross the highway, all along the fields to the Farm called Hor∣sted in Chetham, from Horsted Farm, cross the Woods, to the high-way leading from Rochester to Maidstone, and from thence cross the lands to Windmill hill neer Nassen∣den Farm, and from thence (over the fields) cross the way between St. Margarets and Aylesford, down to a Farm called Rings, and from thence into the River of
Medway in St. Margarets neer Rochester. From the high∣street of Rochester, over the Bridge to the Mill called Stroud Mill (including the Mill) and from thence all a∣long the High-street at the right hand side thereof, to the signe of the Angell, and all Littleborough, and so beyond the Church to the way between Frindsbury and Cookstone, and up the way leading, to Frindsbury, to the house called the Ship (including the Church) in Stroud. The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a cause out of this liberty (whether the Defendant be in custody or not) i thus, To the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Ro∣chester. The Sheriffe directs his Warrants upon process to this liberty thus, viz. To the Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of the City of Roche∣ster, and their Ministers. 14. The Liberty of Romney-Marsh. THis liberty hath in it a Corporation and Court of Record for pleas in all actions, reall, personall and mixt, and claimeth, Part of Apledore, part of Bilsington, all part of Bonnington, part of Brenzt al  Dim-Church all Eastbridge, all Hest all Hope, pt of Ivechurch, part of Kenaron, part of Limpne, all St. Maries, all Ne∣church, all Orgarswick, part of Orl stone part of New Romney, part of Old Romney, part of Rcking, part of Snargate, all Snave, part of Wareborne. The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a cause out of this liberty (whether the Defendant be in custody or not) is, To the Bailiffe and Iurats of Romney Marsh.
The Sheriffe directs Warrants upon process to this li∣berty thus, viz. To the Bailiffe and Iurats of Romney Marsh, and to their Officer. 15. The Liberty of Sevenoke. THis liberty hath no Court of Record for pleas, But claimeth part of Kemsing, part of Lighe next Tunbridge, part of Seale, all Sevenoke and part of Speldherst. The Sheriffe directs Warrants upon process to this li∣berty thus, viz. To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Sevenoke. 16. The Liberty of Wrotham. THis Liberty hath no Court of Record; but claimeth, All Igtham, all Plaxtoole, all Shipborne, all Stansted, all Wrotham. The Sheriffe directs Warrants upon process to this li∣berty thus, viz. To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Wrotham. 17. The Liberty of Wye. THis liberty hath a Court of Record for pleas in all actions, reall, personall and mixt, and claimeth, The Borough of Henwood, otherwise Hewit in Ashford, the Borough of Snodeill in Betherisden, the Borough of Wachinden in Biddenden, all Boughton Aluph, the Borough of Cocklescombe in Braborne, all Booke, part of the Church∣yard, the Faire place, and what else is not in the liberty
of the late Deane of Canterbury in Challock, part of Chil∣ham, the Borough of Frechisley, otherwise Abbots Fran∣chise in Cranbrooke, all Crdall, all Eastwell, part of God∣mersham, the Denn of Romden in Halden, the Borough of Town in Hastingligh, the Borough of Houkeherst, otherwise Southborough in Houkeherst, part of West Hith, all Kings∣noth, the Borough of Dengemarsh in Lid, part of Mersham, part of Molash, the Borough of West Kingsnoth in Pluckles, part of Rcking, the yoke of Develand being all S∣vington, the Denn of Chepredge in Tenterden, the Borough of Town in Walham, part of Warehorne, the Boroughs of Shottenden and Deane in Westwell, the Borough of Hen∣wood in Willesborough, the Denn of Plurenden in Wood∣church, all W. The direction of a Habeas Corpus to remove a Cause out of this liberty, if the Defendant be out of custoy is thus, To the Steward of the Court of the Royall Mannour of Wye in the County of Kent. But if the Defendant be in custody, then thus, To the Steward and Bailiffe of the Court of the Royall Man∣nour of Wye in the County of Kent, and to either of them. The Sheriffe drects Warrants upon process to this li∣berty thus, viz. To the Bailiffe of the liberty of Wye. There are seven principall Rivers in this County. 1. Thames RUnneth about thirty miles in length at the Northside of the County, between the same and Essex. 2. Ravensborne ARiseth at Holliwoods hill in Keston, and runneth from thence by Hayes, and from thence (by Brley, Leu∣am
and Debtford) into the River of Thames, and with it into the Sea. 3. Cray ARiseth at Newell in Orpington, and from thence run∣neth by St. Mary Cray, and Paul's Cray, and from thence between Foots Cray and North Cray, and by Bexley to Crayford, and from thence into the River Darent, and with it into the River of Thames, and with that into the Sea. 4. Darent ARiseth at Squireyes in Westram, and from thence runeth o Brasted, undrish, Otford, Shoram, Lulling∣stone, Aynsford, aningham, Horton Kirby, Sutton at Hone, and Darent, from thence to Dartford, and beyond that meeteth the River Cray, and with that runneth into the River of Thames, and with it into the Sea. 5. Medway HAth four heads, I. About Croberst in Surrey, and runneth from thence to Eatonbridge, Hever, Chidingstone, Pensherst, Lighe, Tunbridge, Hadlow and Yalding, and from thence to Net∣tlested, Teston, and West Farley, and from thence between East Barming and East Farley to Maidstone, and from thence to Alington, and Westward to Aylesford, and from thence Northward, between Boreham and Snodland, and Woldham and Halling, to Cookstone, and from thence to Rochester,
and from thence between Frindsbury and Chetham, it run∣neth Northward about a mile and a half, and from thence Eastward as much, & from thence Southward to Gillingham, then about two miles and a half Eastward, then as much Northward, then Eastward about one mile & a half, then Southward about a mile, then Northward about 2. miles, then Eastward about three miles, and so Northward into the Sea (between the Isles of Greane and Sheppey.) 2. Neer Fant in Sussex, and runneth from thence to Lamberherst, and Horsmanden, and from thence to a place called the Twist, where it spreads it self into two parts, one part whereof runn that he Westside of Marden, and from thence to a place called Hunton Ford, and from thence Westward to Yalding aforesid, and the other part also runneth at the Westside of the Twist to Yalding afore∣said and they both there meeting, run as before to Net∣tlested, Teston, &c. as before. 3. About Goldwell in great Chart, and from thence runneth to a place called Romden, from thence to Sarden and Hedcorne, and from thence to a place called Stile∣bridge, and from thence to Hunton Ford and Yalding aofre∣said, and from thence to Nettlested, Teston, &c. as before. 4. At Bigginoth in Leneham, and runneth from thence to Leeds, and from thence between Bersted and Otha, to Maidstone, Allington, &c. as before. 6. Stoure. THis also hath four heads, 1 At Streatwell in Leneham, and runneth from thence to little Chart and Hothfield, and from thence be∣tween Ashford and Willesborough, and from thence North∣ward, to Wye, Godmersham, Chartham, Milton, Thnington and Canterbury, and from thence to Surrey, from thence be∣tween Fordwich and West Beer to  and from
thence to Sar, and so at the Westside of the Isle of Thanet, into the Sea. 2. At Postling Church, and runneth from thence to Stanford, from thence Westward to Sellindge, Mersham and Sevington, and from thence between Willesborough and Ashford, meeting with the former stream, runneth with i to Wye, Godmersham, &c. as before. 3. At Liminge, and runneth from thence to Eleham, from thence between Berham and Kingstone to Bishopborne, and Bridge, from thence to Patricksorne, and Beakesborne, from thence between Littleborne and Ickham, to Wickham Breaux, Preston and Sturmuth, and from thence in at the Southwest side of the Isle of Thanet, and b that North∣ward to the Sea. 4. Neer great Mingeham, and from thence runneth to Norburne, Ham, Worth and Sandwich, and from thence to Richorough, Esfleet and nether Court, and so meeting with the last stream, runneth to Sarr, and from thence as before into the Sea. 7. Rother ARiseth ao it Argo's hill in or neer Rotherfield in Sus∣sex and runnng by Mayfield, Echingham, Saleherst and Bodehm, in Sussex, comet into Ke, in the Parish of Sandherst and from thence runneth Eastward to Neweden, Wttershm, Eeney, Stone and Apledore, and  thence turning Southward by the East end of the Isle of Oxney, runneth by Iden and Playden in Sussex, and between that and East Guldeford (also in Sussex) into the Sea at Rye. This County hath in it 14. Corporations, viz. In the Forraigne. 1. GRavesend and Milton. 2. Maidstone. 3. Queen∣borough. 4. Rochester. 5. Romney Marsh,
In the Cinque Ports. 6. Dovor. 7. Feversham. 8. Folkstone. 9. Fordwich. 10. Hith. 11. Lid. 12. New Romney. 13. Sandwich. 14. Ten∣terden. And one City, viz. Rochester (the City of Canterbury being a County of it self.) There are in this County 28. Market Townes, viz. In the Forraigne. 1. AShford, 2. Bromley, 3. Cranbrook, 4. St. Mary Cray, 5. Dartford, 6. Eleham, 7. Goudherst, 8. Gravesend, 9. Leneham, 10, Maidstone, 11. West Malling, 12. Milton neer Sittingborne, 13. Rochester, 14. Sevenoke, 15. Smarden, 16. Tunbridge, 17. Westram, 18. Woolwich, 19. Wrotham, and 20. Wye. In the Cinque Ports. 21. Dovor, 22. Feversham, 23 Folkstone, 24. Hith, 25. Lid, 26. New Romney, 27. Sandwich, 28. Tenterden. And the Markets are held in these Townes as follow∣eth, viz. Monday at Eleham. Tuesday at Leeham and Wrotham. Wednesday at St. Mary Cray, Feversham, Goudherst, Gravesend, Dovor, Sandwich, and Westram. Thursday at Bromley, Folkstone, Lid, Maidstone & Wye Friday at Rochester, Smarden, Tenter∣den, Tunbridge & Woolwich. Saturday at Ashford, Cranbrook, Dartford, Dovor, Feversham, Gravesend, Hith, West Malling, Milton neer Sittingorne, New Romney, Sandwich & Sevenoke. Likewise at Sandway in Leneham there is a Market (for Bullocks) upon every Tuesday after Alollo day, till Christma.
And a Market at Northfleet, upon every Tuesday after aster-Tuesday, till Whitson-Tuesday. I have omitted Canterbury out of the names of these Market-Townes, for that it is a County of it self; but there is a Market in the same upon every Wednesday and Saturday. There are in this County yearly 124. Faires, most of which a kept in the severall Monthes of the year as followeth. IAnuary 25. Paul's Conversion, at Milton neer Gravesend. February 2. Candlemas day, at St. Mary Cray, Maid∣stone. 3. St. Blase, at Bromley. 14. St. Valentine, at Fever∣sham, It holdeth ten days. March 12. St Gregory, at Wye. 24. St. Buttolph, at Northfleet. 25. Our Lady day, at great Chart, Lamberherst, St. Peters, Seaaer, Stoke. Aprill 23. St. George, at Charing, Wrotham, 25. St. Mark at Eatonbridge, Tenterden. May 1. Phillip and Iacob, at Maidstone, Wingham, Wit∣tersham. 3. Finding of the holy Cross, at Wareorne called Ham Faire. 6. Iohn Port Latin, at Ashford, Speldherst, cal∣led Groombridge Faire. 19. St. Dunstan, at Cranbrooke, Ro∣chester. 26. Translation of St. Augustine, at Leneham. Iune 9. St. Edmund the King, at Maidstone, called Gar∣lick Faire. 11. St. Barnaby, at Apledore. 24. Midsummer∣day, at Bilsington, called Woodcock Faire, Harietsham, St. Iohns in Thanet, Seasalter, Tunbridge. 29. St. Peter, at Ay∣lesford, Hedcorne, Hith, Mepham, St. Peters in Thanet, Sevenoke. Iuly 7. Translation of Becket, at Christchurch Canterbury, called Becket Faire, it holdeth nine dayes. 13. Anacletus, at Lid. 15. St. Switin, at Horsmanden. 19. St. Rusin, at St. Margarets neer Dovor. 20. St. Margarets, at Betherisden, 22. St. Mary Magdalen, at Cowden, Dartford, Goudherst, cal∣led
Combwell Faire, Stockbury. 23. Apolinaris, at Monkon. 25. St. Iames, at Bromley, Elmsted, East Malling, called Larkefield Faire, Staple. August 1. Lammas day, at Bruckland, Feversham, it holdeth ten dayes, West Malling. 10. St. Laurence, at Hawkeherst, New Romney. 15. Assumption of our Lady, at Goudherst, Strod. 24. St. Bartholomew, at Bobbing, Buckland neer Do∣or, St. Iohns in Thanet, Otford. 29. Decollation of St. Iohn Baptist, at Ashford. September 1. Giles Abbot, at Cranbrooke, Farnborough, Re∣uler▪ Siporne. 8. Nativity of our Lady, at Chetham, We∣stram. 14. Holy Rood, at Bersted, Goodneston neer Sandwich. 21. St. Matthew, at Eastry, West Malling, Wareorne. 27. Cosmus and Dimianus, at Chaliock. 29. Michaelmas day, at Christchurch Cànterbury, it holds nine dayes, Earith, Higham Marden, Seasalter, Sittingborne, it holds five dayes, Smar∣den. October 6. St. Faith, at Maidstone. 8. Pelagis, at Cliffe neer Gravesend. 9. St. Dennis, at Eleham. 13. Translati∣on of St. Edward, at Gravesend, it holds a week. 18. St. Luke, at Charing, Charlton neer Greenwich, called Horne Faire, great Mongeham, Tunbridge. 28. Simon and Iude, at Biddenden, Chilham. November 1. All Saints, at Stelling. 6. St. Leonard, at Badlesmer, West Malling. 11. St. Martin, at Dovor, it holds nine dayes. 20. St. Edward the King, at Hith, Sutton Vallance. 23. St. Clement, at Sandwich, hold three dayes. 30. St. Andrew, at Rochester. December 6. St. Nicholas, at Pluckley, Sandherst, Sevenoke 25. Christmas day, at Seasalter. 29. Thomas Becket, at Christchurch Canterbury, it holdeth nine dayes. And the residue of the said 124. Fairs are kept on no cer∣tain day of the Month, but on the dayes following, viz. Ashwednesday (being the Wednesday) after Shrove sun∣day, at Tunbridge. Palme monday, bing the Monday before Easter, at Eleham in Sheppey.
Good Friday, being the Friday before Easter day, at Whit∣staple. Easter Monday, at Eleham, Kemsing. Easter Tuesday, at Northfleet, Yalding. Ascention day, being the Thursday sevennight before Whitsunday, at Brasted, Earith, Stelling, Stone in Oxney. Whitson Munday, at Eleham, Hadlow, Sittingborne, it hol∣deth three dayes. Whitson Tuesday, at Chevening, called Chepsted Faire, Northfleet. Wednesday in Whitson week, at Ightham, called Coxcomb Faire. THe severall Officers following (are by the Sheriffe of this County) returned to attend at the Assises holden for the same, viz. All the Justices of the Peace of the County, Mayors Of the City of Rochester, of the Town of Maidstone, of the Townes of Gravesend and Milton. All the Coronors of the County. Stewards of Liberties Of the late Archbishop of Canterbury, of the late Dean and Chapter of Christchurch Canterbury, of Wye. Bailiffs of Liberties Ashford, Liminge, Sevenoke, Gravesend and Milton, the late Bishop of Rochester, Wrotham, Eleham. Bailiffs of the County Sutton Bromley, Sutton Dartford, Hoo, Eyhorne, Seaven Hundreds, Milton, Chart and Longbridge, Scray, Bridge, Eastry, Stowting, Shipway, Twyford, Lowy of Tunbridge.
Constables. Hundred of Blackheath, two: Hundred of Ruxley, two: Hundred of Codsheath, two: Hundred of Somerden, two: Hundred of Westram and Eatonbridge, one: Hundred of Bromley and Beckenham, one: Town of Brasted, one: Hundred of Dartford and Wilmington, two: Hundred of Little and Lesnes, one, Hundred of Axstone, two: Hun∣dred of Hoo, two: Hundred of Shamell, two: Hundred of Chetham and Gillingham, two: Hundred of Larkefield, two: Town of West Malling, two: Hundred of Tolting∣trow, two: Hundred of Wrotham, two: Hundred of Twy∣ford, two: Hundred of West Barnfield, one: Hundred of Brenchley and Horsmanden, two: Hundred of Mrdn, one: Hundred of Wahlingstone, two: Hundred of Littlefild, ne: Hundred of Milton, two: Hundred within the Isle of Shep∣pey▪ one: Hundred of Felbrough, two: undred of Fe∣versham, two: Hundred of Tenham, two: Hundred of Boughton Blean, two: Towne of Ospringe, one: Hun∣dred of Downhamfd, two: Hundred of Bridge and Pe∣tham, two: Borough of , one: Hundred of West∣gate, two: Hundred of Blengate, two: Hundred of King∣hamford, two: Hundred of , one: Hundred of Whitstaple, two: Hundred of , one: Hundred of Wngham, two: Hundred of , two: Hundred of Eastry, two: Hundred of Stowting, two: Hundred of Heane, one: Hundred of Lonningborough, two: Hundred of Buborough, two: Hundred of Folkstone, two: Hun∣dred of Wye, two: Hundred of Calehill, two: Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, two: Hundred of Eyhorne, two: Hundred of Maidstone, one▪ Town of Maidstone, one: Helden Borough, one: South Borough, one: Hadlow Bo∣rough, one: Town of Tunbridge, one: Hundred of Cran∣brooke, one: Hundred of Selbrittenden, one: Hundred of great Barnefield, one: Hundred of Blackborne, one: Hun∣dred of Rolvenden, one: Hundred of Barckley, one: Hun∣dred of Bircholt Barony, one: Town of Ashford, one: Hun∣dred of Strete, two: Hundred of Bircholt Franchise, one:
Hundred of , one: Hundred of Newchurch, one: Hundred of Alesbridge, one: Hundred of St. Marins Pountney, one: Hundred within the Isle of Oxney, one. THe West division of the County of Kent hath in it yearly two generall Sessions of the Peace (usually holden at Maidstone) viz. Tuesday after Easter-week, and Tuesday after Michaelmas day. These Officers following are (by the Sheriffe of the County) returned o attend at the said Sessions, viz. Baliffes of Liberties. Sevenoke, Gravesend and Milton, the late Bishop of Ro∣chester, Wrotham. Bailiffes of the County. Sutton Bromley, Sutton Dartford, Hoo, Twyford, Lowy of Tunbridge, Seaven Hundreds, Eyhorne. Constables. Hundred of Blackheath, two▪ Hundred of Ruxley, two: Hundred of Codsheath, two: Hundred of Somerden, two: Hundred of Westram and Eatonbridge, one: Town of Bra∣sted, one: Hundred of Bromley and Beckenham, two: Hun∣dred of Dartford and Wilmington, two: Hundred of Little and Lesnes, one: Hundred of Axtone, two: Hundred of Hoo, two, Hundred of Shamell, two: Hundred of Chet∣ham and Gillingham, two: Hundred of Larkefield, two: Town of West Malling, two: Hundred of Toltingtrow, two: Hundred of Wrotham, two. Hundred of Twyford, two: Hundred of West Barnfield, one: Hundred of Brenchley and Horsmanden, two. Hundred of Marden, one: Hundred of Wahingstone, two: Hundred of Littlefield, one: Hel∣den Borough, one: Town of Tunbridge, one: South Bo∣rough,
one: Hadlow Borough, one: Hundred of Cran∣brooke, one▪ Hundred of Selbrittenden, one: Hundred of great Barnfield, one: Hundred of Blackborne, one: Hun∣dred of Rolvenden, one: Hundred of Barckley, one: Hun∣dred of Eyhorne, two: Hundred of Maidstone, one: Town of Maidstone, one. THe East division of the County of Kent hath in it year∣ly two generall Sessions of the Peace (usualy holden at the Castle of Canterbury) viz. Tuesday after Epiphany (commonly called Twelfide) and Tuesday before St. Iames. These Officers following are (by the Sheriffe of the County) returned to attend at the said Sessions, viz. Stewards of Liberties. Of the late Archbishopick of Canterbury, of the late Dean and Chapter of Christchurch Canterbury, of Wye. Bailiffes of Liberties Ashford, Liminge, Eleham. Bailiffes of the County. Milton, Scray, Bridge and Petham, Stowting, Chart and Longbridge, Eastry, Shipway. Constables Hundred of Milton, two: Hundred of the Isle of Shep∣pey, one: Hundred of Felborough, two: Hundred of Fe∣versham, two: Hundred of Tenham, two: Hundred of Boughton under the Blean, two: Towne of Ospringe, one: Hundred of Downhamford, two: Hundred of Bridge and Petham, two: Hundred of Westgate, two: Hundred of Blengate, two: Hundred of Kinghamford, two: Hundred of Ringslow, two: Hundred of Whitstaple, two: Hundred
of Preston, one: Hundred of Wingham, two: Hundred of Cornilo, two: Hundred of Eastry two: Hundred of Stow∣ting, two: Hundred of Heane, two: Hundred of Loning∣borough, two: Hundred of Beusborough, two: Hundred of Folkstone, two: Hundred of Wye, two: Hundred of Calehill, two: Hundred of Chart and Longbridge, two: Hundred of Bircholt Barony, one: Town of Ashford, one: Hundred of Strete, two: Hundred of Bircholt Franchise, one: Hundred of Ham, one: Hundred of Newchurch, one: Hundred of Aloesbridge, one: Hundred of St. Martins Pountney, one: Hundred of Oxney, one. For Ecclesiastical government, this County had formerly in it two Bishopricks, viz. Canterbury and Rochester; Each of which Diocess was divided into several Deanries, and those Deanries had in them the several Parishes in this County as followeth, viz. The Diocesse of Canterbury had in it eleven Deanries, which had in them the Parishes in this County following, viz. 1. Bridge. ADisham, Ash neer Sandwich, Beakesborne, Berham, Bi∣shopsbourne, Boughton Aluph, Bridge, Brooke, Challock, Chartham, Chilham, Chillenden, Crundall, Elmstone, Godmer∣sham, Goodneston neer Sandwich, upper Hardress, , Kingstone, Littleborne, Molash, Nonnington, Patricksborne, Petham, Preston neer Fordwich, Staple, Stelling, Stodmarsh, Sumouth, Waltham, Wickam Breaux, Wimlingswold, Wing∣ham and Wye.
2. Canterbury. St. Ahage, Christchurch, Cosmus Blean, St. Dunstans, Fordwich, Hackington, Harbldown, nether Hardress, Milton neer Canterbury, Nackington, St. Mary Northgate, St. Paul, Sturrey, Thanington, and Westgate. 3. Charing. Ashord, Benenden, Betherisden, Biddenden, Boughton Ml∣erbe, Charing, great Chart, little Chart, Cranbrooke, East∣well, Egerton, Frittenden, Halden, Hawkeherst, Hedcorne, Hothfield, Kennington, Newenden, Pluckley, Rolvenden, Sand∣erst, Smarden, Tenterden and Westwell. 4. Dovor. Alcham, Beusfield, alias Whitfield, Buckland neer Dovor, neer Folkstone, Charlton neer Dovor, Cheriton, Cliffe neer Dovor, St. Iames and St. Maries in Dovor, Ewell, Folk∣stone, Guston, Hawking, Hougham, Liddon, St. Margarets neer Dovor, Newington besides Hith, Rever and Swingfield. 5. Eleham. Acrie, Braborne, Denton neer Eleham, Elham, Elmsted, Hastingih, Hith, Monkes Horton, Liminge, Padlesworth neer Eleham, Postling, Saltwood, Stanford, Stowting and Woot∣tn. 6. Limpne. , Apledore, Bilsington, Blackmanstone, onning∣ton,
Brenzet, Bruckland, Burmarsh, Dimchurch, Eastbridge, Ebeney, Fairfield, Herst, Hincksel, West, Hith, Hope, Ivechurch, Kenarton, Kingsnoth, Lid, Limpne, St. Maries neer New Romney, Mersham, Medley, Newchurch, Orgarswick, Orle∣stone, New Romney, Old Romney, Rucking, Sellindge, Se∣vington, Shadoxherst, Smeeth, Snargate, Snave, Stone in Oxuey, Warehorne, Willesborough, Wittersham, Woodchurch. 7. Ospringe. Badlesmer, Boughton Blean, Buckland neer Feversham, De∣vington, Doddington, Easeling, Feversham, Goodnestone▪ neer Feversham, Graveney, Hartye, Hernehill, Leveland, Linsted, Luddenham, Newnham, Norton, Ore, Ospringe, Oerden, Pre∣ston neer Feversham, Selling, Sheldwich, Stalisfield, Tenham and Throwley. 8. Sandwich. Barefriston, Betshanger, Coldred, Deale, Eastry, Eyhorne, Ham, Knowlton, East Langdon, West Langdon, great Monge∣ham, little Mongeham, Norburne, Rinwold, Ripple, St. Cle∣ment, St. Mary, St Peter in Sandwich, Shebbertswold, Shol∣den, Sutton neer Dovor, Tineston, Waldershare, Walmer, Woodnesborough and Worde. 9. Sittingborne. Bapchild, Bicknor, Bobbing, Borden, Bredgate, Eastchurch, Emley, Halstow, Hartlip, Iwade, Kingsdowne neer Sitting∣borne, Laysdowne, Misted, Milton neer Sittingborne, Minster in Sheppey, Murston, Newigton besies Sittingborne, Queen∣borough, Reinham Rodmersham, Sittingborne, Stockbury, Tong, Tustall, Vpchurch, Warden and Wichling.
10. Sutton. Bersted, Boughton Monchelsea, Boxley, Brederst, Brom∣field, Chart next Sutton Vallance, Detling, Frinsted, Goudherst, Harietsham, Hollingborne, Hucking, Langley, Leeds, Leneham, Linton, Loose, Maidstone, Marden, Otham, Stapleherst, East Sutton, Sutton Vallance, Thurnham, Vlcomb and Wormsell. 11. West-Beer. Birchington, Chislet, Herne, Hoth, St. Iohns, St. Laurence, Minster in Thanet, Monkton, St Nicholas, St. Peters, Recul∣er, Seasalter, Stonar, Swaycliffe, West Beer, Whitstaple, Woode, alls Woodchurch. The Diocesse of Rochester Had in it four Deanries, which had in them the Parishes in this County following viz. 1. Dartford. BEckenham, Bromley, Charlton neer Greenwich, Chesilherst, Chelsfield, Foots Cray, St. Mary Cray, Pauls Cray, North Cray, Cudham, Dartford, Deptford, Earith, Eltham, Farnbo∣rough, East Greenwich, Horton Kirby, Lee, Leusham, Lulling∣stone, Plumsted, Sutton at Hone, East Wickham, West Wick∣ham, Wilmington, and Woolwich. 2. Malling. Alington neer Maidstone, Asherst, East Bar∣ming,
West Barming, Bidborough, Birling, Brenchley, Capell neer Tunbridge, Cowden, Ditton, Eatonbridge, West Farley, Hadlow, Horsmanden, Laborne, Lamberherst, Lyghe, West Malling, Mereworth, Nettlested, Osham, Padlesworth neer Snodland, West Peckham, Pembury, Ryarsh, Seale, Shipborne, Speldherst, Teston, Trotiscliffe, Tuneley, Tunbridge, Watring∣bury, Westram and Yalding. 3. Rochester. All Hollowes, Ash neer Wrotham, Aylesford, Breham, Chalke, Chetham, Cobham, Cookstone, Cowling, Denton neer Gravesend, Faukeham, Frindsbury, Gravesend, Halling, high Halstow, Harley, Higham, Hoo, Kingsdown neer Wrotham, Longfield, Luddesdon, St. Margarets neer Rochester, St. Ma∣ries neer Rochester, Milton neer Gravesend, Nutsted, Rochester, Ridly, Shorne, Snodland, Southfleet, Stoke, Stone neer Dart∣ford, Stroud, Swanscombe, and Woldham. 4. Shoram. Bexley, Brasted, Chevening, Chidingstone, Cliffe neer Gravesend, Craford, Darent, Eynsford, East Farley, Farning∣ham, Gillingham, Halsted, Hayes, Hever, Hunton, St. Iames in Greane, Ifield, Ightham, Kensing, Keston, East Malling, Me∣opham, Nockholt, Northfleet, Orpington, Oford, East Peckham, Pensherst, Plaxtoole, Sevenoke, Shoram, Stansted, Sundrish, and Wrtham. Now follow alphabetically the names of the Saints, to whom the severall Churches aforesaid were dedi∣cated, and which of the said Churches were so dedica∣ted to every of them.
All Saints. ALl Hollows, All Saints Canterbury. Biddenden, Bi∣chington, Birling, Boughton Aluph Boxley, Brench∣ley, Burmarsh, Chilenden, Footes Cray, East Church, West Farley, Frindsbury, Graveney, Hartley, Holing∣borne, Hope, Iwade, Lid, Maidston, Murston, Petham, Sodland, Stanford, Stapleherst, Sturmarsh, Tudeley, Ulcombe, Waldershare, West Beere, Whitstable, Wold∣ham, Woodchurch. St. Alphage, St. Alphage Canterbury, East Green∣wich, Seasalter. St. Andrew. St. Andrew Canterbury, Bukland neer Dovor, Shebberswold, Tilnestone, Wickham Breaux, St. Anthony. Alcham. St. Augustine. Brookland, East Langdon, Norburne, Snave. St Bartholomew. Bobbing, Goodnestone neer Feversham, Otford, Waltham. St. Beatrice. Betheisden. St. Butolph. Lllingstone Northfleet. St. Clement. Laisdown, Old Romney, Sandwich. Holy Cross. Bersted, Goodnestone neer Sandwich, Westgate Canterbury. Cosmus and Damianus. Challock, Cosmus Blean. St. Dunstan. Canbrook, St. Dunstans, Frinsted, West Petham, Snargate. St. Edih▪ Kemsing. St. Eanswith. Brenzet. St. Edmund the King. Kingsdown (neer Wrotham) St. Edmund Canterbury. St. George. Beckenham, Benenden, Ham, Ivechurch St. George Canterbury. St. Giles. Farnborough, Kingstone, Merston, Shipborn, Tong, Wormsell.
St. Gregory and St. Martin. Wye. St. Helen. Cliff neer Gravesend. St. Iohn Baptist. Berham, Bredgate, Doddington, Earith, Eltham, Hal∣ling, Harietsham, St. John in Thanet, St. John Canter∣bury, Meopham, Mersham, Sutton at Hone, Swaycliffe, Tunstall, Watringbury, West Wickham, Wittersham. St. Iohn the Evangelist. Ikham. St. Iames the Apostle. Cowling, North Cray, Dovor, Elmsted, St. James in Greane, Seldwich, Staple. St. Katherie. Kingsdown neer Sittingborn, Preston, neer Feversham. St. Laurence. Bapchild, Bidborough, Godmersham, Hawkeherst, Longham, St. Laurence in Thanet, Leveland, Mereworth, Otterden. St. Leonard. Badlesmer, Deal, Herst, Hith. St. Luke Charlton neer Greenwich. St. Innocents. Adisham. St. Margaret. Addington, East Barning, Bromfeild Darent, Haltow, High Halstow, Horsmanden, Huking, Lee, St. Marga Canterbury, St. Margarets neer Dovor, St. Margrets neer Rochester, Rainham, Wichling, Wimlingswold. St. Martin. Acrise, Addington, Cheriton, Detling Guston, Herne, St. Martins Canterbury, Great Mongeha, Ryarsh, Wot∣ton. St. Mary. Ashford, Barefriston, Bishopsborn, Boreham, Braborne, Brook, Capel neer Folkstone, Great Chart, Little Chart, Charham, , Chetham, Chilham, Chislet, St. Mary Cry, Crundall, Denton neer Gravesend, Dovor, Easeling, Eastry, Estwell, Ebeney, Egerton, Eleham, Fawkeham, Feversham, Fordwich, Frittenden, Gilling∣ham, Godherst, Gravesend, Hadlow, Halden, Nther
Hardres, Hastingligh, Higham, Hincksell, West Hth, Horton Kirby, Hothfield, Kenarton, Kenington, Lamber∣herst, West Langdon, Langley, Leneham, Lensham, Sid∣don, Luddenham, Lygh, East Malling, West Malling, St. Maries in Hoo, St. Maries neer New Romney, Minster in Thanet, Nakington, Netlested, Newington, (besides Sit∣tingborn) Nonington, Norton, Olestone, Ptrickborn, Postling, Reculver, Ripple, Rolvenden, Sandwich, Sel∣lindge, Selling, Sevington, Smeeth, Speldherst, Stalisfeld, Stelling, Stodmarsh, Stone, neer Dartford, Stone in Oxney Stoting, Sutton Vallance, Tenham, Turham, Upchurch, Walmer, Westram, Westwell, Willesborough, Wingham, Woodnesborough, Woolwich. St. Mary Bredman. Canterbury. St. Mary Breden. Canterbury. St. Mary Castle. Canterbury. St. Mary and St. Eadburgh. Liminge. St. Mary and St. Eanswith Folkstone. St. Mary Holy Crosse. Hoth Miled. St. Mary Northgate. Canterbury. St. Mary Queeningate. Canterbury: St. Mary and St. Sexburge. Minster in Sheppey. St. Mary Magdalen Cobham, Cowden, Denton neer Eleham, Devington, Longfield, St. Mary Magdalen, Canterbury, Monkton, Rucking, Stockbuy. St. Mathew. Warehorne, St. Michael. Chart next Sutton, Cookstone, Harbledown, Hartlip, Hawking, Hernchill, Kingsnoth, Marden, St Michael Canterbury, Oham, East Peckham, Sittingborn, Smar∣den, Throwley, East Wickham, Wilmington. St. Mildred▪ St. Mildred Canterbury, Nutsted, Preston neer Fordwich, Tenterden. St. Nicholas. Ash neer Sandwich, Boughton Malherb, Chiilerst,
Deptford, Leeds, Linton, Newington besides Hith, St. Ni∣cholas in Thanet, Otham, Pluckley, Plumsted, Ring∣wold, Rochester, Rodmarsham, New Romney, Sandherst, Sevenoke, Sholdon, Southfleet, Stroud, Sturrey, Tha∣nington. St. Oswald. Padlesworth neer Eleham. St. Paul Aylesford, St. Paul, Canterbury. St. Paulinus. Pauls Cray. St. Pancras. Coldred. St. Peter. Beakesborne, Besfield, Boughton Monchelsea, Bred∣herst, Bridge, Charlton neer Dovor, Cliffe neer Dovor, Ditton, Monkes Hrtn, Molash. Newenden, Ore, Pem∣bury, St. Peters in Thanet, St. Peters Canterbury, Sand∣wich, Seale, Stoke, Swingfield. St. Peter and Paul. Apledore, Ash neer Wrotham, Bilsington, Borden, Boughton Bleane, Bromley, Charing Cudham, Dim∣church, Eatonbridge, Ewell, Eythorne, upper Hardress, Hedcorne, Laborne, Linsted, Luddesdon, Milton neer Gravesend, Newchurch, Newington, Ospringe, Rever, Saltwood, Shadoxherst, Shrone, East Sutton, Swanscomb, Teston, Trotiscliffe, Tunbridge, Worde, Yalding. St. Romwald. Bonington. St. Stephen. Hackington, Limpne. S. Thomas the Apostle. Hartye. St. Thomas the Martyr. Capell neer Tunbridge, Fair∣field. Holy Trinity. Dartford, Milton neer Sittingborne, Queenborough. St. Vincent. Littleborne. St. Warburgh. Hoo.
Now whereas the names of many Parishes of this Couny end in one Termination, I have here set down Alphabetically, both the Terminations and Parishes, but (for brevity sake) have omitted those Terminations, in which six (at the least) of the Parishes do not end. Borne, 10. BEakesborne, Bishopsborne, Braborne, Hollingborne, Laborne, Littleborne, Norborne, Patricsborne, Ship∣borne, Sittingborne. Church, 7. Dimchurch, Eastchurch, Ivechurch, Newchurch, Woodchurch neer Tenterden, Woodchurch in Thanet. Den, 16. Benenden, Betherisden, Biddenden, Barden, Chillen∣den, Cowden, Frittenden, Halden, Horsmanden, Mar∣den, Newenden, Otterden, Rolvenden, Smarden, Ten∣terden, Warden. Ell, 7. Capell, Capell, Ewell, Eastwell, Hincksell, Westwell, Wormsell. Er, 11. Betshanger, Badlesmer, Hever, Minster, Minster, St. Peter, Reculver, Rever, Rochester, Seasalter, Walmer. Field. 9. Beusfield, Bromfield, Chelsfield, Fairefield, Hothfield, Ifield, Longfield, Stalisfield, Swingfield. Ford, 8. Ashford, Aylesford, Craford, Dartford, Deptford, Eynsford, Oford, Stanford.
Ham, 49. Adisham, Alcham, Beckenham, Beham, Boreham, Chartham, Chetham, Chilham, Cobham, Cudham, Ele∣ham, Eltham, Farmingham, Faukeham, Feversham, Gil∣lingham, Godmersham, Ham, Harietsham, Higham, Hougham, Ickham, Ightham, Leneham, Leusham, Lud∣denham, Meopham, Mersham, great Mongeham, little Mongeham, Newnham, Osham, East Peckham, West Peckham, Petham, Rainham, Rodmersham, Shoreham, Tenham, Thurnham, Waltham, Westerham, Wickham, Wickham, Wickham, Wingham, Wittersham, Woldham Wrotham. Herst, 12. Asherst, Bredherst, Chiselherst, Goudherst, Hawke∣herst, Herst, Lamberherst, Pensherst, Sandherst, Shadox∣herst, Speldherst, Stapleherst. Ing, 24. Barming, Barming, Birling, Bobbing, Charing, Che∣vening, Cowling, Detling, Easeling, Halling, Hawking, Hucking, Kemsing, Liming, East Malling, West Malling, Ospring, Postling, Rucking, Selling, Stelling, Stowting, Wichling, Yalding. Ley, 13. Bexley, Boxley, Brenchley, Bromley, Emley, East Farley, West Farley, Hartley, Langley, Midley, Pluckley Throwley, Tudely. Ry, 8. Eastry, Frindsbury, St. Mary, St. Mary, Pembury, Stockbury, Sturry, Watringbury, Sted, 11. Bersted, Brasted, Elmsted, Frinsted, Halsted, Linsted, Milsted, Nettlested, Nutsted, Plumsted, Stansted. Stone, 15. Blackmanstone, Chidingstone, Cookstone, Elmstone, Folkstone, Goodnestone, Goodnestone, Kingstone, Lul∣lingstone, Maidstone, Orlestone, Stone, Stone, Stone, Tilnestone.
Ton, 53. Addington, Aldington, Allngton, Barefiston, Bil∣sington, Birchington, Bonington, Boughton, Boughton, Boughton, Boughton, Charlton, Chrlton, Cheriton, Denton, Denton, Devington, Ditton, Doddington, Eger∣ton, Gston, Hackington, Horton Horton, Hunton, Kenar∣ton, Kennington, Keston, Knowlton, Linton Milton, Mil∣ton, Milton, Monkton, Merston, Murston, Nakinton, New∣ington, Newington, Nonnington, Norton, Orpington, Preston, Preston, Sevington, Sutton, Sutton, Sutton, Sut∣ton, Teston, Thannington, Wilmington, Wootton. The names of the Sheriffs of the County of Kent, in the five last Centuries, viz. in the times of the Kings and Queens herein after named and since. Henry the 2. Who began his Raign 25. October 1154. 1 Rualon. 2 Raph Picot 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 The same 8 Hugh of Dovor of Chilham 9 The same 10 The same 11 The same 12 The same 13 The same 14 The same 15 Gervas of Cornehill 16 The same 17 The same 18 The same 19 The same 20 The same 21 The same and Robert Fitz-Bernard 22 Robert Fitz-Bernard of Kingsdown. 23 The same 24 The same 25 The same 26 The same 27 The same 28 The same 29 The same 30 William son of Nigel
of Munevile. 31 Allen of Valoynes of Fre∣mom. 32 The same 33 The same 34. Richard the 1. Who began his raign, 6. of June, 1189. 1 Reginald of Cornehill 2 The same 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 William of St Mardal 7 Walter son of Derman 8 Reginald of Cornehill 9 The same 10 The same Iohn. Who began his Raign 6. of Aprill 1199. 1 Reginald of Cornehill 2 The same 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 The same 8 The same 9 The same 10 The same 11 The same 12 Iohn son of Vnam of Selling & Reginald of Cornhill 13 The same 14 The same 15 The same 16 The same 17 The same, Henry 3. Who began his Raign 19. October 1216. 1 Hubert of Burge, and Hugh of Windlesores of Ware∣borne. 2 The same 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 The same 8 Hubert of Burgh and Ro∣ger Grimston. 9 The same 10 The same 11 Hubert of Boroz, and William Brito. 12 The same 13 The same 14 The same
15 The same 16 The same 17 Bartholomew of Cryall 18 The same 19 The same 20 The same 21 The same 22 The same 23 The same 24 Humphrey of Boun Earl of Essex. 25 The same 26 Peter of Subadie and Bertramr of Cryall 27 Bertram of Cryall and Iohn of Cobham 28 Bertram of Cryall 29 The same 30 The same 31 The same 32 The same 33 Reginald of Cobham 34 The same 35 The same 36 The same 37 The same 38 The same 39 The same 40 The same 41 Walter of Bersted and Reginald of Cobham 42 Fulke Playferer of Iseling. 43 The same 44 Iohn of Cobham 45 The same 46 The same 47 Robert Walerand and Tho∣mas Delaway. 48 Roger of Leybourne 49 The same 50 The same and Henry of Bourne 51 The same 52 The same 53 Stephen of Penchester of Alington Castle neer Maid∣stone and Henry of Leeds. 54 The same 55 The same 56 Henry Malemenies of Pluckley. Edward the 1. Who began his Raign 16. November 1272. 1 Henry Malemanies of Pluck∣ley. 2 William Haute of Petham 3 William of Valoynes 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 Robert of Scothon 8 The same 9 The same 10 The same 11 Peter of Huntingfeild of Iseling. 12 The same 13 The same
14 Hamo of Gatton of Throw∣ley. 15 William of Shellessend of Chelsfeild. 16 The same 17 The same 18 William of Brimshet 19 The same 20 Iohn of Nortwood in Mil∣ton neer Sittingborne 21 The same and Iohn of Bourne, 22 Iohn of Bourne 23 The same 24 the same 25 William Trussel 26 The same 27 Henry of Apuldorefeild 28 Iohn of Northwood in Mil∣ton neer Sittingborn, 29 Henry of Cobham 30 The same 31 Warreis of Walloynes 32 The same 33 Iohn of Northwood in Mil∣ton neer Sittingborne 34 The same 35 William of Cossenton in A∣lesford. Edward the 2. Who began his raign 7. of July 1307. 1 Henry of Cobham 2 Iohn of Blunde 3 The same 4 The same 5 The same 6 The same 7 William of Basing & Iohn the younger of Haudlo, 8 The same 9 Henry of Cobham 10 Iohn Malemaines of Hoo 11 The same and Iohn Fre∣mingham, 12 Iohn Fremingham and Henry Sarden 13 Henry Sarden and Wil∣liam Septvans 14 15 William Septvans of Milton and Raph Savage 16 The same 17 Iohn Shelvige of Shelvige Barne 18 Iohn of Fremingham 19 The same Edward the 3. VVho began his raign 25. of January 1326. 1 Raph of St. Laurence of Swaycliffe 2 William of Orlanston 3 The same, and Iohn of Shelvige 4 Iohn of Shelvige and Iohn
of Bourne 5 The same 6 Thomas of Brockhall and Laurence of St. Laurence 7 The same 8 Stephen of Cobham 9 The same 10 The same 11 Thomas of Brockhall of Saltwood 12 William Morant of Mo∣rants Court in Cheven∣ning 13 The same 14 Henry of Valoynes of Repton in Ashford 15 Iohn Mereworth of Mere∣worth 16 The same and Iohn Wid∣leston 17 Iohn Widleston 18 The same 19 The same 20 The same 21 William of Langley of Knowlton 22 Iohn of Fremingham 23 William Langley and Ar∣nold Savage of Bobbing 24 25 William Langley of Knowl∣ton 26 Iames Le Pine of East Sutton 27 William Apuldorefeild of Linsted 28 Iames le Pine of East Sutton 29 Reginald of Dike of Sussex 30 Gilbert of Hels of Egerton 31 William of Apuldorefeild of Linsted 32 Raph Fremingham of Fremingham 33 William Makenade of Pre∣ston 34 William of Apuldorefeild of insted 35 The same 36 The same 37 William Pimpe of Nettle∣sted. 38 William of Apuldorefeild of Linsted 39 Iohn Colepeper of Bayhall 40 The same 41 Richard at Leeds of Shel∣wich 42 Iohn of Brockall of Salt∣wood 43 John Colepeper 44 William of Apuldorefeild of Linsted 45 William Pimpe of Nettle∣sted 46 Iohn Barry of Sevington 47 Jeffery Colepeper 48 Robert Nottingham of Miled 49 William Pimpe of Nettle∣sted 50 Nicholas at Crouch of
Great Chart 5 Henry of Apuldorefeild of Linsted Richard 2. Who began his raign 21 of June, 1377. 1 Thomas of Cobham 2 Iohn of Fremingham 3 James of Peckham of Wro∣tham 4 William Septvans of Milton Septvans 5 Arnold Savage of Bobbing 6 Thomas Brockhall of Salt∣wood 7 The same 8 Robert Corbie of Boughton 9 Arnold Savage of Bobbing 10 Raph St Leger of Vlcomb 11 William of Guldeford 12 James Peckham of Wro∣tham 13 William Burceston of Hun∣ton 14 Richard Berham of Ber∣ham 15 Thomas Chich of the Dun∣geon neer Canterbuy 16 William Barry of Seving∣ton 17 John Fremingham of Fre∣mingham 18 Thomas Colepeper 19 Nicholas Haue 20 Thomas St. Leger of Vl∣comb 21 Nicholas Petine of Sheppey 22 Iohn Boteller of Graveney Henry 4. Who began his raign 29. of September 1399. 1 Robert Clifford of Canter∣bury 2 Thomas Ludlow 3 Iohn Diggs 4 Thomas Hiache 5 Richard Clitherow of Ash 6 The same 7 Valentine Barret of Pery Court 8 Henry Horne of Kenar∣dington 9 Edward Haute 10 William Snach of Adding∣ton 11 Reginald Pimpe of Nettle∣sted. 12 John Darell of Cadehill 13 William Notebenn of Ash neer Sandwich Henry the 5. Who began his rain 20. of March 1412.
1 William Clifford of Bobbing 2 Robert Clifford of Canter∣bury. 3 William Langley of Knowl∣ton 4 William Darell of Cadehill 5 John Darell of Cadehill 6 Richard Clitherow of Ash 7 John Burge of Eatonbridge 8 VVilliam Haute of Bourne 9 The same Henry the 6. Who began his raign 31. of August 1422. 1 John Darell of Cadehill 2 William Cheney of Shur∣land in Sheppey 3 John Rickhill of Frindsbury 4 William Clifford of Bobbing 5 William Colepeper of Ayles∣ford 6 Thomas Ellis of Kemington 7 William Scot of Scots-hall in Smeeth 8 John Peche of Littington 9 John St. Leger of Vlcombe 10 Edward Guldeford of Hal∣den in Rolvenden 11 William Buriston of Hun∣ton 12 Richard Woodvile of Mote Castle in Maidstone 13 William Clifford of Bob∣bing 14 William Manston of Man∣ston in Thanet 15 James Fenis of Seal 16 Richard Walder of Groom-bridg in Speldherst 17 Edward Guldeford of Hal∣den in Rolvenden 18 Grvas Clifford of Canter∣bury 19 John Yeard of Denton neer Eleham 20 John Warner of Sheppy 21 William Maries of Preston 22 Thomas Brown of Wick∣ham 23 VVilliam Crowmer of Tunstall 24. John Thorneberry of Fe∣versham 25 VVilliam Isley of Sundrish 26 VVilliam Kene of Ospring 27 Stephen St. Leger of Vl∣comb 28 Henry Crowmer of Tunstal 29 Gervas Clifford of Canter∣bury 30 Robert Horne of Kinar∣dington 31 Thomas Ballard of Hor∣ton 32 John Fogg of Repton in Ashford 33 John Cheney of Shurland in Sheppey Knight 34 Phillip Belknap of the
Mote Esquire 35 Alexander Eden Esquire 36 John Guldeford of Halden in Rolvenden Esquire 37 Gervas Clifford of Canter∣bury Knight 38 Thomas Bruine Knight 39 John Scot of Scots-hall in Smeeth Esquire. Edward the 4. Who began his raign 4. March 1460 1 John Isaac of Patricksborne Esquire 2 VVilliam Peach of Lulling∣ston Knight 3 The same 4 John Diggs of Berham Es∣quire 5 Alexander Clifford of Bob∣bing Esquire 6 William Haute of Bourne Knight 7 John Culpeper Knight 8 Raph St. Leger of Vlcomb Esquire 9 Henry Ferrers of Peckham Esquire 10 John Bramstone of Preston Esquire 11 Richard Culpeper Esquire 12 James Peckham of Yald∣ham in Wrotham Esquire 13 Iohn Fogg of Repton in Ashford Knight 14 John Isley of Sundrish Es∣quire 15 Willian Haute of Bourne Knight 16 John Green of Chesilherst Esquire 17 William Cheney of Shur∣land in Sheppey Esquire 18 Richard Haute of Bourne Esquire 19 Richard Lee of Delce Es∣quire 20 John Fogg of Repton in Ashford Knight 21 George Brown of Wickham Esquire 22 Richard Haute of Burne Esquire Edward the 5. Who began his Raign the 9. Aprill 1483. 1 Richard Haute of Bourne Esquire Richard the 3. Who began his raign the 22. of Iune 1483. 1 William Haute of Bourne Knight
2 John Barrune of the Grange in Gillingham Esquire 3 Richard Brahenberry of the Mote Knight. Henry the 7. Who began his raign the 22 of August 1485. 1 William Cheny of Shurland in Sheppey Esquire 2 John Pimpe of Nettlested Esquire 3 Henry Ferrers of Great Peckham Knight. 4 Walter Roberts of Glasten∣bury in Cranbrook Esquire 5 William Boleyne of Seale Knight 6 William Sco of Scots hall in Smeeth Knight 7 John Darell Esquire 8 Thomas Kempe of Ollantigh in Wye Esquire 9 Richard Guldeford of Hal∣den in Rolvenden Knight 10 John Pech of Lullingstone Esquire 11 John Diggs of Barham Es∣quire 12 James Wallingham of Sadberry in Chesilherst Es∣quire 13 Lewes Clifford of Bobbing Esquire 14 Robert Wotton of Bough∣ton Malherbe Esquire 15 Alexander Colepeper of Bed∣bury in Goudherst Esquire 16 Thomas Iden Esquire 17 William Scots of Scots hall in Smeeth Knight 18 Raph St Leger of Vlcomb Esquire 19 William Crowmer of Tun∣stoll Esquire 20 John Langley of Knowlton Esquire 21 Thomas Kempe of Ollan∣tigh in Wye Knight 22 Alexander Colepeper of Bedgbury in Goudherst Es∣quire 23 Henry Vane of Tunbridge Esquire 24 Reginald Peckham of Yal∣ham in Wrotham Esquire. Henry the 8. Who began his raign the 22 of Aprill 1509. 1 William Crowmer of Tunstal Knight 2 James Diggs of Diggs Court in Berham Esquire 3 Thomas Colleyn of Hever Castle Knight
4 Thomas Kempe of Ollantigh in Wye Knight 5 John Norton of Northwood in Milton Knight 6 Alexander Colepeper of Bed∣bury in Goudherst Esquire 7 Thomas Cheney of Shurland in Shppey Esquire 8 William Scot of Scots hall in Smeeth Knight 9 Thomas Boline Knight 10 John Crispe of Quex in Birchington Esquire 11 John Wilshire of Stone ca∣stle in Stone neer Dartford Knight 12 John Roper of St. Dunstans Esquire 13 Robert Sonds of Towne place of Throwley Esquire 14 John Fogg of Pepton in Ashford Knight 15 George Guldeford of Hem∣sted in Benenden Knight 16 VVilliam Haute of Bourne Knight 17 Henry Vane Esquire 18 VVilliam VVhetenhall of Peckham Esquire 19 John Scot of Scots hall in Smeeth Knight 20 VVilliam Kempe of Ol∣lanigh in VVye Esquire 21 Edward VVotton of Bough∣ton Malherbe Knight 22 VVilliam VValler of Groom-bridge in Speldherst Es∣quire 23 Richard Clement of the Moe in Ightham Knight 24 William Finch of the Mte neer Canterbury Knight 25 Thomas Roberts of Glast∣enbury in Cranbrook Esquire 26 Thomas Poinings of Osten Hanger, in Stanford Knight 27 Edward Wooton of Bough∣ton Malherbe Knight 28 Thomas Wiat of Alington Castle Knight 29 William Haue of Bourne Knight 30 William Sidney of Pen∣sherst Knight 31 Anthony St. Leger of Vl∣combe Knight 32 Anthony Sonds of Throw∣ley Esquire 33 Reginald Scot of Scots Hall in Smeeth Esquire 34 Henry Isley of Sundrish Knight 35 Humphrey Stile oLangley Parke in Beckenham Knight 36 John Fogg of Repton in Ashford Knight 37 Pereivall Hart of Lulling∣stone Knight 38 Henry Crispe of Quex in Birehintgon, Esquire
Edward the 6. Who began his raign the 28. of January 1546. 1 William Sedley of Southfleet Esquire 2 George Harpur of Sutton Valance Knight 3 Thomas Colepeper of Bedg∣bury in Gudherst Esquire 4 Thomas Wyat of Allington Castle Knight 5 Henry Isley of Sundrish Knight 6 John Guldeford of Hempsted in Benenden Knight. Mary, & Phi∣lip & Mary. 1 Robert Southwell of Mere∣worth Knight 1, and 2. The same 2. 3. William Roper of Wel∣hall Esquire 3. 4. Thomas Kempe of Ollan∣igh in Wye Knight 4. 5. George Vane of Badsll in Capel Esquire. From henceforth are added the names of the Iudges of the Assises holden for the County of Kent in the last Century, beginning first of Queen Elizabeth, 1558. and Ending at sum∣mer Assises 1658. The Names of the severall Sheriffes of the said County when the same assises were holden, and the severall years wherein, dayes upon which, and places where the same were so holden. (Wherein note that Q. B. standeth for Queens Bench, K. B. for Kings Bench, U. B. for Vpper Bench, and C. B. for Common Bench.) In the time of Queen Elizabeth, Who began her raigne the 18. of November, 1558.
Good Reader, you shall finde these in this order set, viz. 1. Queens raign, 2. Judges, 3. Shriffes, 4. Dayes of the Assizes, 5. Places of Assizes, 6. Years of our Lord. 1 Serjants at Law elect, Carus, Chomley, Sheriff Thomas Wootton of Boughton Maleherbe Esq Monday the 20. of February at East-Greenwich. 1588. 1 Serjant, Raph Chomley, Attorney General Gerard, The same Sheriff, Monday the 10. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1559. 2 Serjant Reginald Chomley, Attorney Generall Gerard, Sheriff Nicholas Cripse, of Whitstaple Esq Friday in the third week in Lent, a Dartford. 1559 2 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 1. of Iuly at Maidstone. 1560 3 Serjant Phillip Chomley, Attorney Generall Gerard, Sheriff Warham St. Leger of Vlcombe Esq Tuesday in the third week in Lent, at Dartford. 1560 3 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 10. of Iuly at Maidstone. 1561 4 Serjant Raph Chomley, Atturney Generall Gerard, Sheriff, Iohn Tuton of Hothfeild Esq Monday in the third week in Lent, at East Greenwich. 1561 4 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday 27. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1562 5 Serjant Philip Chomley, Attorney Generall Gerard, Sheriff, Richard Baker of Sissingherst in Cranbrook Esq Wednesday in the fourth week in Lent at East-Greenwich. 1562 5 Q B. Justice Southcote, Queens Serjant Wray, The same Sheriff, Monday the 19. of July, at Maid∣stone. 1563 6 Q B. Justice Southcote, Attorney General Gerard, Sheriff, Thomas Walsingham of Scadbury in Chesilherst Esq Monday in the fifth week of Lent at Dartford. 1563
6 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 17 of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1564 7 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Kempe of Ollantigh in Wye Knight, Monday in the fourth week in Lent at Dartford. 1564 7 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 30 of Iuly, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1565 The same day and yeere, the Assises for the County of the City of Canterbury, were holden by the same Iudges, at the Guilde-hall in the said City. Leo∣nard Cotton Sheriff. 8 The same Judges, Sheriff Iohn Mainey of Biddenden Esq in the third week in Lent, at Rochester. 1565 8 The same Judge, William Isley of Sundrish Esq Mon∣day the 22. of Iuly▪ at Maidstone. 1566 9 The same Judges, Sheriff Iohn Sedley of Southfleet Esq Monday in the fifth week in Lent, at Rochester. 1566 9 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 10. of July, at Maidstone. 1567 10 Q B. Justice Southcote, Queens Serjant Wray, Sheriff William Crowmer of Tunstall Esq Monday the 8. of March, at Dartford. 1567 10 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 15. of July, at Maidstone. 1568 11 The same Judges, Sheriff Iohn Brown, of Horton Esq Thursday 3. of March, at Maidstone. 1568 11 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 14. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1569 12 The same Judges, Sheriff Edward Isaac of Beaksborough Esq Monday the 20. of February, at Rochester. 1569 12 The same Judges, The same Shriffe, Tuesday 11. of Iuly, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1570
The same day and year the Assises (for the County of the City of Canterbury,) were holden by the same Iudges, at the Guildhall in the said City, Reginald Totnall Sheriff. 13 Q. B. Justice Southcote, Serjant Gawdy, Sheriff Iohn Leonard of Chevening, Esq Munday in the second week in Lent, at Dartford. 1570 13 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday 16. Iu∣ly, at Maidstone. 1571 14 The same Judges, Sheriff Walter Mainey the elder, of Stapleherst Esq Thursday in the first week in Lent at Rochester. 1571 14 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday 1. of September, at Maidstone. 1572 15 Q. B. Justice Southcote, C. B. Justice Monson, Sheriff Thomas Fane, the elder of Badsell in Capell Esq Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Roche∣ster. 1572 15 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday, the 25. of Iune, at Maidstone. 1573 16 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Willoughby of Bore∣place in Chidingstone Esq Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Dartford. 1573 16 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 15 of Iuly at Maidstone. 1574 17 Q. B. Justice Southcote, Q. B. Justice Gawdy, Sheriff Iames Hals of the Dungeon neer Canterbury Knight, Monday in the second week in Lent, at Rochester. 1574 17 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 4. of Iuly, at Rochester. 1575 18 The same Judges, Sheriff Iohn Tfton, of Hothfield, Esq Thursday in the first week in Lent, at Roche∣ster. 1575▪
18 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 16 of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1576 19 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Scot, of Scots hall in Smeeth, Knight, Thursday the 21 of February, at Rochester. 1576 19 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 3. of Iuly, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1577 20 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Boys of Fredvile in Nonington Esq Monday in the second week in Lent, at Rochester. 1577 20 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 10. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1578 21 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Wotton of Boughton-Malerbe, Esq Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Rochester. 1578 21 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 23. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1579 22 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Coppinger, Esq Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Dartford. 1579 23 The same Judges, Thomas Fane Esq Monday the 11 of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1580 23 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Sonds of Throwley, Esq Monday the third week in Lent, at Roche∣ster. 1580 23 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday, the 3. of Iuly, at Rochester 1581 24 The same Judges, Sheriff, George Heart of Lullingstone Knight, Thursday in the second week in ent, t Rochester. 1581 24 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 19. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1582 25 Q B. Justice Gawdy, Queens Serjant Gawdy, Sheriff, Richard Baker of Siffingherst in Cranbrook, Knight,
Monday in the third week in Lent, at Rochester. 1582 25 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 15. of July, at Maidstone. 1583 26 The same Judges, Sheriff, Justinian Champneyes of Bexley Esq Thursday the 24. February, at Ro∣chester. 1583 26 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 13. of July, at Rochester. 1584 27 The same Judges, Sheriff, Michael Sonds of Throwley Esquire, Thursday the 25. of February, at Roche∣ster. 1584 27 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 5 of July at Maidstone. 1585 28 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, Baron Gent, Sheriff William Cromer of Tunstall, Esq 21. of February, at Ro∣chester. 1585 21 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, Baron lerk, The same Sheriff, Monday the 27. of June, at Rochester. 1586 29 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, Queens Serjant Puckering, Sheriff James Hales of the Dungeon neer Canter∣bury, Knight, Thursday the 2, of March, at Roche∣ster. 1586 29 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 10. of Iuly, at Maidstone 1587 30 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, Baron Clerk, Sheriff, John Fi∣neux of Herne Esq Thursday the 22. of February at Sevenoke. 1587 30 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 1. of July, at Rochester. 1588 31 Baron Clarke, Queens Serjant Purkering, Sheriff Ric∣hard Hardres, of Great Hardres Esq Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Rochester 1588 31 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Monday the 23. of July, at Midstone. 1589 32 The same Judges, Sheriff, William Sedley of Hever,
Esq Monday the 23. of February, at ochester. 1589 32 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 16. of July, at Rochester. 1590 33 The same Judges, Sheriff▪ Thomas Willoughby of Bore∣place in Chidingstone, Esq Thursday the 25. of February, at Sevenoke. 1590 33 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 1. of July, at Maidstone. 1591 34 The same Judges, Sheriff, Sampson Leonard of Chepen∣ing, Esq Monday the 21. of February, at Roche∣ster. 1591 34 Baron Clerke C. B. Justice Walmsley, The same Seriff, Monday the 26. of June, at Maidstone. 1592 35 The same Judges, Sheriff Robert Binge of Wrotham, Esq Thursday the 22. of February, at Rochester. 1592 35 Baron Clarke, Queens Serjant Owen, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1593 36 The same Judges, Sheriff, Michael Sonds of Throwley, Esq Monday in the third week in Lent, at Ro∣chester. 1593 36 Baron Clark, Queens Serjant Drew, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 25. of July, at Maidstone. 1594 37 The same Judges, Edward Wotton of Boughton Malherbe Knight, Thursday the 20. of February, at Roche∣ster. 1594 37 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 14 of July, at Maidstone. 1595. 38 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, C. B. Justice Owen, Sheriff, Tho∣mas Palmer of Hougham Esq Thursday the 19. of February, at Sevenoke. 1595 38 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 5. of July, at Maidstone. 1596 39 The same Judges, Sheriff, Moyle Finch of Eastwell
Knight, Thursday the 17. of February, at Roche∣ster. 1596 39 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 27. of June, at Maidstone. 1597 40 The same Judges, Sheriff, Thomas Kemp of Ollanigh in Wy, Esq Monday the 20. of February, at Dart∣ford. 1597 40 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 7. of July, at Maidstone. 1598 41 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, C. B. Justice Glanvil, Sheriff, Martin Barnham, of Holingborne, Esq Monday in the fifth week in Lent, at Rochester. 1598 41 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, C. B. Justice Kingsmill. The same Sheriff, Thursday the 5 of July, at Rochester. 1599 42 The same Judges, Sheriff, Roger Twisenden of Great Peckham, Esq Monday in the third week in Lent at Rochester. 1599 42 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday 26. of June at Maidstone. 1600 43 The same Judges, Sheriff, John Smith of Stansted, Esq Monday, in the first week in Lent, at Sevenoke. 1600 43 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, Serjant Daniel, the same Sheriff, Thursday, the 9. of July, at Maidstone. 1601 44 The same Judges, Sheriff, Thomas Scot of Scots-hall in Smeeth, Esq Monday in the first week in Lent, at Rochester. 1601 44 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 7. of Iuly, at the Castle of Canterbury. 1602 45 Q. B. Justice Gawdy, Queens Serjant Heale, Sheriff, Peter Manwood of St. Stevens Esq Monday the 21. of Fe∣bruary, at Dartford. 1602
In the time of King Iames, who began his Raign the 24. of March, 1602. 1 K. B. Justice Gawdy, Kings Serjant Heale, Sheriff, Pe∣ter Manwood of St. Stephens Knight of the Bath, Thursday 29. of September, at Maidstone. 1603 1 The same Judges, Sheriff, James Crowmer of Tunstall Knight, Thursday the 23. of February, at Roche∣ster. 1603 2 K. B. Justice Gawdy, C. B. Justice Daniel, the same Sheriff Monday the 9. of July, at Maidstone. 1604 2 The same Judges, Sheriff Thomas Baker of Siingherst in Cranbrook, Knight, Monday in the third week in Lent, at Rochester. 1604 3 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 4. of July, at Maidstone. 1605 3 C. B. Justice Daniel, C. B. Justice Coventry, Sheriff Moyle Finch of Eastwell Knight, Wednesday in the second week in Lent, at Maidstone. 1605 4 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 21. of July, at Maidstone. 1606 4 Baron Altham, Kings Serjant Crook, Sheriff, Norton Knatchbull of Mersham Knight, Monday in the third week in Lent, at Rochester, 1606 5 Baron Snigge, K. B. Justice Crook, the same Sheriff, Thursday 16, of July, at Maidstone. 1607 5 C. B. Justice Walmsley, K. B. Justice Crook, Sheriff, Ro∣bert Edolph of Hinxhill, Knight, Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Rochester. 1607 6 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday he 30. of Iune, at Maidstone. 1608 6 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Hales, of Woodchurch Knight, Thursday the 23. of February, at Maid∣stone. 1608
7 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 20 of July, at Rochester. 7 The same Judges, William Withens of Eltham, Knight, Monday in the fourth week in Lent, at Milton neer Gravesend. 1609 8 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1610 8 C. B. Justice Walmsley, Kings Serjant Dodderige, Sheriff Nicholas Gilborne of Charing, Knight, Thursday in the second week in Lent, at Maidstone. 1610 9 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 27 of June at Maidstone. 1611 9 C. B. Justice Walmsley, Kings Serjant Crook Sheriff Max∣milian Dalison of Halling, Knight, Thursday the 27. of February, at Rochester. 1611 10 C. B. Justice Winch, Kings Serjant Doderidge, The same Sheriff, Thursday 6. of July, at Maidtone. 1612 10 C. B. Justice Winch, K. B. Justice Doderidge, Sheriff William Stede of Harietsham, Knight, Thursday the third week in Lent, at Maidstone 1612 11 Kings Serjants, Mountague and Davis, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 8. of July, at Maidstone. 1613 11 K. B. Justice, Houghton, Kings Serjant Mounague, Sheriff, Anthony, Anher of Bourne, Knight, 24 of February, at Rochester. 1613 12 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday te 28 of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1614 12 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Filmer of East Sut∣ton Knight, Thursday the 23. of Febuary, at Maidstone. 1614 13 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 20 of July, at Rochester. 1615 13 C. B. Chief Justice Hobert, K. B. Justice Houton, Sheriff Edwin Sandys of Norburne Knight, Thursday the
22. of February, at Milon neer Gravesend. 1615 14 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 10. of July, at Maidstone. 1616 14 The same Judges, Sheriff, William Bewick, of Hors∣manden, Esq Wednesday the 26. of February, at Maidstone. 1616 15 K. B. Justice Houghton, Kings Serjant Crew, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 23. of July, at Maid∣ston. 1617 15 The same Judges, Sheriff Gabriel Livesey of Holling∣borne Esq Thursday the 19 of February, at Ro∣chester. 1617 16 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 16. of July, at Maidstone. 1618 16 the same Judges, Sheriff, Thomas Norton of Bobbing Knight, Thursday the 25. of February, at Roche∣ster. 1618 17 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 1. of July, at Maidstone. 1619 17 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Scot of Scots-hall in Smeeth, Esq Wednesday the 23. of February, at Maidstone. 1619 18 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday, the 20. of July, at Maidstone. 1620 18 The same Judges, Sheriff, John Sedley of Aylesford, Baronet, Wednesday the 28. of February, at Maidstone. 1620 19 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 5. of July, at Maidstone. 1621 19 The same Judges Sheriff, Thomas, Roberts of Glasten∣bury in Cranbrook Knight, and Barone, Wednes∣day, the 27. of February, at Maidstone. 1621 20 K. B. Justice Hoghton, Kings Serjant Mountgue, The same Sheriff, Thursday the 25▪ of July at Maid∣stone. 1622 20 K. B. Justice Houghton, Kings Serjant Crew, Sheriff,
George Fane of Buston in Hunton Knight. Wednes∣day the 26. of February, at Maidstone. 1622 21 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 16. of July, at Maidstone. 1623 21 K. B. Justice Chamberlaine, Kings Serjant Crew, Sheriff John Hayward of Hollingborne, Knight, Wednesday the 3. of March, at Maidstone. 1623 22 The same Judges, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 7. of July, at Maidstone, 1624 22 C. B. Justice Croke, Kings Serjant Davis, Sheriff. Tho∣mas Hamond of Brasted Knight, Wednesday 2. of March, at Maidstone. 1624 In the time of King Charles, Who began his Raigne the 27. of March 1625 1 C. B. Justice Croke, Justice Yelverton, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 20. of July, at Maidston. 1625 1 C. B. Justice Croke, Baron Trevor Sheriff, Isaac Sedley of Great Chart Knight and Baronet, Wednesday the 8. of March, at Maidston. 1625 2 C. B. Justice Croke, Kings Serjant Davis, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1626 2 C. B. Justice Croke, Baron Trevor Sheriff, Basell Dix∣well of Folkston Esq Thursday the 1. of March at Maidstone. 1626 3 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 4. of Juy, at Maidstone. 1627 3 The same Judges, Sheriff Edward Engeham of Canter∣bury, Knight, Wednesday 27. of February, at Maid∣stone 1627 4 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 6.
of July at Maidstone. 1628 4 K. B. Justice Crook, Baron Vernon, Sheriff William Campion of Combwell in Goudherst Knight, Wednesday 4. of March, at Maidstone. 1628 5 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Thursday the 19. of June, at Maidstone. 1629 5 Baron Vernon, Kings Serjant Hitcham, Sheriff Richard Brown, Esq Monday the 22. of March, at Maid∣stone. 1629 6 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday, the 12 of July, at Maidstone. 1630 6 The same Judges, Sheriff Robert Lewnor of Elham Knight, Monday the 7. of March, at Maidstone. 1630 7 C. B. Justice Vernon, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 20 of July, at Maidstone. 1631 7 The same Judges, Sheriff, Nicholas Miller of Wrotham Esq Thursday, the 22 of March, at Maidstone. 1631 8 Baron Weston, Kings Serjant Hitcham, The same Sheriff Monday 9. of Iuly at Milton neer Gravesend. 1632 8 Baron Weston, C. B. Justice Crawley, Sheriff Thomas Style of Warringbury, Baronet, Wednesday the 8. of March at Milton neer Gravesend. 1632 9 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 31 of Iuly, at Maidtone. 1633 9 K. B. Cheie Justice Richardson, Kings Serjant Hitcham Sheriff, Iohn Baker of Singhurst in Cranbrook. Ba∣roet, Monday the 3. of March, at Milton neer Gravesend. 1633 10 K. B. Cheife Justice Richardson, Baron Weston, The same Sheriff, Monday the 14 of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1634 10 Baron Weston, Kings Serjant Hitcham, Sheriff Edward Cute, of Hinxhill Esq Wednesday 25 of Februa∣ 163
11 C. B. Justice Crawley, Baron Westo, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 8. of Iuly, at Maidstone 1635 11 The same Judges, Sheriff William Colepepyr of Ayles∣ford, Baronet, Wednesday the 24. of February, at Maidstone. 1635 12 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 13. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1636 12 The same Judges, Sheriff, George Sonds of Throwley, Knight of the Bath, Wednesday the 22. of Februa∣ry, at Maidstone. 1636 13 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 12. of July, at Maidstone. 1637 13 The same Judges, Thomas Hendley of ourshorne in Cranbrook, Knight, Wednesday 21. of February, at Maidstone. 1637 14 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Monday the 2. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1638 14 The same Judges, Sheriff, Edward Master of Canter∣bury Knight, Wednesday the 27 of February, at Maidstone. 1638 15 Baron Weston, C▪ B. Justice Reve, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 17 of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1639 15 The same Judges, Sheriff David Polhill of Oford Esq Wednesday the 26. of February, at Maid∣stone 1639 16 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Wednesday the 15 of July, at Maidstone. 1640 16 C. B. Justice Reve, Sheriff Iames Hugeson of Kinsted Esq Wednesday the 3. of March, at Maidstone. 1640 17 K. B. Justice Mallet, The same Sheriff, Monday the 23. of August, at Maidstone. 1641 17 The same Judges, Sheriff John Honiwood of Elmsted, Knight, Thursday the 22. of March at Maidstone 1641 18 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Saturday 23. of
July at Maidstone. 1642 18 No Judge, The same Sheriff, No assises, 1642 19 No Judges. The same Sheriff, No assises, 1643 19 No Judges, The same Sheriff, No assises, 1643 20 No Judges, The same Sheriff, No Assises, but there was a Gaole delivery held at maidstone upon Saturday the 21. of September, this year before Iohn Rivers, Baronet and his Associates. 1644 20 No Judges, Sheriff John Rainy of Wrotham, Baro∣net, No Assises; 1644 21 No Judges, The same Sheriff, No Assises but there was a Gaole delivery held at Maidstone upon Tuesday the 5. of August, this year before Tho∣mas Walsingham, Knight, and his associaes. 1645 21 No Judges, Sheriff Edward Monins of Waldershare Baronet, No Assises 1645 22 K. B. Justice Bacon, Serjant Turner, The same Sheriff, Friday the 24. of July at Midstone. 1646 22 C. B. Justice Reve, Serjant Cresheld, Sheriff, John Henden of Biddenden Knight, Monday the 22. of March, at Maidstone. 1646 23. K. B. Justice Bacon, Serjant Cresheld, The same Sheriff Thursday the 5. of August at Seveoke 1647 23 The same Judge, Sheriff, Stephen Scot of Hayes Knight, Tuesday the 7. of March, at Maidstone. 1647 23 The same Judges, the same Sheriff, Tuesday the 5. of September, at Sevenoke. 1648 C. B. Justice Phesant, Sheriff, George Selby, Esq Wed∣nesday the 7. of March, at Maidstone. 1648 C. B. Justice Phesant, Serjant Green, The same Sheriff Tuesday the 10. of July, at Maidstone. 1649 Baron Gate, C. B. Justice Atkins, Sheriff, Henry Crispe of Quex in Birchington, Esq Tuesday the 26. of March, at Maidstone. 1649 Baron Gate, Baron Rigby, The same Sheriff, Monday the 5. of August, at Maidstone. 1650
C. B. Justice Warburton, Commonwealths Serjant Green, Sheriff George Curteis, of Chart next Sutton Valence Esq Tuesday the 11. of March, at Maid∣stone. 1650 C. B Justice Pulestone, C. B. Justice Warburton, The same Sheriff, Wednesday the 9. of July, at Maid∣stone. 1651 V. B. Justice Aske, Common Wealths Serjant Green, Sheriff, Thomas Fludd of Otham, Esq Wednesday the 17. of March, at Maidstone. 1651 V. B. Justice Aske, C. B. Justice Warburton, the same Sheriff, Tuesday the 27. of July, at Maidstone. 1652 V. B. Justice Aske, Sheriff Bernard Hide Esq Mon∣day the 14. of March, at Maidstone. 1652 C. B. Chief Justice St. John, C. B. Justice Waburton The same Sheriff, Monday the 25. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1653 V. B. Justice Aske, Serjant Newdegate, Sheriff, John Earle of Thanet, of Hthfield, Monday the 6. of March, at Maidstone. 1653 Baron Pepys, The same Sheriff, Monday, the 24. of July, at Maidstone. 1654 V. B. Justice Aske, Serjant Steele, Sheriff Humphe∣ry Tustone of the Mote in Maidstone Knight, and Baronet, Monday the 19 of March at Maidstone. 1654 Serjant Croke, Serjant Hill, The same Sheriff, Tues∣day the 7. of August, at Maidstone. 1655 V. B. Justice Aske, V. B. Justice Warburton, Sheriff Michael Livesey, of East-Church in the Isle of Shep∣pey Baronet, Monday the 17. of March at Maid∣stone. 1655 V. B. Justice Warburton, Serjant Croke, The same Sheriff, Monday the 28. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1656
Serjant Hill, The same Sheriff, Twesday the 17. of March, at Maidstone. 1656 C. B. Justice Hale, The same Sheriff, Tuesday the 7. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1657 C. B. Justice Hale, Serjant Crook, Sheriff Charles Bowles of Chetham Esq Tuesday the 30. of March, at Maidstone 1658 C. B. Cheif Justice St. Iohn, C. B. Justice Hale, Sheriff Charles Bowles of Chetham Esq Wednesday the 21. of Iuly, at Maidstone. 1658
Directions for correction of my for∣mer little Book, called a brief Survey of the County of Kent. AT the bottom of the Parishes beginning with the letter A set down, St. Alphage. And marke af∣ter thus, for the Bailiwick of Bridge and Pe∣tham, for the Liberty, Archbishop; for the Hundred, Westgate; for the Lath, St Augustine; for the division of the County, East; for the division of Justices, Lath of St. Augustine; for where the Churches standeth, City of Canterbur; for the Church, St. Alphage; and for the diocess, Canterbury. In Acrise. For the standing of the Church, put out Folkstone hundred, and put in Lonningborough hundred. In Aldington, For the liberty, put out Archbishop, and for where the Church standeth put out Birholt Franchise hundred, and put in Street hundred. In Alington neer Maidstone, for the libery, put in Maidstone, and for where the Church standeth put out Hoo hundred, and put in Larkefield hundred. In Appledore. For the libety, put out Archbishop and add Cinque ports, New Romney, Romney Marsh, and in the division of Justices add, Corpoation of Romney Marsh, and Corporation of New Romney. In Ash with Ridley, put out with Riley, and put in neer Wrtham. In Aylesford, for where the Church standeh put out Larkfield hundred, and put in Ancient Demeen. In . or the liberty, put out Archbishop. In Beaksrne. Fo the libety, pt out St. Augustine, and pun, Towne and Port of Hasting In  for the liberties,  Archbishop
In Betherisden, For the liberties, put out Archbishop. In Birchingstone, For the liberty, add Dovor. In Blackmanstone, For where the Church standeth, add demolished. In Braborne, For the liberties, put out Deane of Can∣terbury, and in the hundred, add Wye. In Brenhley, For the hundreds, add Antient demesne make Breuzet, Benzet, and in the Liberties there add Cinque Ports, New Romney and in the Divisions of Ju∣stices add, Corporation of New Romney, Lath of Ship∣way. In Bromhill, in the Liberty, add New Romney. In Bruckland, in the liberties, put out Archbishop. In Chalton next Dovor, in the liberties, put out Archbi∣shop, and put in Dovor, and in the hundred there add Cinque Ports. In Great Chart, in the liberty, add Archbishop. In Chesilherst, in the hundred, add Ruxley, and for stand∣ing of the Church, put out Blackheath hundred, and put in Ruxley hundred. In Chetham, For the Faire, put in the 8th. of Septem∣ber. In Coldred, For the liberty put out St. Augustine. In Cosimus Bleane, make it Cosmus Bleane, and make Whitestaple, Whitstaple, both in the hundred and place where the Church standeth. In Cowden, For the Bailiwick, add Sutton Dartford, and in the hundreds, add Axstone. In Craford make Lesues, Lesnes, both in the hundred and place where the Church standeth. In St. Mary Cray, For the libety put Dutchy of Lan∣caster. In Deale, For the Liberties, add Sandwich. In Denton neer Eleham, both for the hundred, and place where the Church standeth, put out Eastry, and put in Kinghamford, and for the Church add, in Eastry Bailiwick.
In Dovor, For the liberty, add Dovor. In Eastry, For the Faire, make it 21th. of Septem∣ber. In Ebeney, For the liberties, add Tenterden. In Egerton, For the Liberties, put out Dean of Can∣terbury In Elmsted, For the liberty, add Dutchy of Lancaster. In Eynsford for the Liberty, put in Dean of Canter∣bury. In Eythorne, Both for the hundred and place where the Church standeth, put out Wingham, and put in East∣ry. In East Farley, For the liberty, add Deane of Canter∣bury. In West Farley, For the liberty put in Dean of Can∣terbury. In Farmingham, For the liberty, add Dean of Can∣terbury. In Fawkeham, For the liberty, put in Bishop of Ro∣chester. In Feversham, For the Liberty, add Feversham. In Folkstone, For the liberty add Folkstone. In Fordwich, For the liberty, add Fordwich. In Frittenden, For the Liberty, put out Archbishop. In Gillingham, For the Liberties, add Hasting. In Goodnestone neer Sandwich, For the Faire put in 14. of September. In East Greenwich, For the liberty, put out St. Au∣gustine. In St. Gregories, put out all that Parish In Guston, For the liberty, add St. Augustine. In Hackington, For the hundreds, add Downhamford. In Halden, For the liberties, put out Archbishop. In Ham, For the liberty put out St Augustine. In Hartye, make it Hartley. In Hartly, make it Hartye.
In Hastingligh, in the liberties, put out Deane of Can∣terbury, and put in Dutchy of Lancster; and in the Do∣cess, make Canterbuy, Canterbury. In Hedcorne, in the liberty, put out Archbishop. In Hever, in the division of Justices, put out upper di∣vision, and put in lower division. In Hincksell, For the liberties, put out St. Augustine and Wye. In Hith, For the liberties, add Hith In West Hith, For the liberties, add Hith, for the hundred, put in Hith and Worth; for the division of Ju∣stices, add Lath of Shipway; and for where the Church standeth, put in Worth hundred, demolished. In Hope All Saints, For the liberty put out Archbi∣shop. In Horon Kirby, For the liberty, add Dean of Canter∣bury. In Horsemanden, For the hundeds, add Antient De∣mesne. In Hothfield, For the liberties, put out Dean of Can∣terbury and Wye. In Hougham, for the liberties, put out St. Augustine and add Cinque Ports Dovor, and in the division of Justices put in, Town and Port of Dovor. Next to Ightham, set down Ifeild, and marke after it thus, For the Bailiwick, Hoo; for the Liberty, Archbi∣shop; for the hundred, Toltingtrow; for the Lath, Ayles∣ord; for the division of the County, West; for the divi∣sion of Justices, North division; for the place where the Church standeth, Toltingtrow hundred; and for the Dio∣cess, Rochester; In St. Iones, make it St. Johns, And in the Liberties, add Dovr. In Ivechurch, For the Liberties, add Cinque Ports, New Romney; and for the Division of Justices, add the Corporation of New Romney.
In Kenrion, for the hundreds, add Ham; for the laths, add Shipway; for division of the County, add East; And for division of Justices, add Corporation of Rom∣ney Marsh. In East Langdon, for the liberty, put out Archbishop; and for the hundred, and place where the Church stan∣deth, make Corinlo, Cornilo. In West Langdon, for the liberty put out St. Augustine. In St. Laurence, For the liberties, add Sandwich, and for where the Church standeth, put in Ringslow hun∣dred. In Lenham, for the Market, for the Words, Tuesday at Sandwich, make them Tuesday and at Sandway. In Lid, for the liberties, add Lid. In Liminge, for the liberties, add Eleham. In Limpne, for the liberties, put out Archbishop; and for he division of Justices, add Romney Marsh. In Longfield, for the liberty, put in Bishop of Ro∣chester. In Maidstone, for the Liberty, add Archbishop. In East Malling, For the name of the Church, put in St. Mary. In West Malling, for the hundred, add Larkefield. In Marden, for the Bailiwick, add Eyhorne; and for the hundreds, add Maidstone and Eyhorne. In St. Margarets neer Rochester, for the division of Justices, put out North division. In St. Martine, put out all that Parish. In Meopham, for the faire put in 29. of June. In Mersham, for the liberties, put out Archbishop. In Merston, for the liberty, put out St. Augustine, and put in Archbishop. In Midley, for the liberty, put in Deane of Canterbury. In Great Mongeham, for the liberty put out Archbi∣shop. In Little Mongeham, for where the Church standeth add demolished.
In Newenden, for the Liberty, put out Archbishop. In St. Nicholas, for the liberty, add Sandwich. In Northfleet, For the liberty, put in Bishop of Roche∣ster. Next to Northfleet, set downe Nutsteed, and marke af∣ter it thus, for the Bailiwick, Hoo; for the hundred, To'tingtrow; for the lath, Aylesford; for the division of the County, West; for the division of Justices, North di∣vision; for where the Church standeth▪ Toltingtrow hun∣dred; for the name of the Church, St. Mildred; and for the Diocess, Rochester. In Olestone, For the division of Justices, add Lath of Shipway. In Orpington, for the liberty, put in Dutchy of Lanca∣ster, and Archbishop. In Otford, for the liberty, add Dutchy of Lancster. In Otham, for the liberty, add Maidstone. In Padlesworth neer Eleham, for the liberties, add Elcham. In St. Paul, for the division of Justies, add City of Canterbury. In East Peckham, for the name of the Church, put in St Michael. In West Peckham, for the Baiiwick, add Hoo; for the liberty put in Dean of Canterbury, for the hundred put out Twyford, and put in Hoo. In Pensherst, for the Bailiwick, add Lowy of Tunbridge for the hundred, add Wachlingstone, for the Lath, add Aylesford. In St. Peters, For the liberties, put out St. Augustine, and put in Dovor. Next to Preston neer Fordwich, set down Preston neer Feversham, and marke after it thus; For the Bailiwick, Scray; for the Liberties, St. Augustine, and Deane of Canterbury; for the hundred, Feversham; for the Lath, Scray; for the division of the County, East; for the Divi∣sion
of Justices, upper division; for where the Church standeth, Feversham hundred; for the name of the Church St. Katherine; and for the Diocess, Canterbury. In Rever, for the liberties, put out Archbishop. In Ringwold, for the liberties, put out Archbishop, and put in Dovor. In Rolvenden, for the liberties, put out Archbishop, and put in Bishop of Rochester. In New Romney, for the liberties, put out Archbishop, and put in New Romney, and for the division of Justi∣ces, add lath of Shipway. In Old Romney, put out Archbishop, and put in New Romney. Next to Old Romney, set downe Ridley, and marke af∣ter it thus, for the Bailiwick, Sutton Dartford, for the hundred, Axstone; for the lath, Sutton at Hone; for the division of the County, West; for division of Justices, upper division; and for the Diocess, Rochester. In Sandwich for the Faire, put out six dayes, and make it three dayes. In Seasalter, for the place where the Church standeth▪ put out hundred, and put in Towne. In Sellinge, for the liberty, put out Archbishop. In Sevenoke, for the name of the Church put in St. Nicholas. In Sevington, for the liberties, put out Deane of Can∣terbury. In Shadoxherst, for the liberty, put out Archbishop. In Smarden, for the liberties, put out Wye. In Smeeth, for the liberty, put out Archbishop. In Snargate, for the liberties, add, Cinque Ports, and New Romney, and in the division of Justices add Cor∣poration of New Romney. In Speldherst, for the liberty, put in Sevenoke. In Stelling, for the hundred, add Stowting. In Stonar, for the liberty, add Sandwich.
In Stone neer Feversham, for where the Church stand∣eth, put demolished. In Stroud, for where the Church standeth, add in the liberty of the City o Rochester. In Sturmouth, for the liberty, add St. Augustine. In Sturrey, for the liberties, put out Archbishop. In Sutton at Hone, for the libelty, put in Bishop of Ro∣chester, and Deane of Canterbury. In Swaycife, for the hundred, and for where the Church standeth, put out Blengate, and put in Whtstaple. In Tenterden, for the liberties, add Tenterden. In Vlmbe, for the liberty, add St. Augustine, and in the hundred, add Feversham. In Walmer, for the liberty, add Sandwich. In Waltham, for the Laths, add Scray. In Westgate, for the division of Justices, add City of Canterbury, Make Weshwell, Westwell, and in the hundred, there add Wye. In Whistaple, for the Market, put out Good Fryday, and for the Faire, put in Good Fryday. In Wingham, for the Liberty add S. Augustine, and for the Faire, put in the first of May. In Wood, put out St. Augustine, and put in Dovor. In Woodnesborough, for the liberties add Sandwich. In Woolwich, for the Bailiwick, make Sutton Dartford Sutton Bromley. In Wrotham, where the Church standeth, make Ro∣tham, Wrotham: In Ylding, for the hundred, add Antient Demesne.
An Alphabeticall Table of the Names of Persons and Families mentioned in this Tract. A Aberfeild, Page 162 Abingdon, 97 Aburgaveny, 30 Albrance, 80 104 Albuger, 198 Alese, 190 Alisander, 252 Allard, 27 Alphegh, 54 Altham, 406 Andrew, 298 Apleton, 64 Apuldorefeild, 45, 76 166, 391, 392, often 393 Arsick, 80 160 Arundell, 108 121 178 286 Ashborneham, 79 Asheton 81 Aske, 413, often Aslington, 11 Astall, 153 Athelstan, 145 Atholl, 16 Atkins, 412 Auher, 231 407 twice Audley, 168 276 Auste, 270 Axenham 228 B Ba, 152 Bacon, 412 often Badcock, 130 Badlesmer, 55, 164, 165, 275, Bake, 65, 133, 399, twice, 402, 403, 406, twice 410 twice. Ballard, 394 Bamme 108 396 Banknot, 260 Barnham, 405, twice Barret, 166 393 Barry, 245, 288, 392, 393, Bartilt, 130 Barton, 10 Basing 391 twice Bassa 222 Bah, 75 Beamont, 70 Beausits, 108
Beausod P. 115 Beck 94 Becket, 233 Becklee, 239 Bederenden, 86 236 Begebure, 111 Belknap, 76 394 Berham, 65 393 Bernard 388 often Bersted, 390 Beswick, 408 twice Best, 34 Bettenham, 65 Bigg, 49 189 262 Bing, 404 twice Birtrick 69, 72, 100, 174, 25 Blechenden, 196 Bloor, 22 Blunde 391 often Boddenden 27 Bohun, 390 twice Boleyn, 141, 396, twice 397 Bonfant, 260 267 Borgeris 112 Boroz 389 often Boteler, 112 393 Bourchier, 244 twice Bourne 249, 390 thrice 391 often 392 twice Bowles 414, twice Boys, 130, 135, 402, twice Brandon 128 Brahenbury, 396 Bramstone, 395 Bredgar, 37 Bredon, 204 Brent, P. 46 155 157 Brenton, 241 Bressy, 240 Brimshete 391 Briony, 277 Brito, 389 often Brockhall, 392 often 393 twice Brooke, 60 244 Browne, 188, 394, 395, 400 twice 410 twice. Bryene, 241 395 Backland, 248 , 394 278, 389 297 70 C Cade 67, 100, 149, 168, 244 Camden 25 Campeius, 169 Campion 111, 410 twice Canterbury 87 Capell, 155 Carew 231 Carus 399 Cawne 153 Cely, 247 Chamberlaine 409 twice, Champneyes 403 twice Chapman 260 Cheney 55, 191, 394, twice 395, 396, 397
Chich 393 Chichester 158 Chomley 399 often Chute 2, 410, 411, Clare 276, 277 Clarenbld 102 Cleave 169 Clement 153, 397 Clerke 293, 403, often 404, often. Cliord 31, 393, 394, often 395, twice 396. Clinton 93, 104, 151, Clitherow 14, 393, twice 394. Cobham 60, 63, 217, 248, 390 often, 391, often 392 thrice 393. Cockshot 130 Colbridge 34 Colf 169 Colin 295 Colkins 34 Columbary 11 Colwell 101 Conghest 129 Constenton 209 Coppinger 402 Corbiec 393 Cornhill 388 often, 389 of∣ten. Corveile 191 Cossenton 391 Cotton 400 Coventry 406 twice Courtney 178, 185 236 Cowfeild 239 Crane 128 Cranmer 208 Crawley 410 twice, 411 of∣ten. Crequer 18, 80, 164, 165, Cresheld 412, often Crew 408 often, 409 thrice, Criell 87, 255, 390 often, Crispe 196, 397 twice, 399 twice, 412 twice. Croke 406 often, 407 thrice, 409 often, 410 twice, 413 twice 414, Crouch 392 Crowmer 249, 278, 394 twice, 396 twice, 400 twice, 403 twice, 406 twice Culpeper 76, 111, 138, 165 213, 392 thrice, 393, 394 395 twice, 396 twice, 397, 398, 411, twice. Curtis 270, 413, twice. D Dalison 407 twice, Daniell 405 thrice, 406 of∣ten, Darell 393, 394 thrice, 396 Davis 407, 409 twice Davy 204 Deering 46, 170, 217, Delaway 390 Delmynden 130 Dene 75, 209, 273,
Derman 389 Dew 261 Deyre 247 Digs 22, 393, 395, 396, twice, Dike 392 Dixwell 409 twice Dodderidge 407 twice Donat 96, 221 Dorset 244 Dovor 388, often Downe 86 Drainer 250 Drake 73 Drew 404, thrice E Eastgate 228 Eckisford 96 Eden 149, 395 Edolph 142, 406 twice Edfin 13, 207, 291 Elham 64 Ellis 239, 288, 293, twice 394 Engeham 48, 409, twice Erasmus 10 Ereby 180 Essex 236 Etchingham 129 Evering 79 Evernden 27 F Fane 151, 186, 402, 409 twice, Falconbridge 168 Ferers 395, 396 Feversham 101, 112 Filmer 407, twice Finch 90, 101, 245, 397 404, 405, 406, twice, Eynes 18, 79, 103, 394 Fineux 140, 269 Flammock 73, 168 Fleete 27 Fludd 413 twice Fogg 16, 394, 395, twice 397 twice, Fremingham 391 often, 392. twice 339 Frogenhall 269 Fulbert 55, 80. G Garret 83 Gate 412 twice Gatton 391 Gawdy 401 often, 402 often, 403 often, 404 thrice, 405 often, 406 often. Gawge 297 Gent 403 Gerard 249, 399, often Gibbon 132, 434 Gilborne 407, twice
Gipford 17 Glanvil 227, 263, 405 Glocester 114 Goddard 239, 273 Godfey 170 Godwin 104, 129, 190, 218, 233, 270. Goldwell 48 Goshall 14 Gower 36 Gray 17 Greene 395, 412, 413 twice Gregby 244 Grimston 389 Guldeford 21, 165, 231 twice 393, 394 twice, 395 396, 397, 398. H Hadenham 69, 228 Hale 414 thrice Hales 116 401 twice 403 twice 406, 407. Halden 143, 236 Haleth 49 Hamo 70 Hamond 409 twice Hardres 122, 403 twice Harey 293 Harfleete 14 Harpur 398 Hart 176 397 402 twice Haselwood 165 Hatcher 101 Hatecliffe 167 Haudlo 75, 239, 391 twice Haute 153, 317, 390, 393, twice 394, 39, often 397 twice, Hawkins 53 Haymond 244 Hayward 409, twice Head 151 Heale 405, 406 twice Hels 392 Henden 27, 412, twice Hendley 411, twice Herlackenden 293 Hernden 249 Hesilt 204 Heyman 271 Hiache 393 Hide 413 twice Hill 413, 414 Hitcham 410 often Hith 119, 143, 228 Hobart 407, 408 twice Honiwood 411 twice, 412 often. Hoo 228 Horn 156, 166, 393, 394. Hornley 70 Hougham 150 Houghton 407 often 408 often, 109 Hugeson 411, twice Fitz Hughes 11 Hunsden 133 Hunt 204 Huntingfield 390, thrice.
I. Iddenden 134 Iden 396 Jeames 297 Isaac 395. 400 twice Isley 394, 395, 397, 398, 400 Islip 43, 90, 178, 196, 262 297 Joseline 37 Joseph 73, 168. Ire 35, 102, 303. Jude, 277 K. Karlemane 42 Kempe 55, 298, 299, 396 twice, 397 twice, 398 400 twice, 405 twice, Keyme 125, 394, Kilwarly 222 Kinsmill 405 often. Kirby 147 Kiriell 14 Knatchbull 406 twice Kolles 229 L. Lacy 204 Laken 260 Lamb 178, 267. Lambard, In the Epistle and 115, 119, Langley 160, 392 thrice, 394, 396, Langton 279 Law 244 Ledian 164 Lee 395 Leeds 390 thrice, Leee 247, 392, Legat 239 Lennard 401 twice, 404 twice, Lewknot 410 twice, Leyborne 93, 160, Lisle 247 Liverick 14, 140, Livesey 408 twice, 413 twice, 414 twice, Long 239 Loveton 76 Low 125, 228, Lucy 53, 87, 88, Ludlow 76, 393, Lullingstone 176 Lumbard 260 Lye 204 Lyschild 188
M. Mainey 27, 400, 401 twice. Makenade 392 Malemanies 217, 390, 391 Mallet 411 thrice, Mamigmot 73 Mamouh 80, 280 Manwood 116, 239, 405 406, Mardall 389 Maries 166, 269, 394, Marshall 271 Martin 45, 106, 113, 228, Master 10, 411 twice, Maimsell 28, 233, Manston 163, 394. Mepham 185 Mereworth 392 Merton 228 Mille 410 twice, Monceusies 267 Monins 412 twice, Monson 401 often, Moore 21, 231, Morant 392 Morton 10, 46, 94, 178, 244 Mountague 407 often, 408, Mountford 236 Moyle 27 Munevile 103, 389 N. Naylor 12 Newdegte 41 Norbury 16 Northampton 81, 85 Norton 50, 101 twice, 190, 397, 408 twice, Norwood 190, 191, 249 391 Noteben 393 Notingham 392 O. Ockley 130 Odiarne 291 Offord 178 Orlanstone 207, 391 twice, Owen 404 often, 405 thrice, P. Painter 221 Palmer 252, 404 twice, Paramore 125 Parson 134 Pashey 94 Pashley 36, 129 Payname 260 Peche 394, 395 twice, 396
Peckham 213, 290, 297, 393 twice, 395, 396, Penchester, otherwise Pen∣sherst, 11, 215, 390 thrice Pepis 413 Peter 128 Petine 393 Petlesden 291 Petley 86 Peverell 80 Phesant 412 Philipot 86, 246 Philips 140, 270 Picot 388, often Pierle 94 Pimpe 392, thrice 393, 396. Le Pine 392 twice Playferer 390 twice Plumcooper 239 Pluckley 217 Poinings 67, 100, 255, 397 Pole 252 Polhill 411 twice Poode 249 Porch 24, 80, Potkins 244, twice Pratellis 212 Prene 295 Puckering 403 often, 404 often. Pulestone 413 R. Rabing 239 Rainey 412 twice. Randolph 27 Reade 54, 101 Reve 412 Reynold 75, 87, 280 Richardson 410 Rigby 412 Rikhll 204, 394 Ringley 160 Rivers 412 Roberts 65, 111, 131, 396 397, 408 twice. Rochford 226 Ro 225 Romney 232 Rookesley 67, 13 Roper 87, 94, 397, 398 Rualon 388 Rupy 117, 172, 237, 269 Rust 101 Rutland 55 S. Sandwey 222 Sandwich 104, 239 twice, Sandys 407, 408. Sarden 391 twice, Savage 31, 391 twice, 392 393 twice Savoy 178 Say 30, 244
Sot 36, 129, 394, 395, 396 twice, 397 thrice, 402, twice, 405, twice, 408 twice, 412 twice. Scohon 390, often Scroope 70 Segrave 104 Selby 412, twice Selling 389, often. Sencler 87 Septvans 14, 249, 391 thrice, 393 Sevenoke, 244 Seylard 27 Sharpe 48, 249 Shellesend 391, thrice Shelvige 391, thrice, 392 Shephard 271 Sheppey 228 Sherland 89, 191, Shorne 192 Shorte 270 Sidley 17, 398, 400 twice, 403, 404, 408 twice, 409 twice. Sidney 215, 397, Siesley 130 Sigeline 63, 185 Simons 128 Simonson in the epistle. Siward 186 Smith 249, 405 twice, Snach 393 Snigg 406 Somer 58, 300 Sonds 397, twice, 402 twice, 403, twice, 404 twice, 411 twice, Soole 191 Sorewell 260 Southwell 398 Southcote 399 twice, 400 often, 401, often, 402, often. Staford 244, 276 Staplegate 28 Stede 407 twice, Steele 412 Stile 397, 410, twice St. John 413, 414, St. Legr 165, 279, 393, twice, 394, twice, 395, 396, 397, 399, twice. St. Laurence, 391, 392 twice. St. Nicholas, 14, 163, 201. Stone 87 Stratford 87, 222 Stratton 297 Straw 168 Subaudie 390 Sudbury 62 Suet 174 Surenden 23, 217, Swan 239 T. Thomas 267 Thorne 101, 125, 192, Thorneberry 394 Thornham 112, 209,
Tiler 70, 168, 179, Toke 48 Tong 101, 268 Totnall 401 Tottleherst 244 Trapes 239 Tresse 181 Trevor 409 Trussell 391 twice, Turner 412 Tuston 399 twice, 401, 402 413 often, Twisden 48, 405 twice, V. Valoynes 389 thrice, 390 often, 392. Vane 396, 397, 398, 401, twice, Ver 148 Vernon 410 Veseye 94 At Vies 37 Vsford 178 Vpton 101 W. Walden 87, 228, Walerand 390 Walkesley 157 Walleis 68 Walleynes 76, 391, Waller 397 Walmsley 404 twice. 406 thrice, 407 often. Walsingham 52, 396, 399, 400, 412 twice. Walter 394 Wangdeford 204 Warbeck 71 Warburton 413 often, Ware 191 Warham 208, 229, 244, Warner 394 Warren 11 Waterhouse 293 Wats 230 Watson 119 Watton 291 Weaver 73 Weston 410 often, 411 of∣ten, Whetenhall 397 Whittlesey 121 Whitfeild 270 Wickham 220 Widlestone 392 often, Wigmore 101 Wildegos 27, 132 Wilford 65 Fitz Williams 80, 113 Willoughby 54, 401 twice, 404 twice, Wilshire 26, 397,
Winch 407 Winchelsea 140, 201, 222 Windlesore 389 often Withens 407 twice Woodford 64, 279 Woodvile 394 Wootton 34, 396, 397 twice, 399 twice, 402 twice, 404 twice. Wray 399, 400 often, Wyat 11, 63, 178, 397, 398 Y. Yardley 244 Yeard 394 Yelverton 409 Direction to correct the Errata's. In the Folio's, IN Page 48. read 46. p. 49. r. 47. p. 320. r. 220. p. 250. r. 258. p. 251. r. 259. p. 254. r. 262. p. 255. r. 263. p. 258. r. 266. p. 259. r. 267. p. 262. r. 270. p. 263. r. 271. In the Book. Page 18. line 23. read Southeast, p. 23. l. 14. r. Beatriceden, l. 17. dele comma, p. 26. l. 16. r. Hevenden, p. 27. l. 18. r. town l. 21. r. Mainey, p. 28. l. 31. r. Arundell, p. 35. l. 23. r. vulgarly, p. 38. l. 11. r. Brenchley, p. 54. l. 7. r. Codsheath p. 65. l. 10. r. Hartredge, p. 86 l. 10. dele comma, p. 100. l. 3. r. In, p. 117. l. 10. r. Northeast, p. 143. l. 13. r. Mayor, p. 159. l. 2. r. south∣east, p. 165. l. 15. r. For, p. 177. l. 3. dele comma, p. 183. l. 19. r. Nassenden, p. 196. l. 3. r. Blechenden. p. 198. l 25. r. Carmelites, l. ult. r. oll, p. 202. l. 1. r. Nonington, p 215. l. 27. dele long, p. 216. l. 1. r. breadth p 217. l. 9. r. Mannours, p. 247. l. 2. dele Augustine, p. 253. l. 28. r. Lath of Sutton p. 258. l. 11. r. Stodmarsh, p. 297. l. 20. r. Burgoyne, p. 302. l. 10. r. Mono∣steries, l. 25. r. 1200, p. 306. l. 9. r. Wickham, p. 307. l. 12. r. ath. p. 310. l. 27. r. Smeeth, p. 311. l. 24. add of the hundred, p. 313. l. 26. r. and Alkham, p. 313. l. ult. dele Bridge p. 334. l. 1. r. Brenc∣ley,
350. l. 8. r. hath, p. 354. l. 19. r. at, p. 355. l. 1. r. Selling, p. 360. l. 21. r. Bradbourne, p. 363. l. 24. add a period after Rochester, l. 27. the same after Chetham, p. 366. l. 22. r. Directs, p. 379. ult. r. Tunstall, p. 381. l. 6. r. udeley, p. 383. l. 15. r. Hougham, p. 384. l. 3. r. Leusham, r. Lidon, l. 25. dele comma, p. 385. l. 7. dele comma, l. 21. r. Newnham, l. 22. r. Shorne, p. 386. l. 11. r. Vpchurch, l. 14. r. Borden, p. 391. l. 9. columne 1. r. Northwood. p. 392. l. 21. col. 2. r. Leese, p. 393. l. 29. c. 2. r. raign, p. 394. l. 22. c. 1. r. Kennington, l. 5 c. 2. r Waler, p. 395. l. 15. c. 1. r. Peache, p. 396. l. 1. c. 1. r. Bamme, l. 25. r. Peche, l. 29. r. Walsingham, l. 4. c. 2. r. Bedgbury, l. 22. r. Yalham, l. 31. r. Bolleyn, p. 397. l. 20. c. 1. r. in Throwley, p. 398. c. 2. after l. 4. add She begun her Raign 1 Iuly, 1553, l. 26. r. 17, p. 399. l. 2. r. Sheriffs, p. 400. l. 14. r. Iudges, l. 29. r. Beakesborn, p. 401. l. 16. r. Vane, p. 402. l. 28. r. Hart, p. 403. l. 6. r. 20, l. 19. r. 28. p. 404. l. 10. Chevening, l. 13. r. Sheriff p. 405. l. 20. r. Stanford, p. 407. l. 2. add. 1609 l. 3. add Sheriff, l. 13. r. Maximilian, l. 17. r. 10 p. 409. l. ult. r. 16. p. 410 l. 17. dele, p. 411. l. 28. r. Linsted, l. 33. dele, l. 34. r. Tuesday. l. 35. dele, p. 412. l. 24. adds, l. 34. r. 1650, p. 413. l. 25. r. Tufton, p. 415 l. 6 dele of l. 10 r Church, In the Table, make Alese Alefe, In Burgh r. 5. 78. In Fremingham r. 393. twice, In Gibbon r. 134, In Haute r. 217. In Houghton, r 409. add Harirede 65, make Iude Iud, make Loveton Lovett, make Maimsell Maunsell, make Millen Miller, In Norwood after 391 add often, In Reve after 412 add thrice, In Ri∣chardson after 410 add twice.▪ In Trevor after 409 add twice, In Ver∣non after 410 add thrice, make Vsford Vfford, In Waler add 394, dele Walter, dele Wilford. FINIS.
