L2265B 12696997 65899
PROSODIA CONSTRUED And The meaning of the most difficult words therein con∣tained plainly illustrated: Being An addition to the constructi∣on of LILIES Rules, and of like necessary use. By Barnab. Hampton. LONDON, Printed by Roger Norton, 1672.
PROSODIA CONSTRUED. PRosodia Pro∣sodie (that is to say, that part of Grammar, which tea∣cheth the right accenting or tuning of the syllabels of words and al¦so the quantity of syllabels as Holioke writes:) est is ea pars that part quae which tradit teaches pronunciatio∣nem rectam the right pronun∣ciation vocum of words: di∣citur Latine it is called in La∣tin [after the Latin manner] accentus the accenting [or right tuning of] words in pro∣nunciation. Autem and Pro∣sodia Prosodie dividitur is divided in Tonun into the tone [or tune:] Spiritum the breathing [in pronounciati∣on;] Tempus the time; that is to say, the time for pronun∣ciation of a long syllabel or a short.] Tonus the tone, or tune est is lex a law vel or nota a note [or mark] quâ whereby syllaba a syllabel in dict one in a word elevatur is lifted up vel deprimitur or is pressd down. Autem and tonus the tone est is triplex three∣fold. Acutus sharp [or lifted up] Gravis Grave [great or pressed down,] Circum∣flexus the circumflex [or bow∣ed about accent, or both lifted and pressed down, after Rai∣nus, after others lifted up like the acute accent.] Tonus acu∣tus the acute [or sharp] accent est is virgula obliqua an o∣verthwart stroke [or dash] a∣scendens ascending [or going] in dextram up towards the right hand sic after this fashi∣on ['] Gravis the grave [or pressed down accent or tone] est is virgula obliqua an o∣verthwart dash [or stroke] de∣scendens descending in dex∣tram
towards the right hand ad hune modum after this manner [`.] Circumflexus the circumflex accent [or that accent, which being bowed a bout, is both lifted up & pres∣sed down,] est is quiddam conflatum a certain thing composed [or made] ex utril∣que of them both, hâc figurâ of this figure or fashion [.] Etiam also Apostrophus ad∣datur huc may be added hi∣ther qui which est is quaedam pars circuli a certain part of a circle apposita set to, in sum∣mo litterae on the top of the letter, quam pinges which you shall describe sic after this fashion ['.] Ostenditur hac nota it is shewed by this note or mark [or this note sheweth] vocalem ultimam the last vowel dictionis of the word deesse is wanting [or to be wanting:] ut as, Tan∣ton' me crimine dignum di∣xisti; pro tantone. Ne what dixisti me dignum hast thou said that I am worthy of tanto crimine so great blame? Sunt there be spiritus dito two breathings [thorow the throat in pronounciation, like the Hebrew gutiural letters, ] Asper the rough [or harsh breathing,] & and lenis the mild [or smooth:] Asper the harsh [or rough breathing in pronunci∣ation] quo whereby syllaba aspirata an aspirated syllabel [or a syllabel of harsh pro∣nunciation] profertur is pronounced: ut as, homo a man or woman, honor ho∣nour. Lenis the mild, quo whereby syllaba a syllabel pro∣fertur is pronounced [or utter∣ed] citra aspirationem without harsh breathing in pronun∣ciation: ut as, Amo I love, nus a burden. Regula prima the first rule Tonorum of accents. DIctiobrevis a short word monosyllaba being of one syllabel, aut longa or a long one positione by position, acu∣itur is made acute: ut as, mel hony, fel gall, pars part, pax peace. Longa naturâ a long word by nature circum∣flectitur is made circumflex, [or circumflexed:] ut as, spês hope, flôa flower, sôl the Sun, thûs frankincense, rûs the countrey. In dislyllaba dicti∣one in a word of two syllabels si if prior the formes fuerit longa shall be long naturâ by nature, posterior the latter brevis
short, prior the former circumflectitur is circumflex∣ed: ut as, Lûna the Moon, mû sa a song. Acuitur it is made acute [or lifted up] in caeteris in other words: ut as, cítus quick, [or swift,] látus broad. solers subtile [or cunning.] Si if dictio polysyllaba a word of many syllabels habet hath penultimam the last syllabel saving one longam long, acuit eandern it marketh the same acute, [or lifts it up:] ut as, libértas liberty, penátes he∣thenish houshold gods. Sin but if habet it have penultimam the last syllabel saving one brevem short, acuit antepe∣nultimam it maketh the syl∣label before the last save one acute [or lifts it up:] ut as, Dóminus a Lord, Pontifex an Archbishop or Prelate, Com∣posita words compoundd á of facio the word facio to do excipiuntur are excepted; ut as, benefácis thou dost well, malefácis thou dos evil, ca∣lesácit it maketh hot, frigefá∣cit it marketh cold. At si but if penultima [understand the word syllaba syllabel] the last syllabel save one fuerit longa shall be long naturâ by na∣ture, & and ultima the last syllabel brevis short, penulti∣ma the last syllabel save one circumflectitur is circumflex∣ed: ut as, Românus a Roman, amâtor a lover. Composita the compound words, à of fis thou art made or done & and sit he is made or done acuunt do lift up ultimam the last syllabel: ut as, malefít it is ill done, calefit it is made hot. benefít it is well done, satis∣fít it is satisfied. Quia be∣cause hodie at this time, [or in this age] propter imperi∣tiam for the unskilfulness ho∣minum of men circumflexus the circumflex accent vix discernitur is scarcely dis∣cerned [or distinctly known] ab acuto from the acute ac∣cent prolatione in pronuncia∣tion, Grammatici Grammari∣ans confuderunt have mo∣ved without all order, [or have used promiscuously or in common] circumflexum the circumflex accent cum acuto with the acute accent [that is to say in respect of the tone or sound: otherwise they are not used promiscuously.] Sunt there are quinque five things quae which perturbant do very much trouble regulas to∣norum the rules of the accents differentia the difference transponit transposeth [or re∣moveth]
tonum the [tune or] accent: ut as, unà together adverbium an adverb acuit ultimam makes the last sylla∣ble acute [or lifts it up] ne vi∣deatur that it may not seem esse to be nomen a noun. Sic so eò thither, aliò to ano∣ther place, aliquò somewhi∣ther, continuò by and by [forthwith] sedulò diligent∣ly, porro moreover, fortè by chance, quà which way, ali∣quà by some way, nequà left any way, illò thither, falsò falsly, citò quickly, ferè al∣most, planè manifestly [or plainly,] & alia and others id genus of that kind: putà the word putà pro for sicut, po∣nè pro for pòst afterward, coram in presence, circum on every part, aliàs elsewhere, or otherwise, palàm openly, ergò this word ergò therefore con∣junctio a conjunction, sed but ergô pro for causa a cause circumflectitur is circumflex∣ed: ut as, venimus we came illius ergô for his sake [or cause.] Igitur therefore haec omnia all these, sicut Graeca acuti-sona like as Greek words of an acute sound [or accent] quidem indeed acu∣untur are sounded acute [or as a lifted up] in fine sententi∣arum in the end of sentences, verò but in consequentia ver∣ba among words following [them] gravantur they are [sounded or] made grave tones [or pressed down] Sic so causa differentiae [for the cause of difference or] for dif∣ference sake, antepenultima the last syllabel save two sus∣penditur is lifted up in his in these. Deinde afterward, pró∣inde therefore, périnde even as, aliquando sometime, né. quando lest at any time, hujús∣que and of this sort, álonge far off, délonge from a far, déinceps afterward, duntaxat only, déorsum downward, quápropter wherefore, quini∣mo but that more is, enímvero forsooth, propémodum almost [in a manner] ádmodum ve∣ry much [yea,] áffabre work∣manlike [cunningly] intereá∣loci in the mean while, nihil∣óminus yet nevertheless, pauló∣minus a little less, [somewhat less] cùm when non sunt they are not orationes diversae di∣vers; speeches, uti sunt as are pube tenus up to the middle, crurum tenus up to the shanks: enim for non sunt composita they are not compound words, velut like as, hactenus [thus far] hitherto, quatenus how far,
[so far as] & and reliqua the rest ejus generis of that kind [or sort.] Transpositio trans∣position [or removing of words] invertit tonum [turns or] changeth the [tune or] ac∣cent, id quod that which ve∣nit comes in usu in us in prae∣positionibus among preposi∣tions, quae which postpositae being set after gravantur are made grave tones: ut as, Per transtra through the seats & and remos oars or rowers. Imperium the rule [or govern∣ment] is te penes in the pow∣er of thee. Attractio attraction [or drawing together] mutat tonum changeth the accent, cum when conjunctio incli∣nativa an enclitical conjuncti∣on [or a conjunction that gives his accent to the last syllabel of the word before him] se∣quitur followeth post voca∣bulum aliquod after any word: ut as, que and [or both,] ne whether, ve or [or either. [Enim for hae parti∣culae these particles attrahunt do draw accentum the accent [or tune] syllabae praeceden∣ti to the syllabel before-going que and acuunt eam do make this syllabel acute, [or list it up:] ut as, Liminá{que} both the thresholds [by Synecdoche the Temple] que and laurus the laurels dei of [the feigned god] Apollo: [It may be con∣structed,] Que both lumina the lights laurásque and the lau∣rels dei of God: Sic so Dum, sis, nam, parelca are things added. Autem but ubi where est there is manifest a com∣positio a manifest compositi∣on tonus the accent non vari∣atur is not varied: ut as, Dé∣nique finally, útique verily, ítaque therefore, undique on every side, híccine is this he? & and hujusmodi of this sort. Tamen notwith∣standing ubíque, servat keep∣eth tonum the accent sui temporis of his time, & and also ubívis. Concisio the cutting [short] transfert con∣veighs over tonum the accent cùm when dictiones words castrantur are cut short per Syncopen by the figure Syn∣cope, aut or Apocopen Apo∣cope; tunc enim for then re∣tinent they retain [or keep] tonum the accent dictionis integrae of the whole word: ut as, Virgíli, Valéri, Mer∣cúri, pro instead of Virgilii Valerii, Mercurii. Sic also, quaedam nomina certain nouns & and pronomina pro∣nouns syncopata cut short
by syncope circumflectunt ul∣timam do circumflex the last syllabel tut as, Arpinâs one of Arpinum, Ravennâs one of Ravenna, nostrâs of our coun∣trey or sect, cujas of what countrey or sect, &c. and so forth. Sic likewise donêc un∣til à of donecum. Sic so hûc hither, illuc thither, istuc thi∣ther, adhûc yet, hitherto, &c. and so forth, pro for hucce hither, illucce thither, &c. Et and composita compound words à of dic, duc, fac, ut as, benedic bless thou, redûc being (again, or) back again, calefac make hot or warm. I∣dioma the idiome, hoc est that is, proprietas linguae the pro∣priety of the tongue variat changeth tonum the accent, adot so that, si if Graecae dictiones Greek words veniāt integre ad nos do come wholly or purely unto us servent tonum suum they keep their own accent: ut as, Simois a River in Troy, Periphas a mans name in Virgil, acuunt penultimam they make the last syllabel saving one acute [or lift it up:] at but facta La∣tina being made Latin words elevant antepenultimam they lift up the syllabel before the last saving one, quia because corripiunt they make short penultimam the last syllabel saving one, Autem but quae words which prorsus siunt are made altogether Latina latin words servant quoque they do keep also tonū Latinū the Latin accent: ut as, Geór∣gica, Bucóolica, antepenulti∣mâ acutâ the last syllabel sa∣ving two being acute, licet al∣though apud Graecos among the Greeks habeant they have tonum the accent in ultima on the last syllabel: ut as, Geor∣gica, Sic & so also comoedia, tragoedia, sophia, symphonia recipiunt receive or have to∣num their accent  antèpe∣nultima on the last syllabel saving two, licèt although they have it in penultima on the last syllabel save one in sua lingua in their own tongue. Poro moreover, s if tonus proprius the proper accent vocis peregrinae of a strange word ignoretur be unknown, tutissimum fuerit it shall be a most safe thing e∣nunciare illam to pronounce that word, juxta Latinum ac∣centum according to the Latin accent. Syllabae communes common syllabels in proa o∣ratione in prose  not composed in more temper
corripiuntur are always made shortut as, celebris fa∣mous, cáthedra a seat or chair, mediocris indifferent or mean. HActenus hitherto de to∣nis of the accents & and spiritibus breathings in pro∣nunciation, deinceps hence∣forth [or from henceforth] ad∣jiciemus we will add pauca a few things de tempore sylla∣barum concerning the time of syllabels & ratione and the form carminis of a verse. Tempus the time we est is men∣sura the measure syllabae pro∣nunciandae of a syllabel to be pronounced [or of pronouncing a syllabel.] Syllaba brevis a short syllabel est is unius temporis of one time, vero but longa a long syllabel duo∣rum is of two supines. Tempus breve a short time notatur is noted sic thus [or after this fashion](.) Autem but, lon∣gum a long time sic thus,(-): ut as for example, tērra the earth. Pedes feet siunt are made ex syllabis dispositis of syllabels disposed justo ordine in a just [or right] order. Au∣tem and pes a foot est is con∣stitutio the setting [or pla∣cing] together duarum syllaba∣rum of two syllabels vel or plu∣rium of more ex certa obser∣vatione according to the cer∣tain observation temporum of the times, or measures of the syllabelsr. Alii pedum some of the feet dislyllabi are of two syllabels, alii others trissyllabi are feet of three syllabels. Autem but non multum atti∣net it doth not much apper∣tain ad hoc nostrum institu∣tum to this our purpose [or in∣struction] disterere to reason de teasyllabis concerning feet of four syllabels. Dis∣syllaba feet of two syllabels sunt are Spondaeus, ut as for example, ¯ ¯ virtus virtue; Pyrrichicus, ut as, ˘ ˘ Deus God; Trochaeus, ut as, ¯ ˘ Panis bread; Iambus, ut as, ˘ ¯ amans loving. Trisyl∣labi feet of three syllabels sunt octo are eight, Molossus ut as, ¯ ¯ ¯ magnates Noble men or states; Tribrachus, ut as, ˘ ˘ ˘ Dominus a Lord; Dactylus, ut as, ¯ ˘ ˘ scribere to write; Anapaestus, ut as, ˘ ˘ ¯ pictas godliness; Bacchius, ut as, ˘ ¯ ¯ hone∣stas honesty, Antibacchius, ut as, ¯ ¯ ˘ audire to hear; Amphimacer, ut as,¯ ˘ ¯ cha∣ritas charity; Amphibra∣cus, ut as, ˘ ¯ ˘ venire to come. Porro moreover, pe∣des
feet concinnati trimmed (or well composed) justo nu∣ero in a just or lawful number atque ordine and or∣der constituunt carmen com∣pose (or make) a verse. E∣nim for carmen a verse est is oratio a speech constricta bound justo atque legitimo numero to a just and lawful number pedum of feet, Im∣primis first of all, composi∣turo carmen he that is to compose a verse discendum est must learn metiri ipsum to measure it rite truly (or well) pedibus by the feet, quam which vocant they call scansionem scanning. Au∣tem and scansio scanning est is legitima commensu∣ratio a lawful measuring to∣gether (or measuring) car∣minis of a verse, in singulos pedes into everyone (or each one) of the feet. Synaloepha, Eclipsis, Syjnaeresis, Diaere∣sis & and Caesura accidunt do happen scansioni to scan∣ning (or lawful measuring of a verse by the feet.) Syna∣loepha est is quaedam elisio a certain striking out voca∣lis of a vowel ante alteram before another in diversis di∣ctionbus in divers words: ut as, Crastina vit' to mor∣rows life est is nimis sera too late, viv' live hodie to day. Autem and fit it is made interdum sometime, in his dictionibus in these words: ut as, Dii heathenish gods Diis to, (from, by, or with) those gods. iidem the same, deinde afterward, deinceps afterward (or furthermore) semianimis half dead, semi∣homo half a man, semi-ustus half burnt, deest he (or it) is wanting, deero I shall be wanting, deerit he (or it) shall be wanting, & similia and such like words. At but heu & and ô nunquam in∣tercipiuntur are never taken away. Eclipsis est is quo∣tics as often as  the letter  cum sua vocali with his vowel perimitur is taken away, proxima distione the next word exorsa beginning or (when the next word be∣ginneth) à vocali with a vowel; ut as, Monstr', hor∣rend', inform', ingens; cui lumen ademptum; pro for monstrum, horrendum, &c. and so forth; O ingens, hor∣rendum, informe monstrum O huge, horrible, deformed, (or ill favour'd) monster, cui from whom lumen a∣demptum his eye was taken,
(or whose eye was put out) Synaeresis est is contractio the contraction (or drawing together) duarum syllaba∣tum of two syllabels in unam into one: ut as, Ceu or alva∣ria the hives texta fuerint have been (or were) fra∣med lento vimine with a soft (or tender) twig: pro for alvaria. Diaeresis est is ubi when (or where) duae syllabae two syllabels fiunt are made ex una dissecta of one syllabel cut asunder (or parted:) ut as, Debuerant they ought evoluisse to have unwound fusos suos their spindles: pro for evolvisse. Caesura est is cum when post pedem absolutum after a perfect foot syllaba brevis a short syllabel extenditur is made long in fine dictionis in the end of a word. Spe∣cies Caesurae the kinds of Caesura sunt are Triemime∣ris a Triemimer (as though you should say, The division or the half of three feet) (sub∣audi understand thou con∣stans consisting) ex pede of a foot & and syllaba a syllabel: Inhians pectoribus he much coveting the breast, consulit takes counsel [or divination] from exta the entrals spi∣rantia yet living. Penthe∣mimeris a penthemimer ex duobus pedibus [consists] of two feet & syllaba and a syl∣label: ut as, Amor love vin∣cit overcometh omnia all things, & nos cedamus and let us yield [give place] amo∣ri to love. Hepthemimerit an Hepthemimer ex tribus pedibus of three feet & syl∣laba and a syllabel: ut as, Ostentans boasting of artem his skill [or cunning] que and pariter also [or likewise] arcum sonantem his sound∣ing bow. Eneëmineris an Eneemimer constat consisteth ex quatuor pedibus of four feet & syllaba and a syllabel: ut as, Ille he fultus having born up latus niveum his side white like snow molli hyacintho with soft crow∣tos [being a purple coloured flower.] De generibus concerning the kinds Carminum of Verses. GEnera Carminum the kinds of verses de qui∣bus concerning which decre∣vimus we have determined [or purposed] tractare potis∣simum to entreat of princi∣pally
hoc loco in the place, sunt are Heroicum the He∣roick verse, wherein the deeds done by noble man are set down with praise, Elegracum the Elegiack verse [wherein la∣mētable matters are set forth] Asclepiadaeum the Aslepi∣ade [or the verses whereof A∣sclepads was the first Au∣thor.] Sapphicum the Sap∣phick, Phaleucium the Pha∣leucic, [or the verse whereof Phaleucus was the first Au∣thor.] Lambicum the lambick verse. Carmen Heroicum an Heroick verse, quod idem which same verse dicitur Hexametrum is called an Hex∣ameter, quidem constat in∣deed consith sex pedibus of six feet, numero in number, vero but duobus of two feet genere in kind, dactylo a dactyle, & spondeo and a spon∣dee. Quintus locus the fifth place vendicat claims pecu∣liariter properly dactylum a dactyle libi to it self, sexus the sixth place claims spon∣daeum a spondee: reliqua the rest, hunc vel illum this foot or that prout volumus even as we will: ut as, Tytire O Tytirs, tu thou recubans ly∣ing at rest sub tegmine under the covering patulae fagi of a broad or wide spreading beech tree, Spondaeus a spon∣dee reperitur aliquando is found sometime etiam in quinto loco even in the fifth place: ut as, Chara soboles. O dear off-spring Deum of the Gods, magnum incremen∣tum the great encrease Jovis of Jupiter. Ultima syllaba the last syllabel cujusque versus of every verse habe∣tur communis is accounted common. Carmen Elegia∣cum an Elegiack verse, quod & which also habet hath no∣men the name Pentametri of a Pentameter, constat con∣sisteth  duplici Penthemi∣meri of a double Penthemi∣mer, quarum of which prior the formr comprehendit comprehends or contains duos pedes two feet, dactyli∣cos being dactyles, spondai∣cos spondees, vel or alterutros either of them, cum syllaba longa with a long syllabel; altera eiam also the other (Penthemimer) contains duos pedes two feet, sed but omnino dactylicos always [or altogether] dactyles, item also [or likewise] cum syllaba longa with a long syllabel; ut as, Amor love est is res a thing ple∣na
full soliciti timoris of pen∣sive or careful fear. Car∣men Asclepiadaeum an Ascle∣pide verse constat consists ex Penthemimeri of a Pen∣themimer, hoc est, that is to say, spondaeo of a spondee & and dactylo a dactyle & and syllaba longa a long syllabel, & and deinde moreover duo∣bus dactylis of two dactyles: ut as, Meccenas O neble Me∣nas edite descended atavis Regibus of ancient or noble Kings (Thus Bond) at avis Re∣gibus, id est that is, antiquis Regibus Atavis, after Cooper and Rider are the great grandfathers grandfathers: but it may be interpreted as Bond hath it, by a Metonymy of the subject for the adjunct; for great grandfathers grand∣fathers are the subject. Car∣men Sapphicum a Sapphic verse constat consists ex o∣chaeo of a trochee, spondaeo of a spondee, dactylo a dactile, & and demum at last duobus trochaeis of two trochees: ut as, Jam now Pater id est, Ju∣piter misit Jupiter hath se [for so heathenish men belie∣ved] satis nivis snow enough atque and dirae [subaud grandinis understand thou the word grandmis] terrible o horrible hail terris in our land [or countrey] Tamen notwithstanding in hoc ge∣nere carminis in this kind of verse Adonicum additur an Adonick is added post tres versus after three verses, quod which constat consists ex dactylo & spondaeo of a dactyle and a spondee: ut as, Pusce O suscus, integor a man uncorrupt vitae of life, que and purus pure sceleris of wicked∣ness, non eget needs not jacu∣lis the darts nec acu nor the bow Mauri of the Mor, nec neither pharetrâ his quiver gravida full venenatis sagit∣tis of poysoned arrows. Carmē Phaleuciū that kind of verse whereof Phaleucius was the first Author, five or Hendeca-syllabum a verse of eleven syllabels constat consists ex spondaeo of a spondes dactyio a dactyle, & and tādem at the last tribus trochaeis of thee trochees: ut as pavens Mabili O trembling or fearful Mab∣litu [or Mbil] quoquo dff∣gias whithersoever thou canst fly away, non poteris latere thou shalt not be able to ly hid from nostrum nasum our face [by Synecdoche,] [or fight by Metalepsis Legitm us versus lambicus a lawful lambick
verse constat consists è solis Iambis of Iambicks alone: ut as, Roma ipsa Rome her self ruit falleth viribus suis by her own strength (or force.) Ta∣men notwithstanding in lo∣cis imparibus in places un∣like recipit interdum it re∣ceives sometime tribrachum, spondaeum, dactylum, an a∣paestum, the tribrach, spondee, dctyle, anapest pro Iambo instead of the foot Iambus, at∣que and in paribus (subaudi locis understand the word locis) in like places tribra∣chum it receives or takes a tribrach; rariès it makes more rarely (or seldom) spondeum a spoudee. Hoc carmen this verse deducitur in duo ge∣nera is divided into two kindes, Dimetrum a dime∣ter (which consists of four feet,) & Trimetrum and a Trimeter, five or Senarium a verse consisting of six feet. Dimetrum a Dimeter (verse) constat consists ex quatuor pedibus of four feet: ut as, O dulces notae O sweet notes carminum of songs quas which pulchra thy self be∣ing fair fundis thou pourest out ore melleo with thy ho∣ney mouth (or sweet mouth) que and succinis lyrae singest after the harp (or to the harp) (In verses which are sung to the harp, two simple feet are commonly accounted for one) Trimetrum a Tri∣meter five or Senarium a verse consisting of six feet, Trimetrum a Trimeter verse constat senis pedibus consi∣steth of six feet: ut as, Qui they which damnant do re∣prove (or find fault with) nos us, sunt are maximi hi∣striones the principle stage-players. De quantitate concerning the quantity primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels. QUantitas the quantity primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels cognosci∣tur is known octo modis eight ways (or by eight rules: Positione by position, vocali ante vocalem by a vowel be∣fore a vowel, diphthongo by a diphthong, derivatione by derivation, compositione by composition, praepositione by a preposition, regula by rule, exemplo by example, seu or authoritate by authority. Vocalis a vowel ante du∣as consonantes before two
consonants aut duplicem or a double consonant in eadem di∣ctione in the same word est is ubique longa every where long positurâ by position, ut as, ventus a wind, axis an axel, tree, patrizo to do like his father. Quod si if so be [or, but if] consonans a con∣sonant claudat priorem di∣ctionem do end the former word, item also sequente the word following inchoante beginning á consonante with a consonant, etiam also voca∣lis praecedens the vowel go∣ing before erit longa shall be long positione by position: ut as, Major sum I am great∣er quam tha cui whom for∣tuna fortune possit nocere can hurt. Syllabae the sylla∣bles jor, sum, quam, & and sit, longae sunt are long posi∣tione by position. At si but if prior dictio the former word exeat do end in voca∣lem brevem in a short vowel, equente the word following incipiente beginning a dua∣bus consonantibus with two consonants, interdum some∣time producitur is made long, sed but rariùs more sel∣dom: ut as, Occulta spolia [deportabant they did bear away] secret [or unknown] spoils & and plures trium∣phos many triumphs de pac as concerning peace. Voca∣lis brevis a short vowel ante mutam before a mute sequen∣te liquida a liquid following, redditur communis is re∣hearsed [or made common: ut as, Patris of a father, volucris a fowl [or bird.] Vero but longa a long vowel non mu∣tatur is not changed: ut as, Aratrum a plough, simula∣crum an image. Vocalis a vowel ante al∣teram before an other in ea∣dem dictione in the same word est ubique brevis is e∣very where short, ut as, Dĕus God, mĕus mine, us thine pĭus godly. Excipias you may except [or, excipias for fac ut excipias except] geni∣tivos casus the genitive cases in ius, habentes formam ha∣ving their form or [declining] juxta secundam declinaio∣nem pronominis according to the second declension of the pronouns, ut as, unius of one, illius of that. Ubi where  the vowel  reperitur com∣munis is found common, li∣cèt albeit in alerius in the word alterius of another, sit semper brevis it be always short, in alius in the word a∣lius
of another semper longa it be always long. Etiam also genitivi & dativi the geni∣tive and dative cases quintae declinationis of the fifth de∣clension, sunt excipiendi are to be excepted ubi e where the letter e inter geminum i between the double i fit lon∣ga is made long: ut as, fa∣ciei of a face, alioqui other∣wise non not, [that is, it is not made long:] ut as, rĕi of a thing, spĕ of hope, fidĕi of faith. Etiam also fi the syl∣label fi in  in the verb fio to be made or done, est longa is long, ni i except e & r the letters e and r sequantur do follow simul together: ut as, Fierem I might be made or done, Fieri to be made or done. Sic so octo mariti the eight husbands unt are made up in number (or ac∣count,) for then they might not be married to any more than eight husbands. Quid what non putes may you not think posse fieri can be done. Ohe Interjectio the Interjection ohe signifying ho ho, a voice or shunning habet hath priore sylla∣bam the former syllabel an∣cipitem doubtful (or double that is, both long and short.) Vocalis a vowel ante alte∣ram before another in Grae∣cis dictionibus in Greek words subinde ever now and then fit longa is made long: ut as, Pierides O Muses dicite say you [or tell you.] Respice Lāerten look back unto (or regard) Laertes who was the father of Ʋlys∣ses. Et also in possessivis in possessines, ut as, Aenēia nu∣trix Aeneas his nurse. Rho∣dopēius Orphēus Orpheus of Rhodope [a mountain in Thracia.] Omnis diphihongus eve∣ry diphthng apud Latinos among the Latinists est is longa long: ut as, Aūrum gold, neuter neither the one nor the other, mūsae of a song: nisi, except vocale sequente  vowel following [or when a vowel followeth:] ut as, Prae∣ire to go before, praeustus burned in the sore part, [or burned at the point,] praeam∣plus very large. Derivativa derivatives, or words derived of others sor∣tiuntur are allotted [asssign∣ed] eandem quantitatem the same quantity cum primitivis with their primi∣tives: ut as, ămator a l∣ver, ămicus a friend, ăma∣bilis
amiable [or to be belo∣ved,] prima syllaba the first syllabel brevi being short ab ămo of the verb ămo to love. Tamen notwithstand∣ing pauca excipiuntur a few derivatives are excepted quae which deducta being derived a brevibus of short primitives, producunt do make long primam the first syllabel. Cujus generis of which kind sunt are, Vox vōcis a voice [or word] à vŏco of the verb voco to call; lex lēgis a law à of lĕgo to read; Rex rēgis a King à of rĕgo to rule [or govern;] sēdes a seat & and sēdile a bench [or stool] à of sĕdeo the verb sedeo to sit, jūmentum a drawing beast to draw burdens à jŭ∣vo of the verb juvo to help; sōmes chips [or any matter which is easily set on fire,] & and fōmentum a plaister o mitigate pain à of fŏveo to cherish; jūcundus plea∣sant à of jŭvo to help; jū∣nior younger à of jŭvenis a young man or woman; mōbi∣lis to be moved [or move∣able] à of mòveo to move; hūmanus gentle [or courte∣ous] ab hŏmo derived from homo a man or womans vōmer a plough-share à of vòmo to cast up: pēdor the stink of the feet à of pĕde a foot. Et contra and con∣trariwife: sunt there are [sub∣audi verba understand the word verba words] quae de∣ducta which bring derived a longis of long primitives cor∣ripluntur are made short, qualia sunt of what sort are, Dux dŭcis a captain [or leader] à of dūco to lead, dĭcax a jester [or scoffer] maledĭcus one that useth rail∣ing, & also multa many words id genus of that kind [or sort] à of dco to say [or speak;] sĭdes faith, a of fio to be made or done; ărena sand, ărista the beard of a corn ear, ab āreo de∣rived from [or of] areo to be dry: pŏsui I have, put [or set] à of pōno to put; gĕ∣nui I have begotten à of gig∣no to beget; frăgor the noise made with the fall of any thing, & and frăgilis brittle [or frail] à of frāngo the verb frango to break; nŏ∣to nōtas to mark, à of nŏ∣tu to be known; năto to shoot out under the earth à of nātu to be grown or sprung up; dsetus eloquent à of dissero to dispute; ŏpor a∣dead
(or sound) sleep à of Sōpio to bring asleep. Et also nonnullá alia some others ex∣utroque genera of both kind quae which relinquuntur are lft observanda to be observed studiosis of the studious in∣ter legendum while they are reading. Composita compound words sequuntur do follow quantitatem the quantity simplicium of their simple words; ut as, pŏtens migh∣ty, impŏtens impotent, or weak; sôlor to delight, consôlor to comfort; lĕgo to read, perlĕgo to read tho∣row, lēgo as, to send as an Ambassador à of allēgo to excuse by messengers. Ta∣men notwithstanding, haec brevia these short words ena∣ta being derived à longis of long words excipiuntur are excepted: ut as, Innŭba un∣married, pronūba a bride∣maid à nūbo derived of nu∣bo to be married, dejĕro to swear with a great oath, pjero to for swear à of juro to swear. Ex praepositio∣nibus of the prepositions, hae these ubique producuntur are every where made long; A, de, prae, se, e, nisi, except  sequente a vowel fol∣lowing [or when a vowel doth follow:] ut as, unda the water dehiscens divi∣ding it self with its [or his] own proper motion, Sudibusve praeustis or that kind of countrey spears, being burned at the end. Quoque also pro this preposition pr∣t is longa long, Praeter∣quam saving only in istis in these; Prŏcella a great storm (or tempest on the sea.) prŏtervus saucy, froward, prŏfugus a fugitive, or a wanderer, prŏnepos a ne∣phews son, prŏpago a li∣nage (or stock) pro for stir∣pe a descent of the stock, prŏ∣fanus wicked [or unholy,] prŏfiteor to profess, pr∣fundus deep high, prŏfi∣ciscor to proceed, prŏari to prophesie, prôpero to make haste, prŏfugio to fly fast a∣way, prŏfecto the thing pro∣ceeding [or one departed] [but with O grave it signifeith truly.] procurto to run before, profundo to pow out largely, propella to drive away [a fár off, or to drive forth] propullo to drive a∣way, propago, as, to cause to spread abroad, habent  priorem syllabam the first syllabel ancipitem doubtful
Prŏpheta a Prophet & and prŏpono to drink to sunt are Graeca Greek words [sub∣audi understand thou scripta the word scripta written] per o parvum with little O (which they call ) & and proinde therefore habent they have primam the first syllabel brevem short. Eti∣am also di the syllabel di pro∣ducitur is made long, nisi ex∣cept in dirimo in the word dirimo to break off, & and dĭsertus èloquet. Reliquae praepositiones the rest of the prepositions corripiuntur are made short, si if positio positi∣on sinat do suffer. Cujus∣modi sunt of which sort are ad to, ob for, ab from, sub un∣der, re in composition, &c. and so forth. Omne praeteritum every preterperfect tense dissylla∣bum of two syllabels habet hath priotem the former syl∣label longam long: ut as, lēgi I have read, ēmi I have bought. Tamen notwith∣standing excipias except fídi I have cleaved à of findô to cleave, bĭbi I drank, dĕdi I gave, scĭdi I have cut, stĕti I stood, tuli I have born or suf∣fered. Geminamia words dou∣bling priman the first sylla∣ble praeteriti of the preter∣perfect tense brevem shorts ut as, pēpendi I have weigh∣ed, tĕtendi I have stretched tŏtondi I have sheared, mŏ∣mordi I have bitten, pĕpendi I brake wind backward, tŭ∣tudi I have knocked, fĕfelli I have deceived, tĕtigi I have touched, pŭpugi I have prick∣ed, dĭdici I have learned, cŏ∣cidi I have fallen à of cado to fall, cĕcĭdi I have beaten (or cut) à of caedo to heat (or cut.) Et also quin moreover (that more is) supinum dis∣syllabum a supine of two syl∣labels quoque likewise pro∣ducit priorem maketh the former syllabel long: ut as, mōtum to move, lātum to bear or suffer, lōtum to wash, crētum to perceive. Excipe except thou quĭtum to may or can, lĭtum to dawbe (or smear) over, ĭtum to go, tŭ∣tum to rush, rătum to suppose, dătum to give, ătum to sowe, Et also cĭtum a of cieo, es,to trouble [of the second conjuga∣tion:] nam for as touching citum to trouble à cio cis of cio cis, quartae of the fourth conjugation, habet it hath priorem the former syllabel longam long.
Verò also quantitas the quantity quarum syllabarum of what syllabels non cadit doth not happen [or come] sub praedictas rationes under the aforesaid rules, petenda est it is to be sought [or fetched] à usu from the use, exemplo the example atque and autho∣ritate authority poetarum of Poets, certissima regula being the most certain rule om∣nium of all. Ergò therefore, discant pueri let boys learn observare to observe [or mark diligently] communes quan∣titates the common quantities primarum syllabarum of the first syllabels ex Poetis of Po∣ets. Cujus sortis of what man∣ner sort sunt are Britannus a man of Britan, Bythynus a man of Bythynia, Cacus a gyants name, Cosyra the name of an Iland [or Isle,] Crathys the name of two rivers, one in Greece, the other in Calaber, Pachinus a mountain in Sici∣ly, Palatium a Prince or Em∣perors court or palace, Pelion a hill in Thessaly, Criticus be that judgeth mens writings, Curetes spear-men, Diana Jupiters daughter, [an heu∣thetishgoddess,] Fidene a Town of the Sabines in Italy, Gra∣divus the name of Mars, hin∣nulus a little mule, Pyrene the name of a fountain, rubigo rust, Rutilius the name of di∣vers Romans, Hymen a song sung at a wedding, Italus a man of Italy, liquor moisture [or liquour,] liquidus moist, Lycas ingendred of a wolf and a dog, Orion Neptunes son, rudo to bray like an ass, Sychaerus Dido's husband, Sy∣canius a man of Sicily, & si∣milia and the like words. MEdiae syllabae middle syllabels possunt cog∣nosci may be known partim partly eadem ratione by the same way [or means] quâ by which primae the first [syllabels may be known,] etiam also partim partly ex incrementis from, or by the increases [or in∣creasings] genitivi of the geni∣tive case, atque and analogiâ from the proportion conjuga∣tionis of the conjugation. Ar∣bitramur dictum we think [or judge] it to have been spo∣ken abunde abundantly suprà before in generibus nomi∣num in the genders of nouns de incrementis concerning the increasings genitivi of the genitive case nominum poly∣syllabarum of nouns of many syllabels, unde from whence li∣cebit
it shall be lawful petere to seek [or fetch direction] si quid haesitaveris if you shall doubt anything de hac re con∣cerning this matter. Frequens lectio the often reading & and observatio the diligent obser∣vation optimorum poetarum of the best poets facile suppe∣ditabunt will easily furnish us with caetera the residu, Pueri didicerunt boys have learn∣ed analogiam conjugatio∣nis the proportion of the con∣jugation ex imbibitis rudi∣mentis from the first princi∣ples [or instructions] conceived [or understood,] nempe that is to wit, a the letter a, indi∣cem a sign [or token] primae conjugationis of the first con∣jugation esse to be longam long naturâ by nature, prae∣terquam in do saving only in the verb do to give, & and ejus compositis in the com∣pounds of that verb [or in his compounds,] quando when sunt they are hujus conjuga∣tionis of this conjugation: ut as, Damus we give, circun∣dămus we compass about; dă∣bis thou shalt give, circundăbis thou shalt compass about; dă∣re to give, circundăre to com∣pass about. Praeterea further∣more, animadvertant let them mark diligently syllabas ri∣mus & ritis the syllabels ri∣mus and ritis ubique haben∣das every where to be taken [or accounted] pro brevibus for short in praeterito perfe∣cto, in the preterperfect tense modi subjunctivi of the sub∣junctive mood, autem but de∣bere that they ought esse to be longas long in future, in the future tense in prosa oratione in prose [or that which is no meter:] verò but reperiti indifferntes that they are to be found indifferent in carmi∣ne in verse, quemadmodum even as Aldus the Grammari∣an contendit affirms [or proves;] ut as, praeterito in the preterperfect tense amavé∣rimus when we have loved, amaveritis when ye have lov∣ed: futuro in the future tense, amaverímus when we shall or will love, amaveritis when ye shall or will love. Et also est there is a time ubi when me∣diae syllabae the middle sylla∣bles, variant do vary apud poetas among poets: ut as, in his in these quae which sub∣junximus we have set under: connubium wedlock, ficedu-la agnat-snapper, Malea a promontory by Laconia, Phar∣salia a countrey of Thssaly,
Batavus a man of Holland, Sydonius a man of Sydon, & and similia the like words. Latina adjectiva Latin adjectives in inus ending in i∣nus, producunt penultimam do make long the last syllabel saving one: ut as, clandestî∣nus secret, mediastîmus a slave, parietînus of a decayed watt, matutinus belonging to the morning, vespertinus be∣longing to the evening, repen∣us sudden. Praeter except hae sequentia these adjectives following. Diutĭnus long con∣tinuing, crastĭnus appertain∣ing to tomorrow, pristĭnus ancient, perendĭnus belonging to the next day after tomor∣row (or of the third day after) hornotĭmis of a year old, sero∣nus that is in the evening, oleagĭnus of an olive-tree, fa∣gĭnus of a beh-tree, cedrĭ∣nus of a cedar-tree, carbasĭnus of fine linnen, Et and reliqua materialia the residue of the nouns signifying matter, five or in inus words ending in inus, formata formed a no∣minibus metallerum of the name of metals, qualia sunt of what sort are permulta very many deducta derived à Graecis vocibus in inos of Greek words in inos; ut as, Cristallĭnus of Cristal, my∣rhĭnus of myrrhe, hyacinthĭ∣nus of a jacinth stone, āda∣mantĭnus of an adamant stone, &c and so forth. Usus use & and observatio diligent marking poetarum of the po∣ets foelicius docebit will more happily teach caetera the other words (or the rest) quàm than ullae regulae any rules Gram∣maticorum of Grammarians, quas which solent thae are wont tradere to teach de quautitate concerning the quantity mediarum syllaba∣rum of middle syllabels, aut either fine ullo modo without any measure aut fine or end. Quare wherefore illis praeter∣missis those being passed over, jam accingamut let us now prepare our selves ad aperien∣das quantitates to open (or declare) the quantities ulti∣marum syllabarum of the last syllabels. QUanquam although ul∣timae syllabae the last syl∣lablis aut either aequant do match, aut etiam superant or do moreover exceed nume∣rum ipsum the very number literarum of the letters, tamen notwithstanding non pigebit it shall not irk us etiam also
perourrere ilias to run them over ordine in order. Primum first of all a finita words end∣ing in a producuntur are made long: ut as, Amā love thou, contrā against, ergā to∣wards. Excipias thou mayest except pută that is to say, it s, quiă because. Item also nominativos the nominative cases in a ending in a, cujus∣cunque genoris of whatsoe∣ver gender, numeri number, aut or declinationis declensi∣on fuerine they shall be, prae∣ter vocativos except the voca∣tive cases in a ending in a, à Graecis of the Greek words in as ending in as: ut as, Ô Ae∣neā O Aeneas,  Thomā O Thomas; & also ablativum the ablative case primae decli∣nationis of the first declension: ut as, ab hac muā from this song. Numeralia words of number in ginta ending in ginta, habent have finalem the syllabel at the end commu∣nem common, (that is to say, both long and short,) sed but frequentiùs more often lon∣gam long: ut as, trigintā thirty, quadragintā forty, Desinentia words ending in b, d, t, brevia sunt are short: ut as, ăb from, d to, capŭt an head. Desinentia inc words ending in the latter  produ∣cuntu are made long ut as āc and, ic so & and adverbi∣um hic the adverb hic here. Sed but tria in c three words ending in  semper contra∣huntur are always contracted ut as, ăc milk, nĕc neither donĕc until. Duo two words sunt communia are common, sic do thou, & and pronomen hic the pronoun hic signifying this, or that; & and neutrum hoc the neuter hoc this, on that, modo so that now sit it be not ablativi casus of the ablative case. E finita words ending in e brevia sunt are short: ut as, marĕ the sea almost, legĕ road thou. Omnes voces all words quintae in∣flectionis of the fifth declan∣sion in e ending in e sunt ex∣cipiendae are to be excep ut as, diē in the day, sidē the ablative case of sides faith unà together cum advere with the adverbs enatis ibde sprung from thence (or derived of them) ut as, holi to day, quotidiē dayly, prid the day before, postridiē the day after, quarē for what cause (or wherefore,) qua de rē where∣fore,) ea rē for that cause (or therefore,) & and siqua sunt similia if there be any like
them. Et item and also, secun∣dae perionae singulares the second persons singular secun∣dae conjugationis of the se∣cond conjugation imperativo∣tum of the imperative moods activorum of verbs activte: ut as, Docē teach thou, movē move thou, manē tarry thou, cavē take thou heed; Etiam also monosyllaba in e words, of one syllabel in e producun∣tur are made long: ut as, mē me, tē thee, ē a syllabel ad∣ded to words [as hiccē.] prae∣ter except quĕ and, or both, nĕ whether, vĕ or [or either] con∣junctiones encliticas the con∣junctions enclitical. Quin & yea, and that more is [or more over] quoque also adverbia adverbs inc ending in c, de∣ducta derived ab adjectivis of adjectives habent have e the letter e longum long: ut as, pulchre goodly [beautifully,] doctē learnedly, valdē pro for validē mightily. Quibus un∣to which fermē & and ferē the adverbs, fermè and ferè, signifying almost accedunt are added. Tamen notwithstand∣ing benĕ well, & and malĕ ill omnino corripiuntur are made short alway [or altoge∣ther.] Postremo last of all, [finally,] quae words which scribuntur are written per with the Greek letter nà Grae∣cis of the Greeks producun∣tur are made long naturâ by nature cujuscunque casus of whatsoever case, generis gen∣der, aut ornumeri number fu∣erint they shall be: ut as, Le∣thē a river of Hell [feigned by the poets] causing forgetfulness Anchisē the father of Aane cetē pl. num. n. g. as, cete im∣mania great whales, Tempē a fair field in Thessaly. I finita words ending in i longa sunt are long: ut as, Domini of a lord, magistri of a master, a∣marī to be loved, docerī to be taught. Praeter except mihi to me, tibi to thee, sibi to him∣self [or themselves,] ubi where or when, ibi there, quae which sunt are communia common, Verò but nisĭ except & and quasĭ as it were corripiuntur are made short: cujus sortis of which sort [or manner] eti am also sunt are dativi & vo∣cativi the dative and vocative cases Graecorum of the Greeks quorum genitive singularis whose genitive case singular exit in os endeth in os breve being short: ut as, huic Pal∣ladi to Minerva [the feigned goddess of wisdom,] Phillidi to Phillis [Licurgus daughter]
Minoidito Minois [the daugh∣ter of Minos King of Cretes:] vocativo in the vocative case Ô Amarillĭ O Amarillis, Ô A∣lexĭ O Alexis, Ô Daphnĭ O Daphnis. L finita words end∣ing in I, corripiuntur are made short, ut as, animăl a living creature [that hath life and sense,] Hannibăl a Car∣thaginian captain, mĕl hony, pugil a champion, săl salt, consŭl a consul. Praeter nil except the word nil contra∣ctum a contracted word à of nihil signifying nothing, & and Sōl the Sun. Et also He∣braea quaedam certain He∣brew words in  ending in : ut as, Michaēl a name of Christ, [signifying, Who like God?] [when men are so na∣med, there it is another meaning of the word,] Gabriēl the name of an Angel, Raphaēl the name of an Angel, Daniēl the name of a Prophet. N fi∣nita words ending in n pro∣ducuntur are made long: ut as, Paān one name of Apollo, Hymen the feigned God of mar∣riage, quīn but [or but that,] Xenophon the name of a man so called, nōn no [or not,] dae∣mōn a devil. Excipe except thou forsăn per adventure, for∣sit ān per adventure, ăn whe∣ther, tamĕn notwithstanding, attam ĕn but yet [or notwith∣standing,] veruntamĕn ne∣vertheless. Et also in the prepo∣sition in corripitur is made short cum compositis with his compounds: ut as, exĭn from henceforth, or afterward subĭn ever now and then, deĭn afterward, proĭn therefore. Et also illae voces these words ac∣cedunt his are added to these quae which castrantur are cut short per apocopen by the fi∣gure Apocope: ut as, mĕn' what, me? vidĕn' dost thou not see? audĭn' dost thou not hear? nemŏn is there no bo∣dy? Item also nomina in en nouns ending in en, quoram genitivus whose genitive case habet inis correptum hath inis made short: ut as, carmĕn a verse [or song,] cri∣mĕn a fault, pectĕn a comb. tibicĕn a player on the flute, make ĭnis in the genitive case. Etiam also Graeca Greek words in on ending in on, per o parvum written with little o, cujuscunque casus fuerinc of whatsoever case they shall be: ut as, iliŏn one name of the city Troy, Peliŏn an hill in Thessaly, nominativo in the nominative case: Cauca∣sŏn the name of a mountain,
Pylŏn the name of a town where Nestor was born, ac∣cusativo in the accusative case. Etiam also quaedam some nouns  in ending in in, ut as, Alexin Alexis, (the name of divers men.) In yn ending in yn: ut as Ityn Itys, (the son of Tereus and Pro∣gne,) Quoque also in an words ending in an, a no∣minativis in a of the nomi∣native case ending in a: ut as, nominativo in the nomi∣native case, Iphigenia Aga∣num daughter, Aegina the daughter of Aesopus a certain King, Accusativo in the accusative cases, Iphigeni∣ăn Aeginn, Nam in an and as touching words ending in an (Holyoke so consteueth the word nam) à nominativis in as of the nominative cases ending in as; producuntur are made long: ut as nominati∣vo in the nominative case Ae∣neas a noble man of Troy, Marsyas the name of a famous Historiographer. Accusativo in the accusative case, Aene∣ān Marsyān. O finita words ending in o, communia sunt are common; ut as, amo to love, Virgo a virgin, porrò moreover, docendo in touch∣ing: legendo in reading, eun∣do in going, & and aliae vo∣ces other voices gerundii in do of the gerund in do (or other words being gerunds in do) [But yet remember that adjectives like gerunds are only made long] Praeter except obliquos in o the ob∣lique cases ending in o, qui which semper producuntur are always made long: ut as, huic Dominō to this Lord, subaudi huic understand this word huic) servō to this ser∣vant. Ab hoc templō from this Temple, (subaudi ab hoc understand these words ab hoc) damnō from this loss. Et also adverbia adverbs de∣rivata derived ab adjectivis of adjectives ut as, tantō by so much, quantō by how much, liquid clearly, falsō falsly, primō first & formost, manifestō plainly or clearly, &c. Praeter except sedulò di∣ligently, mutuò mutually, cre∣bro frequently (or often,) se∣rò late in the evening, quae which communia sunt are common. Caeterum but yet modŏ now of late, & and quo∣modŏ how corripiuntur are made short semper always. Quoque also cito quickly ut & as also, ambo both, duo two, ego I, atque also, homo
a man or woman, vix legun∣tur producta are scarcely read (made) long, Tamen yet mo∣nosyllaba in o words of one syllabel in o producuntur are made long: ut as, dō to give, sto to stand, ut & as also ergō pro causa for a cause. Item also Graeca Greek words per ω written with great O subaudi producuntur are made long, cujuscunque ca∣sus of whatsoever case fuerint they shall be: ut as, haec Sapphō this Sappho (a famous Poetress) haec Didò this Dido (the daughter of Pelus King of Tyre:) hujus Androgeō of this Androgius (the son of Mi∣nos King of Crete,) hujus A∣pollō of this Apollos,(the name of a man:) hunc Athō this Athos (a wonderful high hill in Thracia,) hunc Apollō this apollo [for Apollona, as Dis∣pauter writes, of  as Also Camden in his Greek Grā∣mar:] (the name of the feigned heathenish god of wisdom.) R finita words ending in r corripiuntur are made short: ut as, Caesăr the sirname of the Julians in Rome, torçu∣lăr a wine press, pĕr by, vĭr a man, uxŏr a wife, turtŭr a bird called a turtle. Cor the heart semel legitur is once read productum made long apud Ovidium by Ovid ut as, Meum molle cōr my soft heart violabile est is to be broken, or hurt levi∣bus telis with light darts, or slender weapons. Etiam also subaudi haec verba understand thse words, producuntur are made long, Lār a god of the houshold, city, or fields, (as heathen people believed.) Nār, a river running into Tyber, vēr the spring, fūr a thief, cūr wherefore. Quoque also pār equal, or like cum com∣positis with his compounds: ut as compār equal, impar unequal, dispār unlike. Grae∣ca quaedam certain Greek words in er ending in er, quas illis that among them desi∣nunt in , d end in : ut as for example, Aer the air, cratēr a great cup (or gob∣let,) character a mark, sign, seal or print of a thing, aether the firmament or skie,  saviour. Praeter except pater a father, & and mater a mo∣ther, quae which apud Lati∣nos among the Latinists (or Latin Authors,) habent ul∣timam have the last syllabel brevem short. s finita words ending in the letter s, habent have pares termina∣tiones
the like terminations (or endings) cum numero vocalium with the number of the vowels, nempe that is to wit, As, es, is, os, us, Pri∣mo first and formost, As fi∣nita words ending in as pro∣ducuntur are made long: ut as, amās thou lovest musās songs, majestas majesty (or honourable dignity,) bonitās goodness. Praeter except Graeca Greek words quorum of which genitivus singu∣laris the genitive case singu∣lar [or whose genitive case sin∣gular] exit in dos doth end in dos: ut as, Archăs the son of Jupiter, Pallăs Mi∣nerva (the goddess of wis∣dom;) genitivo in the ge∣nitive case Archadŏs, Palla∣dŏs. Et also, praeter except accusativos plurales the ac∣cusative cases plural nomi∣num crescentium of nouns increasing: ut as, Heros a no∣ble man Heroŏs in the geni∣tive case. Phillis King Ly∣curgus his daughter, Phillidŏs in the genitive case. Accusa∣tivo plurali in the accusative case plural Heroăs, Philli∣dăs. Es finita words ending in es longa sunt are long: ut as, Anchisēs Aeneas father, sedēs thou fittest, docēs thou teachest, patrēs fathers, No∣mina in es nouns ending in es, tertiae inflectionis being of the third declension excipi∣untur are excepted, quae cor∣ripiunt which do make short penultimam the last syllabel saving  genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing; ut as, milĕs a souldier, segĕs standing corn, divĕs rich: Sed but ariēs a ram, abiēs a fir-tree, pariēs a wall of an house, Cerēs the feigned god∣dess of corn; & also pēs a foot, unà together cum compositis with the compounds of it: ut as, prepēs light in flying (or swift,) bipēs having two feet, tripēs having three feet, qua∣drupes having four feet (or four footed,) sunt longa are long. Quoque also es the verb es à sum coming of the verb sum to be corripitur is made short, unà together cum compositis with his com∣pounds: ut as potĕs thou canst (or art able,) adĕs thou are present, prodĕs thou pro∣fitest [or art profitable,] obĕs thou hinderest [or hurtest.] Quibus to which words pe∣nĕs in the power potest may adjungi be adjoyned [or an∣nexed] unà together cum neutris with words of the
nuter gender, ac and nomi∣nativis pluralibus to the no∣minative cases plural Graeco∣rum of the Greeks: ut as, Hippomanĕs a venemous hu∣mour coming from a mare, cacoethĕs an evil custom, Cyclôpĕs gyants with one eye, Naidĕs fairies haunting rivers and fountains. Is fini∣ta words ending in is brevia sunt are short: ut as, Parĭs Priamus [King of Troy] his son, panĭs bread, tristĭs sad, hilarĭs merry. Excipe except obliquos plurales the oblique cases plural in is ending in is, qui which producuntur are made long: ut as, Musis the dative or ablative case plural of musa a song [or of Musae the Muses,] [which were feigned goddesses of learning,] mensis the dative or ablative plural of mensa a table, domi∣nis the dative or ablative plu∣ral of dominus a lord, tem∣plis the dative or ablative plural of templum a Church. Item also queīs pro for qui∣bus the dative or ablative of qui which, cum producenti∣bus with words making long penultimam the last syllabel saving one genitivi crescentis of the genitive case increasing ut as, Samnīs a Samnite, Sala∣mīs anle by Athens, geniti∣vo in the genitive case Sam∣nîtis, Salamînis. Adde huic add hither [or to this place] quae words which dosinunt do end in diphthongum is in the diphthong eis, ie Graeca whether they be Greek words sive Latina or Latin, cujus∣cunque numeri of whatsoever number aut casus or case fue∣rint they shall be: ut as, Sy∣mocīs a river in Troy, Pyro∣cīsone of the horses of the sun, parteīs put for partes the parts, omneis put for omnes all. Et item and also omnia monosyllaba all words; of one syllabel: ut as, vis strength, power or force, līs strife, or contention, praeter nominati∣vos except these nominative cases ĭs signifying he & and quĭs who, & also bĭs twice a∣pud Ovidium in Ovid. Se∣cundae personae singulares the second person singular ver∣borum in is of verbs ending in is, accedunt istis are added to these, quorum secundae personae plurales whose se∣cond persons  desinunt in itis do end , penul∣timâ the last syllabel saving one producta being made long, unà together cum futu∣ris with the fure tenses sub∣junctivi.
in is of the sub∣junctive mood in is: ut as, audis thou hearest, velis thou mayest or canst be willing, de∣deris thou shalt or wilt give pluraliter plurally (or in the plural number,) audîtis ye hear, velîtis ye may or can be willing, dederîtis when ye shall or will give. Os finita words ending in os producun∣tur are made long: ut as, ho∣nos honour, nepōs a nephew, Dominōs lords, servos ser∣vants. Praeter except com∣pŏs he that hath ability or power in something, impŏs that is unable (not having power,) & and ŏs ossis a bone Et also Graeca Greek words per o parvum written with little o: ut as, Delŏs an Isle in the Aegean sea, where A∣pollo and Diana were born, Chaŏs a confused heap of all things, whereof poets concei∣ved all things to have come in the beginning, Palladŏs the genitive case of Pallas, Miner∣va, Phyllidŏs the genitive case of Phyllis King Lycur∣gus daughter s finita words ending in  orripiuntur are made short: ut as, famulŭs an houshold man-servant, regiŭs royal, tempŭs time, amamŭs we love. Producentia words making long penultimam the last syllabel saving one genitivi crescentis of the ge∣nitive case increasing excipi∣untur are excepted: ut as, salūs a saluting (or health,) tellūs the earth (the ground) genitivo in the genitive case salûtis, tellûris. Etiam al∣so omnes voces all words quartae inflectionis of the fourth declension in us ending in us, sunt longa are long, praeter except nominativum & vocativum singulares the nominative and the vocative case singular: ut as, hujus manus of this hand, hae ma∣nus these hands, Ô manus O hands. Etiam also mo∣nosyllaba words of one syl∣label accedunt his are ad∣ded to these: ut as, Crūs the leg, (from the knee to the ankle,) thūs frankincense, mūs a mouse, sūs a sow, &c, and so forth. Et item and also, Graeca Greek words per diphthongum  with the diphthong ous, cujus∣cunque casus fuerint of whatsoever case they shall be: ut as, hic panthūs this Pan∣thus, (a Trojan, the son of O∣treus,) Melampūs a famous Soothsayer: Hujus Sapphūs of this Sappho (a great Poe∣tress,)
Cliūsthe genitive case of Clio being the name of one of the Muses. Atque and nomen JESUS the name JESƲS venerandum that is worthy to be reverenced, (or ought, or is to be reverenced) piis cunctis of all godly (or religious) per∣sons. Postremò last of all om∣nia ufinita all words ending in u, producuntur are made long: ut as, manū the abla∣tive case of manus an hand, genū a knee, amatū to be lo∣ved, diū a long time, (or long time of continuance.) Finis Grammatices the end of the Grammar.
