L600 09863718 44285
A SUMMARIE OF DEVOTIONS, Compiled and Used by Dr WILLIAM LAUD, Sometime Ld Arch-Bishop of CANTERBVRY. Now Published according to the Copy written with his own hand, and reserved in the Archives of St. Iohn Baptist's Colledge Library in OXON. OXFORD, Printed by William Hall, Anno Dom. 1667.
Imprimatur, GILBERTUS CANT. Dat. Lambe∣thae Dec. 12. 1666. Imprimatur, IOHAN. FELL. Vicecan. Oxon. Dec. 28. 1666.
Et Conversus vivificasti me. Psal: 70. 20. O Come hither and hear∣ken all ye that fear God, and I will tell you what he hath done for my Soul. Psal. 66. 16. Pater noster Laesus est,Oratio Domini∣ca. sed Pater. Qui es in Coelis Eminenter,Gerson ali∣er: par. 3. pa 1147. non Inclusive. Sanctificetur In me, per me, super me. Nomen tuum. Patris in nobis, ut simus filii Pa∣tris nostri.
Adveniat Reg∣num tuum. Ut destruatur Regnum Peccati, per quod regnant Mors & Diabo∣lus. Fiat voluntas tua, sicut in Caelo, & in Terra. In me, qui sum Terra, sicut a sanctis Angelis. Panem Super Caelestem & Corporeum. Nostrum Proprium, li∣cite acquisitum. Quotidianum da nobis hodie. Pro quotidiana necessitate. Et remitte nobis debita, sicut &c. Talenta dimit∣te nobis Minuta remittentibus. Et ne nos indu∣cas in tentationē: Nec sinas intrare ductos pronos{que}.
Sed libera nos a Mal. Ab authore ma∣li extra nos, Di∣abolo & Mundo; Intra nos, Nobis∣ipsis: Et a malo Culpae, per Gra∣tiam; Poenae, per Misericordiam: Omni, per Pacē. Quia tuum est Regnum Potentia Absolutum in se, Independens ab aliis. Gloria: Circumfulgens omnia & in om∣nibus. Tuum. Et a Te, & per Te, & ad Te, in gloria & salute servorum tuorum AMEN.
The Pre∣face.OUr Father, which art in Heaven, Petitions.1. Hallowed be thy Name. 2. Thy Kingdome come. 3. Thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. 4. Give us this day our dai∣ly bread. 5. And forgive us our tres∣passes, as we forgive them that trespass against us. 6. And lead us not into temp∣tation. 7. But deliver us from evil. The Do∣xologie.For thine is the Kingdome, the Power, and the Glory, for ever and ever. Amen.
Symbolum Apostolicum divisum in Articulos. 1 I Believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of Hea∣ven and Earth. 2. And in Iesus Christ, his only Son our Lord. 3. Who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary. 4. He suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead, and buried. 5. He descended into Hell, the third day he rose again from the dead. 6. He ascended into Heaven, and sitteth on the right hand of God the Father Almighty.
7. From thence he shall come to judge the Quick and the Dead. 8. I believe in the Holy Ghost. 9. The Holy Catholicke Church, The Communion of Saints. 10. The Forgiveness of Sins. 11. The Resurrection of the Body: 12. And the Life Everlast∣ing. AMEN.
Officium Quotidianum. In nomine Patris, & Filii, & Spiritus Sancti. AMEN. O Lord, I am risen up,Pro Gra∣tia Prae∣veniente. Liturg. Anglic. and fallen prostrate before thee: Prevent me, I beseech thee, in all my doings with thy most gra∣cious Favour, and further me with thy continual Help; that in all my Works begun, continued, and ended in thee, I may glori∣fie thy Holy Name, and finally by thy mercy obtain Everlasting Life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Confessio cum pre∣catione. Per L. A. W.ALmighty God and most Merciful Father, all Mer∣ciful, Mercy it selfe; I have er∣red wittingly, and strayed will∣ingly, nay Runne from thy wayes, more like an untamed Heifer, then a lost or wandring Sheep. I have followed too much, even altogether, the absurd devi∣ces and brutish desires of my own heart. I have offended a∣gainst, nay been offended at thy holy, most holy Lawes. I have left undone, not done at all, those things which I ought to have done. And I have done, done no∣thing else, but those things which I ought not to have done. And there is no health, no hope of
health in me. But thou, O Lord, have mercy upon me, misera∣ble, most miserable sinner, the greatest sinner, and most unthank∣full for so great Grace. Spare me, and them all, O God, which confess their faults. Restore me, and all them that be penitent, that desire to be penitent, that wish they were, would be glad if they were so, that fear they are not enough, and are sorry they are no more: For this is accor∣ding to thy Promises, most preti∣ous, most gratious, most sweet Promises, declared unto mankind in Christ Iesu our Lord. Grant therefore, O most merciful Fa∣ther, for his sake, who is our Re∣deemer, Advocate, Author and
Finisher of our Faith, our Pro∣pitiation, Righteousness, and Ju∣stification; that I and all Peni∣tents may hereafter live a God∣ly, Righteous, and Sober life, to the Glory of thy Holy Name, and the Salvation of our own Souls. Amen. Pro Re∣missione Peccato∣rum.O Eternal God and merci∣ful Father; Pardon, I beseech thee, all the Sins, Omissions, and Commissions, Thoughts, Words, and Deeds, by which I have provoked thee unto anger, from the time of my Birth to this present moment: That no one, nor all of my sins together, may ever be able to cry oftner or lowder in thine ears for venge∣ance,
then the Cry of my Pray∣ers may ascend up unto thee for mercy and for forgiveness, and obtain that they sue for. Parti∣cularly I humbly beseech thee, forgive unto me my Great and my Clamorous sins, such as are, &c. O Lord, against Heaven, and against Thee have I sinned, and committed foule Transgressions in thy sight, but I beseech thee wipe them all out of the Book of Remembrances which thou hast written, through Iesus Christ our Lord and only Savi∣our. Amen.
Pro Do∣nis.GIve unto me, O Lord, I humbly beseech thee, a wise, a sober, a patient, an understan∣ding, a devout, a religious, a cou∣ragious Heart: Chast, and tem∣perate reynes, and thoughts: A soul full of devotion to do thee service, strength against all temp∣tations, especially the tempta∣tions of &c. Through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Gratia∣rum A∣ctio.O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks, (increase my thankfulness, I beseech thee) for all benefits and blessings both Spiritual and Temporal, which in the riches of thy great mercy thou hast liberally powred down
upon me, but especially Spiri∣tual. Lord, let me not live, but to praise and magnify Thee and thy glorious Name. Particularly I give thee most unseigned thanks for my preservation from the time of my birth to this present moment; for &c. For bringing me safe to the beginning of this day, in which and all the days of my life, I beseech thee, preserve me from sin, and from danger, in Soul, and in Body, that all my thoughts, words, and works may tend to the honour and glory of thy Name, the good of thy Church, the discharge of my Du∣ty, the salvation of my Soul in the day of my appearance and account to be made before thee,
through Iesus Christ, our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. Pro Ec∣clesia Ca∣tholica.O Eternal God and merciful Father, I humbly beseech thee, Bless thy Holy Catholick Church, wheresoever spread up∣on the face of the whole Earth: Good Lord, purge it from all Atheisme, Heresy, Schisme, Su∣perstition, Factious maintenance of Groundless Opinions; that one Faith, one Lord, one Baptisme may in all places be uniformly professed, as thy Church is, and can be but one. And grant, Good Lord, that I may be, and conti∣nue a faithful, living, and a working member under Christ the Head, in that Church the
Body, all the dayes of my life, and through the hour of my death, through the Merits, and by the Grace of the same Iesus Christ, our Lord and only Sa∣viour. Amen. O Merciful God,Pro Ec∣clesia Particu∣lari. bless this Particular Church, in which I live: make it and all the mem∣bers of it sound in Faith, and ho∣ly in Life, that they may Serve thee, and thou Bless them, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Pro Rege.LOrd, bless our most gratious Soveraigne, treasure up in Him all thy hidden Blessings; make him, and keep him a de∣voted Servant to Thee, a con∣stant Patron of the Church and Truth, that He may live long, and be full of honourable success all his daies, in his Person, in his Actions, in his Queen, in his Children, in his Servants, in his People, and crown'd with Glory after life, and in that good time that shall be best both for Him and Us, make him a joyful Fa∣ther of happy and successful Children: Under him bless the whole State Ecclesiastical and Civil, that Righteousness and
Peace may kiss each other, and we serve and honour thee for ever. Amen. GOod Lord,Pro Ami∣cis & Consan∣guineis. bless all the pla∣ces to which thou hast made me have any nearer Reference, the place where I was borne, &c: Every Soul contained in any of these. All my Friends, Kindred, Acquaintance, any unto whom thou hast made me any way be∣holding; especially my nearer and my bosom Friends, Dr, &c. All those &c. Lord I beseech thee, forgive me and them all our sins, and continue us thy ser∣vants both in Life and Death. A∣men.
Pro Ser∣vis.GRacious Father, bless my Servants and make them thine. Give them Grace to serve thee first, then me with Faithfulness, Soberness, and Di∣ligence: Make me ever willing, and in some measure able to repay unto them the time and the strength, which they either have or shall spend to do me Service, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Pro Af∣flictis.O Lord, bless all the Affli∣cted members of the body of thy Son, wheresoever, how∣soever afflicted; Send them con∣stant Patience or speedy Delive∣rance, as seems best to thee and
is best for them, according to their several wants and necessi∣ties whatsoever; (particularly, &c.) And do unto them accor∣ding to all those mercies, which I would or should desire thou shouldst shew to my own Soul,S. Aug. 2. cont. Advers: Leg. & Prophet. cap. 2. if at any time thou shalt be plea∣sed to make my estate as their's is at this present. And, O Lord, be merciful. Amen. BLessed Father,Pro Om∣nibus, e∣tiam Ini∣micis. bless all sorts of men in their Particulars; mine Enemies with the Forgiveness of sins: Turn their hearts that they may no longer hate thy Servant, and if they will not be turned, deliver me not over I beseech thee into their Power. And next after
the Salvation of my Soul, I hum∣bly beg it, deliver me not into the hands of men, to the shame or scorne of the World. Amen. Submissio mei.O Domine Jesu! Da quod ja∣bes, & jube quod vis. Facias animam meam paratam in adven∣tum tuum, veni quando vis. Des mihi ad minimum sufficientem, si placet pacatissimam patientiam, & veni quomodo vis, O Tu, qui Salus es omnium sperantium in Te. Et in super interpone obsecro, O Do∣mine Jesu, Mortem, Crucem, Pas∣sionem, Meritum & Sanguinem tu∣um inter Iudicium tuum & Animam meam, nunc & semper, & praecipue in hora mortis meae.Hora Mortis. Quae mors (obnixe precor) nunquam sit subitanea, nun∣quam
adveniat & inveniat me im∣paratum; nunquam ita adveniendo saeviat, quin ut retineam Fidem, Spem, & Charitatem, memoriam & intellectum Sanum us{que} ad extre∣mum halitum. Et esto mihi in De∣um Protectorem. Des peccatis meis Misericordiam & Veniam, Eccle∣siae tuae Pacem & Concordiam, mihi peccatorum primo Gratiam in hac vita & Gloriam in futura. Ita, ita venias, O Domine Jesu, & mise∣rere mei. Amen. Lord, here I am, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes; only give mee, I humbly beseech thee, a Penitent and a Patient spirit to expect thee. Amen.
Lord make my Service accep∣table to thee while I live, and my Soul ready for thee when I die. Amen. Our Father, which art in Hea∣ven, &c.
SUNDAY. O Lord,Hora 1. i.e. Mane. by thy mercy I am risen out of my Grave where I might have slept in death, but that thou preservedst me. Make it, I beseech thee, a Resurrection to Grace in this Life, and to Glory in the Life to come, through Iesus Christ, who merited both for us. Amen. This day by the Resurrection of thy Son our blessed Saviour was made Holy to us: Give me that Grace that I may keep it Holy to thee, through Iesus Christ. Amen. O send out thy Light an thyPsal. 43. 3,4.
Truth that they may lead me, and bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to thy Dwelling; that I may goe unto the Altar of thee, O my God, even the God of my joy and gladness, and give thanks un∣to thee. Amen. Domin. 2. post E∣piph.Almighty and everlasting God, who governest all things both in Heaven and Earth; Mercifully hear my supplications for my selfe and all thy people: & grant us thy peace all the days of our life, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Ad vent. Dom. 1.Almighty God, I humbly be∣seech thee, give me grace to cast away the works of darkness, and to put on the Armour of light now in the time of this mortal
life, (in which thy Son Christ Ie∣sus came to visit us in great hu∣mility;) that in the last day, when he shall come again in his glori∣ous Majesty, to judge both the quick and the dead, I with all thy faithfull servants may rise up to the life immortal, through him who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, now and for ever. Amen. Blessed God,Domin. 2. which hast cau∣sed all holy Scriptures to be written for our learning; Grant unto me and all Christians, that we may in such wise hear, read, mark, learn, and inwardly di∣gest them, that by patience and comfort thereof, we may em∣brace and ever hold fast the
blessed hope of everlasting Life, which thou hast given us in our Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. Dom. 4.Lord, I humbly beseech thee, raise up thy power and come a∣mong us, and with great might succour us: that whereas by our Sins we are sore let and hinder∣ed, thy bountiful Grace and Mer∣cy, through the satisfaction of thy Son our Lord, may peedily deliver us; To whom, with Thee and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory, world without end. Amen. Hor. 3. sive ona Matutina. Psal. 34. 7, 8.Lord, let thine Angels tarry round about me, and deliver me: that I may tast and see how gra∣cious thou my Lord art, and how blessed the man is that trusteth in
thee; through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. I will wait for thy loving-kindness,Psal. 48. 9. O God, in the midst of thy Temple, and there will I praise thee. Amen. Lord,Psal. 63. 3. let me behold thee in thy Sanctuary, and there see thy Power and Glory. For thy lo∣ving-kindness is better then life, therefore my lips shall praise thee. Thus will I magnifie thee all my life, and lift up my hands in thy Name. O! satisfie me with that Riches of Mercy which is in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O how amiable are thy Dwel∣lings,Psalm. 84. 1. thou Lord of Hosts? My Soul hath a desire and a longing
to enter into the Courts of thee, O Lord; my heart and my flesh rejoyceth in thee, O merciful God. Amen. Domin. 1. post E∣piph.Lord, I humbly beseech thee to hear and accept my prayers for my self, and for thy people which call upon thee; and grant that we may perfectly know what things we ought to do, and also have grace and power faith∣fully to fulfil the same, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Domin. 3. post Epiph.Almighty & everlasting God, mercifully look upon all my in∣firmities; and in all dangers and adversities, stretch out thy right hand to help and defend me, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
God,Domin. 4 post E∣piph. thou which knowest us to be set in the midst of so many and great dangers, that for mans frailty we cannot always stand upright; Grant, I most hum∣bly beseech thee, to me the health of body and soul, that all those things which I suffer for sin, I may by thy help well pass and overcome, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Hora 6. i. Meri∣die. the sun is at height for this day upon me, but lift up the light of thy counte∣nance, and I shall be whole. Make all darkness and spiritual shadows short upon me, and shorter in me, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Psal. 19. 12, 13.Who can tell how oft he of∣fendeth, O cleanse thou me from my Secret sins; Keep me also, O Lord, from Presumptuous sins,Praesum∣ptio. least they get the Dominion over me: And keep me innocent from the Great offence, I humbly be∣seech thee. Amen. Psal. 84. 4.Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, they will be alway praising thee. Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, in whose heart are thy ways. Lord, thus bless the heart of thy ser∣vant, or Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Nazianz Orat. 13. Charitas.O Sancta, adoranda, & longani∣mis Trinitas! Longanimis e∣nim es, quae eos a quibus scinderis,
tam diu toleras. O Trinitas, cujus ego ut cultor ac minime fictus praeco essem, jam pridem dignus habitus sum: O Trinitas omnibus aliquando vel per Illuminationem vel per Poe∣nam agnoscenda! Oro te, ut hos quo∣que qui nunc contumeliis te affici∣unt, adoratores accipias, ne quis∣quam vel ex minimis pereat; Et hoc, etiamsi mihi propterea aliqua Gratiae jactura facienda sit. Ne{que} enim tantum dicere audeo, quan∣tum Apostolus. Concede autem hoc per & propter merita Jesu Christi Redemptoris nostri. Amen. ALmighty God,Domin. Pasch. who through thine only begotten Son Ie∣sus Christ, hast overcome Death, and opened to us the gate of E∣verlasting
Life: I humbly beseech thee,Pro Gra∣ti. that as by thy special grace preventing me, thou dost put into my mind good desires; so by thy continuall help, I may bring the same to good effect, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Dom. 1. post Pascha.ALmighty God, who hast gi∣ven thine only Son to die for our Sins, and to rise again for our Justification; Give me grace so to put away the leaven of Malice and all Wickedness,Contra Malitiam., that I may alwaies serve thee in pre∣ness of living and in truth, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Almighty God,Domin. 2. post Pascha. who hast gi∣ven thine only Son to be unto us both a Sacrifice for sin, and an Example of godly life; Give me grace that I may always most thankfully receive that inestima∣ble benefit, and also daily endea∣vour to follow the blessed steps of his most holy life, even for the same thy Son Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. LOrd give me that grace,ora 9. i. e. Ter∣ia Po∣med Psal. 37. 7, 8. that I may hold me still by thee, and abide patiently upon thee. That I may not grieve my self at the man whose way doth pro∣sper, nor against him, that doth after evil counsels. That I may leave off from wrath, and let go
displeasure, least I fret my self and be moved to do evil. Amen. Paulinus Epist. 9. Princip.Tribuat hic mihi Dominus, ut in me, pro me, fiat ignis consumens: & ardeat hoc igne cor meum in lumen aeternum mihi, ne eodem ardeat ani∣ma mea in poenam perennem; per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Psal. 52. 8.O Lord, make me like a green Olive-tree in thy house; for I trust in thy tender mercy for e∣ver: And I will alwais praise thee for that thou hast done, and hope in thy name for ever. Amen. Pro me∣ipso.O Lord, I beseech thee, make me remember how much more then other men I have need to call upon thee. My charge is
great, and my strength little; O give me grace to come often be∣fore thee, and to ask that help, which thou art readier to give then I to ask, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Have mercy upon mee,Psalm. 9. 13. Aug. 14. 1629.O Lord: Consider the troubles which I suffer of them that hate me, O thou which didst lift me up from the gates of death. Amen. O Lord,Pro omni dono. increase in me Faith & Devotion: replenish my heart with all goodness, and by thy great mercy keep me in the same. Give me godly zeal in prayer, true humility in prosperity, per∣fect patience in adversity, and continuall joy in the holy Ghost; even for Iesus Christ his sake,
my only Lord and Saviour. A∣men. Penteco∣ste.O God, who hast taught the hearts of thy faithful people by sending to them the Light of thy holy Spirit; Grant me by the same Spirit to have a right judg∣ment in all things, and evermore to rejoyce in his holy comfort, through the merits of Christ Iesus our Saviour, who liveth and reigneth with thee, in the u∣nity of the same Spirit, one God world without end. Amen. Domin. Trinit.Almighty & everlasting God, who hast given unto thy servants grace by the confession of true Faith to acknowledge the Glory of the Eternal Trinity, and in
the power of the Divine Maje∣sty to worship the Unity; I humbly beseech thee, bless me also, that I may live in the sted∣fastness of this Faith, & through it be evermore defended from all Ghostly and Bodily dangers, for thy mercies sake who livest and reignest one God world without end. Amen. O My God,Vesperi. Dan. 9. 19. incline thine eare and hear, open thine eyes and see. O Lord forgive: O Lord consider and doe it, for thine own sake, O my God; and for my Saviour Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.
Psal. 49 16, 17. Patien∣tia.Lord let me not be afraid, though one be made rich, or though the glory of his house be increased: For he shall carry no∣thing away with him when he dieth, neither shal his pomp fol∣low him. But ever make me a∣fraid to offend thee. Amen. Psal. 119. 82.Mine eyes long sore for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me? Lord comfort me, for I am become like a bottle in the smoak; yet let me not, I be∣seech thee, forget thy Law, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Domin. Sexagesi∣ma. Contra Adversi∣tatem.O Lord God, which seest that I put not my trust in any thing that I do; Mercifully grant that I may be defended against all adversity, through Iesus
Christ my Lord and only Savi∣our. Amen. O Lord, which hast taught us,Domin. Quinqua∣gesima. that all our doings without Cha∣rity are nothing worth; Send thy holy Ghost, and pour into my heart that most excellent gift of Charity,Pro Cha∣ritate. the very bond of Peace and all Vertues, without the which whosoever liveth is count∣ed dead before thee: Grant this for thy only Son Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord,Comple∣torium. The Com∣pline is before bed time. fill me with grace that I may fulfil all the ser∣vice which I owe thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord God, spare, I be∣seech thee: who shall raise up
Iacob? for he is small. Spare him therefore, O Lord;Amos 7. 2, 5. spare thy people, spare me. Say unto my soul, thou hast repented of the e∣vil intended, and it shall not be. Amen. Prov. 3. 24. Somnus.Lord, when I am asleep, let me not be made afraid: but let my sleep be sweet, that I may be enabled to serve thee. Amen. Domin. 4. Quadrag.Grant, I beseech thee, most Mercifull Father, that I who for my evil deeds am worthily pu∣nished, may by the comfort of thy grace be mercifully relie∣ved,For Re∣lief. through Iesus Christ our only Lord and Saviour. Amen.
COnsider & hear me,Bed time. Et Nocte, si vigiles. Psal. 13.3. O Lord my God: Lighten mine eyes, that I sleep not in death. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 17.3. thou hast proved and visited my heart, in the night sea∣son thou hast tried me: O bles∣sed Father, purge me that thou mayst find no wickedness in me; through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord, hear me,Psal. 119. 164. that seven times a day I may praise thee; and be acquainted with that great peace, which they have that love thy Law. Amen.
Domin. 5. Post Pascha.O Lord, from whom all good things do come; Grant unto me thy humble servant, that by thy holy inspiration I may think those things that are good,Cogitati∣ones. and by thy merciful guiding may al∣so perform the same, through our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen.
MUNDAY. POnder my words, O Lord,Mane Psal. 5. 1, 2, 3. consider my meditations. O hearken unto the voice of my calling, my King and my God; for unto thee will I make my prayer. My voice shalt thou hear betimes, O Lord: early in the morning will I direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up. But make me remember, that thou art God, and hast no pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee. Amen.
Psal. 96. 2. Gratiae.O Lord, bless me and I will sing unto thee, and praise thy Name, and be telling of thy sal∣vation from day to day. Amen. Prov. 2. 11. Consili∣um.O Lord, let counsell preserve me, and understanding keep me. Deliver me from the evil way, & from the man that speaketh fro∣ward things; and from all such as leave the ways of Righteous∣ness to walk in the ways of Dark∣ness: even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Jerem. 10. 23.O Lord, I know the way of man is not in himself. It is not in man that walketh to direct his own steps. Therefore, O Lord, I beseech thee, make me know my way,Viarum Directio. and direct my steps to thy honour and my own salvation,
through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. BE not wroth with me,Hoa ter∣tia. 2 Esdr. 8. 45, 31. Miseri∣cordia. O Lord, but spare me and have mercy upon me; for thou wilt be merciful unto thy creature. O Lord, I and my Fathers have all had the same sickness: but, be∣cause of us that are sinners, thou shalt be called merciful; through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 74. 24. Consilium guide me here with thy Counsell, and after that re∣ceive me into Glory. For whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth, that I desire in comparison of thee.Sitire Deum. O Lord preserve me in those long∣ings after thee. Amen.
Psal. 119. 29.O God, take from me the way of lying, and cause me to make much of thy Law, that I may chuse the way of Truth,Veritas. and lay thy Iudgments before me: that I may stick unto thy Testi∣monies,Obedien¦tia. and run the way of thy Commandements, when thou hast set my heart at liberty. A∣men. Domin. 1. post Trin.O God, the strength of all them that trust in thee; Merci∣fully accept my prayers: and be∣cause the weakness of mans na∣ture can do no good thing with∣out thee;Pro Gra∣tia. grant me the help of thy Grace, that inkeeping of thy commandements, I may please thee both in will and in deed, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
O Lord, thou art just,Hora 6. Tob. 3. 2,3,6. and all thy ways are mercy and truth: thou judgest truly for e∣ver; remember me and look up∣on me:Miseri∣cordia. punish me not accor∣ding to my sins or my ignoran∣ces, or my Fathers, which have sinned before thee: deal not with me according to my sins, but as seemeth best unto thee, O Lord my strength and my salvation. A∣men. Lord,Jer. 14. 20. Venia. I acknowledge my wickedness, and the iniquity of my Fathers: we have sinned a∣gainst thee, O Lord be merci∣ful. Amen. Remember not Lord our of∣fences,Liturg. Angl. nor the offences of our
forefathers; neither take thou vengeance of our sins: spare us good Lord, spare thy people whom thou hast redeemed with thy most precious blood, and be not angry with us for ever. A∣men. Domin. 3. post Trinit.Lord, I beseech thee, merci∣fully to hear me: And as th hast given me an hearty desire to pray; so grant that by thy migh∣ty aid I may be defended both in soul and in body,Pro De∣fensione. through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. Aug. Serm. 18 de San∣ctis.O Domine, accipe quaeso quas offero preces, dona quod rogo, excusa quod timeo: quia tu per Christum tu∣um es unica spes peccatorum, & per eum spero veniam delictorum. A∣men.
O Lord, be gratious unto me,Hora. 9. 2 Macc. 1. 3, 4,5. and give me an heart to wor∣ship thee, and to do thy Will; and open my heart in thy Law, and send me peace:Miseri∣cordia. hear my prayers, and be reconciled to me, and never forsake me in the time  trouble, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Remember me, O Lord,Ps. 106.4. Remem∣ber me. ac∣cording to the favour that thou bearest unto thy people. O visit me with thy salvation, that I may see the felicity of thy cho∣sen, and rejoyce in the gladness of thy people, and give thanks with thine inheritance. Amen. O God the Protector of all that trust in thee,Dom. 4. post. Trin. without whom
nothing is strong, nothing is holy; Encrease and multiply upon me thy mercy, that thou being my ruler, and guide, I may so pass through things temporal, that I finally lose not the things eter∣nall. Grant this, O heavenly Fa∣ther, for Iesus Christ his sake. A∣men. Grant, O Lord, that I may live in thy feare, dye in thy fa∣vour, rest in thy peace, rise in thy power, raigne in thy glory, for thy only beloved son's sake Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Vesperi. Psal. 17. 1. Exaudi∣re.HEar, O Lord, consider my complaint, hearken unto my prayer, that goeth not out of feig∣ned lips: and prevent me in mer∣cy,
before the Evening of my daies close up upon me; even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Domine! Oro te,S. Hilar. L. 12. de Trin. p. 195. ultra se infir∣mitas mea non tendat, sed loquatur hoc solum, in quo animae salus est. Neque in id stultitiae simul & impi∣etatis unquam erumpam,Praesum∣ptio. ut omnipo¦tentiae tuae & Sacramentorum arbi∣ter esse velim. Ne{que} permittas me erigere infirmitatis meae sensum ul∣tra aut infinitatis tuae religiosam o∣pinionem, aut significatam mihi aeter∣nitatis tuae fidem. Amen. Illumina quaeso, Domine,Coll. Vesp. pro auxilio contra o∣mnia pe∣ricula. Nox. tene∣bras nostras, & totius noctis hujus insidias a me & omnibus fidelibus tuis, ab animabus praecipue, sed & a corporibus nostris repelle propitius
per Iesum Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen. Dom. 6. post Trin.O God, which hast prepared for them that love thee, such good things as pass mans under∣standing; Pour into my heart such love towards thee, that I o∣beying thee in all things,Obedien∣tia. may ob∣tain thy promises, which exceed all that I can desire, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Com∣pline. Psal. 17. 6, 7, 8.ENcline thine ear unto me, O Lord, and hearken unto my words. Shew thy marvellous lo∣ving-kindness, thou that art the Saviour of them that put their trust in thee.Defensio. Keep me as the apple of thine eye, and hide me under the shadow of thy wings, even
for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord, I cry unto thee,Psal. 141. 2. Exaudire let my prayer be set forth in thy sight as Incense, and the lifting up of my hands be an Evening Sa∣crifice, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. The Lord is my Strength and my Shield,Psal. 28. 8. my heart hath trust∣ed in him, and I am helped: therefore my heart danceth for joy,Gratiae. and in my song will I praise him. Amen. O Lord of all power and might,Dom. 7. post Trin. who art the Author and giver of all good things; Graft in my heart the love of thy Name, increase in me true Re∣ligion,Religio. nourish me with all good∣ness, and of thy great mercy keep
me in the same, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Bed-time Et Nocte, si vigiles. Psal. 39. 5. &c. Mors.LOrd, let me know my end, and then umber of my daies; that I may be certified how long I have to live. Behold, thou hast made my daies as it were a span long, and my age is even as no∣thing in respect of thee: and ve∣rily every man living is altoge∣ther vanity. For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain: he heapeth up riches, and cannot tell, who shall gather them. And now, Lord, what is my hope? truly my hope is even in thee. Deliver me from all mine offences and make me not a rebuke to the foolish, e∣ven
for Iesus Christ his sake. A∣men. O Domine!Gregor. Nazian. Orat. 8. Submissio meiipsi∣us. Mea omnia & meip∣sum tibi dono offero, actionem & sermonem, quietem & silentium. Tantum me habeas & dūcas; & ma∣num & mentem & linguam, ad ea quae honesta sunt & tibi grata, moveas: & ab omnibus, a quibus abstinere praestat, abducas. Per & propter Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
TUESDAY. Mane. Psa. 1.1,2. Praeser∣vatio.LOrd, preserve me, that nei∣ther this day, nor any day of my life I may walk in the counsel of the ungodly, stand in the way of sinners, or sit down in the seat of the scornful; but that my delight may be in thy Law, O Lord, and my exercise in it day and night. Amen. Erasmus. Illumi∣natio.O Sol Iustitiae, Pater & Origo omnium, tuo sydere afflari revi∣viscere est, tuo foveri lumine pro∣ficere est, tuis accendi flammis per∣fici est, abs te deseri perire est. O ter felices, quibus mitis & roscidus
exoreris. Bees me, O Domine Jesu, lumine tuo, & discute nebulas ig∣norantiae meae, & caliginem pecca∣torum meorum: ut non aberrans a via mandatorum tuorum, te sequar in lumen aeternum, per teipsum unicum Salvatorem & Redempto∣rem meum. Amen. O Lord,Prov. 3. 26. thou art my Assu∣rance; I humbly beseech thee preserve my foot from taking, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord,Dom. 9. post Trin. Cogitati∣ones. give me, I beseech thee, the spirit to think and do alwayes such things as be right∣ful; that I who cannot be with∣out thee,Gratia. may by thee be able to live according to thy will, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Hora. 3. Psal. 25. 1,3,4. &c. Pro omnis generis auxilio.O Lord, I lift up my soul to thee, my God, I have put my trust in thee: O let me not be confounded, neither let mine enemies triumph over me. Shew me thy waies, O God: & teach me thy paths. Lead me forth in thy truth, and learn me: for thou art the God of my salvation; in thee is my hope all the day long. Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy loving kindness, which hath been ever of old. O remember not the sins and offences of my youth, or my riper age: but according to thy mercy think thou upon me, O Lord, of thy goodness, and the merits of Iesus Christ my Sa∣viour. Amen.
Almighty God,Domin. 2. Qua∣drages: who seest that we have no power of our selves to help our selves; Keep me, I beseech thee,Pro Prae∣servatio∣ne. both out∣wardly in my body, and inward∣ly in my soul, that so I may be defended from all adversity which may happen to my body, and from all evil thoughts which my assault and hurt my soul, through Iesus Christ my Lord and only Saviour. Amen. HEarken unto my voice,Hora 6. Psal. 27. 8,9,10, 11. Exaudi∣re. O Lord, now I cry unto thee: have mercy upon me, and hear me. My heart hath talked of thee, Seek ye my face; thy face, Lord, will I seek. O hide not thou thy face from me, nor cast
thy servant away in displeasure. Thou hast been my succour, leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my Salvation. Amen. Psal. 55. 18. Paulin. Epist. 17. pag. 181. Delive∣rance.At Evening, Morning, and at Noon day will I pray, and that in∣stantly: Lord hear my voice. O deliver my Soul in peace from the practises that are against me. Amen. Dom. 10. post TrinLet thy merciful ears, O Lord, be open to the prayers of me thy humble servant; and that I may obtain my petitions, make me to ask such things as shall please thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
LOrd, let me not be confoun∣ded,Hora 9. Psal. 31. 19, 21. Gloria Deo. for I have called upon thee. O how plentiful is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee, and that thou hast prepared for them that put their trust in thee, even before the sons of men! Lord, I trust in thee, have mercy upon me. My tears have been my meat day and night,Psal. 42. 3. Tempore advero. while they daily say unto me, Where is now thy God? But let them have no cause to say it any more, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.
Dom. 3. post Pasc.ALmighty God, which shew∣est to all men that are in er∣rour, the light of thy truth,Illumina∣tio. to the intent that they may return into the way of Righteousness; Grant, I beseech thee, unto me and all them that are admitted into the Fellowship of Christs Religion, that we may eschew those things which are contrary to our profession,Obedien∣tia. and follow all such things as are agreeable to the same, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Vesperi. S. Am∣bros. Ser. 8. in Psal. 118.O Domine Salvator, qui habes in potestate peccatum solvere, dicas mihi, oro, Exi de vinculis tuis, Exide nexibus peccatorum tu∣orum,
& dicendo solve funes erro∣rum meorum quibus circumdatus & ligatus sum.Venia. Etsi enim nequissimus sim omnium & detestabilis usu peccatorum, te tamen jubente liber ero. Amen. LOrd,Psal. 91.1 Auxi∣lium. give me grace that I may dwell under the defence of the most highest, and that I may abide under thy shadow, O thou Almighty: For thou art my hope and my strong hold; in thee will I trust, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O God,Dom. 11. post Tri∣nitatem. thou which declarest thy Almighty power, most chiefly by shewing mercy and pity, Give unto me abundantly
thy grace, that I running to thy promises, may be made partaker of thy heavenly treasure, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Comple∣torium. Psal. 46.1.O God, thou art my hope and strength, a very present help in trouble; Confirm me, that I may not fear,Auxilin̄. though the earth be moved, and the hills carried into the midst of the sea: though the waters thereof rage and swel, and the mountains shake at the tempest of the same. O be in the midst of my soul, and I shall ne∣ver be moved. Amen. Psal. 119. 122. Miseri∣cordia.O Lord, look upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do to those that fear thy Name, Order my steps in thy word,
and so shall no wickedness have dominion over me. Amen. Almighty God, give unto me,Dom. 14. post Trin. Donum omne. I beseech thee, a full increase of faith, hope, and charity: And that I may obtein that which thou dost promise, make me love that which thou dost command, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. LOrd,ed time Et Nocte, i vigiles. Psal. 50. 15. I call upon thee in the day of my trouble, in the night of my heaviness. O deliver me, and I will glorifie thee. Amen. O Lord correct me,er. 10. 24. but with judgement, not in thy anger, lest thou bring me to nothing. And grant that thy correction may a∣mend me, and make me thine, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Respice me quoque, O Domine Jesu! ut propria possim recognoscere peccata,S. Ambr. 5. Hexā. ca. 25. Poeniten∣tia. & fletibus piis culpas sol∣vere. Da quaeso lacrymas Petri: nolo laetitiam peccatoris. Utque hoc fiat, Respice tu, & des ut mihi eti∣am miserrimo peccatorum aliquis gal∣lus cantet; ut liberatus tibi cantem in secula seculorum. Amen. O Eternal God and merciful Father, grand, I humbly beseech thee,Dom. 4. post Pasc. that I may love all those things which thou commandest, and desire that which thou dost promise,Obedien∣tia. that among the sundry and manifold changes of the world, my heart may surely there be fixed, where true joys are to be found, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
WEDNESDAY. O Lord, I have sinned,Mane. Baruch 2. 12,14. Poeniten∣tia. and dealt wickedly; nay, of∣fended in all thine Ordi∣nances. Let thy wrath turn from me, for I am weak; and hear my prayers, and deliver me for thine own sake, and the merits of my Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. Gracious Father, without thee I can do nothing but sin; nor can I confess it to have par∣don but by thee. I was concei∣ved and born in sin: And though thou didst wash me from that in
the laver of Baptisme, yet I have since defiled my self again, and by many grievous actual sins, have made my self a sinner above all other men, considering the great measure of grace that thou hast given me. Lord, increase thy grace, and by it weaken first, and then cut off my resistance, that I may see, and confess, and hate, and forsake all my sins, and find mer∣cy and salvation in the merits of my blessed Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. Psal. 119. 147. Exaudi∣re.O Lord, early this morning do I cry unto thee; for in thy word is my trust. Hear me, O Lord, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Psal. 143. 8.O Lord, let me hear thy lo∣ving
kindness betimes in the mor∣ning, for in thee is my trust. O shew me the way that I should walk in this day, and all the daies of my life; for I lift up my soul unto thee in the mercies of Jesus Christ. Amen. Deliver me, O Lord,Hora. 3. Psal. 39. 9,7, 8. from all mine offences, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish. For man walketh in a vain shadow, and disquieteth himself in vain. But Lord, what is my hope?Spes. truly my hope is even in thee: And there let it still continue accep∣table in Iesus Christ our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. O Lord,Poeniten∣tia. look upon me in mer∣cy; In the greater mercy, be∣cause the calling and place I am
in, must give a stricter account to thee. Look therefore upon me, O Lord, but not till thou hast nailed my sins to the Cross of Christ: not till thou hast bathed me in the Blood of Christ: not till I have hid my self in the Wounds of Christ, that so the pu∣nishment, which should else over∣take me, may pass over me: then look, and say unto my soul, I have forgiven thee; and by the work of thy mercy in my soul make me feel it, through Iesus Christ our only Lord and Savi∣our. Amen. Gr. Naz. Orat. 6. fine. pag. 144. Pro gregeO Domine, qui magnos greges perficis, & parvos per gratiam au∣ges, pro amplissima benignitate tua copiose me consolare, & gregem me∣um
mecum & pasce & conserva: per Jesum Christum summum Pasto∣rem, et Salvatorem nostrum. Amen. O Lord,Hora 6. Psal. 35. 1, 3. Defensio. plead thou my cause with them that strive with me, and fight against them that fight against me. Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me. Say un∣to my soul, I am thy Salvation. Even so. Amen. Give ear, O Lord,Ps. 86. 6. Exaudi∣re. unto my Prayer, and ponder the voice of my humble desires. In the time of my trouble I will call upon thee; for thou hearest me. Amen. Deliver my soul, O God,Ps. 120.2. Delive∣rance. from lying lips, and from a de∣ceitfull tongue. Amen.
Dom. 15. post Trin.Keep me, O Lord, thy poor humble servant, with thy per∣petual mercy: And because the frailtie of man without thee cannot but fall, preserve me ever by thy help, and lead me to all things profitable to my salvation, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Hora 9. Esai. 55. 6,7. give me such grace as I may seek thee while thou mayest be found, and call upon thee while thou art near; that I may detest and forsake the wick∣edness of my wayes,Paeniten∣tia. and the un∣righteousness of my own imagi∣nations: that I may return unto thee, and thou have mercy upon
me in Iesus Christ my only Savi∣our and Redeemer. Amen. Teach me thy ways, O Lord,Psal. 86. 11. Timor Dei. and I will walk in thy truth. O knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name. Amen. Lord, I beseech thee,Dom. 17. post Trin. Pro Gra∣tia. grant that thy Grace may alway prevent and follow me, and make me continually to be given to all good works, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. HAve mercy upon me,Vesperi. Psal. 51. 1. Poeniten∣tia. O God, after thy great good∣ness, and according to the mul∣titude of thy Mercies do away mine offences. Wash me through¦ly from my wickedness, and cleanse me from my sin: For I
acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me. But let not this Evening take from me the light of the Sun of Righteous∣ness, Iesus Christ my Saviour. Amen. S. Aug. Ser. 30. de Verb. Dom. & Ser. 120. de Diver∣sis, et Ser. 2. Donum omne.O Domine, exaudire dignare pre∣ces meas in beneplacito tuo. Inmi∣cum ab actibus meis & cogitationi∣bus virtute tua expelle. Multipli∣ca mihi fidem, guberna mentem, spi∣rituales cogitationes concede (super stratum vigilanti,) & ad beatitudi∣nem tuam perducito, per Jesum Christum Filium tuum, & Salvato∣rem nostrum. Amen. Dom. 18. post Trin. Obedien∣tia.Lord, I beseech thee, give me grace to avoid the infections of the Devil, and with a pure heart and mind to follow thee the only
true God, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. LOrd,Com∣pline. Ps. 51.17. Poeniten∣tia. I offer up unto thee my Evening Sacrifice; thy Sa∣crifice, even a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, which thou wilt not despise, in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Domine, supplex te oro, respice me, & purga mentem meam & co∣gitationes meas ab impuris concupis∣centiis, & ab omni inquinamento carnis & spiritus, & ab omni dia∣bolica operatione, per Jesum Chri∣stum Dominum nostrum. Amen. O Domine,Miseri∣cordia. ineffabilem miseri∣cordiam tuam clementer ostende, & simul exue me a peccatis quae com∣misi, & eripe me a poenis quas
merui, per Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen. Dom. 19. post Trin.O God, for as much as with∣out thee I am not able to please thee, grant that the working of thy mercy may in all things di∣rect and rule my heart, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Bed-time Et Nocte, si vigiles.O Lord, give me that grace, that I may remember thee upon my Bed, and think upon thee when I am waking.Psal. 63.6 Thou hast been my helper; therefore under the shadow of thy wings I will hope to pass through the darkness of this night,Nox. in the com∣fort of Iesus Christ my Lord and only Saviour. Amen. Psal. 119. 148.O Lord, make mine eyes pre∣vent
the night watches, that I may be occupied in thy words. Amen. O Lord, thou which hast made the night for man to rest in, as well as the day to labour; Grant, dear Father, that I may so take my bodily rest, that my soul may continually watch for my deliverance out of this mor∣tal life.Somnus. And that my sleep be not excessive, according to the in∣satiable desires of the flesh, but sufficient to relieve and maintain nature; to live and serve thee in all sober and godly conversation, through the aid and assistance of Iesus Christ my only Lord and Saviour. Amen.
THURSDAY. Mane. Psal. 17. 5.O Hold thou up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. Amen. S. Aug. de 5. Hae∣res. cap. 7. Auxi∣lium.Subveni Domine mi Jesu, & ac∣cingere gladium tuum circa femur Potentissime. Omnium Potentissime egredere: Occide me in me, ut vi∣vam in te, & desinant inimici per∣sequi me. Amen. Ps. 63.1. Consola∣tio.O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee: My soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh long∣eth greatly after thee, in a barren and dry land, where no water is. O satisfie this thirst with thy
freshest waters of comfort, in Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Esay 33. 2,5,6. have mercy upon me; I have waited for thee: Be thou my arm in the morning, and my help in the time of trouble: that I may exalt thy Name which dwellest on high, that I may live in the stability of thy times, and that thy fear may be my treasure, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Almighty God and merci∣ful Father,Ascensio∣onis dies. grant, I beseech thee, that as I do believe thy only Son our Lord to have ascended into the heavens; so I, and all thy faithful Servants, may in heart and mind thither ascend, and with thee continually dwel. Amen.
Dom. post Ascen.O God, the King of glory, who hast exalted thine only Son Iesus Christ with great triumph into thy Kingdom in heaven, I beseech thee leave neither thy Church, nor my poor self com∣fortless; but send us thy Holy Ghost to comfort us, and exalt us unto the same place, whither our Saviour Christ is gone before, who liveth and raigneth with thee, one God world without end. Amen. Hora 3. Ps. 55. 2. Exaudi∣re.HEar my prayer, O God, and hide not thy self from my petition. Take heed unto me and hear me, how I mourn in my prayer and am vexed. Give me strength and comfort in thee,
through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O God,Ps. 86.14. Inimici. the proud are risen a∣gainst me, and the Congregation of factious men have sought after my soul, and have not set thee before their eyes. But thou Lord God art full of compassion and mercy, long suffering, plenteous in goodness and truth. O turn thee then unto me, and have mercy upon me: shew some token upon me for good, that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed, because thou Lord hast holpen me, and comforted me in Iesus Christ our Lord. A∣men. Assist me mercifully, O Lord,Liturg. Angl. Defensio. in these, and all other my suppli∣cations
and prayers, and dispose my ways towards the attainment of everlasting salvation, that a∣mong all the changes and chances of this mortal life, I may ever be defended by thy most gracious and ready help, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Hora 6. Psal. 55. 22. Blandien∣tes.O Deliver me from them whose words are softer then but∣ter, when they have war in their heart: And from them whose words are smoother then oyl, while they are very swords. Lord, I cast my burthen upon thee, that thou mayst sustain me, and not suffer me to fall for ever. Amen.
Bless me, O Lord,Ps. 94.12. Correctio. when thou chastenest me, and teachest me in thy law; that thou mayst give me patience in time of adversity, till the pit be digged up for the ungodly. O Lord, fail me not, neither forsake me, for I am part of thine Inheritance in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Almighty and merciful God,Dom. 20. post Trin of thy bountiful goodness keep me from all things that may hurt me;Defensio. that I being ready both in body and soul,Obedien∣tia. may with a free heart accomplish those things that thou wouldest have done, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Hora 9. Patientia S. Aug. cont. E∣pist. Fun∣dam. c. 37.O AEterne Deus, quamdiu hic in ter∣ris sum, supplex oro, in quantum terrena mihi serviunt, doceant me esse Dominum suum, sed a te constitutum: In quantum molesta sunt, doceant me servire ibi Domino meo, cui dum non obtempero, illa in justam vindi∣ctam molesta esse solent: Ut sive illa mihi serviant, sive non, ego semper serviam tibi, in & per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Psal. 109. 1. Opprobri∣um.Hold not thy tongue, O God of my praise; for the mouth of the ungodly, yea, and the mouth of the deceitful is opened upon me: And they have spoken against me with false tongues, they com∣passed me about also with words of hatred, and fought against me without a cause. But I give my
self unto prayer; Lord, forgive them, and hear me. Amen. O God which art the author of peace,Prec. Mat. Coll. pro Pace. and lover of concord, in knowledge of whom standeth our eternal life, whose service is perfect freedome;Et pro de∣fensione. defend me and all thy servants in all assaults of our enemies, that we surely trusting in thy defence, may not fear the power of any adversaries, through the might of Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. DIc, ô Domine mi Jesu, doce, discā a te, quod doceam de te.Vesperi. Aug. de 5. Haeres. c. 7. Psal. 140. 1, 2. Inimici. Amen Deliver me, O Lord, from the man that is evil, and preserve me from the cruel man, which imagines mischief in his heart, and stirs up strife all the day long:
The proud have laid a snare for me, and spread their net abroad with cords, and set traps in my way. Lord keep me from trea∣cherous hands, and preserve me, that though they purpose, yet they may not be able to over∣throw my goings, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Coll. 1. Precum Vespert.O God, from whom all holy desires, all good counsels, and all just works do proceed: Give un∣to me, and all thy servants, that peace which the world cannot give,Pro Pace. that both our hearts may be set to obey thy commandments, and also that by thee we being defended from the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness, through the
merits of Iesus Christ our Savi∣our. Amen. HAve mercy upon me O God,Com∣pline. Psal. 57.1. Spes. have mercy upon me, for my soul trusteth in thee, and in the shadow of thy wings will I trust, till these and all other my afflictions be over-past. O send out thy mercy and truth upon me, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Domine misericors qui ad cor altum non accedis,S. Aug. Nom. Scala Pa∣radisi. c. 4. humilia animam meam. O tu, qui non videris nisi a mundis cordibus, veram cordis mun∣ditiem dato mibi. Sitio, O Domine,Sitire Deum. da arrham haereditatis futurae, sal∣tem da guttam coelestis pluviae, qua refrigerare possim sitim meam, quia
amore ardeo. Nec hoc peto, Domine, propter merita mea, indignissimus e∣nim sum qui gustem; sed pro miseri∣cordia tua, & meritis Salvatoris no∣stri Jesu Christi. Amen. Liturg. Angl. Praeserva∣tio.Almighty God, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to direct, sanctifie and govern both my heart and body in the wayes of thy Laws, and in the works of thy Com∣mandments, that through thy mighty protection, both here and ever I may be preserved by night and by day, in body and in soul, through our Lord and Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen. Bed-time Et noce, si vigiles Ps. 77.1,2.O Lord, I cry unto thee, hear∣ken unto me, O God. Thou holdest my eyes waking: I am so
feeble that I cannot speak: And in the night season my soul refu∣seth comfort;Tempore valde pre∣mente. yet even then give me grace especially, that I may commune with mine own heart, and search out my spirits, and compose them in thee, that I may rise to serve thee. Amen. Da mihi, Domine,Somnus. dormitum a∣beunti requiem corporis & animae. Custodi me a caliginoso peccati som∣no, ab omni tenebrosa & nocturna mollitie. Ignita maligni tela dolose in me vibrata extinguito. Rebellio∣nes carnis meae reprimito. Et om∣nem terrenam & mundanam in me cogitationem sopito, per Jesum Chri∣stum Dominum nostrum. Amen. I humbly beseech thee,Coll. in fine Lit. Anglic. O Fa∣ther, mercifully to look upon my
infirmities;Defensio. and for the glory of thy Names sake, turn from me and the rest of thy servants, all those evils which we most just∣ly have deserved: And grant that in all our troubles we may put our whole trust and confi∣dence in thy mercy, and ever∣more serve thee in holiness and pureness of living, to thy honour and glory, through our only Me∣diator and Advocate, Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
FRIDAY. DEus magne, Deus omnipotens,Mane. S. Aug. L. 1. Ret. c. 15. & de Duab. Anim. cont. Ma∣nich. c. 15. Deus summae bonitatis, quem inviolabilem & incorrup∣tibilem credi & intelligi fas est; Trina Unitas, quam Catholica Eccle∣sia colit, supplex oro, expertus in me∣ipso misericordiam tuam, ne homines, cum quibus mihi a pueritia in omni victu fuit summa consensio, in tuo cultu a me dissentire permittas: nec vel me vel illos a veritate & salute, quae est in Christo Jesu. Amen. O Lord, I will call upon thee,Ps. 88.13. and early shall my prayer come before thee. Lord, do not abhorre
my soul, neither hide thy face from me, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Dom. 2. post Trin. Timere, Amare Deum.Lord, make me to have a per∣petual fear and love of thy holy Name; for thou never failest to help and govern them whom thou dost bring up in thy stedfast love. Grant this even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Para∣sceue. Domin. ante Pasc.Almighty and everlasting God, which of thy tender love towards man, hast sent our Sa∣viour Iesus Christ, to take upon him our flesh, and to suffer death upon the cross, that all mankind should follow the example of his great humility: Mercifully grant that I may both follow the exam∣ple of his patience, and be made
partaker of his resurrection, through the same Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Almighty God,Coll. 1. diei. I humbly be∣seech thee graciously to behold thy Family,Ecclesia. for the which our Lord Iesus Christ was content to be betrayed, and given up into the hands of wicked men, and to suffer death upon the cross, who liveth and reigneth with thee and the Holy Ghost, one God world without end. Amen. Almighty and everlasting God,Coll. 2. diei. by whose Spirit the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified; Receive these my supplications and prayers which I offer up before thee,Pro omni∣bus. for all e∣states of men in thy holy Church,
that every member of the same, in his vocation, may truly and devoutly serve thee, through our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen. Hora 3. S. Aug. de 5. Hae∣res. cap. 7. Haereses.Diu est, O Domine, ex quo con∣tra Haereses laboravi, & sum poene fatigatus. Veni Domine mi Jesu, praeliator fortissime, Princeps exerci∣tus Domini, qui Diabolum vicisti & seculum: Apprehende arma & scu∣tum, & exurge in adjutorium mihi. Amen. Psal. 109. 20. Delive∣rance.Deal with me, O God, ac∣cording to thy Name; for sweet is thy mercy. O deliver me, for I am helpless and poor, and my heart is wounded within me. Lord save my soul. Amen. Ps. 25.14.Mine eyes are ever looking un∣to
thee, O Lord; O pluck my feet out of the net. Amen. Almighty God,Liturg. Angl. who hast pro∣mised to hear the Petitions of them that ask in thy Son's Name, I beseech thee mercifully to incline thine ears to me, now that in his Name I make my prayers and supplications unto thee;Exaudi∣re. and grant that those things which I have faithfully asked ac∣cording to thy will, may effectu∣ally be obtained, to the relief of my necessity, and to the setting forth of thy glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Remember not my old sins,Hora 6. Ps. 79. 8. Venia. but have mercy upon me, & that soon, for I am come to great
misery. Help me, O God of my salvation; O deliver me, and be merciful unto my sins, for thy Names sake. Amen. Psal. 115. 1.Not unto us, O Lord, not un∣to us, but unto thy Name give the praise; and that for thy loving mercy and for thy truths sake. Amen. S. Athan. Lib. 1. de Vnita Deitate Trinit. pag. 444.O tu unus Deus Pater, & Fili, & Sancte Spiritus, qui unitam De∣itatem nobis declarasti, & sacrosan∣ctae solius Divinitatis indivisam glo∣riam revelasti, et perfectam Trinita∣tis tuae sempiternitatem demonstrasti; Da mihi obsecro fidem et obedientiam in hac vita,Dom. Trinit. & gloriam in futura, per & propter Redemptorem nostrum Jesum Christum. Amen.
O Lord God of hosts,Hora 9. Ps. 80. 4. how long wilt thou be angry with thy poor servant that prayeth? O turn me again, O God; shew the light of thy countenance, and I shall be whole. Amen. Tibi gloria, tibi gloria, Domine!S. Chry∣sost. L. 3. de Sacer∣dotio. Quanta apud te clementiae abyssus? quanta patientiae copia? En, qui no∣minis tui praetextu ex ignobilibus & obscuris clari & illustres effecti sunt, honore abutuntur, & contra te, qui honorem largitus es; auden{que} non audenda in sacro sancta mysteria tua injurii. Probos quantum possunt extrudunt, ut homines perditis mo∣ribus praediti summa cum quiete & licentia conturbent omnia.Ecclesia. O Do∣mine, exurge adjuva Ecclesiam tu∣am,
& ne sinas animam meam in eorum Consilium descendere, per Je∣sum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Vesperi. Psal. 88. 1, 2.O Lord, I will cry day and night before thee, let my prayer enter into thy presence, encline thine ear unto my calling; for my soul is full of trouble,Afflictio∣nes. and my life draws nigh unto the pit. O let not thine indignation lie too hard upon me, neither vex me with all thy storms: But remember of what mould thou hast made me, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. S. Hilar. l. 12. de Trin. fine. Fides.O Domine, ne sit mihi inutilis pugna verborum, sed incunctanis fidei constans professio. Conserva,
oro, in me fidei incontaminatam re∣ligionem. Et, usque ad excessum spi∣ritus mei, hanc conscientiae meae vo∣cem dona mihi: ut, quod in regenera∣tionis meae symbolo baptizatus in Patre & Filio & Spiritu Sancto professus sim, semper obtineam. Ut te habeam Patrem; ut una tecum Fi∣lium tuum adorem, & Spiritum Sanctum tuum promerear, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. A∣men. O Lord, be merciful unto me,Com∣pline. Psal. 92. 1, 2. Miseri∣cordia. and I will sing praises unto thy Name; yea, I will tell of thy loving kindness early in the mor∣ning, and of thy truth in the night-season. O bless me, and fulfill all thy works of grace in
me, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Nox.Dona mihi, Domine, mentem vi∣gilem, cogitationem sobriam, cor ca∣stum, somnum placidum, & ab omni diabolica imaginatione libe∣rum. Et deinde excita me, Domine, hora Orationis, ut praeceptis tuis fir∣miter adhaeream, & memoriam reti∣neam in violatam judiciorum tuorum. Amen. Bed-time Et Nocte, si vigiles. Psal. 119. 49, 54.LOrd, remember thy promise unto thy servant, wherein thou hast caused me to put my trust. That thy statutes may be my songs in the house of my pil∣grimage; and that I may remem∣ber thy Name in the night season. Amen.
In manus tuas, Domine, com∣mendo animam & corpus meum: creasti enim & redemisti ea, Domine Deus veritatis. Commendo autem me∣cum et mea omnia; tu enim mihi gra∣tiose largitus es illa pro beneplacito tuo. In pace ergo me simul cubare & dormire facias, ô Domine, qui solus me habitare facis secure, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. O omnium Domine & effector,Gr. Naz. Orat. 10. p 176. O Deus tuorum Pater & Guberna∣tor, O vitae & mortis arbiter, O Animarum Custos & Benefactor; O qui omnia facis, & tempestive, atque ut ipse pro sapientiae tuae & admi∣nistrationis altitudine nosti, artifice sermone transmutas! me opportuno tempore tuo suscipe,Mors. tamdiu in carne vitam meam moderatus, quamdiu con∣ducibile
fuerit mihiipsi & Ecclesiae. Et suscipe quaeso ob metum tuum paratum, non turbatum, nec in ex∣tremo die terga vertentem, nec invito animo tanquam abstractum aut avul∣sum a mundo, sed ut prompte & a∣lacriter ad beatam illam & aeternam vitam proficiscentem, quae est in Chri∣sto Jesu Domino nostro, cui gloria in secula seculorum. Amen. Aug. Ser. 53. de di∣versis.O Domine Deus meus, voca me, ut accedam ad te: firma me, ne re∣cedam a te, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
SATURDAY. O Lord,Mane. Ps. 59.16. Laus Dei. I will sing of thy power, and will praise thy mercy in the morn∣ing, for thou hast been my de∣fence and my refuge in the day of my trouble. Unto thee, O my strength will I sing; for thou, O God, art my defence and my merciful God. Amen. The glorious Majesty of thee,Ps. 90.17. Benedictio O Lord my God, be upon me: prosper thou the work of my hands upon me, O prosper thou my handy-work. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 119. 18 open mine eyes that I
may see the wonders of thy Law.Illumi∣natio. I am a stranger upon earth, O hide not thy Commandments from me. For thy Testimonies are my delight and my counsel∣lors. Lord continue that favour to me, that so they may ever be. Amen. Prec. Mat. Coll. pro Gratia.O Lord, our heavenly Father, Almighty and everlasting God, who hast safely brought me to the beginning of this day;Auxi∣lium. defend me in the same with thy mighty power, and grant that this day I fall into no sin, nor run into any kind of danger: but that all my doings may be ordered by thy go∣vernance, to do alwayes that which is righteous in thy sight, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
O My soul,Hora. 3. Ps. 62. 5. wait thou still up∣on my God, for my hope is in him: he is my strength and my salvation, he is my defence so that I shall not fall. So Amen Lord Iesu, Amen. O Lord God,Oratio Ezekiae, 2 Chron. 30. 19. Imperfe∣ctio. be mercifull unto every one that prepares his whole heart to seek thee, O Lord God, the God of his Fathers, though he be not according to the Purification of the Sanctuary. Amen. O Lord,Ps. 138.7. Inimici. I walk in the midst of trouble, I beseech thee refresh me. Stretch forth thy hand up∣on the fury and the cunning of mine enemies, that thy right hand may save me. O make good thy
loving-kindness towards me, and despise not, I beseech thee, the work of thine own hands. Amen. Psal. 119. 121. Inimici.I deal with the thing that is lawful and right; O give me not over unto mine oppressors. A∣men. ver. 122.O make me, thy poor servant, still to delight in that which is good, that the proud do me no wrong; for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Liturg. Angl.Almighty God, the fountain of all wisdom, who knowest our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in asking; I beseech thee to have compassion upon my infirmities,Infirmi∣tas. and those things which for my unworthiness I dare not, and for my blindness
I cannot ask, vouchsafe to give me, for the worthiness of thy Son Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Hora 6. Ps. 62. 8.I will put my trust in thee alwayes: O let thy people do it with me, and I will pour out my heart before thee, O God my hope. Amen. O that my wayes were made so direct that I might keep thy Statutes!Ps. 119.5. Viarum directio.O Lord direct them. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 119. 33. teach me the way of thy Statutes, and I shall keep it unto the end: yea, I shall keep it with my whole heart. O sta∣blish thy word in thy sevant, that I may fear thee;Timor Dei. and that for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.
Hora 9. Ps. 81. 7. Exaudi∣re. Afflictio∣nes.O Lord, I will call upon thee in my troubles, O deli∣ver me and hear me; and then especially at what time any storm falls upon me, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Psal. 119. 10, 12. Viarum directio.Blessed art thou, O Lord, O teach me thy Statuts: That my whole heart may seek thee, and that I may not go wrong out of thy Commandments: That I may take greater delight in the way of thy Testimonies, then in all manner of riches. Amen. Vesperi. Ps. 134. 1. Laus Dei.O Praise the Lord all ye his ser∣vants, ye that by night stand in the house of the Lord. With these, O Lord, I lift up my
hands to thy Sanctuary, and will praise thy Name. O Lord, be with me this Evening in all the mercies of Iesus Christ my Sa∣viour. Amen. Miserae carnis meae infirmitatem tu nosti, qui finxisti me: Invisibilium hostium meorum vigilantiam tu nosti, qui vides eos;Protectio. Protegat me ala boni∣tatis tuae, per Jesum Christum Do∣minum nostrum. Amen. O Lord,Comple∣torium. Psal. 139. 10. there is no hiding me from thy presence: For if I should say, the darkness shall cover me, then shall my night be turned to day. For the dark∣ness is no darkness with thee, but the night is as clear as the day, the darkness and the light to thee
are both alike. Therefore, O God,Confessio. I present my self open be∣fore thee, O cleanse my soul, that it may rejoyce to be seen of thee in Iesus Christ. Amen. Gratia∣rum actio.Die jam transacto, graias tibi a∣go Domine, gloriam tibi tribuo, quod sine scandalo; hymnis effero, quod liber ab insidiis diem transege∣rim, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Psal. 71. 17, 19. &c.Thy righteousness, O God, is very high, and great things are they which thou hast done for me. O God, who is like unto thee? Thou hast brought me to great honour, and comforted me on every side.Laus Dei. Therefore will I praise thee and thy righteousness, O God, and unto thee will I
sing, O thou holy One of Israel. My lips will be glad when I sing unto thee, and so will my soul which thou hast delivered. My tongue also shall talk of thy righ∣teousness all the day long: for many are confounded & brought to shame that have sought to do me evil. O Lord,Gratia∣rum actio. continue thy blessings to me, and multiply my thankfulness to thee, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord, thou keeper of Israel,Bed-time Et Nocte, si vigiles. Ps. 121.4. which in the watch over thy servants dost neither slumber nor sleep, be my keeper, and pre∣serve me this night. O keep my soul. Amen. Lord,Psal. 119. 59. give me grace to make
haste,Procrasti∣natio. and not prolong the time to keep thy Commandments. That I may call my own ways to remembrance, and turn my feet to thy Testimonies. And then at midnight will I rise and give thee thanks, because of thy righteous judgments, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen. Ps. 120.4.Wo is me, that I am constrain∣d to dwell with Mesech, and to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar: For my soul hath too long dwelt among them that are enemies unto peace:Mors. Too long, O Lord, but that it is thy good pleasure to continue my dwelling in this vale of misery. Amen.
Quid es, ô Deus meus?Adoratio & Glorifica∣tio Dei mei. S. Aug. l. 2. Con∣fess. c. 4. Quid rogo nisi Dominum, Deus? Quis enim Dominus praeter Dominum, aut quis Deus praeter Deum nostrum? Summe, Optime, Potentissime, Mi∣sericordissime & Iustissime, Secre∣tissime & Presentissime, Pulcherri∣me & Fortissime, Stabilis & In∣comprehensibilis, Immutabilis, mu∣tans omnia. Nunquam novus, nun∣quam vetus, innovans omnia, & in vetustatem perducens superbos, & nesciunt. Semper agens, semper qui∣etus, colligens & non egens. Por∣tans, & implens, & protegens, cre∣ans, & nutriens, & perficiens. Quae∣ris, cum nihil desit tibi. Amas, nec¦aestuas. Zelas, & securus es. Poeni∣tet te, & non doles. Irasceris, & tranquillus es. Opera mutas, non con∣silium.
Recipis quod invenis, & nunquam amisisti. Nunquam inops, & gaudes lucris. Nunquam ava∣rus, & usuras exigis. Supereroga∣tur tibi ut debeas, & quis habet quicquam non tuum? Reddis debita, nulli debens: Donas debita, nihil perdens. Et quid dicimus, Deus meus, vita mea, dulcedo mea sancta? Aut quid dicit aliquis, quum de te di∣cit? Et vae tacentibus de te, quoni∣am loquaces muti sunt: Miserere mei Deus, ut loquar de te, & glo∣rificem nomen tuum. Amen.
PROSPERA. LOrd, this is the time of fear,Ps. 19.13. keep thy servant from Presumptuous sins, lest they get the dominion over me: That though my sins be many and great, yet I may be innocent from the Great offence, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord, make me worthy of the place to which thou hast rai∣sed me in thy Church, that all my endeavours may be to make Truth and Peace meet together. In this course give me understan∣ding to discover my enemies, and
wisdom to prevent them: A heart to love my friends, and carriage that may bind them. Lord, make me love thy Church, and the place where thine honour dwelleth; that as thou hast ho∣noured me above many others, so I may honour thee above all, and spend whatsoever is accepta∣ble in the poor remainder of my life to serve thee in thy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Psal. 119. 37.O Lord, turn away mine eyes that they behold not vanity, and quicken thou me in thy way. Amen. Salvian. l. 6. de Guberna∣tione Dei. p. 222.O Domine misericors, quando a te ipse exoratus, (nec enim un∣quam ita vivimus, ut exorare merea∣mur,)
pacificos nobis dies, proventus uberes, divitem bonis omnibus tran∣quillitatem, & abundantiam dederis super vota crescentem, ne sinas me tanta secundarum rerum prosperitate corrumpi, ne & tui penitus obliviscar & mei: sed humilitatem & grati∣tudinem adauge, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Familia. Domus. VIsita quaeso, Domine, habitatio∣nem meam, et omnes insidias Ini∣mici ab ea longe repelle: Angeli tui sancti habitent in ea, & nos in pace & sanitate custodiant, & benedictio tua sit super nos semper, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. A∣men.
Linguae fraenum. Ps. 19.14.LEt the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my heart, be alwaies acceptable in thy sight, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen. Psal. 34. 12, 13.Lord, keep my tongue from evil, and my lips that they speak no guile: that so I may eschew evil and do good, seek peace and ensue it. Amen. Ps. 37.31.O Lord, give me the mouth of the righteous, that it may be exercised in wisdom, and that my tongue may be talking of judgment. Amen. Psal. 39. 1, 2.Lord, I have said in thy grace, I will take heed unto my waies,
that I offend not in my tongue. Give me, O give me that grace, that I may take this heed, that I may keep my mouth, as it were with a bridle; especially when the ungodly is in my sight, be it never so much pain or grief unto me. Hear me, and grant, even for Christ Iesus sake. Amen. Let the freewill offerings of my mouth please thee,Psal. 119. 108. O Lord, and teach me thy Judgments. Amen. O Lord,Ps. 141.3. set a watch before my mouth, and keep the door of my lips, and let not my heart be inclined to any thing that is e∣vil. Amen. O Lord,Ecclus. 22. 27. set a watch before my mouth, and a seal of wis∣dom
upon my lips, that I fall not suddenly by them; and that my tongue destroy me not. Amen. Afflictiones. David fugiens 2. Sam. 15. 25.IF I find favour in thine eyes, O Lord, thou wilt bring me again, and shew me both the Ark and the Tabernacle, and set me right in thy service, and make me joyful and glad in thee. But if thou say, (O for Iesus his sake say it not,) I have no pleasure in thee; behold, here I am, do with me as seemeth good in thine own eyes. Amen. 2 Cor. 4. 8.O Lord, though I be afflicted on every side, let me not be in
distress: Though in want of some of thy comforts, yet not of all: Though I be chastned, yet let me not be forsaken: Though I be cast down, let me not perish: And though my outward man decay and perish,ver. 16. yet let my in∣ward man be renewed daily, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 38. 10. whatsoever thou shalt lay upon me, I will hold my peace, and not open my mouth, because it is thy doing and my deserving. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 119. 65. thou hast dealt gra∣ciously with thy servant accord∣ing to thy word. For before I was troubled I went wrong, but now have I prayed that I may keep thy Law. And it is good for
me that I have been in trouble, that so I may learn still to keep it better, in the mercies of Iesus Christ. Amen. ver. 75.I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, & that thou of very faithfulness hast caused me to be troubled. O let thy merciful kindness be my comfort, according to thy word unto thy servant, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Baruch 3. 1, &c.O Lord Almighty, O God of Israel, the soul that is in trou∣ble, and the spirit that is vexed, cryeth unto thee. Hear, O Lord, and have mercy, for thou art merciful, and have pity upon me, because I have sinned before thee. For thou endurest for ever, but
unless thou have mercy I utterly perish. Have mercy therefore e∣ven for Iesus Christ his sake. A∣men. O Lord,Ps. 9. 18. remember thy pro∣mise, that the poor shall not al∣wayes be forgotten; nor the pa∣tient abiding of the meek perish for ever. Amen. Lord,Psal. 31. 8, &c. I will be glad and re∣joyce in thy mercy, for thou hast considered my trouble, and hast known my soul in adversities. A∣men. Have mercy upon me,ver. 10. O Lord, for I am in trouble, and mine eye is consumed for very heaviness, yea, my soul and my body.12. My strength faileth me because of mine iniquitie, and
my bones are consumed:14. I am even become like a broken Ves∣sel:15. For I have heard the blas∣phemy of the multitude, and fear is on every side.16. But my hope hath been and is in thee, O Lord, thou art my God, save and de∣liver me for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Ps. 42. 6. Why art thou so full of heavi∣ness, O my soul, and why art thou so disquieted within me? O put thy trust in God, that I may yet give him thanks for the help of his countenance. O my God, my soul is vexed within me, therefore will I remember thee. Amen. Psal. 44. 23.Up Lord, why sleepest thou? Awake, and be not absent
from us for ever: wherefore hi∣dest thou thy face, and forgetest our misery and trouble? For our soul is brought low even unto the dust, our belly cleaves unto the ground. Arise O Lord, and help us, and deliver us for thy mercies sake. Amen. In thee, O Lord,Ps. 31. 1. have I put my trust, let me never be put to confusion, deliver me in thy righ∣teousness. Bow down thine ear to me, make haste to deliver me. Be thou my strong rock and house of defence, that thou may∣est save me. Be also my guide, and lead me for thy Names sake. Amen. O God, the enemy cryeth so,Ps. 55. 3. and the ungodly cometh on so
fast, that they threaten to over∣bear me, they are minded to do me some mischief, so maliciously are they set against me. My heart is disquieted within me, and the fear of death is fallen upon me. Fearfulness and trembling and an horrible dread hath overwhelmed me. And I said, O that I had wings like a dove, that I might flie away and be at rest: that I might make hast to escape the stormy wind and tempest. But be thou my helper, and I will mag∣nifie thee, O Lord my strength and my Redeemer. Amen. Psal. 60. 11.O be thou my help in trouble, for vain is the help of man. A∣men. Pericula.Gracious Father, the life of
man is a warfare upon earth, and the dangers which assault us are diversly pointed against us. I humbly beseech thee be present with me in all e course and pas∣sages of my life; but especially in the services of my Calling. Suffer no malice to be able to hurt me, no cunning to circum∣vent me, no violence to oppress me, no falshood to betray me. That which I cannot foresee, I be∣seech thee prevent: That which I cannot withstand, I beseech thee master: That which I do not fear, I beseech thee unmask and frustrate; that being delive∣red from all danger both of soul and body, I may praise thee the deliverer, and see how happy a
thing it is to make the Lord of Hosts my helper in the day of fear and trouble. Especially, O Lord, bless and preserve me at this time from, c. that I may glorifie thee for this deliverance also, and be safe in the merits and the mercies of Iesus Christ my only Lord and Saviour. A∣men. Ps. 80. 5.O Lord, thou hast fed me with the bread of affliction, and given me plenty of tears to drink. I am become a very strife to my neighbours, and mine enemies laugh me to scorn. But turn thee again, thou God of Hosts, shew me the light of thy countenance, and I shall be whole. Amen. Psal. 109. 25.Help me, O Lord my God,
O save me according to thy mercy; and then the world shall know that this is thy hand, and that thou Lord hast done it. A∣men Lord Iesu, Amen. If my delight had not been in thy Law,Psal. 119. 92. I should have perished in my trouble. O continue my delight. Amen. Pestilentia. DEliver me, O Lord,Ps. 39. 9, 11. from all my offences, and make me not a rebuke to the foolish. Take, I humbly beseech thee, thy plague away from thy people, for we begin to be consumed by means of thy heavy hand. And for Iesus Christ his sake lay nei∣ther
me nor mine under this un∣comfortable disease. Amen. Ps. 91. 3.O Lord, deliver me from the nare of the hunter, and from the noisome pestilence: O defend me under thy wings, and keep me safe under thy feathers, that I may not be afraid for any terror by night, nor for the arrow that flyeth by day; for the pestilence that walketh in the darkness, nor for the sickness that destroyeth in the noon-day. Though thou∣sands fall beside me, and ten thou∣sands at my right hand, yet let it not come near me, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. ver. 10.O Lord, thou art my hope, I beseech thee let no evil happen unto me, neither let any plague
come nigh my dwelling; but give thine Angels charge over me to keep me in all my wayes, O Lord my strength and my Re∣deemer. Amen. O let the sorrowful sighing of them whom thou hast visited come before thee;Ps. 79.12. and according to the greatness both of thy pow∣er and mercy preserve thou them that are appointed to die, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord,Domin. Septua∣gesima. Si intre Familiā. I beseech thee favou∣rably to hear the prayers of thy humble servant; that I & my Fa∣mily, which are justly punished for our offences, may be merciful∣ly delivered by thy goodness from this and all other infection both of soul and body: that so we may
live both to serve and to praise thee, to the glory of thy great Name, through Iesus Christ our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. Liturg. Angl.O Almighty God, which in thy wrath in the time of King David didst slay with the plague of Pestilence threescore and ten thousand, and yet remembring thy mercy didst save the rest: Have pity upon us miserable sin∣ners, that now are visited with great sickness and mortality; and like as thou didst then com∣mand thine Angel to cease from punishing, so it may now please thee to withdraw from us this plague and grievous sickness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
O Lord God,Liturg. Angl. Gratia∣rum actio post Libe∣rationem. who hast woun∣ded us for our sins, and consumed us for our transgressions by thy late heavy and long-continued Visitation, and in the midst of that Judgment remembring mer∣cy, hast redeemed us from death: We offer up unto thee our selves, our souls and bodies (which thou hast now delivered) to be a living sacrifice unto thee. And here I offer up unto thee, most merci∣ful Father, in the name of all thy people, all possible praise and thanks, and shall ever magnifie thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord Amen.
Morbus. Psal. 18. 3, 4, 5.O Lord, the sorrows of death compass me, and the snares of it are ready to overtake me. When thou wilt dissolve my ta∣bernacle, thou alone knowest: therefore in this my trouble I will call upon thee my Lord, and will complain unto my God. O be with me at the instant of my death, and receive me for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Psal. 31.6.Into thy hands I commend my spirit, for thou hast redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. Psal. 32.4.O Lord, thy hand is heavy upon me day and night, and my moisture is become like the
drought in Sommer. I acknow∣ledge my sin unto thee, O Lord, and my unrighteousness have I not hid. O Lord be merciful un∣to me. Amen. O Lord, hear my prayer,Psal. 39. 13. and with thine ears consider my cal∣ling, hold not thy peace at my tears. For I am a stranger with thee and a sojourner, as all my Fathers were. O spare me a little, that I may recover my strength before I go hence and be no more seen. Amen. O Domine, media vita in morte sumus, unde aut a quo quaerimus auxilium, nisi a te Domine, qui ta∣men pro peccatis nostris merito infen∣sus es nobis? Sancte fortis, sancte misericors Salvator, amarissimis poe∣nis
mortis aeternae ne tradas me. Ne projicias me in tempore aegritudinis meae, quum deficit virtus mea ne de∣relinquas me. Domine, ante te omne desiderium meum, & suspiria mea a te non sunt abscondita. Nosti, Do∣mine, nosti intima Cordis mei; ne quaeso occludas precibus meis aures misericordiae tuae. Quin parce mihi ô Domine sanctissime, ô Omnipo∣tens Deus, sanctus & Salvator ma∣xime misericors, dignissime & aeter∣ne Iudex, ne sinas me in hora mea novissima pro quocunque terrore mor∣tis excidere a te. Amen, O Domine Salvator Jesu. Psal. 116. 2, 3.O Lord, the snares of death compass me round about, the pains of hell get hold upon me. I have found trouble and heavi∣ness,
but will call upon thy Name, O Lord; O Lord deli∣ver my soul. Deliver my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling: that I may walk before thee in the land of the living. Amen. Thou, O Lord,Psal. 118. 18. hast chaste∣ned and corrected me, but not gi∣ven me yet over unto death. O∣pen me the gates of righteousness, that I may go into them, and give thanks unto the Lord. A∣men. There is no health in my flesh by reason of thy wrath, neither is there any rest in my bones by reason of my sin. Yet, O Lord, be merciful unto me and heal me, even for thy Names sake. Amen.
Liberatio à morbo gravissi∣mo, in quē incidi Aug. 14. 1629.O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks for the great and almost miraculous bringing of me back from the bottom of my grave. What thou hast fur∣ther for me to do or to suffer, thou alone knowest: Lord give me patience and courage, and all Christian resolution to do thee service, and grace to do it. And let me not live longer then to ho∣nour thee, through Iesus Christ. Amen. Bellum. Esai. 8. 9, 10.O My God, though mighty Nations gather together on heaps, yet let them be broken in
pieces: though they take counsel together, bring it to nought. For though they pronounce a decree, yet it shall not stand, if thou, O God, be with us. Be with us therefore, O God, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Blessed be thou,1 Macc. 4. 30. O Saviour of Israel, which didst destroy the assault of the Mighty man, by the hand of thy servant David, and gavest the Host of strangers into the hand of Ionathan; shut up this Army in the hand of Israel, and let them be confounded with their power, and with their horse∣men. Make them afraid, and con∣sume their boldness and strength, that they may be astonished at their own destruction. Cast them
down by the sword of them that love thee; that we which love thy Name may praise thee and sing unto thee. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Ps. 18.37.O Lord of Hosts, give us strength that we may follow on upon our enemies and overtake them, and not return till we have destroyed them. O gird us with strength unto the Battail, that we may smite them that they may not be able to stand, but fall under our feet. And when thou hast thus blessed us, make us fall down at thy feet, and ever wor∣ship thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord, Amen. Ps. 46. 9.O make the wars to cease in all the world, break the Bow,
and knap the Spear in sunder, and burn the Chariot in the fire; that men may be still and know that thou art God, that thou wilt be exalted among the hea∣hen, and in the earth. Amen. Lord, be not far off,Ps. 44.10. put us not to confusion, but go out with our Armies and prosper them, that we may not turn our backs upon our Enemies, while they that hate us spoil our persons, our honour, and our goods. O sell not us thy poor people for nought; make us not a rebuke to our in∣solent neighbours, nor a scorn to them that are round about us. Our confusion by reason of our sins is daily before us, and the shame of our face hath covered
us. But, Lord, we humbly be∣seech thee forgive us our sins and deliver us, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Psal. 108. 11.Hast thou forsaken us, O God? and wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our Hosts? O help us against the Enemy, for vain is the help of man. O Lord help us. Amen. Liturg. Angl.O Almighty God, King of Kings, and Governour of all things, whose power no creature is able to resist, to whom it be∣longeth justly to punish sinners, and to be merciful to them that truly repent: Save and deliver us, we humbly beseech thee, from the hands of our Enemies, abate their pride, asswage their malice,
and confound their devices, that we being armed with thy de∣fence, may be preserved evermore from all perils, to glorifie thee who art the only giver of all vi∣ctory, through the merits of thy only Son our Saviour, Iesus Christ. Amen. Almighty God,Liturg. Angl. Gratia∣rum actio. who art a strong tower of defence unto thy servants against the face of their Enemies: We give thee praise and thanks for our deliverance from those great and apparent dangers wherewith we were compassed. We acknowledge it thy great goodness that we were not delivered over as a prey unto them. And we humbly beseech thee to continue such thy mercies
towards us, that all the world may know that thou art our Sa∣viour and mighty Deliverer, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord, bless the King, all his Commanders under him, and all his Souldiers. Cover all their heads, his especially, in the day of Battail. Teach all their hands to warre, & their fingers to fight. And bless all the Guides and Conductors of his Armies under him, with wisdom and courage, and faithfulness, watchfulness and diligence, and whatsoever else may lead on good success. And set a happy end, we humbly be∣seech thee, to all these Bloody di∣stractions, and restore Peace and
preserve Religion in integrity a∣mong us, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Paupertas. O Lord,Ps. 9. 12. when thou makest in∣quisition for blood, remem∣ber and forget not the complaint of the Poor. Arise, O Lord God,Psal. 10, 13, 16. and lift up thy hand, forget not the Poor. Take his cause into thy hand, for he commits himself unto thee, and thou art the helper of the friendless. O be so still, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O praise the Lord ye that fear him,Psal. 22. 23 and magnifie him all ye of
the seed of Iacob: For he hath not despised nor abhorred the low estate of the Poor, he hath not hid his face from him, but when he called unto him he heard him. O bow down thine ear and hear him still, O thou holy one of Is∣rael. Amen. Ps. 70.5.I am poor and needy, O God, make haste unto me: Thou art my helper and my deliverer, O Lord make no long tarrying. A∣men. Dolor. Psal. 25. 15.LOrd, turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me, for I am desolate and in misery. The
sorrows of my heart are inlarged, O bring thou me out of my trou∣bles. Look upon mine adversity and misery, and forgive me all my sins, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Hear my crying, O God,Psal. 61.1. give ear unto my prayer: from the ends of the earth, whither soever thou shalt cast me, I will call upon thee when my heart is in heaviness. O set me upon the Rock that is higher then I, to be my hope and a strong tower a∣gainst my oppressors. Amen. Save me, O God,Psal. 69. 1, 15. for the wa∣ters are entred into my soul. I stick fast in the deep mire where no stay is, I am come into deep waters, and the streams run over
me. They that hate me without a cause are more then the hairs of my head, and they which would destroy me causless are mighty. O let not these water∣floods drown me, neither let the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. Hear me, O Lord, for thy loving-kindness is great, turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. Hide not thy face from thy servant, for I am in trouble, but draw near unto my soul and redeem it, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Psal. 119. 28.My soul melteth away for ve∣ry heaviness, comfort thou me according to thy word. Amen. Psal. 119. 143. Tristitia.O Lord, trouble and heaviness
have taken hold upon me; pati∣ence, good Lord, that for all this my delight may be in thy Com∣mandments. Amen. Infamia. O Lord,Psal. 44. 14. my sins have made me a rebuke to my neigh∣bours, and to be laughed to scorn of them that are round about me. O suffer me not longer to be a by-word among the people. My confusion is daily before me, and the shame of my face hath cove∣red me. The voice of the slande∣rer and blasphemer hath overta∣ken me. And though all this be come upon me, suffer me not, O
Lord, to forget thee, or to be∣have my self frowardly in thy Covenant, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Psal. 55. 9, 16.Destroy their tongues, O Lord, and divide them, for I have seen cruelty and strife in the City. But I will call upon thee, O Lord, and thou wilt save me. Amen. Psal. 57. 3, 4.O Lord, send down from hea∣ven, and save me from the reproof of them that would swallow me. Send out thy mercy and truth, for my soul is among Lions, I lie among the children of men that are set on fire, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp sword. O deliver me, and I shall magnifie thy
Name for ever. Amen. I am become a Monster to many,Ps. 71.7. but thou art my sure trust. O be my Anchor for ever. A∣men. O remember, Lord,Psal. 89. 49. the re∣buke that thy servant hath, and how I do bear in my bosom the rebukes of many people. O re∣member me. Amen. Vis. O Lord,Psal. 119. 95. the ungodly laid wait for me to destroy me, yet make me the more thankful, and the more careful to consider thy testimonies. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 119. 150. they draw nigh that
of malice persecute me; there∣fore be thou nigh at hand to help me, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. ver. 157.Many, O Lord, they are that trouble me and persecute me, yet do I not swerve from thy Testi∣monies: yes, Lord, I do daily swerve from them. Quicken me as thou art wont. Amen. Psal. 119. 22.O take from me shame and rebuke, and I will keep thy Te∣stimonies. O take away the re∣buke that I am afraid of,ver. 39. for thy Judgments are good. O Lord do this for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.
Timor. LOrd,Ps. 19. 9. make me remember that the fear of thee is clean, and that thy Judgments are true and righteous altogether. Amen. O Lord, give me that grace that I may so carry my self, and that courage that I may so bear up my self, as that I may fear none but thee, nothing but that wherein I offend thee, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Fraudes. Dolus. O Lord, watch over thy servant;Ps. 41. 9. for my familiar friends whom I trusted have laid wait for me. Be
thou merciful unto me, O Lord, and deliver me from them: that even in this I may know thou fa∣vourest me, that mine Enemies are not able to triumph against me. Amen. Ps. 57. 5.Exalt thy self, O God, above the heavens, and thy glory upon all the earth. For men have laid a net for my steps, they have pressed down my soul, they have digged a pit before me. Lord, I desire not that they should fall into the midst of it themselves, but I beseech thee keep me out and deliver me, for thy mercy sake. Amen. Psal. 71. 10.Mine enemies lay wait for my soul, and take counsel together: They pursue me out of an opini∣on
that thou, O God, hast for∣saken me. But go not far from me, O God; my God, haste to help me. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 119. 85. the proud have dig∣ged pits for me: They persecute me falsely, O be thou my help. They had almost made an end of me upon earth, yet suffer me not, I beseech thee, to depart from thy Commandments, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Lord,Psal. 141. 10. keep me from the snare which malicious men have laid for me, and from the traps of wicked doers. If they will not repent, let them fall into their own nets together, but let me e∣ver escape them. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 142. 2, 7. I pour out my com∣plaints
before thee: Consider them, for I am brought very low. O deliver me from my persecu∣tors, for they are too strong for me. Amen. Templi ingressus. Psal. 9.7.LOrd, I will come into thy house upon the multitude of thy mercies, and in thy fear will I worship towards thy holy Temple. O bless me that I may. Amen. Ps. 28. 2.Hear the voice of my humble Petitions, O Lord, when I crie unto thee in this place, when I hold my hands towards the mer∣cy-seat of thy holy Temple, even
for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. I will dwell in thy Tabernacle for ever,Ps. 61. 4. and my trust shall be under the covering of thy wings. O Lord, hear our desires, and give an heritage unto those that pray unto thee, and fear thy Name. Amen. O my God,Psal. 100. 3, 4. I will go into thy Gates with thanksgiving, and in∣to thy Courts with praise: I will be thankful unto thee, and speak good of thy Name: For thou, Lord, art gracious, thy mercy is everlasting, and thy truth endu∣reth from generation to generati∣on. Amen. O Lord,Ps. 26. 8. I love the habitation of thy House, and the place where thine Honour dwelleth. O shut
not up my soul with impenitent sinners, but give me plenty of thy grace, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Fames. Psal. 37. 19.BE merciful, O Lord, and re∣member us, that we be not confounded in these perillous times, and that in these daies of dearth we may have enough, and a free heart and hand to be∣stow it upon thy poor ones, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Psal. 65. 3, 9.O Lord, our sins have prevai∣led against us, yet be thou merci∣ful unto our transgressions. O vi∣sit the earth, and prepare corn
for the Inhabitants thereof. Crown the year with thy good∣ness, and let no cloud drop other then fatness; that the very Hills may rejoyce  every side; that the Pastures may be covered with sheep and the Vallies with corn, that thy People may rejoyce and sing unto thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O God heavenly Father,Liturg. Angl. who by thy Son Iesus Christ hast pro∣mised to all them that seek thy Kingdom and the righteousness thereof, all things necessary for their bodily sustenance: Behold, we beseech thee, the afflictions of thy people, and grant that the scarcity and dearth (which we do now most justly suffer for our
sins) may through thy goodness be mercifully turned into cheap∣ness and plenty, for the love of Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Litan. Angl.O Lord, be mcifully pleased to give and preserve to our use the kindly fruits of the Earth, so that in due time we may enjoy them, and praise thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Pluvia. Liturg. Angl.O God, heavenly Father, whose gift it is that the Rain doth fall, the Earth is fruitful, Beasts increase, and Fishes do multiply; Send us, we beseech thee, such moderate rain and
showres, that we may receive the fruits of the earth to our com∣fort, and to thy honour, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Serenitas. O Lord God,Liturg. Angl. which for the sin of Man didst once drown all the world except eight per∣sons and afterward of thy great mercy didst promise never to de∣stroy it so again: We humbly beseech thee, that though we for our iniquities have worthily de∣served a plague of rain and wa∣ters, yet upon our true repen∣tance thou wilt give us such wea∣ther, whereby we may receive
the fruits of the earth in due sea∣son; and learn both by thy pu∣nishment to amend our lives, and for thy clemency to give thee praise and glory, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Poenitentiales. 6. 32. 38. 51. 102. 130. 143.Psalmi. Psal. 90. 13.O Lord, turn thee again now at the last, and be gracious unto thy servant. O satisfie me with thy mercy, and that soon, so shall I rejoyce and be glad all the dayes of my life. And when thou hast forgiven my sins, O comfort me again after the time that thou hast plagued me, and
for the years wherein I have suf∣fered adversity, O Iesus Christ my Saviour, and be merciful. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 119. 116, 120. my flesh trembleth for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments; yet stablish me according to thy word, that I may live, and let me not be dis∣appointed of my hope, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost;ver. 176. O seek thy servant, that I may not forget thy Com∣mandments, bu return to thee. Amen. O Lord,Jer. 14. 7, 8, 9. our iniquities testifie against us; for our backslidings are many, and we have sinned a∣gainst thee: yet, O thou hope of
Israel, thou Saviour thereof in time of trouble, shew mercy fo thy Names sake; and on me espe∣cially. For why shouldest thou be as a stranger in my soul, or as a wayfaring man that turns aside to tarry but for a night? O Lord be and dwell in the midst of me, for thy Name is called upon me. Leave me not O God of my sal∣vation, but have mercy for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Psal. 25. 10.For thy Names sake, O Lord. be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Amen. O Lord Almighty, I acknow∣ledge and confess I am not worthy to lift up mine eyes to heaven, much less to present my self be∣fore thee with any confidence
that thou shouldest hear my prayers and grant my requests, if I consider my own desering: For my Conscience accuses me, and my sins witness against me; and thou art a just and an upright Judge, and wilt not justifie any sinner in his transgressions. O Lord, suffer me not to be swal∣lowed up of death and desperati∣on, but in the multitude of thy mercies pardon me, O Lord, for thy goodness sake. For though I am a worm and no man, yet thou art my Creator, and I am the work of thy hands; yea, thou art my Father, and I thy Son: Thou my Shepheard, & I one of thy stragling Flock: Thou my Redeemer, and I one of thy Peo∣ple
whom thou hast dearly bought: Thou my God, and I thy Creature. O correct me not in thine anger, O Lord, neither punish me according to my de∣servings, but remember my weak∣ness as well as my sin, and have mercy upon me for my dearest Saviours sake Iesus Christ. A∣men. Coll. in die Ciner.Almighty & everlasting God, which hatest nothing that thou hast made, and forgivest the sins of all them that are penitent; Create & make in me a new and contrite heart, that I may wor∣thily lament my sins, and ac∣knowledge my wretchedness, and obtain of thee the God of all mer∣cie perfect remission and forgive∣ness,
through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Almighty & everliving God,Dom. 12. post Trin. which art alwaies more ready to hear then we to pray, and usest to give more then either we de∣sire or deserve; Pour down upon me most miserable sinner the a∣bundance of thy mercy, forgiving me those things whereof my con∣science is afraid, and giving me that which my prayer dares not presume to ask. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake, our Lord and only Saviour. Amen. Grant,Dom. 21. post Trin. I beseech thee merci∣ful God, to me thy sinful but humble servant pardon and peace, that I may be cleansed from all my sins, and serve thee
with a quiet mind, through Ie∣sus Christ our Lord. Amen. Dom. 24. post Trin.Lord, I beseech thee, free me from all my offences, and by thy bountiful goodness deliver me from the bands of all those sins which by my ignorance, frailty, or wilfulness I have committed. Grant this even for Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Coll. in fine Lit. Angl.O God merciful Father, that despisest not the sighing of a con∣trite heart, nor the desire of such as besorrowful; Mercifully as∣sist my prayers that I make be∣fore thee in all my troubles and adversities whensoever they op∣press me: and graciously hear me, that those evils which the craft and subtilty of the devil or
man worketh against me be brought to nought, and by the providence of thy goodness so dis∣persed, that I thy poor servant being overcome by no temptati∣on, nor hurt by any persecution, may evermore give thanks unto thee in thy holy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Lit. Angl. of thy great good∣ness I beseech thee give me true repentance, and forgive me all my sins, negligences, and ignoran∣ces, and indue me with the grace of thy holy Spirit, that I may amend my life according to thy holy word, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O God,Liturg. Angl. whose nature and property is ever to have mercy
and to forgive, receive my hum∣ble petitions: And though I am tied and bound with the chain of my sins, yet let the pitifulness of thy great mercy loose me, and that for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Exaudi quaeso, Domine, suppli∣cis preces, & confitentis tibi parce peccatis, ut pariter mihi indulgentiam tribuas benignus & pacem, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum. Amen. Omnipotens Deus, qui aquam de petra produxisti, educ de duritia cor∣dis mei compunctionis lachrimas; ut peccata mea ita plangere valeam, ut remissionem eorum te miserante ac∣cipiam, per Jesum Christum Domi∣num nostrum. Amen.
Almighty God,Liturg. Angl. in Commun. Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, Maker of all things, Judge of all men; I ac∣knowledge and bewail my mani∣fold sins and wickedness, which I have from time to time most grievously committed, by thought, word, and deed against thy divine Majesty, provoking most justly thy wrath and indig∣nation against me. I do earnestly repent, and am heartily sorry for these my misdoings, the remem∣brance of them is grievous unto me, the burden of them is into∣lerable. Have mercy upon me, have mercy upon me, most mer∣ciful Father. For thy Son our Lord Iesus Christ his sake, for∣give me all that is past, and
grant that I may ever hereafter serve and please thee in newness of life, to the honour and glory of thy Name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Ibidem.Almighty God, and my most merciful Father, who of thy ten∣der mercy hast promised forgive∣ness of sins to all them which with hearty repentance and true faith turn unto thee; Have mer∣cy upon me, pardon and deliver me from all my sins, confirm and strengthen me in all goodness, and bring me to everlasting life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. S. Aug. Ser. 7. de Tempore.Piissime Domine, misericordissi∣me Deus, sufficiat mihi quod hucus∣que peccavi, quod contempsi, quod
foetoribus carnis meae satisfeci, jam nu te inspirante voveo me a ne∣quitia mea conversurum. Adjuva, Domine, & des ut impleam, in & per Jesum Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen. Gratiarum actio & Laudes. I Will magnifie thee, O Lord,Pro libe∣ratione ab Inimicis. Ps. 30. 1. for thou hast set me up, and not made my foes to triumph o∣ver me. O Lord, my God I cri∣ed unto thee, and thou hast heal∣ed me, thou hast kept my life from them that go down into the pit. Sing praises unto the Lord, O my soul, and give thanks un∣to him for a remembrance of his holiness. Amen.
Ps. 35.9.O my soul, be joyful in the Lord and rejoyce in his Sali∣on. All my bones shall say; Lord, who is like unto thee, which de∣liverest the poor from him that is too strong for him: yea, the poor and him that is in misery from him that spoileth him. A∣men. Ps. 7. 18.I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, according to thy righte∣ousness, and I will praise thy Name, O Lord most high. Psal. 47. 2, 3. Post Vi∣ctoriam in bell.O Lord, thou art high and ter∣rible, a great King over all the Earth; thou hast subdued the people under us, and the Nations under our feet: therefore will I sing praises unto thee, O God, who art greatly to be exalted. A∣men.
Thy Vows are upon me,Psal. 56. 12. O my God, I will render praise unto thee; for thou hast delivered my soul from death, and my feet from falling, that I may yet walk before thee, O my God, in the light of the living, and bless thee. Amen. Gratias tibi Deus;S. Aug. Orat. de 5. Hres. cap. 7. Gratias tibi vera & una Trinitas, una & tri∣na Veritas, trina & una Unitas. Gratias tibi Deus Pater, qui & Fi∣lium tuum ostendisti, & mihi Docto∣rem dedisti. O & semper des in misericordiis antiquis. Amen. My heart is ready, O Lord,Psal. 57. 7. my heart is ready, I will sing and give praise; yea, I will praise thee among the People, and I will sing unto thee among the Nations.
O let thy Mercy which is great unto the heavens and thy Truth which reacheth unto the clouds, imbrace me and preserve me to thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Psal. 9.1.I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will speak of all thy marvellous works: I will be glad and re∣joyce in thee, yea, my songs will I make of thy Name, O thou most highest. For thou hast maintained my right and my cause, thou art set in the Throne that judgest right. Lord, conti∣nue to be my defence against the oppressor, and my refuge in due time of trouble, that I may ever rejoyce in thy Salvation Iesus Christ. Amen.
My trust is in thee, O God,Ps. 13. 5. and my heart is joyful in thy sal∣vation. I will sing unto thee, O Lord, because thou hast dealt so lovingly with me; yea, I will praise thy Name, O Lord most highest. Amen. O praise the Lord with me ye that fear him,Psal. 22. 23. magnifie him all ye of the seed of Iacob. My praise shall be of thee in the great Congregation, and my vows will I perform in the sight of them that fear thee. Amen. What profit is there in my blood,Ps. 30. 9. when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust give thanks unto thee, or shall it declare thy truth? Hear, O Lord, and have mercy upon me; Lord, be thou
my helper. Thou hast turned my heaviness into joy; thou hast put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness: therefore will I sing of thy praise without ceasing. O my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Amen. Ps. 34. 1.I will alwaies give thanks un∣to thee, O Lord, thy praise shall ever be in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast of thee, O my God, and the humble shall hear thereof and be glad. For I sought thee, O Lord, and thou heardest me, and didst deliver me out of all my fear, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Ps. 71. 8.Let my mouth be filled with praise, and with thy glory every day. Amen.
O Lord, who is like unto thee?Psal. 71. 20. For thou hast shewed me great troubles and adversities but thou wilt, I hope, return and quicken me, thou wilt return and take me out of this depth. Amen. I will thank thee,Psal. 86. 12. O Lord my God, with all my heart, and will praise thy Name for ever: For great is thy mercy towards me, and thou hast delivered my soul from the nethermost Hell. O de∣liver it still for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord, I give thee humble and hearty thanks for the measure of knowledge which thou hast gi∣ven me of thy truth; for giving me a love to it, and thy Church: for quieting my soul in the midst
of thy Churches distractions; for the measure of rest and repose which thou hast given me in thee, whereas no true content is found without thee. Lord, I give thee humble thanks likewise for the temporal blessings which thou hast heaped on me; the favour of my Leige Lord and Soveraign: the place to which thou hast rai∣sed me: the means which thou hast given me to do good. Lord, I cannot name all thy blessings, how shall I thank thee for them? Lord, I will thank thee for them by honouring thee in them. O give a heart to desire all this, and grace to perform it; that my sins may be forgiven me, and that I may be thine, through Iesus
Christ our Lord. Amen. O praise the Lord,Psal. 135. 3. Psal. 138. 1. for he is gracious: O sing unto his Name, for it is lovely. I will give thanks unto thee, O Lord, with my whole heart, I will worship to∣wards thy holy Temple, and praise thy Name; and that be∣cause of thy loving kindness and truth, for thou hast magnified thy Name and thy Word above all things. Lord, give me grace to obey thy Word, and to ho∣nour thy Name for ever, in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Pro Inimicis. S. Mat. 5. 44.O Lord, I beseech thee, forgive mine enemies all their sins against thee; and give me that measure of thy grace, that for their hatred. I may love them, for their cursing I may bless them, for their injury I may do them good, and for their persecu∣tion I may pray for them. Lord, I pray for them; forgive them, for they know not what they do. Amen. Deus Pacis & Charitatis, da omnibus inimicis mihi pacem & cha∣ritatem, omniumque remissionem pec∣catorum, meque ab eorum insidiis potenter eripe; per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
O Lord,Psal. 25. 18. consider mine Enemies how many they are; and they bear a tyrannous hate a∣gainst me. Lord, deliver me from them. Amen. Almighty God,Dom. 3. Quadrag. I humbly beseech thee, look upon the hearty deires of thy humble servant, and stretch out the right hand of thy Majestie to be my defence a∣gainst all mine Enemies, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Be merciful unto me, O God,Ps. 56. 1. for mine Enemies would swallow me up, and many they are which fight against me, O thou most highest; they gather together and keep themselves close, they mark my steps, because they lay wait for my soul. But when I
was afraid I trusted in thee and when I cry, then shall mine Ene∣mies turn back. This thou wilt make me know, when thou art with me: Be with me therefore, O Lord, and let me see delive∣rance. Amen. Psal. 35. 19.O Lord, let not them that are mine Enemies triumph over me, neither let them wink with their eyes that hate me either without a cause, or for thy cause. Amen. Psal. 7.1.O Lord God, in thee have I put my trust, save me from all them that persecute me, and de∣liver me; lest they devour my soul like a Lyon, and tear it in pieces while there is none to help. Lift up thy self, O God, because of the indignation of mine Ene∣mies:
arise up for me in the Judg∣ment which thou hast comman∣ded, that my help may still be from thee, O God, who preser∣vest them that are true of heart. Amen. Have mercy upon me,Ps. 9. 13. O God, consider the trouble which I suffer of them that hate me, O thou that liftest me up from the gates of death. Amen. Hear my voice, O God,Psal. 64.1. in my prayer, preserve my life from fear of the Enemy; hide me from the conspiracy of the wick∣ed, and from the rage of the wor∣kers of iniquity. They have whet their tongues like a sword, and shoot out their arrows, even bit∣ter words: Lord, deliver me from them. Amen.
Episcopatus. Menev. Bathon. London. Dioecesis.DEs omnium fidelium Pastor & Rector, me Famulum tuum, quem Pastorem Ecclesiae Cantuar. praeesse voluisti, propitius respice: Da mihi, humillime peta, verbo & exemplo quibus paesum proficere. Ut una cum Grege mihi credito ad vitam perveniam sempiternam, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. S. Aug. lib. 22. contra Faust. ca. 69. de Mose.O Deus mi, Pater clementissime, gratia tua ita in me operetur, ut sim humilis in recusando omne magnm ministium, subditus tamen in sus∣cipiendo, idelis in servando, ste∣nuus in exequendo, i regendo popu∣lo vigilans, in corrigendo vehemens,
in amando adens, in sustinendo pa∣tiens, in moderando prudens: ut pro¦iis quibus praesum Deo me interpo∣nam consulenti, opponam iascenti, in fiducia & meritis Jesu Christi Salvatoris nostri. Amen. O Lord,Esal. 55. 10. as the rain cometh down from heaven, and returns not thither, but waters the Earth, and makes it bud and bring forth, that it may give seed to the sow∣er, and bread to him that eateth: So let thy Word be that goeth out of my mouth, let it not re∣turn to me void, but accomplish that which thou wilt, and pros∣per in the thing whereto thou hast sent it, that the people commit∣ted to my charge may go out with joy, and be led forth in
peace to thy freshest waters of comfort, in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Son of God, thou which takest away the sins of the world, have mercy upon me in this hea∣vy Charge. Amen. Rex. Ps. 61. 6.O Lord, grant the King a long life, that his years may en∣dure as many ages: Furnish him with wise and safe Counsels, and give him a heart of courage and constancy to pursue them. O prepare thy loving mercy and faithfulness for him, that they may preserve him; so will I
alwaies sing praises unto thy Name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 20.1. hear the King in the day of his trouble, that thy Name, O God of Iacob, may defend him. Send him help from thy Sanctuary, and strength out of Sion. Grant him his hearts de∣sire, & fulfill all his mind. Set his heart firm upon thee, and upon o∣ther things, but as they are in and from thee: that we his Ser∣vants under thee may see with joy that thou helpest thine Anointed, and that thou wilt hear him from thy holy Heaven, even with the wholsome strength of thy right hand. And, O Lord, close not mine eyes till I see thy favour
shine ou upon him, even for Ie∣sus Christ his sake. Amen. Ecclesia. Dom. 5. po Epist∣phan.O Lord, we humbly beseech thee to keep thy Church and Houshold continually in thy true Religion, that they which do lean only upon hope of thy heavenly grace, may evermore be defended by thy mighty pow∣er: And that I may humbly and faithfully serve thee in this thy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Gracious Father, I humbly beseech thee, for thy holy Ca∣tholick Church, fill it with all
truth; in all truth with all peace. Where it is corrupt, purge it: where it is in error, direct it: where it is superstitious, rectifie it: where any thing is amiss, re∣form it: where it is right, streng∣then and confirm it: where it is in want, furnish it: where it is di∣vided and rent asunder, make up the breaches of it, O thou holy one of Israel. Amen. O merciful God, since thou hast ordered me to live in these times, in which the rents of thy Church are grievous; I humbly beseech thee to guide me, that the divisions of men may not se∣parate me either from thee or it, that I may ever labour the preser∣vation of truth and peace, that
where for and by our sins the peace of it succeeds not, thou wilt yet accept my will for the deed, that I may still pray, even while thou grantest not, because I know thou wilt grant it when thou seest it fit. In the mean time bless, I beseech thee, this Church in which I live, that in it I may honour and serve thee all the daies of my life, and after this be glo∣rified by thee, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Psal. 80. 8.O Lord thou hast brought a Vine out of Egypt and planted it; thou madest room for it, and when it had taken root it fil∣led the land. O why hast thou broken down her hedge, that all which go by pluck off her grapes:
the wild boar out of the wood rooteth it up, and the wild beasts of the field devour it. O turn thee again thou God of Hosts, look down from heaven, behold and visit this Vine, and the place of the Vineyard that thy right hand hath planted, and the branch that thou madest so strong for thy self. Lord, hear me for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 127. 1. except thou buildest the house, their labour is but lost that build it: and except thou, O Lord, keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. It is but lost labour to rise early, and take late rest, and to eat the bread of carefulness, if thou bless not the endeavours that seek
the peace and the welfare of thy Church. Therefore, O Lord, build thy Church and keep it, and take care for it, that there may be no lost labour amog the builders of it. Amen. Ecclesia Angl. post Possessio∣nes dire∣ptas. Nehem. 9. 32, 33.O Lord our God, the great, the mighty, and the terrible God; O thou which keepest covenant and mercy, let not all the trouble seem little before thee that hath come upon us, upon our Priests, upon the Houses built and dedicated to thy Name, upon the Maintenance for them that serve at thy Altar, upon our Kings, State, and People since that day of affliction. Thou art just in all that is brought upon us: For thou hast done right,
but we have done wickedly. Yet, O Lord, have mercy, and turn to us again, for Iesus and his mercy sake. Amen. Respublica. O Lord,Psal. 33. 10, 12. thou which bringest the counsels of the Heathen to nought, and makest the devices of the people to be of none effect, and castest out the counsels of Princes when they have offended thee: Have mercy upon this Kingdom, forgive the sins of this People; turn thee unto them and bless them, that the world may say, Blessed are the people whose God is the Lord Iehovah,
and blessed are the folk that he hath chosen to him to be his In∣heritance. Lord, hear and grant for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Lord, bless this Kingdom, that Religion and Virtue may season all sorts of men: that there may be Peace within the Gates, and Plenty within the Pa∣laces of it. In Peace I beseech thee so preserve it, that it cor∣rupt not: In War so defend it, that it suffer not: In Plenty so order it, that it riot not: In Want so pacifie and moderate it, that it may patiently and peace∣ably seek thee, the only full sup∣ply both of Men and States; that so it may continue a Place and a People to do thee service to the
end of time, through Iesus Christ our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. O Lord,Dan. 9. 16, 17. according to all thy righteousness, I beseech thee let thine anger be turned away from this City and thy People; and cause thy face to shine upon whatsoever is desolate therein, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Pro Afflictis. O Let the sorrowful sighing of the Prisoners come before thee,Psal. 79. 12. Alias the Sick, the Afflicted. and according to the great∣ness of thy power preserve thou them that are appointed to die, even for Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Regnum Angliae. BEnedic, Domine Deus omnipo∣tens, Regnum hoc, ut sit in eo sanitas, castitas, victoria, virtus om∣nis, & gratiarum actio Deo Patri, & Filio, & Spiritui Sancto: et haec Benedictio maneat super hoc Regnum, & super habitantes in eo, per Jesum Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen. Iejunium. Psal. 69. 9.O Lord, the zeal of thine house hath even eaten me up, and the rebukes of them which rebu∣ked thee, are fallen upon me:
Therefore I wept and chastned my self with fasting, and that was turned to my reproof. I put on sackcloth also, and they jested upon me: they that sate in the gate also spake against me, and the drunkards made songs upon me. But, Lord, I make my pray∣er unto thee, &, I hope, in an ac∣ceptable time. O hear me in the multitude of thy mercies, which are in Iesus Christ our Saviour Amen. Quadragesima. O Lord,Dom. 1. Quadrag. which for our sake didst fast fourty days & four∣ty nights; Give us grace to use
such abstinence, that our flesh being subdued to the spirit, we may ever obey thy godly moti∣ons, in righteousness and true ho∣liness, to thy honour and glory, who livest and raignest one God with the Father and the Holy Ghost. Amen. Rogationes. Dom. 25. post Trin.STir up, I beseech thee O Lord, the wills of thy faith∣ful people, that they plenteously bringing forth the fruit of good works, may of thee be plente∣ously rewarded, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Iejunia quatuor Temporum. ALmighty God, the giver of all good gifts, who of thy divine Providence hast appointed divers Orders in the Church; Give thy grace, I humbly beseech thee, to all those which are to be cal∣led to any Office and Admini∣stration in the same: and so re∣plenish them with the truth of thy doctrine, and innocence of life; that they may faithfully serve before thee, to the glory of thy great Name, and the be∣nefit of thy holy Church, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Consecrationes. Ordinationes. O Lord, I am now at thy Altar, at thy work;1 Tim. 5. 22. keep me that I lay not my hands suddenly upon any man, lest I be partaker of o∣ther mens sins: but that I may keep my self pure, in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Lord, give me grace, that as oft as they shall come in my way,2 Tim. 1. 6. I may put them in remembrance whom I have ordained, that they stir up the gift of God that is in them by the putting on of my hands, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Dom. 5. post Trin. Pro Ec∣clesia.Grant, O Lord I beseech thee, that the course of this world may be so peaceably ordered by thy
Governance, that thy Church may joyfully serve thee in all godly quietness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Lord, I beseech thee,Dom. 16. post Trin. let thy continual mercy cleanse and de∣fend thy Church. And because it cannot continue in safety with∣out thy succour; preserve it ever∣more by thy help and goodness, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Lord, I beseech thee,Dom. 22. post Trin. keep thy Houshold the Church in conti∣nual godliness; that through thy protection it may be free from all adversities, and devoutly given to serve thee in good works, to the glory of thy Name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Exilium. Psal. 137. 1.LOrd, send me not to the wa∣ters of Babylon, that I may have no cause to weep when I remember Sion: that no mans cruelty may lead me away cap∣tive, nor no mans scorn call upon me to sing in my heaviness. But that in my Country where I learnd to serve thee, I may live to honour thee all the daies of my life, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Martyrium. Psal. 141. 8.LOrd, make me remember the bones of thy Saints, how they lie scattered before the pit,
even as when one heweth wood upon the earth. O Lord, mine eyes look unto thee, in thee is my trust, O cast not out my soul. And if my bones also must be broken, O Lord I beseech thee give me courage and abundance of patience, that no torment may make my faith fall away from thee, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Eucharistia. Quaecunque ab Infantia usque ad momentum hoc,Praevia. sciens vel ig∣norans, intus vel extra, dormiens vel vigilans, verbis, factis vel cogi∣tationibus, per jacula Inimici ignita,
per desideria cordis immunda pecca∣vi tibi, miserere mei, & dimitte mi∣hi, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Almighty God and most mer∣ciful Father, give me I beseech thee that grace, that I may duely examine the inmost of my heart, and my most secret thoughts, how I stand before thee. Lord, I confess all my sins, and my un∣worthiness to present my self at thine Altar. But thou canst for∣give sin and give repentance; do both, Gracious Father, and then behold I am clean to come unto thee. Lord, make me a wor∣thy receiver of that for which I come, Christ, and remission of sin in Christ: And that for his
own mercy sake and thine. Amen. O Lord, into a clean, chari∣table, and thankful heart, give me grace to receive the blessed Body and Blood of thy Son, my most blessed Saviour, that it may more perfectly cleanse me from all dregs of sin; that being made clean, it may nourish me in faith, hope, charity, and obedience, with all other fruits of spiritual life and growth in thee: that in all the future course of my life, I may shew my self such an ingrafted member into the Body of thy Son, that I may never be drawn to do any thing that may disho∣nour his Name. Grant this O Lord, I beseech thee, even for his merit and mercy sake. Amen.
O Lord God, hear my pray∣ers, I come to thee in a stedfast faith: yet for the clearness of my faith, Lord, enlighten it; for the strength of my faith, Lord, en∣crease it. And, behold, I quar∣rel not the words of thy Son my Saviour's blessed Institution. I know his words are no gross un∣natural conceit, but they are spi∣rit and life, and supernatural. While the world disputes, I be∣lieve. He hath promised me if I come worthily, that I shall re∣ceive his most precious Body and Blood, with all the benefits of his Passion. If I can receive it and retain it, (Lord, make me able, make me worthy) I know I can no more die eternally, then that
Body and Blood can die and be shed again. My Saviour is wil∣ling in this tender of them both unto me: Lord, so wash and cleanse my soul, that I may now and at all times else come pre∣pared by hearty prayers & devo∣tion, and be made worthy by thy grace of this infinite blessing, the Pledge and Earnest of eternal life, in the merits of the same Iesus Christ, who gave his Body and Blood for me. Amen. Almighty God,Coll. pro Mundati∣one Cor∣dis. unto whom all hearts be open, all desires known, & from whom no secrets are hid: Cleanse the thoughts of my heart by the inspiration of thy holy Spirit, that I may per∣fectly love thee, and worthily
magnifie thy Name, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Litan. brevis.Pater de coelis Deus, qui uni∣genitum tuum pro nobis ad mortem tradidisti. Fili Redemptor mundi Deus, qui sanguine tuo pretioso nos a peccatis abluisti. Spiritus Sancte Paraclete Deus, qui corda sanctorum tua gratia vi∣sitas & confirmas. Sacra, summa, sempiterna, bea∣ta, benedicta Trinitas; Pater bone, Fili pie, Spiritus benigne: cujus o∣pus vita, amor gratia, contemplatio gloria: cujus majestas ineffabilis, potestas incomparabilis, bonitas inae∣stimabilis: Qui vivorum Dominus es simul & mortuorum: Te adoro, te invoco, & toto cordis affectu
nunc & in seculum benedico. A∣men. O Domine Jesu, da vivis mi∣sericordiam & gratiam: da tuis regimen & lucem perpetuam: da Ecclesiae tuae veritatem & pacem; da mihi miserrimo peccatorum poeni∣tentiam & veniam. Amen. O Domine, errantes oro corrige, incredulos converte, Ecclesiae fidem auge, Haereses destrue, Hostes ver∣sutos detege, violentos & impoeni∣tentes contere, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen. Misericors Pater, pro beneficiis quae mihi largiti sunt in terris Bene∣factores mei, praemia aeterna conse∣quantur in coelis. Oro etiam ut cum his pro quibus oravi, aut pro quibus orare teneor, & cum omni populo
Dei, introduci mihi detur in Reg∣num tuum, & ibi apparere in ju∣stitia, & satiari gloria, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. A∣men. O Lord, consider my com∣plaint, for I am brought very low. O Lord, how long wilt thou be angry with thy servant that prayeth? O Lord give me grace and repentance, and thou canst not be angry with my pray∣er. O Lord, I am thine save me, and deliver me not into the will of mine enemies, especially my ghostly enemies. O Lord, I am thy servant, thy unprofitable wastful servant, yet thy servant. O Lord, set my accounts right before thee, and pardon all my
mis-spendings & mis-reckonings. O Lord, I am thy son, thy most unkind, prodigal, run-away son, yet thy son. O Lord, though I have not retained the love and du∣ty of a son, yet do not thou cast off (I humbly beg it) the kind∣ness and compassion of a Father. O Lord, in thy grace I return to thee; And though I have eaten draugh with all the unclean swine in the world, in my hungry ab∣sence from thee, yet now, Lord, upon my humble return to thee, give me, I beseech thee, the bread of life, the Body and Blood of my Saviour into my soul, that I may be satisfied in thee, and ne∣ver more run away from thee, even for Iesus Christ his sake,
that gave himself for me. Amen. Coll. 3 in die Parasc.Misericors Deus, Creator omni∣um hominum, qui nihil odisti eorum quae condidisti, nec vis mortem pec∣catoris, sed magis ut convertatur & vivat; Miserere omnium Iudaeorum, Turcarum, Infidelium, & Haereti∣corum. Aufer ab iis ignorantiam, duritiem cordis, & contemptum ver∣bi tui: & reduc eos, misericors Do∣mine, ad Gregem tuum, ut serven∣tur inter reliquias veri Israelis, ut fiat unum Ovile, & unus Pastor, Jesus Christus Dominus noster, qui vivit & regnat, &c. Amen. Dum Al¦tari adsto, si fieri possit. Si non, tum mane, &cTanquam pro Tribunali tuo tre∣mendo (ubi nullus erit personarum respectus) reum memet peragens, ita hodie antequam praeveniat me dies judicii mei coram sancto tuo
Altari prostratus, coram te & stu∣pendis Angelis tuis a propria consci∣entia dejectus, profero improbas & nefarias cogitationes & actiones me∣as. Respice, oro Domine, humilita∣tem meam, & remitte omnia peccata mea, quae multiplicata sunt super capillos capitis mei. Quodnam enim est malum quod non designavi in ani∣ma mea: quin & multa & nefanda opere perpetravi. Reus enim sum, ô Domine, invidiae, gulae, &c. Om∣nes sensus meos, omnia membra mea pollui. Sed incomparabilis est mul∣titudo viscerum tuorum, & ineffa∣bilis misericordia bonitatis tuae, qua peccata mea toleras. Quare, ô Rex omni admiratione major, O Domi∣ne longanimis misericordias tuas mi∣rificato in me peccatore: potentiam
benignitatis tuae manifestato, clemen∣tissimae propensionis tuae virtutem ex∣erito: & me Prodigum revertentem suscipito, per Jesum Christum Do∣minum nostrum. Amen. Immedia∣te ante perceptio∣nem Pa∣nis.O Lord God, how I receive the Body and Blood of my most blessed Saviour Iesus Christ, the price of my Redemption, is the very wonder of my soul, yet my most firm and constant belief up∣on the words of my Saviour. At this time they are graciously tenderd to me and my faith: Lord, make me a worthy recei∣ver, and be it unto me as he hath said. Amen. Immedia∣te pot re∣ceptionem utriusque speci.Lord, I have received this Sa∣crament of the Body and Blood of my dear Saviour. His mercy
hath given it, and my faith recei∣ved it into my soul. I humbly be∣seech thee speak mercy and peace unto my Conscience, and enrich me with all those graces which come from that precious Body and Blood, even till I be possessed of Eternal life in Christ. Amen. O qui sursum Patri assides & hic nobiscum invisibiliter versaris, venito & sanctificato praesentia haec dona; eos item pro quibus, & eos per quos, & ea propter quae offeruntur. Amen. Pro Duce Buckinghamiae. GRacious Father, I humbly beseech thee, bless the Duke of Buckingham with all spiritual
and temporal blessings, but espe∣cially spiritual. Make and con∣tinue him faithful to his Prince, serviceable to his Country, de∣vout in thy Truth and Church: a most happy Husband and a blessed Father; filled with the constant love and honour of his Prince, that all thy blessings may flow upon himself and his poste∣rity after him. Continue him a true-hearted friend to me thy poor servant whom thou hast ho∣noured in his eyes: Make my heart religious & dutiful to thee, and in and under thee true, and secret, and stout, and provident in all things which he shall be pleased to commit unto me. Even so, Lord, and make him continu∣ally
to serve thee, that thou may∣est bless him, through Iesus Christ our only Lord and Savi∣our. Amen. O most merciful God and gracious Father,The Spa∣nish Jour∣ney. the Prince hath put himself to a great Adventure, I humbly beseech thee, make a clear way before him: Give thine Angels charge over him, be with him thy self in mercy, power, and protection: in every step of his journey: in every moment of his time: in every consultation and address for action, till thou bring him back with safety, ho∣nour, and contentment, to do thee service in this place. Bless his most trusty and faith∣ful Servant the Lord Duke of
Buckingham, that he may be dili∣gent in service, provident in busi∣ness, wise and happy in counsels: for the honour of thy Name, the good of thy Church, the preser∣vation of the Prince, the content∣ment of the King, the satisfacti∣on of the State. Preserve him, I humbly beseech thee, from all envy that attends him; and bless him, that his eyes may see the Prince safely delivered to the King and State, and after it live long in happiness to do them and thee service, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. The Isle of Re, 1627.O most gracious God and merciful Father, thou art the Lord of Hosts; all victory over our Enemies, all safety against
them is from thee: I humbly be∣seech thee go out with our Ar∣mies, and bless them. Bless my dear Lord the Duke that is gone Admiral with them, that wis∣dom may attend all his Counsels, and courage and success all his Enterprises: that by his and their means thou wilt be pleased to bring safety to this Kingdom, strength and comfort to Religi∣on, victory and reputation to our Country. And that he may re∣turn with our Navy committed to him, and with safety, honour, and love both of Prince and Peo∣ple. Grant this for thy dear Sons sake Iesus Christ our Lord. A∣men. O merciful God,His death Aug. 23. 1628. thy Judg∣ments
are often secret, alwayes just: At this time they were temporally heavy upon the poor Duke of Buckingham, upon me, upon all that had the honour to be near him. Lord, thou hast (I doubt not) given him rest, and light and blessedness in thee. Give also, I beseech thee, com∣fort to his Lady. Bless his Chil∣dren, uphold his Friends, forget not his Servants. Lay open the bottom of all that irreligious and graceless plot that spilt his blood. Bless and preserve the King from danger, and from security in these dangerous times. And for my self, O Lord, though the sorrows of my heart are inlarged, in that thou gavest this most honourable
Friend into my bosom, and hast taken him again from me; yet blessed be thy Name, O Lord, that hast given me patience. I shall now see him no more till we meet at the Resurrection: O make that joyful to us and all thy faithful servants, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Senectus. O Lord,Ps. 71.9. cast me not off in the time of mine Age, for∣sake me not now my strength be∣gins to fail me. Amen. Forsake me not, O God,ver. 16. in mine old age, now I am gray-headed, until I have declared thy
strength unto this Generation, and thy power to all them that are to come. Amen. Psal. 89. 44.O Lord, though thou hast shortned the dayes of my youth, yet cover me not with dishonour. Hide not thy self from me for e∣ver, but remember how short my time is, and make me remember it, O Lord. Amen. Psal. 90. 12.O Lord, teach me to number my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. Amen. Psal. 102. 2.O Lord, hide not thy face from me in the time of trouble;ver. 3. for my dayes are consumed a∣way like smoke, and my bones are burnt up like a fire-brand. My dayes are gone like a shadow,ver. 11. and I am withered like grass.
Thou, O Lord,ver. 23. hast brought down my strength in my journey, and shortned my daies. But,ver. 24. O my God, take me not away but in the timeliness of my age, that I may continue to serve thee, and be faithful in thy service, till thou remove me hence. Amen. Tentationes. O Lord, as thou art faithful,1. Cor. 10. 15. so suffer me not, I beseech thee, to be tempted above that I am able, but give an issue with the temptation, that I may be able to bear it. Amen. Omnipotens Deus, respice preces meas, & libera cor meum a malarum
cogitationum tentationibus, ut te mi∣serante dignum esse possim Spiritus Sancti habitaculum, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. A∣men. Deus, qui diligentibus te facis cuncta prodesse, da cordi meo invio∣labilem charitatis tuae affectum & nulla unquam tentatione mutabi∣lem, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum. Amen. Misericors Deus, da mihi in Fi∣de tua constantiam, & in Charitate firmitatem, ut nullis tentationibus ab earum integritate possim divelli, per Jesum Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen.
Carcer. O Lord, have mercy upon me,Psal. 142. 9. and bring my soul out of Prison, that I may give thanks unto thy Name, even in Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 146. 4, 6. blessed is the man that hath thee for his help, and whose hope is in thee. O Lord, help me and all them to right that suffer wrong. Thou art the Lord which loosest men out of Prison, which helpest them that are fallen. O Lord, help and de∣liver me when, and as it shall seem best to thee, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O Lord,Psal. 88. 6, 7. thine indignation lies
hard upon me; and though thou hast not (for thy mercy is great) vexed me with all thy storms, yet thou hast put my acquain∣tance far from me, and I am so fast in Prison that I cannot get forth. Lord, I call daily upon thee, hear and have mercy, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. Ps. 68. 6.O Lord, thou which bringest the Prisoners out of captivity, while thou lettest the Runagates continue in scarceness; Have mercy upon me, and deliver me out of the Prison and affliction in which I now am: and give me grace, that being free, I may faith∣fully and freely serve thee all the daies of my life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
Confessiones. O Domine, in multis deliqui, & improbe egi, & tristitia affeci spiritum tuum sanctum. Exacerba∣vi viscera clementiae tuae, cogitatione, sermone, opere, noctu & interdiu, palam & in occulto, consult & in consulto. O si constituas peccata mea in conspectu meo; O si rationem a me exigas peccatorum in se non ig∣noscibilium, quae scienter commisi, quid faciam? quo fugiam? Sed O Domine, ne in furore tuo arguas me, nec in ira tua corripias me. Miserere mei, non solum quia infirmus sum, sed quia figmentum sum tuum. Obsecro t, ne in∣tres in judicium cum servo tuo:
si enim iniquitates observaveris Do∣mine, Domine, quis in judicio con∣sistet? Non ego certe, si quis alius. Ego enim sum peccati pelagus, & non sum dignus in coelum suspicere prae multitudine peccatorum meorum, quorum non est numerus; probra, in∣juriae, &c. et mille praeterea ne∣fandae passiones sunt, a quibus non destiti. Quibus enim non corruptus sum peccatis? Quibus non sum con∣strictus malis? Inutilis factus sum tibi Deo meo, & hominibus. Quis me in talia prolapsum suscitabit? In te, Domine, confido, qui es Deus meus: esto mihi Salvator secundum viscera compassionis tuae, & miserere mei se∣cundum magnam misericordiā tuam, & ne retribuas mihi secundum opera mea, sed converte te ad me, me ad te.
Remitte omnia quae in te peccavi: serva me propter misericordiam tu∣am, & ubi abundavit peccatum, su∣perabundet grat tua; & laudabo & glorificabo te per omnes dies vitae meae. Tu enim es Deus poenitentium, & Salvator peccantium. Tibi gloria per Jesum Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen. Anniversaria. O Eternal God and merciful Father,Apr. 11. 1594. ors Pa∣ris. Dies erat Mercurii. with whom do rest the souls of them that die in thy faith and favour: Have mercy upon me,Et Nov. 24. 1600. Mors Ma∣tris. and grant that my life may be a preparation to die, and my death an entrance to life with
thee. As upon this day it pleased thee to take my dear Father to thy mercy, whe I was yet young. O Lord, he was  servant, thy meek, humble, faihful servant: and I assure my self he is in rest, and light, and blessedness. Lord, while I am here behind in my pilgrimage, showre down thy grace upon me. Thou hast been more then a Father to me: thou hast not suffered me to want a Father; no, not when thou hadst taken him from me. O be plea∣sed to be a Father still, and by thy grace to keep me within the bounds of a Sons obedience. Thou hast given me temporal blessings beyond desert or hope; O be graciously pleased to heap
spiritual blessings on me, that I may grow in faith, obedience, and thankfulness to thee; that I may make it my joy to perform duty to thee. And after my painful life ended, bring me, I beseech thee, to thy joyes, to thy glory, to thy self: that I and my Parents, with all thy Saints and Servants departed this life, may meet in a blessed glorious resurrection, ever to sing praises and honour to thee, in and through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Deus meus,Decemb. 26. 1605. Dies erat Iovis, & Festum S. Stephani. om. De∣von. & E.M. An. 1609. respice servum tu∣um, & miserere mei secundum vis∣cera misericordiae tuae. Scandalum ecce factus sum Nomini tuo, dum ambitioni meae & aliorum peccatis servio. Quin & hoc licet aliorum
suasu, oblatrante tamen Conscientia perpetravi. Obsecro, Domine, per misericordias Jesu, ne intres in judicium cum servo tuo, sed exaudi sanguinem ejus pro me perorantem: nec hoc Conjugium sit animae meae Di∣vortium a sinu tuo. O quanto satius fisset si vel hujus diei satis memor, Martyrium cum Proto-martyre tuo potius perpessus essem, negando quod urgebant, aut non satis fidi, aut non satis pii amici mei. Pollicitus sum mihi tenebras peccato huic, sed ecce statim evolavit, nec lux magis aper∣ta, quam ego qui feci. Ita voluisti Domine prae nimia misericordia tua implere ignominia faciem meam, ut discerem quaerere Nomen tuum. O Domine, quam gravis adhuc est me∣moria peccati hujus etiam hodie, eti∣am
pst tot & toties repetitas preces a tristi & confusa anima mea coram te profusas. O Domine miserere; exaudi preces depressi & humiliati valde servi tui. Parce, Domine, et remitte peccata, quae peccatum hoc & induxerunt & sequuta sunt. Nam confiteor, Domine, iterum & eodem die revolventis anni, nec sa∣tis adhuc cautus, aut satis humilis factus in aliud grave peccatum in∣cidi; lapidatus iterum non pro, sed a peccato. Nunc plene suscita me, Domine, ne moriar ultra in peccatis meis; sed des ut vivam, & vivens gaudeam in te, per merita & mise∣rationes Jesu Christi Salvatoris no∣stri. Amen. O merciful God,Iulii 28. 1617. Die Lun E. B. thou hast shewed me much mercy, and
done great things for me;Et Martii 6. 1641/. and as I was returning, instead of thankfulness, I wandred out of my way from thee, into a foul and a strange path. There thou ma∣dest me see both my folly & my weakness; Lord, make me ever see them, ever sorry for them. O Lord, for my Saviours sake forgive me the folly, and streng∣then me against the weakness for ever. Lord, forgive all my sins, and this; and make me by thy grace, thy most true; humble, and faithful servant all the daies of my life, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. Sept. 26. 1617. Die Vene∣ris. Ignis & pericu∣lum inde.O misericors Pater, quo me ver∣tam? Qui & exeundo & rever∣tendo peccavi contra te. Abii cum
Prodigo pdigus in longinquam regionem. Dissipavi substantiam me∣am, tuam luxuriose. Ibi primum sensi omnia consumpta, & me dig∣num non meliori quam porcorum con∣sortio: Nec tamen aut vita illa im∣munda, aut fames gratiae, de reditu ad meliorem frugem vel cogitare fe∣cit. Reversum jam ab itinere infausto ecce judicia tua, Domine, insequun∣tur me. Ignis corripit tecta sub qui∣bus sum; vidit enim Deus, nec mul∣tum distulit, sed ignis accensus est in Jacob, & ira ascendit in Israel. Et scelera (non dubito) mea confla∣grationem Collegio minitabantur, & mihi. Nam dum igni extinguendo intentior sum, parum abfuit, quin ab igne extinguerer. Quam ecce misericordia tua, Domine, vix sine
miraculo me flammis puit. Nam dum amica manus astantis me vi quadam amovit, eodem instanti ex eodem loco, ubi pedem figere decrevi, prorupit inclusus ignis, in flammas subsidunt gradus, & ego, st ibi inve∣nisset incendium, una periissem. O peccata mea nunquam satis deflenda! O misericordia tua, Domine, nun∣quam satis praedicanda! O poeniten∣tia nunquam mihi magis necessaria! O gratia tua, Domine, humillime & jugiter imploranda! Surgo, ô Domine Pater, & ecce venio; lento quidem & instabili gressu, sed venio, & confiteor: peccavi enim in coelum & contra te, nec dignus sum vocarifi∣lius tuus. Sim, ô Domine, quid vis, modo tuus. Ablue peccata mea in sanguine Filii tui, ut sim tuus. Et
concede obsecro, ut sicut tum terror, ita quotidie memoria ignis hujus ex∣urat faeces omnes & reliquias pecca∣torum meorum: ut me cautiorē factum melior ignis charitatis & devotionis in amorem tui & in odium peccati accendat, per Jesum Christum Do∣minum nostrum. Amen. O Domine misericors,Febr. 5. 1628. die Martis Computo Iuliano Tendonē fregi, & iter. Mar. 6. die So∣li inter ambulan∣dum in cubiculo in Turri London. Anno 1641/2. glorificetur beatissimum nomen tuum: Ecce enim ego, dum pro Officio Regem sequor, & tui, & humanorum casuum im∣memor, & mihi praefidens, infausto in via saltu in terram infidam incidi, & Tendonem fregi. Levatus in cur∣tum, Hamptoniam perveni. Cru∣ciatus talis fuit, qualem nervi sen∣tire solent. Et certe in febrem fer∣ventiorem ipse angor conjecisset, nisi ingens defluxus sanguinis me ab illo
metu liberasset. Magna infirmitate la∣boravi, et fere per biennium claudus incessi. Infirmitatem aliquam adhuc sentio, sed, gratiae immortales tibi, O beatissima Trinitas, usum satis perfectum Crurium dedisti mihi, & confirmasti praeter omnium expecta∣tionem, gressus meos. Dirigas nunc eos, O Domine, in viis mandatorum tuorum ut nunquam vel inter te & falsum cultum, vel inter te & mun∣dum claudicem; sed recta pergam, & viam testimoniorum tuorum cur∣ram, quum dilatasti cor meum. Oro ita{que} ne differas vel dilatationem cordis, vel confirmationem pedum in semitis justificationum tuarum, per & propter Jesum Christum Domi∣num nostrum. Amen.
O Eternal God,Maii 11. 1640. My house at Lam∣beth beset with vio∣lent and hase peo∣ple. and my most merciful Father, as this day the fury of the enraged multitude was fierce upon me and my house, to destroy me and to pil∣lage it, it pleased thee in mercy to preserve both, and bring some of them to shame and punish∣ment. I have sinned many ways against thee, O Lord, and this was a loud call of thine and a merciful to bring me to repen∣tance, which I beseech thee give me grace to hear and obey. But what I have done to hurt or of∣fend them, that should stir up this rage against me, I know not. Lord, in thy mercy look down upon me; fill my heart with thankfulness for this great delive∣rance,
and suffer me not to for∣get it, or the Examination which I took of my self upon it. And as for them and their like, let them not have their desire, O Lord, let not their mischievous imagi∣nations prosper against me, nor their fury lay hold upon me; lest they be too proud, and lest I end my wearie days in misery. Yet forgive them, O Lord, for they know not why they did it. And according to thy wonted mercy preserve me to serve thee, and let the same watchful Protection which now defended me, guard me through the remainder of my life. And this for thine own good∣ness sake, and the merits of my Saviour Iesus Christ. Amen.
O Eternal God and merciful Father,Decemb. 18. 1640. I was ac∣cused by the House of Com∣mons of High-Treason. I humbly beseech thee look down upon me in this time of my great and grievous afflicti∣on. Lord (if it be thy blessed will) make mine Innocency appear, and free both me and my Profession from all scandal thus raised on me. And howsoever, if thou be pleased to trie me to the utter∣most; I humbly beseech thee, give me full patience, proportionable comfort, contentment with what∣soever thou sendest, and an heart ready to die for thy Honour, the Kings Happiness, and this Chur∣ches Preservation. And my zeal to these is all the sin (humane frailty excepted) which is yet known to me in this particular,
for which I thus suffer. Lord, look upon me in mercy, and for the merits of Iesus Christ pardon all my sins many and great, which have drawn down this Judgment upon me, and then in all things do with me as seems best in thine own eyes: and make me not only patient under, but thankful for whatsoever thou dost, O Lord, my strength and my Redeemer. Amen. Octob. 24. 1643. I received Additio∣nal Arti∣cles and Summōs to my Trial.O Eternal God and merciful Father, after long imprisonment I am now at last called to answer; I most humbly eseech thee to strengthen me through this Try∣al, to preserve the patience with which thou hast hitherto blessed me through this affliction. Suffer
no course language, or other pro∣vocation to make me speak or do any thing that may mis-become my person, mine age, my calling, or my present condition. And Lord, I beseech thee, make me able to clear to the world that Innocency which is in my heart concerning this Charge laid a∣gainst me. Grant this, O Lord, for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen. O merciful Lord,Nov. 1. 1644. I received Summōs to appear in the House of Commōs next mor∣ning. I have had a long and a tedious Tryal: And I give thee humble and hear∣ty thanks for the wonderful strength that I have received from thee in the bearing up of my weakness. Lord, continue all thy mercies towards me, for the storm gathers and grows black
upon me, and what it threatens is best known to thee. After a long Tryal I am called to answer in the House of Commons; and that not to Evidence, but to one single man's report of Evidence, and that made without Oath. What this may produce in pre∣sent or in future, thou knowest also. O Lord, furnish me with patience and true Christian wis∣dom and courage, to bear up a∣gainst this drift, and send not out thy storms to beat upon me also; but look comfortably upon me to my End, in and through the merits of Iesus Christ my Lord and only Saviour. Amen.
Prayers added since the restoring of this Book to me, which was taken from me in a search by Mr. Prinne May 31. 1643: and with much difficulty re∣stored unto me Nov. 6. 1644. O Domine,August. Ser. 193. de Temp. ad Adventum tuum secundum paratus sim, ne talem me non invenias, qualem volui∣sti invenire, qui omnia pro me pas∣sus es, ut invenires talem, cui non supplicia inferres, sed praemia red∣deres sempiterna. Amen. O Domine,Ibidem Ser. 198. cum Christi adjutorio sic agere studeam, ut te tam pium Dominum, non solum hospitem reci∣pere possim, sed etiam perpetuum ha∣bitatorem habeam, per Jesum Chri∣stum
Dominum nostrum. Amen. Ibidem Ser. 202.O AEterne Deus, auxilium tuum imploro, ut veram discretionem, et perfectam charitatem praestare mi∣hi pro tua pietate digneris, cui est gloria & imperium cum Patre & Spiritu Sancto in secula seculorum. Amen. Ibidem Ser. 204.O Domine misericors, qui tanta mihi beneficia concessisti, des insuper mihi cum omni humilitate fidem re∣ctam tenere, charitatem integram cum omnibus hominibus conservare, mun∣do corde & casto corpore tibi Domi∣no meo servire usque ad finem vitae serio laborem, ut post labores desi∣derabilem illam vocem audire possim; Euge serve bone, intra in gaudium Domini tui. Amen.
Meditationes praeparantes ad Mortem. O Lord, quicken and com∣fort my soul, for I have sinned against thee. Lord, I call to mind all the years of my life past in the bitterness of my soul for my sin. My misdeeds have prevailed against me, O be thou merciful unto my sin; O for thy Names sake be merciful unto my sin, for it is great. Amen. Namely and especially, O Lord, be merciful unto me, &c. Herein O Lord be merciful unto thy servant. O Lord, lay not these, nor the rest unto my charge.
O let the depth of my sin call up the depth of thy mercies, of thy grace. Lord, let it come, that where my sin hath abound∣ed, grace may supeabound. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief. O Lord, though thou kill me, yet will I put my trust in thee. Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, yet will I fear no evil. For I hope verily to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. O let this Cup pass from me; nevertheless, if it may not pass from me, but that I must drink of it, thy will be done. Thou art the Lord, do what seemeth good in thine own eyes.
For I will take it as the Cup of Salvation, and give thanks to thy Name, O Lord. O Lord, grant that all the dayes of my appointed time up∣on earth I may wait when my Changing shall come. O that thou wouldst hide me in the grave, and keep me secret until thy wrath be past, and ap∣point me a time in which thou wilt remember me! Say unto my soul, O say it now, I am thy Salvation. Command my spirit, whene∣ver thou wilt command it, to be received up to thee in peace. O bid me come unto thee: say unto me, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
Lord thus, and now let thy servant depart in peace, that mine eyes may see thy Salvation. O Lord, thou blessed Trinity, three Persons and one God, have mercy upon me. I commend my self into thy hands as to a faithful Creator. Lord, receive thine own Crea∣ture, not made by any strange God, but by thee the only living and true God. Psal. 138 8.Despise not, O Lord, the work of thine own hands. Gen. 2. Eph. 4. 24.I am created to thine own I∣mage and likeness; O suffer not thine own Image to be defaced, but renew it again in righteous∣ness and true holiness.
I commend my self into thy hands, as to a most gracious Re∣deemer: For thou hast redeem∣ed me, O Lord God of Truth. O Lord, I am the price of thy Blood, of thy most precious Blood; O suffer not so great, so unvaluable a price to perish. O Lord, thou camest down from heaven to redeem that which was lost; suffer not that to be lost which thou hast redeemed. I commend my self into thy hands, as to my most blessed Comforter. O Lord, I am weary and hea∣vy laden, and I come to thee to be refreshed by thee. Behold, O Lord, I have been the Temple of thy holy Spirit; I have I con∣fess,
strangely polluted it; yet destroy me not, but dedicate me anew, and sanctifie me to thy self yet once again. Dan. 9. 19.O Lord, I wear thy Name: 'tis thy Name that is called up∣on me. For thy Names sake therefore be merciful unto me. O spare, Lord, if not me, yet thine own Name in me. And do not so remember my sin, O Lord do not, as that in remembring it, thou forget thine own Name. I have desired to fear thy Name,Neh. 1.11. to love and to honour thy Name. And I now desire to depart this life, in the Invocation and Con∣fession of thy Name. Lord, I confess it and call upon it, O come Lord Iesu. Amen.
Peccavi O Domine! Sed non negavi te: O nunquam praevaleat Inimicus ut negem. Sed credo; O Domine adauge fi∣dem, & non confundar in aeternum. Sed spero; et quae spes mea nisi tu solus? suscipe me secundum elo∣quium tuum, & non confundar ab expectatione mea. Sed praeparavi & direxi cor me∣um ad te quaerendum: & etiamsi non secundum munditiem Sanctuarii, ta∣men linum fumigans, & quassam arundinem nec extinguas nec fran∣gas, O Domine Jesu. Sed patienter sustineo castigatio∣nem tuam, & taceo quia tu fecisti. Sed remitto debitoribus meis, et tu pollicitus es remissionem remittenti.
Sed projicio me in te; ne te sub∣trahas, & venientem ad te ne ejicias foras. Sed in Nominis tui confessione & invocatione opto decedere. Quare non propter me, O Domine Jesu, aut quicquam mei, sed propter temetipsum. Propter Nomen tuum. Propter gloriam Nominis tui, & ve∣ritatem tuam. Propter misericordias tuas multas, magnas, mirificas. Propter Christum Mediatorem, & Spiritum Paracletum, suscipe re∣versum ad se, & revertentem ad te. Amen. Et ideo ô Domine Deus meus! Inter te & me. Christum Sacerdotem, Agnum, Sa∣crificium.
Inter Satanam & me. Christum Regem, Leonem, Trium∣phum. Inter Peccatum & me. Christi Innocentiam in vita. Inter Poenam peccatorum et me. Christi Satisfactionem, Passionem, Sanguinem. Inter defectum Iustitiae et me. Christi Iustitiam, Obedientiam ab∣solutam. Inter defectum ad Praemium & me. Christi Meritum. Inter defectum Doloris pro peccatis, & me. Christi Lachrimas, & Sudorem. Inter defectum fervoris in Orando & me. Christi Intercessionem.
Inter accusationem Satanae vel propriae Conscientiae, et me. Christum Advocatum. Inter Concupiscentiam & me, Christi Charitatem ostendo, offero, commemoro. Acceptum habe Do∣mine, propter. Christum ipsum. Amen. Peccavi O Domine! Sed non abscondo peccatum. Sed non excuso. Sed ultro fateor. Sed recogito in amaritudine a∣nimae. Sed meipsum propter peccata in te odi: des gratiam, ut judicem & vin∣dicem; ut non sine venia exeam e vita hac mihi miserrima. Amen. Psal. 78. 40.O Lord, I have not only sin∣ned,
but provoked thee with ma∣ny and grievous sins; yet, I be∣seech thee, remember that I am bnt flesh, even a wind that passeth and cometh not again. Et plus potest ad salutem mise∣ricordia Servatoris, quam ad perni∣ciem nequitia mei peccatoris. Amen. O Domine Jesu,S. August. T. 3. in S. Iohan. non habebas tu quare morereris, & mortuus es pro me: ego habeo quare, des gratiam ne dedigner mori, et paratus sim. Amen. O Domine Jesu, propter illam a∣maritudinem quam pro me miserrimo sustinuisti in Cruce; maxime in illa hora, quando nobilissima anima tua egressa est de benedicto corpore tuo, deprecor te miserere animae meae in egressu suo, & perduc eam in vitam aeternam. Amen,
Pro Infirmis. DEus, sub cujus nutibus vitaeno∣strae momēta decurrunt, suscipe quaeso preces meas pro aegrotantibus famulis tuis, pro quibus humillime misericordiae tuae auxilium imploro. Ut reddita sibi sanitate, gratiarum tibi in Ecclesia tua referant actio∣nes, per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum. Amen. Visitatio Infirmi. EXistimas ne? Nullum morbum aut crucem casu evenire cuiquam, vel temere. Quin immitti a Deo, citra cujus Providentiā neminē morbo laborare? Deum autem sapientissimum, ut
nihil unquam permittat contingere, nisi quum expedit? Expedire itaque tibi morbum hunc vel crucem, quem vel quam tibi nunc immisit Deus. Porro Deum Paterno erga nos ani∣mo esse. Patrem autem, sive indul∣geat sive castiget, aeque Patrem esse: nec minore, & forsan majore hoc quam illud amore facere. Bona tibi diu dedisse, nunc mala dare; sed nec mala haec, nisi ut majo∣ris boni causa sint, nempe ut redeas ad illum. Gratiae esse hoc, quod toties a te re∣pulsus, tamen nec sic deferat; quin vi∣sitet te denuo, & requirat te. Si sic; subdes hac in re Divinae voluntati voluntatem tuam, sacrifi∣cium omnium (post Christi) Deo gra∣tissimum.
Confiterisne? Non tam bene vixisse te quam o∣portuit? imo vixisse te male, saepe∣que & graviter peccasse? Estne peccatum aliquod praeter vel supra caetera? vel suntne peccata a∣liqua, quae gravent Conscientiam tu∣am, ut peculiaris Absolutionis bene∣ficio tibi sit opus? Estne scrupulus aliquis circa ea quae sunt Fidei, vel Religionis? Recogitasne annos elapsos vitae tuae in amaritudine animae tuae? Cuperesne majorem pro iis amari∣tudinem sentire, quam sentis? & gauderesne si sentires? & doletne quod majorem non sentias? Petisne illuminari de iis quae ig∣noras, vel oblitus es, ut de iis poeni∣tere
possis? & poenitetne id etiam quod vel ignoras, vel oblitus es? Estne propositum si vixeris judi∣candi e, & vindicandi in teipsum quod deliquisti? Estne propositum si vixeris emen∣dandi vitam, & devitandi tum me∣dia, tum signa eorum quae hactenus peccasti? Hoccine sancte promittis? An petis de hoc promisso admoneri te libere? Credisne? Quae in Symbolo sunt Fidei Chri∣stianae semel Sanctis traditae? Te servari non posse nisi ea credas? Laetarisne & gratias agis Deo, quod in hac Fide natus es, vixisti, & jam morieris in ea?
Petisne ipse, & visne nos tuo no∣mine a Deo supplices petere, ne defi∣ciat in te Fides haec ad ipsum, atque adeo ne in ipso mortis articulo? Petisne etiam ut fructus Fidei hujus, & praecipue Mortis Jesu Chri∣sti, utcunque in vita tua periit, tamen ne pereat in morte? Si te sensus defecerit, aut dolor seu debilitas eousque pertulerit, ut quaedam tibi excidant contra Religi∣onem, seu Praecepta ejus, visne haberi pro non dictis? & renunciasne iis tanquam non tuis? Remittisne? Illis, qui te quocunque modo laese∣rint, sicut tibi vis remitti? Petisne a Deo ut ipse quoque illis remittat?
Remittisne illis satisfactionem ad quam tenentur ratione illorum, quibus te verbo vel facto laeserunt? Visne hoc illis, qui in te peccarunt, tuo nomine significari; Te illis quan∣tum in te est noxas omnes remisisse? Remissurusne esses si graviora & plura in te deliquissent? Gauderesne si plures jam haberes quibus remittere possis, quo inde u∣berius tibi remissio peccatorum tuorum a Deo impertiri possit? TU ipse si quos laesisti, petisne ab iis veniam, ut & tibi remittant? Ecquos imprimis commeministi, & vis significari illis hoc tuo no∣mine? Quum remissio nulla sperari po∣test peccatorum contra octavum
vel nonum praeceptum Legis Divinae, nisi fiat restitutio. Paratusne es re∣stituere illis rem, quibus in re fami∣liari; & illis famam, quibus in fa∣ma detraxisti: idque sine dolo, & dilaione? Recordarisne qui tandem sint? Symbolum Apostolicum. CRedo Domine (tu meae incre∣dulitati subvenito) esse te Unum Deum, Patrem, Fili∣um, Spiritum Sanctum. Pro summa tua benignitate & potentia creasse Coelos & Terram. Pro immensa charitate omnia in Christo recapitulasse.
Qui caro factus et conceptus est. Natus. Mortuus. Resurrexit. Revertetur. Passus. Sepultus. Ascendit. Retribuet. Crucifixus. Descendit. Assedit. Virtute et operatione Spiritus San∣cti, ex Universo vocasse Ecclesiam ad sanctitatem. In ea nos consequi bonorum parti∣cipationem, & peccatorum remissio∣nem. In ea nos expectare carnis resur∣rectionem, vitam aeternam. CRedo Domine (ôsupple defectus Fidei meae!) Patris benevolum affectum. Omnipotentis potentiam salutarem. Creatoris providentiam in custodia, gubernatione, consummatione mundi.
Credo magnum Pietatis Mysteri∣um, propter nos homines, pro nostra salute Deum in Carne revelatum, Filium Patris, Unctum Spiritus, Dominum Jesum. Conceptum esse, et Natum; ad pur∣gandam impuritatem Conceptionis & Nativitatis nostrae. Passum esse; quae nos oportuit, (inexplicabilia) ne nos oporteret. Crucifixum, Mortuum, et Sepul∣tum, ne haec pro eo timeamus subire. Descendisse; quo nos oportuit, & ne nos omnino. Resurrexisse, Ascendisse, Consedis∣se; ubi nihil nobis, et ut nos quoque. Adventurum Iudicem mundi, ut nos assumat. Credo eum esse. In Conceptione & Generatione, Naturae Purgatorem.
In Passione Crucis, Mortis Sepul∣turae, Redemptorem Personae. In descensu, Triumphatorem In∣ferni & Mortis. In Resurrectione, Primitias Dor∣mientium. In Ascensione, Praecursorem. In Sessione, Paracletum sive Ad∣vocatum. In secundo Adventu & Iudicio, Consummatorem Fidei. Sic loco Abaddon. Satanae. Diaboli. Delatoris. Captivantis. Aculei. Jesum intueor. Mediatorem. Paracletum. Intercessorem. Redemptorem. Christum. Credo autem et Spiritus vim vivi∣ficam,
sanctificantem. Invisibiliter, extra, efficaciter, tanquam ventus. In Increpatione, Compunctione, Doctria, Commone factione, Advoca∣tione, Consolatione, Attestatione, Dif∣fusione Charitatis, Illuminatione Cognitionis. Credo praeterea Spiritus Sancti Cor∣pus mysticum Vocatorum ex universo mundo, ad fidem veritatis & sancti∣tatem vitae. Membrorum vero Corporis reci∣procam participationem. Praeterea Remissionem peccatorum in praesenti, spem vero Resurrectionis et Translationis ad vitam aeternam. DOmine, adde mihi fidem; non fi∣dem quae legem annihilet.
Sed fidem per Charitatē operantem. Operibus efficacem. Vincentem mundum. Sanctissimam denique, ut te amem ut Patrem, verear ut Omnipotentem. Ut fideli Creatori animam in be∣neficentia committam. Ut in me Christus formetur; ego vero conformer imagini ejus. Ut pro iis, quae pro me passus est, agam gratias; ipsi compatiar: pro ipso patiar, quodcunque ipsi visum fuerit. Ut pro ejus Cruce, Morte, Sepultu∣ra ulciscar, crucifigam, interimam, sepeliam, quod istis causam praebuit, peccatum. Ut pro descensu ad Inferos, vi∣vus frequenti meditatione descen∣dam in Infernum.
Ut conformer Resurrectioni ejus, in novitatem vitae resurgens. Ascensioni vero, quae sunt supra meditans, & quaerens. Ut et Consessus sim memor, quoties dono aliquo Coelestis Consolationis egeo; & quoties in Invocatione frigeo. Adventus autem, & Iudicii nun∣quam obliviscar. Tubae resonantis sonum semper audiam, & semper orem, donec ad Dextram constitutus sim. Amen.
Conscientiae Quotidianum Ex∣amen. O Anima mea! An egisti Deo pro acceptis beneficiis gratias? An petiisti gratiam a Deo pro cog∣nitione & expulsione peccatorum? An exegisti a te ipsa rationem de admissis praesenti die peccatis, cogita∣tione, verbo, opere, per singulas horas ex quo evigilasti? An expetiisti veniam de delictis? An proposuisti cum Dei gratia emen∣dationem? Benedicta sit sancta & individua Trinitas nunc & semper, & in se∣cula seculorum. Amen.
Itinerarium. O Domine, stellam ducem non sum meritus, tribue tmen quaeso mihi iter prosperum, tempus tranquillum, reditum felicem. Ut Angelo tuo sancto comite & custode, ad eum quo pergo locum, deinde ad do∣mum propriam, & demum ad aeternae salutis portum, pervenire feliciter valeam, per Jesum Christum Domi∣num nostrum. Amen. Adesto, quaeso Domine, et me fa∣mulum tuum custodi; esto mihi in lu∣brico baculus, in naufragio portus. Ut te duce, quo tendo prospere per∣veniam, & demum incolumis ad pro∣pria redeam, per Jesum Christum Dominum nostrum. Amen.
Exaudi Domine supplicationes meas, & viam famuli tui dispone: ut inter omnes vitae & viae hujus va∣rietates, tuo semper protegar auxilio, per Jesum Christum Dominum no∣strum. Amen. O Domine, salvum me fac ser∣vum tuum sperantem in te. Mitte mihi auxilium de Sancto, & de Sion tuere me. Esto mihi turris fortitudi∣nis a facie Inimici. Nihil proficiat Inimicus in me, & filius iniquitatis non opponat nocere mihi. O prospe∣rum iter faciat mihi Deus salutari∣um nostrorum. Domine exaudi ora∣tionem meam, & clamor meus ad te veniat, per Jesum Christum Domi∣num nostrum. Amen.
At the laying of the first Stone of a Chappel. Hammer∣smith Chappel March 11. 1629. O Lord merciful and gra∣cious, this thy People are preparing to build a place for thy Service: Accept I humbly beseech thee their present Devotion, and make them perfect both in their present and future duty; that while thou givest them ease to honour thee, they may with the greater alacrity go on in thy Service. And now, O Lord, I have by thy mercy and goodness, put to my hand to lay the first stone in this Building: 'tis a Corner-stone, make it, I be∣seech
thee, a happy Foundation, a durable Building. Let it rise up, and be made, and continue a House of Prayer and Devotion through all ages; that thy Peo∣ple may here be taught to believe in Iesus Christ the true Corner-stone, upon whom they and their souls may be built safe for ever. Grant this for the merit of the same Iesus Christ our most bles∣sed Lord and Saviour. To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Power, Majesty, and Dominion this day and for ever. Amen.
Prayers upon sundry Publick Oc∣casions. For the H. Court of Parlia∣ment, 1625. Tempore Iejunii ob Pestem gravissi∣mam.MOst gracious God, we humbly beseech thee, as for this Kingdom in general, so especially for the High Court of Parliament, un∣der our most Religious and Gracious King at this time as∣sembled; that thou wouldest be pleased to bless and direct all their Consultations, to the pre∣servation of thy Glory, the good of thy Church, the safety, ho∣nour, and welfare of our Sove∣raign and his Kingdomes. Lord, look upon the humility and de∣votion with which they are come
into thy Courts. And they are come into thy House in assured confidence upon the merits and mercies of Christ (our blessed Sa∣viour,) that thou wilt not deny them the grace and favour which they beg of thee. Therefore, O Lord, bless them with that wis∣dom which thou knowest neces∣sary to speed, and bring great de∣signes into action; and to make the maturity of his Majesties and their Counsels, the happiness and the blessing of this Common-wealth. These, and all other ne∣cessaries for them, for us, and thy whole Church, we humbly beg in the Name and Mediation of Iesus Christ our most blessed Lord and Saviour. Amen.
For the Navy, 1625.O Eternal God and our most gracious Father, thou art the Lord of Hosts, and the strength of all Nations is from thee: If thou keepest not the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. And no Victory can wait upon the justest Designs, upon the wi∣sest Counsels, upon the strongest Armies, if thou teach not their hands to warre, and their fingers to fight. Thou art the steady hope of all the ends of the earth, and of them which go and remain in the broad sea. Lord, at this time we need thy more special Assi∣stance both by Land and Sea; and or the mercy of Christ deny us neither. Be with our Armies, and the Armies of our Allies and
Associates by Land; be with our Navy at Sea. Be not from the one, nor from the other in power and in great mercy, until thou hast brought them back with ho∣nour and a setled Peace. Lord, turn our Enemies sword into their own bosome: For we sought Peace and ensued it; and while we did so, they did more then make themselves ready to battel. We are thy servants, truly and heartily sorry for our sins. Lord, forgive them, and then we will trust upon thee, that thou wilt pour down all thy blessings up∣on this & all other designes and actions of this State, undertaken for thy glory, the honour of our most gracious King CHARLES,
and the peace and welfare of this Church and Common-wealth. Grant this we humbly beseech thee, for Iesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and Advocate. Amen. In time of Pestilence & unsea∣sonable Weather, 1625.Most gracious God, we hum∣bly beseech thee pardon and for∣give all our many, great and grie∣vous transgressions. We may not hope thou wilt take off thy pu∣nishments, until thou hast forgi∣ven our sins. We may not think thou wilt forgive our sins, until our humiliation and repentance come to ask forgiveness. We have been too slow to come, and now thou hast apparell'd thy Mercy in Justice, to force us to thee. Lord, we believe, but do thou increase
our Faith, our Devotion, our Repentance, and all Christian Vertues in us. At this time the viols of thy heavy displeasure drop down upon us, and while we smart under one Judgment, thou threatnest the rest. The Pe∣stilence spreads in our Streets, and so as if it sought whom to devour. No strength is able to stand against it, and it threatens to make Families, nay, Cities de∣solate. While the Pestilence eats up thy People, we hear the sound of War, and the Sword calleth for such as it would devour. In the mean time the heavens are black over us, and the clouds drop leaneness; and it will be Fa∣mine, to swallow what the Pesti∣lence
and the Sword shall leave alive, unless thou send more sea∣sonable weather to give the fruits of the earth in their season. Our sins have deserved all this and more, and we neither do nor can deny it. We have no whither to go but to mercy. We have no way to that, but by the Alsuffici∣ent merit of thy Son our blessed Saviour. Lord, for his merit and mercies sake look down upon us thy distressed servants: Com∣mand thine Angel to stay his hand, and remember that in death we cannot praise thee, nor give thanks in the pit. Go forth with our Armies when they go, and make us remember that all our strength and deliverance is
in thee. Clear up the Heavens o∣ver us, and take not from us the great plenty with which thou hast crowned the Earth: but remem∣ber us, O thou that feedest the Ravens when they call upon thee. Lord, we need all thy mer∣cies to come upon us, and thy mercies are altogether in Christ, in whom, and for whose sake we beg them of thee, who livest and reignest in the unity of the Spirit, one God, world without end. Amen. O Eternal God and most merciful Father,In danger of Ene∣mies. 1626. we humbly be∣seech thee be merciful unto us, and be near to help us in all those extremities which our sins threa∣ten to bring upon us. Our Ene∣mies
are strengthened against us, by our multiplied Rebellions a∣gainst thee. And we deserve to suffer whatever our Enemies threaten. But there is mercy with thee that thou mayest be feared. O Lord, shew us this mercy, and give us grace so to fear thee, as that we may never be brought to fear or feel them. And when∣soever thou wilt correct us for our sins, let us fall into thy hands, and not into the hands of men. Grant this for Iesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and Re∣deemer. Amen. O Eternal God and most gra∣cious Father, we have deserved whatsoever thy Law hath threat∣ned against sinners. Our Con∣tempt
of thy Divine Worship is great, and we hear thy Word, but obey it not. Forgive us, O Lord, forgive us these and all o∣ther our grievous sins. Give us light in our understanding, readi∣ness and obedience in our will, discretion in our words and acti∣ons; true, serious, and loyal en∣deavours for the peace and pro∣sperity of Ierusalem, the unity and glory of this Church and State: that so we may love it and prosper in it, and be full of grace in this life, and filled with glory in the life to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.Gratia∣rum actio pro Pesti∣lentia ex∣tincta. 1626. O most merciful God, we give thee praise and thanks for the wonderful ceasing of the late
raging Pestilence in the chief Ci∣ty of this Kingdom and other places. Lord, shew us yet father mercy, and look upon all parts of this Land with tender compassi∣on. Keep back the destroying Angel, that he enter not into pla∣ces that are yet free, nor make farther waste in those which are already visited. Comfort them that are sick, preserve them that are sound, receive them that die to mercy, that living and dying, they and we may continue thy faith∣ful servants, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. In danger of Ene∣mies. 1626.O most gracious God and lo∣ving Father, we have felt thy ma∣nifold mercies, no Nation more: and we have committed sins a∣gainst
thee, few Nations greater. Enter not into judgment with us, O Lord, but for Christ and his mercy sake, pacifie thine anger, and save us from the malice and cruelty of our Enemies. They are our crying sins that have cal∣led them upon us. Let it be an addition to thy wonted mercy, to restrain their fury. To this end, Lord, pt thy bridle into their mouths, and thy bit between their teeth. Frustrate their de∣signes and let them find no way in our Seas, nor any path in our Floods: but scatter them with thy tempest, & follow them with all thy storms; that we being delivered by thy hand, may bless and honour thy Name, devoutly
serving thee all our daies, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. 1626. 1628.O Lord, thou gracious Go∣vernour of all the Kingdoms of the Earth: Look down, we be∣seech thee, in mercy upon this Realm, & upon all other Refor∣med Churches. Save and deliver us and them from the hands of all such as threaten our destruction. Protect the person of our Gra∣cious Soveraign, direct his Coun∣sels, go forth with his Armies, be unto him and to us a wall of brass, and a strong tower of de∣fence against his and our Ene∣mies; that so we being safe through thy mercy, may live to serve thee in thy Church, and ever give thee praise and glory,
through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen. O Eternal God and merciful Father,For the sfe child-bearing of the Queens Majesty, 1628. all peace and strength of Kingdoms is from thee: and li∣neal Succession is thy great bles∣sing both upon Princes and States; the great means to pre∣serve unity, and confirm strength. We therefore give thee humble and heary thanks, as for all thy blessings, so especially at this time for thy great mercy and lo∣ving-kindness to our dread So∣veraign, his Royal Queen, and this whole State, in giving her Majesty hope of her long desired Issue, thereby filling their and our hearts with gladness. Lord, go along with thine own blessings to
perfect them. Be with her in soul and in body, preserve her from all dangers. Keep her safe to and in the hour of Travel, that there may be strength to bring forth her Joy and our Hope. And make her a joyful Mother of ma∣ny Children, to the glory of thy great Name, the happiness of his Majesty, the security of this State, and the flourishing of the Church and true Religion a∣mongst us. Grant this, even for Iesus Christ his sake our only Lord and Saviour. Amen. For the safe childbearing of the Qeens Majesty. 1629.O Eternal God and merciful Father, since lineal Succession is under thee, the great security of Kingdoms, and the very life of Peace. We therefore give thee
most humble and hearty thanks for the great blessing which thou1631. hast again begun to work for our Gracious King CHARLES and this whole State, in giving the Queens Majesty further hopes of a desired and happy Issue. And as we give thee humble and hear∣ty thanks for this, so we pray thee to perfect this great blessing thus begun, to preserve her from all dangers, and to be with her by special assistance in the hour of Travel. Lord, make her a happy Mother of succesful Chil∣dren, to the increase of thy glory, the comfort of his Majesty, the joy of her own heart, the safety of the State, and the preservation of the Church and true Religion
among us. Grant this even for Iesus Christ his sake our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. A Thanks∣giving for the Queens safe Deli∣very, and happy Birth of Prince Charles 1630. May 29.O most merciful God & gra∣cious Father, thou hast given us the joy of our hearts, the content∣ment of our souls for this life, in blessing our dear and dread Sove∣raign, and his vertuous Royal Queen with a hopeful Son, & us with a Prince in thy just time and his to rule over us. We give thy glorious Name most humble and hearty thanks for this. Lord, make us so thankful, so obedient to thee for this great mercy, that thy goodness may delight to en∣crease it to us. Encrease, it good Lord, to more Children, the prop one of another against single
hope. Encrease it to more Sons, the great strength of his Majesty and his Throne. Encrease it in the Joy of his Royal Parents, and all true-hearted Subjects. En∣crease it by his Christian and hap∣py Education both in Faith and Goodness: that this Kingdom and People may be happy in the long life and prosperity of our most Gracious Soveraign and his Royal Consort. And when ful∣ness of daies must gather time, Lord double his Graces, and make them apparent in this his Heir and his Heirs after him, for all Generations to come, even for Iesus Christ his sake our Lord and only Saviour. A∣men.
A Thanks∣giving for the Queens safe Deli∣very, and happy Birth of the Lady Mary, Nov. 4. 1631.O most gracious God and lo∣ving Father, we give thee, as we are bound, most humble and hear∣ty thanks for thy great mercy extended to us and this whole State, in blessing the Queens Ma∣jesty with a happy Deliverance in and from the great pains and pe∣rils of Child-birth. We humbly beseech thee to continue and en∣crease this Blessing: to give her strength, that she may happily overcome this, and all dangers else: that his most Gracious Majesty may long have joy in her happy life: that she may have joy in his Majesties prosperity; that both of them may have comfort in the Royal Prince Charles, the new-born Princess
the Lady Mary, and with them in a hopeful, healthful and suc∣cesful Posterity: that the whole Kingdome may have fulness of joy in them; and that both they and we may all have joy in the true honour and service of God: that both Church and Kingdom may be blessed, and their Royal Persons filled with honour in this life, and with eternal happiness in the life to come, even for Ie∣sus Christ his sake our only Lord and Saviour. Amen. O Eternal God and merciful Father,A Thanks∣giving for his Maje∣sties Re∣covery from the Small Pocks 1632. we give thee all humble and hearty thanks for our most Gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles; both for the gentleness of thy hand in a disease otherwise
so troublesome and fearful. And for the mercifulness of thy hand in taking it off: so soon, and so happily. We know and acknow∣ledge before thee our sins, and what grievous punishments they have deserved. But Lord we be∣seech thee still to remember us in mercy, and long to bless our Gracious King with life and healh, and strength, and happi∣ness; and above all with the fear of thy holy Name: that so he may continue under thee, and o∣ver us, a Father of the State, a Patron of the Church, a Com∣fort to his Royal Queen, till he see his Childrens Children, and peace upon Israel. Grant this good Lord, even for Iesus Christ his sake. Amen.
Most gracious God and loving Father,A Thanks∣giving for the Queens safe Deli∣very, and happy Birth of Iames Duke of York. we give thee all humble and hearty thanks for thy great mercy in blessing the Queen's Majesty with a happy Delive∣rance in and from the great pains and peril of Child-birth. We humbly beseech thee to continue thy mercies towards her, that she may happily overcome this and all other dangers; that his most Gracious Majesty may long have joy in her most happy life, & both of them comfort in the Royal Prince Charles, & the rest of their Princely Issue; particularly in the new-born Prince the Duke of York, that they all may prove a healthful, hopeful, and a suc∣cesful Posterity; that both
Church and Kingdom may have fulness of joy in them. That their Majesties Royal Persons may be filled with honour in this life, and with eternal happiness in the life to come. And this even for Iesus Christ his sake our only Saviour and Redeemer. Amen. A Prayer for the King's Majesty in his Northern Expediti∣on, 1639.O Eternal God and merciful Father, by whom alone Kings reign, thou Lord of Hosts, and giver of all Victory, we humbly beseech thee to guard our most Gracious Soveraign Lord King Charles; to bless him in his Per∣son with health and safety, in his Counsels with wisdome and pru∣dence, and in all his Actions with honour and good success. Grant, blessed Lord, that Victory may
attend his designes, and that his liege People may rejoyce in thee; but that shame may cover the face of thine and his treacherous Enemies. Give him, blessed Fa∣ther, so to settle his Subjects in Peace, and the true fear of thy Divine Majesty, that he may re∣turn with joy and honour, and proceed long to Govern his King∣doms in peace and plenty, and in the happiness of true Religion and Piety all his daies. These blessings, and whatsoever else shall be necessary for him, or for our selves, we humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father, for Iesus Christ his sake our only Mediator and Redeemer. A∣men.
For the King in his Nor∣thern Ex∣pedition, 1640.O Eternal God and merciful Father, by whom alone Kings reign, thou Lord of Hosts and Giver of all Victory: We hum∣bly beseech thee both now and e∣ver to guide & preserve our most gracious Soveraign Lord King CHARLES. To bless him in his Person with health and safety; in his Counsels with wisdom and prudence, and in all his Actions with honour and good success: especially against those his Trai∣terous Subjects, who having cast off all Obedience to their Anoin∣ted Soveraign, do at this time in Rebellious manner invade this Realm. Grant, Blessed Lord, that Victory may attend his Ma∣jesties designs, that his Liege Peo∣ple
may rejoyce in thee; but that shame may cover the faces of thine and his treacherous Ene∣mies, Enable him (blessed Fa∣ther) so to vanquish and subdue them all, that his Loyal Subjects being setled in Peace and the true fear of thy holy Name, he may return with joy and honour, & continue to Govern his King∣domes in peace and plenty, and in the happiness of true Religion and Piety all his daies. These blessings, and whatsoever else shall be necessary for him, or for our selves, we humbly beg of thee, O merciful Father, for Ie∣sus Christ his sake, our only Me∣diator and Redeemer. Amen.
Quotidie. O Lord, forgive me all my sins that are past. O Lord, strengthen me against all Temp∣tations, especially the Temptati∣ons of, &c. O Lord, fill my heart with thankfulness: and I do give thee most humble and hearty thanks for the great deliverance of me from the rage and fury of the Multitude. O Lord, let the same wings of thy merciful protection be spread over me all the daies of my life. O Lord, give me a faithful, a patient, a penitent, a persevering heart in thy service; that so I may with comfort dai∣ly
nay hourly expect when my Changing shall come. So Amen, Lord Iesu. Amen. Absolutio. OUr Lord Iesus Christ, who hath left power to his Church to Absolve all sinners, which truely repent and believe in him, of his great mercy forgive thee thine offences. And by his Authority committed to me, I Absolve thee from all thy sins, In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen.
Admissio in Ecclesiam. GOd, who of his mercy hath given you grace to give your self to his Church; Preserve aud keep you in his Truth, free both from Super∣stition and Prophaneness. The Lord bless and keep you.Numb. 6. 24. The Lord make his face shine upon you, and be merciful unto you. The Lord lift up his counte∣nance upon you, and give you peace in Conscience, and con∣stancy in Truth. And by the power of Ministration commit∣ted to me by our Lord and Sa∣viour Iesus Christ, I Readmit
you into the Fellowship of his Church, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, Amen.
His Grace's Speech, according to the Original, written with his own hand, and delivered by him upon the Scaffold on Tower-hill, Jan. 10. 1644. to his Chaplain Dr. Sterne, now Lord Arch-Bishop of York. Good People, THis is an uncomfortable time to preach; yet I shall begin with a Text of Scripture, Heb. 12.2. Let us run with patience that race which is set before us: Looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, despising the
shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God. I have been long in my Race, and how I have looked unto Iesus the Author and Finisher of my Faith, he best knows. I am now come to the end of my Race, and here I find the Cross, a death of shame. But the shame must be despised, or no coming to the right hand of God. Iesus despi∣sed the shame for me, and God forbid that I should not despise the shame for Him. I am going apace (as you see) towards the Red sea, and my feet are upon the very brink of it: An argument (I hope) that God is bringing me into the Land of Promise; for that was the way
through which he led his peo∣ple. But before they came to it, he instituted a Passeover for them. A Lamb it was, but it must be eaten with sowre herbs, Exod. 12. 8. I shall obey, and labour to digest the sowr herbs, as well as the Lamb. And I shall remem∣ber it is the Lords Passeover. I shall not think of the herbs, nor be angry with the hands that ga∣thered them; but look up only to him who instituted that, and governs these. For men can have no more power over me then what is given them from above, S. Iohn. 19. 11. I am not in love with this Pas∣sage through the Red-sea, for I
have the weakness and infirmity of flesh and blood plentifully in me. And I have prayed with my Saviour, Ut transiret calix iste, that this cup of red wine might pass from me, S. Luke 22. 42. But if not, Gods will, not mine, be done. And I shall most wil∣lingly drink of this cup as deep as he pleases, and enter into this Sea, yea, and pass through it in the way that he shall lead me. But I would have it remem∣bred (Good people) that when Gods servants were in this boi∣sterous Sea, and Aaron among them, the Egyptians which per∣secuted them, and did in a man∣ner drive them into that Sea, were drowned in the same wa∣ters,
while they were in pursuit of them. I know my God, whom I serve, is as able to deliver me from this Sea of blood, as he was to deliver the three Children from the Furnace, Dan. 3. And (I most humbly thank my Saviour for it) my resolution is, as theirs was: They would not worship the Image which the King had set up, nor will I the Imaginations which the People are setting up. Nor will I forsake the Tem∣ple and the Truth of God to fol∣low the bleating of Ieroboams Calves in Dan and in Bethel. And as for this People, they are at this day miserably misled: God of his mercy open their
eyes, that they may see the right way. For at this day the blind lead the blind; and if they go on, both will certainly into the ditch, S. Luke 6. 39. For my self, I am (and I ac∣knowledge it in all humility) a most grievous sinner many ways, by thought, word, and deed: And yet I cannot doubt but that God hath mercy in store for me a poor penitent, as well as for o∣ther sinners. I have now upon this sad occasion ransacked every corner of my heart; and yet I thank God I have not found a∣mong the many, any one sin, which deserves death by any known Law of this Kingdom. And yet hereby I charge no∣thing
upon my Judges: For if they proceed upon proof by va∣luable witnesses, I or any other Innocent may be justly condem∣ned. And I thank God, though the weight of the Sentence lie heavy upon me, I am as quiet within as ever I was in my life. And though I am not only the first Archbishop, but the first man that ever died by an Ordi∣nance in Parliament, yet some of my Predecessors have gone this way, though not by this means. For Elphegus was hurried away and lost his head by the Danes; Simon Sudbury in the Fury of Wat Tyler and his fellows. Be∣fore these S. Iohn Baptist had his head danced off by a lewd Wo∣man:
And S. Cyprian Archbi∣shop of Carthage submitted his head to a persecuting sword. Many examples great and good; and they teach me patience. For I hope my Cause in heaven will look of another die, then the co∣lour that is put upon it here. And some comfort it is to me, not only that I go the way of these great men in their several Generations; but also that my Charge, as foul as it is made, looks like that of the Jews against S. Paul, Acts 25. 8. For he was accused for the Law and the Temple, i. e. Religion. And like that of S. Stephen, Acts 6. 14. for breaking the Ordinances which Moses gave, i. e. Law and Reli∣gion,
the Holy Place and the Law, ver. 13. But you will say, Do I then compare my self with the inte∣grity of S. Paul and S. Stephen? No, far be that from me. I only raise a comfort to my self, that these great Saints and Servants of God were laid at in their times as I am now. And it is memorable that S. Paul, who helped on this accusation against S. Stephen, did after fall under the very same himself. Yea, but here's a great cla∣mour that I would have brought in Popery. I shall answer that more fully by and by. In the mean time you know what the Pharisees laid against Christ him∣self,
S. Iohn 11. 48. If we let him alone, all men will believe on him: Et venient Romani, and the Romans will come, and take a∣way both our Place and the Nation. Here was a causeless cry against Christ, that the Romans would come. And see how just the judgment of God was. They crucified Christ for fear lest the Romans should come; and his death was it which brought in the Romans upon them; God punish∣ing them with that which they most feared. And I pray God this clamour of Venient Romani, of which I have given no cause, help not to bring them in. For the Pope never had such a Har∣vest in England since the Refor∣mation,
as he hath now upon the Sects aud Divisions that are a∣mongst us. In the mean time, by honour and dishonour, by good re∣port and evil report, as a deceiver and yet true, am I passing through this world, 2 Cor. 6. 8. Some particulars also I think it not amiss to speak of. 1. And first, this I shall be bold to speak of the King our gracious Soveraign: He hath been much traduced also for bringing in of Popery. But on my Conscience (of which I shall give God a present account) I know him to be as free from this Charge as any man living: And I hold him to be as sound a Pro∣testant according to the Religion
by Law established, as any man in his Kingdom; and that he will venture his life as far and as free∣ly for it. And I think I do or should know both his affection to Religion, and his grounds for it, as fully as any man in England. 2. The second particular is concerning this great and popu∣lous City (which God bless.) Here hath been of late a fashion taken up to gather hands, and then go to the great Court of the Kingdom, the Parlia∣ment, and clamour for Justice; as if that great and wise Court, before whom the Causes come which are unknown to the Many, could not or would not do Justice but at their appoint∣ment;
a way which may endan∣ger many an innocent man, and pluck his blood upon their own heads, and perhaps upon the Cities also. And this hath been lately pra∣ctised against my self: the Ma∣gistrates standing still and suf∣fering them openly to pro∣ceed from Parish to Parish with∣out check. God forgive the set∣ters of this, withall my heart I beg it: but many well-meaning people are caught by it. In S. Stephens case, when no∣thing else would serve, they stir∣red up the people against him, Act. 6. 12. And Herod went the same way: when he had killed S. Iames, yet he would not ven∣ture
upon S. Peter, till he found how the other pleased the peo∣ple, Acts 12. 3. But take heed of having your hands full of blood, Esai. 1. 15. For there is a time best known to himself, when God above other sins makes Inquisition for blood. And when that Inquisition is on foot, the Psalmist tells us, Psal. 9. 12. that God remembers; but that's not all, he remembers, and forgets not the complaint of the poor, i. e. whose blood is shed by Oppression, ver. 9. Take heed of this: 'Tis a fear∣ful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 12. but then e∣specially, when he is making In∣quisition for blood.
And with my prayers to avert it, I do heartily desire this City to remember the Prophecy that is expressed Ierem. 26. 15. 3. The third particular is the poor Church of England. It hath flourished, and been a shelter to other neighbouring Churches, when storms have driven upon them. But alas now it is in a storm it self, and God only knows whe∣ther or how it shall get out. And which is worse then a storm from without, it is become like an Oak cleft to shivers with wedges made out of its own bo∣dy. And at every cleft profane∣ness and irreligion is entring in; While (as Lib. 2. de vitae contempt. cap. 4. Prosper speaks) men that introduce profaneness are cloa∣ked
over with the name Religionis Imaginariae, of Imaginary Religion: for we have lost the Substance, and dwell too much in Opinion. And that Church, which all the Jesuits machinations could not ruine, is fallen into danger by her own. 4. The last particular (for I I am not willing to be too long) is my self. I was born and bapti∣zed in the bosome of the Church of England established by Law. In that Profession I have ever since lived, and in that I come now to die. What clamours and slanders I have endured for labouring to keep an Uniformity in the exter∣nal Service of God, according
to the Doctrine and Disci∣pline of this Church, all men know, and I have abundant∣ly felt. Now at last I am accu∣sed of High-treason in Parlia∣ment, a crime which my soul ever abhorred. This Treason was charged to consist of two parts, An endeavour to subvert the Laws of the Land: and a like endeavour to overthrow the true Protestant Religion established by Law. Besides my answers to the se∣veral Charges, I Protested mine innocency in both Houses. It was said, Prisoners Protestations at the Barre must not be taken. I must therefore come now to it upon my death, being instantly
to give God an account for the truth of it. I do therefore here in the pre∣sence of God and his holy Angels take it upon my death, that I ne∣ver endeavoured the Subversion either of Law or Religion. And I desire you all to remember this Protest of mine for my innocen∣cy in this, and from all Treasons whatsoever. I have been accused likewise as an Enemy to Parliaments: No, I understand them, and the benefit that comes by them too well to be so: But I did dislike the misgovernments of some Par∣liaments many wayes, and I had good reason for it; for Corruptio optimi est pessima. And that being
the highest Court, over which no other hath jurisdiction, when 'tis misinformed or misgoverned, the Subject is left without all re∣medy. But I have done. I forgive all the world, all and every of those bitter Enemies which have per∣secuted me; and humbly desire to be forgiven of God first, and then of every man. And so I heartily desire you to joyn in prayer with me. O Eternal God and merciful Father, look down upon me in mercy, in the riches and fulness of all thy mercies. Look upon me, but not till thou hast nailed my sins to the Cross of
Christ, not till thou hast bathed me in the blood of Christ, not till I have hid my self in the wounds of Christ; that so the punishment due unto my sins may pass over me. And since thou art pleased to trie me to the uttermost, I most humbly be∣seech thee, give me now in this great Instant, full patience, pro∣portionable comfort, and a heart ready to die for thine honour, the Kings happiness, and this Chur∣ches preservation. And my zeal to these (far from arrogancy be it spoken) is all the sin (humane frailty excepted, and all incidents thereto) which is yet known to me in this particular, for which I come now to suffer: I say in
this particular of Treason. But otherwise my sins are many and great; Lord pardon them all, and those especially (what ever they are) which have drawn down this present judgment upon me. And when thou hast given me strength to bear it, do with me as seems best in thine own eyes, Amen. And that there may be a stop of this issue of blood in this more then miserable Kingdom, O Lord, I beseech thee give grace of repentance to all Blood-thirsty people. But if they will not re∣pent, O Lord confound all their devices, defeat and frustrate all their designes and endeavours up∣on them, which are or shall be
contrary to the glory of thy great Name, the truth and sincerity of Religion, the establishment of the King and his posterity after him in their just Rights and Pri∣viledges, the honour and conser∣vation of Parliaments in their just power, the preservation of this poor Church in her Truth, Peace, and Patrimony, and the settlement of this distracted and distressed People under their An∣cient Laws, and in their native Liberties. And when thou hast done all this in meer mercy for them, O Lord, fill their hearts with thankfulness, and with Re∣ligious dutiful obedience to thee and thy Commandments all their dayes. So, Amen Lord Iesu,
Amen. And receive my soul in∣to thy bosom. Amen. Our Father which art in heaven, &c. The Lord Archbishop's Prayer, as he kneeled by the Block. LOrd, I am coming as fast as I can. I know I must pass through the shadow of death, be∣fore I can come to see thee. But it is but Umbra mortis, a meer sha∣dow of death, a little darkness up∣on nature: but thou by thy Merits and Passion hast broke through the jaws of death. So, Lord re∣ceive my soul, and have mercy upon me: and bless this King∣dome with peace and plenty, and
with brotherly love and charity, that there may not be this effusi∣on of Christian bloud amongst them, for Iesus Christ his sake, if it be thy will. Then he layd his head upon the Block, and after he had prayed to himself, said aloud, Lord receive my Soul, which was the signal gi∣ven to the Executioner. FINIS.
