M1800 11859091 49981
Immorality, Debauchery, and Profaneness, Exposed To the Reproof of Scripture, and the Censure of the Law. Containing a Compendium of the Penal Laws now in Force against Idleness, Profane∣ness, and Drunkenness; Houses of unlawful Games; profane Swearing and Cursing; speak∣ing or acting in contempt of the Holy Sacra∣ment; disturbing of Ministers; profane jesting with the Name of God; absenting from the Church; profanation of the Lord's Day; De∣bauched Incontinency, and Bastard-getting. With several Texts of Scripture prohibiting such Vices. Also a brief Collection of several signal Judgments of God against Offenders in the said Vices and Debau∣cheries. Published for the Advancement of Reformation of Manners, so happily begun and carried on by several Societies. By G. MERITON, Gent. Righteousness exalteth a Nation, but Sin is a Reproach to any People, Prov. 14. 34. God will wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such a one as goeth on still in his Wickedness. Psal. 68. 21. LONDON, Printed for John Harris and Andrew Bell, at the Harrow in Little Britain, and at the Cross-keys and Bible in Cornhil. 1698.
To the Honourable PAUL FOLEY, Esq SPEAKER OF THE Honourable House of Commons, And to the rest of the Honourable and Worthy Members of that High Council of the Realm now assembled in Parliament, This COMPENDIUM is humbly dedicated by G. MERITON.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. Reader, OƲR Gracious Soveraign, King William, having observed the spreading growth of profane, vitious and profligate Debauchery and Immorality within this Realm; out of his devout and pious Zeal for the Honour of God, the advancement of true Religion, and the Credit and Wel∣fare of this his Kingdom of England, in his most gra∣cious Speech to both the Houses of Parliament, at the opening of this present Session, tells them, That he esteems it one of the greatest Advantages of Peace, that he shall now have leisure to rectify such Corruptions or A∣buses, as may have crept into any part of the Admini∣stration during the War, and effectually to discourage Profaneness and Immorality. And to that purpose his Majesty has not only issued out his Proclamation for the discouraging of all De∣bauchery, Profaneness and Immorality; and command∣ed the same to be read in every Church, and publick Chappel, four times in the year; but has also required all his Judges, Justices of the Peace, and other Magi∣strates and Officers, within their several Limits and
Jurisdictions, according to their several Powers and Authorities, to put the Laws made against Profaneness and Immorality, effectually in execution. And has likewise recommended the further Care of the more ef∣fectual suppressing Debauchery, Profaneness and Im∣morality, to the Consideration of the Parliament, who have prepared a Bill for that purpose. And every good Christian ought devoutly to join with the Church in that Prayer appointed by her Liturgy, to be read for the Parliament when sitting; That God would be pleased to direct and prosper all their Con∣sultations, to the advancement of his Glory, the good of his Church, the Safety, Honour, and Wel∣fare of our Soveraign and his Kingdoms; that all things may be so ordered and settled by their En∣deavours, upon the best and surest Foundations, that Peace and Happiness, Truth and Justice, Religion and Piety, may be established among us for all Ge∣nerations. And as every one ought thus to pray; so al∣so every individual Person within this Realm, ought (as a Reverend and Grave Divine lately declared in his Pulpit) according to his Capacity, and the Post he is placed in, to contribute his Help and Assistance towards the carrying on this great and pious work of Reformation. In compliance wherewith, and to manifest my good Will by contributing towards the carrying on this great and good Work, I have compil'd this Essay as a Compendium of the Laws now in force against Idleness, Profaneness, Drunkenness, Swearing, &c. and for the more effectual enforcing the Observation of the same. I have after the said Laws, set down several Texts of Scripture a∣gainst such Sins: and after them (lest some by their long continued wicked Courses be so hardned in their Sins, that neither Law nor Gospel will restrain them) I have given an Account of several exemplary Judg∣ments of God, upon such as have accustomed themselves in the practice of such profane Vices; in hopes that up∣on the perusal thereof, such as walk and tread in the
same Steps, may be brought to a sight and sense of their Sins, repent of their Wickedness, and resolve to lead a new Course of Life. There are some other Laws against suspicious Persons that walk by Night, and sleep by Day, keep lewd Com∣pany, and frequent lewd Houses. 39 Eliz. Ch. 4. 43 Eliz. Ch. 2. 7 Jac. 1. Ch. 4. and against wandring Rogues, 1 Jac. 1. Ch. 7. But the other Vices aforementioned, being the customary and provoking Sins of the Nation, and these others last mentioned, not so common; and the Laws made against them not so properly falling under the Title of this Compendium, I have therefore purposely omitted the inserting of them. And such Readers as are desirous to inform themselves herein, may have re∣course to the several Statutes as they are here cited. But I shall proceed no further, only desire that this small Treatise may in some measure effect its intended pur∣pose, and prove serviceable to the Publick; which is the hearty prayer of G. Meriton.
A Catalogue of the Authors Names out of whose Works the signal Examples of God's severe Justice, mentioned in this ensuing Treatise, are excerpted. ABbot. Anton. de Torquenda. Augustinus. Baxter. Beadle. Batman. Baker. Beard. Bernard. Beza. Bolton. Burton. Clark, Camden. Discipulus de Tempore. Eusebius. Fauconer. Fox. Gregory Tomonensis. German History. Heylin. Heywood. Johan. Wierus. Johan. Fincelius. Lonicerus. Luther. Laertius. Maginus. Platina. Perkins. Quintus Curtius. Socrates. Spotswood. Speed. Stanley. Stow. Teate. Theatr. Historiarum. Turner. Twisden. Ward.
THE Laws against Profaneness. CHAP. I. A summary Account of the Laws made against profuse, idle, customary and expensive Tip∣ling; and against sinful, customary and pro∣fane Drunkenness; and against keeping Pla∣ces or Houses of unlawful Games. SOme of our Chronologers tell us, that the Danes were the first and principal Introducers and Promoters of the immoderate, profuse and sinful Vice of excessive Carousing, Quaf∣fing and Drinking, which by their Example did so influence the People of this Kingdom, that in a small time it arrived to that height of Vanity, that Edgar the seventeenth King of the West-Saxons, and first sole Saxon Monarch of England, in order to the re∣straining and curbing the growth of the said debauch∣ed Vanity and sinful Vice, did ordain certain Cups or Pots, with Gages, Pins or Marks in them, and ap∣pointed a Penalty to be inflicted upon every one that should presume to drink beyond the limited Gage; which Ordinance of his possibly might in some mea∣sure abate the exorbitant Practice of this growing
Wickedness; yet the Practice thereof was never wholly laid aside, especially in the times of Peace and Tranquillity. And upon the Union of the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, by the Accession of King James the First to the Crown of this Realm, the Minds and Hearts of the People were so elevated with the pro∣spect and great assurances they propounded to them∣selves of the future Tranquillity, Peace, Plenty, Hap∣piness and great Prosperity that in all probability was thereby likely to ensue, that they thereupon became less industrious and laborious in their several Callings, Trades, Arts, Mysteries, Professions, and ways of getting their Livelihoods, and did much indulge themselves in the pleasant enjoyment of frequent and frolick Society, by them call'd Good-fellowship, which oft-times happened to be with such expence of Time and Money too, that many of their Fami∣lies became much impoverished thereby: And the antient, true and principal use of Inns, Alehouses, and Victualing-houses being for the Receipt, Re∣lief and Lodging of such People as are not able by greater quantities to make their Provision of Victuals, became common Tipling Houses, and places of Entertainment, and Harbour of lewd and idle People, to spend and consume their Money and their Time in lewd and drunken manner, con∣trary to the true meaning of the principal intended Purposes of such Houses; as the Parliament the first Year of King James the First observes. It is therefore enacted by the said Parliament, 1 Jac. 1. chap. 9. That if any Inn-keeper, Vic∣tualer or Alehouse-keeper within the Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, do permit or
suffer any Person or Persons inhabiting or dwel∣ling in any City, Town Corporate, Village or Hamlet within the said Realm, or Dominions, where any such Inn, Alehouse or Victualing-house is or shall be, to remain and continue drinking or tipling in the same, other than such as shall be invited by any Traveller, and shall accompany him only during his necessary Abode there, and other than labouring and Handicrafts-men in Ci∣ties and Towns Corporate, and Market Towns, upon the usual working days, for one hour at Dinner-time, to take their Diet in an Alehouse; and other than Labourers and Workmen which for the following of their Work by the day, or by the great, in any City, Town Corporate, Market-Town, or Village, shall for the time of their said continuing in work there, sojourn, lodg, or victual in any Inn, Alehouse, or Victu∣aling-house, other than for urgent and necessary occasions to be allowed by two Justices of the Peace: That then every such Innkeeper, Victualer, and Alehouse-keeper, shall for every such Offence forfeit and lose the Sum of Ten Shillings of cur∣rent Money of England, to the use of the Poor of the Parish where such Offence shall be com∣mitted; the same Offence being view'd and seen by any Mayor, Bailiff, or Justice of Peace within their several Limits, or proved by the Oaths of two Witnesses to be taken before any Mayor, Bailiff, or any other head Officer, or any one or more Justice or Justices of the Peace, who are authorized to administer the same within the Limits of their Commission.
The said Penalties to be levied by the Consta∣ble or Church-wardens of the Parish or Parishes where the Offence or Offences shall be committed, by way of Distress, to be taken and detain'd for the said Forfeiture; and for default of Satisfaction within six days next ensuing, the same then to be presently apprized and sold, and the Surplusage or Remainder over and above, to be deliver'd to the Party distrained: and for want of sufficient Distress, the Offenders to be by the Mayor, Bai∣liff, or other head Officer, or Justice or Justices of the Peace aforesaid, committed to the common Goal, there to remain until the same Penalty be truly paid. If the Constable or Church-wardens neglect their Duty in levying, or in default of Distress, do neglect to certify the default of Distress, by the space of twenty days then next ensuing, to the Magistrates aforesaid, within whose Juris∣diction the Offence is committed; then every Person so offending, shall forfeit for every such default, the Sum of Forty Shillings, to the use of the Poor of the Parish where such Offence shall be committed, to be levied by Distress and Sale of the Offender's Goods, by Warrant from any such Magistrate within the Limits of their Jurisdictions respectively, under his Hand and Seal, if Payment be not made within six days next ensuing the taking of the said Distress; and the Surplusage (if any be) to be delivered to the Party distrained; and for want of sufficient, the Constable or Church-wardens so offending, to be by such Magistrate committed to the common Goal, there to remain until the said Penalty or Pe∣nalties be truly paid.
Notwithstanding the Restraint put upon Inn-kee∣pers, Victualers and Alehouse-keepers by the Act of Parliament aforementioned, and the Penalty to be in∣curred by them, for suffering Tipling in their Hou∣ses, the People did still continue their Bowsing, Tip∣ling, and Carousing, which by little and little arrived to that height of Excess, that it usually ended (and does so still) in downright Drunkenness, and grew so habitual and practicable, that it was (and still is) even in a manner become an Epidemical Vice through the whole Realm: for Punishing and Suppressing of which odious Sin, in the fourth year of King James the First, an Act of Parliament was made, in∣flicting a Penalty upon Drunkards, and such as con∣tinue drinking in Ale-houses. In the preamble of which Act, the Parliament takes notice of several Sins occasioned by, and proceeding from Drunken∣ness, as appears by what follows. Stat. 4 Jac. 1. Ch. 5. Whereas the loathsom and odious Sin of Drunkenness is of late years grown into common use within this Realm, being the Root and Foundation of many other enor∣mous Sins, as Bloodshed, Stabbing, Murder, Swear∣ing, Fornication, Adultery, and such like, to the great dishonour of God, and of the Nation; the overthrow of many good Arts, and manual Trades; the disabling of divers Workmen, and the general impoverishing of many good Subjects, a∣busively wasting the good Creatures of God: It is therefore Enacted, That all and every Per∣son and Persons that shall be drunken, and of the same Offence of Drunkenness shall be lawfully Convicted, shall for every such Offence forfeit and lose five Shillings, to be paid within one Week
next after Conviction, to the hands of the Church∣warden of that Parish where the Offence shall be committed, who shall be accountable for it to the use of the said Poor: and if the Persons convicted refuse or neglect to pay, then the same to be levi∣ed of their Goods, by Warrant or Precept from the same Court, Judg, or Justices before whom the said Conviction shall be: And if the Offenders be not able to pay the Penalty, then to be committed to the Stocks for every Offence, there to remain by the space of six Hours. And if any Officer of the Place where the Of∣fence shall be committed, upon a Precept sent to him, shall neglect his Duty in correcting the Of∣fenders, or in due Levying the Penalties where Di∣stress may be had, then the Officer so offending shall forfeit ten Shillings to the use of the Poor there, to be levied by Distress by any Person or Persons having Warrant from the Magistrate or Court where any Conviction shall be; and to be paid to the Church-wardens as before limited, who are to account for the same as aforesaid. And if any Person or Persons within this Realm of England, or Dominion of Wales, shall remain or continue Drinking, or Tipling, in any Inn, Victualing-house, or Ale-house, being in the same City, Town, Village, or Hamlet, wherein they dwell or inhabit at the time of such Drink∣ing and Tipling, and the same being viewed or seen by any Mayor, or other head Officer, Jus∣tice or Justices of the Peace within their several Limits, or duly proved in such manner and form as is limited in, and by the Act of Parliament, 1 Jac. 1. Ch. 9. aforementioned, except it be in
such Case or Cases as be tolerated or excepted in the said Act; That then every Person or Persons so offending shall forfeit for every such Offence, three Shillings and four Pence to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the Offence shall be committed, to be levied by Distress in such man∣ner and form as is before appointed by this Act, for the levying the Penalty of five Shillings for being Drunk; and the Offender being unable to pay, and being lawfully Convicted, then any of the Magistrates aforesaid, or Court where any such Conviction shall be, may punish the Offender or Offenders, by setting them in the Stocks for every such Offence, by the space of four Hours. The Offences in this and the former mentioned Act, shall be inquired of, and presented before the Justices of Assize in their Circuits, Justices of Peace in their ordinary Sessions, and before the Mayor, Bailiffs, or other Head Officers of every City, or Town Corporate, who have Power to enquire of Trespasses, Riots, Routs, and such like Offences, and in every Court Leet; and such Proceedings to be had thereupon against such Offenders for their Conviction, as in such like Ca∣ses is used by the Laws of the Realm, or Custom of the City, Town, or Place, where such Pre∣sentment or Indictment shall be enquired of and found. And if any Person or Persons being once law∣fully Convicted of the said Offence of Drunken∣ness, shall after that be again lawfully Convicted of the like Offence of Drunkenness; Then for such second Offence, they shall be bound with two Sureties to the King's Majesty in one Recogni∣zance,
or Obligation of ten Pounds, with Condi∣tion to be from thenceforth of the good Behavi∣our. All Constables, Church-wardens, Headboroughs, Tything-men, Ale-Conners, and Side-men, shall in their several Oaths incident to their Offices, be charged to present the Offences contrary to this Act. This Act is not to restrain the Ecclesiastical Pow∣er or Jurisdiction, nor the Liberty of either of the Universities, but that they enjoy their Jurisdicti∣ons, Rights, and Privileges. And if any Offender against the true Intent and Meaning of this Act, or any Branch thereof, hath been once punished or corrected for his or her Of∣fence, by any the Ways or Means before limited, he shall not be punished or corrected for the said Offence by any other Ways or Means. And none shall be punished or molested for any Offence mentioned in this Statute, unless he shall be Indicted, Presented, or Convicted for the same within six Months after such Offence committed. Then by another Act of Parliament, 7 Jac. 1. Ch. 10. It is Enacted That if any Person being an Alehouse-keeper, shall be lawfully Convicted for any Offence or Offences committed against any of the Branches of the two before mentioned Acts of Parliament, that then every Person or Persons so Convicted, shall for the space of three Years next ensuing the said Conviction, be utterly disabled to keep any such Ale-house. The two Statutes first mentioned in this Chapter, made against Tipling and Drunkenness, requiring proof to be made by two Witnesses, for the more easy Conviction of such Offenders:
It is by the Statute 21 Jac. 1. Ch. 7. Enacted, That proof by one Witness shall be allowed and taken for sufficient in that behalf; and the volun∣tary Confession (before any such Persons as by the said Acts are authorized to minister the Oath) of any Person offending either of the said Statutes, shall suffice to convict the Person so offending; and after such Confession, the Oath of the party so offending, shall and may be taken, and be a sufficient proof against any other offending at thesame time. And it is further Enacted, That if any Person or Persons wheresoever his or their Habitation or a∣biding be, shall at any time be found upon view, or his own Confession, or proof of one Witness, to be Tipling in any Inn, Ale-house, or Victual∣ling-house, such Person or Persons shall be within the meaning of the said Statutes, as if such Person had inhabited and dwelt in the same place, where the said Inn, Ale-house, or Victualling-house is or shall be, where he or they shall be found Tip∣ling, and shall incur the like Penalty; and the same to be levied and disposed as in the said Act is expressed, concerning such as there inhabit; and the voluntary Confession of the Offenders (before such as by the said Statutes are authorized to mi∣nister the Oath) shall suffice to convince them∣selves. And after such Confession, the Oath of such Person or Persons so confessing; shall and may be taken by such as by the said Act have Authority to minister the said Oath, and shall be a sufficient proof against any other offending at the same time.
And any Justice of Peace in any County, and any Justice of Peace or other Head Officer in any City or Town Corporate within their Limits re∣spectively, shall have Power and Authority upon his own View, Confession of the party, or proof of one Witness upon Oath before him, to con∣vince any Person of the offence of Drunkenness, whereby such Person so convict, shall incur the forfeiture of five Shillings for every such Offence; and the same to be levied, or the Offender other∣wise punished, as in the Statute is appointed; and for the second Offence shall become bound to the good Behaviour, as if he had been convicted in open Sessions, any thing in the said former Act, 4 Jac. 1. Ch. 5. to the contrary notwithstanding. And if any Person being an Alehouse-keeper, shall at any time be lawfully convicted for any Of∣fence against any the Branches of either of the two former mentioned Statutes, according to the Alterations and Additions herein contained, against the true meaning of this Statute; then every Per∣son so convict, shall for the space of three years next ensuing such Conviction, be utterly disabled to keep any such Ale-house. And Constables, Church-wardens, Headbo∣roughs, Tything-men, Ale-conners, and Side∣men, are to be charged in their Offices and Oaths to present all the Offences made in the Statute, 1 Jac. 1. against inordinate Haunting and Tipling in Inns, Ale-houses, and other Victualling-houses, according to the Alterations and Additions of the same in this Act contained. There being no Penalty inflicted by the aforemen∣tioned Act upon the Inn-keeper, Alehouse-keeper or
Victualler that suffers Foreigners to Tipple in their Houses: It is therefore 1 Car. 1. Ch. 4. Enacted, That every Inn-keeper, Alehouse-keeper, or Victual∣ler that shall permit or suffer any Person or Per∣sons, not inhabiting in the City, Town Corpo∣rate, Market-Town, Village, or Hamlet, where such Inn, Ale-house, or Victualling-house is, to Tipple in the said Inn, Ale-house or Victualling-house, contrary to the true intent of any or either of the aforesaid Statutes; the said Inn-keeper, Alehouse-keeper, and Victualler so offending, shall incur the same Penalty; and in such manner to be proved, levied, and disposed as in the former Sta∣tute, 1 Jac. 1. Ch. 9. is appointed for permitting such to tipple as dwell in the same City, Town Corporate, Market-Town, Village, or Hamlet. And it is also Enacted, That the keepers of Ta∣verns, and such as do sell Wine in their Houses, and do also keep Inns or Victualling-houses, shall be taken to be within the said two former Statutes, and also within this Statute. If these Laws against inordinate and customary Tippling and Drunkenness, were duly and effectual∣ly put in Execution, it would not only be greatly to the Honour of God, but tend much to the Honour and Credit of this Realm: And might also prove very instrumental in the preventing many Families from Ruin, and becoming burdensom and charge∣able to the Places where they live and are settled; for many ingenious Handicraft-men, and other labori∣ous and working Persons, are so bewitch'd and charm'd with the love of strong Drink, that what they earn with hard Labour all the day, having nei∣ther
regard to their own Credit, nor any Charity, Love or Kindness for their poor Wives and Families, they embezle and spend at Night, in profuse, idle, and insatiable Tipling and Drunkenness, amongst their debauched Comrades, when at the same time perhaps their poor Families at home are ready to starve for want of Bread. I shall therefore in the next Chapter acquaint these obstinate, presumptuous, and vitious Persons, with some Texts of Scripture against these their sinful Courses, in hopes that the perusal and serious Con∣sideration of them, may bring them to a sight and sense of their Wickedness, and work some Reforma∣tion in them. But before I proceed to the next Chapter, I think it will not be amiss if we give a brief Account here, of the Laws made against Keepers of Play-houses and unlawful Games; of which Offences many Inn∣keepers, Alehouse-keepers and Victuallers' are guilty. By the Statute 33 H. 8. Ch. 9. it is Enacted, That none shall keep or maintain any House or Place of unlawful Games, on pain of forty Shillings every day. And none shall use or haunt such places, on pain of six Shillings and eight Pence every time. And it shall be lawful for every Justice of the Peace in every County, and for head Officers in Corporations, as well within the Liberties as without, to enter and resort into all such Houses and Places, where such unlawful Games are sus∣pected to be used; and as well the Keepers there∣of, as the Resorters thereto, to arrest and imprison until they shall severally give good Security at the discretion of the said Justices, or Officers, not to keep such Games any more.
Every Mayor, Sheriff, Bailiff, Constable, and other head Officer within every City, Borough or Town, shall make due Search as aforesaid, once every Month at least, on pain to forfeit 40 s. for every such Default. No Artificer or Journey-man, nor Husband∣man, Apprentice, Labourer, Servant at Husband∣ry, Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman, or Serving-man, shall play at Tables, Tenis, Dice, Cards, Bowls, Clash, Goyting, Logating, or any other unlawful Game, out of Christmass, or then out of his Master's House, or Presence, on pain of twenty Shillings; and none shall play at Bowls in open Places, out of his Garden or Orchard, on pain of six Shillings and eight Pence. All Informations or Suits upon this Statute shall be prosecuted within one year, and the Forfeitures thereof, which happen within a Leet or Liberty, shall be divided between the King and the Lord thereof; and in all other Places betwixt the King and the Prosecutor. Proclamation of this Act shall be made quar∣terly in every Market-Town, as also at every Goal∣delivery, Assize and Sessions Then lastly there is a Proviso, that this Act shall not restrain a Servant (by his Master's License) to play at Cards, Dice, or Tables, with the Mas∣ter himself, or other Gentlemen resorting to his Master's House: and if the Master have Freehold of an hundred Pounds per Annum, he may also li∣cense his Servant to play at Bowls or Tenis. By the Statute 2 & 3 Ph. & Ma. Ch. 9. All Li∣cences to keep Houses or Places of unlawful Games shall be void. Before this Statute several
Persons used to obtain Placards, or Licences to keep common Gaming; so that by this Statute all such Licences are made void. CHAP. II. An Account of some Texts of Scripture, shew∣ing the sad Consequences and Effects that attend the customary, sinful and profane practice of profuse Quaffing and Drunken∣ness. SUCH Persons as neither the fear of the Law, respect to their own Credit, nor love to their Families, will reclaim or deter from their obstinate and presumptuous, sinful Progress in their profane Courses of customary, expensive, and profuse ex∣cessive Tipling, and inordinate Drinking, upon the perusal of these several Scripture-sentences following, may I hope be thereby induced and excited to follow a more frugal, vertuous and godly course of Living, and to abandon the charming Delilahof their be∣loved sinful Vice. And they shall say unto the Elders of his City, This our Son is stubborn and rebellions, he will not obey our Voice, he is a Glutton and a Drunkard. And all the men of his City shall stone him with stones that he die; so shalt thou put evil away from among you, and all Israel shall hear and fear. Deut. 21. 20, 21. Wine is a Mocker, strong drink is raging; and who∣soever is deceived thereby is not wise. Prov. 20. 1.
Be not among Wine-bibbers, amongst riotous eaters of Flesh. For the Drunkard and the Glutton shall come to Poverty, and drowsiness shall clothe a man with Rags. Prov. 23. 20, 21. Who hath wo? who hath sorrow? who hath con∣tentions? who hath bablings? who hath wounds with∣out cause? who hath redness of Eyes? They that tar∣ry long at the Wine, they that go to seek mixt Wine. Look not thou upon the Wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour in the Cup, when it moveth it self a∣right. At the last it biteth like a Serpent, and sting∣eth like an Adder. Prov. 23. 29, 30, 31, 32. Wo unto them that rise up early in the Morning, that they may follow strong Drink, that continue until Night, till Wine inflame them. And the Harp and the Viol, the Tabret and Pipe, and Wine are in their Feasts: but they regard not the Work of the Lord, neither consider the Operation of his Hands. Isa. 5. 11, 12. Wo unto them that are mighty to drink Wine, and Men of strength to mingle strong Drink. Isa. 5. 22. Wo to the Crown of Pride, to the Drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious Beauty is a fading Flower, which are on the Head of the fat Vallies of them that are overcome with Wine. Behold, the Lord hath a mighty and strong One, which as a Tempest of Hail, and a destroying Storm, as a flood of mighty Waters overflowing, shall cast down to the Earth with the Hand. The Crown of Pride, the Drunkards of Ephraim, shall be troden under feet. Isa. 28. 1, 2, 3. Come ye, say they, I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with strong Drink; and to morrow shall
be as this day, and much more abundant. Isa. 56. 12. Then said the Lord unto me, Go yet, love a Woman (beloved of her friend, yet an Adulteress) accord∣ing to the Love of the Lord toward the Children of Israel, who look to other Gods, and love Flagons of Wine. Hosea 3. 1. Whoredom and Wine, and new Wine take away the Heart. Hosea 4. 11. Awake, ye Drunkards, and weep and howl all ye drinkers of Wine, because of the new Wine, for it is cut off from your Mouth. Joel 1. 5. Wo to them that are at ease in Zion; that chaunt to the sound of the Viol, and invent to themselves Instruments of Musick, like David: That drink Wine in Bowls, and anoint themselves with the chief Ointments; but they are not grieved for the Afflicti∣on of Joseph. Amos 6. 1, 5, 6. For while they be folden together as Thorns, and while they are drunken as Drunkards, they shall be devoured as Stubble fully dry. Nahum 1. 10. Wo unto him that giveth his Neighbour Drink, and puttest thy Bottle to him, and makest him drunken also, that thou mayst look on their Nakedness. Ha∣bakkuk 2. 15. How exceeding strong is Wine! it causeth all Men to err that drink it: And when they are in their Cups, they forget their Love both to Friends and Brethren, and a little after draw out Swords. 1 Esr. 3. 18, 22. Do that to no Man which thou hatest: Drink not Wine to make thee drunken: neither let Drunkenness go with thee in thy Journey. Tob. 4. 15. A drunken Woman and a gadder abroad, causeth
great Anger, and she will not cover her own shame. Ecclus. 26. 8. Shew not thy Valiantness in Wine, for Wine hath destroy'd many. Wine drunken with excess, maketh bitterness of Mind, with brawling and quarrelling. Drunkenness increaseth the Rage of a Fool, till he offend; it diminisheth Strength, and maketh Wounds. Ecclus. 31. 25, 29, 30. Therefore thou shalt say unto them, Thus saith the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Drink ye, and be drunken, and spue and fall, and rise no more, be∣cause of the Sword which I will send among you. Jer. 25. 27. But and if that evil Servant shall say in his Heart, My Lord delayeth his coming, and shall begin to smite his fellow-Servants, and to eat and drink with the drunken: The Lord of that Servant shall come in a day when he looketh not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of: And shall cut him asunder, and appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Mat. 24. 48, 49, 50, 51. Luke 12. 45, 46. And take heed to your selves, left at any time your Hearts be over-charged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life, and so that day come upon you unawares. Luke 21. 34. Let us walk honestly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying: But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the Flesh, to fulfil the Lusts thereof. Rom. 13. 13, 14. But now I have written unto you, not to keep company, if any Man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, or Covetous, or an Idolater, or a Railer,
or a Drunkard, or an Extortioner; with such an one, no not to eat. 1 Cor. 5. 11. Know ye not that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived; neither Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor effe∣minate, nor abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Now the Works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Ʋncleanness, Lasci∣viousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulation, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Heresies, En∣vyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revellings, and such like: of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. And be not drunken with Wine, wherein is ex∣cess; but be filled with the Spirit. Ephes. 5. 18. Therefore let us not sleep as do others: but let us watch and be sober. For they that sleep, sleep in the night; and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night. 1 Thess. 5. 6, 7. It seems in the times of the Apostles, that Drun∣kards were possessed with some kind of Dread and Fear that attended the Guilt of their profligate and vicious Lives, or else they were asham'd that their sinful Debaucheries should be publickly known, or apparently seen: For St. Paul tells the Thessa∣lonians, They that be drunken, are drunken in the Night. But it appears otherwise now in our days and time. For,
Tempora mutantur, & nos mutamur in illis. Both Times and Men are chang'd, and alter'd quite. Drunkards are drunk by Day as well as Night. For these Champions of Bacchus are neither pos∣sess'd with Fear, nor are they asham'd even at Noon∣day to expose themselves publickly and openly to the view of all People, in their debauched, profane, loathsom, abominable, sinful Disguises. Lest therefore neither Law nor Gospel can stop such habituated and desperate Drunkards in the career of their profuse and sinful drunken Caresses, I shall in the next Chapter acquaint them with several signal and exemplary Judgments of God's severe Justice in∣flicted upon obstinate, desperate, presumptuous, da∣ring, customary, profane, sinful Drunkards, in hopes that their serious Perusal and Consideration thereof may have some influence upon them, and prove a means to season them with some considerable measures of Religion and Piety. And I hope they will take notice of that excellent saying of the Orator, Lege historiam (says he) ne sias historia; That they will read the following His∣tories with such deliberation, and apply them so ef∣fectually, that they may thereby avert the displea∣sure of the Almighty, and prevent the like Judg∣ments from falling upon their Heads; lest they be∣come a History to after Ages themselves.
CHAP. III. Of several exemplary Judgments, both Anti∣ent and Modern, Foreign and Domestick, of God's severe Justice inflicted upon custo∣mary, presumptuous, and profane sinful Drunkards. DRunkenness is a Vice not fit to be named (says a learned Divine) much less to be practised a∣mongst Christians; nay, we are forbid not so much as to look upon the Wine when it is red, when it sparkles in the Cup; or to rise up early in the Morn∣ing to follow drink that is strong, as appears by the places of Scripture beforecited in the last preceding Chapter. And we read that Pitticus the Mitelenian Philoso∣pher, and one of the seven wise men of Greece, made a Law, that whosoever committed a Crime when he was drunk, should be punished double, both for the Offence committed, and also for being drunk. And Solon another of the seven wise men of Greece, and the famous Law-giver to the Athenians, ordained, that if any Prince were taken drunk, he should be put to death. Noah that Holy Patriarch drinking too much Wine, not only discovered his own shame, but also was the occasion of the cruel Curse which the Lord sent upon the Posterity of Cham, which even to this day lieth hard upon them. And Lot though he hated the Sin of Sodom, and
escaped the Punishment thereof; yet being overcome with the Wine of the Mountains, he committed Incest with his own Daughters, and made a new Sodom of his own Family. Balthasar rioting and revelling amongst his Whores, had the end of his Life and Kingdom denounced a∣gainst him by a bodiless Hand, writing upon the Wall the Lord's Decree. And whilst Holofernes besotted his sences with ex∣cess of Wine, and good Chear, Judith found means to cut off his Head. Alexander the Great, having invited many of his Favourites and Captains to a Supper, propound∣ed a Crown in reward to him that should drink most; so one in the Company swallowed up four Steans of Wine, being in value worth six hundred Crowns, and so won the Prize, but lost a greater Prize, (viz. his Life) for he survived not three days after; and one and forty of the rest that did strive with him for Conquest, dyed also to bear him Company at his Death, as they had done in the Frolick. Alexander also himself was so addicted to the ex∣cess of drinking Wine, and was oft-times so dis∣tempered therewith, that sometimes he kill'd his Friends at the Table in his drunken fits, whom in sobriety he loved dearest. Cyrillus a Citizen of Hippon, had a drunken Son, who in the midst of his Drunkenness, kill'd his own Mother great with Child, and his Father also that en∣deavoured to restrain his drunken Fury; and would have ravished his Sister, had she not strugled sore and made her escape, not without many wounds. Three not far from Huntington, to my own know∣ledg (saith my Author) being overcharged with Drink,
perished by Drowning; when being not able to rule their Horses, they were carried by them into the main Stream, from whence they never came out again a∣live, but left behind them visible marks of God's Justice, for the Terror and Example of others. Upon the Coasts of Bohemia, Anno 1551. five drunken men quaffing together, with horrible Blas∣phemies, profaned the Name of God; and the Picture of the Devil being painted on the Wall, they caroused Healths to him, to which the Devil answered immediately: and the next Morning all five were found dead, their Necks being broken, and squeez'd to pieces as though a Wheel had gone over them, Blood running out of their Mouths, Nostrils, and Ears, to the great Astonishment of the Beholders. An Alewife in Kesgrave near Ipswich, who would needs force three Serving-men (that had been drink∣ing in her House, and were taking their leaves) to stay and drink the three Outs before they went, that is, Wit out of the Head, Money out of the Purse, and Ale out of the Barrel; as she was coming towards them, with the Pot in her hand, was suddenly taken speechless, and sick, and her Tongue swoln in her Head, and never recovered her Speech, but did the third day after. Two Servants of a Brewer in Ipswich, drinking for the Rump of a Turkey, and strugling in their Drink for it, fell into a scalding Caldron backwards, whereof one died presently, and the other lingringly and painfully, since my coming (says Mr. Ward) to Ipswich. A Man coming home drunk, would needs go and swim in the Mill-pond; his Wife and Servants know∣ing he could not swim, perswaded him, and once got
him out of the Water, but he going in again, was drowned in the Pond. In Barnwel near Cambridg, a lusty young man li∣ving at the sign of the Plough, with two of his Neigh∣bours, and one Woman in their Company, agreed to drink up a Barrel of strong Beer; and drinking up the same, three of them died within four and twenty Hours, and the fourth hardly escaped after great Sick∣ness. A Butcher in Haslingfield, hearing the Minister in∣veigh against Drunkenness, being at his Cups in the Alehouse, fell a scoffing at the Minister and his Ser∣mons; and as he was drinking, the Drink, or some∣thing in the Cup, got into his Throat and stuck so there, that he could neither get it up nor down, but was choaked therewith presently. At Tillingham in Dengy Hundred in Essex, Three young men meeting to drink strong Waters, fell by degrees to half Pints, and one of them fell down dead in the Room; and the other two prevented by Company coming in, escaped not without much Sickness. At Bungy in Norfolk, three coming out of an Ale∣house in a dark Evening, swore they thought it was not darker in Hell it self: one of them fell off the Bridg into the Water and was drowned, the second fell off his Horse, and the third sleeping on the Ground by the River side was frozen to Death. A Bailiff of Hedley, being drunk upon the Lord's Day at Melford, would needs get upon his Mare to ride through the Street, affirming (as the report goes, says my Author) that his Mare would carry him to the Devil; and his Mare casting him off broke his neck. Company drinking in an Alehouse at Harwich in
the Night, over against one Mr. Russels Mayor of the Town, was by him once or twice desired to depart; and at length coming down, he took one of them, making as if he would carry him to Prison; who drawing his Knife, fled from him, and was three days after taken out of the Sea with the Knife in his hand. At Tenby in Pembrokshire, a Drunkard being ex∣cessive drunk, broke himself all to pieces, from an high and steep Rock, in a most fearful manner; and yet the occasion and Circumstances of his fall so ri∣diculous, as I (says my Author) think not fit to re∣late, lest in so serious a Judgment, I should move laughter to the Reader. A Glasier in Chancery-lane in London, fell to a common course of Drinking, and being admonished by his Wife, and many of his Friends, to leave off his sinful Course; yet he presuming much of God's Mercy, continued in his sinful practise, till upon a time having overcharged his Stomach with Drink, he fell a vomit∣ing, broke a Vein, lay two days in extream pain of Body, and sorrow of Mind, till in the end recover∣ing a little Comfort, he died. Four sundry instances of Drunkards, wallowing and tumbling in their Drink, and slain by Carts, I (says my Author) forbear to mention, because such Examples are so common and ordinary. A Yeoman's Son in Northamtonshire, being drunk at Wellingborough on a Market day, would needs ride his Horse in bravery over the Ploughed Lands, so fell from his Horse and broke his Neck. A Knight notoriously given to drink, carrying some Pales of Drink into the open Fields to make People drunk withal, being upon a time drinking with Company, a Woman comes in, delivering him
a Ring with this Posy in it, Drink and Die, saying to him, this is for you, which he took and wore, and within a Week after came to his end by drink∣ing. One of Aylesham in Norfolk, a notorious Drunk∣ard, was drowned in a shallow Brook of Water, with his Horse. And one to my own knowledg in Yorkshire being drunk, as he was going home, fell down upon his Face into a very small running Water, and was drowned there, though the back side of his Head was all dry, and not covered with the Water. Two examples (says Mr. Ward) have I known of Children that murdered their own Mothers in drink, and one notorious Drunkard that attempted to kill his Father; of which being prevented, he fired his Barn, and was afterwards executed. A young Fellow of North-Allerton in Yorkshire being Drunk, and having some reproof given him by his Mother, he murdered her in her own House, upon a Good-Friday; she having received the Sacra∣ment that day, and being but come from the Church a little before. At a Tavern in Breadstreet in London, certain Gen∣tlemen drinking Healths to their Lords, on whom they had Dependance, one desperate Wretch steps to the Tables end, lays hold of a Pottle Pot of Ca∣nary Sack; swears a deep Oath, What! will none drink a Health to my noble Lord and Master? and so setting the Pottle Pot to his head, drank it off to the Bottom, but was not able to rise up, or to speak when he had done, but fell into a deep snoaring Sleep; and being removed, laid aside, and covered by one of the Servants in the House at∣tending
the time of his waking, was within the space of two hours irrecoverably dead. A man in Suffolk overtaken with Wine, (tho never in all his Life before, as he himself said a little be∣fore his Death, and others that knew him said the same) vet going down a pair of Stairs, against the perswasion of a Woman (sitting by him in his Chamber) he fell, and was so dangerously hurt, that he died soon after, not being able to speak from the time of his Fall to his Death. I for∣bear, says my Author, to name the parties thus punished for their Kindreds sakes, yet living, says he. In Dengy Hundred near Maldon, there fell out an extraordinary Judgment upon five or six that plotted a solemn Drinking at one of their Houses, laid in Beer for the purpose; drunk Healths in a strange manner, and all died thereof within a few Weeks after, some sooner, and some later. In August 1618, one Thomas Alred of Godman∣chester in Huntingdonshire, Butcher, an accustomed Drunkard, being entreated by a Neighbour to un∣pitch a load of Hay; and being at that very time in drink, leting his Pitchfork slip out of his hand, and stooping to take it up again, slipped from the Cart with his head downwards; his Fork standing upright with the Tines, he fell directly upon them, which at once run him into the Breast, and struck his Heart so, that he died suddenly. And in July 1628. one John Vintner of Godman∣chester Gardiner, a known Drunkard, and one that would profanely (especially in his drink) scoff at Religion, and abuse good men, fell from the top
of a Pear-Tree, and brake his Neck, and so died. Manlius in his common Places, gives a Relation of three abominable Drunkards, who drank so long till one of them fell down stark dead; and yet the other two nothing terrified with such a dread∣ful example of divine Vengeance, proceeded on still in their vain presumptuous drinking, and poured the dead mans part into him, as he lay by them: So that the Text in the Prophet Isaiah, Chap. 5. ver. 12. might well be applied to them; They regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the opera∣tion of his Hands. St. Ambrose tells of one Theotimus, that being told by his Physicians, that much Quaffing would make him blind; Vale Lumen Amicum, said he: Farewel dear Eyes, if ye can bear no Wine, Then ye no Eyes shall henceforth be of mine. So that he would rather lose his Sight than his Sin, his Soul than his Lust. And St. Austin brings in a Drunkard saying, Malle se vitam quam vinum eripi, he had rather lose his Life than his Wine. We are told by a credible Author, That about eight Persons that were Citizens, and Citizens Sons, in the Country of Swaben, meeting together at a Tavern on a Sabbath-day morning, proceeded to that height, that they drank themselves drunk, and then began to blaspheme God, and scoff at the Vintner, who ad∣vised them to leave drinking, and go to Church, and hear the Word of God preached; at which ad∣vice they did not only continue to mock, but conti∣nued on their drinking; but on a sudden the Devil coming in among them, in a Gentlemans Habit, and
drinking to them, set their Mouths in such a Fire, that these Drunkards not only became amazed there∣at, but also after a miserable manner were all strang∣led to death. A Soldier in Salisbury, in the midst of his Health-drinking and Carousing in a Tavern, drank a Health to the Devil, saying, that if the Devil would not come and pledg him, he would not believe that there was either God or Devil; whereupon his Companions being strucken with Horror, hasted out of the Room: and presently after hearing an hideous noise, and smelling a stinking Savour, the Vintner went up into the Chamber, and coming in, he missed his Guest, and found the Window broken, the Iron Bar in it bowed, and all Blood, but the man was never heard of afterwards. A Vintner that accustomed himself to Swearing and Drunkenness, as he was upon a Lords-day stand∣ing at his Door, with a Pot in his Hand, to invite in Guests, there carne suddenly such a violent Whirl∣wind, as carried him up into the Air, after which he was never more seen. Zeno the Emperor was such a Drunkard, that he would often lie as one dead for many hours; so that he grew not only odious to all People, but even to his own Wife, who upon a time finding him in that case, caused him to be laid in a Tomb with a great Stone upon the top of it, whereby he was miserably pined to death. Maginus reports, of Fliolmus King of Goths, that he was by his drunken Servants thrown headlong into a Vessel of Ale, and therein was drowned.
In Glocestershire, an horrid Patricide was com∣mitted by an ungracious Son being drunk, upon his Father whom he desperately slew. The like unnatural Villany was committed by one Purchas an Essex Monster, upon the Body of his Mother, whom he likewise slew. In the Parish of Castle-Terra, in the County of Cavan in Ireland, a Gentleman when he met with jovial Company, used to drink Healths, and throw the Glasses against the Walls; he delighted also to contradict what Ministers delivered in their Sermons; and having heard one preach of the Benefits and Trial of a justifying Faith, after Sermon he de∣manded of the Preacher, whether he could re∣move Mountains; if I could see you do that, then (said he) I would believe you had Faith, otherwise not; for does not the Gospel say, If a Man have Faith but as a Grain of Mustard seed, he shall say to Mountains, be removed hence, and it shall be done? But at length this Gentleman was strucken with the Small-pox, which got into his Throat in such manner, that he could not swallow nor let down a little Beer, to cool his excessive internal Heat; wherewith being sore tormented, he broke out into these Expressions to an honest man that stood by, O Thomas, would I could now receive one of those Glass-fulls of Drink, which former∣ly I have thrown against the Wall in a Fro∣lick: and afterwards when he saw there was no Re∣medy, but die he must, he said again, O that I now had Faith like a Grain of Mustard-seed: and a little after he deceased in the fifty seventh year of his Age.
We read of a Drunkard (says Mr. Clark) who in the midst of his Cups, sold his Soul to the Devil for a Tankard of Wine, and the Devil forthwith had his Bargain. A certain young man that had devoted himself to a pious and retired course of Life, was much as∣saulted by the Devil by sundry Temptations, and pressed to make choice of one of these three Sins, once to be drunk, or to lie with his Neighbours Wife, or to kill his Neighbour; and the Temptation so far prevailed, that at last he chose the first, viz. once to be drunk, as deeming it the least Sin; but when the Devil had drawn him to that, at the same time both the other Sins were committed by him: For as St. Bernard observes, Ad universa vel crudelitatis vel turpitudinis facinora perpe∣tranda facilis invenitur via, cui nulla sobriæ men∣tis ratio, sed ebrietas dominatur. When Drunk∣enness gets rule and dominion over a man, he is then easily drawn to commit any sort of Vil∣lany: so when the young man was gotten drunk, he then did not scruple to lie with his Neighbour's Wife, and to kill his Neighbour too. A certain Drunkard whom I (says a godly Mi∣nister) knew very well, when he was in drink, quarrelled with his fellow-Servant, and after a few words knock'd him down with his Flail, and kill'd him at one blow; yet when he came to his Trial, by the help of his Friends he made a shift to escape the Halter, and came home again, and there he used to swear and curse, and drink at as high a rate as ever; but at last when he was in the same Yard, where he committed the afore∣said Murder, he fell down dead in a moment: and
I was (saith the same Minister) one of the first that saw him. Mr. Baxter tells us a Story for a certain Truth: There is in London (saith he) an understanding so∣ber pious man, oft one of my Hearers, who hath an elder Brother, a Gentleman of considerable Rank, who having formerly seemed pious, of late years doth oft fall into the Sin of Drunkenness; he oft lodgeth long together here, in this his Bro∣thers House, and whenever he is drunk, and hath slept himself sober, something knocks at his Bed∣head, as if one knocked on the Wainscot; when they remove the Bed, it followeth him; besides loud noises in other parts where he is, that all the House heareth. They have oft watch'd, and kept his Hands, lest he should do it himself; and his Brother has often told me, and brought his Wife (a discreet Woman) to attest it, who aver∣reth moreover that she watching him, has seen his Shoes under the Bed taken up, and nothing touch them; they brought to me the man himself, and when we asked him how he dared to sin after such a warning, he had no excuse: but being a person of Quality, for some special reason, I (says Mr. Baxter) must not name him. Nathaniel Butler was first addicted to Drunk∣enness, Gaming, Purloining, and Fornication, be∣fore he committed that murder upon his Friend John Knight in Milk-street, London, 1657. for which he was afterwards condemned to the Gal∣lows and executed. Mr. William Rogers an Apothecary in Crane-brook in Kent, exceedingly much given to Drink∣ing, and Sabbath-breaking, tho a young man of
a pleasing sweet Temper, was often admonished and perswaded by Mr. Robert Abbot Minister of the place to come to Church, but had often promised and failed. But one Lord's-day in the morning, when he said he was ready to come, he was taken sick and betook him to his Bed, but it proving on∣ly an Ague, next morning he betook him to his old course again; next Week after the Messenger of Death came in earnest, Mr. Abbot addressed him∣self to him in his Chamber, with these words; O how often have you deceived God, your own Soul, and me, and what is now to be done? I fear you will die, and then what will become of you! his Sickness prevailed, and there was too great a Fire kindled in his Breast to be smothered, it burned in his own Soul, and it lightned from his Heart and Lips into the Ears and Hearts of those about him: one while he cries out of his Sins, saying, I have been a fearful Drunkard, pouring in one draught after another, till one draught could not keep down another, I now would be glad if I could take the least of God's Creatures which I have abused; and have neglected my Patients which have put their Lives into my hands; and how ma∣ny Souls have I thus murdered? I have wilfully neglected God's House, Service and Worship; and tho I purposed to go, God strikes me thus be∣fore the day of my promise comes, because I am unworthy to come amongst God's People. Again, another while he falls to wishing, O that I might burn a long time in that Fire, (pointing to the Fire before him) so I might not burn in Hell; O that God would grant me but one year, or a month, that the World might see with what an
Heart I have promised to God amendment! O that God would try me a little, but I am un∣worthy. Another while to his Companions—Beware by me to forsake your wicked ways, lest you go to Hell as I must do; calls his young Ser∣vant, tells him that he had been a wicked Master to him, But be warn'd by me, says he, you have a Friend that has an Iron Furnace which burns hot and long; but if you give your self to my Sins, you shall be burned in the furnace of Hell, an hot∣ter Furnace, millions of millions of Ages. The Minister propounding the Gospel-promises of the largest size, he cri'd, it is too late, I must be burn∣ed in Hell: he pressed him with Tears not to cast away his Soul, for Christ died, &c. he answered, he cast off Christ, and therefore must go to Hell; in short, at last in idleness of thoughts and talk he ended his miserable Life. Anno 1576. Tir-Owen, the Irish Rebel in Queen Elizabeths time, was such a Drunkard, that when his Body was immoderately inflamed with drink∣ing strong Drink and Usquebath, he used many times (as Mr. Camden reports) to be set in the Earth up to the Chin to cool himself. A Gentleman whom I knew, having been at a Fair at North-Allerton in Yorkshire (a Town fa∣mous for strong Ale) and there having overcharged himself with that Liquor; as he was riding home∣wards, putting his Horse into a galloping posture, the Horse being in great heart and very mettl'd, and he not in a condition to guide him, having gotten about a mile from the Town, the Horse threw the Gentleman in the open High-way, and kill'd him with the Fall; for he died presently.
Another Person with whom I had been long ac∣quainted, (he being Barliff to the Lords of a Mar∣ket-Town, where I kept their Courts several years) being full of strong Drink, and not able to govern his Horse, was in like manner slain with a fall from his Horse. And one who lived in the same Town where I lived, having gotten too large a quantity of strong Drink, and riding his Horse into a River to pass over it, the Water at that time being very high, and scarce passable, and he not keeping the Horses head up against the current of the Water, when he came into the main Stream, being driven down the River, after a little while he parted from his Horse and was drowned. And another of my Acquaintance, being invited by a Gentleman to the Tavern, and there drink∣ing too freely; at his going homewards from the Tavern, on the back-side of the Town, coming to enter into his own Yard, he fell from off a little Bridg at the end of the Yard, with his Head downwards into a Ditch; and tho the Ditch were dry without any Water in it, and that he was missed, and found in a very short time, yet he was found dead, for the weight of his Body had choaked him. A man being riding in the same Company that I was in, and being very full of strong Liquor, and clapping his Spurs to the Horses sides, the Horse run into a Ditch or Gutter with the man on his back; and riding along in the Gutter, a Tree in the Hedg over hanging the same, the Horse run the man's Head against the Tree, and beat out his Brains, and he fell down dead and never spoke one word;
of this sad Accident I was an Eye-witness, and see the man's Brains lying on the Ground. And one who was a customary, prosane Swear∣er, and a great Drinker, being gotten drunk at North-Allerton aforesaid, and desiring one of his Neighbours to let him ride home behind him; when they came near the Town where the Drunk∣ard dwelt, he desired to alight from behind his Neighbour to ease himself; and so getting down, his Neighbour rid along the Street; and some Com∣pany coming not long after, found the man dead, lying in the Street with his Breeches about his Feet, in an unseemly and nasty manner. A Mason who loved strong Drink too well, and was frequently drunk, one time lying down upon the ground to sober himself when he was drunk, he fell into a long Sleep, for he never awaked again, but was there found dead. A Farmer who lived in Cleaveland in Yorkshire, in the same Constablery where I have a small Estate, going with other of his Neighbours to pay his Tythe Rent to the Impropriator, who be∣ing a jovial boon, free man, was very liberal, and bestow'd great store of strong Ale on them. And this man having drunk too freely, had it seems got more than he was able to bear; for when he was got very near his own House, at his coming home, when he alighted from his Horse, it being in the Night, and dark, and he not able to guide himself, he staggeed into a Pond close by the House, and not able to get out of it, was in the Morning found standing in the Pond, with his Back against the bank of the Pond, and up to the Knees in Water, and there starv'd to death. All
these eight last mentioned exemplary Judgments have fall'n within the compass of my own certain knowledg. Drunkenness is a flattering Evil, a sweet Poison, a cunning Circe that besots the Soul, and destroys the Body; Dolores gignit in capite, in stomacho, in toto corpore acerrimos. Dolours and grievous Pains, by Drunkenness, The Head, the Stomach, and whole man possess. At last (as Solomon observes) it bites like a Ser∣pent, and stings like an Adder. CHAP. IV. A Compendium of the Laws made against profane, idle, customary Swearing and Cur∣sing. TIpling and excessive Drinking having obtain'd a kind and favourable Reception, and in a manner a general approbation within this Realm, as appears by the several Acts of Parliament (men∣tioned before in the first Chapter hereof) made for the restraining this exorbitant sinful Vice; the Peo∣ple in their Frolicks, and extravagant Cups, were apt and prone to fly out (one profaneness ushering in another) into sinful profane, desperate Swearing and Cursing, which by little and little began to be so very common and practicable, that the Parlia∣ment
of 21 Jac. 1. taking notice thereof, and knowing that profane Swearing and Cursing is forbidden by the Word of God, they thereupon made an Act for the restraining the growth of this catching Sin. For by the Statute of 21 Jac. 1. Ch. 20. it is Enacted, That no Person or Persons shall pro∣sanely Swear or Curse; and that if any Person or Persons shall offend herein, either in the hear∣ing of any Justice of the Peace of the County, or any Mayor, Justice of the Peace, Bailiff, or Head Officer of any City, or Town Corporate, where such offence is or shall be committed, or shall be convicted by the Oaths of two Witnesses, or by Confession of the party, before any such Justice of the Peace of the County, or Head Of∣ficer, or Justice of the Peace in the City, or Town-Corporate, where such offence is or shall be com∣mitted, (which Oath they have power to admi∣nister) That then every such Offender shall for every time so offending, forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor of the Parish, where the offence is or shall be committed, the sum of twelve Pence, to be levied by the Constable, Church-wardens, and overseers of the Poor of that Parish, by Warrant from such Justice of the Peace, or head Officer, by Distress, and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendring to the party the Overplus: and in default of such Distress, the Offender, if he or she be above the age of twelve Years, shall by Warrant from such Justice of the Peace, or Head Officer, be set in the Stocks three hours; but if the Offender be under that Age, and shall not forthwith pay the same sum of
twelve Pence, then he or she by such Warrant as aforesaid, shall be whip'd by the Constable, or by the Parent or Master in his presence. And if such Offender shall commence any Suit at Law, against any Officer, or other, for such distraining, sale of Goods, whipping, or set∣ting in the Stocks, the Defendant, or Defendants, may plead the general Issue, and give the special matter in evidence to the Jury at the Trial; and if it be found against the Plaintiff, or Plaintiffs, or they are Nonsuited, then the Defendant, or De∣fendants shall be allowed good Costs to be taxed by the Court. The Offence shall be complained of, and proved as abovesaid, within twenty days after the Offence committed. And it is Enacted, That this Act shall be read in every Parish-Church by the Minister thereof, upon the Sunday after Evening-Prayer, twice in the Year. There being no Penalty inflicted upon Ministers by this Statute of the 21 Jac. 1. for the not reading thereof, it was therefore in most Churches very sel∣dom, and in some Churches never read; and it be∣ing a long time since the making of this Law, and the Penalty appointed thereby to be paid by the Offend∣ers very small, and proof by two witnesses troublesom, it was therefore very seldom put in execution. So for the more effectual discouragement, and restrain∣ing of this spreading and catching, profane Vice, another Act of Parliament has been made in the sixth and seventh years of his present Majesties reign, King William the third, something more severe, as appears by the Tenure thereof, hereafter following.
By the Statute of the 6 & 7 Gul. 3. Ch. 2. it is Enacted, That if any Person or Persons shall pro∣fanely Swear or Curse in the presence and hearing of any Justice of Peace of the County, Riding, or Division, or of the Mayor or other Head Of∣ficer, or Justice of Peace for any City, or Town-Corporate, or by the Confession of the party of∣fending before any such Magistrate where the said Offence shall be committed; that then for every such Offence, the party so offending, if a Ser∣vant, Day-labourer, common Soldier, or com∣mon Sea-man, shall forfeit and pay to the use of the Poor of the Parish where such offence is com∣mitted one Shilling, and every other Person two Shillings; and in case any of the Persons aforesaid, shall after Conviction offend a second time, such Person shall forfeit and pay double; and if a third time, treble the sum respectively by him or her to be paid for the first Offence. And upon neglect, or refusal of paiment of the said Forfeiture, any Justice of Peace of the Coun∣ty, Riding, or Division, or Mayor, or other Head Officer, or Justice of Peace, for any City, or Town-Corporate, where the Offence is com∣mitted, shall have Authority, and are required to send his Warrant to the Constable, Tything-man, Church-warden, or Overseer of the Poor of the Parish where the Offence is committed, or where the Offender shall inhabit, thereby commanding them, or some or one of them, to levy by Distress, and sale of the Goods of the Offender, or Offenders, the sum so forfeited for the use of the Poor of the Parish as aforesaid: and for want of Distress, then every such Offender being above the age of six∣teen
Years, shall by such Warrant as aforesaid, be publickly set in the Stocks for the space of one Hour for every single Offence; and for any num∣ber of Offences, whereof he shall be Convicted at one and the same time, then two Hours: and if the party offending be under the age of sixteen years, and shall not forthwith pay the said For∣feiture, then he or she shall by Warrant as afore∣said, be whip'd by the Constable, or by the Parent, Guardian, or Master of such Offender in the pre∣sence of the Constable. And if any Justice of Peace, or chief Magis∣trate shall wilfully, or wittingly omit the perfor∣mance of his Duty, in the execution of this Act, he shall forfeit the sum of five Pounds, one moiety to the use of the Informer, to be recover∣ed by Action, Suit, Bill, or Plaint, in any of his Majesties Courts at Westminster, wherein no Essoin, Protection, &c. shall be allowed, nor any more than one Imparlance. And if any Action or Suit shall be commenc'd, or brought against any Justice of Peace, Consta∣ble, or other Officer, for any thing done in the pursuance of this Act concerning the said Of∣fences, the Defendant in such Action may plead the general Issue, and give the special matter in Evidence; and upon a Verdict for the Defen∣dant, or Non-suit of the Plaintiff, or Discon∣tinuance, then the Defendant shall have treble Costs. No Person to be prosecuted or troubled for any Offence against this Statute, unless the same be proved and prosecuted within ten days next after the Offence committed.
This Act shall be publickly read four several times in the Year, in all Parish Churches, and publick Chappels, by the Parson, Vicar, or Cu∣rate of the respective Parishes or Chappels, im∣mediately after Morning-Prayer, on four several Sundays; that is to say, the Sunday next after the four and twentieth day of June, the nine and twentieth day of September, the five and twen∣tieth day of December, and the five and twenti∣eth day of March; under the pain of twenty Shillings for every such Omission or Neg∣lect. And the Justice of Peace, Mayor, or other Head Officer, shall register in a Book, to be kept for that purpose, all the Convictions made before him upon this Act, and the time of making thereof, and for what Offence; and shall certify the same to the next general Quar∣ter-Sessions of the Peace for the said County or Place, where the Offences are committed, to be there kept upon Record by the respective Clerks of the Peace, to be seen without Fee or Reward. Altho some Persons accustomed to profane Swear∣ing and Cursing in their ordinary discourse and communication, may possibly evade the Punish∣ments ordained and appointed by the aforementi∣oned Laws, for such abominable wickedness: yet such daring presumptuous Sinners may be assured they cannot (without serious and unfeigned Repen∣tance, and an absolute and total renouncing and forsaking of their Wickedness) escape the punish∣ments threatned by Almighty God against such pro∣voking Sins; and that they may not be ignorant
thereof, I shall in the next Chapter set down several proofs of Scripture to that purpose, in hopes that upon the perusal and serious Consideration thereof, their Consciences may be touched with the guilt of their profane debauched Wickedness. CHAP. V. Some Texts of Scripture, shewing the odious∣ness and danger of profane, customary Swear∣ing and Cursing. THOƲ shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, for the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. Exod. 20. 7. Deut. 5. 11. He that Curseth his Father or Mother, shall surely be put to death. Exod. 21. 17. Thou shalt not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People. Exod. 22. 28. Thou shalt not swear by my Name falsly, neither shalt thou profane the Name of thy God, I am the Lord. Levit. 19. 12. Thou shalt not curse the Deaf, nor put a stumbling block before the Blind, but shalt fear thy God: I am the Lord. Levit. 19. 14. He that blasphemeth the Name of the Lord, he shall surely be put to death. Levit. 24. 16. Every one that curseth his Father or his Mother, shall be surely put to death; he hath cursed his Fa∣ther or his Mother, his Blood shall be upon him. Lev. 20. 9.
Cursed be he that curseth his Father or his Mother. Deut. 27. 16. The Ʋngodly is so proud that he careth not for God, neither is God in all his Thoughts. His Mouth is full of Cursing, Deceit, and Fraud; under his Tongue is Ʋngodliness and Vanity. Psal. 10. 4, 7. For the sin of their Mouth, and for the words of their Lips, they shall be taken in their Pride, and why? Their Preaching is of Cursing and Lies. Psal. 59. 12. Their device is only how to put him out whom God will exalt; their delight is in Lies; they give good words with their Mouth, but curse with their Heart. Psal. 62. 4. His delight was in cursing, and it shall happen un∣to him; he loved not blessing, therefore shall it be far from him. He clothed himself with Cursing, like as with a Raiment; and it shall come into his Bowels like Water, and like Oil into his Bones. Psal. 119. 16, 17. The wicked is snared by the Transgression of his Lips; but the just shall come out of Trouble. Prov. 12. 13. A wholesom Tongue is a Tree of Life, but perverse∣ness therein is a breach in Spirit. Prov. 15. 4. A man's Belly shall be satisfied with the fruit of his Mouth, and with the increase of his Lips shall he be filled. Death and Life are in the power of the Tongue, and they that love it shall eat the Fruit there∣of. Prov. 18. 20, 21. Whoso Curseth his Father or his Mother, his Lamp shall be put out in obscure Darkness. Prov. 20. 20.
Whoso keepeth his Mouth and his Tongue, keepeth his Soul from Trouble. Prov. 21. 23. As the Bird by wandring, as the Swallow by flying, so the Curse causeless shall not come. Prov. 26. 2. There is a Generation that curseth their Father, and doth not bless their Mother. Prov. 30. 11. Suffer not thy Mouth to cause thy Flesh to sin. Eccles. 5. 6. Curse not the King, no not in thy Thought; and curse not the rich in thy Bed chamber: For a Bird of the Air shall carry the Voice, and that which hath Wings shall tell the matter. Eccles. 10. 20. For the Land is full of Adulterers; for because of swearing the Land mourneth; the pleasant places of the Wilderness are dried up, and their course is evil, and their force is not right. Wherefore their way shall be unto them as slippery ways in the Darkness, they shall be driven on and fall therein: for I will bring evil upon them, even the year of their Visitati∣on, saith the Lord. Jer. 23. 10, 12. By swearing and lying, and killing and stealing, and committing Adultery, they break out, and Blood toucheth Blood. Hosea 4. 2. For Wisdom is a loving Spirit, and will not acquit a Blasphemer of his words; for God is witness of his Reins, and a true beholder of his Heart, and a hearer of his Tongue. Therefore he that speaketh unrighteous things cannot be hid, neither shall Venge∣ance when it punisheth pass by him. For inquisition shall be made into the counsels of the Ʋngodly, and the sound of his words shall come unto the Lord, for the manifestation of his wicked Deeds. Wisd. 1. 6, 8, 9.
The Blessing of the Father establisheth the Houses of Children, but the Curse of the Mother rooteth out Foundations. Ecclus. 3. 9. Then said he unto me, This is the Curse that goeth forth over the face of the whole Earth: for every one that stealeth shall be cut off as on this side according to it: and every one that sweareth shall be cut off on that side according to it. I will bring it forth, saith the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter into the House of the Thief, and into the house of him that sweareth falsly by my Name: and it shall remain in the midst of his House, and shall consume it, with the Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. Zech. 5. 3, 4. Accustom not thy Mouth to swearing, neither use thy self to the naming of the Holy One. A man that useth much Swearing, shall be filled with Iniquity, and the plague shall never depart from his House; if he shall offend, his Sin shall be upon him; and if he acknowledg not his Sin, he maketh a double Offence; and if he swear in vain, he shall not be Innocent, but his House shall be full of Calamities. Ecclus. 23. 9. 11. But I say unto you, Swear not at all, neither by Hea∣ven, for it is God's Throne; nor by the Earth, for it is his Foot-stool; neither by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the great King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy Head, because thou canst not make one Hair white or black. But let your Communication be, yea, yea, nay, nay; for whatsoever is more than these, cometh of evil. Matth. 5. 34, 35, 36, 37. For God commanded, saying, Honour thy Father and thy Mother: and he that Curseth Father or Mo∣ther, let him die the Death. Mat. 15. 4.
Their Throat is an open Sepulchre, with their Tongues they have used Deceit, the poison of Asps it under their Lips. Whose Mouth is full of Cursing and Bitterness. Destruction and Misery are in their ways. There is no fear of God before their Eyes. Rom. 3. 13, 14, 16, 18. Let bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamour, and evil speaking, be put away from you, with all malice. Ephes. 4. 31. The Tongue is a Fire, a world of Iniquity; it de∣fileth the whole Body, and setteth on fire the course of Nature, and it is set on fire of Hell. It is an unru∣ly Evil, full of deadly Poison. Therewith bless we God, and therewith curse we Men, which are made af∣ter the similitude of God. Out of the same Mouth proceedeth Blessing and Cursing: my Brethren these things ought not so to be. James 3. 6, 8, 9, 10. But above all things, my Brethren, swear not, nei∣ther by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath; but let your yea be yea, and your nay nay, lest ye fall into Condemnation. James 5. 12. If any idle, debauched Swearers and Cursers be so emboldned in their profane customary Wickedness, as that after the reading or hearing of these before∣mentioned places of Scripture, they shall still dare to proceed and run on in their wilful wick∣ed sinful Courses; I shall for their further Caution, in this next following Chapter, give them a brief relation of several signal Instances of God's severe wrath and displeasure against such Wickedness, ma∣nifested by the fearful, terrible, and amazing Judg∣ments which he hath several times signally inflicted upon such profane sinful wretches.
And I hope upon the perusal and consideration of the following exemplary Punishments inflicted by God upon others, that all customary, common Swear∣ers and Cursers will lay it to heart, and that we may find that of the Prophet Isaiah manifested in them; When thy Judgments are in the Earth, the inhabitants of the World (saith the Prophet) will learn Righte∣ousness. Isa. 26. 9. It was an excellent saying of the Poet, Exemplo alterius qui sapit, iile sapit; He is a wise man in∣deed that learns Wisdom by the Example of o∣thers: and the saying is often found true, Ma∣gis intuentur quid fecerit Jupiter, quam quid decuit Plato. More by Example oft reclaimed be, Than are by Precept, and smooth Oratry. CHAP. VI. Of several signal, fearful, and amazing Judg∣ments of God's severe Justice, inflicted upon customary profane and presumptuous Swearers and Cursers. EARL Godwin justifying himself before King Ed∣ward the Confessor, about King Alfred's Death, prayed to God that if he were any way guilty of it, he might never swallow down one morsel of Bread; and thereupon by the just judgment of God, he was choaked by the first Morsel he offered to eat.
We find mention made by a good Author, of a wicked wretch in France, among the People call'd Averin, that forswearing himself in an unjust cause, had his Tongue so tied immediately upon it, that he could not speak, but roar; and so continued till by earnest Prayers and Repentance, the Lord restor∣ed to him the use again of that unruly and sinful Member. Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem, a man famous for his Vertues, and sharpness in reproving and cor∣recting Vice, was accused falsly and maliciously of Unchastity, by three Sons of Belial; The first pro∣fanely said, If I lie, I pray God I may perish by Fire. The second, If I speak ought but Truth, I pray God I may be consumed by some filthy and cruel Disease. The third, If I accuse him falsly, I pray God I may be deprived of my sight, and be∣come Blind. Thus tho the Honesty and Chastity of Narcissus was so well known to all the Faithful, that they believed not what the Valets attested; yet the good Bishop moved with grief of his Accusation, and partly with the desire of quietness from worldly Affairs, forsook his Bishoprick, and lived in a De∣sart for many Years. But these wicked Wretches by their deaths, witnessed his Innocence, which by their words they had so much impugned; for the first had his House set on Fire so suddenly, and in such a violent and extraordinary manner, that he perished in the Flames, with all his Family and Pro∣geny. The second languished away with a tedious infections Disease, that spread his Body all over. The third seeing the woful ends of his Compani∣ons, confessed all their Villany; and sadly lament∣ing his woful Case, and wicked Crime, persisted so
long in a continued course of Weeping, till both his Eyes were out. And thus God in his Judg∣ment sent upon each of them their wishes, and thereby manifested the innocency of the good Bishop, and cleared him from Shame and Oppro∣bity. A Fellow hearing profane Cursing and Swearing condemned in the Pulpit by a learned Preacher, and that it never escaped Punishment, said in a bra∣very, I have oft forsworn my self, and yet my Right-hand is not a whit shorter than my Left; which words he had scarce uttered, when presently such an Inflammation arose in his Hand, that he was constrained to go to a Surgeon and get it cut off, lest it should infect his whole Body; and so his Right-hand became shorter than his Left, in re∣compence of his Perjury which he so lightly esteem∣ed of. In the Town of Rutlinquen, a certain Passenger coming into an Inn, gave a Budget with a good sum of Money therein, to his Host to lay by: but when he demanded it again at his going away, the Host deny'd it, and gave him bad Language, with many Mocks and Taunts; so the Traveller call'd him before a Judg, but having no Witnesses, desired to have him sworn, which he without scru∣ple offered to do, and wished he might go to the Devil, if ever he received or concealed such a Bud∣get. But the Passenger as he was going out, meets two men, and being informed by him of the mat∣ter, offer him their Assistance, and returned back again to the Judg: these two unknown Persons jus∣tified that the Budget was delivered to the Host, and that he had hid it in such a place, at which the
Host became astonished, and by his countenance and gesture discovered his Guiltiness; whereupon the Judg resolved to send him to Prison, but the two unknown Witnesses (who were indeed Fiends of Hell) began to say, you shall not need, for we are sent to punish his Wickedness; and having so said, they hoisted him up into the Air, where he vanished with them, and was never after found. In the reign of Queen Elizabeth, there was in the City of London, one Ann Averyes a Widow, who forswore her self for a little Money that she was to pay for six pound of Tow, at a Shop in Woodstreet; and being suddenly surprized with the Justice of God for this Wickedness, she immediate∣ly fell down speechless, and cast up at her Mouth in great abundance, and with an horrible stink, that matter which by Nature should have bin voided downwards, and so died. There was a profane wretch in Germany, that almost at every word he spake, the Devil was at one end of it; if walking he chanced to tread awry and stumble, presently the Devil was in his Mouth: and notwithstanding the many Reproofs he had from his Neighbours, with serious advice to cor∣rect and amend so detestable a Vice, yet all was in vain; for continuing this his presumptuous Wicked∣ness, and damnable custom, as he was passing o∣ver a Bridg, he fell down, and in his fall uttered these words, Hoist up with an hundred Devils; which he had no sooner spoken, but the Devil whom he call'd for so oft, was at his Elbow to strangle him.
In the year 1551. at Megalapale near Voildstat, at the Feast of Pentecost, the People being set on Drinking and Carousing, a Woman in the Com∣pany, commonly named the Devil in her Oaths, till at length he being so often call'd on, came on a sudden and carried her through the Gate aloft in the Air, before them all, who ran out astonished, to see whither he would transport her; and seeing her hanging in the Air for a while without the Town, at length she fell down dead to the Ground. About the same time there lived one that was both a monstrous Swearer, and also otherwise very vi∣cious, who tho he was frequently admonished to forsake his customary Swearing, and to amend his Life, yet it was all but lost labour, for he would not at all listen thereunto. And the Pestilence being on a time in the City, he became infected there∣with, and thereupon he withdrew himself apart, with his Wife and a Kinswoman into a Garden he had; and the Ministers coming to admonish him, and exhort him to Repentance, he was so far from being touched in Conscience, or any ways moved with their godly Admonitions, that he strove ra∣ther to harden himself more and more in his Wick∣edness. And being one day swearing and denying God, and giving himself to the Devil, and calling for him with vehemency, the Devil came and snatch∣ed him up presently, and heaved him up into the Air, his Wife and Kinswoman looking on, and seeing him fly over their Heads, he was never af∣terwards seen any more. A Popish Priest on a time thundring out bitter Curses in the Pulpit against Luther, wished if Luther's Doctrine was true, that a Thunder-bolt
might strike him to death; three days after a migh∣ty tempest of Thunder and Lightning arising, the Priest ran to the Altar into the Church, and fell to his Prayers; but the Vengeance of God found him out and his Hypocrisy, so that he was strucken in a manner dead with the Lightning; but coming to Life again, as they led him homewards through the Church-yard, another flash so scorch'd him, that he was burnt from the crown of his Head, to the sole of the Foot, as black as a Shoo, so that he died with the manifest mark of God's Vengeance upon him. Beza reports, that he knew a man in France of good parts, well instructed in Religion, and a Mas∣ter of a Family, who in his anger Cursing, and bidding the Devil take one of his Children, had presently his wish, for the Child was possessed im∣mediately with a Spirit; from which tho by the fre∣quent and continual Prayers of the Church, he was at length released, yet before he came to his perfect Health he died. The like hapned to a Woman whom her Husband in anger devoted to the Devil with bitter Curses; whereupon Satan assaulted her presently, and de∣prived her of her Wits, so that she could never be recovered. Another example, saith the same Author, hapned to a Perjurer that wittingly and wilfully forswore himself, to the end to prejudice and deceive another: but he had no sooner made an end of his false and wicked Oath, but a grievous Apoplex seized him, so that without speaking any one word afterwards he died within a few days.
A decrepit Romish Priest being by the help of others heaved and lift up into the Pulpit, and choo∣sing the Text out of 1 Cor. 11. concerning the Lord's Supper, and taking occasion to defend the Papistical errors of the Mass, he used these or the like blasphemous Speeches, O. Paul, Paul, if this Doctrine touching the receiving the Sacrament in both kinds be true, and if it be a wicked thing to receive it otherwise, then I wish the Devil would come to take me: and then (turning himself to the People) if the Pope's Doctrine concerning this point be not true, then I am the Devil's bond-slave; neither do I fear to pawn my Soul upon it. These and many other blasphemous words he used, till the Devil came indeed, in the likeness of a tall man, black and terrible, sending before him such a fearful noise and such a wind, that the People fearing the Church falling on their Heads were greatly amazed; but he not able to hurt the rest, took away the old lame Priest, being his devoted Bond-slave, and carried him so far, that he was never after heard of. In the year 1556. at St. Gallus in Helvetia, a certain man that earned his living by making clean rough foul Linen against the Sun, entring a Tavern, tasted so plentifully of the juice of the Grape, that he vomited out terrible Curses against himself and others; amongst the rest he wished if ever he went into the Fields to his old Occupation, that then the Devil might come and break his Neck; yet not∣withstanding his late words, and this his profane and wicked Execration, after sleep had conquer'd his drink, and sobriety restored his Senses, he went again to his Trade; remembring his late words, but little regarding them: but however the Devil at∣tended
him at his appointed hour, in the likeness of a big swarthy man, and asked him if he remembred his promise, the Vow which he made the day be∣fore, and if it were not lawful for him to break his Neck; and so struck the poor trembling man over the Shoulders, that his Feet and his Hands present∣ly dried up, and there he lay not able to stir, till by help of men he was carried home, the Lord not giving the Devil so much power as he wished him∣self, but yet permitting him to plague him on this sort, for his Amendment, and our Example. Henry Earl of Schwartburgh, through a corrupt custom, used commonly to wish that he might be drowned in a Privy; and as he wished, so it hapned unto him, for he was so served, and murdered at St. Peter's Monastery in Erford, in the year of our Lord 1148. The like befel a young Courtier at Mansfield, whose custom was in any earnest Asseveration to say, the Devil take me if it be not so; so the Devil took him indeed, whilst he slept, and threw him out at a high Window; where tho by the goodness of God, he caught no great harm, yet he learnt by ex∣perience to bridle his Tongue from all such cursed Speeches, this being but a taste of God's Wrath that is to fall upon such wretches. A Woman giving her self to the Devil, both Bo∣dy and Soul, did use most horrible Cursing and Oaths, both to her self and others usually at all times, and in a more effectual manner at a certain Wedding: and the People exhotting her to leave off her sinful course of Life; yet she not regarding their advice, continued in her profane wicked progress, till all the People were set at Dinner, and very
merry, and then the Devil came in Person and tran∣sported her into the Air before them all, with most horrible outcries and roarings, and in that manner carried her round about the Town, so that the In∣habitants were very terribly afraid; and then he tore her in four pieces, leaving in several Highways a quarter, that all that came by, might be witnesses of the Punishment, and then returning to the Mar∣riage, threw her Bowels on the Table before the Mayor of the Town, with these words, Behold these dishes of Meat belong to thee, whom the like de∣struction awaiteth, if thou dost not amend thy wick∣ed Life. There is mention made in Luther's Conferences, that divers Noble-men being striving together at an Horse-race, in their Course, cried The Devil take the last; and the last being a Horse that broke loose, the Devil hoisted him up into the Air, and took him clean away. We read of a certain man that provided a sump∣tuous Supper, and none of his invited Guests com∣ing to it, he in a great Passion and Heat said, If none of them will come, then let all the Devils in Hell come; and presently came a number of those hellish Fiends, whom he not discerning from men, coming to welcom and entertain them, when he took them by the Hands, he perceiving Claws in∣stead of Fingers, he was most terribly amazed, and ran out of Doors with his Wife, and lest none in the House but a young Infant and a Fool sitting by the Fire, whom the Devils had no power to hurt, neither any Body else, but devoured up the Victu∣als, and so departed.
One Hacket of Oundle in Northamptonshire, used in his earnest talk, to curse himself in this manner, If it be not true, then let a visible confusion come up∣on me, which afterwards happened to him; for fall∣ing into abominable Errors, he call'd himself Christ and Judg of the World, for which he was hanged in the 33d year of Queen Elizabeth in Cheapside, London. At Witberg, before Martin Luther, and divers Learned men, a Woman whose Daughter was pos∣sessed by a Spirit, confessed that by her curse, that plague was faln upon her Child; for being angry at a time, she bid the Devil take her; and no soon∣er spoken the words, but the Devil did take her indeed, and possessed her in a most strange man∣ner. And a Woman of Neuburg in Germany, cursing her Son in her angry Passion, prayed to God she might never see him again return alive, which came to pass that very day; for he bathing himself in the Water was drown'd, and never returned to his Mo∣ther alive, according to her ungodly wish. Also another Woman in Astorga, in her rage cur∣sed one of her Sons with detestable Maledictions, giving him to the Devils of Hell, and wishing they would fetch him out of her presence, with many o∣ther horrible Execrations: this being about ten of the Clock at Night, and the night being very dark, the Boy growing fearful hearing his Mother curse so, went out into a little Court behind the House, from which place he was presently hoised up into the Air, by men in shew of grim Countenance, great Stature, and loathsom and horrible Gesture, but in∣deed cruel Fiends of Hell, and that with such swift∣ness
(as the Boy confessed) that it was not possible as he thought for any Bird to fly so fast; and light∣ing down amongst certain Mountains amongst Bush∣es and Briers, was trailed through the thickest of them, and so torn and rent not only in his Clothes, but also in his Hands and Face, and almost all his whole Body; at last the Boy remembring God, and beseeching his merciful Favour and Assistance, the cruel Fiends brought him back again through the Air, and put him in at a little Window into a Chamber in his Father's House, where after much search and grief for him, he was found in this miserable Condition, and almost distracted; and thus tho they had no power to deprive him of his Life, yet the Lord suffered them to afflict the Parents in the Son, for the good of both if they belonged to God. But above all, (says my Author) this is most strange which happned in a Town of Mesina, Anno 1552. when a diolerick Father seeing his Son slack about his Business, wished he might ne∣ver stir from that place; which was no sooner said, but it was done, and his Son stuck fast in the place, and could not by any means possible be removed, no not so much as to move or bend his Body, till by the prayers of the Faithful his pains were somewhat mitigated, tho not remit∣ted; three years he continued standing with a Post at his back for his case, and four years sitting, at the end whereof he died: nothing weakned all this while in his Understanding, but professing the Faith, and not doubting of his Salvation in Christ Je∣sus. When any asked him at any time how he did? his usual answer was, that he was fastned of
God, and that it was not in mans Power, but God's Mercy to release him. Mr. Fox in his Acts and Monuments, makes mention of a certain young Gallant that was a monstrous Swearer, who riding in the Company of divers Gentlemen, began to swear and most horribly blaspheme the Name of God; and one in the Company telling him that he must one day an∣swer for it, he in a great huff said, Why takest thou thought for me? take thought for thy Wind∣ing-sheet. Well says the other, amend, for death gives no warning, and as soon comes a Lambs∣skin to the Market as an old Sheeps. Gods wounds (said he) care not thou for me, raging still on this manner worse and worse, till at length as they past on their Journey, they came riding over a great Bridg; upon which the Gentleman Swear∣er spurred his Horse, so that he leapt clear over the Battlement with the man on his Back, who as he was going, cry'd, Horse and Man and all to the Devil. In August 1629. one Thomas Wilson Labourer, a known and common Swearer and Blasphemer of God's Name by Oaths and Curses, and much given to drink to excess, upon a slight occasion moved to displeasure against his Wife, and not daring to do much violence to her, turned it upon himself, and with his Knife stabb'd himself and so died, many of his Friends and Neighbours being pre∣sent. Sir Jervasa Elwayes Lieutenant of the Tower of London, when he was hanged on Tower-hill, for be∣ing Accessary in the poisoning of Sir Thomas Over∣bury his Prisoner, confessed, that at his playing at
Cards and Dice, he had often wished that he might be hang'd if it were not so and so, and therefore (says he) this shameful death is justly come upon me. Anno 1603. A man that dwelt in Wimble Staf∣ford in Cheshire, seeing two godly Persons going in the Highway near to him, said to one that was with him, I will dance, and swear, and swagger, to anger yonder Puritans; and so he did to their great Grief, but presently the revenging hand of God fell upon him; so that immediately he was strucken with Sickness, was carried home in a Cart, and three days after he died in a most fearful manner. About the beginning of April 1661. a Woman in Darbyshire, having cozened a Boy of some Mo∣ney, was charged with it, but she stifly denyed it; and being further urged to confess the Truth, she (in a fearful manner) prayed God that the Earth might open and swallow her up quick if she had it, and immediately the Earth under her opened, and she sunk down into it; and being afterwards digged for, they found her nine Foot deep with∣in the Earth, and that very Money was found in her Pocket: this was attested by credible Witnesses. John Peter, Son-in-law to Alexander Keeper of Newgate, in Queen Maries time, an horrible Blas∣phemer, upon every idle occasion used to say, if it be not true, I pray God I may rot before I die, and accordingly God made him exemplary; for as he wished, so it happened to him, for his Body rot∣ted away by piece-meal till he died. And a certain Maid having stoln and pilfred ma∣ny things out of her Mistresses House, and being ex∣amined about it, forswore them, and wished that
she might rot, if ever she touched them or knew of them; and being carried to Prison about them, she began there to rot and stink so, that they were forced to thrust her out of Prison into an Ho∣spital, where she in great Misery repented of her foul Sin. Also one John Duncalf of Kings Swinford, in January 1677. coming to the House of one Hum∣fry Baby at Grangewell about three miles from Wool∣verhampton, he begg'd of the Woman there Victu∣als and Drink; who formerly knowing him, and compassionating his Condition, freely gave him some; but while she was stooping to draw him some drink, he stole her Bible, and sold it after∣wards: fort three Shillings to a Maid not far off, whereby the Woman came to hear-of it, and pay∣ing her the Money, received it again, but could not hear what was become of the man. But a while after John Duncalf hearing it discoursed that he stole a Bible, grew very angry, and gave out threat∣ning words against a young man that reported it; but being severely charged with it, he did not only deny it with some fierceness, but execrated and cur∣sed himself, wishing his Hands might rot off if it were true; which words he had no sooner uttered, but by his own Confession to divers that came to see him in his miserable Condition, he said that imme∣diately thereupon he had an inward Horror and Trembling upon him, a dread and fear of the Di∣vine Vengeance of God, and the Justice of him from whom no secrets are hid; and that within a few days after his Cursing himself, his Flesh began to look black at the wrists of his Hands; and he con∣tinued divers Weeks with Faintness; and fearing
an Ague, was going for his Acquaintance; but not being able to go further, he laid himself down in a Barn, and there continued two days and nights before he was found, from whence he was removed to another Barn near Woolverhampton, and had a Keeper appointed him: his Flesh began first to rise in great knobs at his Wrists and Knees, and to break and run with putrid Matter, the Flesh shrunk from the Bones, his pain was exquisite, the smell very offensive, Worms bred in the putrid Flesh, and his Hands and Legs fell off. And thus conti∣nued he begging the Prayers of those Divines that came to visit him, and acknowledging the just Judg∣ment of God for his Stealing, Lying, and Cursing, &c. for some Weeks a dreadful spectacle of the Divine Vengeance. Anno 1677. At Atherbury in Oxfordshire, a Wo∣man that kept a petty Alehouse having much ad∣dicted her self to Oaths and Curses, and one Morn∣ing a neighbouring Woman coming thither for some strong Drink she had occasion for, and offer∣ing a piece of Money, she would have two pence or three pence more for a former Debt, which the other resolutely denied. The Hostess began to swear, and use several profane and abominable wish∣es and imprecations; as, God damn me, and the Devil burn me, if it be not so; which last words she often repeated, thrusting the other Woman violent∣ly out of her House, shutting the Door, and lock∣ing it against her. Her Husband not long after coming home, wondered to find the Door fast, but at last with one or two of his Neighbours, he forced it open, and to his great surprizal finds in the midst of the Floor the Relicks of his Wife, one
side of her Body and the Clothes on it, from the sole of her Foot to the crown of her Head, burnt to ashes, and nothing left but the Skeleton, or part of the Bones; whereas the other side remained whole, and the Clothes not so much as touch'd or sing'd, tho it was observed that the Flesh and Skin was all turned black. Much the like Story (as Reverend Mr. Turner tells us) was published not many years ago concerning a Maid in Dublin. A dissolute young man (Servant to a Gentleman) who was much given to beastly Drunkenness, meet∣ing with some of his Companions at Sangall in Switzerland to be merry, when they had drunk free∣ly and extravagantly, he began to rail at and quar∣rel with his Companions, and using many blasphe∣mies against God, he added this execration also; If I serve my Master any longer, I give my Body and Soul to the Devil; and staying there all night, in the morning he began to think of what he had said the night before, yet having no other means of subsistence, he resolved to return to his Master's Service; but at his return when he was not far from his Masters House, a man met him clad in black and fearful to behold, who said to him, Come fellow, I am now ready to take that which is my right, and which thou gavest me yesterday; and so taking him by the Hand (to his great Horrour and Amazement) the Devil threw him to the ground, and so vanished: and not long after this miserable young man being found by some of his Neighbours, his Hands and Feet were drawn together; and being brought to a Lodging, he had the use of all his Limbs taken from him, and so continued till he died miserably.
A Serving-man in Lincolnshire, for every trifle used to swear by God's blood, and would not be warned by his Friends, till at length falling into a grievous Sickness, he was again much perswaded by his Friends to repent, which counsel he still reject∣ed, and hearing the Bell toll, in the very pains of Death, he started up, God's wounds the Bell tolls for me, but he shall not have me yet; whereupon the Blood issued out in a most fearful manner from all the joints of his Body, from Mouth, Nose, Wrists, Knees, Heels, and Toes, and other parts of his Bo∣dy; and so he died, as Mr. Perkins relates. Another example of like Punishment befel one Mr. Barrington a great Swearer, who going forth a Hunting or Hawking on the Lord's-day or a Festi∣val, and not finding game and speeding to his mind, he went to an Ale-house at Puckeridg five miles from Ware, in the way to Cambridg, and call'd for drink, beginning to swear after his unhappy Custom, saying, By God's blood this is an un∣lucky day: and presently after he bled at the Nose, which so vexed him that he began to rail and blaspheme the Name of God, swearing Passion, Wounds, Nails, Flesh, Blood, &c. till at last he proceeded further to bleed at the Ears, Eyes, Wrists, joints of his Hands, and of all his Body, at the Navil and Fundament, in a wonderful great quantity, and streams of Blood, blaring out his Tongue in a fearful manner as black as Pitch, so that no Person durst come near him: this continued till the De∣vil and Death made an end of him; next day (says the Publisher hereof) the Body was laid in a Cart, carried to Standon, and buried in the Highway.
Michael a Jewish Rabbin, as he was swearing and blaspheming the Name of Jesus, fell down and broke his Neck. Three Soldiers passing through a Wood in the Country of Samurta, there arose a tempest of Thun∣der and Lightning, and one of them to shew his contempt of God and his Judgments, burst forth into swearing and blasphemy; but the Tempest tear∣ing up a Tree, it fell upon him, and crusht him to pieces. One who for twelve or sixteen years together used to swear by God's Arms, in the end his own Arm being hurt with a Knife, could not be healed by any means, but rankled and festered from day to day, at length so rotted, that it fell away piece∣meal, and he himself through the anguish and pain thereof died. I my self (faith a godly Divine that wrote late∣ly) knew two most notorious Swearers that brake their Necks, the one with a fall down a pair of Stairs, and the other from his Horse. At a Village called Benevides in Spain, two young men being together in the Fields, there suddenly arose a terrible Tempest, and withal so violent a Whirlwind, that it amazed the beholders: the two young men seeing the fury of it coming towards them, run as fast as possible they might, but yet it overtook them; and they fearing to be hoisted up into the Air by it, fell down flat upon the Earth, where the Whirlwind whisked round about them for a pretty while, and then passed forwards, and the one of them rose in such an Agony, that he was scarce able to stand, and the other lying still and not stirring, some other that stood under a
Hedg a far off, went to see how he did, and found him stark dead, with his Bones so crush'd that the joints of his Arms and Legs turned every way, as tho his Body had bin made of Moss; his Tongue also was pull'd out of his Mouth by the Roots, and could never be found, which was the more remark∣able, because he was noted to be an outragious swear∣er and blasphemer of God's Name. At Tubing in Germany (as the History tells us) a Boy used to invent such new Oaths as were not common; but the Lord sent a Canker or some worse Disease that did eat out his Tongue, the instrument wherewith he blasphemed God. A certain man (says Mr. Bolton) who in his Life∣time was given exceedingly to the fearful sin of Swearing, had his Heart on his death-bed so exceed∣ingly filled with enraged greediness after it, that he desperately desired the standers by to help him with Oaths, and to swear for him, tho himself in the mean time swore as fast and furiously as he could. Anno 1649. about the end of June, there was a Soldier at Ware, going with some others to wash themselves in the River; and this Soldier finding the Water shallow, he asked if there were no deep∣er a place for him to swim in, and some told him that there was not far off a deep pit, but that it was very dangerous, and therefore advised him to take heed how he went into it: to whom he answer∣ed, God damn me, if it be as deep as Hell I will go into it, which accordingly he did, but immedi∣ately sunk to the Bottom, never rising again, but was there drowned.
November 1626. a Serving-man being at a Ta∣vern in Essex, threatned to swear the Constable out of the Town if he came there; but in a drunken fit as he was running after one to make him pledg him a pint of Sack at a draught, he fell down the Stairs and died immediately. A Fisher-man whom I knew (says Mr. Beadle in his Diary) bringing Mackarel to a Port-town in Suffolk, where the People (because they were the first that came that year) pressing eagerly to buy them, some against his Will being entred into the Boat, he took up a Stone and swore by the Name of God he would make them stand farther off, whereupon he sunk down instantly, and soon after died. I of my own certain knowledg knew a Man in Yorkshire, a customary profane desperate Swearer, who going out on a time, with some Neighbours on foot a Hunting, it happened that he espied an Hare upon her Seat in his Range, so he swore a great Oath or two, she's here, and putting up the Hare he ran over two or three Lands and fell down, the rest of the Company following their Game be∣ing got three or four Closes from him; and hav∣ing lost the Hare, and not seeing this man coming, they went back to see what was the cause of his not coming, and finding him in the same place where he fell, they turned him up, and he was stark dead. There is no surer sign of a wicked Person than common and customary Swearing, such should be served as Lewis the 9th of France served a Citizen of Paris, that seared his Lips for swearing with an hot Iron; and when some said that it was too
great Cruelty, he answered, I would to God that with fearing mine own Lips with an hot Iron, I could banish out of my Realm all abuse of Oaths. Rashness is a fault in any human Action, but in no Cases more dangerous than in the imprecati∣on of Divine Judgments: men had need to deli∣berate and be well advised before they appeal to Heaven for Vengeance; for ofttimes the pray∣ers of these rash People are heard by God, and answered beyond their expectation, to their great Terror and Amazement, as plainly appears by seve∣ral of the before mentioned Examples. And infinite more Examples might be produ∣ced, demonstrating the displeasure of Almighty God against the provoking sin of profane Swearing and Cursing, and the severity of his Justice in the signal punishments inflicted by him upon the pre∣sumptuous customary practisers thereof. But I hope the perusal and serious Consideration of these al∣ready set down, may be sufficient motives not only to bring all rational Persons guilty of such wicked∣ness to a sight of their profaneness, but also to a sense of the great danger they are in, and be there∣by moved and incited to a firm purpose, and sted∣fast resolution of Amendment, and a total forsak∣ing of this their accustomed abominable Sin. But if neither Law, Scripture, nor Example will prevail with them, then may that of the holy Psal∣mist be fitly applied to them; Ye imagine mischief in your heart upon the Earth, and your hands deal with wickedness. The Ʋngodly are froward even from their Mothers Womb. They are as venom as the poison of a Serpents, even like the deaf Adder that stoppeth her Ears: Which refuseth to hear the voice
of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. Psal. 58. 2, 3, 4, 5. However let such profligate presumptuous pro∣fane, provoking Sinners assuredly know, That the Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his Name in vain. Exod. 20. 7. He that dwelleth in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision. Then shall he speak unto them in his Wrath, and vex them in his sore Displeasure. Psal. 2. 4, 5. For tho God sometimes have leaden Feet, yet the wicked find that he hath iron Hands; For God shall wound the head of his Enemies, and the hairy Scalp of such an one as goeth on still in his Wickedness. Psal. 68. 21. CHAP. VII. An Abstract of the Laws made against the profanation of the Lord's-day, commonly called Sunday. I Conceive it will not be altogether improper (be∣fore I proceed to give an account of the Laws made for the observation of the Lords day) to set down an Abstract here of the Statute of E. 6. about the Sacrament, and of that of Q. M. about dis∣turbing Ministers; likewise the Statute Jac. 1. about profane speaking or jesting with the Name of God, &c. and then to proceed to the other Laws. By the Statute 1 E. 6. Ch. 1. it is Enacted, That none shall speak or do any thing in contempt of the most Holy Sacrament, in pain of Impri∣sonment,
and to make Fine and Ransom at the King's Will. Three Justices of the Peace (Quor. unus) have power to take Information by the Oaths of two lawful Persons (at least) concerning the Offence aforesaid, and to bind over by Recognizances every Accuser and Witness in five Pound apiece to appear at the next Sessions to give Evidence a∣gainst the Offendors, who are there to be enquired of before three Justices or more, by the Oaths of twelve men, and also indicted if the matter al∣ledged against them be found true; the Offence to be prosecuted within three Months. By the Statute 1 M. Sess. 2. Ch. 3. it is Enacted, That if any shall disturb a Preacher lawfully Licen∣sed, in his open Sermon or Collation, he shall be by the Constables or Church-wardens of the Parish, brought before a Justice of the Peace, who upon due Accusation shall commit him to safe Custody, and within six days after, together with another Jus∣tice, shall diligently examine the Fact; who if they find cause, shall commit him to the common Goal, there to remain for three Months, and from thence to the next Quarter-Sessions; at Which upon the parties Reconciliation, and entring in∣to Bond for good Behaviour for one whole Year (at discretion of the Justices in Sessions) he shall be released; but if he persist still in his Obstinacy, he shall remain in Prison without Bail, until he shall reconcile, and be penitent for his Offence. He that rescues an Offendor in this kind, shall suffer like Imprisonment as aforesaid, and besides shall forfeit five Pounds to the King. The Inhabitants of a Town that suffer such an
Offendor to escape, shall forfeit five Pounds, being presented before the Justices of Peace in Sessions within the County or Corporation where the escape was made. Justices of Peace, Assize, and Oyer and Ter∣miner, and Mayors, and head Officers of Corpo∣rations, have power to hear and determin these Offences, and to impose the Fines aforesaid. This Act shall not restrain the jurisdiction of the Ecclesiastical Laws, howbeit none shall be punish∣ed here for one Offence. By the Statute 3 Jac. 1. Ch. 21. None shall in any Stage-play, Shew, May game or Pageant, pro∣fanely use the Name of God, Christ Jesus, the Holy Ghost, or Trinity, on pain of ten Pounds, to be divided between the King and Prosecutor. It's said that Constantine the Great made Laws for the strict observation of the Lord's Day, command∣ing that through all the Roman Empire all servile Employments should cease on those days: he prescrib∣ed also a form for the Legions of Soldiers to be used both on the Sabbath-days and other days; and him∣self used to shew much Reverence and Attention to the Word of God, so that many times he would stand up all the Sermon time: and when some of his Courtiers told him that it would tend to his dis∣paragement, he answered that it was in the Service of the great God, who was no respecter of Persons. By the Statute 1 Eliz. Ch. 2. Every Person is to resort to their Parish Church, or (upon let thereof) to some other, every Sunday and Holy-day, upon pain to be punished by Censures of the Church, and also to forfeit twelve pence for every Default, to be levied by the Church-wardens there for the
use of the Poor, upon the Offendor's Goods by way of Distress, and for want of Distress, to be committed to some Prison until the same be paid. And by the Statute 23 El. Ch. 1. Every Person not repairing to Church, (according to the Statute aforesaid) shall forfeit twenty Pounds for every Month they so make Default; and if the Offen∣dor is not able to pay, and do not pay within three Months after Judgment, then to be committed to Prison, and there to remain until he have satisfied the same, or shall conform himself and go to the Church. By the Statute 3 Jac. 1. Ch. 4. The King may refuse the twenty Pounds a Month for absenting from the Church, and take in lieu thereof two third parts of the absenters Lands and Leases; but here he shall not include the Recusants Mansion-house, nor demise the two third parts to a Recusant, or to any other for a Recusants use. The Church-wardens and Constables of every Parish, or one of them, or (if there be none such) then the High-Constable of the Hundred there shall present once every year at the general Sessions of the Peace, the monthly absence from Church of e∣very Popish Recusant, and then Children being a∣bove the Age of nine years, and their Servants, to∣gether with the Age of their Children, as near as they can know them, on pain to forfeit respective∣ly for every such default twenty Shillings; which Presentment the Clerk of the Peace, or Town-Clerk shall record without Fee, on pain of forty Shillings. If upon such Presentment (being the first) the Recusant be convicted, the Officer that presents
him shall have forty Shillings reward, to be levied by Warrant upon the Recusants Goods and Estate, as the more part of the Justices of Peace shall think fit. But Note, that his Majesties Protestant Subjects, Dissenting from the Church of England, and qua∣lified according to the late Statute of Indulgence, are exempted from the Penalties of these Statutes. The command of the Sabbath hath a special me∣mento prefixed to it, which may not only note to us, that we are by this Memento, Remember thou keep Holy the Sabbath-day, to observe the Lord's zeal for the observance thereof, but we are thereby put in mind, timely to lay aside our worldly Business, and get our Hearts into readiness for the entertainment of God into the same. And altho nothing is more acceptable to God than the true and sincere Worship and Service of him according to his Holy Will, and that the Holy keeping of the Lord's-day is a prin∣cipal part of the true Worship and Service of God: Yet the People of this Kingdom having enjoyed a long continued series of Peace, Plenty, and Pro∣sperity, instead of rendring thanks to Almighty God for this great Blessing, and of serving him in Holiness and Righteousness of Life and Conversati∣on; they on the contrary, like the idolatrous Jews upon the making of their Golden-Calf, they sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play, Exod. 32. 6. 1 Cor. 10. 7. Nay the people of this Realm were so entirely devoted to Games and Pastimes, that they could not, or would not forbear them upon the Lord's Day, but spent that day in the service of Satan, which Almighty God hath hallowed and commanded to be set apart for the Service and Worship of himself.
For this Day in many Places of the Realm being prophaned and neglected by a disorderly sort of People, in exercising and frequenting Bear-bait∣ing, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, Common Plays, and other unlawful Exercises and Pastimes thereon. And for that many Quarrels, Bloodsheds and o∣ther great Inconveniencies did grow by the Resort and Concourse of People going out of their own Parishes, to such disorderly and unlawful Exercises, and Pastimes, neglecting Divine Service both in their own Parishes and elsewhere. Therefore by the Statute 1 Car. 1. Ch. 1. it is enacted, That there shall be no Meetings, Assem∣blies, or Concourse of People out of their own Parishes on the Lord's Day, within this Realm of England, or any the Dominions thereof, for any Sports or Pastimes whatsoever, nor any Bear-baiting, Bull-baiting, Enterludes, Com∣mon Plays, or other unlawful Exercises or Pas∣times used by any Person or Persons within their own Parishes, and that every Person and Per∣sons offending in any the Premisses, shall for∣feit for every Offence three Shillings and four Pence, to the use of the Poor of the Parish where the Offence shall be committed. And if any one Justice of the Peace of the County, or the Chief Officer or Officers of any City, Borough or Town-corporate, where such Offence shall be committed, upon his or their view, or Con∣fession of the Party, or Proof of any one or more Witness by Oath, which such Magistrate hath power to administer, shall find any Person of∣fending in the Premisses, the said Magistrate shall give Warrant under his or their Hand and
Seals to the Constable or Church-wardens of the Parish or Parishes where such Offence shall be committed, to levy the said Penalties so to be assessed by way of Distress and Sale of the Goods of every such Offender, rendring the said Offenders the overplus; and in Default of such Distress, that the Party offending be set publickly in the Stocks by the space of three Hours. And if any Man be sued or impeached for the Execution of this Law, he may plead the general Issue, and give the matter of Justi∣fication in evidence; and no Man to be impeach∣ed by this Act, except he be called in question within one Month next after the Offence com∣mitted. The Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction not to beabridged by this Act, but that the Ecclesiastical Court may punish the same Offence, as if this Act had not been made. This Statute 1 Car. 1. Ch. 1. only prohibiting unlawful Sports, Games and Pastimes, on the Lord's Day; Carriers, Waggoners, Wayr-men, Car∣men, and Drovers, being out of the Statute, ha∣ving no Veneration for the Lord's Day, kindness for themselves, nor pity for their Beasts, did make a Common practise of Travelling upon this Day; and Butchers did usually kill and fell Victuals on the Lord's Day. So in the 3 Car. 1. An Act was made, prohibiting Carriers, Drovers, &c. to travel on this Day, on pain of twenty Shillings every Offence; and Butchers for killing and sel∣ling Victuals thereon, on pain of six Shillings and eight Pence for every Offence. But this Statute standing but upon contiunance, and expiring after the end of the first Session of Parliament then next
following: Several of these Persons returned a∣gain (like the Dog to his Vomit) to their former accustomed Prophaness. And tho this Statute 3 Car. 1. Ch. 2. was by the Statute 17 Car. 1. Ch. 4. continued and made per∣petual, yet the unnatural uncivil Civil War be∣tween the King and Parliament breaking out shortly after, this Statute was much neglected and seldom put in Execution; two Witnesses being required for the conviction of the Offender, which was troublesome. So by the Statute 29 Car. 2. Ch. 7. it is en∣acted, That all Persons whatsoever shall on the Lord's Day apply themselves to the observation of the same, by exercising themselves thereon in the Duties of Piety and true Religion, pub∣lickly and privately. And no Tradesman, Arti∣ficer, Workman, Labourer, or other Person what∣soever, shall do or exercise any worldly Labours, Business or Work of their ordinary Callings, up∣on the Lord's Day: (Works of Necessity and Charity only excepted) And every Person being of the Age of Fourteen Years or upwards of∣fending in the Premisses, shall for every such Offence forfeit the Sum of five Shillings; and no Person or Persons whatsoever shall publickly cry, shew forth or expose to Sale, any Wares, Merchandizes, Fruit, Herbs, Goods or Chat∣tels whatsoever upon the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, upon pain of forfeiting the same Goods so cryed, or shewed forth, or exposed to Sale. And no Drover, Horse-courser, Waggoner, Butcher or Higler, their or any of their Ser∣vants
shall travel, or come into his or their Inn, or Lodging upon the Lord's Day, or any part thereof, upon pain of twenty Shillings for eve∣ry such Offence; and none shall use, imploy, or travel upon the Lord's Day, with any Boat, Wherry, Lighter or Barge, except it be upon extraordinary occasion, to be allowed by a Jus∣tice of the Pace of the County, or Head Offi∣cer, or Justice of the Peace of the City, Borough, or Town-Corporate, where the Fact shall be committed, on pain of five Shillings for every such Offence; and if any Person so offending in any of the Premisses shall be thereof convic∣ted before any Justice of the Peace of the Coun∣ty, or chief Officer or Justice of the Peace of the City, &c. where the Offence shall be commit∣ted, upon his or their view, or confession of the Party, or proof of any one or more Witnesses (which Oath the said Magistrates are impower∣ed to administer) then the said Justice, or chief Officer or Officers, shall give Warrant under his or their Hand, to the Constable or Church-war∣dens of the Parish or Parishes where the Offence shall be committed, to seize the said Goods so shewed forth, or put to sale, as aforesaid, and to fell the same: And to levy the said other For∣feitures or Penalties by way of Distress and Sale of the Goods of every such Offender distrain∣ed, rendring them the overplus of the Money raised thereby; and in Default of such Distress, or in case of Insufficiency or Inability to pay, the Party offending to be set publickly in the Stocks by the space of two Hours. And all Forfeitures to be imployed to the use of the
Poor of the Parish where the said Offence shall be committed: Save that any such Justice, May∣or, &c. may out of the said Forfeitures re∣ward the informer according to their Discre∣tions, so as such Reward exceed not a third part of the Forefeitures. But this Act is not to extend to the prohibit∣ing of dressing of Meat in Families, or dres∣sing or selling of Meat in Inns, Cooks-shops or Victualling-houses, for such as otherwise can∣not be provided, nor to the crying or selling of Milk before nine of the Clock in the Morning, and after-four in the Afternoon. No Person to be impeached, prosecuted, or molested for any Offence before mentioned, un∣less it be within ten Days after the Offence com∣mitted. And if any Person shall travel upon the Lord's Day, and be robbed, the Inhabitants of the Hun∣dred shall not answer for the Robbery, but up∣on notice of such Robbery to them or some of them given, or Hue and Cry for the same to be made, they shall make or cause to be made fresh pursuit after the said Offenders with Horsemen and Footmen, according to the Statute 27 Eliz. upon pain to forfeit as much Money to the King's Majesty as might have been recovered a∣gainst them by the Party robbed. And no Person or Persons whatsoever upon the Lord's Day shall serve or execute any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree (except in Cases of Treason, Felony or Breach of the Peace) but that the Service thereof shall be utterly void, and the Person or Persons so
serving or executing the same, shall be as lia∣ble to the Suit of the Party grieved, and to an∣swer Damages to him for doing thereof, as if he or they had done the same without any Writ, Process, Warrant, Order, Judgment or Decree at all. Having shewed what Provision the Law makes for the Observation of the Lord's Day. I shall proceed in the next Chapter to give an Account what some Texts of Holy Writ command in such Case to be observed. Note that by the Statute 1 Jac. 1. Ch. 22. No Shoe-maker shall put his Wares to sale upon Sun∣days, on pain of three Shillings and four Pence, and also to forfeit the full value of the Wares sold. CHAP. VIII. Of the several Texts or Places of Scripture re∣lating to the due Observation and Sanctify∣ing of the Sabbath. REmember the Sabbath Day, to keep it holy: Six Days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work; but the Seventh Day is the Sabbath of thy Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, Thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, thy Man Servant, nor thy Maid Servant, nor thy Cattel, nor thy Stranger that is within thy Gates. For in Six Days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and  that in them is, and rested the seventh day; wherefore the Lord blessed the seventh day, and hallowed it, Exod. 20. 8, 9, 10, 11.
Six days thou shalt do thy work, and on the seventh day thou shalt rest: that thine Ox and thine Ass may rest, and the Son of thy Handmaid, and the Stranger may be refreshed, Exod. 23. 12. Speak thou also unto the Children of Israel, saying, Verily my Sabbaths ye shall keep; for it is a sign between me and you, throughout your Generations, that ye may know that I am the Lord, that doth sanctify you: Ye shall keep the Sabbath therefore; for it is holy unto you. Every one that defileth it, shall surely be put to death: for whosoever doth any work therein, that Soul shall be cut off from amongst the People. Six days may work be done, but in the seventh is the Sabbath of rest, holy to the Lord: whosoever doth any work in the Sabbath day, he shall surely be put to death, Exod. 31. 13, 14, 15. Six days thou shalt work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest, in Earing-time, and in Harvest thou shalt rest, Exod. 34. 21. Ye shall keep my Sabbaths, and reverence my Sanc∣tuary, I am the Lord, Levit. 19. 30. 26. 2. And while the Children of Israel were in the Wil∣derness they found a Man that gathered Sticks upon the Sabbath-day, and they that found him gathering Sticks, brought him unto Moses and Aaron, and unto all the Congregation. And they put him in Ward, because it was not declared what should be done to him. And the Lord said unto Moses, the Man shall surely be put to death: all the Congregation shall stone him with Stones; and all the Congregation brought him without the Gamp, and stoned him with Stones, and he died; as the Lord commanded Moses. Num. 15. 32, 33, 34, 35, 36. Keep the Sabbath-day to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God hath commanded thee; six days thou shalt labour
and do all thy Work; but the seventh Day is the Sab∣bath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt not do any Work, thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Man servant, nor thy Maid-servant, nor thine Ox, nor thine Ass, nor any of thy Cattel, nor thy Stran∣ger that is within thy Gates; that thy Man-servant, and thy Maid-servant may rest as well as thou. Deut. 5. 12, 13, 14. Six days shall Work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you an Holy day, a Sabbath of Rest to the Lord; whosoever doth work therein shall be put to death. Exod. 35. 2. Blessed is the Man that doth this, and the Son of Man that layeth hold on it: that keepeth the Sabbath from polluting it, and keepeth his hand from doing any Evil. Isa. 56. 2. If thou turn away thy Foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy Pleasure on my Holy day, and call the Sabbath a Delight, the Holy of the Lord, Honourable, and shalt honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasures, nor speaking thine own words. Then shalt thou delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the Earth, and feed thee with the Heritage of Jacob thy Father: for the Mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Isa. 58. 13, 14. And on the seventh day, ye shall have an holy Convocation, ye shall do no servile Work, Num. 38. 25. Thus saith the Lord, Take heed to your selves, and hear no Burden on the Sabbath day, nor bring it in by the Gates of Jerusalem. Neither carry forth a Bur∣den out of your Houses on the Sabbath-day, neither do ye any work, but hallow the Sabbath-day; as I com∣manded your Fathers. But if you will not hearken to me to hallow the Sabbath-day, and not to bear a Burden,
even entring in at the Gates of Jerusalem on the Sab∣bath-day: Then will I kindle a Fire in the Gates there∣of, and it shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. Jer. 17. 21, 22, and 27. Thou hast despised mine Holy things, and hast profan∣ed my Sabbaths. Ezek. 22. 8. Moreover, this they have done unto me, they have defiled my Sanctuary in the same day, and have profaned my Sabbaths. Ezek. 23. 38. And the Lord said unto Moses, How long refuse ye to keep my Commandments and my Laws? See for that the Lord hath given you the Sabbath, therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the Bread of two days; abide ye every Man in his place, let no Man go out of his place on the seventh day. So the People rested on the seventh day. Exod. 16. 28, 29, 30. Moreover also I gave them my Sabbaths to be a sign between me and them, that they might know that I am the Lord that sanctify them. But the House of Israel rebelled against me in the Wilderness: they walk∣ed not in my Statutes, and they despised my Judgments, which if a Man keep he shall even live in them. And my Sabbaths they greatly polluted: then I said I would pour out my Fury upon them in the Wilderness to con∣sume them. Ezek. 20. 12, 13. In those days I saw in Judah some treading Wine∣presses on the Sabbath, and bringing in Sheaves, and la∣ding Asses; also Wine, Grapes, and Figs, and all manner of Burdens which they brought into Jerusalem on the Sabbath-day, and I testified against them in the day wherein they sold Victuals. There dwelt Men of Tyre also therein, which brought Fish, and all man∣ner of Wares; and sold on the Sabbath unto the Chil∣dren of Judah, and in Jerusalem. Then I contended
with the Nobles of Judah, and said unto them, what Evil thing is that ye do and profane the Sabbath day? Did not your Fathers thus, and did not God bring all this Evil upon us, and upon this City? Yet ye bring more Wrath upon Israel, by profaning the Sabbath. Nehem. 13. 15, 16, 17, 18. Several other Places of Scripture might be here inserted to this purpose; but it being plain and ob∣vious that many Persons are so emboldned by their customary and continued Practice in the Prophana∣tion of the Lord's Day, that (to the great grief of every good Christian) they contemn the Law, neglect God's House, and despise his Holy Ordi∣nances, ridicule all good Counsel and Advice, and stop their Ears to all Godly Perswasions. I shall therefore (for the Terror of such obstinate Sinners) in this next Chapter, set down several Examples of God's Indignation and Wrath poured down upon the Heads of customary and presump∣tuous Profaners of the Lord's Day; in hopes that thereby they may be brought to take notice of that Saying of the Poet, Fœlix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. An happy Man is he, that can beware Of others harms, and of himself take care. And so intitle themselves to that promise of God: When the wicked man turneth away from his Wickedness that he hath committed, and doth that which is lawful and right, he shall save his Soul alive. Ezek. 18. 27. And by turning to the Lord, and forsaking their wicked Courses, prevent the like Judgments from
falling upon their own Heads. For to the Lord our God belong Mercies, and Forgivenesses, tho we have rebelled against him: Neither have we obeyed the Voice of the Lord our God, to walk in his Laws which be set before us. Dan. 9. 9, 10. CHAP. IX. An Account of several Instances of God's severe Justice, and Punishments that have befaln presumptuous, customary Profaners of the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday. IT has been observed, and still taken notice of, that most of those Criminals that make their Ignominious Exit at the Gallows, who come to a sight and sence of their Sins, and make Confes∣sion of their Wickedness, and beg pardon at God's Hands for their sinful course of Life; do bewail their neglect of the due Observation of the Lord's Day, and warn others by their Example, to for∣sake such Wickedness, and of the sad Consequen∣ces that attend those that make a practice of pro∣phaning the Lord's Day. This is the Market-day of the Soul, wherein the Lord in a more special manner useth to meet his People, to dispense his Blessings and Graces in and by his holy Ordinances, to those that humbly and reverently attend upon him therein: The care∣ful Sanctification of it, keeps up the Power of Godliness in our Hearts and Lives, and the Pro∣phaners thereof have often been punished with
signal Judgments of God's severe Justice, as may partly appear by the following Examples. In Bedfordshire, a Match at Foot-ball being made and appointed on the Sabbath-day in the Afternoon, whilst two were in the Belfry toling of the Bell to call the Company together, there was suddenly heard a Clap of Thunder, and a Flash of Lightning was seen by some that sate in the Church-Porch, coming through a dark Lane, and flashing in their Faces, which much terrified them, and passing through the Porch into the Belfry, it tripp'd up his Heels that was toling the Bell, and struck him stark dead; and the other that was with him, was so sorely blasted therewith, that shortly after he died also. At a place called Tidworth, on the Sabbath-day many being met together to play at Foot-ball in the Church-yard, one of them had his Leg broken, which presently gangreenizing, he forthwith died thereof. At Alecester in Warwickshire, a lusty young Women went to a Green not far off, where she said she would dance as long as she could stand, but while she was dancing (it being upon the Sab∣bath day) God struck her with a violent Disease, whereof within two days after she died. Also in the same Place not long after, a young Man presently after the Evening Service was end∣ed, brought a pair of Cudgels into the Street, near to the Minister's House, calling upon divers to play with him, but they all refusing, at length came one who took them up; saying, tho I never play'd in my Life, yet I will play one Bout now; but shortly after he was jesting with a young
Maid, he took up a Birding Piece, which was char∣ged, saying, Have at thee; and the Piece going off, shot her in the Face, whereof she immediatly died, for which Act, he forfeited all his Goods and Chat∣tels, and underwent the Law. At Wooton in the same County, a Miller going forth on the Sabbath-day to a Wake, when he came Home at Night, found his House, Mill, and all he had burnt down to the Ground. And at Woolston in the same County, many loose Persons kept a Whitson-Ale, and had a Mau∣rice-dancing on the Sabbath-day, in a Smith's Barn, to the great Grief of the Godly Minister there, who used his utmost endeavour to restrain them from such Profaneness, but in vain; so as it pleased God shortly after a Fire kindled in that Smith's Shop, which burnt it down, with his House and Barn; and raging furiously, going some-times with the Wind, and sometimes against it, it burnt down many others Houses, most of which were those of the prime Actors in that Profana∣tion of the Lord's Day. Anno 1634, On a Lord's Day, in the time of a great Frost, Fourteen young Men while they were playing at Foot-ball upon the Ice on the River Trent, near to Gainborough, meeting all together in a scuffle, the Ice suddenly broke, and they were all drowned. In the Edg of Essex near Brinckly, two Fellows working in a Chalk-Pit, the one was boasting to his Companion how he had angred his Mistress with staying so late at their Sports the last Sunday Night, but he said he would anger her worse the next Sunday Night; but he had no sooner said
this, but suddenly the Earth fell down upon him, and kill'd him outright, with the Fall whereof his Fellow's Limbs was broken, who had been also Partner with him in his Jollity on the Lord's Day. In the County of Devon, one Edward Ameridith a Gentleman, being pained in his Feet a long time, and being somewhat recovered, one said to him he was glad to see him so nimble, Mr. Ameridith replied, he doubted not but to dance about the May-Pole the next Lord's Day, but before he mo∣ved out of that place he was smitten with such a Feebleness of Heart, and Dissiness in his Head, that desiring help to carry him to a House, he died be∣fore the next Lord's Day came. At Walton in Surrey upon the Thames, there in a great Frost, Anno 1634, Three young Men on the Lord's Day, after they had been at the Church in the Forenoon, where the Minister pressing the words of his Text, out of 2 Cor. 5. 10. That we must all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, &c. They the while whispered as they sate: And in the Afternoon they went together over the Thames upon the Ice, unto a disorderly House of Gameing, &c. where they spent the remainder of the Lord's Day, and part of the Night also in Revelling; one of them in a Tavern merrily dis∣coursing the next Day of his Sabbath Deeds, and of his Voyage over the Ice; but on the Tusday after these three returning homewards, and at∣tempting to pass over the Ice again, they all sunk down to the bottom like Stones; whereof one only was miraculously preserved, but the other two were drowned.
Anno 1598, the Town of Teverton in Devoshire, was often warned and advised, and told by the Godly Pastor thereof, that God would bring some heavy Judgment upon the Inhabitants of that place, for their horrible Profanation of the Lord's Day, occasioned chiefly by reason of their Market-day being on the Monday, and accordingly not long after their Minister's death, in the said Year, God sent a terrible Fire, which in less then half an Hour consumed the whole Town; except the Church, the Court-house, Almes-houses, and a few poor People's Dwellings, and above 50 Per∣sons were consumed and perished in the Flames. Also Anno 1612, it was again wholly burnt down, except a few poor Houses; they not being warned by the former Judgment, but continuing in the same Sin. In the Year 1635, A Profane Company of young Men went (as Mr. Faucnor relates) on the Lord's Day early in the Morning to Clarendon-Park, to cut down a May-Pole, and having loaden the Cart with it, at Milnrs-Barn entring into Salisbury, one of the Cart Wheels falling into a Rutt, made the young Tree in the Cart (which they had stoln for a Pole) to give a great shugg on one side, which struck one of the Company such a blow on the Head, that it beat out his Brains, so that he presently died in the place, and there lay a fearful Spectacle of God's Wrath, both against that idle Sport, and wilful prosaning of the Sabbath, whilst he makes the ve∣ry thing they had chosen for their Sport and Pas∣time, to be the Instrument of executing his Fury. And Dr. Teate gives a second Example of this Na∣ture, in the Year 1626.
We read that Mr. Abberley a Godly Minister in Burton upon Trent, did often take occasion to re∣prove and threaten Sabbath-breakers, especially such as sold and bought Meat upon the Sabbath-day Mornings, a Practice too common it seems in that place; nevertheless there was a Taylor in the Town, a very nimble active Fellow, dwelling at the upper end of the Town, who would go through the long Street (as it were in Bravado) to the other end of the Town, and fetch home Meat on the Lord's Day before Morning-Prayer: But as he came back with both his Hands full, in the midst of the Street he fell down stark dead, which as it pleased God, says the Doctor, did work some Reformation, both amongst the Butchers and others. When I was in Cheshire (says my Author) there was one Sir T. S. a Papist, and at that time in favour at the Court, who coming into his Coun∣try was much feasted and followed by the Gentry, and upon a Sabbath day was entertained and feast∣ed at a Knight's House, where many others were present; towards Evening they went to Dancing, and in the midst of their Sports there was one Sir J. D. that had a great Blow given him on his Leg, by an invisible Hand, which made him lame for a long time after. Thomas Savage (a young Man who was Execu∣ted at Ratcliff, Octob. 28. 1668, for Murthering his Fellow-Servant) whilst he was in Newgate, cryed out thus to some that came to see him, O Wretch (said he) that I was  studied how I might spend the Lord's Day in the Devil's Work, I thought I could never dishonour God enough, and that time I should have served God in, I did most for Satan in it; on the
Sabbaths I used to play my Prancks, I sometimes went into the Church indeed, but (I may speak it to my Shame and deep Sorrow) I never heard one whole Ser∣mon all the while I was with my Master, and indeed I laughed at those that spent the Sabbath in Hearing and Praying, and looked upon them as the veriest Fools in the World; I was glad when the Sabbath came, that I might have time to run to my Vile Comrades, I re∣joiced that then I could go to satisfy my cursed Lusts with Wherish Women. O tell young Men from me, that the breaking of the Sabbath is a dangerous and costly Sin. Also while he, was in Newgate, one Sabbath day his Fellow-Prisoners being at Cards, asked him to join with them, O (said he) you and I have something else to do with our Time, than to play at Cards; is it now a time for us to be sporting away the Sabbath, when we have but one poor Sand left us to work for Eternity? A Minister on a time preaching and pressing the Sanctification of the Sabbath, had occasion in his Sermon to make mention of that Man, that by the special Command of God was stoned to death for gathering Sticks upon the Sabbath day. Where∣upon one in the Congregation stood up and laugh∣ed, and made all the haste that he could out of the Church, and went to gathering of Sticks, the he had no need of them, but when the People came out from Sermon they found this Man stark dead, with the bundle of Sticks in his Arms, lying in the Church-Porch. Gregory Tomonensis reports, that an Husband∣man, who upon the Lord's Day went to plow his Field, as he cleansed his Plow-share with an Iron,
the Iron stuck so fast into his Hand, that for two Years he could not be delivered from it, but carried it about continually to his exceeding great Pain and Shame. Another Profane Fellow without any regard to God or his Service, made no Conscience to lead his Corn out of the Field on the Lord's Day in Sermon time; but he was well rewarded for his ungodly Covetousness, for that Corn which with so much care he gathered together, was consumed with Fire from Heaven, with the Barn, and all the Grain that was in it. And a certain Noble-man every Lord's Day using to go a Hunting in the Sermon time, the Lord punished his Impiety with this Judgment, he caused his Lady to bring forth a Child with a Head like a Dog, that seeing he preserred his Dogs be∣fore the Service of God, he might have one of his own getting, to make much of. At Kimstat a Town in France, in the Year 1559, there lived a certain covetous Women that was so greedy of Gain, that she would neither frequent the Church her self to hear the Word of God, not suffer any of her Family to go, but continually stay'd labouring and toyling about drying and pil∣ling Flax, and doing other domestick Businesses, and could not be reclaimed by her Neighbours, and one Sabbath day Fire seemed to run among the Flax without doing any harm, the next Sabbath day it took Fire indeed, but was quickly extinct; all this would give her no warning, but she conti∣nued obstinate in her Profaneness, the third Sab∣bath day the Flax again taking Fire could not be quenched, till it burnt her, and two of her Chil∣dren
to death; for tho they were taken out alive, yet the next day they all three died, and that which was most to be wondered at (says the Re∣porter) a young Infant in the Cradle was taken out of the mid'st of the Flames without any hurt: thus God uses to exercise his Judgments upon the Con∣temners of his Commandments. In the Year 1583, at London, at the Bear-Garden, a great number of People being gathered together on a Sabbath day to see the Sport, the Lord that he might chasten them in some sort, and show his dislike of the profaning the Sabbath. caused the Scaffolds suddenly to break; the Beholders to tum∣ble down headlong, so that eight Persons Men and Women were slain, besides many others were sore hurt and bruifed, to the shorthing of their Lives. The like Judgment happened at a Town in Bed∣fordshire called Risley, in the Year 1607, where the Floor of a Chamber, wherein a great number were gathered together to see a Play on the Sabbath day, fell down, and many by the Fall thereof sore hurt, and some killed. In May 1629, one John Bow of Ely (Coachman to one Mr. Batnum of Beenham) a Fellow very vitious, and exceeding in these two Evils of Pro∣fane Swearing and Drunkenness, on the Sabbath day in the Sermon time drank himself drunk, so that when he was to sit in the Coach-box to drive the Coach, he fell from it under the Horses Feet, and was trodden to death, or so hurt at least that he died shortly after. In November 1621, one Richard Burn Servant to Jasper Burch, Gardiner of Ely, accustomed to travel on the Lord's Day, and making no reckoning of the
Sabbath, seldom or never coming to the Church on that day but went onwards to St. Ives Market, and so spent the day; and being drunk, was at length overtaken by the just Judgment of God, for go∣ing up the Stream in his Boat, which he had loaden with Marketable Wares, he fell into the River and was drowned. Mr. Hugh Clark, preaching about Oundle in Northamptonshire, where the People were general∣ly very ignorant, and much addicted to the Pro∣fanation of the Lord's Day, by Whitson-Ales, Maurice-Dances, &c. which he much set himself against, endeavouring to evince their, and to draw them from the Evil and Danger o the Sin, de∣nouncing God's Judgments in case of their obstinate Perseverance: but they being train'd up in those Courses, and hardned by custom, persisted still in their Wickedness. At last on a Lord's Day the Leader of the Dance, a Lusty young Man, in the mid'st of their Profane Pastimes, fell down sud∣denly and died; but they soon shaking off their Fear, returned to their Vomit again; the Lord's Day following Mr. Clark took occasion from this sad dispensation to quote that Text, Jer. 17. 27. If thou wilt not hearken to me, to hallow the Sabbath day, &c. then will I kindle a Fire in the Gates thereof, &c. The People still kick'd against these Admonitions, and the Eve following returned to their Sports a∣gain, among whom was a Smith that was a chief Ring-leader, but it pleased God the very next day, two Husbandmen coming to sharpen their Plow-shares at his Shop, a spark from the red hot Iron as he was beating it upon the Anvil, flew into the Thatch, which both the Smith and the Neigh∣bours
saw, but had no power to move towards it, which presently burnt down the Shop, House, and all the Smith had. This Mr. Clark pressed upon their Consciences, but nothing would prevail till at last upon a Sabbath day at Night, when they were return'd to their several Homes, there was heard a great noise and ratling of Chains up and down the Town, which was accompanied with such a smell and stink of Fire and Brimstone, that many of their guilty Consciences suggested to them that the Devil was come to fetch them away quick into Hell, and now and not till now they began to think in good earnest of a Reformation. Edmond Kirke Vintner, executed July 11. 1684, for murthering his Wife, in his Confession acknow∣ledged himself frequently guilty of profaning the Lord's Day, upon which Holy Day (saith he) I committed the heinous Sin of murthering my Wife. Thus Sin was punished with Sin, a less with a greater, and the greater with the Gallows, and that greater committed near the same Gallows, and himself confessed that he had (to his Wife asking whilst she passed by what place that was) told her, it was Tyburn, where John Gower was lately hang'd for killing his Wife. O Lord how dear to me thy Counsels are, but how just and terrible thy Judg∣ments. Mr. Smythies Curate of St. Giles's Cripple-gate, in the Confession and Discovery of a condemned Prisoner executed for Theft, May 25, 1687, saith (as Mr. Burton reports) that it was his earnest desire that all young Men should take care not to mispend the Lord's Day. And I do not know (says Mr. Smythies) that ever I observed any Repentance in
a condemned Malefactor, who did not bitterly lament his neglect of his duty to God on that day. In a Convocation of the Clergy at Perth in Scotland, Anno 1188, for the better Sanctification of the Sabbath day; it was ordained (as Arch-Bi∣shop Spotswood tells us) that every Saturday from twelve of the Clock should be set apart for prepa∣ration thereunto, and that all People at the sound of the Bell should address themselves to hear Pray∣ers, and abstain from worldly Labours till Monday Morning. If nothing that is here shewed can prevail, or any ways induce the presumptuous obstinate Pro∣saners of the Lord's Day to forsake their sinful and provoking Wickedness, then let him that is young observe what Solomon says, Rejoice O young Man in thy Youth, and let thy Heart chear thee in the days of thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy Heart, and in the sight of thine Eyes. But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment, Eccles. 11. 9. And he that is old, let him know that death is at his Heels, ready to trip them up, and gives no warn∣ing of his coming; let not such an one therefore procra∣stinate and put off Repentance, but let him watch, for he knows neither the day nor the hour wherein the Son of Man cometh. For he shall come in an hour that he is not aware of, and if he find him in the daring provok∣ing pursuit of his unrepented of Prafaness, shall cut him in sunder, and appoint him his Portion with the Hypocrites, there shall be weeping and gnashing of Teeth. Math. 24. 50, 51. and 25. 13. Luke. 12. 46.
CHAP. X. A brief Account of the Laws made against vi∣tious and debauched Men, and lew'd Women, about getting Bastards. NOte that before the Raign of K. H. 7. there were eighteen infamous Stews or Brothel-houses, and H. 7. for a time forbad them; but after∣wards twelve only were permitted, and had Signs painted on their Walls, as a Boars-Head, the Cross-Keys, the Gun, the Castle, the Cardinals-Hat, the Bell, the Swan, &c. But afterwards H. 8. in the 37th Year of his Raign, by Proclamation under the great Seal, dated 30 March, Anno 37. a∣foresaid, suppressed all the Stews and Brothel-hou∣ses on the Bank-side in Southwark, for that they were against the Law of God, and the Law of the Land: And those Infamous, Women were not bu∣ried in Christian Burial, when they were dead, nor permitted to receive the Rites of the Church whilst they lived. And the Keeper, He or She, of such Houses, is punishable by Indictment at the Common Law, by Fine and Imprisonment; for altho Adultery and Fornication be punishable by the Ecclesiastical Law, yet the keeping of Bawdy, or Stews, or Brothel-houses, being as it were a Common Nu∣sance, is punishable by the Common Law, and is the cause of-many Mischiefs, not only to the over∣throwing of their Bodies, but to the indangering of their Souls.
By the Custom of London, as appears by the 1 H. 7. Fol. 6. &c. If a Constable, &c. has Notice that a Woman is in Adultery with a Man, that a Man or Woman of Evil Fame, is gone to a sus∣pected House, he may take help with him and en∣ter the House, and if he find them so, he may ar∣rest them, and carry them to Prison, or to a Jus∣tice of the Peace, to be bound over and prosecu∣ted. Bastards begotten and born out of lawful Ma∣trimony, being an Offence against God's Law, and Man's Law. It is by the Statute 18 Eliz. Chap. 3. Enacted, That two Justices of the Peace, whereof one to be of the Quorum, in or next to the Limits where the Parish Church is, within which Pa∣rish a Bastard shall be born, that may be charge∣able to the Parish (upon Examination of the Cause and Circumstances) shall by their discre∣tion take order, as well for the punishment of the Mother and reputed Father, of such Bastard Child, as also for the relief of every such Pa∣rish in part, or in all; and for the keeping of e∣very such Bastard Child; by charging such Mo∣ther or reputed Father, with the Payment of Money weekly, or other Sustentation for the relief of such Child in such wise as they shall think meet and convenient. And if after the same Order by them subscribed under their Hands, the Mother or reputed Father upon no∣tice thereof, shall not observe and perform the same, that then every such Party so making Default in the non-performance thereof, to be committed to the Common Goal without Bail,
except they give sufficient Surety to perform the same, or to appear Personally at the next Gene∣ral Sessions of the Peace to be holden for the same County, where such Order shall be taken, and al∣so to abide such Order, as the Justices there, or the more part of them, shall take in that Be∣half (if they take any) and if they take none at the Sessions, then to abide and perform the Order before made as is abovesaid. And by the Statute 7 Jas. 1. Ch. 4. It is Enacted, That every lewd Woman which shall have any Bastard Child, which may be charge∣able to the Parish, the Justice of Peace shall com∣mit such lewd Woman to the House of Correcti∣on, there to be punished, and set on work du∣ring the term of one whole Year; and if af∣terwards she offend again, then to be committed to the House of Correction as aforesaid, and to remain there, until she can put in good Sureties for her good Behaviour, not to offend so again. And by the Statute 3 Car. 1. Ch. 4. It is En∣acted, That all Justices of the Peace, within their several Limits and Precincts, and in their several Sessions, may do and execute all things concerning that part of the Statute 18 Eliz. Ch. 3. aforementioned, that by Justices of the Peace in the several Counties are by the said Statute li∣mited to be done. The Punishment appointed by these Statutes being gentle and easy, we see by every days Ex∣perience that Bastards are very frequently begot∣ten; I shall therefore inform such vitious profane and sinful Persons in the next Chapter, what Pu∣nishments the Scripture has appointed for such
Persons of such profligate and debauched Lives, that they may not be ignorant of the great Anger and Displeasure conceived by Almighty God against such profane sinful Courses, and of the great Ha∣zard and Danger they involve their precious Souls in, if they forsake not their vitious way of living, and by hearty Repentance cleanse their Souls, putting away the Filth of the Flesh, 1 Pet. 2. 3. 21. And perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1. For he that soweth to the Flesh, shall of the Flesh reap Corruption: but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit neap Life everlasting. Gal. 6. 8. CHAP. XI. Of the several Places of Scripture threatning Judgments, or forbidding Adultery, Forni∣cation, Incontinency, Lasoiviousness and Whoredom, and shewing God's Anger and Displeasure against such profane Wicked∣ness. THou shalt not commit Adultery. Exod. 20. 14. Deut. 5. 18. Do not prostitute thy Daughter, to cause her to be a VVre; lest the Land fall to VVhoredom, and the Land become full of VVickedness. Lev. 19. 29. the Ma that committeth Adultery with another Mans VVife, even he that committeth Adultery with his Neighbours VVife, the and the Adulteress shall surely put to death, Lev. 20. 10.
And the Daughter of any Priest, if she profane her self by playing the Whore, she profaneth her Fa∣ther, she shall be hurnt with Fire. Levit. 21. 9. If a Man be found lying with a Woman married to an Husband, then they shall both of them die, both the Man that lay with the VVoman, and the VVoman: So shalt thou put away Evil from Israel. Deut. 22. 22. The Eye also of the Adulterer waiteth for the i∣light, saying, No Eye shall see me, and disgiseth his Face. Job 24. 15. VVhen thou sawest a Thief thou consented'st unto him, and hast been Partaker with the Adulterers. Psal. 50. 18. By the means of a VVhorish VVoman, a Man is brought to a piece of Bread, and the Adulteress will hunt for the precious Life. Prov. 6. 26. Who so committeth Adultery with a VVoman, lack∣eth Ʋnderstanding: He that doth it, destroyeth his own Soul. Prov. 6. 32. A VVound and Dishonour shall he get, and his Reproach shall not be wiped away. ver. 33. The Lips of a strange VVoman drop as an Honey-Comb, and her Mouth is smoother than Oil. But her and is bitter as Worm-wood, sharp as a two-edged Sword, her Feet go down to death, her Steps take hold n Hell. Prov. 5. 3, 4, 5. and 2. 18. and 7. 27. A Whore is a deep Ditch; and a strange Women a narrow Pit. Prov. 23.27. and 22. 4. Such i the way of an Adulterous Woman; she eateth and wipeth her Mouth, and saith, I have done  Wickedness. Prov. 30. 20. O that I had in the Wilderness  Lodging Pla Way-faring Men, that I might leave my People, and
go from them; for they be all Adulterers, an Assembly of Tracherous Men. Jer. 9. 2. Will ye steal, murder, commit Adultery, and swear falsly, and burn Inence unto Baal, and walk after o∣ther gods whom ye know not. Therefore I will cast you out of my sight. Jer. 7. 9, 15. I have seen thine Adulteries, and thy Neighings, the lewdness of thy Whoredom, and thine Abominati∣ons on the Fields; We unto thee, O Jerusalem! wilt thou not be made clean; when shall it once be? Jer. 13. 27. Because they have committed Villany in Israel, and have committed Adultery with their Neighbours Wives, and have spoken lying words in my Name, which I have not commanded them, even I know, and am a Witness saith the Lord. Jer. 29. 23. For the Land is full of Adulteries, for because of swearing the Land mourneth: The pleasant Places of the VVilderness are dried up, and their Course is E∣vil, and their Force is not Right. Jer. 23. 10. In thee have they discovered their Fathers Nakedness; in thee have they humbled her that was set apart for Pollution. And one hath committed Abomination with his Neighbours Wife, and another hath lewdly defiled his Daughter in Law, and another in thee hath humbled his Sister, his Father's Daughter. Ezek. 22. 10, 11. By Swearing, and Lying, and Killing, and Steal∣ing, and committing Adultery, they broke out, and Blood tocheth Blood. Therefore shall the Land mourn, and every one that dwelleth therein shall languish. Hos. 4. 2. Whoredom and Wine, and New Wine take away the Heart. Hos. 4. 11.
I will not punish your Daughters when they commit Whoredom, nor your Spouses when they commit Adul∣tery: for themselves are separated with Whores, and they sacrifice with Harlots; therefore the People that doth not understand, shall fall. Hos. 4. 14. I will come near unto you, to Judgment, and I will be a swift Witness against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers. Mal. 3. 5. A Fornicator in the Body of his Flesh, will never cease till he hath kindled a Fire. All Bread is sweet to a Whoremonger, he will not leave off till he die. A Man that breaketh Wedlock, saying thus in his Heart, Who seeth me? I am compassed about with darkness, the Walls cover me, and no Body seeth me, what need I to fear, the most High will not remember my Sins? Such a Man only feareth the Eyes of Men, and know∣eth not that the Eyes of the Lord are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, beholding all the ways of Men, and considering the most secret parts. Ecclus. 23. 16, 17, 18, 19. Thus shall it go with the Wife that leaveth her Hus∣band and bringeth in an Heir by another. She shall leave her Memory to be cursed, and her Reproach shall not be blotted out. Ecclus. 23. 22, 26. Three sorts of Men my Soul hateth, and I am great∣ly offended at their Life; a Poor Man that is proud, a Rich Man that is a Lyar, and an Old Adulterer that doteth. Ecclus. 25. 2. The Whoredom of a Woman may be known in her haughty Looks and Eye-lids. Ecclus. 26. 9. Be ashamed of Whoredom before Father and Mo∣ther, and of a Lye before a Prince and a mighty Man. Ecclus. 41. 18. But I say unto you, whosoever looketh on a Woman to
lust after her, hath committed Adultery with her al∣ready in his Heart. Math. 5. 28. Out of the Heart proceed Evil Thoughts, Murders, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, false Witness, Blasphemies. Math. 15. 19. Mark. 7. 21. But that we write unto them, that they abstain from Pollutions of Idols, and from Fornication, and from things strangled, and from Blood. Acts 15. 20. God gave them over to a Reprobate Mind, to do those things which are not convenient: Being filled with all Ʋnrighteousness, Fornication, Wickedness, Covetous∣ness, Maliciousness; full of Envy, Murder, Debate, Deceit, Malignity, Wisperers. Rom. 1. 28, 29. I wrote to you in an Epistle, not to company with Fornicators. 1 Cor. 5. 9. Know ye not, that the Ʋnrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, neither Forni∣cators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effemi∣nate, nor Abusers of themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Meats for the Belly, and the Belly for Meats, but God shall distroy both it and them. Now the Body is not for Fornication, but for the Lord, and the Lord for the Body. 1 Cor. 6. 13. Neither let us commit Fornication, as some of them did, and fell in one day three and twenty thousand. 1 Cor. 10. 8. Having therefore these Promises (dearly Beloved) let us cleanse our selves from all Filthiness of the Flesh and Spirit, perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. 2 Cor. 7. 1.
Now the works of the Flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication, Ʋncleanness, Lasci∣viousness, &c. Of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in time past, that they which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Gal. 5. 19, 21. Who being past feeling, have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all Ʋncleanness with gree∣diness. Eph. 4. 19. But Fornication, and all Ʋncleanness, or Covetous∣ness, let it not be once named amongst you, as becometh Saints: Neither Filthiness, &c. For this ye know, that no Whoremonger, unclean Person, nor coverous Man who is an Idolater, hath any Inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God. Eph. 5. 3, 5. Mortify therefore your Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication, Ʋncleanness, inordinate Affecti∣on, evil Concupiscence, and Covetousness which is Ido∣latry. For which things sake the Wrath of God com∣eth on the Children of Disobedience. Col. 3. 5, 6. For this is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye should abstain from Fornication; that every one of you should know how to possess his Vessel in San∣ctification and Honour, not in the Lust of Concupi∣scence, as the Gentiles which knew not God. 1 Thess. 4. 3, 4, 5. Knowing this, that the Law is not made for a righte∣ous Man, but for Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with Mankind, &c. 1 Tim. 1. 9, 10. Lest there be any Fornicator, or profane Person,  Esau, who for one morsel of Meat sold his Birth-right. Heb. 12. 16. Marriage is honourable in all, and the Bed undefiled: but Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judg. Heb. 13. 4.
Wherefore lay aside all Filthiness, and supersluity of Naughtiness, and receive with Meekness the engrafied Word, which is able to save your Souls. Jam. 1. 21. Ye Adulterers and Adulteresses, know ye not that the Friendship of the World, is Enmity with God? Jam. 4. 4. Having Eyes full of Adultery, and that cannot cease from Sin, beguiling unstable Souls. 2 Pet. 2. 14. For all that is in the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of the Eyes, and the Pride of Life, is not of the Father, but of the World. 1 Joh. 2. 16. Even as Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities a∣bout them, in like manner giving themselves over to For∣nication, and going after strange Flesh, are set forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. Jude ver. 7. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and abominable, and Muderers, and Wboremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars, shall have their part in the Lake which burneth with Fire and Brimstone: which is the second Death. Rev. 21. 8. More Places of Scripture might be cited to this purpose, but I suppose these may be sufficient to convince any sober rational Christian of the Dan∣gers that attend the sinful Wickedness of inconti∣nency and Whoring. I shall therefore proceed to the next Chapter, and acquaint the Reader with some few signal Marks of God's Justice in the pu∣nishment of Persons guilty of such profane Wick∣edness, and so shall conclude this Treatise.
CHAP. XII. An Account of some Persons signally punished by Almighty God for the Profane and Wick∣ed Vice of Whoring, and Lustful Inconti∣nency. WE read in Scripture that the Sons of Ely were Sons of Belial, they knew not the Lord. And when their Father heard all that his Sons did unto all Israel, and how they lay with the Women that assem∣bled at the Door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; Their Father Ely reprov'd them, saying, ye make the Lord's People to transgress. If one Man sin against another, the Judg shall judg him; but if a Man sin against the Lord, who shall intreat for him? Notwithstand∣ing they hearkned not to the Voice of their Father, be∣cause the Lord would slay them. Which accordingly came to pass: For the Philistines fighting against Israel, made a great Slaughter of them, for there fell of Israel thirty thousand Footmen. And the Ark of God was taken, and the two Sons of Eli, Hophni and Phineas were slain. 1 Sam. 2. 12, 22, 24, 25. and 4. 10, 11. And David having committed Adultery with Bathsheba the Wife of Ʋriah, and caused her Hus∣band to be slain: The Lord thereupon caused Ab∣salom David's own Son, to rebel against him, so that he was forced to flie from Jerusalem for foar of his Son, and had his Head covered, and went bare∣foot, and wept when he went up by the Ascent of Mount Olivet: As appears by the Story, in the 2 Sam. Ch. 11. and 15.
In Germany a Gentleman of Note, finding his Wife in Bed with another Man, slew first the Adul∣terer, and then his own Wife. A Nobleman in Thuringia being taken in Adul∣tery, the Husband of the Adulteress bound him Hand and Foot, cast him into Prison, kept him fast∣ing, only causing daily hot Dishes of Meat to be set before him, to tantalize him with the smell: in this Torture the Letcher continued till he gnawed off the Flesh from his own Shoulders, and on the eleventh day he died. Mary of Arragon, Wife to the Emperor Otho the 3d, carry'd a young Fornicatour along with her in Womans Habit: But he being discovered was burnt to death. Afterwards soliciting the Count of Mutina, and not able to draw him to her Lure, she accused him to the Emperor, of attempting a Rape upon her, for which he was Beheaded: But the Emperor at last finding out his Wife's Wick∣edness, caused her to be burnt at a Stake. Luther tells us of a great Man in his Country, so besotted with the Sin of Whoredom, that he was not ashamed to say, that if he might live for ever here, and be carried from one Whore-house to a∣nother, there to satisfy his Lusts, he would never desire any other Heaven; this Vile Fellow after∣wards breathed out his wretched Soul betwixt two notorious Harlots. Joan Queen of Naples was insatiable for her Lust, which caused her to hang her first Husband (which was Andrew, second Son to the King of Hungary) at her Window, for insufficiency. Her second Husband was Lewis of Tarentum who died with the over-straining himself to satisfy her Lustful
Appetite. Her third Husband James of Tarracon, a gallant Gentleman, she Beheaded, for lying with another Woman. Her fourth Husband was Otho Duke of Brunswick, in whose time the King of Hungary drew her out of her Kingdom, and having taken her, hung her out of the same Window, where she had hang'd her first Husband. An ancient Gentleman of good Account, marry∣ing a beautiful young Gentlewoman, but having no Issue, he took into his House a young Gentle∣man, a Neighbours Son, and compleatly qua∣lified, purposing to make him a sharer in his Estate. This Gentleman grows familiar with his Wife, which gave so much occasion of Suspicion, and caus'd such a Rumour in the Country, that his Fa∣ther requires him to return home again: He doth so, but at parting, promiseth Marriage to the Gentlewoman, in case of her Old Husbands de∣cease, and she to him, both with Oaths. The Old Gentleman's Maid meeting with this young Gallant over a Glass of Wine, tells him in private, how much his Company was missed at her Master's House, and his Return desired. But withal, tho she knew the Familiarities between him and her Mistress, yet it was all feigned, for another en∣joyed both her Heart and Body (naming the Per∣son); the Gentleman is startled, but incredulous. And after some time the Old Gentleman sends for him again; he goes in the Night, but very privily (having before by Letter desired that the Garden Door might be left open for him) and tells the Old Gentleman the reason of his absence: But before he went back, he goes softly to the Gentle∣woman's Bed-chamber Door (who often lay by
her self) and hears the Whispers of two distinct Voices. Upon which in a sudden Passion, he re∣solves to break in upon them, and run them through with a Sword; but relenting with tenderness, he departs softly to his own home, grows melancholy and distemper'd; but recovering, he resolved to travel. The Old Gentleman sends for him to take an unwilling Farewel: At the importunity of his Father he goes. After Dinner the Gentlewoman singles him out for a Farewel, weeping in his Bo∣som, and beseeching him to have care of his Safe∣ty, but especially of his Vow and Promise. In∣stead of a Reply, he gave her a Letter, which he desired her to peruse in his Absence. She opens the Letter, and reads there all the Story of her Lust laid open, particularly and pathetically. This struck her to the Heart. She falling presently into Frenzy and Despairing, soon after died: Which News came to the Gentleman before he reach'd Gravesend. The Old Man afterwards inriched him with a great part of his Land, which he enjoys (saith my Author) to this day. Thomas Savage frequenting the House of Hannah Blan, a noted Bawdy-House, spending upon her such Money as he could get, to satisfy his own Lust and her craving Appetite, is tempted first to steal∣ing and purloining from his Master, and at length to the murthering of a Maid, his Fellow-Ser∣vant; for which he was afterwards brought to the Gallows and hang'd. Mr. Robert Foulks of Stanton Lacy, first an Adul∣terer, and then a Murtherer of his Bastard Child, ended his Days very Ignominiously at Tyburn, tho Penitently.
John Allerion Bishop of Waterford in Ireland, for unnatural Concupiscence, came to a very disgraceful end, being arraigned and executed at Dublin for the same. Venery was the Destruction of Alexander the Great, of Otho the Emperor (call'd for his good parts otherwise, Miraculum mundi) of Pope Sixtus 4. who died of a Wicked Waste; of Paul the 4th, of whom it passed for a Proverb, Enim per eandem partem animam profudisse, per quam acceperat. 'Tis notoriously known, how far this Sin pre∣vailed in England, amongst the lazy Monks and Nuns, what Skulls of Infants were found near their Religious Houses, before the dissolution of them in K. H. 8. days: And much about the same time, viz. at the beginning of the Reformation (as I have read in a Letter writ by the Popes Notary to a Gentleman of Germany, says my Author) there was a Nunnery visited in the Outer Skirts of Italy, and thirteen of the Nuns found with Child at the same time, all by the Confessor, for which cause by order of the Pope it was put down. The Minister of Staunton Lacy, Mr. Foulk afore∣mentioned, who was executed at Tyburn, Jan. 31. 1678, for murdering his Bastard-Child: being at the place of Execution, he admonished the People to consider the Mischief of Uncleanness; and what a Sin it was, for a Member of Christ to make himself the Member of an Harlot; that it was a Sin that seldom goes alone, but is the Mother-Sin to a number more; warning all to avoid the Snares of a Whorish Woman, and to keep the Marriage-Bed undefiled, and to remember his Ignominious Exit, occasioned by his sinful defiling of the same.
Nathaniel Butler, executed in Cheapside, 1657, for killing his Fellow-Prentice; being at the place of Execution, he warned the People to beware of the Beginning of Sin, saying, When I was first enticed into Evil, I was tender and fearful of it; but not diligently hearkning to the Word of God, nor the Voice and Checks of Conscience, I went on so, that by degrees I was emboldned in Sin, and at last it became as familiar to me as my daily Food. Therefore as you love your Souls, take heed of the beginnings of Sin: If I had so done, I had escaped this Punishment and Shameful end. O that I could prevail (cry'd he) with every young Person to cast away Sin betimes, and check it in the first beginning; and that I had taken the Counsel which I have now given, &c. Loathing my Be∣loved and Darling-Sin Ʋncleanness: And admonish∣ing all young People to watch and pray against it. Hoping if he were to live as many Years, as he had then but Moments to live, he should (through the Grace of God) never commit it any more. John Marketman, executed in Essex for murder∣ing his Wife, April 17. 1680, confessed he had departed from his God in his Youth; that he had neglected the Church and the publick Worship of God, and choosing rather to spend his time in an Ale-house: It brought me (says he) to Evil Com∣pany, and so to Drunkenness; which getting an habit made me a professed Enemy to God, and to give my self over to Swearing and Cursing, Ly∣ing, Whoring, and so from one Sin to another, till I arrived at the height of all Impiety, &c. That formerly he loved to commit Sin, but now hated the very thoughts of it, and would not commit a Sin for a Kingdom; exhorting the People to take
heed of the beginnings of Sin, telling them you will find if once you habituate your selves to the committing of Sin, it will be very hard to root it out: it must cost you many a Tear, and much Bitterness in crucifying your Darling-Sins: which Trouble and Expence might be sav'd, if you would be careful to resist the first Temptation. Bewail∣ing his Drunkenness and Uncleanness. Henry Parker Executed at Tyburn 1689, for Coun∣terfeiting Guineas, lamented much the mispending of his Time, saying, O the precious Time I have squandered away upon Trifles and Vanities, upon my Lusts and Pleasures, which I now want to make my Peace with God, and purchase Eternal Life! That it was not so easy to repent as he supposed. It were endless to enumerate all the sad Exam∣ples of Divine Judgments that might be brought under this Head, but I shall not multiply Exam∣ples, but recommend these already set down, to the perusal and serious Consideration of all profane, lascivious, incontinent, debauched Persons, and shall conclude and shut up all in St. Paul's Advise to them, Rom. 13. 13, 14. Let us walk honest∣ly as in the day, not in Rioting and Drunkenness, not in Chambering and Wantonness, not in Strife and Envying. But put ye on the Lord Jesus Christ, and make no Provision for the Flesh to fulfil the Lusts there∣of. FINIS.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SEVERAL CHAPTERS.   Page CHAP. I. A Summary Account of the Laws made against profuse, idle, customary and expensive Tipling; and against sinful, customary and profane Drunkenness; and against keeping Places or Houses of un∣lawful Games. 9 CHAP. II. An Account of some Texts of Scripture, shewing the sad Consequences and Effects that attend the customary, sinful and pro∣fane practise of profuse Quaffing and Drunkenness. 22
CHAP. III. Of several exemplary Judgments, both Ancient and Modern, Foreign and Dome∣stick, of God's severe Justice inflicted up∣on customary, presumptuous, and profane sinful Drunkards. 28 CHAP. IV. A Compendium of the Laws made a∣gainst profane, idle, customary Swearing and Cursing. 44 CHAP. V. Some Texts of Scripture, shewing the Odiousness and Danger of profane, custo∣mary Swearing and Cursing. 50 CHAP. VI. Of several signal, fearful and amasing Judgments of God's severe Justice, inflic∣ted upon customary, profane and presump∣tuous Swearers and Cursers. 55 CHAP. VII. An Abstract of the Laws made against the Profanation of the Lord's Day, com∣monly called Sunday, about the Sacra∣ment, disturbing Ministers, absenting from the Church, &c. 76
CHAP. VIII. Of the several Places or Texts of Scripture relating to the due Observation and Sanctifying of the Sabbath. 86 CHAP. IX. An Account of several Instances of God's severe Justice, and Punishments that have befaln presumptuous, customary Profaners of the Lord's Day, commonly called Sunday. 91 CHAP. X. A brief Account of the Laws made a∣gainst vitious and debauched Men, and lewd Women, about getting Bastards. 103 CHAP. XI. Of the several Places of Scripture threatning Judgments, or forbidding A∣dultery, Fornication, Incontinency, Lasci∣viousness and Whoredom, and shewing God's Anger and Displeasure against such profane Wickedness. 106 CHAP. XII. An Account of some Persons signally punished by Almighty God, for the pro∣fane and wicked Vice of Whoring, and lustful Incontinency. 113
BOOKS Lately printed for and sold by John Harris at the Harrow in Little-Britain. THE Secret History of White-Hall, from the Restora∣tion of K. Charles II. down to the Abdication of the late K. James. Writ at the Request of a Noble Lord, and conveyed to him in Letters by—late Secretary Interpre∣ter to the Marquess of Louvois, who by that means had the per∣usal of all the Private Minutes between England and France for many Years. The whole consisting of Secret Memoirs, which have hitherto lain conceal'd, as not being discoverable by any other hand. Publish'd from the Original Papers. By D. Jones, Gent. Price 5 s. A Continuation of the Secret History of White-Hall, from the Abdication of the late King James, in 1688. to the Year 1697. Together with the Tragical History of the Stuarts, from the first Rise of that Family, in the Year 1068, down to the death of her late Majesty Queen Mary of Blessed Memory. By D. Jones, Gent. Price 5 s. God's Judgment against Whoring. Being an Essay to∣wards a General History of it, from the Creation of the World, to the Reign of Augustus, (which, according to common Computation, is 5190 Years) and from thence down to the present Year 1697. Being a Collection of the most Remarka∣ble Instances of Uncleanness, that are to be found in Sacred or Profane History during that time. With Observations thereon, Price 3 s. 6 d. Concubinage and Poligamy disproved: Or, the Divine Institution of Marriage betwixt one Man and one Woman on∣ly, asserted. In answer to a Book, writ by John Butler, B. D.
called his Case, lately presented by the Grand Jury of Lon∣don; wherein he mentions 'tis lawful to keep a Concubine, &c. Price 1 s. The Political Mischiefs of Popery: Or, Arguments de∣monstrating. (1.) That the Romish Religion ruins all those Countries where 'tis established. (2.) That it occasions the loss of above 200 Millions of Livres, or 16 Millions Sterlin per Annum to France in particular. (3.) That if Popery were abolish'd in France, that Kingdom would become incompara∣bly more Rich and Populous; and the King's Revenues would advance above 600 Millions of Livres per Annum. (4.) That it is impossible that France should ever be Reestablish'd, while Popery is their National Religion. By a Person of Quality, a native of France; Author of the Desolation of France de∣monstrated; Dedicated to the Honourable House of Commons, Price 1 s. 6 d. The Revelation Ʋnveiled: Or, an Essay towards the discover∣ing, I. When many Scripture Prophecies had their Accom∣plishment, and turned into History. II. What are now fulfil∣ling. III. What rest still to be fulfilled. With an Appendix, proving that Pagan Rome was not Babylon, Rev. 17. and that the Jews shall be converted. By Samuel Petto, Minister of the Gospel at Sudbary in Suffolk. Price 1 s. 6. d. A Collection of Modern Relations of Matter of Fact concern∣ing Witches, and Witchcraft upon the Persons of People. To which is prefixed a Meditation concerning the Mercy of God, in preserving us from the Malice and Power of Evil An∣gels: Written by the late Lord Chief Justice Hale, upon occasi∣on of a Tryal of several Witches before him. Price 1 s. Some General Considerations offered, relating to our pre∣sent Trade: and intended for its Help and Improvement. By T. T. Merchant. Price 6 d. Mathematical Divinity: Or, a Plain Demonstration from the Holy Scriptures, that the Times of this World were foreap∣pointed by the Covenant made with Abraham: And determined to be according to the Measure of the Age and Fulness of Christ. Kept Secret since the World began, but is now made
plain upon XII. Tables, in a Solar Calendar, as familiar to the Understanding as any common Almanack. With full proof that this is the last Generation, which shall not pass away till all things be fulfilled, and the Gates of Righteousness be opened. Being the Result of many Years Study. By Elias Palmer. An Apology for Congregational Divines: Against the charge of, 1. Crispianism, or Antinomianism. 2. Countenancing Incompe∣tent Tradesmen, as Preachers. 3. Causeless Separation from Publick Worship. Under which Head are Published Amicable Letters between the Author and a Confrmist (a Man of Re∣nown, known every where to be such) about Liturgies and Ce∣remonies. By a Presbyterian. Also a Speech delivered at Tur∣ners-Hall, April 29. where Mr. Keith, a Reformed Quaker, with the leave of the Lord Mayor and Bishop, required Mr. Pnn, Mr. Elwood, &c. to appear to answer his Charge against them. By Trepidantium Malleus. With an Account of his be∣ing knockt down, and a Stone flung at his Head till the Blood run down his Cloaths, after a threat about ten days before, from Friend J. F. openly in the Coffee house, That a Church Friend of theirs, vow'd he would do it. The Description and Uses of a new contriv'd Eliptical and Double Dial; as also of the Ʋniversal and Aequinoxial Dial. Which serve to find the Latitude, Hour of the Day, the true Meridian, the Altitude, Azimuth, and Declination of the Sun; his Place in the Ecliptick, the Time of his Rising and Setting, Length of Day and Night, &c. With a Scheme of each Dial Curiously Engraven. Very useful for all Seamen and Travellers, and our Curious Gentry to Set, Examine, and Adjust their Pendulums. Whereunto is added a Correct Table of the Latitude of the most Eminent Cities and Towns in Europe; as also a Table of Equati∣on. By Tho. Tuttell, Mathematical Instrument maker, at the King's-Arms and Globe at Charing-Cross.
BOOKS Lately printed for and sold by A. Bell at the Cross-Keys and Bible in Cornhil, near Stocks-Market. THE General History of England both Ecclesiastical and Civil, from the earliest Accounts of Time to the Reign of his present Majesty King William III. Taken from the most Antient Records, Manuscripts and Historians. Con∣taining the Lives of the Kings, and Memorials of the most E∣minent Persons both in Church and State. Vol. I. By James Tyrrel Esq Fol. Price 1 l. A Detection of the Court and State of England during the 4 last Reigns, and the Interregnum; consisting of private Memoirs &c. Wherein are many Secrets never before made publick; as also a more impartial Account of the Civil Wars in England than has yet been given. By Rog. Coke Esq The 3d Edition. Price 7 s. An Abridgment of Sir Walter Raligh's History of the World, in 5 Books. 1. From the Creation to Abraham. 2. From Abraham to the Destruction of the Temple of Solomon. 3. From the Destruction of Jerusalem to Philip of Macedon. 4. From Philip of Macedon to the Race of Antigonus. 5. From the establishment of Alexander until the Conquest of Asia and Macedon by the Romans. To which is added his Premoni∣tion to Princes. Price 5 s. A compleat History of Europe: Or, a View of the Affairs thereof, Civil and Military, from the beginning of the Treaty of Nimeguen, 1676, to the Conclusion of the Peace at Reswick, 1697. Including the Articles of the former, and the several Infringements of them; The Turkish Wars; The forming of the Grand Confederacy; The Revolution in England, &c. With a particular Account of all the Actions by Sea and Land on both sides, and the Secret Steps towards a Peace, both before, as well as during the last Negotiation. The whole intermix'd with Original Letters, Papers and Memoirs, never before pub∣lish'd. Among others are several Letters between the Emperor, Duke of Lorain, K. of Poland, Count Staremburg, Grand Vizier, &c. relating to the Turkish Wars: The Speeches of the Lord Russel, Col. Sidney, &c. Monmouth's and Argile's Declarations. The Bill of Exclusion; the Prince of Orange's Declarations:
The Claim of Rights for England and Scotland. The Negotia∣tions at Reswick, with the Articles of Peace at large. Written by a Gentleman, who kept an Exact Journal of all Transactions for above these 20 Years. Price 6 s. An Essay concerning the Power of the Magistrate, and the Rights of Mankind in Matters of Religion. With some Reasons in particular for the Dissenters not being oblig'd to take the Sa∣cramental Test but in their own Churches, and for a General ∣turalization. Together with a Postscript in answer to the Letter to a Convocation-man. Price 2 s. Joannis Clerici Ars Critica, in qua ad Studia Linguarum Latinæ, Graecæ, & Hebraicæ via munitur; Veterum{que} emendan∣dorum, & Spuriorum Scriptorum à Genuinis dignoscendorum ratio traditur. In 2 Vol. Price 5 s. A Rational and Speedy Method of attaining to the Latin Tongue. In 2 parts. The first containing such Precepts as are common to all Languages. The second what is more peculiar to the Latin Tongue. The whole being fitted to the meanest Capacities, not only those of riper Years, but any Child that can read English, may by this Method in a little time arrive at a greater degree of Knowledg than is usually attain'd after se∣veral years Drudgery in the common Road. Most Logical Terms being in this Treatise also explain'd, the Art of Reasoning may be perfectly learn'd without much farther trouble. By A. Lane M. A. Price 1 s. The Art of Memory: A Treatise useful for all, especially such as are to speak in publick. By Marius D' Assigny, B. D. Price 1 s. Scotland's Sovereignty asserted. Being a Dispute concerning Homage, against those who maintain that Scotland is a Fee Liege of England, and that the King of Scots owes Homage to the King of England. By Sir Tho. Craig. Price 5 s. Short-hand yet shorter; or the Art of Short-writing advanc∣ed in a more swist, easy, regular, and natural Method than hi∣therto. By G. Ridpath. The 2d Edition. Price 1 s. Artamenes, or the Grand Cyrus, that famous Romance. In 10 Books. By Mons. de Scudery. English'd by F. G. Adorn'd with various Sculptures. Price 25 s. Chamberlain's Midwisery, the third Edition. Price 4 s. Bound in Calf. Useful for Chirurgions and Midwives. Rutherford's Letters. Price 3 s.
The Fulfilling of the Scriptures for confirming Believers, and convincing Atheists, with rare Histories of the Works of emi∣nent Persons in the Church of God. The 3d Edition. By Robert Fleming. Price 2 s. The Present State of England as to Coin and publick Char∣ges. In 3 parts. Treating of the Necessity of more Money, and of Ways and Means to procure it; of raising its value, against which the opposite Prejudices, as injurious to King, Par∣liament and People, with Mr. Lock's chief Positions, are refuted by demonstrable Reason and Matter of Fact. By J. Hodges. Price 3 s. 6 d. A Help to Prayer: or a Direction how to perform that holy Duty, that it may be well-pleasing to God. With Prayers for Morning and Evening. Price 1 s. By T. Knaggs, M. A. The Providences of God towards this Nation in introducing the True Religion. The 2d Edition. By the late Slingsby B∣thil Esq Price 1 s. An Essay concerning a Vacuum; wherein is endeavoured to be demonstrated, that a Vacuum Interspersum runs through the World, and is more or less in all Bodies. By a Lover of the Corpuscular Philosophy. Price 6 d. Gauging and Measuring made Easie: being a brief Compen∣dium of measuring of Surfaces and Solids after a more concise and intelligible Manner than commonly practised. Containing, First, The most Material Propositions of Geometry, relating to Mensuration. 2dly. The way of Measuring Surfaces. 3dly. The way of Measuring Solids, whether it be Timber, Stone, or Liquids, &c. after a most exact Method. Very useful for all Lovers of Art; such as Gugers, Measurers, Painters, Car∣penters, Joyners, Masons, Bricklayers, and Glaziers. Price  d. Ars Chirurgiea, a Compendium of the Theory and Practice of Chirurgery. In Seven Books. By William Salmon, M. D. In 2 Vol. Price 10 s. The Militia Reform'd; or an easy Scheme of Furnishing Eng∣land with a constant Land Force, capable to prevent or to sub∣due any Foreign Power; and to maintain perpetual Quiet at Home, without endangering the Publick Liberty. Price 1 s. A Letter to a Member of Parliament, shewing that a restraint on the Press is absolutely in consistent with the Protestant Religi∣on, and dangerous to the Liberties of the Nation.
