M2797 12812800 94113
THE Bishop of Winchester's VINDICATION Of Himself from divers False, Scandalous and Injurious Reflexi∣ons made upon him by Mr. RICHARD BAXTER in several of his Writings. See the TABLE on the other side of the Leaf. . 1 Cor. 11. 16. London, Printed by M. Flesher for Joanna Brome, 1683.
A TABLE OF THE Matters contained in this Book. TWo Prefaces, the One to Mr. Baxter, the Other to the Reader. The Bishop's Letter, whilst he was Bishop of Worcester, in Vindication of himself against Mr. Baxter's Calumny. Page 1. The Attestation of Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pear∣son. p. 27. Mr. Baxter's Theses of Government in general, and his Doctrine of the Government of England in particular. p. 29. These formerly Printed 1662. and now Re∣printed.
Loyalty censured, and his Way of Concord dis∣approved. Mr. Baxter's pretended Recantation, printed at the End of his Life of Faith, 1670. and here Re∣printed. The Scotch Act Anent Religion and the Test, made at Edenburgh, 1681.
For the Reverend Mr. Richard Baxter. Reverend Sir, IT is now more than four years since I (being then elder than Barzillai was, when he made the like request to King David) did beg and obtain leave from the King my Gracious Lord and Master to quit my personal attendance on him at the Court in Council, and to retire in∣to the Countrey, and to serve him there, by praying for him without distraction, or interruption; remembring that old and wise saying, And withall resolving, having with∣drawn my self from the encumbrance
and noise of all Secular Affairs, to mind nothing else (besides the necessary care of mine own Diocese) but the making my self ready by God's gracious assistance for a quiet and a comfortable Exit out of this evil and troublesome World. The near approach whereof (by reason of my great Age) you do well to put me in mind of and I thank you for it, though you do it in such a manner as seems to imply, that you think me to have more need of such a Memento than one of my Age ought to have. But then being my unfeigned well∣willer (as in the subscription of your Address to me you tell me you are) why do you endeavour so unseasonably to withdraw me from so necessary a work (especially supposing me to have so little time left for the doing of it) which you do, first, by calling me to an Account for what I writ in a Letter above 18 years ago, in which you say there are many mistakes in matter of fact, which (if I say nothing to the contrary) will be taken for granted. And secondly, by your so
earnestly pressing me as well as the Bishop of Ely (to whom you make the afore∣said Address also) to tell you what we think of that which you call the Onely true way of Concord of all Christian Churches, and if upon Perusal thereof we are con∣vinced it is so, to see that Prejudice resist not, but that we would acknowledge and confess it to be so. But this you know cannot be done without reading over and considering and examining that whole Book of yours; nor consequently by me without taking off my thoughts from minding so much, as otherwise I might do that Ʋnum necessarium which you ad∣vise me to think on, and which indeed is a much more proper employment for one so near the grave as I am, than to engage or to be engaged to Apologize for mine own, or to Censure other mens Writings. Yet rather than to seem by my silence to acknowledge what you charge me with to be true, which I cannot without being injurious to truth it self as well as to mine own reputation; I will in the first place vindicate my self from having made so
many, or any one so gross a mistake in matter of fact, as you say there are in my aforesaid Letter. And then, if I live long enough and have time enough to spare from better and more necessary employ∣ments, I will tell you freely and plainly what I think of the Book you address to the Bishop of Ely and me; I mean whether what you promise in the Title-page of it be performed in it. In the mean time wishing you Saniorem mentem in saniori cor∣pore, I rest (as much as the peace and safety of the Church will permit me to be) Your Friend and Servant, George Winton.
TO THE READER. NExt to the carrying of a good Consci∣ence towards God out of the World with him, I think the next care every man ought to have, is to leave a good name or me∣morial of himself in the World behind him; especially if he be or have been a man of any Eminency of Place, or Office, or Order, ei∣ther in the Church, or State; because, what∣soever aspersions of infamy are cast upon such mens persons, do commonly in vulgar con∣struction reflect on their Office, and Order also, and are often by the malignancy of the Authours of them intended to do so. And therefore though we must (if it be God's will it should be so) be content, as St. Paul was, to run the race that is set before us,
, whether we be well or ill spoken of; yet we may and ought, as St. Paul did (and did it often) doe what we can to vindicate our personal Credit and Reputation also; especially when the Credit and Reputation of our Office, or Order, is concerned in it; and more especially when we are ill spoken of publickly, and in Print, and by one that is a professed Adversary to the Church and Order whereof we are, as well as to our selves; most especially if he be the Head, or one of the heads of a very nume∣rous Party, and therefore likely to be be∣lieved in what he says or writes of or against any one (though never so false and injurious) by many too credulous though well meaning men, if he be not publickly contradicted and confuted. This therefore being my very case in all the aforesaid particular circumstances of it; I am constrained (weak, and feeble, and old, as I am, drawing near the end of the 85th year of my age) to enter into the Lists with this great Goliah or Champion of the Non-conformists; not to defend our Church against him or them; that is too great a work for my undertaking, at this
time of day, my night being so near, when no man can work; and that work being done (thanks be to God) and done better al∣ready than I could have done it (when I was much more able than I now am:) but onely to vindicate my self, together with the honour of the Order whereof I am (though I confess myself unworthy to be so) from being guilty of such crimes, and reproaches, as it hath pleased Mr. Baxter to lay unto my charge; which may perhaps, after I am gone, be be∣lieved to be true, if they be not proved to be false before I go from hence and be no more seen. And this I had done sooner, had not some of my learned Friends and Brethren ad∣vised me not to take notice of any thing Mr. Baxter had said of me; because (as they said) his tongue is no slander, nor his pen neither; especially when he whets either the one or the other against Bishops; and because I had already long ago, both answered and preven∣ted all the Objections he had then, or hath since made against the truth of what I had said of him in relation to the Conference at the Savoy, and of the justice of what I had done to him when I was Bishop of Worcester, which
is now above 20 years ago. These perswasions, and reasons, together with the consideration of the little time I had left for better employ∣ment, prevaild with me to lay aside some few Observations and Animadversions I had begun to make upon some particulars relating to me in some of Mr. Baxter's late Writings; un∣till some other of my Learned and Reverend Brethren did very lately let me know, that in their opinion, I was obliged for the Churches sake, as well as for mine own, not to suffer it to be said hereafter, that a Bishop of the Church of England having been told, and told in Print, that he was a Preacher of un∣truths, and consequently a liar in the pulpit, a slanderer of all the Non-conformists, nay a blasphemer, or a defier not of Humanity onely, but of the Deity it self, had nothing to say, be∣cause he did say nothing, to the contrary; though I could have replied that I thought, and some others of my Reverend Brethren thought also, that the Letter I had written and printed so long ago, with the Testimony annexed to it, was enough, and more than enough, to vindi∣cate me from the two first of those Reproaches, and to prevent the last of them also: yet be∣cause
they have been again repeated, and because there hath been since a Book written, and written on purpose (as Mr. Baxter the Authour of it saith) to prove Bishop Morley to have been grosly mistaken in the relation he hath made in the aforesaid Letter of what was asserted by Mr. Baxter in the aforesaid Conference at the Savoy; and because it was since the writing of that Letter also, that he makes me a defier of Deity and Humanity, because I am not of his opinion, that all unli∣mited Governours are Tyrants, and have no right to their Governments; for these reasons (I say) and for the satisfaction of some of my friends, rather than out of any inclination of mine own, who love , to be quiet and to doe mine own business, as well as Mr. Baxter doth , to have an Oar in every man's Boat, and there∣by quieta movere, to disquiet both himself and others, I have adventured to launch forth once more; though I have reason to fear I may not live to finish what I have begun, not because I foresee any difficulty at all in the work I have to doe (I mean the justifying of my self against any thing Mr. Baxter hath
laid unto my charge) but because, humanely speaking, there is so little of the sand in the Hour-glass of my life left, which yet if it last but a month or two longer before it be run out, (with the continuance of that mediocrity of health of body and soundness of mind, which by God's great goodness and mercy I do yet en∣joy) I hope it will by God's gracious assistance be long enough to make the impartial part of the world see, that Mr. Baxter is not a man of that sincerity, ingenuity or integrity, as he would be thought, (and perhaps he is by those who have his person in admiration) but one that will , to serve his turn for the present, and to keep up his reputation with his party, say or unsay, affirm or deny any thing either in matter of right or of fact, and juggle one proposition into the room of another, as if it were identically the same, or at least equipollent or equivalent to the other, when there is nothing of likeness either in sound or of sense betwixt them. Which that it may the more clearly appear, and that the impartial Reader may the bet∣ter judge, both of what I have said of him, and what he hath said of me, and whether I
or he have dealt more difingenuously or in∣juriously with one another, I have caused all that I printed before to be reprinted, (viz.) Mr. Baxter's own report of the Conference at the Savoy, and my Letter in reply to that report of his, together with the Collection of Aphorisms out of that Book which he calls his Holy Commonwealth, and all these ver∣batim in the same words, without any the least addition, diminution, or alteration; onely I have added thereunto another Paper of Mr. Baxter's, which I met with since, and which he calls a Revocation or Recantation of his Book of the Holy Commonwealth or Political Aphorisms; which whether it be indeed a Recantation, or such a Recan∣tation as it ought to have been or no, we shall examine in due place. But I have added, I say, that, because it was printed by him since the printing of what I have now reprin∣ted, and because it is in that paper, that Mr. Baxter hath been pleased to expose me as a Defier of Deity and Humanity. This Advertisement I thought fit to pre∣mise, and withall to desire the impartial
Reader, first to peruse what I have reprinted, I mean Mr. Baxter's Narrative to his Kidder∣minster friends, and my Letter in answer thereunto, together with Mr. Baxter's Politi∣cal Aphorisms annexed to that Letter, and then to take notice of the time when that Nar∣rative of his and Letter of mine were first prin∣ted, which was 10 years before the publishing of his pretended Recantation of all or any of his aforesaid Aphorisms; and lastly when he hath done this to proceed to the perusing of what upon another provocation of Mr. Baxter's I now write to justifie what I writ before, and after mature deliberation to pronounce sentence for me or against me, as he shall see cause. April 3. 1683. Reader, You are desired to take notice, that this work was prepared, designed and expected to have come forth before Easter-Term last.
THE Bishop of Worcester's LETTER To a Friend For VINDICATION of himself FROM Mr. BAXTER'S Calumny. Together with The ATTESTATION of Dr. GƲNNING and Dr. PEARSON: AND A Collection of Mr. Baxter's Theses and Doctrine concerning Government. Re∣printed. —Tenet insanabile multos Scribendi Cacoethes— LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brome, 1683.
Mr. Baxter hath lately printed a Book cal∣led [The Mischiefs of Self-Ignorance, and the Benefits of Self-Acquaintance] in the Address of which Book to his dearly be∣loved the Inhabitants of Kidderminster, he hath this ensuing passage relating to the Bishop of Worcester. IN a disputation by writing, those of the other part formed an Argument, whose Major Proposition was to this sense (for I have no Copy) [Whatsoever Book enjoyneth nothing but what is of it self lawfull, and by lawfull Authority, en∣joyneth nothing that is sinfull,] We denied this Proposition, and at last gave divers Reasons of our denial; amongst which one was, that [It may be unlawfull by Accident, and there∣fore sinfull] You now know my Crime; it is my concurring with Learned Reverend Brethren, to give this reason of our denial of a Proposition: yet they are not forbidden to Preach for it, (and I hope shall not be) but onely I. You have publickly heard from a mouth that should speak nothing but the words of Charity, Truth and Soberness, (especially there) that this was [a de∣sperate shift that men at the last are forced to] and inferring [that then neither God nor man can enjoyn without sin] In City and Countrey this soundeth forth to my reproach; I should take it for an act of Clemency to have been smitten professedly
for nothing, and that it might not have been thought necessary to afflict me by a defamation, that so I might seem justly afflict∣ed by a Prohibition to Preach the Gospel. But indeed is there in these words of ours so great a Crime? though we doubted not but they knew that our Assertion made not Every Evil Accident to be such as made an imposition unlawfull, yet we expressed this by word to them at that time, for fear of being misreported: and I told it to the Right Reverend Bishop when he forbad me to Preach, and gave this as a reason: And I must confess I am still guilty of so much weakness, as to be confident that Some things, not Evil of themselves, may have Accidents so Evil, as may make it a sin to him that shall command them. Is this opinion inconsistent with all Government? yea I must confess my self guilty of so much greater weakness, as that I thought I should never have found a man on Earth, that had the ordinary reason of a Man, that had made question of it; yea, I shall say more than that which hath offended (viz.) That whensoever the commanding or forbidding of a thing indifferent is like to occasion more hurt than good, and this may be foreseen, the commanding or forbidding it is a sin. But yet this is not the Assertion that I am chargeable with, but that [Some Acci∣dents there may be that may make the Imposition sinfull] If I may ask it without accusing of others, how would my Crime have been denominated if I had said the contrary? should I not have been judged unmeet to live in any governed Society? It is not unlawfull of it self to command out a Navy to Sea: but if it were foreseen that they would fall into the Enemies hands, or were like to perish by any Accident, and the necessity of sending them were small, or none, it were a sin to send them. It is not unlawfull of it self to sell Poyson, or give a knife to another, or to bid another to do it; but if it were foreseen that they will be used to poyson or kill the buyer, it is unlawfull; and I think the Law would make him believe it that were guilty. It is not of it self unlawfull to light a Candle, or set fire on a straw; but if
it may be foreknown, that by another's negligence or wilful∣ness it is like to set fire on the City, or give fire to a train or store of Gunpowder that is under the Parliament House, when the King and Parliament are there, I crave the Bishop's pardon for believing that it were sinfull to doe it, or command it; yea or not to hinder it (in any such case) when Quinon vetat pec∣care cum potest, jubet, yea though going to God's publick wor∣ship be of it self so far from being a sin, that it is a Duty, yet I think it is a sin to command it to all in time of a raging Pesti∣lence, or when they should be defending the City against the as∣sault of an Enemy, it may rather then be a duty to prohibit it. I think Paul spake not any thing inconsistent with the Govern∣ment of God or man, when he bid both the Rulers and the People of the Church, not to destroy him with their meat for whom Christ died: and when he saith, he hath not his power to destruction, but to edification; yea there are evil Accidents of a thing, not evil of it self, that are caused by the Commander: and it is my opinion that they may prove his Command unlawfull. But what need I use any other instances than that which was the matter of our dispute? Suppose it never so lawfull of it self to kneel in the Reception of the Sacrament, if it be imposed by a penalty that is incomparably beyond the proportion of the offence, that penalty is an Accident of the command, and maketh it by Accident sinfull in the Commander. If a Prince should have Subjects so weak as that all of them thought it a sin against the example of Christ and the Canons of the Gene∣ral Councils, and many hundred years practice of the Church, to kneel in the Act of Receiving on the Lord's day, if he should make a Law that all should be put to death that would not kneel, when he foreknew that their Consciences would command them all, or most of them to die rather than obey, would any man deny his command to be unlawfull by this Accident? Whether the penal∣ty of ejecting Ministers that dare not put away all that do not kneel, and of casting out all the people that scruple it, from the
Church, be too great for such a circumstance (and so in the rest) and whether this, with the lamentable estate of many Congrega∣tions, and the divisions that will follow, being all foreseen, do prove the impositions unlawfull which were then in Question, is a Case that I had then a clearer call to speak to, than I have now; onely I may say, That the Ejecting of the Servants of Christ from the Communion of his Church, and of his faith∣full Ministers from their Sacred Work, when too many Con∣gregations have none but insufficient, or scandalous Teachers, or no Preaching Ministers at all, will appear a matter of very great moment in the day of our accounts, and such as should not be done upon any but a necessary cause, where the be∣nefit is greater than this hurt (and all the rest) amounts to. Having given you (to whom I owe it) this account of the cause for which I am forbidden the exercise of my Ministry in that Countrey, I now direct these Sermons to your hands, that seeing I cannot teach you as I would, I may teach you as I can: And if I much longer enjoy such Liberty as this, it will be much above my expectation.
The Bishop of Worcester's Letter to a Friend for Vindication of himself from Mr. Baxter's Calumny. SIR, I Have received that Letter of yours, whereby you inform me that Mr. Baxter hath lately written and printed something with such a reflexion upon me, that I am obliged to take notice of it. I thank you for your care of my Reputation, which next to Conscience ought to be the dearest of all things to all men, especially to men of my Profession and Order, who the more they are vilified (whether justly or unjustly) the less good they will be able to doe, especially amongst those that have industriously been prepossessed with prejudice either against their Persons or their Functions. This was St. Paul's Case, when there were some that did what they could to make the Corinthians to undervalue his Person, that there∣by they might discredit his Doctrine, and weaken his Authority, whom therefore he thinks he may with∣out breach of Charity call False Apostles and Deceit∣full Workers. Nay this was our Saviour's own Case, who, whilst he lived here upon the Earth, was ever and anon traduced and slandered by the Scribes and Pharisees, those proud Hypocrites, who were the grea∣test
pretenders to Holiness, and yet the greatest Se∣ducers of the people, and the grossest falsifiers of God's Word, that ever were in the world, untill these our times, which have brought forth a generation of men (St. John Baptist would have called them a Generation of Vipers) who in the Art of holy juggling and mali∣cious slandring have out-done the Pharisees themselves and all that went before them; witness their so often wresting and perverting the Scripture in their Sermons to stir up the people to Sedition, and their as often Li∣belling the King in their Prayers, in order to the ma∣king of his Subjects first to hate him, then to fight against him, and at last to take away his Crown and his Life from him. And is it any wonder that those that are such enemies to Kings, should not be friends to Bishops? or that one (who had done what he could to make the late King odious unto his People) should doe what he can likewise to make the Pastour odious unto his Flock? to his Flock, I say; For it is the Bi∣shop of Worcester, and not Mr. Baxter that is Pastour of Kidderminster, as well as of all other Parochial Churches in that Diocese; neither did I or any other Bishop of Worcester, ever commit the Care of Souls in that, or any other Parish of that Diocese to Mr. Bax∣ter, though by that Preface of his to those of Kidder∣minster, he would make the world believe, that they were his Flock, and not mine, and that therefore he hath the more reason to complain of my defamation of him (as he calls it) in that place and before that people: whereas the truth is that Mr. Baxter was never either Parson, Vicar, or Curate there or any where else in my Diocese; for he never came in by the Door, that is, by any legal right or lawfull admission into that Sheepfold, but climbed up some other way, name∣ly, by violence and intrusion, and therefore by Christ's
own inference he was a Thief and a Robber; and in∣deed he did Rob him that was then, and is now again the lawfull Vicar of that Church; he Robbed him, I say, first of his Reputation amongst his Flock, and then of his means and maintenance, by taking away the Fleece as well as the Flock from him; though (as Mr. Baxter himself hath confessed to me) He be a man of an unblameable life and conversation, though not of such parts (said Mr. Baxter) as are fit to qualifie him for the Cure of so great a Congregation; which whe∣ther it were so or no, I am sure Mr. Baxter was not to be the Judge; but in that Case the Bishop that was then living should and would have provided him a Coadjutor, as I have done since, and such an one, as I hope will feed that Flock with much more whole∣some Doctrine than Mr. Baxter did, when he sowed the Seed of Schism and Sedition, and blew the Trum∣pet of Rebellion amongst them. For which cause I thought it my Duty (as being their Pastour in Chief) not onely to forbid Mr. Baxter to Preach there any more, which, by the way, he had done without my Licence; but likewise to Preach there my self, and to doe what I could to undeceive that poor seduced and miserably deluded People; which was not to be done, as long as they had the person of their Seducer in so great admiration; and therefore by the example of St. Paul, who in order to the same end, did take the same course with Alexander the Copper-smith, with Demas, Philetus and Hymeneus; as likewise by the example of Christ himself, who in order to the same end, did take the same course with the Scribes and Pharisees, I thought it necessary to let them know that one that was of great authority amongst them (meaning indeed, though not naming Mr. Baxter) was not the man they took him for; that he had not dealt faithfully with them,
nor preached the word of God sincerely to them, when he made them believe it was lawfull for them to take up Arms against the King, nor in suffering (if not making) them to scruple at those things as unlawfull, which he he himself confesses to be lawfull; and afterwards ma∣king use of those scruples of theirs (which he himself had infused into them, or not endeavoured to take from them) as the onely argument why those things they did so scruple at should not be enjoin'd by law∣full Authority, though lawfull in themselves, because forsooth, the enjoining of things lawfull by lawfull Au∣thority, if they may by Accident be the occasion of sin, is sinfull; which assertion of his (as I then said, and must still maintain) is destructive of humane Society in taking away the Authority of Commanding and the Obligation of Obeying, together with the whole Legislative Power, Civil as well as Ecclesiastical, and Divine as well as Humane. And thus much (as Mr. Baxter himself saith) I told him before in mine own House, neither did he then deny the assertion, or endeavour to disprove what I inferr'd from it, by any of those distinctions or instances he now useth. And that this is true the Reverend Dr. Warmstry, now Dean of Worcester, will witness for me, whom I de∣sired to be by whilst I conferr'd with Mr. Baxter, foreseeing what misreport a man of Mr. Baxter's principles and temper was like enough to make of what should pass betwixt us. And it was very well I did so; for I find that the Presbyter as well as the Papist will serve themselves, as often as they are put to it, of their pioe fraudes, or holy artifices, of spea∣king more or less than the truth, as it makes more or less for their purpose or advantage; as likewise of put∣ting non causam pro causa, or a part and a less princi∣pal part of the cause for the whole cause. For who
would not think that knows not Mr. Baxter, that when he tells his Disciples of Kidderminster, You now know my Crime, with reference to the aforesaid asser∣tion, and to that onely, who would not think, I say, that either there was nothing else objected against him, or at least nothing of moment, or that could be any just and reasonable cause of my forbidding him to Preach in my Diocese? especially when he adds that the Right Reverend Bishop gave him this as a reason for his forbidding him to Preach; where if he means that the Bishop gave him this as the onely, or the prin∣cipal reason, he speaks without truth, and against his Conscience; for the first and principal reason the Bi∣shop gave him for his forbidding him to Preach, was (as he well knows, and as the Dean of Worcester will witness against him) His Preaching before without Li∣cence, having no Cure of his own to Preach to; where∣unto when he replied, I had promised to give him such a Licence as the Bishop of London had given him, viz. Quàm diu se bene gereret, & durante beneplacito, I rejoin'd, That it was true indeed, I had once promi∣sed to give him such a Licence, but withall, that it was as true, that first I had never promised to give him a Licence, if he took it before I gave it him; and that for this presumption of his, I had now forbidden him to Preach any more. Secondly, That I knew more of him since than I did at that time; for, first, I had been cre∣dibly informed, that he had abused the Bishop of Lon∣don's favour by preaching factiously, though not in the City, yet in the Diocese of London, and I named the place to him: Secondly, that since that promise of mine (which cannot be supposed to be other than Conditional) I my self had heard him, at a Conference in the Savoy, maintaining such a Position as was destructive to Legis∣lative Power both in God and Man (meaning the Asser∣tion
before spoken of, viz. That the enjoining of things lawfull by lawfull Authority, if they might by Accident be the cause of sin, was sinfull) which Assertion of his with the horrible consequences of it, I told him then at Worcester, I had formerly told him of at the Savoy openly, and before all the Company that was at the Con∣ference; whereunto all that he replied at my second telling him at Worcester, was, that he had used some distinctions to salve that Assertion from those consequen∣ces; but what those distinctions were he did not then mention, (as Dr. Warmstry can witness) though in this printed Address of his to his Friends of Kidder∣minster, he saith, he did tell the Bishop in what a limi∣ted and restrained sense he and his Brethren understood that Assertion; which whether they did or no, will appear by and by, when we shall more nearly exa∣mine his printed Narrative as to that particular. In the mean time, though I said indeed that one that held and was likely to teach such Doctrines, was not to be suffered to Preach unto the People, yet this was not then alledged by me as the cause or crime for which I had forbidden him to Preach, (for that, as I said be∣fore, was His presuming to Preach without a Licence) but onely as a reason why I should have thought my self not obliged by the promise I had formerly made him, to give him a Licence, though he had not other∣wise forfeited his claim to that promise by preaching without, or before he had it. Lastly, He might have remembred another reason I gave him why I could not have made good that promise, namely, those Prin∣ciples of Treason and Rebellion publickly extant in his Books, which I had not taken notice of till after the making of that promise, and which till he should recant in as publick a manner, I thought my self obliged in Conscience not to suffer him to Preach in my Diocese;
whereunto his answer was, That whatsoever he had said or done in that kind, was pardoned by the Act of Indempnity: True, said I, so far as the King can pardon it, that is, in regard of its corporal punishment here in this world, but it is God that must pardon the guilt or obligation to punishment in the world to come, which he will not without repentance, and it is the Church that must pardon the scandal, which she cannot doe neither without an honourable amends made her by publick Con∣fession and Recantation. I could tell Mr. Baxter in his ear likewise, that in excuse of his rebellious Principles formerly published, he said, That now the Parliament had declared where the Sovereign Power was, he should acknowledge it and submit to it, as if the King owed his Sovereignty to the Declaration of a Parliament, which is as false as rebellious, and as dangerous a Prin∣ciple as any of his former: however by what hath been said, it appears that Mr. Baxter meant to impose upon his credulous Friends at Kidderminster, and up∣on his unwary Readers, by making them believe that was the onely cause for which the Bishop forbad him to Preach, which was neither the onely, nor the prin∣cipal cause, why the Bishop did so, nor indeed, to speak properly, any cause of it at all; for the onely proper cause for which the Bishop forbad him to Preach, was His preaching before without the Bishop's Licence; the other which he pretends, together with the third which he conceals, were properly and professedly the causes why the Bishop would not take off that Prohibition, or why he would not give him a Licence to Preach for the future, either at Kidderminster, or in any other place of his Diocese, untill he should publickly retract that Position which he had openly asserted at the Con∣ference, and should publickly renounce likewise those seditious and rebellious Principles which are published
in his Books. And this is the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth of what passed betwixt me and Mr. Baxter at Worcester, before I preached at Kid∣derminster, where whether I defamed him, or he, by saying so, hath not grosly defamed me, will appear by that which follows; wherein that I might neither be deceived my self, nor deceive others, I have not trusted to my own memory onely, as Mr. Baxter saith he doth to his, but I have consulted with Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pearson, two of the three that managed that Conference with Mr. Baxter and his Assistants, and have seen that Assertion in the same sense that I object it, and Mr. Baxter disclaims it, affirmed by Mr. Bax∣ter himself under his own hand. I found Mr. Baxter at the Savoy engaged in a Dis∣pute, and I perceived that to keep himself off from that part of the Argument which would press near to the merits of the Cause, he had often affirmed in his Answers, That the Command of a most lawfull Act was sinfull; if that Act commanded might prove to any one a sin per accidens. This Assertion I did then and there presently and openly lay to his charge; and when he denied it (as it was most frequent with him immediately to deny what he had before affirmed) the answers which he had delivered written with his own hand were produced, and upon the reading of them, the justice of my charge was most apparent; where∣upon I urged him farther, that this Assertion of his was not onely false, but destructive of all Authority Humane and Divine, as not onely denying all power to the Church of making Canons Ecclesiastical for the better ordering and governing of the Church, but al∣so taking away all Legislative Power from the King and Parliament, and even from God himself: I deli∣vered at the same time my reason for what I said,
which was briefly this, because there can be no Act so good of it self, but may prove per Accidens, or by Ac∣cident, a sin; And therefore, if to command an Act which may prove per Accidens a sin, be a sin, then eve∣ry Command must be a sin. And if to command be a sin, then certainly God can command nothing, be∣cause God cannot sin; and by the same reason, Kings, Parliaments and Churches ought not to command any thing, because they ought not to sin. Thus far I then charged Mr. Baxter, and to this Charge he gave then no satisfaction. Neither can I yet conceive it possible to give any satisfaction, but by one of these two ways, either by proving that the As∣sertion, with which I charged him was never his, or by shewing that the consequence I urged, is not good; neither of which was he then able to doe: and by what he hath now been pleased to publish, it is more than probable that he can never perform either of them. For in his bold, but weak Apology, he doth not so much as pretend to shew any Invalidity in my Infe∣rence, and for the Assertion with which I charged him, he denies it so poorly, and goes about to prove another instead of it so manifestly, that he may without any injury be interpreted to yield it. He saith indeed now, That he told us that his Assertion made not every Evil Accident to be such as made an Imposition unlawfull. But whether he ever said so before this time or no, it was then clearly proved that he did assert, That an Act for nothing else, but because it might be per Accidens a sin, could not be commanded without sin. And now in his publick Appeal, he hath taken a strange way to wipe off all this, for he makes a very brief Narration, and most notoriously imperfect, and then says, You know my Crime, as if that were all that had been, or could be objected against him. Besides,
in the relating of this short Narrative, he relies wholly upon his own memory; not so much as endeavouring to satisfie himself, before he presumed to satisfie others. How his memory may be in other things I know not, in this if it hath been faithfull to him, he hath been very unfaithfull to others. He relates an Answer in what terms he pleaseth, and brings one Proposition, as made by his Opponents in what terms he thinks fit, and the Application of this answer to that Proposition he propoundeth as all his Crime; whereas his Answer was far more largely given, and that to several Propo∣sitions in several Syllogisms, of which the Proposition which he relateth was but one, or rather none; so that he hath most shamefully abused his Disciples at Kidder∣minster, with a short and partial Narrative of his Fact. As for his Concurring with Learned Reverend Bre∣thren (which he would pretend to be part of his Crime) and his invidious insinuation, That they are not forbid∣den to Preach for it, though he be, the reason is clear. He had often delivered this Assertion before the Com∣pany, his Brethren had not; the words of the Answer were written with his hand, not with his Brethrens. His Brethren had several times declared themselves not to be of his Opinion (as particularly when he affirmed That a man might live without any actual sin). And therefore we were so just as not to charge them with this Assertion; especially considering they did shew themselves unwilling to enter upon this dispute, and seemed to like much better another way tending to an amicable and fair compliance, which was wholly fru∣strated by Mr. Baxter's furious eagerness to engage in a Disputation. All his Discourse which followeth (after his imper∣fect Narrative) in justification of himself, is grounded first, upon a misreporting of his own Assertion; se∣condly,
upon the dissembling of the several Propositi∣ons, to which his Answer was so often applied; third∣ly, upon his pretending That he says more now, than that which had offended formerly; which is most palpa∣bly false, and in all probability (if he have any memo∣ry) against his own Conscience. And this will pre∣sently appear by the vanity and impertinency of all those specious instances which he brings to mollifie his Assertion. To Command a Navy to Sea (he says) is lawfull, but if it were foreseen that they would fall into the Enemies hand, or were like to perish by any accident, it were a sin to send them. Is this more than he said before, or is it any defence of his Assertion at all? It is not certain∣ly, because the Opponents had put it expresly in the Proposition; That the Act in it self lawfull, was to be sup∣posed to have nothing consequent, which the Commander of it ought to provide against; and yet being so stated, Mr. Baxter affirmed, That if the Act might be per Ac∣cidens sinfull, the Commanding of it was sin. Now cer∣tainly the falling of a Navy into the Enemies hand, or the perishing of it any other way, if foreseen, ought to be provided against by the Commander; whereas Mr. Baxter's answer did import, That if any Prince did Command a Fleet to Sea, though he did not foresee the Fleet would fall into the Enemies hand, or perish any other way, yet if by Accident it miscarried that or any other way, which he could not foresee, or were not bound to provide against, the very Command at first was sin. The same reason nullifies his instances of the Poison, and the Knife, because the sin in selling them supposeth the murther of the buyer to be foreseen, and conse∣quently that the seller ought to prevent it; but if he will speak in correspondence to his former Answer, he
must shew, that though the seller do not foresee that the buyer will use the Poison or the Knife, to his own, or any other man's destruction, yet if by any Accident or mistake, either the buyer, or any other perish by the Poison or the Knife, the seller is guilty of his death. His instance of setting a City on fire, or putting Gun∣powder under the Parliament House when the King and Parliament are there, is of the same nature, and needs no addition of answer but onely this, that Mr. Baxter, in a sense too true, hath been very instrumental in set∣ting the City on fire, and in adding powder to the Par∣liament. The rest which follows betrays the same weakness, because the inconveniences are urged upon a Duty to prohibit them, and his Answer did charge the Command with sin in respect of such Accidents, as it was no part of the Commander's Duty to provide against. It is therefore most certain, that no one of those instances singly, nor all of them jointly have any force in any measure to justifie that Assertion which Mr. Baxter did maintain, and whereof he is accused. As for that last instance, which was (saith he) the matter of the Dispute, and which he urgeth in this man∣ner, (Suppose it never so lawfull of it self to Kneel in the reception of the Sacrament, if it be imposed by a penalty, that is incomparably beyond the proportion of the offence, that penalty is an Accident of the Command, and maketh it by Accident sinfull to the Commander) he is manifest∣ly guilty of a double falsification: First, in pretending the matter in dispute, was the imposition of kneeling at the Communion; when this very matter was expresly rejected in the very beginning of the Dispute, as be∣longing to the Canons, not the Common-Prayer-Book, the lawfulness of which Canons the Commissioners had no authority to debate, and Mr. Baxter knows, that
his Argument was denied upon that ground. The se∣cond falsification is yet greater, in urging the penalty to make the Command sinfull, when his Answer did charge the Command with sin, without any relation to the punishment; and when the Proposition he repli∣ed to was so framed, that all unjust penalties were in terminis expresly excluded, even then I say he charged the Command of a lawfull Act with sin, if it were otherwise by Accident sinfull; though by the way I must not grant that the penalty imposed by the Law for not kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament (namely the not admitting of such as will not kneel, at the receiving of it) is incomparably greater than the offence; for the greatness of the offence in such cases, and as it stands in relation to such or such a penalty ap∣pointed for it, is not to be measured by the Quality of the Act considered in it self, but by the more or less mischievous consequences it is likely to produce, if men be not restrain'd from such an Act by such a penalty; for example, when a Souldier is hang'd for stealing of a Hen, or for taking away any thing of never so little a value, without paying for it, no wise man will blame the General for such a severity; because if he did not doe so, every one would take what he pleased, which would discourage the Country from bringing in provi∣sions, and consequently the whole Army would be ru∣in'd. And as the Martial, so the Civil and Ecclesiasti∣cal Laws likewise in commanding or forbidding any thing under such or such a penalty, have an eye not so much to the merit of the Action it self, as to the more or less danger of the Publick in the consequences of it; whence it comes to pass, that a less evil may sometimes most justly be forbidden under a more severe penalty than a greater, because the former may be of much more dangerous consequence than the latter; so that
he that will judge rightly, and impartially of the equi∣ty or iniquity of appointing or inflicting such or such a penalty, he must not so much consider the quality of the Transgression singly in it self, nor whether it be from weakness, or wilfulness in the party transgressing (as he is this or that individual person) but rather he must consider what the Consequence would be of the breach of such a Command if it were not prevented by such a penalty, (always supposing the Command it self to be lawfull, and that the transgressour of it is to be considered as he stands in relation to that whole Bo∣dy, whether Civil, or Ecclesiastical, whereof he is a part;) and that the whole is not to be endangered out of tenderness and indulgence to some particulars, as evidently it would be, if every man were left at liber∣ty to doe what seem'd best in his own eyes, even in the Ceremonials and Circumstantials of God's Worship; for considering the pride and self-love that is in humane nature, which makes men so overvalue their own practices and their own opinions, that they are always apt to undervalue those that will not conform to them, as it always hath been, so it always will be; he that worshippeth God one way, will either judge or con∣demn him that worshippeth God another way; he that Kneeleth at the Sacrament, will be thought to be Ido∣latrous or Superstitious by him that Kneeleth not, and he that kneeleth not will be thought wilfull, or weak, by him that kneeleth. And thus from diversity grows dislike, from dislike enmity, from enmity opposition, and from opposition, first Separation and Schism in the Church, and then Faction, Sedition and Rebellion in the State; which is a progress very natural, and I would we had not found it to be so by our own experience; for as the safety of a State depends upon the safety of the Church, so the safety of the Church depends upon
Unity, and Unity it self depends upon Uniformity, and Uniformity there cannot be, as long as there is di∣versity or divers ways of Worship in the same Church, which will be always, unless it be lawfull for publick Authority to oblige all particulars to one way of publick Worship, and that under such penalties, as the Law-givers shall think necessary to prevent the disturbing of the publick peace and safety; the preservation whereof be∣ing the main end of all Laws, and of all penalties ap∣pointed by Law, those practices that are either inten∣tionally or consequentially destructive to this End, may be, and no doubt ought to be restrain'd by severe pe∣nalties. It is not therefore the not kneeling at the Sa∣crament, but the breaking of the Orders of the Church, and the endangering of the Peace and Safety of the whole, which our Laws punish by not admitting such unto the Sacrament, as will not, or perhaps dare not kneel at it; for as they will not endanger the Peace of their Consciences for the Churches sake; so it becomes the Law-givers not to endanger the Churches and the States Peace for their sakes: And surely when there is a necessity of the yielding of the one or of the other, it is much more reasonable that a part should yield un∣to the whole, than the whole unto a part, especially when the whole cannot yield without endangering it self, and with it self even those themselves also, that, will they nill they, must be involved in the ruine of it; as the Presbyterians have found by their own experi∣ence also, who by their groundless and needless separa∣tion from us, have given example and ground enough for others to separate from them, till by dividing and subdividing from one another, there was nothing of Uniformity, or unity, or order, or decency left in that Church, which was formerly (and I hope by the Pru∣dence and Piety of Publick Authority will be now
again) the Glory and Pattern of all other Protestant and Reformed Churches in the world; of which, by the way, there is not one which doth not use as great severity for the preserving of Unity by Uniformity as we do, even in this particular; for do not the Prote∣stant Churches in France enjoyn Standing, the Chur∣ches of Holland, Scotland, and the Churches of Germany that follow Calvin enjoyn Sitting, and the Churches that follow Luther there and elsewhere enjoyn Kneeling as we do, and all of them upon the same penalty of not receiving it otherwise? And is it not as lawfull for our Church, as for all other Protestant, and all other Chri∣stian Churches, to require of her Children the like con∣formity to her Laws under the like penalty for the same end, and to prevent the same danger? Yes (re∣plyed Mr. Baxter when this question was ask'd him) just as lawfull, that is, not lawfull at all, such an injunc∣tion upon such a penalty being sinfull, wheresoever and by whomsoever it is enjoyned. O happy England, that hath such an Aristarchus as is worthy to censure all the Churches of the world, whose Catholick practice (if it cross Mr. Baxter's opinion) must presently without more adoe be Condemn'd as sinfull, and all the world must be Lyars rather than Mr. Baxter must not be ju∣stified in his sayings. You have before seen the inge∣nuity and veracity, you now see the humility and the modesty of the Man; and indeed in proportion, of the whole Party, for crimine ab uno,—Disce omnes. But doth Mr. Baxter and the rest of his perswasion think indeed, that it is so great and grievous a punishment to be kept from the Sacrament when men will not receive it in that way and upon those terms that the Church offers? if they do, why then do they deny it to so ma∣ny that hunger and thirst after it, whensoever either by reason of Age, or Lameness, or Sickness, or some
other bodily infirmity they cannot come to Church for it? especially when the Catholick Church in the Twelfth Canon of the first General Council commands it be given even to those that are Excommunicate, if they desire it when they are in Extremis, or going out of the world. Secondly, why have they suffered so many whole Parishes in England under their charge to have been without a Communion so many years to∣gether, as I am credibly informed they have? Thirdly, why do they reject those from the Sacrament, that will not come before hand to them to be examined by them, there being neither precept nor practice in the Gospel, nor Canon in the Church, either to warrant them to require it, or to oblige the People to submit to it upon any such penalty? I am sure St. Paul when he chides those of the Church of Corinth for coming ignorantly to the Sacrament, and for behaving themselves profane∣ly at the Sacrament, that which he prescribes for avoi∣ding the same or the like faults for the future, is not that every man should come, and be examined by the Minister, but that every man should examine himself be∣fore he eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup; And yet I will not deny but that every man before he Com∣municates ought to be well Catechis'd and instructed by the Minister, and thereby enabled to examine him∣self the better; nor will I deny neither but that every man may and ought in case of scruple of Mind or trou∣ble of Conscience to advise with, and to be advised by him that hath the cure of his Soul; but that every man as often as he intends to receive the Sacrament should be obliged under the penalty of being rejected from it, to come and to be examined by the Minister, this is that which I utterly deny, and which I take to be the same thing in other words with that of Auricular Confession; so that they who exact the one, have no reason to con∣demn
the other, unless it be because they would in∣gross it wholly unto themselves: Howsoever, if refu∣sing the Sacrament to those that will not kneel, when the Church enjoyns it, be a penalty so far transcending the offence, how much more must the same penalty transcend the offence, when there is indeed no offence at all? for where there is no , there can be no , where there is no Law there can be no Trans∣gression, and consequently there being no Law of God nor Man that requires all Communicants to be pre∣examined by the Minister, those that are refused the Sa∣crament because they will not be pre-examined, are punished with the same punishment which they com∣plain of, for no offence at all. And therefore Si maxi∣mè digna essem (may our Church say) ista contumelia, indigni vos, qui faceretis tamen; for, Who art thou, O Man, that judgest another? nay, that judgest thy Mo∣ther, when thou doest the same, or worse, things, than those are for which thou condemnest her? And how can any man of reason be so scrupulous, as to quit his Calling, rather than deny the Sacrament to those that will not receive it kneeling, when the Church com∣mands it should neither be taken nor given otherwise, and yet make no scruple at all of denying it to whole Parishes? of denying it to those that cannot come to Church for it, though desirous of it, and qualified for it, and such as have most need of it to strengthen their Faith in their last Agony? and lastly, of denying it to such as refuse to be pre-examined by them, and all this without any command or warrant from God's Word, and contrary to the Command and Custom of God's Church? whereby it plainly appears, that either they do not think the receiving of the Sacrament of so great importance, as indeed it is, nor the denying of it so great an injury or punishment as they pretend it to be;
or else that they would have every Minister to be a Monarch or Sovereign Law-giver in his own Parish, and this indeed is that they would fain be at, now they have lost their hopes of governing the whole Kingdom; for you see by what Mr. Baxter adds, that if they may not be suffered to give or deny the Sacrament to whom they please, and in effect to doe what they list in their own Parishes, they threaten to quit their Stations, which he calls being Ejected because they dare not put away all that will not kneel at the Sacrament: And this menace they often repeat upon all occasions, as if they were the onely men that could carry on the work of the Lord; or as if the Church must needs sink and pe∣rish, if it wanted such Pillars as they are to uphold it. But (thanks be to God for it) the Church of England is not yet (notwithstanding all their endeavours to that purpose) reduced to so very ill a condition, that she cannot subsist without them; whereas the truth is, she cannot subsist with them, as long as they continue to be what they have been, the sowers and somenters of Schism in the Church, and Sedition in the State; and as long as they continue to doe as they have done in humouring, and hardning, and confirming the peo∣ple in their obstinate standing out against the lawfull commands of their Superiours; which they would ne∣ver have done at all, if these men had not at first in∣fused into them these scruples. And therefore as God asked Adam and Eve, How came ye to know that ye are naked? so if I should ask those poor Souls whom those sly and subtile Serpents have beguiled and seduced, How came ye to know that ye shall sin against God if ye obey the Orders of the Church in general? or particularly how came ye to know, That it is against the Canons of the General Councils, and many hundred years practice of the Church to Kneel in the Act of re∣ceiving?
Did ye or can ye your selves reade those General Councils? Did ye or can ye examine so ma∣ny hundred years practice of the Church as Mr. Bax∣ter speaks of? What answer can they make to these demands, but that which Eve made unto God? The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat; Mr. Baxter, or some such Godly and Learned men as Mr. Baxter is, did tell us so, and we believed them: But what if Mr. Baxter do not believe that himself which he would have you believe? For first he would have you believe that there is great reverence and respect to be given (as indeed there is) to the Canons of General Councils, and to the Catholick practice of the Primitive Church; but doth he himself believe this? if he do, why did he so furiously oppose that which all General Councils ap∣prove of and confirm? I mean the Government of the Church by Bishops in the sense wherein it is asserted and practised in our Church? Or why did he per∣swade Subjects to take Arms against their Sovereign? which he knows to be contrary to the Doctrine and practice of the Primitive Christians for many hundred years more than he speaks of. Secondly, Mr. Baxter would have you believe, that Kneeling at the receiving of the Sacrament is forbidden by General Councils, and contrary to the custom and practice of the Ancient Church, which I am affraid he doth not believe him∣self; I am sure there is no convincing reason to make him believe it; for it is not the Ancient Churches in∣junction to stand when they prayed betwixt Easter and Whitsontide, that will prove they were forbidden to Kneel when they received; especially if the Presbyte∣rian opinion be true, that we are not to be in the Act of Praying, when we are in the Act of receiving; But if we may pray (as no doubt we may and ought to pray) in the Act of Receiving, then supposing the Ancient
Injunction of the Church to stand at Prayer upon Sun∣days betwixt Easter and Whitsuntide to be still in force, yet all the rest of the year we are to kneel when we Pray, and consequently when we Receive, though there were no particular command of our own Church for it. Besides, Mr. Baxter knows that the aforesaid Injunction of the Church was but Temporary, till the people were sufficiently confirmed in the Doctrine and Belief of the Resurrection; for if it had been of perpe∣tual obligation, and were still in force, Mr. Baxter must needs condemn the whole present Church of God for kneeling when they pray betwixt Easter and Whitson∣tide, and particularly he must most of all condemn himself and the Presbyterians of England, for not stan∣ding when they receive, if at least that Injunction be to be understood of Receiving, as well as Praying; which if it be not, then is it urged by Mr. Baxter against us to no purpose, as indeed it is; And therefore no doubt Mr. Baxter doth not believe himself what he would have others believe, when he presseth that occa∣sional temporary injunction of the Church for standing against kneeling; which if it be of force, must needs condemn his own practice of sitting, as well as ours of kneeling. The like may be said of Christ's example alledged by him also; for would he, or would he not have his Disciples believe that they are obliged to doe as Christ did? if he would not have them believe so, why doth he press them with Christ's example? if he would have them believe so, I demand again whether he doth believe it himself or no? if he do not, it is plain he is a Seducer of the People; but if he do believe it, he must needs condemn the French Presbyterians for stan∣ding, as well as the English Protestants for kneeling; nay he must needs condemn himself and all other Chri∣stians in the world for not doing as Christ did in point
of time, I mean for not giving and receiving the Sacra∣ment in the Evening as Christ did, as well as he con∣demns us for not doing as Christ did in point of ge∣sture; unless he can prove (which I think he cannot) that we are of necessity to follow Christ's example in one circumstance of the same action, and not in ano∣ther, and in that circumstance which is less, but not in that which is more material; for certainly that circum∣stance which denominates the action (as the circum∣stance of time doth the Lord's Supper) is most materi∣al; and yet that circumstance by the consent of all Christendom is altered from the Evening to the Mor∣ning, and so was the gesture or posture of receiving al∣so, and that upon most just and weighty reasons, till those that delight in change would needs have it other∣wise, and that perhaps for no other reason but because they found it settled in the Church: This is not to follow Christ's example, who in things indifferent in their own nature conform'd his practice to that of the Church in which he lived, though varying in some circumstances from the Primitive Institution; and par∣ticularly in this very action, from which they press us with Christ's example. For it is certain that Christ and his Disciples sate at the Passeover, (though it be uncertain whether he or they sate at the giving and re∣ceiving the Sacrament or no, for it was , after he had supped, saith the Text, Luke 22. 20.) Howsoever it is certain, I say, that Christ and his Disciples sate when they ate the Passeover, and this no doubt was according to the custom of the Jewish Church at that time; but it is as certain that this was not the manner according to the first Institution of it, which was to eat it standing, as you may reade, Exod. 12. 11. So that to urge Christ's example against us, is to urge Christ's example against himself; for as we
conform our selves to the Churches order and custom of our times, in receiving the Communion otherwise in point of gesture, than perhaps it was received at the first Institution; so Christ and his Apostles conforming themselves to the order and practice of the Church of their times, did celebrate the Passeover otherwise than according to the first Institution it was to be celebrated in point of gesture also; thereby perhaps intending to teach us, that as long as the Essentials of Doctrine and Worship (which are unalterable) are preserved, we are not to separate from the Church, or quarrel with our Superiours, if those things that are in their own nature alterable, be not always and in all places just the same that they were at first; because there may be very just cause for the alteration of them; and whether there be such a cause or no in this and the like particulars, it is the Church that is to be the Judge. So that there is nothing that can be collected either from the Canons of the Councils, or from the practice of the Primitive Church, no nor from Christ's own example, that can prove Kneeling at the Sacrament to be a sin; neither doth Mr. Baxter himself believe it to be sinfull, for if he did, he would not say (as he does, Pag. 411. of his Five Disputations) that he himself would kneel rather than disturb the Peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion. In which words he confesseth, First, that Kneeling at the Sacrament is not sinfull or unlaw∣full, Secondly, that not to Kneel when it is imposed, is to disturb the Peace of the Church; and, Thirdly, that the imposing of it upon penalty of being deprived of the Communion, is an effectual means to make those that otherwise would not kneel, to conform to it; and consequently that the imposing of it upon such a penal∣ty is prudent and rational, and whatsoever is prudent and rational cannot be unlawfull; so that not onely the
Act of Kneeling it self, but the imposition of it by law∣full Authority must needs be lawfull. Neither indeed would the People scruple at the imposition, if they had not been taught that the thing it self were unlawfull, or if Mr. Baxter would yet teach them to believe what he himself believes, namely, that it is lawfull; which with what Conscience he can refuse to do I know not; for sure he is obliged to teach them obedience not to Divine Authority onely, but to Humane Authority al∣so in all lawfull things; and not to let them go on in such an erroneous opinion, as will disturb the Peace, and deprive them of the Communion of the Church, and consequently make them sin against God and Man and their own Souls. Of which sin of theirs he must needs be a partaker in a great measure, if he do not perswade them from it; seeing (as he himself saith) Qui non vetat peccare cum potest, jubet. And what Power he hath to lead or mislead those kind of men, their venturing to kill and be killed in an unrighteous quarrel (upon his perswasion) hath more than enough demonstrated during the time of the late troubles; unless he will say that he hath conjured up a Spirit that he cannot lay. Howsoever by how much the more faulty he hath been in misleading them heretofore, by so much the more zealous he should be to reduce them into the right way hereafter; which if he and the rest of his Brethren can doe (as I am confident they can if they will) they will make some amends for the mischief they have done, and then there will be no fear or danger of Ministers being Ejected for their tenderness towards the People, nor of the Ejecting of any of the People from the Commu∣nion of the Church for not conforming themselves to the Orders and Commands of it, and consequently, there will be no Schisms or Divisions amongst us, when we shall all worship the same God the same way. But if
they will not doe this (which by all obligations humane and Divine they are bound to doe) for my part I know no better way for undeceiving and reducing of the Peo∣ple, than by removing such Ministers, and then we shall see when the blowing of those boysterous winds ceaseth, whether the waves will not be still or no: In the mean time I hope the removing of erroneous and seditious, will not necessitate the introducing of ignorant and scanda∣lous Ministers, though Mr. Baxter ought to remember, that as there is no sin more heinous than Rebellion, so no teacher ought to be more scandalous (I am sure there is none more dangerous) than a teacher of Rebellion. And now (to use Mr. Baxter's own words) I think there is no man to be found on earth, that hath the ordi∣nary reason of a Man, but will confess, That it is indeed destructive of all Government and Legislative power, to Assert (as Mr. Baxter did Assert) the command of a thing in it self lawfull by lawfull Authority, under no un∣just punishment, with no evil circumstance, which the Commander can foresee or ought to provide against (for all these pre-cautions were expresly put in the proposition which Mr. Baxter denied) is a sinfull Command, for no other reason, but because the Act Commanded may be by Accident a sin. Let Mr. Baxter then know, and (if he have ingenuity enough) confess, that the words I spoke (as to this par∣ticular) were words of truth, and words of Charity also, as being intended and spoken to no other end, but to undeceive that People, who by having his person too much in admiration (as if he could neither deceive nor be deceived) had been so long and so dangerously misled by him; so that it was not I that defamed him then, but it is he that hath defamed me now. Neither could I expect less from the boldness of this man and that party, who have had the confidence publickly to own the ob∣ligation
of the Covenant, even since it hath been con∣demn'd to be burnt by the Parliament. And truly I see no reason why all those Books and Sermons which have been Preach'd and Printed in defence of the Covenant, or to maintain the same or worse principles of Sedition than are in the Covenant, should not be burnt also. Nay I dare be bold to say, that if the Authours of such Books and Sermons were not still of the same opinions, (and if they be, God deliver us from such Preachers) if they were not still, I say, of the same opi∣nions, but did truly repent of them, and were heartily sorry for the horrible mischief they have done by them, they would with those converted Exorcists, Act. 19. 19. bring all those Conjuring Books of theirs together, and to save the Hang-man a labour; would publickly burn them all with their own hands, that so, though by the burning of their works they may perhaps suffer some loss in point of reputation with some of their Disciples, yet they themselves may be saved, but so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 15. At least they ought to be enjoyned to write Books of Retractation, as St. Augustine did, having much more reason to doe so than St. Augustine had. And this, Sir, is all I have to say upon this occasion, and more a great deal than I ought to have said, or than perhaps was needfull to be said to one that knows Mr. Baxter and me as well as you do; which if it satisfie you, as I hope it will, you may doe what you please with it, in order to the satisfying of others; for this is the first and last trouble I mean to put my self to of this kind, whatsoever provocation I may have from him hereafter, Your very affectionate Friend and Servant, G. Worcester.
The Attestation of Dr. Gunning, and Dr. Pearson. Concerning a Command of Lawfull Supe∣riours, what was sufficient to its being a a lawfull Command. THis proposition being brought by us, viz. That Command which commands an Act in it self lawfull, and no other act or circumstance unlawfull, is not sinfull. Mr. Baxter denied it for two reasons which he gave in with his own hand in writing thus: One is, Because that may be a sin per accidens, which is not so in it self, and may be unlawfully commanded though that accident be not in the command. Another is, That it may be commanded under an unjust penalty. Again this Proposition being brought by us, That Command which commandeth an Act in it self law∣full, and no other Act whereby any unjust penalty is in∣joyned, nor any circumstance whence per accidens any sin is consequent which the Commander ought to provide a∣gainst, is not sinfull. Mr. Baxter denied it for this reason given in with his own hand in writing thus: Because the first Act com∣manded may be per accidens unlawfull, and be com∣manded by an unjust penalty, though no other Act or circumstance commanded be such.
Again this Proposition being brought by us, That Command which commandeth an Act in it self lawfull, and no other Act whereby any unjust penalty is in∣joyned, nor any circumstance whence directly or per acci∣dens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide against, hath in it all things requisite to the law∣fulness of a Command, and particularly cannot be guilty of commanding an Act per accidens unlawfull, nor of com∣manding an Act under an unjust penalty. Mr. Baxter denied it upon the same Reasons. Peter Gunning. John Pearson.
The Postscript. LEst Mr. Baxter should say I have defamed him once more, by charging him with devising and publishing Maxims of Treason, Sedition and Rebellion, (which till he should as publickly recant, I thought it unfit to restore him to the exercise of any Act of the Ministery in my Dio∣cese) I think my self obliged to set down some few of his Political Theses or Aphorisms in his own words, as they are extant (though it be strange such a Book should still be extant) in his [Holy Common-wealth] most falsly and profanely so called. Mr. Baxter's Theses of Government and Go∣vernours in General. I. GOvernours are some limited, some de facto unli∣mited; The unlimited are Tyrants and have no right to that unlimited Government, P. 106. Thes. 101. II. The 3. qualifications of necessity to the being of Sovereign Power are, 1. So much understanding, 2. So much will or goodness in himself, 3. So much strength or executive power by his interest in the People or others, as are necessary to the said ends of Government, P. 130. Thes. 133. III. From whence he deduceth 3. Corollaries, (viz.) 1. When Providence depriveth a man of his under∣standing
and intellectual Capacity, and that statedly or to his ordinary temper, it maketh him materiam indispo∣sitam and uncapable of Government, though not of the name. Thes. 135. 2 If God permit Princes to turn so wicked as to be uncapable of governing so as is consistent with the ends of Government, he permits them to depose themselves. Thes. 136. 3 If Providence statedly disable him that was the So∣vereign from the executing of the Law, protecting the just, and other ends of Government, it makes him an uncapable subject of the power, and so deposeth him. Thes. 137. IV. Whereunto he subjoyns, that though it is possible and likely that the guilt is or may be theirs, who have disabled their Ruler by deserting him, yet he is dismissed and disobliged from the charge of Government; and particular innocent members are disobliged from be∣ing governed by him. V. If the person (viz. the Sovereign) be justly dispos∣sess'd, as by a lawfull War, in which he loseth his right, cially if he violate the Constitution and enter into a Military state against the people themselves, and by them be conquered, they are not obliged to restore him, un∣less there be some special obligation upon them besides their allegiance. Thes. 145. VI. If the person dispossess'd, though it were unjustly, do afterwards become uncapable of Government, it is not the Duty of his Subjects to seek his restitution. Thes. 146. No not although (saith he) the incapacity be but accidental, as if he cannot be restored but by the Arms of the Enemies of God or of the Commonwealth.
VII. If an Army (of Neighbours, Inhabitants, or whoever) do (though injuriously) expell the Sovereign, and resolve to ruine the Commonwealth, rather than he shall be restored; and if the Commonwealth may pro∣sper without his restauration, it is the duty of such an injured Prince for the Common good to resign his Go∣vernment, and if he will not, the people ought to judge him as made uncapable by Providence, and not to seek his restitution to the apparent ruine of the Common∣wealth. Thes. 147. Where by the way we are to note, he makes the People judge of this and all other incapacities of the Prince, and consequently when or for what he is to be Depos'd, or not Restored by them. VIII. If therefore the rightfull Governour be so long dispossess'd, that the Commonwealth can be no longer without, but to the apparent hazard of its ruine, we (that is, we the people, or we the Rebels that dispossess'd him) are to judge that Providence hath dispossess'd the former, and presently to consent to another. Thes. 149. IX. When the people are without a Governour, it may be the duty of such as have most strength, ex cha∣ritate, to protect the rest from injury. Thes. 150. and consequently they are to submit themselves to the Parlia∣ment, or to that Army which deposed or dispossess'd or murthered the rightfull Governour. X. Providence by Conquest or other means doth use so to qualifie some persons above others for the Govern∣ment when the place is void, that no other persons shall be capable competitours, and the persons (doth not he mean the Cromwells?) shall be as good as named by Providence, whom the people are bound by God to
chuse, or consent to, so that they are usually brought under a divine obligation to submit to such or such, and take them for their Governours, before those persons have an actual right to Govern. Thes. 151. XI. Any thing that is a sufficient sign of the will of God, that this is the person, by whom we must be Go∣verned is enough (as joyned to God's Laws) to oblige us to consent and obey him as our Governour. Thes. 153. XII. When God doth not notably declare any person or persons qualified above others, there the people must judge as well as they are able according to God's general rules. Thes. 157. XIII. And yet All the people have not this right of chusing their Governours, but commonly a part of every Nation must be compelled to consent, &c. XIV. Those that are known enemies of the Common Good in the chiefest parts of it, are unmeet to Govern or chuse Governours, but such are multitudes of ungodly vicious men. Pag. 174. So that if those that are strongest (though fewest) call themselves the Godly Party, all others besides themselves are to be excluded from Go∣verning or chusing of Governours. And amongst the un∣godly that are to be thus excluded, he reckons all those that will not hearken to their Pastours (he means the Presby∣terian Classis) or that are despisers of the Lord's-Day, that is, all such as are not Sabbatarians, or will not keep the Lord's day after the Jewish manner, which they pre∣scribe, and which is condemned for Judaism by all even of the Presbyterian perswasion in the world, but those of England and Scotland onely.
XV. If a People that by Oath and Duty are obliged to a Sovereign, shall sinfully dispossess him, and con∣trary to their Covenants, chuse and Covenant with another, they may be obliged by their latter Covenant notwithstanding their former; and particular subjects that consented not in the breaking of their former Cove∣nants, may yet be obliged by occasion of their latter choice to the person whom they chuse. Thes. 181. XVI. If a Nation injuriously deprive themselves of a worthy Prince, the hurt will be their own, and they punish themselves; but if it be necessarily to their welfare, it is no injury to him. But a King that by war will seek reparations from the body of the people, doth put him∣self into an hostile State, and tells them actually that he looks to his own good more than theirs, and bids them take him for their Enemy, and so defend themselves if they can. Pag. 424. XVII. Though a Nation wrong their King, and so quoad Meritum causoe, they are on the worser side, yet may he not lawfully war against the publick good on that account, nor any help him in such a war, because propter fiuem he hath the worser cause. Thes. 352. And yet as he tells us (pag 476.) we were to believe the Parliaments Declarations and professions which they made, that the war which they raised was not against the King either in respect of his Authority, or of his Person; but onely against Delinquent Subjects, and yet they actually fought against the King in person, and we are to believe (saith Mr. Baxter pag. 422.) that men would kill them whom they fight against.
Mr. Baxter's Doctrine concerning the Go∣vernment of England in particular. HE denies the Government of England to be Monar∣chical in these words. I. The real Sovereignty, here amongst us was in King, Lords and Commons. Pag. 72. II. As to them that argue from the Oath of Supre∣macy and the title given the King, I refer them (saith Mr. Baxter) to Mr. Lawson's He might have referr'd them to himself, pag. 460. where he gives the same answer to the same ob∣jection. answer to Hobbs's Politicks, where he sheweth that the Title is often given to the single Person for the honour of the Commonwealth and his encourage∣ment, because he hath an eminent interest: but will not prove the whole Sovereignty to be in him: and the Oath excludeth all others from without, not those whose interest is implied as conjunct with his—The emi∣nent dignity and interest of the King above others al∣lowed the name of a Monarchy or Kingdom to the Commonwealth, though indeed the Sovereignty was mixed in the hands of the Lords and Commons. Pag. 88. III. He calls it a false supposition. 1. That the So∣vereign power was onely in the King, and so that it was an absolute Monarchy. 2 That the Parliament had but onely the proposing of Laws, and that they were Enact∣ed onely by the King's Authority upon their request. 3. That the power of Arms and of War and Peace was in the King alone. And therefore (saith he) those that
argue from these false suppositions, conclude that the Parliament being Subjects, may not take up Arms with∣out him, and that it is Rebellion to resist him; and most of this they gather from the Oath of Supremacy, and from the Parliaments calling of themselves his Subjects; but their grounds (saith he) are sandy, and their super∣structure false. Pag. 459, & 460. And therefore Mr. Baxter tells us, that though the Parliament are Subjects in one capacity, yet have they their part in the Sovereignty also in their higher capa∣city, Ibid. And upon this false and traitorous supposition he endeavours to justifie the late Rebellion, and his own more than ordinary activeness in it. For, IV. Where the Sovereignty (saith he) is distributed into several hands (as the King's and Parliaments) and the King invades the others part, they may lawfully defend their own by war, and the Subject lawfully assist them, yea, though the power of the Militia be expresly given to the King, unless it be also exprest that it shall not be in the other. Thes. 363. The conclusion (saith he) needs no proof because Sovereignty, as such, hath the power of Arms and of the Laws themselves. The Law that saith the King shall have the Militia supposeth it to be against Ene∣mies and not against the Commonwealth, nor them that have part of the Sovereignty with him. To resist him here is not to resist power, but usurpation and private will; in such a case the Parliament is no more to be re∣sisted than he. Ibid. V. If the King raise War against such a Parliament upon their Declaration of the dangers of the Common∣wealth, the people are to take it as raised against the Commonwealth. Thes. 358.
And in that case (saith he) the King may not onely be resisted, but ceaseth to be a King, and entreth into a state of War with the people. Thes. 368. VI. Again, if a Prince that hath not the whole Sove∣reignty be conquered by a Senate that hath the other part, and that in a just defensive War, that Senate can∣not assume the whole Sovereignty, but supposeth that government in specie to remain, and therefore another King must be chosen, if the former be incapable. (Thes. 374.) as he tells us, he is, by ceasing to be King, in the immediately precedent Thes. VII. And yet in the Preface to this Book he tells us that the King withdrawing (so he calls the murthering of one King and the casting off of another) the Lords and Commons ruled alone; was not this to change the species of the Government? Which in the immediate words be∣fore he had affirmed to be in King, Lords and Commons; which constitution (saith he) we were sworn, and sworn, and sworn again to be faithfull to and to defend. And yet speaking of that Parliament which contrary to their Oaths changed this Government by ruling alone, and taking upon them the Supremacy, he tells us that they were the best Governours Vide Preface to the Hly Common wealth. pag. 6. in all the world, and such as it is forbid∣den to Subjects to depose upon pain of damnation. What then was he that deposed them? one would think Mr. Baxter should have called him a Traitour, but he calls him in the same Preface, the Lord Protector, adding, That he did prudently, piously, faithfully, and to his immortal honour exercise the Government, which he left to his Son, to whom (as Mr. Baxter saith pag. 484.) he is bound to submit as set over us by God, and to
obey for conscience sake, and to behave himself as a Loyal Subject towards him, because (as he saith in the same place) a full and free Parliament had owned him: thereby implying, That a maimed and a manacled House of Commons, without King and Lords, and notwithstand∣ing the violent expulsion of the secluded Members were a full and free Parliament; and consequently that if such a Parliament should have taken Arms against the King he must have sided with them. Yea, though they had been never so much in fault, and though they had been the beginners of the War, for he tells us in plain and express terms, VIII. That if he had known the Parliament had been the beginners of the War and in most fault, yet the ruine of the Trustees and Representatives, and so of all the se∣curity of the Nation being a punishment greater than any faults of theirs against the King could deserve from him, their faults could not disoblige him (meaning himself) from defending the Commonwealth. Pag. 480. And that he might doe this lawfully, and with a good Conscience, he seems to be so confident, that in his Pre∣face, he makes as it were a challenge, saying, that if any man can prove that the King was the highest power in the time of those Divisions, and that he had power to make that war which Vid. The Pref to his Holy Commonwealth, prope. finem. he made, he will offer his head to Justice as a Rebel. As if in those times of Division the King had lost or forfeited his Sovereignty, and the Parliament had not onely a part, but the whole Sovereignty in themselves. IX, Finally Mr. Baxter tells us, Pag. 486. That ha∣ving often searched into his heart, whether he did law∣fully engage into the War or not, and whether he did
lawfully encourage so many thousands to it; he tells us, I say, that the issue of all his search was but this,—That he cannot yet see that he was mistaken in the main cause, nor dares he repent of it, nor forbear doing the same, if it were to doe again in the same state of things. He tells us indeed in the same place, that if he could be convinc'd he had sinned in this matter, he would as gladly make a publick recantation, as he would eat or drink: which seeing he hath not yet done, it is evident he is still of the same mind, and consequently would upon the same occasion doe the same things, viz. fight, and encourage as many thousands as he could to fight against the King for any thing that calls it self, or which he is pleased to call a full and free Parliament: as likewise that he would own and submit to any Ʋsurper of the Sovereignty as set up by God, although he came to it by the murther of his Master, and by trampling upon the Parliament. Lastly, That he would hinder as much as possibly he could the restoring of the rightfull Heir unto the Crown. And now whether a man of this Judgment, and of these affections, ought to be permitted to Preach or no, Let any, but himself, judge.
THE Bishop of Winchester's VINDICATION Of Himself from divers False, Scandalous and Injurious Reflexi∣ons made upon him by Mr. RICHARD BAXTER in several of his Writings. As likewise A Vindication of the Rights and Sovereignty of all Kings (properly so called) and particularly of the King of England's being sole Soveraign over all persons, in all capacities, within his own Realms and Dominions, from What Mr. Baxter (to justifie the Rebellion against our late King of ever blessed Memory) hath in many of his False, Factious and Seditious Aphorisms asserted to the contrary. Together with A Proposal of a more Legal, and more effectual Expedi∣ent for the keeping Popery and Arbitrary Government for ever out of England, than the passing of an Act to exclude the right Heir from Succession to the Crown (either now or hereafter) is, will be, or can be. LONDON, Printed for Joanna Brome, 1683.
SECTION. I. Mr. BAXTER'S Assertion at the Savoy undeniably proved upon him; and con∣sequently his Charge against the Bishop of many mistakes in his Letter, in matter of fact, and of his Gross mista∣king charge, viz. Concerning the judgment of the Nonconformists of things sinfull by Accident, cleared.
The Bishop of Winchester's Vindica∣tion of himself, from divers false, scandalous and injurious Reflexi∣ons made upon him by Mr. Ri∣chard Baxter in several of his Writings. CHAP. I. Mr. Baxter's Charge against the Bishop, gathered out of several Writings of his, and set down in his own words. MAster Baxter in his Preface to his Book (called by him The true and onely way of Con∣cord of all Christian Churches) reflecting upon a Letter of mine, Written and Printed near 20 years before, saith; There are so many Mistakes in matter of fact in it, that although he had made an Answer to it, yet he cast it aside for Peace sake; believing, that the opening of the aforesaid so many mistakes would not easily be born: the rather, because (as he
says in the words immediately foregoing) he knew he had greatly incurr'd both our displeasures already, (to wit, the Bishop of Ely's and mine) for what he had said and done against our Way; and that (as to my particular) the aforesaid Letter of mine was a proof of it. Again, in the same Preface to the same Book, he saith, You, (meaning the Bishop of Ely and Me, to whom he addresseth that Preface) have (above all men I know) effectually helped to bring us (meaning himself, and the rest of his Party) under. These are Mr. Baxter's complements when he speaks to me, and therefore, I am not to expect more Civility from him, when he speaks of me, as he doth in divers of his Books which I have seen, and perhaps, in many more of them which I have not seen; (for I hope all men are not bound to reade all Mr. Baxter writes:) But in those I have seen, when he speaks of me, it is neither Ho∣noris, nor Charitatis gratiâ; but to reproach me either directly and in express terms, (or covert∣ly and by the bye) as, when in his Preface to the second part of his Plea for Nonconformists, he saith, It was Bishop Morley's gross mistaking charge that made him write one whole Tract, or Trea∣tise, namely, That of things sinfull per Accidens or by accident. Again, in the former part of the aforesaid Plea for Nonconformists, he saith, Bishop Morley advised him to reade Bilson and Hooker, in whom (saith he) I found more than he approv'd, for resisting and re∣straining of Kings. Again, in another of his printed Papers; (I mean that Paper which he would have taken for a Recanta∣tion
of some of those Political Aphorisms, I had laid to his charge) though he do not name me, yet he points directly at me, as if I had accused him for asserting, That all humane powers are limited by God; which to deny (as he there insinuates I do Vid. his Letter to Mr. Hinkley, and his last answer to Dr. Stil∣lingfleet. and elsewhere plainly tells me I do) is to defy Deity and Humanity: and consequently makes me a defyer of them both. Lastly, with the same ingenuity and candour, he aims at me more obscurely, and more obliquely indeed, but yet more spitefully and more mischie∣vously; when in the close of his Animadversions upon the Dean of St. Paul's Sermon, he speaks of somebody that removed somebody from a great Man's service, who might have kept him from Apo∣statizing, if he had been suffered to continue with him; meaning my supposed removing Mr. Jones the Authour of Elymas the Sorcerer; from being one of the Duke of York's Chaplains. These are the things that Mr. Baxter doth either directly and expresly, or implicitely and obliquely charge me withall: And perhaps there be many more in other of his voluminous Writings which I have not seen, nor heard of yet; and all of them as true perhaps as any of those I have here named, that is, not true at all, as I hope I shall make it appear to any indifferent and impartial Reader, that will take the pains to compare his several Allegations with my several Answers to them.
CHAP. II. The Bishop's Answer in general to his charge of Ma∣ny Mistakes in a Letter of the Bishop's long since printed, together with a pretended Answer of Mr. B's to it, and the Reason of reprinting that Letter of the Bishop's. FIrst then, whereas Mr. Baxter chargeth me with having made many Mistakes in a Letter I writ and printed many years ago, to justifie my silencing of him, when I was Bishop of Worcester; it is to be observed, 1. That this is a charge in general terms onely, without specifying any one of those many mistakes in He names no one mistake. particular. And 2dly that he names no body, no not so much as any one of his own Party, that now doth, or ever Himself the only Accuser. did for 20 years together, lay any such thing to my Charge besides himself; so that whether there be many or any, or if any mistakes, they being mistakes in matter of Fact (as he saith they are) there is no Constat, no other evidence, but Mr. Baxter's bare Affirmation onely, whereunto my bare Negative ought in Law, Equity, and Reason to be esteemed a sufficient Answer. Unless, though according to the Apostolical Canon, an accusation against a Pres∣byter ought not to be received by a Bishop (for so was Timothy) without two or three witnesses; yet An Accusati∣on against a Presbyter not to be received without wit∣nesses. an accusation of a Bishop by a Presbyter, without any witnesses at all, ought to be believed, and that in matter of Fact too, which cannot be otherwise
proved but by Witnesses; or unless, as S. Hierom saith of himself and St. Austin, that Quamvis Episco∣pus sit major Presbytero, tamen Augustinus est minor Hieronymo; Though a Bishop be greater than a Presbyter, yet Austin is less than Hierom: So Mr. Baxter will say (as I doubt not but he thinks) that though the authority of a Bishop be greater than a Presbyter's, yet such a Presbyter as Mr. Baxter ought to be credited before such a Bishop as Bishop Morley. Be it so; but yet neither Bishop nor Presbyter, No one to be believed in his own Case. nor any body else, is to be believed in his own Case, or upon his accusing of a third person upon his own word, or upon his own affirmation onely; especial∣ly when the accusation is general, without any in∣stance thereof in particular. As if, when one man speaking of another, saith, he is a Liar, a Thief, or a Perjured person, he were to be believed, and the man he speaks of were to be thought to be such a one as he saith he is, without so much as naming, and much less proving any one particular either Lie or Theft or Perjury that he is guilty of. What is this, but to make a Pope of a Presbyter? for the Pope claims no more than that his Ipse dixit, his bare saying of a thing, should be proof enough to oblige men to believe what he affirms to be true, no nor so much neither as to matter of fact; The Non-Con∣formists Tea∣chers as In∣fallible as the Pope. though some of the Pope's shameless Sycophants have of late offered to maintain that he is as Infallible in matter of Fact, as he is in matter of Faith; and I verily believe him to be so. And I believe likewise that many of the Nonconformists have the same opinion of their Teachers, which the most Bigott-Papists have of their Pope, as to their
Veracity at least, if not to their Infallibility also. So I mean as undoubtingly to believe whatsoever they teach them in matters of Faith, or tell them in matters of Fact. But whether it be because they are taught to believe so, or because their having such mens persons in admiration makes them believe so, I will not, I cannot determine: I hope it is the latter rather than the former, though I am afraid, some of their Teachers are well enough pleased they should so esteem and believe of them. Howsoever, or whatsoever may be the cause of it, We are sure enough, by undeniable experience, that it is so. And truly Mr. Baxter doth very much presume upon his own very great, or upon my very little Credit in the World, if he thinks that whatsoever he is pleased to say of me, without any proof or in∣stance of it will for his own bare saying of it onely, be believed by any, but those of his own party; and by those of his own party, I mean not all the Non∣conformists, but the Baxterian Nonconformists Baxterian Nonconfor∣mists. onely, if there be any such besides himself. But Mr. Baxter may perhaps say in his own be∣half, that although in his aforesaid Preface to his M. Baxter's Answer to the Bishop's Let∣ter inquired after. Book of Concord, he gives no particular instance of any of the many mistakes he chargeth me with, yet in his Answer to that Letter of mine, wherein he says, those many mistakes are in general, there were not Instances onely, but also Proofs of all and every one of those many mistakes in particular. Well, But Where is that Answer of his to that Let∣ter of mine? Why, Mr. Baxter after he had writ it laid it aside; for so Mr. Baxter himself (which Not likely that it was laid aside. ought to be taken for proof enough) saith. But
Why did he lay it aside? Sure he did not mean to lay it aside when he writ it: It was therefore for some very extraordinary reason, if he did so; For never any man had a greater , natural tender∣ness and affection for all the Issues of his own brain, His writings; numerous, than Mr. Baxter seems to have; Which Issues of his are so numerous, as if he had begun to write assoon as he could speak, and to print assoon as he could write; and they do so croud to come into the world, that one seems to take hold of the heels of another, as Jacob did of Esau's, strugling which should get out first, and from this striving, while they were yet in the womb of his brain, comes their so often And contra∣dictious. crossing, and contradicting of one another, after he is delivered of them. This fondness of his towards his own concepti∣ons and the delight he takes in the multiply∣ing and publishing of them makes me think, that His own reasons why he laid it aside. either there was never any such Answer at all made by him, or if indeed there were any such Answer, there were some other reasons, besides what are al∣ledged by him, that made him forbear the Printing of it; for whereas he saith, It was for peace, or for peace sake that he laid it aside, or forbore printing it; because having already (that is, before my publishing of the aforesaid Letter) greatly in∣curr'd the Bishop of Ely's displeasure and mine by what he had said and done against our Way, he believed the opening of so many mistakes in matter of fact (as were in that Letter) would not easily be born; and for that reason, he laid aside that Answer of his to that Letter of mine. I cannot believe that this was the onely, or indeed any reason at all of his so doing; I mean it was nei∣ther
his love of peace in general, nor his fear of gi∣ving me any farther provocation in particular, that made him suppress that pretended Answer. For first, if he were of so peaceable a disposition Not probable for peace-sake. or so great a lover of Peace as he would seem to be, he would not have spent so much of his time in writing so many Volumes to keep up and increase Schism and Separation in the Church, together with Faction and Sedition in the State as he hath done. Which might be made to appear yet farther from the manner, as well as the matter of his writing, Mr. Baxter Magisterial in his writing. which is so Magisterial, and with that contempt, undervaluing and vilifying of those he writes against, or that write against him, and sometimes with such exasperating and provoking language as very ill be∣comes him that pretends to be a Peace maker. And perhaps in such a style was that Answer of his written (if he writ any answer at all) to the afore∣said What likely might be the reason of his laying it a∣side. Letter of mine; and then perhaps too, some wiser Friend of his might advise him to forbear printing of it, at least at that time, namely, at the King's first coming in, against one that came in a little be∣fore him, and was sent by him, and had been, all the while the King was abroad, in Exile with him, and for him, and had newly received some more than ordinary marks of his Majestie's favour from him. These, or the like considerations to these, being suggested to him, might peradventure at that time prevail with him, rather wholly to suppress, or at least to defer the printing of that Answer of his (if there were any such answer) than thereby so unseasonably to provoke me more, whose displea∣sure, he saith, he had greatly incurr'd by what he had said and done against the Bishop of Ely's way
and mine; as if the Bishop of Ely and I had a Way of our own, wherein no body walked but our selves. I would therefore fain know what he calls the Bishop of Ely's way and mine, and for his speaking and acting against which, he had so greatly incurr'd that Bishop's and my displeasure: Is it a new or a newly found out Way, or a way of our own de∣vising as Mr. Baxter's way is of his? a way that Mr. Baxter's Way a New way of his own. never any walked in before, nor none but himself doth walk in yet, nor will (I believe) ever walk in hereafter. For it is neither Episcopal, nor Presbyte∣rian, nor wholly Independent, nor any of any other denomination either ancient or modern, that I ever heard of; but partly of all, and partly of none of them. But Ours, I mean, the Way, which the Bishop of Ely and I do walk in, is no By-path, not The Bishop's Way the old Church of England∣way. a Way of Sufferance or Toleration onely, such as Mr. Baxter and all the Nonconformists plead for: but the Good old way, the King's, the Church of England's way, nay, the Catholick Churches High-way; the Way wherein all the Primitive Fathers, Saints and Martyrs, and all the Orthodox Christians in all Ages, (untill the last before this of ours) have gone before us. I mean the Government of the Church by Bishops, teaching all and nothing else, but what was taught by Christ and his Apostles in point of Doctrine; and commanding nothing which God has forbidden, nor forbidding any thing which God has commanded, in the outward Administration of God's publick Worship and Service: but making use of that liberty and power that God hath left to his Church in order to Decency and Uniformity and Edificati∣on, and consequently in order to that Unity and Concord, which Mr. Baxter doth so much pretend to
desire and plead for. This, and no other but this, is the Way of the Church of England, and this, and no o∣ther but this is the Way, which the Bishop of Ely and I do walk in, and would have all men else, that are born within the pale of our Church, to walk in also. And therefore, as we cannot chuse but be sorry for those that are led or kept out of this way, both for their Nonconfor∣mist Teachers draw and keep people out of the way. own and the Churches sake, so we cannot chuse but be displeased too with those that not onely re∣fuse to walk in it themselves, but endeavour and doe what they can to draw others from it, and to keep those that are gone out of it, from returning again into it, by making and preaching and print∣ing Pleas and Apologies for Nonconformists, which can have no other end (consequentially at least, if not intentionally) but to confirm them in their Non∣conformity. And surely, he that would not forbear Mr. Baxter's Pleas for them justly taxed. to doe this, and to doe it over and over again, being so prejudicial and destructive to the peace of the Church and State (as We have experimentally found it to be) He (I say) that would not forbear to doe this for the publick peace sake, nor for fear of offen∣ding the King and the Parliament, the makers of those Laws against those things and persons, he so loudly and so boldly pleads for, did not in all proba∣bility for peace sake (and much less for fear of dis∣pleasing Bishop Morley) forbear to publish what he had written in answer to that Letter of the Bishop's which would have been much less provoking, by specifying though not proving some of those many mistakes he now chargeth him with, without naming any of them, and consequently, as much as in him lies, imposing upon his Readers, especially such as are ill-affected to Bishops, an implicit belief, that
there are indeed many, very many mistakes in the Bishop's Letter; and perhaps gross ones too, and such as Mr. Baxter could have named, and proved also; but being a man of so peaceable, so patient, and so meek a disposition as he is, he did for peace sake, and because he would not provoke the Bishop to be more displeased with him than he was already, for∣bear to doe so; Credat Judoeus, non Ego, Believe it who list for me, as he faith. And therefore he must give me leave to think, upon better considerations, that he never writ any Most likely that he writ no Answer. Answer at all to my Letter; So that all the Reply I need to make to this general unattested and unpro∣ved Charge of Mr. Baxter, is to oppose my bare Negative to his bare Affirmative; for Affirmantis est probare, He who affirms a thing ought to prove it; which untill he hath done, it is to be supposed, (forthe reasons before by me alledged) he cannot doe; And consequently that the Charge itself is a mere Calumny. Which that it may be made more evidently to ap∣pear, The reason of reprinting the Bishop's Let∣ter with Mr. Baxter's A∣phorisms. I have caused the self same Letter (wherein he saith there are so many mistakes) without any the least addition, subtraction or alteration, to be re∣printed and publish'd, to the end, that such as will vouchsafe to reade it without prejudice, may judge betwixt us, whether there be indeed so many, or any such mistakes in matter of Fact in it, as Mr. Baxter saith there are; as likewise, whether I did well or ill in restraining him from preaching in my Diocese; which that all men may the better judge of, I have reprinted likewise those Political Apho∣risms of his which were at first annexed to that Letter, not as accusing him for holding them now,
but as remembring him of his holding them then, which though it was not the cause (as the Letter tells him) of my Silencing him at first, yet, that together with what he had asserted at the Conference in the Savoy was the cause (as the Letter tells him also) why I continued, and resolved to continue that restraint and Suspension, untill he should make a publick Recantation, as well of what he had affirm∣ed in the aforesaid Conference, (namely, The unlaw∣fulness of lawfull Commands by lawfull Authority, if by accident they might be the cause or occasion of sin) as likewise of those not onely false and erroneous, but dangerous, seditious and rebellious Maxims of his; which howsoever he may have since repented and recanted, I am sure he had not recanted them then, at least not publickly, or so as I or the World could take notice of it. They therefore that reade the Letter with the Aphorisms annexed to it, and reprinted with it, are to consider them rebus sic stantibus, I mean as things were then when they were first printed. And if Mr. Baxter himself would consider them so too, he must needs confess (if at least he will stand to what he hath written Mr. Baxter justly silenced upon his own grounds. since, even in this very Book, of which he would have me give him my opinion) he must needs con∣fess (I say) that he was justly Silenced, or restrain∣ed from Preaching, as being then one of Those, who he himself saith are Vid The True and one∣ly way of Concord, cir∣ca finem. intolerabiles, that is, such, as ought not to be suffered to Preach, as being disturbers of the publick peace, , as St. Paul calls them, that is, Seducers of the people, , overturning or turning upside down whole Houses or Families, , whose mouths (St. Paul saith in the same place) ought to be
stopped. And if those mens mouths ought to be stopped, that by Seditious Preaching disturb Fami∣lies, how much more ought they to be silenced, that by Printing and Publishing seditious and rebellious Books and Maxims, doe what they can, not onely to disturb, but overthrow whole Churches and King∣domes? But Mr. Baxter will say he doth not own any of those Maxims now: I do not say he does, but I do say he did own them, at least he had not disown'd them then, when I silenced him; and consequently when he was one of those whom he himself calls intolerabiles, or such as ought not to be permitted to Preach, which is enough to justifie what I said or did then. But whether he hath since made or pub∣lished any declaration, whereby he hath clearly and fully disown'd all those Seditious Maxims of his, We shall see hereafter. CHAP. III. One Particular Gross mistake (as he calls it) char∣ged in a late Treatise of his upon the Bishop, about the Nonconformists judgment of things sin∣full by accident, taken to task. ANd now I should proceed to the consideration of some particulars, which Mr. Baxter is pleased to charge me with in his aforesaid Preface to his afore∣said Book of Concord; having I suppose said enough, if not more than enough, already to his general Charge without witness or proof, relating to my
aforesaid Letter, had not Mr. Baxter himself sent me by my friend Mr. Isaac Walton, another Book of his called The second part of the Nonconformists Plea for Mr. Baxter's bundle of ex∣torted and distorted Treatises. peace, which he calls an extorted and distorted Trea∣tise, or rather a bundle of Treatises bound up toge∣ther. And distorted enough indeed it is, but how or by whom it was extorted from him I know not; he seems by the many Books he hath written, to be so ready a Writer, that he needed not to have any thing he writes to be extorted from him. For indeed he is rather one of those, quibus difficile est non scri∣bere, who are as hardly to be restrained from Wri∣ting, as others are from Preaching. But in this bun∣dle of Treatises, whether extorted or not extorted, there is one wherein I am particularly concerned, He calls it, The judgment of Nonconformists of things sinfull by accident; and in his Preface to that whole bundle of Treatises, he saith, This Treatise in par∣ticular was written purposely to answer the gross mistaking charge of Bishop Morley. And truly if he had not said so, or if that Treatise had been Printed by it self, I should neither by the The Bishop's pretended mistake not mentioned in the Treatise written to answer it. Title of it, nor by the Book it self have suspected it to have been purposely written against me, or a∣gainst any mistake of mine: For neither in the Title nor in the Book it self do I find Bishop Morley so much as once named, or any way so characterized by any thing I have said or done, as to conclude my self to be understood by it. Nay, I verily believe, that if I should grant all and every one of the sixty four Propositions asserted in that Treatise to be true, yet nevertheless whatsoever I have laid to Mr. Bax∣ter's charge in that Letter of mine, would be true also; so that I cannot chuse but wonder that he
should say, as he does in the aforesaid Preface, That this particular Treatise of scandal or evil by accident was purposely written to answer the gross mistaking charge of Bishop Morley: whereas the Title page to that Treatise saith no such thing, neither is that wherein he saith the Bishop is so grosly mistaken to be found either in terminis terminantibus or oequipol∣lentibus (either in downright terms, or in words that imply as much) in the whole Treatise. If it be replyed, that as the general Preface to the whole bundle of Treatises called The second Part of the Nonconformists Plea tells me, that I am the man that am guilty of so gross a mistake; so that the Title page to that particular Treatise, We are now speaking of, (though not explicitly and formally, yet implicitly, and intelligibly enough) tells me That gross mistake, what it is. what it was wherein I was so grosly mistaken, namely, in misreporting the Nonconformists judgment of things sinfull by accident. I rejoyn (first) that unless Mr. Baxter thinks that every body is obliged to reade all that he Writes, he No man bound to reade all Mr. Baxter writes. could not rationally presume, that a man of my age, and one that had so little time left to spare from his more pressing and more important concerns, was likely to enquire after every Book that came out in Print, and to see whether he was concerned in it or no; and it seems Mr. Baxter thought so, and there∣fore sent me by Mr. Walton that Book, in the Preface whereunto he saith he did purposely write that Treatise in answer to the gross mistaking charge of Bishop Morley; which I had never seen nor heard of before, nor perhaps should ever have seen or heard of it at all, if Mr. Baxter himself had not sent it to me; and which if he had sent me sooner, I would
not have said as I have done in the foregoing Chap∣ter, that he had not given so much as any one In∣stance of the many mistakes he saith there were in my printed Letter, as indeed he did not where he speaks of them to me; nay, he saith he had laid aside an Answer he had written to that Letter for peace sake, that he might not by opening or publishing so many mistakes of mine, give me any farther cause of being displeased with him. And yet two years Mr. Baxter's ingenuity. before (mark the ingenuity of the man) he had published a whole Book, consisting of sixty four Pro∣positions besides Quoeries, purposely intended then, (though he doth not say so in plain terms, till two years after) for an Answer to Bishop Morley's gross mistaking charge; though neither then nor since, neither there nor any where else hath he yet told us what that gross mistaking charge is, but leaves it to be guessed at or collected out of the Title page to that Treatise, which he saith he purposely writ for an Answer to it; where∣in whether he hath dealt justly and candidly either with me or with his readers, I am now to consider and examine, after I have premised out of what I have already said two or three short preliminary Ob∣servations. Whereof the first is this; That it was not, Three Obser∣vations from what hath been said. nor could not be for peace sake, nor because he would not give me any farther provocation, (as in his Preface to his Book of Concord he pretends it was) that he laid aside the Answer he saith he had made to my printed Letter; for then, he would not without any farther provocation on my part, have afterwards printed a whole Book on purpose to con∣vince me of one of the many mistakes in that Letter, or rather to expose me to the World, for having been guilty of so gross a mistake as he calls it.
A second observation is this, That naming but one of those many mistakes he saith there were in that Letter of mine, he doth implicitly confess that he could name no more; because by aggrava∣ting that as much as he can, he declares he would not have forborn to specifie the rest, if there had been any more to be specified. And consequently (which I would have to be observed in the third place) That if this which he calls a gross mistake, be no mistake at all of mine, but a very great Mistake, or rather a very great Calumny of his, as I doubt not but I shall prove it is, Mr. Baxter had no reason to charge that Letter of mine with so many mistakes, nor I any reason to thank him for concealing of them. CHAP. IV. His dreadfull Title page, wherein he ushers in this Charge, examined and retorted upon himself. NOw whether that which Mr. Baxter calls a gross mistaking charge be indeed such a charge He doth not set down the charge in plain terms, but leaves it to be guessed. as he would have it to be believed it is, he should in the first place have in plain and express terms set down that charge of mine, as I have set it down my self in that Letter, wherein he saith that gross mista∣king charge is. For in all debates betwixt rational and ingenuous men (whether in point of opinion, or in matter of fact) the  or thing in question, ought to be clearly stated, and agreed on, betwixt the dif∣fering
Parties, before they can proceed to the pro∣ving, or disproving of any thing that is in difference betwixt them: But this (as I said before) Mr. Bax∣ter hath not done, but onely affirmed that such a gross mistaking charge there is of Bishop Morley's, and that he hath written and published such a Trea∣tise in answer to it, leaving his Readers (as I said before) to guess at what that Charge is, or rather what he would have it thought to be; and that is (as may be collected from the Title page to that Treatise which he calls an Answer to that charge) the Bishop's misreporting the judgment of Nonconfor∣mists The Title page is the Trea∣tise, wherein he pretends to answer it. of things sinfull by Accident, to make men believe that the Nonconformists Asserted, That whatsoever may be the occasion of sin to any, must be taken away; or that nothing may be imposed, which men may take scandal at, or by Accident turn to sin. And he adds, That to save mens Souls from the guilt of believing this misreport, the Treatise following, (saith the Title page) was published; as likewise to help those to repentance, who have polluted their Souls with falshood and uncharitableness by believing and second∣ing such reports. This I say is the Title page prefixed to the afore∣said Treatise, and a very notable one it is. Never Written in as dreadfull a style, as any Pope's Bull. any Pope's Bull came forth with a more dreadfull bellowing against all that shall say, write, preach, print or report, or that shall believe any thing that is said, written, printed, preached or reported by any body else, concerning any of the Nonconformists, though never so truly, or never so well attested, if any Nonconformist, especially such a one as Mr. Baxter, one of the , one of those who seem to be Pillars, shall please to disown
it; For in that case (saith Mr. Baxter) not onely the reporting any such thing is a gross mistake, but the believing such a report doth so pollute mens Souls with falshood and uncharitableness, that they cannot be saved from the guilt thereof, unless that ensuing Treatise of his do help them to repent of it. So dange∣rous a thing, it seems it is, not onely to report, but to give credit to any thing that is reported to the pre∣judice either of the doctrine or practice of any of the Godly party; as if they could not err in either, which is in effect to assume unto themselves a more than Popish Infallibility, which is the worst of the Popish errours, as being the ground and foundation of all other heresies or errours that are held by them. And yet they that would be thought the most zea∣lous Our zealous Antipapists take up many of the Popish principles. Antipapists do really, though not professedly, sympathize with the Papists in this which is the Root, and in several of the most pernicious Bran∣ches, and false doctrines, growing out of this Root, as appears speculatively by Mr. Baxter's Politick Aphorisms, and practically by what was acted by the Nonconformists, before, and in, and after the late Rebellion against the best of Kings by the worst of Subjects; I mean during the Ʋsurpation of the Sovereignty, first by both Houses, and then by one of the Houses of Parliament, and afterwards by Cromwell, and his Son, and lastly by the Rump or the fag-end or worst part of but one of the two Houses. Again, as they sympathize with the Papists in They have the same arts of keeping their Proselytes. some of the worst of their doctrines and practices, to draw more to them, so they imitate them also in making use of the same arts and artifices for keeping of those whom they have made their Pro∣selytes
from revolting from them: For as the Ro∣mish Confessours do terrifie and fright their Converts, by forbidding them upon the penalty of being guilty of mortal sin, to hear or reade, and much more to give any credit to any thing that is written or spo∣ken to confute or disparage any of their doctrines or practices; so I know not what other ends Mr. Baxter could have in prefixing so terrifying and terrible a Title to so petty a Treatise, but to fright Mr. B's end in this Title. those that have been seduced by him, from making use of their own reason to bring them into the right way again, by hearkening to, or believing of any thing that is or can be said or written by any of us to his prejudice, or to the prejudice of any thing that hath been asserted by him, by telling them be∣forehand, that it is no less than a damnable sin, to believe that he, or the Nonconformists, asserted any such thing, as Bishop Morley by a gross mistake im∣putes to him, and the rest of the Nonconformists, and therefore that he writ the following Treatise on purpose partly to save mens Souls from the guilt of believing, and partly, to help them to repentance, that have polluted their souls by believing that gross mistake or misreport of the aforesaid Bishop. Whereunto he adds in another place, that it was the fear he should die with the guilt of silence upon him, if he had not published the aforesaid Treatise in order to the afore∣said ends, that made him write it and publish it; as if the salvation of so many mens souls had depended upon it, which if Mr. Baxter himself did believe to If it be so as he says, he was highly to blame for not publishing this Treatise sooner. be true, then wo be to all those that died in the be∣lief of the truth of Bishop Morley's charge before the publishing of this Treatise, and wo to Mr. Baxter himself for publishing this Treatise no sooner. For
the first Edition of this his admirable both  and , of this his severeign both Antidote to prevent, and Restorative to recover those Souls that were otherwise in danger to be lost for ever, for believing, or for not repenting their belief of Bishop Morley's charge, was not published untill the year 76, which was 14 years at least after Bishop Morley's charge was printed. And how did Mr. Baxter know, but that many hundred Souls during that long interval might be infected with that so dangerous a sin of believing the truth of that Charge, and die in that belief without repentance, merely for want of being helped to it by this so effi∣cacious or none-such a remedy, as is prescribed by him in this Treatise? Again how could Mr. Baxter himself tell but that Ʋpon his own account as well as others. he might have died in less than 14 years, (which is double the age of a man in Law) especially consider∣ing the dying condition he so often tells us he is in, and was in many years before? And then I would fain know, how his deferring so long to publish this so sovereign an Antidote and Remedy against so malignant, and Soulkilling a disease, could consist either with the charity he owes to other mens Souls, or the care of his own? For if it be true that when he did publish it, it was (as he tells us it was) For fear of dying with the guilt of silence upon him; why should not the same cause have produced the same effect sooner? Truly Mr. Baxter had little care of his own as well as of other mens Souls in the mean time, if he himself believes what he would have other men to believe, namely, that the believing of Bishop Morley's mistaking Charge is of so very dangerous a consequence to those that die without
repentance for their believing of it. And therefore I verily believe that this was but an hyperbolical His design to draw an odi∣um upon the Bishop from all the Non∣conformists. strain of Mr. Baxter's Rhetorick, to enhance the grossness of Bishop Morley's mistaking Charge, and to make his Readers more averse from believing of it; and withall, to make the Bishop himself the more odious to all the Nonconformists, by insinua∣ting, that what the Bishop had affirmed to be the assertion of Mr. Baxter, he had affirmed to be the judgment of all the Nonconformists. For why else doth he entitle the Treatise, which he saith was purposely written to Answer that gross mistaking Charge of Bishop Morley, why doth he intitle it I say, The judgment of the Nonconformists? as if what I had laid to his charge, I had laid to the charge of all the Nonconformists; or as if what I had said he had maintained in the Conference at the Savoy concerning things sinfull per Accidens, I had said, all the Nonconformists had maintained it also; which I never said, nor never thought they did.
CHAP. V. Mr. B's. Assertion of things sinfull by Accident not charged by the Bishop upon all or any of the Nonconformists, as he pretends it to be. The En∣glish and Scotch Presbyterians censured. Why all Religions tolerated in Holland. FOr indeed I know not what the judgment of Nonconformists (if by Nonconformists he mean all the Nonconformists) is in this or in any other particular, except it be in being Dissenters from the Government and discipline of our Church, as it is by Law established; no nor what is the judgment of all the Nonconformists of any one species or kind of them, (whether Presbyterians or Independents or Anabaptists or Antinomians or any other of any one denomination) as to this particular. And therefore I could not, I am sure I did not, say this or that was the judgment, or that this or that was asserted by the Nonconformists; unless Mr. Baxter will say, that He and all the Nonconformists are and must be always of the same mind and judg∣ment, and consequently, that what I said was assert∣ed by him, I must needs mean it to be asserted by them all also. As if he were to all the Nonconfor∣mists what the Pope is to all the Papists, virtu∣ally Mr. B. makes himself the Head of the Nonconfor∣mists and their Advo∣cate; their whole Church; and therefore as all Pa∣pists professing to believe as the Church believes, must needs believe as the Pope believes; so all Non∣conformists, because they agree with him in Non∣conformity, must therefore needs be of his mind in all things else also; because he takes upon him to
be their head, or at least to be their mouth or Ad∣vocate General for all of them; as appears by the Title he gives to those two Books of his, which he calls The first and second part of the Nonconformists Plea for Peace; as if they all spake by his mouth, or had all of them made him their Proxy to speak for them: which if they have done, why doth he not shew us his Commission for it? which as he hath not done yet, so I am confident he will never be able to doe, no not from all, or from the most of any one Without their Commission or approbation. party of the Nonconformists. Which I am the bolder to affirm, because having sometimes occasionally made use of his Authority in point of opinion, and of his Example in point of practice, for the convincing of some both Presbyterians and Independents, who by their practice seemed to be of another judgment in diverse things, than he was, I found that what he said or did signified little or nothing unto them: Nay, they told me in plain terms, that I was very much mistaken, if I thought that Mr. Baxter's either judgment or practice was of so great weight with them, as for that reason onely, to make them alter their own either judgment or practice in any thing whatsoever: So that it doth not follow, that because Bishop Morley in that printed Letter of his saith that this or that was Mr. Baxter's Assertion, therefore he said, or must be understood as if he had said, it was the assertion of all or indeed of any o∣ther of the Nonconformists but of Mr. Baxter himself onely. Of any other I say; for I did not so much His two As∣sistants at the Savoy confe∣rence dis∣charged from that Asserti∣on. as charge both or either of those two Nonconformists, that were Mr. Baxter's Assistants at that Conference with asserting what he asserted. Nay, I do in that Letter of mine discharge them both from concurring
with him in that Assertion, which I lay unto his charge, though he saith, he concurr'd with them in it. I charge him with it, because (as I tell him in my printed Letter) he did often affirm and declare it to be his; and I discharge them from it, because neither of them did affirm or declare it to be theirs, but rather seem'd to dislike it, and to dissent from him in it. But why then (will he say) do I say Crimine ab u∣no disce omnes, From ones ill carriage you may know the rest; which seems to imply that what I charge upon him I charge upon his whole party, as I do indeed, but not in that same place, nor speaking of the same mater, but for their censuring and con∣demning all other Protestant Churches in the World The Noncon∣formists con∣demn all Pro∣testant Chur∣ches. as well as ours, as Mr. Baxter did expresly at the Conference aforesaid, because They as well as We re∣fuse to give the Communion to those that will not receive it so, as by publick order it is to be received. And it was upon account of this proud, peevish and censorious humour (of which I take all the Non∣conformists, and amongst them the Presbyterians espe∣cially, to be more or less guilty) that I then (taking Mr. Baxter to be a Presbyterian) said Crimine ab uno disce omnes; that is, By one man's ill temper you may know the whole party. But then as by Omnes All of them, I did not mean all the Nonconformists, so I did not mean all the Pres∣byterians neither, but those of England and Scot∣land All the Pres∣byterians a∣broad agree with us in the main point a∣gainst our Presbyteri∣ans. onely; all foreign Presbyterians, that allow of and practice Calvin's Scheme of Discipline and Go∣vernment of the Church, agreeing with us against our Presbyterians in the main difference betwixt us and them; namely that as it is in the power of a Na∣tional
Church, to appoint and prescribe to those of her own Communion the usage of such indifferent things, as she shall think to be most for order, de∣cency and edification in the publick service and worship of God; so it is in her power also, to ob∣lige all of her Communion, to the use and observa∣tion of all such indifferent things after they are pre∣scribed and enjoyned (as long as they continue to be so) under the penalty of Excommunication, or of being excluded out of the Society or Commu∣nion of that Church, if they do not comply, and much more if they preach or write against any such orders or ordinances, as are made by publick Au∣thority, or by the Representatives of the whole Society: and most of all, if they deny theChurches power to ordain and enjoyn any such orders or or∣dinances; of all which Crimes, or degrees of the same crime, no other Presbyterians are guilty (for ought I know) but those of England and Scotland onely; or if perhaps some be, they are excluded from Communion with the National Church where∣in they live as well as Nonconformists are with us here in England; so that in Holland it self (where it is said any man may chuse his own Religion, or be of what Religion he will) no man that will not subscribe to the Synod of Dort in Rituals as well as Doctrinals is, or can be admitted to be a member, and much less a Preacher in that Church: no nor to the exercise of any Office Civil, or Ecclesiastical in their Church or State. It is true, they suffer men of all Religions to live amongst them, Luthe∣rans Why all Reli∣gions tolera∣ted in Hol∣land, and how. as well as Calvinists, Arminians as well as An∣tiarminians, nay Papists as well as Protestants, and Jews as well as Christians, but not as members of
their Church who are Calvinists, and Calvinists onely. The rest indeed beforenamed are some of them conniv'd at, and some of them permitted to have their Meetings and preaching after their own way, but it is at their own charge, and severely punishable if they preach or print any thing to the reproach or scandal of the Religion allowed of and established by the State. We wish no more, will our Sectaries perhaps say, Let us have but so much liberty as this upon the same terms, and We will thank God and you for it. But what security will you or any of you give us, that when you have that liberty, you will not all of you joyn together to destroy our Religion, though you know not what to set up instead of it? We see you have done so once already, and attempt∣ed it often both before and since, and why may not you do so again? For the Laws were against you then, as much as they are now, and so was the Such Tolera∣tion not prac∣ticable with∣out the charge of a standing Army. King too. And therefore granting such a Tolerati∣on of several Sects of Religion, or ways of Belief and Worship, as there are in Holland; it is not pos∣sible (humanely speaking) to secure the pub∣lick peace either of Church or State, but by keeping up a standing Army of thirty or forty thousand men always in pay (even in times of peace) with a powerfull Fleet at Sea, as the Hollanders do to secure themselves from Insurrections at home, as well as Invasions from abroad. Now whether the People of England will be content to be at such a Charge, and to live under such a Government, those that would have such a Liberty of Conscience, or Toleration of Religion as there is in Holland, let them
enquire of the peoples Representatives, and Petition them to that purpose at their next meeting. In the mean time all their Pleas for Peace are but sowing the seeds of War, or like Cadmus sowing the serpents teeth, which presently grew up to so many armed men, and presently fell a cutting one anothers throats; which though it will not be the first work the Sectaries will doe, yet it will come to that at last. For preventing whereof, considering the nature of man, and the animosity, and the irreconcileableness of differences in Religion, there is no other way to secure the publick Peace either in Church or State, no nor the several Sectaries themselves, from out∣raging and destroying one another, but either the suppressing of them all, by execution of the Laws that are or may be made against them, or by over∣awing of them all by such a standing force, as may be always ready and able to keep them from joyning together against the Government, or to dissipate them if they should joyn. But if the safety of the Government might be pre∣served and secured by either of the two aforesaid The necessity the Hollan∣ders lie under of keeping up a standing force at Land and Sea. Ways, why did not the States of the Ʋnited Pro∣vinces (may some men say) make use of the former, rather than the latter of these Expedients, in order to that end? I answer, because they were always after their revolt from Spain in danger of Invasion from abroad, as well as of differences and divisions among themselves at home; and therefore, there was and always will be a necessity of their having and keeping up such a force both at Land and Sea, for their own defence against their potent and con∣fining Enemies, as could not possibly be supported
and maintained, but by so vast an Income of Re∣venue as was not to be expected from so small a Ter∣ritory as theirs is, though never so industriously husbanded, or thriftily managed, without the help of many more hands, than their own to work and fight for them; and of many more mouths than their own, to consume what the Commodities of their own growth and their trading with other Na∣tions brings in to them; together with the product of that Consumption by the Excise that is laid upon Their Excise and other Taxes. all things that are eat, or drunk, or worn, or bought or sold amongst them: And hence it is, and from other Taxes and Impositions (which are grea∣ter than any that by the Turks are imposed up∣on the Christians) which all that live amongst them are subject to, that they are able to maintain such Armies and Navies as they do and must do for their defence against any sudden and powerfull Invasion of them by their enemies that lie round about them; and this makes them not onely to suf∣fer as many as will, but to invite and incourage as many as they can, to come and live there, by let∣ting them to be of what Religion they please a∣mongst themselves (so they contribute to the publick Charges as well as they who are of the Religion of the Countrey) because the more mouths they have to eat and drink, the more hands they are able to keep in pay, to oppose any Invasion from without, and withall to suppress and prevent any Commotion or Insurrection from within also. So that there the Toleration of so many Sects and Sectaries as are a∣mongst them, is not onely not dangerous, but in a Political sense very usefull and advantageous to that Government, by helping them to keep up and pay
their Army, which otherwise they must have kept up wholly at their own Charges; by which Army, the Sectaries that help to keep it up are themselves kept under. But here with us (thanks be to God) there is no need of having or keeping up a Standing Army, to We under no such necessity. defend us against Invasions from abroad; being na∣turally fortified and intrenched within so wide and deep a ditch as cannot be passed on a sudden to sur∣prize us, nor at all with such a Force as may very much indanger us, but We shall hear of it time enough to provide against it, by joyning all of us (I mean all the whole Nation) together to oppose it, as certainly all of us, (unless we be mad, or worse than mad) shall do upon such an occasion, when our lives, our Wives and all that We have are at stake. And therefore (I say) We need not always be at the Charge of keeping up an Army, against any fo∣reign Enemy, having the Sea for our Wall, and our Ships for our Bulwarks, nor for the preventing of any Insurrection or Rebellion at home neither, if the good Laws which are already made be put in execution, especially those that are made to secure Provided the Laws be put in execution. the established Government both in Church and State; I mean those Laws that are made against all Recusants or Nonconformists, by what name soever they are specified or distinguished: But if instead of putting those Laws in execution, there shall be such a Toleration granted here, as there is in Holland, there will be a necessity of raising and keeping up such a standing Army here, as there is there, though not to defend us against our Enemies abroad, yet to keep peace and prevent a Civil War at home, which will infallibly be the product of such a Toleration,
if there be not always a Standing Army to prevent it; and truly if there must be such an Army, it is but reason, that they for the keeping down of whom it is raised and kept up, should be at all the charge of raising and keeping up of it. CHAP. VI. The Charge of that Assertion brought home, and laid at his own door. BUt to return from this long (though I hope not altogether impertinent or unseasonable) Di∣gression, to what I was before speaking of; I say Mr. Baxter unjustly chargeth me with charging all, or any of the Nonconformists, but himself onely with that which he calls the gross mistaking charge of Bishop Morley. And therefore if all, or any of the Nonconformists▪ think themselves injured to have this Assertion said or thought to be theirs, they may be pleased to take notice whom they are to thank or to blame for it; it is Mr. Baxter, and not Bishop Morley that imputes it to them. And if the believing of Mr. Baxter's holding and maintaining such an assertion be of so dangerous a consequence, that it puts a man into a state of damnation that doth believe it; then Wo be to me, and to all that were then there, (I mean at the Conference in the Savoy) whether Conformists or Nonconformists; for all of them as well as I, heard him assert it, and therefore they cannot chuse but believe (whether they will or no) that it was his
Assertion, because they heard him assert it, and that not once or twice onely but often; nay Wo especial∣ly, Wo be to Mr. Baxter himself, who knows it was his Assertion; and therefore though he may, and I believe doth repent his asserting of it, yet he cannot disbelieve that he did assert it, though he were never so willing or desirous to do so; for Nescit vox missa reverti, A word once spoke is not to be recalled: and he cannot chuse but remember what he cannot forget, having been then, and since, so often put in mind of it: So that Mr. Baxter has pronounced a dreadfull sentence against himself, if the believing that he asserted what I charge him with, be not indeed a gross mistake (as he calls it) which whether it be or no is now to be considered. CHAP. VII. The Assertion charged upon him, laid down in termi∣nis, with its evil consequences. IN order whereunto We are first to consider, what the Assertion was that I charge Mr. Baxter with∣all, He in his Title page to the Treatise (which he saith was purposely written to answer that Charge) saith it was this (viz.) Whatsoever may be the Occasion of sin to any, must be taken away; or that Nothing may be imposed which Men may take scan∣dal at, or by Accident turn to sin. But the truth is that neither the one nor the other of these Asserti∣ons, was that with which I charged Mr. Baxter,
either in my Sermon at Kidderminster, or in my printed Letter; but that Assertion which I charged him with, both in my aforesaid Sermon, and in my aforesaid Letter, was this, and no other but this. viz. That the enjoyning things lawfull by lawfull Authority, if they may by Accident be the Occasion of Sin, is sinfull: From whence, (if it were true) it would follow, that nothing may be imposed, that may be Accident be the occasion of Sin, nor con∣sequently the Common Prayer Book, which was then the thing in question; but then it would follow like∣wise, that nothing at all could be impos'd (as I then told Mr. Baxter, and since repeated in my aforesaid Letter) by any Civil, any more than by any Ecclesiastical, nor by any Divine, more than by any Humane Authority; because there is nothing which either man or God himself hath commanded, but considering the pravity of humane nature, it may by Accident, be the occasion of Sin. Now that this Assertion, which draws along with it all these Consequences, was that very Assertion, with which I charge Mr. Baxter in my Letter, and did charge him with in my Sermon, appears partly by the Letter it self, which I have reprinted, and part∣ly by a Passage in a book Mr. Baxter had printed before, which was the occasion of my Writing and printing that Letter, and therefore I have reprinted that provoking passage of his also; both which I must desire the Reader of these Papers to peruse before∣hand, that he may be the better able to judge whe∣ther what I have said already, touching what was the Assertion I charged him with, as likewise, what I shall say to prove he did assert it, be true or no; and consequently whether I in charging him with
it was grosly mistaken, or he, in denying he as∣serted it, be not worse than grosly mistaken. For surely he cannot chuse but know and remember whether he asserted it or no. But Affirmantis est probare, (as I said before) It lies upon him who affirms a thing, to prove it; and therefore seeing he denies it, I must prove it. CHAP. VIII. Some Account of the Conference at the Savoy, where in the Dispute Mr. Baxter own'd and stood by that Assertion. AND to that end, it is to be considered what kind of thing it is, which is in question be∣twixt us; it is not matter of dispute, either Specu∣lative, or Practical; (as that was, which was in question betwixt our Disputants and him and his Assistants, at the Savoy-Conference) but a mere matter of fact; namely, whether he did then and there assert, what I in my printed Letter do af∣firm The thing charged upon Mr B. mat∣ter of Fact, and prov'd by Testimony. he did then and there assert, or no: which being (as I said before) mere matter of fact, is not to be proved or disproved by Metaphysical no∣tions or Logical distinctions, but by the Testimony, pro or con, of Witnesses, that were then and there present, and such, as against whom there lies no exception; such, I am sure, I have produced to prove my Affirmative, as appears by their Sub∣scriptions to my printed and reprinted Letter.
And this Testimony of theirs, to prove my Affirma∣tive, was by me produc'd and published, presently af∣ter Mr. Baxter had complained in print to those whom he calls his Parishioners of Kidderminster, (though they were never so legally) that what I had said of him in a Sermon to them, was not true, but onely made use of by me, to defame him, that so he might seem to be justly prohibited by me to preach the Gospel. Presently (I say) after this his printed com∣plaint The Bishop's Letter when and why printed. of me, I printed that Letter of mine, part∣ly to vindicate and confirm the truth of what I had said, or rather meant of him (for I did not name him) and partly to justify my self for silen∣cing of him, which was not for what he had said at the Conference in the Savoy, or for what I said in my Sermon he had said there, but upon another account; namely, for preaching in my Diocese be∣fore he had obtained or asked any leave to doe so, as is fully declared and proved by the aforesaid Let∣ter; which though it was written and published for both of the aforesaid ends, yet that Attestati∣on subscribed and annexed to it, as it was at first printed, so it is now reprinted again, not to justi∣fie my silencing of Mr. Baxter, or to prove that what he had said at the Conference, was the cause of his being silenced by me, but onely to attest the truth of what I had said in my Sermon first, and afterwards in my printed Letter, Mr. Baxter had said or asserted in the aforesaid Conference; The Attestati∣on why an∣nexed to it. which affirmation of mine and attestation of theirs (if it had not been true, and generally taken and acknowledged to be so) why in all this time (it being twenty years since that Letter of mine with
that Attestation of theirs was first printed) why I say in all that time, hath none, no not so much as one of all the Nonconformists that were present at the Conference, ever as yet appeared, either to deny No notice ta∣ken of it for twenty years. the one, or to disprove the other, except Mr. Bax∣ter himself onely? Nor he himself neither, till the very last year, that is, not till his Second part of the Nonconformist's plea for Peace was printed. For in the Preface of that Book it is, that Master Baxter first tells the World and me of the gross mistaking charge of Bishop Morley, meaning (as I suppose) my charging of him, and consequent∣ly (as he thinks, or rather would have it to be thought) all the Nonconformists with this Asserti∣on, That a Command of a thing lawfull in it self, by lawfull Authority, if it may by Accident be the occasion of Sin, is unlawfull; and consequently that no such thing ought to be imposed; or if there be any such imposition, it ought to be taken away. The first of which three Assertions, I acknow∣ledge to be that which I charge Mr. Baxter with; but not all, or any other of the Nonconformists, besides Mr. Baxter himself. The two last are not The Conse∣quences of Mr. B's As∣sertion. charged upon him by me, but are his own Collec∣tions from that I charge him with, as being indeed the necessary Consequences of it. For if the command of a lawfull thing by lawfull Authority be unlawfull, if it may by accident be the occasion of Sin, then indeed it will necessarily follow first, that there ought to be no such Command or Imposition; and secondly too, that if there be any such Command or Imposition, it ought to be taken away. For Ʋno absurdo dato, mille sequuntur; that is, If you grant one absurdity, a thousand will follow at the
heels of it: and from this Topick he may conclude against the lawfulness of any Command whatsoe∣ver, as I said before, and as I then told him. Where∣upon (as it is in my Letter) when I first charged him with the horrible consequences of this Asserti∣on of his, he denyed the Assertion it self; I mean, he denied that he had asserted it, untill the very words of it, which he had written a little before with his own hand, were produc'd and read before His Assertion written with his own hand. all the Company; then indeed he added another rea∣son, why the Command of a lawfull thing by lawfull Authority, might be unlawfull, namely if it were commanded under an unjust penalty; Whereunto he afterward added another, or a 3d reason also, name∣ly, if the Evil per Accidens were such as was foreseen, and ought to have been prevented or provided a∣gainst by the Commander. But neither of these two last or additional reasons did make him quit or forego his first: For it was that, and onely that which he stuck to at last, when his other two rea∣sons were by our Disputants wrested from him, or made useless to him; as may appear to any ratio∣nal man, that will but cast an eye upon their Ar∣guments and his Answers to them, as they are an∣nex'd to my Letter at the end of it, where he shall find that our Disputants, being to prove, that what our Church commands to be done in the publick The first Ar∣gument at the Savoy Confe∣rence. service of God by those of her Communion, was lawfull for her to command; Their first Argument was this, (viz.) That Command (supposing it to be the Command of a lawfull Superiour) which commands an Act in it self lawfull, and no other act or circumstance un∣lawfull, is not sinfull.
But such were all the Commands or Injunctions of our Church in the book of Common-Prayer. Er∣go, &c. I Subjoyn the Minor to the Major of this Syllogism, because by Mr. Baxter's not denying of the Minor, which every one believed and expected he would have denied, he seems to grant that to be true; and consequently that there is nothing in that Book injoyned or commanded by our Church, but what is lawfull in it self; otherwise no doubt he would have denied the Minor, rather than the Major; Mr. B's rea∣son for denying the Major. but (as I said before) he denied the Major, first be∣cause that may be a Sin per accidens, which is not so in it self, and therefore the command thereof may be unlawfull, though that Accident be not in the Command: This (I say) was the first reason he gave for his denying of the Major, as he himself con∣fesseth in his printed Address to those of Kiddermin∣ster. Afterwards indeed, upon my urging him with those horrid consequences of such an Assertion, he added another reason for his denying the Major, or for his denying the lawfulness of the command of a lawfull thing by a lawfull Superiour, namely, if it were commanded under an unjust penalty; for the invalidating or nullifying rather of which second reason, our Disputants second Syllogism was this, The 2d. Syllo∣gism. That Command which commandeth an act in it self lawfull, and no other act whereby any unjust penalty is enjoyned, &c. is a lawfull command. But that which the Church commands is in it self lawfull, and is not commanded under an unjust penalty, Ergo &c. And here again, one would have thought Mr. Baxter would have denied the Minor, but he did not; and
therefore as his not denying the Minor of the first Syllogism, was in effect a Confession, that our Church commands nothing in that Book but what is lawfull in it self, so his not denying of the Minor of the se∣cond Syllogism, is in effect, a confession also, that the Church injoyns nothing in that Book under an unjust penalty: for still the Proposition he denies is the Major in this Syllogism, as well as in the for∣mer, without taking any exception to the Minor in either of them. But why did he deny the Major of this Syllo∣gism? Mr B. denies the Major a∣gain, and his peevish rea∣son for his so doing. or what reason or reasons did he give for it? Why the very self same, and no other than he gave for his denial of the former; namely, because the first Act commanded may per Accidens be unlaw∣full, and be commanded under an unjust penalty; which in plain terms, is all one as if he had said, The Command of a thing lawfull in it self is sinfull, be∣cause a thing lawfull in it self may by Accident be∣come sinfull (which is the very Assertion I charge him withall) or because a thing commanded under no unjust penalty, may be commanded under an unjust penalty; Whereas our Major Proposition, which he denied, asserts the lawfulness of such a Command onely, as is commanded under no un∣just Penalty. Yet because there was one starting hole more, Another start∣ing hole of his. which Mr. Baxter might think to get out at; namely that though the thing commanded were lawfull in it self, and though it were commanded under no un∣just Penalty, yet if by Accident it might be the oc∣casion of such an evil as the Commander ought to provide against, the commanding of it must needs be sinfull and unlawfull; to stop up this gap, or
starting hole (I say) our Disputants added a third Syllogism to the former, of which the Major Propo∣sition was this, That Command which commandeth an Act in it self lawfull, and no other Act whereby any unjust The 3d. Syl∣logism. penalty is injoyned, nor any circumstance whence di∣rectly, or per Accidens any Sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide against, hath in it all things requisite to the lawfulness of it, and par∣ticularly cannot be guilty of commanding an Act per Accidens unlawfull, nor of commanding an Act under an unjust penalty: But such are all the things commanded by our Church in the aforesaid Book. Ergo—&c. And here again Mr. Baxter without excepting a∣gainst Mr. B. in ef∣fect grants the Premisses and denies the Conclu∣sion. the Minor Proposition, denied the Major, without giving any other reason for it, but what he had given before; which was in effect to grant both the Premisses, and deny the Conclusion: for the Major is so self-evident a Proposition, that We thought he that could have the confidence to deny it, was not a man any longer to be disputed with. Now that these were our Arguments, and that these were his Answers, written, and given in with The Attesta∣tion made by Dr. Gunning and Dr. Pear∣son never so much as que∣stioned. his own hand, appears by the attestation of Dr. Gun∣ning now Bishop of Ely, and Dr. Pearson now Bishop of Chester, and then both of them the Primarii Pro∣fessores Theologiae (the King's and the Lady Marga∣ret's Professours of Divinity) in the University of Cambridge, and two of the three Disputantsfor the Common-Prayer-Book against Mr. Baxter and his Assistants; which Attestation of theirs being printed and published twenty years ago, and never since contradicted, or so much as questioned by any of
the contrary party, no not so much as by Mr. Bax∣ter himself, to this day, I hope there needs no other proof of the truth of it. And if that Attestation be true, then it is evident, that Mr. Baxter did affirm and maintain as well as he could, from first to last, in the Conference, That the command of a thing law∣full in it self, by lawfull Authority, was unlawfull, if by The Assertion charged home upon-Mr. B. Accident it might be the occasion of Sin; though it were not commanded under an unjust penalty, and though that evil, whereof it might be the occasion by Acci∣dent, were not such as the Commander was obliged to provide against; For all this he thatdenies the aforesaid Major Proposition of the last ofthe aforesaid three Syl∣logisms, as Mr. Baxter did, must needs grant, and con∣sequently must he needs grant and assert also, (if he will not contradict himself) That any command of a∣nything though never so lawfull in it self, by what Au∣thority soever it is commanded, is unlawfull, if it may be the occasion of Sin though per Accidens onely; and though that Accidental Sin or evil be such, as the Commander either did not, or could not foresee, or was not obliged to provide against it: For all this is consequentially and necessarily affirmed and asserted by him that denies the aforesaid Major Pro∣position for no other reason, but because the Com∣mand may by Accident be the Occasion of Sin. But if Mr. Baxter shall say he gave another reason for his denial of the aforesaid Proposition, namely, that such a Command, though never so lawfull in it self, might become unlawfull, if it were commanded under an unjust penalty; I confess he did, but most illogically and irrationally; because one of the con∣ditions of the Command which the Proposition af∣firms, and Mr. Baxter denies to be lawfull, is, that
it must not be commanded under an unjust penalty, and the reason why Mr. Baxter denies it to be law∣full, is, because it is or at least it may be command∣ed under an unjust Penalty: which is all one as if he had said that which is not so, is so, because it may be so. This reason therefore being so expressly excluded as it is from being any reason at all why the Propo∣sition which Mr. Baxter denied should be, or could be denied with any shew or colour of reason, there was nothing left him to resort to or rely on as his last refuge, but his first reason; namely, because such a command, though it was not commanded under an unjust penalty, yet it might be the occasion of Sin per Accidens, and therefore unlawfull to be com∣manded; which being given for a reason for his de∣nying of the aforesaid Proposition of the last Syllo∣gism, he could not mean it of such an evil per Acci∣dens as that the commander ought to provide against, because it was another of the Conditions expressly required by the Proposition it self, to make a Com∣mand lawfull, that as it should not command any thing evil in it self, so it should not command any thing neither though never so good in it self, that might by accident be the occasion of such an evil, as the Commander ought to prevent or provide a∣gainst; so that the occasion of evil in that sense per Accidens, could not be the reason why Mr. Baxter denied the Proposition; and therefore by evil per Accidens in relation to this Proposition and his de∣nial of it, he must needs mean such an evil per Ac∣cidens, as was neither commanded under an unjust penalty, nor such as the Commander was obliged to hinder or prevent. Whence it follows that
Bishop Morley's charging him with asserting, That the command of that which is lawfull in it self is un∣lawfull, The Bishop's charge a∣gainst Mr. B. no gross mi∣stake. if it may by Accident be the occasion of Sin, was not, as Mr. Baxter saith it was, a gross mistake, or any mistake at all, though he had not asserted it in terminis, or in express terms, as he did often when he gave it for the first of his reasons why he denied the Major Proposition of the first of the aforesaid Syllogisms. CHAP. IX. His instances of Things lawfull in themselves, be∣coming unlawfull by Accident, Impertinent to the present business. FRom hence it follows likewise that all those In∣stances (which Mr. Baxter assigns and alledges in his Narrative to his friends at Kidderminster, to free himself from the Assertion I charge him with, and which his denial of the aforesaid Proposition doth necessarily and manifestly convince him of) are all of them frivolous and impertinent, and not so onely but fraudulent, and scandalous, and injurious also; I mean those instances which he gives of such evils per Accidens, as make the Commands of things good and lawfull in themselves to become evil and unlawfull. As, saith he, To command out a Navy to Sea, is not Mr. B's In∣stance of com∣manding out a Navy to Sea. unlawfull in it self, but if it were foreseen they would fall into the enémies hands, or were like to perish
by any Accident, and the necessity of sending them were small or none, it were a Sin to send them. Again (saith Mr. Baxter) it is not unlawfull of it self to sell poison, or to give a knife to another, or Of selling poy∣son. to bid another to doe it, but if it were foreseen (he must mean by him that sells the poyson, or gives the knife) that they will be used to poyson or kill the buyer (he might have added, or any body else) it is unlawfull. He goes on and saith, It is not of it self unlawfull to light a Candle, or set fire on straw, but if it may be (he should have said if it be) Of lighting a candle. foreknown (to him) that by another's negligence or wilfulness it is like to set fire to the City, or give fire to a train of Gun-powder that is under the Par∣liament House when the King and Parliament are there, I crave the Bishop's pardon (saith he) for believing it were Sinfull to doe or command it. You All granted have it, Mr. Baxter, you have the Bishop's pardon not onely for believing as you say you do in this last, but in all the former particulars which you in∣stance in also: And I do assure you the Bishop be∣lieves them all as much as you do, and so I am confident do all the Episcopal Party in England; for they are all of them notoriously and unquestio∣nably true; and are undoubtedly sufficient to prove the Command of a thing lawfull in it self to be un∣lawfull, if the Commander foresees it will be by Acci∣dent the cause or occasion of such an evil or mischief as he ought to prevent. But what is this to the proving the Command of a thing lawfull in it self to be unlawfull, if it may be by Nothing to the purpose. Accident the cause or occasion of some such evil as the Commander doth not foresee, or is not bound to pre∣vent? For such a Command it must be, that Mr.
Baxter by his denial of the aforesaid Proposition is obliged to prove to be unlawfull; and therefore the more of such Instances as these he doth or may al∣ledge, the more he seems to prevaricate in his own Mr. B's pre∣varication. cause, and to argue against himself; just as I have heard a Pleader at the Barr did in Westminster Hall, when the Judge interrupting him, said to him, You, such a one, if you love your Client or his cause, speak no more; for you are all this while speaking against him, though you think you speak for him: The like may I say of Mr. Baxter, and of his Instances, because they do not onely not disprove, but prove and confirm the truth of my Charge against him. For if it be the Commander's foreseeing, and being obliged to prevent such an evil or mischief as his Command will be (though but per Accidens) the occasion of, that makes his command to be unlawfull; then if the Commander do not foresee it, or be not obliged to prevent it, the Command is not unlaw∣full; as Mr. Baxter by his denying of the aforesaid The charge against him stands good. Proposition must needs conclude it was; so that all his aforesaid Instances are (as I said before) frivolous and impertinent, as to the disproving of my Charge against him, or to the proving of it to be a gross mistaking Charge, as he saith it is.
CHAP. X. His other Instance of Kneeling at the Sacrament, as imposed by an unjust Penalty, were it true, reach∣eth not his Case. ANd so is the other Instance of his likewise which makes the two reasons (which in his aforesaid Answer he did severally insist upon) to be but one, namely, Supposing (saith he) to kneel at the Sacrament to be never so lawfull in it self, if it be imposed by a His Instance of kneeling at the Sacra∣ment as fri∣volous; penalty incomparably beyond the proportion of the of∣fence, that Penalty is an accident of the Command, and maketh it by Accident sinfull in the Commander. This instance I say of his, though he speaks of it as very pertinent and argumentative, yet is it as frivo∣lous and impertinent as any of the former; I mean as to the discharging him from the Charge I charge him with, and which his denying of the aforesaid Proposition proves him to be guilty of. For sup∣posing all that he supposeth in this Instance to be Supposing an unjustpenalty; never so true; namely, that the penalty for not re∣ceiving the Sacrament is an accident to the com∣mand of Kneeling, and supposing too, that penalty to be incomparably beyond the proportion of the offence, and consequently must needs make the com∣mand it self to be Sinfull in the Commander of it under such a penalty; supposing all this (I say) to be true: what then? Doth this prove the Com∣mand of a thing lawfull in it self and commanded under no unjust penalty to be sinfull in the Comman∣der of it? For this it must prove, or it proves nothing
at all, as to the discharging Mr. Baxter from what his denial of the aforesaid proposition proves against him. For doth not that proposition say  or in express words, that The command which it affirms to be a lawfull command, must, first, command an act in it self lawfull; and, secondly, no other Act whereby an unjust penalty is injoyned; nor, thirdly, any circumstance whence directly or per Accidens any Sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide against? And yet such a Command so quali∣fied did Mr. Baxter then deny to be lawfull, as ap∣pears by the aforesaid subscribed Attestation. And now, what he then denied to be lawfull, though it were not commanded under an unjust penalty, he would by this instance prove to be unlawfull, be∣cause it is commanded, or rather because he sup∣poseth it to be commanded under an unjust penalty. Quo te constringam Protea nodo? What tye can hold one, who so Proteus like shifts his shape? For whe∣ther it be or be not commanded under an unjust pe∣nalty, the command it seems must be alike unlaw∣full, if Mr. Baxter and his Disciples list not to o∣bey it, that is, if they themselves are not the Com∣manders of it. Again supposing, but not granting Mr. Baxter's supposed unjust penalty for not kneeling at the re∣ceiving And supposing such an acci∣dent as the commander ought to pro∣vide again?. of the Sacrament to be an Accident to the command of kneeling; I ask him, whether it be such an accident as the Commander ought to pro∣vide against, or no? If not, how can it be sinfull in the Commander to command it? or how can it make his commanding of it to be unlawfull? But if it be such an Accident as the Commander ought to provide against, (as indeed every unjust penalty is)
then this instance of his is altogether as frivolous and impertinent as any of his former. For that command which we affirmed, and he denied to be lawfull, and consequently asserted to be unlawfull, was to be such a Command as commanded an Act lawfull in it self, and no other Act whence directly or per Ac∣cidens any Sin is consequent, which the Comman∣der ought to provide against: But this instance of his, is of such a Command, as is per accidens at least the cause or occasion of some such evil, or sin, as the Commander ought or is obliged to provide against. Whereas if he had meant to speak pertinently (in order to the discharging himself from my charge a∣gainst him) he should have given us an Instance of the unlawfulness of a lawfull command by lawfull Authority, where no evil which the Commander ought to provide against, was any way consequent either directly or by Accident onely. But this he hath not done yet, nor I dare say ever will doe, or can doe, though the Metaphysical Limbeck of his brain sweat never so much for it. CHAP. XI. Those Instances of his, as they are Impertinent, so they are Fraudulently design'd. ANd thus having (as I suppose) made it appear that all Mr. Baxter's Instances are frivolous and impertinent as to the proving what I charge him with, to be a gross mistake, or indeed any mistake
at all, I am now to make it appear also, that those before specified Instances of his, are not onely fri∣volous and impertinent, but fraudulent, scandalous and injurious, and (I am afraid) malicious also, as to the intention and design of them. And first, they are fraudulent, and fraudulent∣ly The fraudu∣lence of these Instances de∣tected. alledged by Mr. Baxter, because by all and eve∣ry of those Instances, he would make his Readers to believe that all that he had asserted at the Confe∣rence in the Savoy was onely the unlawfulness of such commands as the Commander of them fore∣saw would by accident at least be the cause or oc∣casion of some such evil or mischief as the Com∣mander ought or was obliged to hinder, or provide against; or of such Commands as were comman∣ded under an unjust penalty. For as to make his Readers believe the former, he produceth the in∣stances of commanding a Navy to Sea by him that foresees it would fall into the enemies hands; and the selling of Poyson by him that foresees it will be used to kill the buyer or some body else with it; and of setting Fire on Straw, foreknowing that by another's negligence or wilfulness it is likely to set fire on the City or the Parliament-House; as by these and the like instances (I say) he would make his Parishioners at Kidderminster and others of his Readers believe the former; namely, that when he asserted that the command of a thing lawfull in it self was unlawfull, if it might by accident be the cause or occasion of sin, he meant it onely of such commands where the evil or sin which by accident they would, or probably might be the cause of, was foreseen or ought to have been hindred by the Com∣mander: So by the last of his instances; namely,
supposing to kneel at the receiving of the Communi∣on to be lawfull, yet the enjoining of it under an unjust penalty makes the Command it self to be unlawfull; he would make it to be believed that he did not deny the command of a lawfull thing by lawfull authority to be lawfull, unless it were injoined or commanded under an unjust pe∣nalty, such as he supposeth the penalty for not recei∣ving the Sacrament kneeling to be. So that adding Mr. B's de∣sign in them. this last instance to the former, and considering them one with another, or all of them together, his de∣sign in alledging of them must needs be this, to make it to be believed that whereas Bishop Morley chargeth him with having affirmed the Command of a lawfull Act by lawfull Authority to be unlaw∣full, if by accident it might be the cause of sin; all that he said or at least all that he meant was this, that such a Command was unlawfull, if the evil, it might by accident be the cause of, was foreseen and ought to have been prevented by him that com∣manded it, or if it were commanded under an un∣just penalty; and consequently that Bishop Mor∣ley's charge of him was a gross mistake. Whereunto Bishop Morley replies by referring His charge convincingly renew'd upon him. himself to Mr. Baxter's aforesaid answers to our Disputants aforesaid Propositions, especially to the third or last of them, which affirming such a com∣mand of a thing lawfull in it self, under no unjust penalty, and neither directly, nor by accident, the cause of any such evil or mischief, as the Comman∣der of it did foresee, and ought to prevent, was a lawfull command; Mr. Baxter by denying this proposition to be true, and consequently such a command to be lawfull, because it might be evil
by accident, cannot be imagined to mean such an accident as the Commander did foresee, and ought to prevent, nor the enjoining what he comman∣ded under an unjust penalty: both which kinds of accidents the proposition he denyed had in terminis excluded; and therefore he must needs mean such an accident as the Commander did not foresee, or was not obliged to prevent; and such a Command as had no unjust penalty annexed to it; and conse∣quently some such accident as either the peevishness or perverseness, or some fault or other in those to whom such a command is given, and who ought and will not submit to it, is the cause of. That there∣fore What he must mean by Acci∣dent in his Assertion at the Savoy. which I did then, and do still charge Master Baxter withall, is, that he did then at the afore∣said Conference assert the Command of a thing law∣full in it self to be unlawfull, if by accident it might be the occasion of Sin; now that by acci∣dent he did not, nor could not mean either the in∣joyning of it under an unjust penalty, or any other accidental evil which the Commander was obliged to prevent or provide against, is evident, from his denying the Proposition to be true, which affir∣med such and no other but such a command of a thing lawfull in it self to be lawfull, as was neither commanded under an unjust penalty, nor could by accident be the occasion of any either evil or mis∣chief, which the Commander was answerable for or ought to prevent: From Mr. Baxter's denying of this Proposition (I say) and from his giving no other reason for his denying of it, but that such a command as the Proposition affirmed to be lawfull might by accident be unlawfull, it is undenyably evident he must needs mean such an accident or ac∣cidental
evil as the Commandee, not the Comman∣der may be guilty of; and if no Command be law∣full, that may be the occasion of such an evil, then (as Mr. Baxter truly tells his Kidderminster The conse∣quence of his Assertion ur∣ged. Friends) Bishop Morley did infer that no Command either of God or man could be lawfull, or (as he is pleased to word it) That neither God nor man can enjoyn any thing without Sin, if the sinfulness, it may by accident be the occasion of in those to whom the Command is given, be to be imputed either to the Command, or to the Commander, which I think is little less than blasphemy to affirm; and therefore Mr. Baxter had reason to disguise the Assertion I charge him with, by giving such in∣stances His Instances onely disgui∣ses of his As∣sertion. of it as are nothing a kin to it; for all his aforesaid instances are instances of the unlawful∣ness of such Commands as are or may be the cause or occasion of some such evil or mischief as the Commander foresees and is obliged to prevent, or of such as are commanded under an unjust penalty. Whereas if he would have dealt ingenuously and pertinently he should have given us one instance at least, if not more of the unlawfulness of such a Command, (as he asserted at the Conference to be unlawfull, namely of the unlawfulness of such a Command) as was neither commanded under an unjust penalty, nor was the occasion or cause of any such evil, mischief or sin, as the Comman∣der did not foresee, or was not bound to prevent. For how does the unlawfulness of selling of Poyson by an Apothecary to one whom he knows or sus∣pects will poyson himself or some body else with it, prove the unlawfulness of selling of poyson by him that doth not know or suspect any such use
will be made of it, because it may fall out that some body or other may be poysoned with it? Or how doth the unlawfulness of commanding a Na∣vy to Sea, when the Commander foresees it will fall into the Enemies hands, prove the unlawfulness of such a Command, because by such a chance as the Commander did not, nor could not foresee, it did fall into the Enemies hands? or lastly, how doth the unlawfulness of commanding to kneel at the receiving of the Sacrament, if it were comman∣ded under an unjust penalty, as he supposeth, (but did not nor cannot prove it is) prove the unlaw∣fulness of the same command if it be not comman∣ded under an unjust penalty, as We and all other Protestant Churches in the World, as well as ours, say it is not? for proof whereof I refer the Reader to what I have said long ago in my printed Let∣ter. CHAP. XII. Further, those Instances are scandalously Injurious. His disingenuous humour of Calumny taken notice of. AND now having shewed what in truth it was that I charged Mr. Baxter withall, and that I charged him with it truly; and consequently, that all his Instances to the contrary are frivolous, and impertinent, and fraudulent; I am now to make it appear that they are scandalously (if not mali∣ciously)
injurious also. For first, as nothing can be more fraudulent than for a man, when he is charged with an Assertion that is false, and in its consequences impious and blasphemous, to substi∣tute The Injuri∣ousness of thse Instan∣ces made ou; a true one instead of it; and by giving many instances of the latter to indeavour to make it to be believed he is not guilty of the former; so, nothing can be more provoking and injurious than to charge another falsly with what himself may be charged truly: And does not Mr. Baxter doe so, by pro∣ducing those aforesaid instances of his, which no man can reade that hath any opinion of Mr. Bax∣ter's veracity and sincerity, but must needs con∣clude Bishop Morley or those that disputed with Mr. Baxter had affirmed, That the Command of that which is lawfull in it self is a lawfull Command, As implying that the Bi∣shop had as∣serted the contrary: though it be commanded under never so unjust a pe∣nalty; which is more than insinuated by the last of his instances before specified, namely the Com∣mand of Kneeling when we receive the Sacrament, as likewise that I, or they, or some of us, had af∣firmed the Command of a thing lawfull in it self, to be a lawfull Command, though the Commander did foresee it would be the cause of some great e∣vil or mischief, which he was bound to prevent; and this is not onely insinuated, but necessarily im∣plyed in all the rest of the instances produced by him, as in that of sending of a Navy to Sea, fore∣seeing it will fall into the Enemie's hand; and that of selling of Poyson, knowing he that buyes it will poyson himself or some body else with it; concer∣ning which and the like damnable actions he doth in effect plainly enough tell me, that I allow such things to be lawfull, when in his libellous Narrative
to his Kidderminster Friends he tells them he must crave the Bishop's pardon for believing those or any of the like commands to be sinfull; as if the Bi∣shop had asserted all or any of them to be lawfull; which if it can be proved the Bishop did, either Which the Bishop utter∣ly disclaims. expresly or implicitly, formally or virtually, dogma∣tically or consequentially, say there, or any where, any thing which can grammatically be construed or logically inferr'd to tend towards the asserting or ap∣proving of any of the aforesaid instances, the Bi∣shop himself doth hereby acknowledge himself to be utterly unworthy to be called a Bishop, or a Priest, or a Christian, or a Man, but rather a Devil incarnate, or an utter and professed Enemy to all Mankind. But if the Bishop did never affirm or say any such thing, nay if he and the Disputants of the Epis∣copal party did not by that Proposition, which Mr. Baxter frequently and finally denied, assert the contradictory to this calumny, namely that what the Church injoined in the Common-Prayer-Book or publick service of God, and the Sectaries refused to obey, were therefore lawfull injunctions and commands, not onely because they were law∣full in themselves, and commanded by lawfull Au∣thority, but because they were not commanded un∣der any unjust penalty, or might so much as by accident be the cause of any such evil or sin, as they by whom they were injoyn'd, ought to pro∣vide against; if this (I say) be the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth of what was then affirmed by Bishop Morley, or by the Dis∣putants, or any other of the Episcopal party as re∣ally it is; (and I defie Mr. Baxter, or any of his party to prove the contrary) what then doth Ma∣ster
Baxter deserve for indeavouring by his imper∣tinently, Mr. B's no∣torious Ca∣lumny. fallaciously and injuriously at least (if not maliciously) alledged Instances, to make so notori∣ously-impious, unchristian and inhumane a Calum∣ny to be believed, not onely of Bishop Morley, but of all the Episcopal party that were there present; for sure Bishop Morley did not differ from the rest of his party, nor the rest of his party from him in this, or any other particular at that Conference? And to this very purpose it is in the 48th pro∣position of the Book (which he saith was pur∣posely written to answer Bishop Morley's grossly mi∣staken charge) that Mr. Baxter resumes his in∣stance In his Book called The judgment of Nonconfor∣mists of things sinfull by Ac∣cident p. 65. of an Apothecary's selling Poyson to one who he knows will kill his Neighbour, or himself, or his Prince with it, as of a thing thought lawfull and justified by us; because (as he makes us speak) the selling of Poyson is lawfull per se, of it self, and unlawfull onely per accidens, by accident. Whereunto he adds in the same place, That he hopes that our Casuists (meaning the Casuists of Some other Instances of his calumni∣ous dealing. the Conforming party) shall never see a Law made to command or tolerate all Apothecaries to sell Poyson to those that they know mean to use it to treason or murther; As if we had any such amongst us, I mean, of the Episcopal party, that not onely justifie the selling of Poyson by those that know it will be used for Murther or Treason, but would have a Law made to command or tolerate the doing of it. If there be any such Casuists a∣mongst us, I will readily acknowledge they are as bad, if not worse than the worst of the Jesu∣ites; but let Mr. Baxter name any, at least one such Casuist of ours, if he can, or if he cannot, if
he have any thing of Ingenuity left in him, let him confess his fraudulent and injurious deal∣ing with us and repent of it. For as for that passage which he quotes out of Ecclesiastical Polity Page. 23. to prove the Authour of that Book such a Casuist as he speaks of, it is so illogical and unconcluding, that none but one that cares not what he says, or that thinks his Ipse dixit, his own bare saying, is enough to conclude quidlibet ex quolibet, any thing from any thing, would have quoted it upon such an occasion. In the mean time I do not, I cannot deny, but Some amongst us as bad Ca∣suists as the Jesuits. there be some, nay many Casuists among us, (but they are not of us) as bad as any of the Jesuits, especially in that Casuistical doctrine which is most Jesuitical; I mean, that of the lawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against their Sovereign; nay of selling, buying, imprisoning, deposing and murthering of Kings by their Subjects; I need not name those Casuists, Mr. Baxter knows whom I mean. But of this no more at this time, neither should there have been so much, if Mr. Baxter had not forgotten what he might have learned at School without going to the University; that Qui alterum accusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet, He who chargeth another with a crime, ought to look home to himself: and it is but just, Ʋt qui ex maledicendo voluptatem ca∣pit, malè audiendo amittat; That he who takes plea∣sure in speaking ill of others, should lose that plea∣sure by having his own faults told him. And indeed I have very often and very much wondred, that of all men living Mr. Baxter should reproach us so frequently, so loudly, and so ground∣lesly as he does, with what he knows himself and
his party may most justly and undeniably be re∣proached with, unless he thinks the calling of an honest Woman Whore first will make her that calls her so, to be thought an honest Woman. And in∣deed men are apt to believe that one would not for shame accuse another of what he knows himself to be more guilty; but experience proves the contra∣ry. And I hope I have proved it too, partly by con∣firming my Charge against Mr. Baxter, and partly by confuting his Calumny against me. But the truth is, when Mr. Baxter is in his fit of raving a∣gainst Mr. B. cares not what he says against the Bishops. Bishops and the Episcopal party, he cares not whether what he saith be true or false, pertinent or impertinent, so it be virulent and scandalous enough; having amongst many other of their spe∣culative and practical Maxims, learned of the Po∣pish Puritans, the Jesuits, calumniari audacter, to charge boldly, as hoping that aliquid hoerebit, some∣thing will stick, though it be never so improbable or incredible; at least that those of their own Party will believe any thing of or against us, which is per∣haps all they care for; of which practice that Mr. Baxter is often and very much guilty in his treating of me, I have given some Instances already, and shall give more hereafter.
CHAP. XIII. The Charge of the forementioned Assertion renewed and made good against Mr. B. notwithstanding that late Treatise of his which he pretends was purposely written in answer to it. IF it be objected, that I have said nothing yet in answer to the Creatise, which Mr. Baxter saith he writ on purpose to prove my Charge against him, to be a gross mistake; I confess I have not, because in truth I do not see how I am concerned in it, or how That Treatise of his imper∣tinent to this business. any thing I charge Mr. Baxter withall, is disproved, or so much as offered to be disproved by it. Inso∣much that (as I said before) if Mr. Baxter had set out that Treatise by it self, and had not in the Pre∣face to another of his Treatises told me himself, it was purposely written against me, I should not have taken any notice of it at all; neither do I yet, (af∣ter the reading of it over and over again and again) see any reason why I should put my self to the trou∣ble of writing, or any body else to the trouble of reading, any thing in reply to it; because if all and every one of his sixty three Metaphysical Propositi∣ons, (of which that Treatise of his doth consist) were all of them so many Mathematical Demonstrations (as perhaps he thinks they are) yet my Charge of Mr. Baxter would still stand in full force against him, being not so much as touched, much less o∣verthrown, by any of those Propositions. For His charge repeated. what was that I charged Mr. Baxter withall? was it not this? That he at the Conference in the Sa∣voy
denyed the command of a thing lawfull in it self, and commanded by lawfull authority, to be a lawfull command, if by accident it might be the cause or occasion of Sin? Yes, will Mr. Baxter say, but then His sham Answer, by accident I meant not every accident, but such an accident as the Commander might and ought to prevent; as for example, the commanding it under an unjust penalty (for that he will have to be an ac∣cident) or the commanding of it, though the Com∣mander knows or foresees it will by accident be the cause or occasion of some such evil, or mischief, as he can and ought to provide against. And in the one or the other of these two notions of an accident, would Mr. Baxter have his Assertion (of the unlawfulness of a Command of a lawfull thing by lawfull Authority, if by accident it may be the occasion of Sin) to be understood; and I cannot blame him; for Secundoe cogitationes sunt meliores, Second thoughts are like∣ly wiser and better than the first. But that he did not then by such an accident as made a lawfull com∣mand with the re∣ply to it. unlawfull, mean an accident in either of those notions is evident, by his frequently and finally de∣nying the command of a thing lawfull in it self to be lawfull, if by accident it may be the cause of Sin, though it be not injoyned under an unjust penalty, and though the accidental evil or mischief, it may be cause or occasion of, be such as the Commander either cannot or ought not to provide against. Now, he that denies such a command as this to be lawfull, or (which is all one) asserts such a command as this to be unlawfull, because by accident it may be the cause of Sin, cannot either Grammatically or Logi∣cally be understood, to mean such an accident or accidental Sin as the Commander ought to provide
against; and consequently, if he mean any thing, he must needs mean such an accident, or acciden∣tal evil, as not the Commanding, but the Com∣manded party, is to answer for. And therefore as The conse∣quence of his Assertion. I said then so I say now, That to assert the lawfull command of a lawfull thing, to be unlawfull, upon such an account, or because it may by such an ac∣cident (as Mr. Baxter must needs be understood to mean) be the cause or occasion of Sin, is destructive of all Legislative power Divine as well as Humane: And therefore Bishop Morley was not grosly mista∣ken either in charging Mr. Baxter with such an asser∣tion, or in charging such an assertion with such im∣pious and pernicious consequences, as he affirms, and I confess I did. But Mr. Baxter doth grosly abuse me, and his His soul dealing. Reader too, by substituting a true Assertion instead of a false one for himself, and a false one instead of a true one for the Bishop and his party. As if that which he asserted, was, The unlawfulness of the command of a lawfull thing, if either it were com∣manded under an unjust penalty, or the Comman∣der of it did foresee it would be the cause of some such great evil or sin, as he was obliged to prevent; and that which we had asserted, was, The lawfulness of a Command of a thing lawfull in it self, though it were commanded under never so unjust a penalty, or though the Commander of it foresaw it would be the cause of such an evil or mischief as he might and ought to prevent. And as to make the latter of these two Assertions to be believed to be ours, he brings in the aforesaid Suppositions and fraudulent instances of selling of poyson, &c. So to make the former to be believed to have been his Assertion
then, he asserts that, and none but that now; ho∣ping his friendly or unwary Readers will believe it was the very same which he asserted then. And this indeed he might have reason to hope for from his Friends at Kidderminster, who he knew would believe whatsoever he told them, to be, as he said it was, especially telling it them in print, and before there was any thing in print to the contrary; but that he should think to impose such a belief upon the impartial part of the World, after the truth of what I charge him with had been so long before at∣tested in print, under the hands of two such men, as the Bishops of Ely and Chester, (who could not chuse but know what was then said on both sides) is a confidence that never any yet even of Mr. Bax∣ter's own party hath assumed, and I believe never will. Good reason therefore had I to reprint that Let∣ter The Attesta∣tion annexed to the printed Letter proves the charge of that Assertion against Mr. B. of mine together with the aforesaid Attestation annexed to it, that what is in question betwixt Mr. Baxter and me might truly and clearly be stated, (namely, whether he did, or did not assert what I charge him with) which being onely matter of fact, and consequently no way to be decided but by Wit∣nesses, and such Witnesses as cannot justly, nor ever were actually, either by Mr. Baxter himself, or any of his party, in so many years since excepted against; and they having testified so clearly and effectually (as they do) that charge of mine against Mr. Baxter; I know not what needed to have been done more, for my justification and his conviction, but the re∣printing of the testimony of two such Witnesses as Nothing he saith now can invalidate that testimo∣ny. they are. Against whose Testimony, as to the in∣validating of it, nothing he asserts now, though never
so true, nor none of the Instances he gives of such an Assertion, though never so pertinent, do, or can signifie any thing; for that which I charge him with, and what the aforesaid Witnesses testifie a∣gainst him, is onely concerning what he asserted then, and not what he hath asserted at any time since, or doth assert now; which, as is already proved, is very far from being the same which he asserted then. And this Mr. Baxter himself must needs confess, un∣less he will say (as I think he will not) that there is no difference betwixt denying (as he did then) the command of a lawfull thing to be lawfull, though it be not commanded under an unjust penalty, and the denying (as he doth now) the lawfulness of such a command if it be commanded under an un∣just penalty; or as if it were all one to assert (as he did then) the command of a thing lawfull in it self to be unlawfull, if by accident it might be the cause or occasion of evil or sin, though it were such an evil or sin as the Commander was not obliged to prevent; and to assert (as he doth now) such a com∣mand to be unlawfull, if the evil or sin which it might be the cause of, were foreseen and ought to have been prevented by the Commander: But these What he saith now, contrary to what he said then. Assertions being so contrary, (as they are) to one another, Mr. Baxter's asserting that which is true now, will not excuse him from having asserted that which was false then, which was all that I charged him with. If he hath changed his mind since, and be ashamed to own and maintain now, what he then held and asserted, and therefore sought to palli∣ate and disguise it as well as he could, yet he ought not to have excused himself by accusing me, (and which is much worse) by endeavouring to make it
to be believed that we of the Episcopal Party asserted the Command of a lawfull thing to be lawfull, if it were commanded by lawfull Authority, though under never so unjust a penalty, and though the Commander did foresee that it would by accident be the cause of never so great a mischief, and such as he knew he was bound to prevent; as the selling of Poyson by an Apothecary who foresees it will be made use of to poyson some body; and thereby im∣plying that they were onely such things as this, or of the like nature to this, which we asserted, and he denied to be lawfull; which is evidently and equally His false re∣presentation of the thing false in relation to us, and to himself also; for we never asserted the lawfulness of the one nor denied the unlawfulness of the other, as he would have it to be believed we did; so that to what I charged him with before, I must now add not onely his want of ingenuity in disguising and misrepresenting what He asserted or denied, but his being guilty of Calumny also, in disguising and misrepresenting what we as∣serted or denied, at the aforesaid Conference in the Savoy. And therefore this being the ground of all that he That Treatise of his ground∣ed on a false supposition. hath said in that Treatise, of which he saith it was purposely written against me to confute my gross mistaking charge against him, needs no refutation, because it proceeds all the way ex falso supposito, upon a false supposition, as if what he asserts there, were the same that he asserted at the Conference; or as if, because what he asserted afterwards was true, therefore what he had said before was not false; or lastly, as if, because he doth not continue to say so, therefore he never did say so; by which kind of Logick he might as well conclude he never thought
it lawfull to fight against the King, because he now doth not, or at least pretends he doth not; or that he never writ all his Political Aphorisms, because he tells us since that he hath recanted some of them; or that he never thought it lawfull to subscribe and conform, when he was ordained by a Bishop, because he doth not think so now: such Inferences as these are not, nor cannot be true, when they are affirm∣ed of any fallible and mutable subject, as all men are both in their Words and Actions; and Mr. Baxter (will some men say) hath been so as much as any man in both of them. So that having sufficiently The issue of the whole matter; His charge stands good. proved, that which I charged Mr. Baxter with, which was, what he asserted then, I have sufficiently discharged my self from being so grosly mistaken as he pretended, or indeed from being mistaken at all; And therefore need say nothing, or at least no more than I have said already in answer to the afore∣said Book or Treatise of his, which onely tells us what his Judgment of things sinfull per accidens is now but not what it was then; which was the thing and onely thing I charged him withall, which he is so far from disproving, that he doth not as much as deny it, or take any notice at all of it, in this whole Treatise, which he pretends purposely to have written for the confutation of it; which it is so far from confuting, that there be several of his own Propositions in that Treatise that do implicitly and His own Trea∣tise fights a∣gainst him. consequentially justifie my Charge against him, by proving that Proposition of ours to be true, which he then denied as false. For Example, Prop. 31. Vid his book of Things sinfull by ac∣cident. He saith, Rulers may command many things which the Subject may by acci∣dent make sinfull for himself to doe. And in the next
Proposition, he saith, There be some accidents ren∣dring the Act commanded unlawfull, which the Com∣mander may and ought to make provision against, or prevent; But there are some which he neither can, nor is bound therefore to forbear or to change his Laws; because (as it follows in the next Proposition) the publick welfare is not to be hazarded to save a parti∣cular person from himself, and from his sinfull inclina∣tion to ill doing. And of such Laws, and of such evils, and of such onely per accidens did our Pro∣position in express terms affirm then, what Mr. Bax∣ter asfirms now, but then denied. Again, Propos. 36. Mr. Baxter saith, Wicked men are so much inclined to turn all things into sin, that it is not possible to command any thing so good, which bad men may not make sinfull use of. Which I hope Mr. Baxter intends not for an Argument to prove the command of lawfull things by lawfull Authority to be unlawfull; nor consequently, to justi∣fie his aforesaid denial of our aforesaid Proposition, or to disprove my Charge against him for denying of it. Much less doth that Instance he gives in his 48 The instance of an Aptthe∣cary's selling poyson can∣va, ed. Proposition come near to what is controverted be∣twixt him and me, and was then controverted be∣twixt him and our Disputants at the Savoy. I mean the so often alledged aforesaid instance of an Apothe∣cary's selling of Poyson to one whom he knows will use it to murther himself, or some body else with it; which to maintain or justifie to be lawfull, because it is a sin per accidens, is, saith Mr. Baxter, an inhumane Errour: And so indeed it is; and therefore as we were worse than the worst of men, if his imputation of it to us were true; so it being so false, that nothing
can be falser, I will not say what Mr. Baxter is, but I will say that his imputing that inhumane Errour Mr. B's slan∣derous impu∣tation. unto us, as being held, taught, or countenanced, or any way connived at by us, or by any Casuist of ours, is an inhumane and Diabolical slander. For we would have Mr. Baxter know, that we are not so muddy brain'd (as he is pleased to say we are) but we can and do distinguish betwixt what a Man doth or may foresee, and what he doth not or can∣not; as likewise betwixt what a Commander can, and is obliged to hinder, and what either he cannot, or is not obliged to hinder. The former is Mr. Bax∣ter's Apothecary's case, and therefore we do not call his selling of Poyson (knowing what mischief will be done with it) a sin or cause of sin per acci∣dens; Mr. Baxter may call it so if he pleases, Nobis The Case rightly stated. non licet esse tam disertis, but we that love to speak plain English, and to call a spade a spade, do not call such a selling of Poyson, a casual or an accidental, but an intended and a presumptuous sin; not a Chance-medley, but wilfull murther in the Seller, as well as in the Buyer of the poyson. Because though the selling and the buying of poyson be not sinfull per se, or in it self, abstracting from the End for which, and the Intention with which it is sold or bought, because it may be sold and bought and used for a good end as well as for a bad; yet in Mr. Bax∣ter's Apothecary's case, the selling as well as the buying of it is sinfull per se and not per accidens, be∣cause the Seller is supposed to foresee what the Buyer will doe with it. For according to our Grammar, and our Logick too, per accidens is not always nor onely opposed to per se, but to praevisum and prae∣destinatum, to what is foreseen and design'd afore∣hand
also; so that whatsoever falls out or comes to pass contra or proeter intentionem or opini∣onem agentis, Contrary to the intention or opinion or expectation of the Agent, may be said to be per accidens, whether it be per se or no. And in this notion of per accidens Mr. Baxter's Apothecary's selling of poyson, cannot excuse him from being a Murtherer, or guilty of murther per se, and not per accidens onely; no not though per accidens there were not that ill use, that he thought there would be, made of it. I might say the like of his Impropriety of speech, when he tells us, That the command of a lawfull thing under an unjust penalty is a sin in the Commander per Another in∣stance of his, misapplying the term per accidens. accidens. For though an unjust penalty be an acci∣dent or accidental as to the command it self, because it might have been commanded under no penalty at all, or under some other more equitable penalty; yet in respect of the Commander and commanding of it, it is sinfull per se, and not per accidens; not∣withstanding Mr. Baxter's Metaphysical notion to the contrary: which I note the rather, that he and his admirers may see that he is not the Man of that di∣stinctness in his Notions, nor of that propriety and accurateness in his Expressions, as he would be thought to be; the want whereof he doth so fre∣quently and so insultingly impute to his Adversaries upon all occasions, and particularly in this Treatise of his which we are now speaking of.
CHAP. XIV. A farther Prosecution of that Treatise, as also a farther Account of the Conference at the Savoy. IN the beginning of which Treatise, speaking of the Men he had to doe with at the Savoy-Conference, he saith, that Vid. The Nonconfor∣mists judg∣ment of things sinfull by Ac∣cident, p. 1. as they were men of confounding Practices, so they were men of confus'd Conceptions, and such as could not be reconcil'd to distinctness and congruity of speech. For with this Encomium of those that disputed with him, he be∣gins that Treatise of his, which he saith he writ His Encomi∣um of the E∣piscopal party. purposely against me; but I am sure that cha∣racteristical Preface thereunto cannot so properly be meant of me, as of those that disputed with him; at least it cannot be meant of me onely, but of them also, nor of them and me onely neither, but of the whole Episcopal party, at least as to the first Clause of the Character whereby he describes his Adversaries, when he saith, They were Men of Why he calls them men of confounding practices. confounding Practices; for so he takes it for gran∣ted the Bishops and Episcopal party are, because they will not consent to the alteration of the set∣led Government, either in Church or State; or the letting in of Wolves and Foxes in Sheeps cloathing into the Sheepfold; I mean all the several sorts of Sectaries, who dissent as much perhaps or more from one another than all of them do from us: and consequently such, as if they were admitted with∣in the Pale of the Church, would bring in a very Babel of Confusion along with them. And it is
this, and nothing else but this, I mean the keeping of Anarchy and confusion out of the Church and State, which Mr. Baxter is pleased to call a con∣founding practice: But then he should have re∣membred who They are, whom he so rudely re∣flects Whom he must mean by that Title. upon, and who are the Men of such confoun∣ding practices: Surely, They were not the men he had to doe with, whether by them he means any or all of the Conforming Party that were at that Conference; for what do We conform to but the Laws? and who are the Makers of those Laws for Conformity, and for excluding all that will not conform, but the Parliament? That is, the King, with the consent of Lords and Commons, (and not the Bishops, who doe nothing but in obedience to those Laws,) are the Men whom Mr. Baxter (if he speaks properly, as he would be thought to do always) must needs mean by the men of confoun∣ding Practices; which how he will justifie if he be called in question for it, he were best to consider. But as for the men of confused Conceptions, and such as could not be reconciled to distinctness Whom he means by the men of confu∣sed concepti∣ons. and congruity of speech, I doubt not but he meant Me for one, (as I doubt not neither but he meant me for one of the men of confounding Practices also) but as he meant more besides my self, when he speaks of men of confounding Practices, so he must do also, when he speaks of men of confus'd Concepti∣ons; because he speaks of men in the plural num∣ber, speaking of both the sorts of them; and there∣fore by the men of confused Conceptions, though he may, and I believe doth mean me for one, yet he must needs mean those that disputed with him as well as me, and rather them than me, or
any other of the Bishops that were there; for the Disputants on our part were they, that he and his Assistants had to deal with. And they were men that, I dare say, were ne∣ver Their just Vindication. thought by any, but Mr. Baxter, to be men of such confus'd Conceptions, and so irreconcileable to distinctness, and congruity of speech, that is, so ut∣terly without Logick or Grammar as he would have them thought to be. I am sure the University of Cambridge did not think them to be so, when two of them were made the Primary Professours of The∣ology in that famous University: Neither did the King think them to be so, when he made all three of them Bishops: nor did We that were then Bi∣shops, think them to be so when we made choice of them to be ours and the Churches Advocates in a Cause of so high concernment as that was. But Mr. Baxter having been so shamefully nonpluss'd as he was at that Disputation, would have it to be be∣lieved Mr. B's de∣sign in so ter∣ming them. by those that were not there, that he had, or should have had much the better of it, if the men he had to deal with, had not been men of such confus'd Conceptions that they could not understand his meaning by his words, or of such impatience (for that's part of his character of them also) that they would not give him leave to explain himself more fully than he did. This might have had some colour of reason in it, The Manage∣ment of the conference at the Savoy how it was. if the Conference betwixt our and their Disputants had been oral, or by word of mouth, which is always indeed lyable to heat, and eagerness, and impatience, and misunderstanding of one another, whilst they are arguing, as likewise, to misrepor∣ting afterwards of what was said of either side.
But this Conference was by writing, to prevent jangling and all other the aforesaid inconveniences, which oral interlocutory Disputes are subject to; as likewise that each party might have time to consider what they were to stick to, and abide by, before they writ it down, and to peruse it afterwards, and if need were, to alter or amend any thing they saw amiss in it before they delivered it to those that were to answer or reply to it. And thus were our Arguments delivered unto them by us, and thus were their Answers to our Arguments delivered un∣to us by them, all of them written with Mr. Bax∣ter's The Dissen∣ters Answers written with Mr. B's own hand. own hand, who seem'd to be the Dominus fac∣totum, The Ruler of the Roast, in the business. The Arguments and the Answers that were writ∣ten down, and interchangeably delivered from one Party to the other, were the very same in terminis which I have before recited, and which are attest∣ed The same as are attested in the Bishop's printed Let∣ter. by the subscriptions of the aforesaid witnesses printed above 20 years since, and now again re∣printed with the Letter whereunto they were first annexed; which Attestation, together with the Arguments and Answers which are attested, I de∣sire the Reader seriously and impartially to peruse and consider, and then to judge whether the men Mr. Baxter had to deal with were Men of such con∣fus'd Conceptions, and so irreconcileable to distinct∣ness and congruity of speech, as he would have them thought to be: or whether indeed he himself were not evidently and inextricably confus'd, puzzled and perplexed in his Answers to their Arguments; espe∣cially when he gave his final Answer to their last Syl∣logisme, Mr. B's fi∣nal answer strangely pee∣vish and ab∣surd. the Major Proposition whereof, I am con∣fident, would never have been denied by either of
his Assistants, had not he, (being such a , Lover of preheminence, such a  and , so contentious and self-will'd, as he is,) overruled them both. For who not blinded with prejudice or transported with passion (as Ma∣ster Baxter often is, and as it seems then was) would have denied (as he did) the truth of this Proposition, (viz.) That Command which comman∣deth an act in it self lawfull, and no other act where∣by any unjust penalty is enjoyned, nor any circumstance whence directly or per accidens any sin is consequent, which the Commander ought to provide against, hath in it all things requisite to the lawfulness of a Com∣mand; and particularly cannot be guilty of comman∣ding an Act per accidens unlawfull, nor of comman∣ding an act under an unjust penalty? This, this (I say) was the Proposition which Mr. Baxter did, in Writing with his own hand, finally deny to be true; and this is that which I charge him withall, and from which (as I then told him) it necessari∣ly follows, that no Law, either humane or Divine, can be lawfull; because there is no Law of either sort but may by some accident or other, be the cause or occasion of sin. For example, Preaching, and Fasting, and Pray∣ing, The Conse∣quence of it urged. and Thanksgiving, are all of them God's holy Ordinances; but may not any, nay all of these Or∣dinances of God himself, be by accident the occa∣sion of sin? nay, were not all of them so in a ve∣ry high degree in the late Times? being made use of in their several seasons, to stir up and encourage the People to rebell against their Sovereign; and to plunder and murther their fellow Subjects: But
did this make God's commanding all or any of these holy Ordinances to be unlawfull? by Master Baxter's Logick it must do so, because by acci∣dent they were the cause or occasion of very ma∣ny, and very great sins; and such sins as the Com∣mander foresaw, they would be the occasion of, and might have prevented if he would, by suffering no ill use to be made of them; (which is more than any humane Lawgiver can doe) and yet he did not, nor would not prevent those accidental e∣vils, either by forbearing to make such Laws, as he knew would be the occasion of sin, or by re∣pealing, or altering, or dispensing with them after they were made, or by remitting and not inflic∣ting the punishment that was due to the transgres∣sours of them; all which he might have done if he would; but he would not because he was not obli∣ged to doe so, and because it seemed best to his in∣finite wisedom not to doe so. But Men, Mr. Baxter will say, or humane Law∣givers, are obliged (though God be not) to pre∣vent A rejoynder to Mr. B's Reply. or provide against all (even accidental) evils which they can prevent, or provide against. 'Tis true, but not by making no Laws at all. For Meliùs vivitur ubi nihil licet, quàm ubi omnia, It is better living under the severest Laws, than under none at all. And if there be any Laws made for men to live by, or to live under, such is the pride and the pravity of humane nature (as Mr. Baxter himself confesseth) that there will be transgressions of them, and such transgressions as the wisest hu∣mane Lawgiver cannot foresee, or the most power∣full of them be able to prevent; and consequently,
no humane Lawgiver is bound to doe so; for, Nemo tenetur ad impossibile, No body is bound to impos∣sibilities. Neither is a Humane Lawgiver bound to prevent all the Evil which it is possible for him to prevent, if it be not to be prevented, but by making no Laws at all; or if it be not to be prevented, but by omitting or forbearing to doe some important pub∣lick good, which as a Lawgiver he is bound to doe. So that no accidental evil which the Lawgiver either cannot or ought not, (and by ought not, I mean, is not bound or obliged) to provide against, can make the command of a thing lawfull in it self The Conse∣quence char∣ged home. to be unlawfull. And he that denies this (as Mr. Baxter did) must (as I said before) consequently affirm no command, either of man or God to be lawfull; because there is no command, either Hu∣mane or Divine, but is liable to such accidental e∣vils, as man either cannot or ought not, and God hath not thought fit, to provide against, any otherwise than by forbidding, and threatning to punish the transgressours of them; which Humane Lawgivers are obliged to doe also; which being all they can doe, and consequently all they are obliged to doe, neither they, nor their just Laws, or lawfull Commands, are to be blamed or repealed, because they accidentally prove to be the occasion of such evils as the Lawgi∣ver either cannot, or is not bound to provide against. And such sins as these must he needs mean, who de∣nies (as Mr. Baxter did) the command of a lawfull thing by lawfull Authority, under no unjust penal∣ty, to be lawfull, because, by accident it might be
the occasion of some such sin as the Commander was not bound to prevent or provide against. And therefore I would fain have Mr. Baxter speak out, and tell us plainly and distinctly, (being such A Call to Mr. Baxter. a Master of distinctness as he is) what these acci∣dental evils or sins are, that can make such a com∣mand as he denied to be lawfull to be unlawfull. Sure I am, they can be no such evils or sins as by his aforesaid Instances he would make it to be be∣lieved they are. For they are all of them such as the Commander is obliged to hinder or provide a∣gainst; but he must instance in some such accidental evils or sins which the Commander is not bound to hinder or provide against, and then prove that a lawfull command, by being the cause or occasion of such an accidental evil or sin, becomes unlawfull; which when he hath done, erit mihi magnus Apollo, I shall take him for a great Prophet; and then I will confess that I have been grossly, very grossly mistaken in my charging of him, as I did. In the mean time, he hath grossly, very His gross shuffling and cutting. grossly abused his friends at Kidderminster, in that Narrative of his, where by shuffling in of one Pro∣position instead of another, a true one instead of a false one, he would make them believe that it was the true one that he asserted, viz. That the Com∣mand of a thing lawfull in it self was unlawfull if it were commanded under an unjust penalty, or would be the occasion of some such evil as the Commander foresaw and ought to prevent. And not the false one, viz. That the Command of a thing lawfull in it self was unlawfull though it were not commanded under an unjust penalty, nor would be the occasion of any such ac∣cidental
evil or sin as the Commander was bound to prevent; which was that indeed and in truth which Mr. Baxter asserted, and not the former: And up∣on his asserting whereof, I do very well remem∣ber, (and so may he too, if he will) I stood up, and said, There is no more Disputing with this man who doth in effect deny any of God's commands as well as Man's to be lawfull. For what Law or Command of God is there, that may not be the His Assertion the occasion of breaking up the Confe∣rence. occasion of some such evil or sin? And so the Disputeended; for Contra Principia negantem non est dispu∣tandum, There is no disputing against a man who de∣nies principles: And certainly this if any is a Prin∣ciple among Christians, That all God's commands are just and righteous; which none of them are or can be, if by accident to be the occasion of sin can make them not to be so; which I affirmed to be the Con∣sequent of what Mr. Baxter had asserted. But I did not charge him with asserting the con∣sequence it self; nay, I did not charge him, and much less all or any other of the Nonconformists, He is not charged with it as his judg∣ment. besides him, with asserting that which he did assert, as theirs, or his own judgment; (as by the Title page to his Treatise of sinfulness per accidens (which he saith was purposely written against me) he would make his Readers believe I did) but I charged him with it, In his prin∣ted narrative to his friends of Kidder∣minster. as a desperate shift he was forced to make use of; for so he himself saith I said I did, (when I charged him with what he had asserted) which im∣plies that I did not charge him with that Asserti∣on, as that which was, or which I did believe to be indeed his Judgment; but rather, with what contrary to his Judgment, he was fain or forced
to assert  to serve his turn for the present, as not knowing how otherwise (all at once) to impeach the lawfulness of the Injuncti∣ons of our Church in the Common-Prayer-Book (which was then his business) and consequently to justifie his own and his Party's refusing to obey and conform to them. And as when I charged him with what he had Nor is He, but the Assertion, charged with its Consequen∣ces. asserted, I did not charge him with it, as with that which I thought to be his Judgment; much less, when I charged that Assertion of his with those im∣pious and absurd Consequences that may be, nay, must be inferrr'd from it, do I charge him with as∣serting all or any of those Consequences: For a man may abhor the necessary consequences of his own Opinion, as I believe all well meaning Papists (and sure there be some Papists that are well mean∣ing men) do detest and disclaim all the necessary consequences of their blasphemous Doctrine of Tran∣substantiation, and as I believe Mr. Baxter doth the necessary consequences of that Assertion I charged him with. Nay, I am apt to believe that Mr. Bax∣ter himself, now he sees what will necessarily follow upon that Assertion of his, is sorry and ashamed that ever he did assert it, and wishes with all his heart he had never asserted it; but his heart is too great to suffer him to confess it, and he values his reputa∣tion with his Party at too high a rate to acknowledge His reputati∣on more valu∣ed by him than truth. that ever he was guilty of so much weakness, as to have denied what he did deny, and consequently to have asserted what he did assert. And therefore (as I said before) he would fain have it to be believed that it was another thing that he denied and asserted,
than indeed it was. But all that he hath done hitherto, or can doe hereafter, to that end, will be all in vain, and to no purpose, as long as two such Witnesses, as the Bishop of Ely and the Bishop of The Attesta∣tion utterly spoils all his endeavours of clearing himself. Chester, who disputed with him, have attested it under their hands, presently after the matter of fact, and when it was fresh in every man's memory, with∣out having been contradicted or excepted against either by Mr. Baxter himself, or any of his party in his behalf, though it be above twenty years ago, since this Attestation of theirs was first prin∣ted. And therefore whatsoever Mr. Baxter hath said since, or doth say now, or shall say hereafter, it will never make what he did say then to be non dictum, not to have been said, or what he writ then to be non scriptum, not to have been written; so that he may as well call back yesterday as unsay what he had said; repent it he may, but recall it he cannot. If therefore that Pamphlet of his con∣cerning That Treatise of his wholly useless to that purpose. sinfulness per accidens was purposely writ∣ten (as he saith it was) to prove Bishop Morley was grossly mistaken in charging him with what he did assert then, because he doth not assert it now, or because he now doth assert the contrary; the pub∣lishing of it to that end is not onely vain and use∣less but absurd and ridiculous, unless Mr. Baxter thinks his own Party does believe of him, as the Bygott-Papists do of their Pope; namely, that he never erred, because he cannot err; which is Blas∣phemy to be said of any but of God. For Errare, labi, decipi, suit, eritque semper humanum, to err, to slip, to be deceived and mistaken, hath been and
will always be the effect and character of Humane frailty. And therefore Mr. Baxter ought not to have taken it so heinously to be charged, and to be charged ashe was with an , with that which is but an humane infirmity; for so, and no more but so, is all Errour. But the denying of it, and much more the persisting in it, and defend∣ing of it, and most of all the defending of it by dis∣guising it and making a false representation of it; seems to have somewhat of a much worse principle in it, and makes the Errour to be much more cul∣pable, than otherwise it would have been; for Causa Patrocinio non bona pejor erit, A bad cause will but prove worse by standing out in it and en∣deavouring to make it good. It would have been therefore much more ingenu∣ously, and much more excusably too, done of Mr. Baxter, if, as when he speaks of his Politi∣cal Aphorisms, he saith he would have some part at least of that Book to be taken pro non scripto, as if it had never been written; so in speaking of what I say he said in the Conference at the Sa∣voy he would not have said it was non dictum, a thing that he had not said; but that he would have it taken pro non dicto, as a thing he wished he had not said: and so he might have saved all the pains he hath taken, and all the trouble he hath given his Readers, in his Metaphysical Casuistical Treatise of things sinfull per accidens; wherein there is no∣thing to prove Mr. Baxter did not say, what I say he did at the Conference in the Savoy; nor conse∣quently to prove that I was grossly mistaken in
charging him with it; , Which is the thing I was to make out. Which being the onely Instance he hath given of The Ʋpshot: the Bishop's charge a∣gainst Mr. B. no mistake. the many mistakes in matter of fact, which he saith there are in that long ago printed, and now reprinted Letter of mine; They that observe how (notwith∣standing all the disingenuous, fraudulent, scandalous, and injurious Artifices he hath made use of) he foully fails in the proof of this one mistake onely; will (I hope) hardly take his own bare word for proof e∣nough, that there are many, or indeed any other mistakes in matter of fact in that Letter of mine, as he pretends there are, and no doubt would not have omitted to specifie, if he could have proved any of them. The End of the First Section.
SECTION II. A Confutation at large of Mr. Bax∣ter's Aphorism concerning Governours; wherein, having said, that Governours are some Limited, some de facto Ʋnlimited; he affirms, that The unlimited are Tyrants, and have no right to that unlimited Govern∣ment. CHAP. I. A calumnious Charge of Mr. Baxter in some late wri∣tings of his, against the Bishop, making him to be a defier of Deity and Humanity, answered. One of his Aphorisms, concerning Governours limited and unlimited, taxed and censured. The Bishop's so∣lemn declaration in the point. ANd now having (as I suppose) sufficiently vin∣dicated my self from what Mr. Baxter hath excepted against (as a gross mistake of mine in mat∣ter of Fact) in my so long ago printed (and now reprinted) Letter: I am (if I can, and I doubt not
but I can) to vindicate my self from a much higher charge of Mr. Baxter's against me, which is no less Mr. B. char∣ges the Bishop to be a defier of Deity and Humanity. than, That I am a defier of Deity and Huma∣nity. An horrible and a diabolical Crime, if true; and therefore an horrible and diabolical Slander, if false; which, whether it be or no I am now to examine. But first, I must make it appear, that Mr. Baxter doth indeed, and in totidem verbis, in plain terms, charge me to be so; For proof whereof, I refer my self to a printed Paper of his, now before me, sub∣scribed R. B. and pretended to be a Recantation or Revocation of some of his Political Aphorijms in That he doth so prov'd out of his Recan∣tation, his Holy Common wealth; in which Paper (which together with some of his Aphorisms I have caused to be reprinted) he saith, He doth not reverse all the matter of that Book, nor all that more than ONE hath accused him of; which he saith he cannot without defying Deity and Humanity, as they, saith he, (meaning his accusers) defie them both. In which words it is observable, that the word One is printed in a different Character, from any of the rest, on purpose no doubt, that the Readers of that pretended curtail'd Recantation, may take no∣tice of whom he means by that One, which it was easy for any that had read my Collection of some of his Aphorisms, to guess at; but this is certain, that whomsoever he means by that One, he saith of him in express terms, that he is a defier of Deity and Hu∣manity. Now that he means me by that One, though it be not clearly and plainly exprest in that Paper, and out of his Answer to a Letter of Dr. Hinckley's, yet it is more than intimated in Mr. Baxter's An∣swer to a Letter of Dr. Hinckley's; wherein he doth
repeat what the Doctor had said touching those A∣phorisms of his, which I had collected and printed, so as though neither of them name me, yet it cannot be doubted, but both of them mean me; the rather, because Mr. Baxter doth there, and in that place of his Letter, set down the very words of the first of those Aphorisms I have collected, from denial of which Aphorism, or rather from the denial of another Proposition substituted by him in the place or instead of that Aphorism, he doth in the afore∣said Paper infer and conclude that One he speaks of to be a defier of Deity and Humanity. But to put it out of question that I am the man he means by that One in the aforesaid Paper, and whom he there makes to be a defier of Deity and Hu∣manity: And out of his Apology for the Noncon∣formists Mi∣nistry. p. 138. There is a late (I will not say the last) Book of his (for he may have writ two or three since for ought I know) wherein he saith, He wonders that Bishop Morley (there you have whom he means in words at length, and not in figures or figurative in∣timations onely) did put the denial of this amongst the accused passages of his Political Aphorisms, where (saith he) I expressly speak of God's limitation. But what, or of what was that denial of Mr. Bax∣ter, which he wonders the Bishop puts among the ac∣cused passages of his Aphorisms? Why, It was (saith he) my denial that there was any such thing in the World as a lawfull unlimited Monarchy, or humane Power, expressly speaking of limitation by God. But Mr. B. gives a false ac∣count of the Bishop's accu∣sing of him. where doth Bishop Morley accuse Mr. Baxter for de∣nying there is any lawfull Monarchy, or humane Power, unlimited by God? He doth it (saith Mr. Baxter) among the Passages of my accused Aphorisms. But why doth not he name the passage where, or
the particular Aphorism wherein I do accuse him, for his denying the aforesaid Proposition, or for his denying there is any lawfull Monarchy, or any o∣ther humane Power, unlimited, or not limited by God? I will tell you why he doth not, because in∣deed he cannot; there being no such Aphorism nor any such Passage in any of those Aphorisms of his, which I question him for, or accuse him of. There is indeed an Aphorism of his (viz.) the first of those which I have collected and exposed, The true ac∣count what it is the Bishop accuseth him of. wherein he saith, That of Governours some are limit∣ed, and some are unlimited, and those which are de facto unlimited are Tyrants, and have no right to their unlimited Governments: And the reason why I put this Aphorism of his into the catalogue of those which I except against, is his affirming that such Governours (I presume he means all such Gover∣nours) as are de facto unlimited, are Tyrants and have no right to their unlimited Governments. It is (I say) his affirming of this, and not his denying the lawfulness of a Monarchy or any other power or species of Government that is not limited by God, that I question him for or accuse him of. For if he thinks the affirming of that and the denying of this to be all one, he is very much mistaken: but the truth is that he is not at all mistaken as to this particular; he knows well enough, that it is not all one to af∣firm the one and deny the other; for if he had thought it had been so, why did he not specifie the Aphorism it self (which I except against) in termi∣nis, as it is set down in my Collection, and as he sets it down himself in his aforesaid Letter to Dr. Hinckley? It had been much more fairly and in∣genuously done of him, if he had done so, and much
more pertinently too, as to the business in hand; there being no question betwixt him and me (in re∣lation The Question rightly stated. to the truth or falshood of the aforesaid Apho∣rism) whether all lawfull Monarchies or humane Powers are limited by God or no? but whether all such Governours as are de facto unlimited (not by God but by Men) are Tyrants, and such as have no Right to their unlimited Governments. The former I never did, nor no man that is not a downright professed Atheist can deny to be true: The latter I affirm to be false, and not false and erroneous onely, but dangerous and seditious also; and I doubt not but by God's assistance to prove it to be so. In the mean time, let no man think it was the not discerning or not animadverting the difference betwixt what Mr. Baxter affirms in his Aphorism, and what he denies in his Paraphrase of it, that makes him substitute the one for the other; Non sic notus Ʋlysses, The cunning man is better known than so. No, he doth it artificially and designing∣ly, that he might the more probably and plausibly infer from the one, what he knew he could not with any colour of consequence infer from the Mr B's arti∣fice to vent his gall against the Bishop. other; and thereby to vent the overflowing of his Gall against me, in revenge of my publishing of those Aphorisms of his, whereby he seems to be so much galled. And hence it is, that as in the aforesaid recanting His wretched falshood in charging the Bishop. or rather canting Paper of his, instead of my de∣nying all unlimited Governours to be Tyrants and to have no right to their unlimited Governments (which he affirms in his Aphorism) he saith, I deny all hu∣mane Powers to be limited by God, and thence infers that I am a defier of Deity and Humanity: So here
again in that aforesaid late printed Book of his, in∣stead of my denial of what he affirms in the afore∣said Aphorism, he saith, that I accuse him for de∣nying that there is any lawfull Monarchy or humane Power unlimited by God; and then infers That he who asserteth the contrary (as he implies I do) is 1. (saith he) an Enemy to God, because he denies God to be the universal Sovereign, which is Atheism. His zealous descant upon it. 2. He is an Enemy to Kings, because he renders them odious to Mankind by drawing such a picture or description of them, as to say a King is absolutely un∣limited in his power, and therefore may deny or blaspheme God, and may destroy City and Kingdom, and kill all the innocent People when he pleaseth. 3. He is an Enemy to all Mankind, who would bring them all into such a slavery to such a Monster. By which large, and indeed monstrous Paraphrase of his, not upon what I do indeed assert, but upon what he would have his Readers believe I do assert, he explains what he means when he said I was a defier of Deity and Humanity. Sed ne soevi, magne Sacerdos; But do not bluster so, mighty Presbyter! Is this the humble, the meek, the mortified and daily dying Mr. Baxter? Tantoene animis Coelestibus irae? Have heavenly minds such boisterous passions? And why not, may some Friend of his say; can a man be too zealous for God, or too angry with any that defies God, or that denies his Sovereignty over all his Creatures, and consequently over all humane Pow∣ers or Governours? Was not Moses the meekest man alive, and yet was not he angry, very angry, so angry that he brake the Tables of stone where∣in the Law was written by God's own hand, be∣cause
the People had by their Idolatry broken the Law, written by God's own hand in the Tables of their hearts? The like may be said of Phineas, of David, and of St. Paul, who was so angry that he wished that the  & , The disturbers and overturners, of the Church in those times were cut off (which by the way is as bad, if not worse than silencing.) Why then should Master Baxter be blamed, if he thinks no words bad e∣nough for those that are the defiers of Deity and Humanity, and the Enemies to God, to Kings, and to all Mankind? True; but who, or where are they that are so? Who they are he means in that descant. they are those (saith Mr. Baxter in one place) that deny all humane Powers to be limited by God. But who are they that deny all humane Powers to be limited by God? they are (saith Mr. Baxter in ano∣ther place) Such as deny all Governours whether li∣mited or unlimited to be Subjects themselves, and under the Sovereignty and laws of God. But who are they, or who is he, that denies either this or the former of those two Propositions? Bishop Mor∣ley for one (saith Mr. Baxter in the aforesaid late Book of his) and therefore he is a defier of Deity and Humanity; and so are others too for the same reasons, as he tells us in his Paper of Recantation (but they it seems must be nameless.) Well, but how doth he know that Bishop Morley doth or ever did deny either, That all humane Powers are limi∣ted by God, or that all Governours are subject to God? Did he ever hear me say so himself? or can he produce any Witness that is fide dignus, That may be believed, who told him so? I am sure I never thought so, and therefore I am sure I never said so.
But because he grounds my being a defier of Deity and Humanity upon this supposition, and upon this supposition onely, That I deny all Humane Powers to be limited by God, or That all Humane Gover∣nours are Subject unto God; And because there be many that will believe whatsoever he saith, because he saith it: Be it known to Mr. Baxter and all Baxterians in the World, that I Bishop Morley do in my own name The Bishop's solemn decla∣ration con∣cerning Go∣vernours. (and I am confident may doe it in the name of all the Episcopal Party, that is, of the whole Church of England truly so called) not onely confess and acknowledge, but declare, and aver, and avow; first, That all Humane Powers, and not Humane onely, but Terrestrial, Celestial and Infernal Powers also, are subject to God and limited by God; that is, by the Power, the Will and Wisedom of God, so that none of them can doe more or less, or otherwise than he wills or permits them to doe; and that he restrains, overrules and orders whatsoever they doe, as he pleaseth, in order to his own most wise and just ends. Secondly, I do acknowledge and declare also, that all humane Powers, or Governours, the Supreme as well as the Subordinate, and the Ʋnlimited (I mean the unlimited by humane Pacts and constitu∣tions) as well as the Limited, are all of them limit∣ed by God; and that not by his Power onely, but by his Laws also, either as they are written by him in Mens hearts, or revealed by him in his Word; and that as all the Heathen World (Kings as well as Subjects) were limited by the former; so all the Christian World, (Kings and States, as well as Sub∣iects) are limited by the latter, and by the former
also; so as to be thereby obliged (though not ne∣cessitated) to observe the Dictates, and to doe no∣thing contrary to either of those Laws; and if they doe not accordingly, that they are answerable to God, and punishable by God for it, as he is , King of Kings and Lord of Lords, as much or more than any of the meanest of their Subjects. This is, and always was my Creed as to this par∣cular; and therefore, instead of defying Deity and His disavow∣al of Mr. B's charge. Humanity, I defy Mr. Baxter and all the Baxterians in the World, to prove that I ever did dicto vel scrip∣to, By saying or writing, directly or indirectly, in terminis vel in sensu oequipollenti, In downright terms or equivalent meaning, formally or conse∣quentially, deny all or any humane Powers, or Governours, either de jure, As to matter of right, or de facto, As to matter of fact, to be limited by God; or that I did ever accuse Mr. Baxter or any body else for affirming it. And therefore I do now accuse him for having Mr. B. a false accuser. falsely accused me of such a Crime as is no less (as he himself saith) than the defying of Deity and Hu∣manity; which is a very high degree not of Pro∣faneness onely, but of Atheism and Blasphemy also; and therefore highly criminal, and highly punisha∣ble even here in this world in them that are guilty of it; and per legem talionis, By that law which re∣quires like for like, in those also that accuse any man of it, and cannot prove it; especially in one Church man accusing another, and more especially (according to the ancient Canons of the Church) in a Presbyter accusing a Bishop of so high a Crime as this is.
But Mr. Baxter it seems will joyn Issue with me upon this point, and will prove that though I did not in terminis defy Deity and Humanity, by de∣nying in terminis all humane Power to be limited His conse∣quential proof of the charge. by God; Yet I am nevertheless a defier of Deity and Humanity, because I do consequentially deny all humane Powers to be limited by God. And that I do consequentially deny all humane Powers to be limited by God, he proves, or thinks he proves, or rather indeed would have others think he proves it (for I am confident he himself believes it no more than I do) because I deny this Aphorism of his, That all unlimited Governours are Tyrants, and have no right to their unlimited Governments; so that the proof of my being a defier of God, because I deny all humane Powers to be limited by God, depends upon the truth of this Syllogism: He that denies all unlimited Governours to be Tyrants, and such as have no right to their unlimited Govern∣ments, doth consequentially, or by necessary consequence, deny all humane Powers to be limited by God. But Bishop Morley doth deny the former, Ergo, he doth deny the latter also. Well, suppose he did so, yet if (being not so clear-sighted as Mr. Baxter is, nor having such a His Metaphy∣sical Micro∣scope. Metaphysical Microscope as Mr. Baxter hath to see so far into a milstone as Mr. Baxter doth) the Bishop doth not discern either the necessity, or probability, or possibility of any such consequence, must he because he is , moap-ey'd, or because he hath no better a discerning faculty than God hath given him, must he needs (I say) be therefore a defier of Deity and Humanity? when if he saw or did believe there were any such consequence, he would be as ready to
condemn the opinion from whence it is inferr'd, and to anathematize the maintainers of it, as Mr. Baxter himself is, or can be? But thanks be to God, we have a more mercifull Judge than Mr. Baxter is; for Woe be to the Bishop, We are not to be judged by consequences. and Woe be to Mr. Baxter himself; nay, Woe be to the best and wisest of all mankind (neither of which do I think that I or Mr. Baxter himself is) if we were to be judged by the consequences of all our O∣pinions at the last day. For, I know nothing by my self, says St. Paul (who was spiritually as wise and as good a man as perhaps ever any mere man was) yet I am not, saith he, thereby justified: and there∣fore though our hearts do not condemn us (says St. John) yet God who is greater than our hearts, may. And truly I know no Man that hath more reason to be afraid to be tried by Consequences than Mr. Baxter himself hath, as I think I have made it ap∣pear already from the Consequences of what he asser∣ted at the Savoy-Conference, and shall make it ap∣pear more and more before I have done with him. And therefore it is for his sake more than for mine own (at least upon this occasion) that I would not have men judged of by the Consequences of their O∣pinions, though never so truly inferr'd from them, if they be denied by them. But I say not this, as No such conse∣quence in the case. any way or in any the least degree acknowledging that there is any such Consequence logically or ra∣tionally to be inferr'd, as Mr. Baxter saith there is from my denying of his aforesaid Aphorism to be true, that therefore I deny all humane Powers to be limited by God. An unlimited lawfull Mo∣narchy, in what sense. But doth not (saith Mr. Baxter) he that main∣tains (as the Bishop doth) that there is such a thing
in the world as an unlimited lawfull Monarchy or hu∣mane Power, consequentially deny, that all humane Powers are limited by God? No, (saith the Bishop) if by unlimited he means unlimited by men, or by humane Laws or constitutions; for some humane Powers may be unlimited in this sense, and yet all of them notwithstanding be limited by God: I, but saith Mr. Baxter, this subterfuge will not serve the Bishop's turn; for in my Aphorism which he noteth as false, I do expressly speak of God's limitation. Do you so, Mr. Baxter? then the Printer hath done you great wrong, or mine Eyes are grown so dim with age, as no spectacles will enable me to see any such words as limitation of God or by God, either in the Text or Margent of that Aphorism which is now in question; no nor in the Paraphrase which you give us of that Aphorism in the aforesaid late Book of yours, which I have now before me: where indeed it is said that Bishop Morley maintains, (though he had not maintained it then, but means to do it now) that there may be a lawfull unlimited Monarchy or Sove∣reign Power; but it is not said there nor any where else, that Bishop Morley maintains there may be a lawfull Monarchy or any other Government (law∣full or unlawfull) unlimited by God. But he that denies that aforesaid Aphorism (may Mr. Baxter re∣ply) doth consequently maintain there may be such a Monarchy or Sovereign power unlimited by God; because Mr. Baxter doth expressly speak of limita∣tion by God. He doth so indeed in the words im∣mediately subjoyn'd to that Aphorism, but not in the Aphorism it self, neither doth he speak of it in the words subjoyned, to explain what he meant by the limitation he speaks of in the Aphorism before, but
rather to intimate that it was not a limitation by God, which he before spake of. For having said in his Mr. B's Go∣vernours, some limited, some unlimited. Aphorism, that Of Governours some were limited and some unlimited, and that the unlimited were Tyrants and had no right to their unlimited Governments; he adds (as a reason why the unlimited were Ty∣rants, and had no right to their Governments) For they are all subject themselves, and under the Sove∣reignty and Laws of God. Which is in effect, as much and no more than if he had said, Though I tell you, that of Governours some are limited and some are unlimited, I do not mean any of them are unlimited or not limited by God; and what is this but a plain confession that by limitation of Gover∣nours in the aforesaid Aphorism, he means their limi∣tation If he means limited by men, the con∣sequence is a∣voided. by men, and not by God? And then (Ihope) a man may deny all such Governours to be Tyrants, that are not so limited, without denying them to be li∣mited by God; and consequently without incurring the Censure of being a defier of Deity and Humanity. For why, of these Governours or humane Powers that are all of them limited by God, may not some of them be unlimited or not limited by men, that is by humane Pacts, Laws or Constitutions? And if this be not Mr. Baxter's own meaning, I would fain know how he will make good his divi∣sion of Governours, into some that are limited, and some that are unlimited? For, if his meaning be If he means limited by God, this, that of Governours some are limited by God, and some are unlimited by God, he must needs own that assertion to be his, which he would impose upon me; namely that all humane Powers are not limited by God; and consequently besides his unavoidably The conse∣quence falls upon himself. involving himself in a palpable Contradiction (for
what can be more contradictory, than to say that all Governours are, and some are not limited by God? he doth necessarily make himself, what he would have me thought to be (viz.) a defier of Deity and Humanity, if to deny all humane Powers to be limited by God, be consequently to defy Deity and Humanity. For what more evident or undeniable consequence can there be than this? Some Governours, or some humane Powers, are un∣limited, that is, not limited by God; Therefore All Governments, or all humane Powers, are not li∣mited by God; but the Antecedent or former of these two Propositions is Mr. Baxter's (if by li∣mitation in his Aphorism he means limited by God as he saith he does) and therefore the Con∣sequent or latter of these two Propositions must be his also. Neither will his de facto doe him any service at all, to help him at this dead lift: for, whereas he saith in his Aphorism, Some are limited, and some are de facto unlimited (supposing him still to mean unli∣mited as well as limited by God) I would fain know what de facto was put in for, and written in ano∣ther Character, to make it the more observable? Was it, because there was some Metaphysical myste∣ry couched in it? If so, he should have explained himself so, as that we, who want his higher Intel∣lectuals, might have understood what he meant by it; but if he meant no more than ordinary Grammar and Logick enables us to comprehend; namely that de facto is to be understood as it is opposed to de jure, and then (still supposing that by limited and unlimited he means limited and un∣limited by God) the meaning of that part of his
Aphorism must be this, that of Governours, though all are limited by God de jure, yet some of them are unlimited by God de facto. And then I de∣mand of Mr. Baxter, where there are, or ever All Gover∣nours limited by God de facto as well as de jure. were, or ever can be any Governours unlimited or not limited by God de facto as well as de jure, that is, that are not de facto under the Sovereignty and Laws of God, (which is Mr. Baxter's own ex∣pression of what he means by being limited by God) and then I say, I would fain know who and where those Governours are that are unlimited by God de facto. And if there neither be, nor can be any such, Mr. Baxter's division of Governours is be∣come a Cripple, and hath but one legg left to stand on; One of the membra dividentia, The members of the distinction, being no where to be found in Rerum Natura, In the world. And he might as truly and rationally have said, Of Governours there are some that are somewhere, and some that are nowhere. CHAP. II. Concerning Mr. Baxter's Governours unlimited de facto. His Ingenuity, Charity and Logick taken notice of, and his Calumny cleared. ANd here I might leave the poor Man intangled in his self-contradictions, and fallen himself into the pit which he had digged for me; but I re∣member that if our Enemie's Ox or Ass, and much
more if our Enemy himself be fallen into a Pit, we are obliged in charity to doe what we can to help An expedient to help Mr. B. out of his own pit. him out. And truly it will be no hard matter to doe it, if Mr. Baxter will be so charitable to himself, as to lend us his own helping hand towards it, by telling us truly and plainly what Governours he means by those he says are Unlimited de facto, and His Gover∣nours de facto unlimited, what. by telling us too by whom de jure they ought to be limited; for there must be some such unlimited Governours somewhere or other, or else (as I said before) his division which must be Bipes, two∣legg'd at least (as all Logical divisions are) having lost one of its leggs, will be stans pede in uno, Stand∣ing onely upon one legg, and so no division at all. But there are no Governours that are not limited by God saith Mr. Baxter, and limited de facto as well as de jure saith the Bishop, and I think Mr. Baxter will not in cool bloud deny that they are so: and therefore Mr. Baxter's de facto Ʋnlimited Governours must needs be such Governours, as though they are both de jure and de facto limited by God, yet are de facto unlimited by Men, or by hu∣mane Pacts and Constitutions. Speak out, Mr. Baxter; was not this your mean∣ing in your Aphorism? Give glory unto God, and confess the truth, especially when it will be for your own advantage; for hereby you will extricate your self from those otherwise inextricable difficulties you will inevitably continue to be involv'd in; I mean the aforesaid self-contradiction and self-condemnati∣on, which will both of them evidently and unde∣niably follow, and fall upon you, if you persist in your asserting that by Limited in your Aphorism, you mean limited by God. For then by Ʋnlimited
you must mean Ʋnlimited by God also. And is it not a plain contradiction for you to say as you do in His self con∣tradiction set home, if he means li∣mited by God. your Aphorism, that some Governours are unlimited or not limited, (meaning not limited by God) and to say as you do say in the words immediately follow∣ing, that they are all limited by God? Is not this (I say) as plain a contradiction as to say, Omnis homo est rationalis, Every man is rational, and Aliquis or Qui∣dam homo non est rationalis, Some man is not rational? It is so in our Logick, I know not what it may be in Mr. Baxter's. Again, is not the affirming of some Go∣vernours to be unlimited or not limited by God a de∣nial, that all humane Powers are limited by God? and consequently doth not Mr. Baxter by affirming the former deny the latter, and thereby prove him∣self to be what he says I am, a defier of Deity and If he mean li∣mited by men, his charge a∣gainst the Bi∣shop falls. Humanity? Whereas, if he would acknowledge that by limited and unlimited Governours, in his Apho∣rism, he means limited and unlimited by men, or by humane Pacts and Constitutions, (as no doubt he did, and as by the whole drift and Tenour of all that follows from that Aphorism, to the very end of that whole Book it manifestly appears he did) neither would he have had any pretence to charge me with being a defier of Deity and Humanity, nor I have had cause for the vindicating of my self from being guilty of so horrid a Crime, to charge him with contradicting and condemning himself as guilty (upon the same supposition) of the same crime which he chargeth me withall: and consequent∣ly with pronouncing the terrible censure of being a defier of Deity and Humanity against himself; though really neither He for asserting, nor I for denying the truth of that Aphorism of his, do deserve to be bran∣ded
with so black and supersevere a stigma or brand as that is. And therefore I do not positively charge him, as he doth me, to be a defier either of Deity or Huma∣nity; but all that I have said hitherto, hath been first and principally, for mine own Vindication from Mr. Baxter's calumny and aspersion; and (2.) in order thereunto, to let the World see, first, This Godly Man's candour and ingenuity in stating the question concerning the truth or falsehood of this Mr. B's Inge∣nuity in shuf∣fling in one Proposition instead of a∣nother. Aphorism of his, betwixt him and me. For where∣as he cannot choose but know that what I except against, and deny to be true in this Aphorism, is his asserting all unlimited Governours to be Tyrants, and to have no right to their unlimited Governments; he shuffles in another Proposition instead of this, and such a one as is neither affirmed or denied in this Aphorism, as if the Interloper were the same which I denied, (viz.) That all humane Powers are limited by God. But this is but Antiquum obtinere, To doe what he hath ever done; he cannot leave this jug∣ling trick: for as he used it once before to disguise what he had asserted at the Conference at the Savoy, so he useth it now to disguise his Aphorism now in question, and will use it again and again upon the like occasion, as we shall see hereafter. Secondly, as by his shuffling in one Proposition in∣stead of another, a true one instead of a false one, you may observe Mr. Baxter's sincerity and inge∣nuity, so by his shuffling in of this rather than of any other, into the place of that which was in que∣stion, you may observe his excessive charity to∣wards me, and those of my Order. For designing His design to make the Bi∣shop odious. to make a Bishop, and especially Bishop Morley, (for
so he is always pleased to call me, (not honoris gratiâ, For honour's sake, you may be sure) when by name he speaks of me) as odious as he could to all man∣kind, what more probable, or to the Sectaries more plausible, a Medium could he have devised to make use of to that End, than first to shuffle in this Propo∣sition (All humane Powers are limited by God) and then to make me the denier of it, and finally there∣upon to pronounce me a defier of Deity and Hu∣manity? Lastly, you may observe likewise his wonderfull skill in the art of reasoning, and the Transubstan∣tiating power of his Logick, by which he will needs infer from my maintaining there may be a lawfull His strange Logick. unlimited Monarchy, I do therefore deny all hu∣mane Powers are limited by God. O the weight of a Straw, when it is turned into a Club and weild∣ed by such a Hercules! For what doth all this sig∣nifie, but that he had rather bely himself, than not slander me, and that he had rather contradict and condemn himself, than not say something to make a Bishop, and especially Bishop Morley; to be thought to be an Atheist and a Blasphemer? not animadverting perhaps that the fiery darts which he slung at the Bishop might with much more force be retorted against himself; for aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus, Sometimes honest Homer is caught napping; or as we say, It is a good horse that never stumbles; and Malice sometimes is blind, as well as Love. By this time, I think, it is evident enough, ac∣cording to Mr. Baxter's own way of reasoning, that either he himself is a defier of Deity and Hu∣manity,
or Bishop Morley is not. And God forbid, that by any concluding argument either of us should be proved to be so. But now this bold and groundless Calumny (from which, for the honour of my Order as being a Bishop, as well as for my His calumny cleared. personal reputation as I am a Christian, I was bound in the first place to vindicate my self) be∣ing removed out of the way; it is high time to come to the consideration of that which was, or ought to have been the  the main Question, or the onely subject matter of debate betwixt Mr. Baxter and me in relation to this An address to the main Question. Aphorism: namely, whether I had reason to set down this in the Catalogue of those Aphorisms I excepted against, either as false and erroneous, or as dangerous and seditious; (and I confess I set it down, both as false and erroneous, and as dangerous and seditious also;) which I am now to prove it is.
CHAP. III. The Aphorism aforesaid proved to be False, from the account of Paternal Government and anci∣ent Monarchy. Governours not therefore Tyrants, because Ʋnlimited. ANd that we may not any longer Andabatarum more pugnare, Fight blindfold or in the dark, as Mr. Baxter loves to doe, without discovering or discerning what that is which is affirmed by one or denied by the other, I will once more repeat the The Aphorism in question. Aphorism it self which is This. —Of Governours some are limited, some de facto unlimited; the unlimited are Tyrants, and have no right to their unlimited Governments— This is Mr. Baxter's Aphorism in terminis; and this I confess is one and the first of those Aphorisms of his, which I think are all of them nigro signanda lapillo, To be marked with a black cole; as being all of them, (I mean all that I have specified) not onely false and errone∣ous, but, as I said before, dangerous and seditious also; And I put this Aphorism of his in the first place, because it is the most general, as speaking of all Go∣vernours, Sovereign as well as Subordinate, law∣full and unlawfull, limited and unlimited; and pronounceth all the Unlimited, without ex∣ception, to be Tyrants, and to have no Right to their unlimited Governments. 2. I put it in the first place, because Mr. Baxter seems to have laid it as the Foundation or Corner-stone, upon which he
superstructs all that follows, not in my Collection onely, but in that whole Book of his Holy Common∣wealth This Aphorism the foundati∣on of his Holy Common∣wealth. (as he calls it) from Page 106 to Page 490. that is to the end of the Book: Upon this foundation (I say) all his several discourses that follow in that whole Book are superstructed; As, 1. That Of the objective or material diffe∣rences of Government. 2. That Of the efficient and conveying Causes of Power. 3. That Of the happiest Commonwealth, and best form of Government. 4. How a Commonwealth may best be reduced to a Theocratical temper. 5. Of the Sovereigns Power over the Pastours of the Church. 6. Of the Sovereigns Prerogatives and Power go∣verning by Law and Judgments. 7. Of due Obedience to Rulers, and of Resistance. 8. And lastly, Of the late War; (for so he calls the late horrid Rebellion) for the justifying whereof, as this Aphorism is laid as the foundation, so all the aforesaid discourses that are built upon it, are espe∣cially and finally designed and intended; but most especially two ofthem, I mean that Of the efficient and conveying Causes of Power, and that Of due Obe∣dience to Rulers, and of Resistance. These (I say) are the reasons why I put this before all the rest of his Aphorisms which I except against in my Col∣lection. And this I except against, first, as considered in it self, without relating to Us or to our Governours either Civil or Ecclesiastical, and so considered I say it is false and erroneous: and secondly, I except against
it also, as it may be considered, and as I verily be∣lieve it was intended, with a respect to our Govern∣ment here in England; and so considered, I say it is dangerous and seditious. First then I say that what Mr. Baxter affirms in this Aphorism, (namely, that Governours de facto unlimited are Tyrants, and have no right to their This Apho∣rism of his charged with falshood. unlimited Government) is false, and erroneous con∣sidered in it self, as it is set down in general terms, without relation or application to any particular species or form of Government. For proof whereof, and in order thereunto, I will presume to take for granted, 1. That by Govern∣ours Three things premised. (of whom he saith some are limited, and some are unlimited) he means Sovereign or Supreme Go∣vernours; Subordinate Governours being all limited by the Supreme, (and therefore none of them un∣limited.) 2. That by limited and unlimited is meant li∣mited and unlimited by Men; there being no such thing as any Governour, how great or absolute so∣ever, that can be said either de jure or de facto to be unlimited by God, as I have already proved. And therefore, 3dly. I shall take it for granted al∣so, that by his de facto unlimited Governours, he means such as are not de facto limited by men or by humane Pacts and Constitutions; and consequent∣ly of all such Sovereign and Supreme Governours it is that he affirms, that they are Tyrants, and that none of them have any right to their respective so unlimited Governments. These things premised, I demand first of Mr. Bax∣ter, what he thinks of Paternal Government or the Of Paternal Government.
Government of Fathers over their Children, which was the first and most natural Government that ever was in the World, and was antecedent to Proprie∣ty in Nature, as well as in Time; though Mr. Bax∣ter doth Magisterially pro more suo, According to his custom, define Vide His Apology for the Noncon∣formists Mi∣nistry. p. 138. Propriety to be in Nature antecedent to Dominion. But to let that pass, I demand (I say) whether Paternal Government was either de facto or de jure a limited Government by any humane antecedent Law, Pact or Constitution? If so, I demand again, by whom or betwixt whom, was it made to be so? There were no Men to make it to before Adam, (unless Mr. Baxter will allow of the dream of the Preadamites) nor any besides Adam, untill the World began to be peopled with his Children; of all whom, I presume, Adam the first Gover∣nour, unlimi∣ted. Mr. Baxter will not deny their Father Adam to have been the lawfull Governour, though he was not, nor could not be limited by them, nor by any antece∣dent Covenant or Constitution made betwixt them and him: whence it follows, that either all de facto unlimited Governours are not Tyrants, and such as have no Right to their unlimited Govern∣ments, or that Adam the Father of all Mankind, and the first Governour that ever was in the World, was a Tyrant, and had no right to Govern his own Children, as he did, and his Childrens Children also, or at least had a right to do so as long as he lived; which was very near a thousand years. So that if any during that time did not submit to his Govern∣ment, it was not because he was not a lawfull, though an unlimited Governour; but because who∣soever disobeyed or resisted him, were not onely
unnatural Children but rebellious Subjects; of whom Cain that killed Abel his Brother was the first, and Cain the first Rebel. probably so were all descended from him, a wicked and rebellious generation, who for their rebellion against God and God's Vicegerent their Father Adam, their Sovereign Lord and King, were all swept a∣way by that universal Inundation and Deluge, wherein all mankind perished, but Noah and his Family onely, who were none of the cursed offspring of Cain, but the Posterity of Seth, whom God gave unto Adam, instead of Abel, whom Cain slew. After the Deluge, the first Monarch of the new Noah the first Monarch af∣ter the floud. World de jure was Noah, and probably de facto too as long as he lived, or at least as long as he and his Children and his Childrens Children lived together or near one another; and were all one people, and of one language (as the Text tells us they were) un∣till they set upon the building of Babel: but assoon as there was a confusion of Tongues, some speaking one language and some another, then (saith the Text) they were scattered over the face of the Earth; those that spake the same language and understood one another going together to the same place, and plant∣ing themselves in the same Countrey; which being then uninhabited was jure naturali, By the right of nature, primi occupantis, His that took first possessi∣on; and jure Divino positivo also, By God's positive law; God himself telling us, that he hath given the earth to the children of men; that is, to be possessed, inhabited, and cultivated by them. So that there were as many several Colonies which An account of Government after the con∣fusion of lan∣guages. afterwards grew into as many several Nations, as there were then several Languages, and as many se∣veral
Governours in chief over them, who if they were not the Fathers and Heads of the several Colonies (as probably enough they might be, and then the Regiment might still be Paternal) yet were without doubt such, as for their eminent courage and vertue, were submitted to by the rest of the same Language; or took upon themselves to be first their Conduc∣tors to their several places of habitation, and then to be their Kings or Supreme Governours after they came thither, and became one People or Body-Politick. So that upon this division and distribution of Ʋnlimited Monarchy most ancient. Mankind into several Countreys and Nations, were those first Kings, whom Justin speaksof, when he tells us that Principio rerum; Gentium, Nationumque Impe∣rium penes Reges erat, That all Nations at first were governed by Kings, & arbitria Principum pro legibus erant, And the Will of the Prince (saith he) was the Law of the People: so that as Monarchy (next to the Paternal) was the most ancient of all Govern∣ments, so Arbitrary or unlimited Monarchy was the most ancient of all Monarchies. I say most ancient; I do not say the best; for I do willingly acknowledge a Political Monarchy, (such as ours is in England) Political Mo∣narchy (as ours is) better than Despo∣tical. where the people are Governed by a King governing by Laws, and by Laws made for them by the King, with their own consent, is incomparably a much bet∣ter Government both for King and People, than an absolute, arbitrary and Despotical Monarchy is, or can be; as I did at large assert and maintain in the Sermon I preached at our present King's Coronation, and after∣wards printed by his Majestie's special command; which I add to shew, that the King himself was of the same Judgment as to that Particular.
But yet for all that I am not afraid to affirm, that Mr. Baxter's Political Aphorism I am now speaking Mr. B's opi∣nion of unli∣mited Gover∣nours false and dange∣rous. of, viz. That all unlimited Governours are Tyrants, and have no right to their unlimited Governments, is false in it self, and the publishing of it, as it is capitally criminal in a Subject of any unlimited Go∣vernment, so it is of dangerous consequence and se∣ditious, even in a limited or Political Government, of any Species or kind whatsoever. For there is no species or kind of Government, whether it be Monarchical, or Aristocratical, or Demo∣cratical, Ʋnlimited Governours not Tyrants, because unli∣mited. but it may be limited or unlimited, and it may be more or less limited; but none of them are therefore Tyrannical, because they are unlimited. For Tyrannus a Tyrant, properly so called, I mean as now the word signifies; (for at first it sig∣nified Two sorts of Tyrants. neither more nor less than a Monarch, or One governing All) is either Tyrannus usurpatione, a Tyrant by Usurpation, or Tyrannus exercitio, a Tyrant in Administration; that is, such a one as doth either violently and injuriously usurp the Govern∣ment which he hath no right to; or though he hath a right to it, doth wickedly and injuriously behave himself in the exercise of it. And such in Cromwell in both senses a Tyrant. both respects was Cromwell (if ever there were any) notwithstanding Mr. Baxter's magnifying of him, when time was, and exhorting his Son to follow his example in Governing as he did; which was, as he saith, to his immortal glory, and yet was as arbitrarily and as unlimitedly, as ever any of the Assyrian, or Persian, or Roman Empe∣rours did heretofore, or as the Turk or great Mogul now do.
And so may any unlimited Monarch doe, and yet Several unli∣mited Mo∣narchs, no Tyrants in either sense. be neither an Usurper, nor an unjust Governour, nor consequently be a Tyrant in either of the true no∣tions of a Tyrant, as Cromwell was in both: for as in the Monarchies before named, and in all other Kingdoms in all parts of the World, the Succession of Princes one unto another was Hereditary, general∣ly at least, and I think I may say universally, till oflate, and consequently They cannot all of them be said to have been Usurpers, or Tyrants by Ʋsurpa∣tion; so many of them have been Just, and Wise, and Temperate, and every way most excellent Prin∣ces; and so beloved by their Subjects while they lived, that they were Deified and adored by them af∣ter they were dead; and consequently they were not all of them Tyrants in the Exercise of their Go∣vernments, though they were unlimited by any an∣tecedent Pact, Covenant or Constitution betwixt them and their Subjects: which is enough to prove that all de facto unlimited Governours are not Tyrants, and consequently to prove this Aphorism of Mr. Bax∣ter's which affirms they are so, to be false. Neither if it could prove them to be Tyrants Exercitio, that is to govern Tyrannically, would that prove them to have no Right to their Government, supposing them to be no Usurpers.
CHAP. IV. No obligation from any Law, either of God or Nature or Nations, that all Governours should be limited by the People. Conquerours in a just War have an Ʋnlimited right; and for the people conquered, after submission, to rise up against them is Re∣bellion. BUt Mr. Baxter perhaps will reply, All of them Mr. B's mean∣ing perhaps, that all Go∣vernours ought de jure to be limited. are therefore Ʋsurpers because they are unlimi∣ted, as indeed he seems to insinuate by annexing de facto to unlimited; as if de jure all Governours ought to be limited in their governing by antecedent Covenants and Compacts betwixt those that are to govern, and those that are to be governed by them; and therefore those Governours that are not so limi∣ted or precontracted with, are Tyrants, and such Tyrants as have no right to govern, because de jure, by right, they ought to be limited or precontracted with. And this I do verily believe to be Mr. Bax∣ter's genuine sense and meaning in this Aphorism; and he that reads what he writes afterwards, espe∣cially in his Aphorisms and discourses of the Causes of Conveying power, and of Obedience and Resistance, will I am confident be of my mind as to this par∣ticular. Now if the reason why he doth so magisterially pronounce all those Governours that are de facto No obligati∣on that all Government should be so limited by any law. Ʋnlimited to be Tyrants, and to have no right to their Governments, be, because they ought de jure to be limited, I mean so limited as is before declared;
I demand quo jure, By what right or law, they are obliged to be so limited? Was it jure divino positi∣vo, By divine positive law? or was it jure divino naturali, By divine law of nature? or was it jure gentium, By the law of nations? for one of these three it must be, or else it could not be obligatory to all Governours and all Nations that are to be Govern∣ed by them. But first it was not jure divino positivo, By divine positive law. For where or in what place of God's 1. Not by the positive law of God. word, either of the new or old Testament, do we reade any positive command of God, that the Kings or Governours of all Nations, or of any Nation, should be antecedently limited by Pacts or Cove∣nants agreed upon betwixt them and the People, over whom they were to reign, before they could have any just Right or Title to governor reign over them? I am sure the Kings of Israel, though they were limited by God, not as Men onely, and as all other Kings are, but as Kings, or in the execution of their Kingly Office, and that jure positivo, By posi∣tive law, as well as jure naturali & morali, By na∣tural and moral law; yet they were never limited by the people either antecedenter or consequenter, neither à parte ante nor à parte post; nor was there any command of God, or so much as any intimati∣on from God that they should be so. Again, as such limitation of Governours by the 2 Not by the law of nature. People is not de jure divino positivo, By any positive law of God, there being no positive Command in God's word for it; so it is not de jure divino natura∣li, By the law of nature, neither; for then it would have been de facto likewise at first as well as after∣wards; and in all places as well as in some; especially
in such places, where there are no other rules or Laws for the People to live by, but the dictates of Nature onely; as in all inhabited places of the late∣ly discovered New world, where we find no other Government, but by Kings or Monarchs, no nor o∣ther Kings or Supreme Governours, but such as are unlimited. Lastly, as such a limitation of Kings or Supreme Governours by the People, is neither de jure positivo 3. Not by the law of Nati∣ons. nor naturali, Neither by any positive law, nor by the law of nature; so it is not de jure Gentium, By the law of Nations, neither; For nothing is de ju∣re Gentium, By the law of Nations, but that where∣in the interest of all Nations is concerned; as free∣dom of Trade and Commerce, the inviolableness of the Persons of Ambassadours, &c. but how is the in∣terest of all other Nations concerned in this or that particular Nation's being governed by a limited or unlimited Prince or Governour? and supposing the first Kings or Sovereigns to have been unlimited, as Justine and all other Historians tell us they were; and as in all probability they were indeed in the first plantation of the World: and supposing too their unlimited Governments to have been Heredita∣ry, as all History Humane and Divine do testify also: I would fain know, how the Heirs and Successours of such unlimited Princes could come to be limited. It could not be upon the account of a conditional Election; for an Election cannot be, but into a place that is void; but in an Hereditary Kingdom there is never any vacancy, because in an Hereditary Kingdom The King never dies, though the man The King ne∣ver dies, how to be under∣stood. who was King doth; for immediately assoon as the Father ceaseth, the Son or next Heir begins to
be King, and to be King as his Father was, that is, an unlimited Sovereign as his Father was, and so from generation to generation. And then Mr. Bax∣ter must grant, that the Hereditary Successours of unlimited Governours may have a Right to their un∣limited Governments, and such a right as their Sub∣jects cannot deprive them of, without such a Go∣vernour's own consent; nor he deprive his Heirs of the same right, by his consenting to the limitation or lessening of it, unless they and every one of them consent to it also. Or else he must prove that a free People, or a People that were sui juris, At their own disposal, and under no Government at all (if there were ever such a people in the World) might not voluntarily and lawfully submit themselves to the Government of one or more Governours, without any antecedent Pact or Covenant to limit him or them in his or their Government; and for proof of this he must produce some universal binding Law to the contrary; which untill he can doe, I do and must still affirm, that unlimited Governours (supposing them to be no U∣surpers, and that they do not reign tyrannically, as certainly there be some that do not) are not all of them Tyrants, because they are unlimited; or such as have no right to their Governments upon that account onely; and consequently that this Aphorism of Mr. Baxter's, which affirms the contrary, is false; The conse∣quence dri∣ven home. and would be Treason and justly punishable as Trea∣son, if it were affirmed by a Subject of a Despotical Prince or Sovereign, such as all Kings at first were; and such as all Kings in the East and West-Indies, and in Africk, and some in Europe, as the Turk and Musco∣vite and French King, are at this day.
Whereunto may be added the unlimited Right Conquerours in a just war unlimited. and Title which Conquerours have over those they have conquered; I mean such Conquerours, as by a just War are become Lords and Masters of the lives and fortunes of those they have subdued; whe∣ther they be Rebels or Enemies; and therefore as they may justly save the lives of as many or as few as they please, so, and much more so, may they justly govern those, whose lives they have saved, as they think fit, and most for their own advantage; as the Israelites did the Gibeonites, making them Instances out of Scripture. Hewers of Wood and drawers of Water; that is, by employing them in all manner of drudgery, and servile works: And thus and worse than thus, Da∣vid did to the Ammonites, even to all the people of the cities of Ammon (saith the Text) which he had conquered, putting them under sawes and harrows of iron, and making them pass through the Brick-kilns, because they had violated the jus Gentium or the law of Nations, by the barbarous usage of his Ambassa∣dours, whom out of kindness he had sent unto them. And yet (which is observable) the Ammonites were none of those Nations, which God had devoted to destruction, and commanded the Israelites to make war upon; but it was a War the Ammonites had justly drawn upon themselves with the sad and severe effects of it. And what if our King having been so long, and The like Case supposed be∣twixt our King and the Algerines. so continuedly, and so outragiously injured and pro∣voked by the Algerines robbing and pillaging of his Ships, and inslaving and murthering of his Sub∣jects, should make War upon them, and by God's blessing vanquish and subdue them, making himself
Master of all they have, both of strength and wealth, both by Sea and Land, and of that den of Thieves it self (I mean the City of Argiers,) might he not, if he would, justly destroy them all? or if he thought it better for himself, or more for his own Interest, sell them all for slaves, or use them all as slaves to tugg at the Oar all their life long in their own Gal∣leys, or to dig in Mines and Quarries, or to mend high ways, or to put them to any other toilsome or sordid labour, and to have nothing for it but brown Bisket and water for their food, and for their clothing any thing that will but cover their naked∣ness; and all this while to be beaten as often and as much as their Task-masters shall think fit to inflict it? This would be very hard usage you will say, but no harder than that wherewith they have used others; nor no harder than a Conquerour may most justly inflict on such inhumane Monsters, and such profest Enemies of all mankind, as they are. Howsoever I hope Mr. Baxter will not deny such a Conquerour to be an unlimited Governour of those whom he hath so conquered, and yet to have a just right and Title to his unlimited Government, as every Master hath likewise over his slaves, whether they be born in his house, or bought with his money, without capitulating with them before-hand, how he shall govern them, or how they will be governed by him. But may not a People though conquered in a just Whether a∣conquered peo∣ple may after submission free themselves by force? War, and deservedly made and used as slaves and Vassals by the Conquerour, doe what they can, to free themselves from that slavery and servitude? Mr. Baxter thinks they may, as appears by what he saith Page 193 of his Holy-Commonwealth, where Mr. B. saith, I.
he tells us that Dominatio, that is, (in his sense) any unlimited Government is penal to the Subjects, and they may escape it if they can, yea though they have submitted themselves to such a servitude: and conse∣quently, à fortiori, By stronger reason, they may doe what they can to free themselves from it, if they be forced by a Conquerour to submit to it. But this was not the judgment or doctrine of the Prophet Jeremy; for Nebuchadnezzar had no right The prophet Jeremy of another judg∣ment. or title, but that of Conquest, to that unlimited power he exercised over the Jews by making what Viceroys he pleased to govern them, and by impo∣sing and exacting what tribute he pleased from them; and by forcing their King his Vassal to take an Oath of Allegeance to him, which is called the Oath of God, and for the breaking whereof Zedechiah (whom Nebuchadnezzar after he had deposed Jehoiachim, 2 Chron. 3. 13. Jerem. 5. 2. made his Viceroy under him) seeking to free himself and the people from that bondage or unlimited power, which the King of Babylon exercised over them, is by God himself declared to be a Rebel, and his endeavouring to cast off that unlimited yoke is called Rebellion; and Rebellion it could not be, Zedekiah's casting off the yoke of the king of Baby∣lon, called Rebellion and punished as such. unless it had been a rising up against a rightfull So∣vereign: and therefore as God called it a Rebellion, so he punish'd it as a Rebellion by giving up Jerusalem and Zedechiah himself into the hands of him against whom he had rebelled; who after he had slain his Children before his eyes, he presently caused them to be put out, that the slaughter of his Children might be the last thing he should ever see; and then carried him captive unto Babylon, and kept him in a dungeon till he died: he caused likewise the walls
of Jerusalem to be broken down, and the House of God it self, that glorious fabrick, that wonder of the World, to be destroyed, and all the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and Artificers of the Nation to be carried away captive also, together with all the wealth and whatsoever was worth the carrying a∣way, leaving nothing but some of the poorer sort of labouring People to dress and till the ground, and to keep it from being overrun with wild beasts. So that all the Jews got by this and their former Rebellion against the King of Assyria, was but the making of their yoke harder to be born, and hea∣vier than it was before; as it seems by the Prophet Jeremy's sad bewailing of it in his Book of Lamenta∣tions. And as the Prophet Jeremy declares the Ef∣fects, so the Prophet Ezekiel declares the Causes of Witnessed by the prophet Ezekiel. this their miserable condition; namely their Perjury, breaking the Oath of Allegeance they had taken, and their revolting from their obedience they had sworn to the King of Babylon, who had conquered them and forced them to submit to his unlimited power in Government of them; which if it had been unlawfull for them to obey, God would not have suffered them to be punished as they were, for endeavouring as they did, to free themselves from it; at least he would not have called that endeavour of theirs a Rebellion, and specified it as the main cause, for which they were so punished. And it is very observable, that though God had promised to free them from that yoke, which first the Assyrians had laid upon them, and afterwards Their delive∣rance at last from the Babylonish captivity, was not by force of Arms. the Persian Monarchs did keep them under; yet, when after their seventy years Captivity was accom∣plished, and the prefixed time of their deliverance
was come, as the Text tells us Daniel knew by Books (namely by what he had read in the former Prophets) it was, God would not suffer them so much as to endeavour to deliver themselves by strong hand, or by rising up in Arms against their unlimited So∣vereign, as no doubt he could have done if he would; but he put into the heart first of Cyrus, and after∣wards of Artaxerxes Kings of Persia, then their Ma∣sters and unlimited Sovereigns, not onely to give them leave to return into their own Countrey, but abundantly to furnish them with Money and Mate∣rials of all sorts, for the rebuilding of the Temple and City of Jerusalem, as is recorded at large in the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah. And like unto this was their former Deliverance out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage, As neither was that from the E∣gyptian bon∣dage. from whence after a long and grievous slavery they were brought out by a strong hand indeed, but not by a strong hand of their own; for as they never attempted any thing against the arbitrary unlimited Government they lived under, during their very long and very cruel slavery in Egypt, so when at last they went out of it, they went not out without Pharaoh's leave to doe so; though there were above Six hundred thousand fighting Men amongst them, a number sufficient to have made their way by force against all the Power Pharaoh could have raised to hinder it; but God would not give them courage, or suffer them to doe so, to the end that there might The reason of this, to give no counte∣nance to re∣bellion. be no countenance or colour for Rebellion, against even the most unjust, and injurious, and tyrannical So∣vereign Powers, to be found upon record in his Word, as allowed by him in his own People, to justifie or en∣courage any other people or persons, upon any pre∣tence
to rebell against their Sovereigns, whether li∣mited or unlimited; nay whether they were no Ty∣rants or Tyrants, so they were not Ʋsurpers, and consequently Rebels themselves against their right∣full Sovereign. For, as I have already proved, that all unlimited Go∣vernours are not Tyrants, because they are unlimited: so I am now to prove that all Tyrants do not lose their right to their Government, because they are Tyrants or because they govern tyrannically, still supposing them to be no Usurpers. CHAP. V. That lawfull Governours by being Tyrants, do not forfeit their Right to their Government, proved from Scripture, both Negatively and Affirma∣tively. NOw what or whom Mr. Baxter himself doth mean by Tyrants here in this place, it is plain What a Tyrant is, in Mr. B's notion. and evident from what he saith Page 86. of his Po∣litical Aphorisms; where distinguishing betwixt an Ʋsurper and a Tyrant, he tells us, that An Ʋsurper is he that wants a Title, and A Tyrant is one that doth abuse it, or useth it not as he ought to use it; that is (saith he) for the common good. So that in his Notion of a Tyrant, he that hath never so just a Title to the Government, if he govern not as he ought to govern, is a Tyrant; and if he be a Tyrant,
he hath no Right (saith he) unto his Government, whether it be limited or unlimited. No, saith Mr. Baxter, I do not say he hath no right to his Government, but that he hath no right to his unlimited Government, whereby I confess I know not what he means, unless it be this, that an unlimited Governour is not a Governour, but a Ty∣rant; and that he hath no right to his unlimited Go∣vernment, because there ought to be no such Go∣vernment. But then again, what will become of his division of Governours, and consequently of Governments also, into some that are limited, and some that are unlimited? If he reply, that though de facto, As to matter of fact, there be some Governours and Go∣vernments that are unlimited, yet de jure, As to matter of right, they ought all of them to be limi∣ted; and consequently, no man can have a right to an unlimited Government, because a Government that is unlimited is no rightfull Government. If this be his meaning, it is but petitio Principii, A beg∣ging of that which is in question, nay of that which A Gover∣nour's being unlimited, no hindrance to his Right. I think I have put out of question already, by the Instances I have given. (1) of Paternal Govern∣ment in the Old World before the Floud. (2.) Of the first Monarchs in the New World after the Floud. (3.) Of all Conquerours over those whom they have conquered in a just War; who were all of them un∣limited Governours by any humane Constitution, and that not de facto, As in fact, onely, but de jure, In right, also; there being no positive law of God, nor no humane antecedent Pact, or Constitution to the contrary. Such likewise were the Roman Empe∣rours; and yet their Right and Title to their unli∣mited
Government was never question'd, either by Christ himself, or by any of the Primitive Christi∣ans, who were his first and best disciples. So that there is no more to be said to prove that it is not the Governour's (I mean the Sovereign or Supreme Governour's) being unlimited that can make him to have no right to his unlimited Government. Neither need there to be much said to prove, that A lawfull Go∣vernour's be∣ing a Tyrant, doth not for∣feit his Right. it is not the lawfull Governour's being a Tyrant (whe∣ther he be limited or unlimited) that can make him lose or forfeit the right he had, or hath, unto his Government, so as to free his Subjects from their obligation of obedience to him, or warrant their taking up of Arms, or rebelling against him, and consequently to depose him and put him to death: for upon the same ground, and by the same reason the former may be done, the latter may be done also. So that the Presbyterians are no more excusable from being our late blessed King's murtherers, than the In∣dependents; the latter inferring the Conclusion from the Premisses of the former. But this by the way onely. I proceed to the proof of what I have in hand, namely, That a lawfull Sovereign, whether limited or un∣limited, The Propo∣sition to be proved. doth not lose or forfeit his right to his So∣vereignty or Government over his Subjects by being a Tyrant, or by Governing them in a Tyrannical man∣ner; so as upon that account his Subjects may law∣fully disown or rebell against him. 1. Because there is nothing in God's word to war∣rant Several ar∣guments to prove it. it. 2. Because there is much to be alledged out of God's word to disprove it.
3. Because the Doctrine and Practice of the Pri∣mitive Christians is against it. 4. Because it seemeth to be a contradiction to the nature of the thing it self to maintain it. 5. And lastly, Because supposing, but not grant∣ing it to be true, it would be mischievous to Man∣kind and destructive to humane Society in the prac∣tice of it. And first, this Aphorism or Assertion of Mr. Bax∣ter's, viz, That a Sovereign or Supreme Governour (whether limited or unlimited it matters not) hath no Right, or forfeits the Right he had, unto his Go∣vernment, if he be a Tyrant, or Governs otherwise than by the Laws of either God or man or both he ought to do; is False, because there is nothing in The 1. Ar∣gument. Scripture either of the old or new Testament to warrant the truth of it. For this being a matter of so important and universal a concernment as it is, in regard of all Times, Places and Nations, though God foresaw that some, nay many, very many of the Kings or Supreme Governours, both unlimited and limited, not onely of other Nations, but of his own People, would be Tyrants, that is, such as would govern their Subjects, not with Equity, Justice and Moderation, as they ought to doe; nor accor∣ding either to Divine or humane Laws (though of their own making) but according to their own Will and pleasures: yet there is no mention of any for∣feiture of their Right to govern their Subjects that they incur by it, nor of any permission for their Subjects to rise or rebell, no nor so much as to de∣fend themselves by any kind of force against them; much less to depose them or to set up others in the stead of them: which if they might have done, or
if it had been best for them to doe so, God no doubt (having so special and peculiar a care of them and kindness for them more than he had for any other of the Nations) would have permitted them (at least) to have done what they could, to have freed themselves from so heavy a yoke, and told them how, and when, and in what case they might have done so: which because he hath not, we may be sure it was not his Will they should doe so, and conse∣quently it was not lawfull for them to doe so; and if not for them, then certainly 'tis for no other Subjects of any other Nation neither. Again, besides this proof of the falseness of this Aphorism ab authoritate Scripturae negativè, From the authority of Scripture in a Negative way, The 2. Argu∣ment from Scripture Af∣firmatively. because there is nothing in Scripture to justifie the truth of it by: there be many Affirmative and po∣sitive places in Scripture to prove the contrary; namely, that Sovereign Princes or Supreme Gover∣nours do not forfeit their Right to their respective Governments though they be Tyrants, or because they are Tyrants; nor are their Subjects disobliged from their Allegeance and Obedience to them in all lawfull things because they are so. Such are all those places in the New Testament, which command obe∣dience to the Sovereign or Supreme Governours that then were; and particularly to Nero himself Obedience to Nero himself, strictly com∣manded. the Roman Emperour, who was not onely one of the worst of Men, but the greatest of Tyrants that ever was in the World. And yet it was in his time, and for subjection and obedience to him, and not to the Roman Senate as partakers of the Sovereignty with him, (as Mr. Baxter would have it) that those strict commands were given to the Christians of
those times, that were his Subjects, to obey him in all his lawfull commands, and not to resist him, not , though they could not obey him, when he commanded what was sinfull or unlawfull. Moreover it is observable, that as the Prince then reigning, when these commands of obedience to him, and not resisting of him, were given to the Christians by the Apostles, was a most merciless and cruel Tyrant toward all his Subjects in general, and And that when Christi∣ans under his actual perse∣cution. most of all to those that professed themselves Chri∣stians in particular: So it is observable (I say) that at this very time this cruel Tyrant did actually per∣secute the Christians in a most horrible and outra∣gious manner and measure; and yet even then, when and whilst they were so cruelly persecuted by him, they were commanded to behave them∣selves as dutifull and obedient Subjects towards him, and that for Conscience sake, and not for fear of punishment onely, or for fear of being worse and worse used by him; which the Apostles (who knew the mind of God much better than we do) would never have commanded them to doe, if Nero, by his tyrannical usage of them, had lost his right to go∣vern them, or ceased to be their Sovereign. Lastly, as it is observable at what time these Precepts of obedience to Sovereign Princes, and of not resisting them, were given to their Christian Subjects, (namely, when the worst of Men, and greatest of Tyrants, and first Persecutour of Christi∣ans was their Sovereign) so it is worth our obser∣vation also, to take notice of the Persons, whom the Holy Ghost made choice of to publish and pro∣claim Why S. Peter and S. Paul made choice of, to preach up obedience. these Precepts unto the World. They were St. Peter and St. Paul; of whom the one had been
reproved by Christ, whilst he was upon the Earth, for resisting the Magistrate, though it were in de∣fence of Christ himself; and the other was reproved by Christ from Heaven, for obeying the Magistrate's sinfull commands by persecuting Christ in his mem∣bers: but both of them had now better learned Christ, namely, neither to obey the Magistrate when he com∣manded them to doe that which was sinfull, nor to resist him when he persecuted them for not obeying of him. And what they had learned themselves, they of all the rest of the Apostles were the fittest to teach o∣thers; because as the one of them was more peculiarly than any other of the Twelve, the Apostle of the Jews; so the other of them was as peculiarly the Apostle of the Gentiles; and both of them so by God's own appointment: so that the whole world being ac∣cording to Scripture divided into Jews and Gentiles, the whole world or all Mankind might be taught this doctrine, which it so much concerns the peace of the world, that all men should learn and practice, namely, the Doctrine of indispensable either active or passive Obedience of Subjects to their Sovereigns, how ill soever they are governed or how much so∣ever they are oppressed by them.
CHAP. VI. This Proposition farther proved from the Practice of the Primitive Christians. ANd as this was the doctrine preached both to Jews and Gentiles by the Apostles; so was it believed and practised by the Primitive Christians, The 3. Argu∣ment from the practice of the Primitive Christians. who followed herein the example of Christ their head, of whom as it was foretold by the Prophets, so it is recorded by the Evangelists, that he was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet as a sheep before the shearer is dumb, so he opened not his mouth, but without murmuring or contradiction submitted him∣self to the sentence of an unjust Judge, and patiently endured the execution of it; leaving to us an Exam∣ple (as St. Peter tells us) of suffering as he did without resisting those that are in authority, though they use it or abuse it unjustly and injuriously, and though it be in our power to resist it, as I am sure it was in Christ's. And herein (I say) the first and best of his Disciples follow'd his example; I mean the Primi∣tive Christians of the three first Ages, that is, all the Whilst under Heathen and Tyrant Prin∣ces. while they were subject to Heathen and Tyrannical and persecuting Princes; and yet we do not reade that ever they did so much as make any the least doubt of the right, those Tyrannical and persecuting Princes had to govern them: much less did they upon the pretence of those Princes having forfeited their Right to their Government, ever take up arms either offensive or defensive, against any of them; as no doubt they might and would have done, if
they had thought or had been taught, that those Princes had either had no right to govern them, because they were unlimited, or that they had forfeited the Right they had, because they were Tyrants. For it was not out of Stupidity, or because they were insensible of their sufferings, neither was it Their non-re∣sistance not for want of power, &c. out of Pusillanimity, or want of courage to encoun∣ter with their enemies, though never so numerous; for how could they that did not fear death, the most painfull and tormenting death, fear any thing that men could doe unto them? nor lastly, was it Weakness or want of power to make resistance or to defend themselves against their persecuting Princes, that was the cause they did not, (as not onely Bellarmine and other Papists, but many of those that call and think themselves to be the best of Protestants, are not ashamed to say it was) but mere Conscience of their But cut of conscience to God. duty to God, in obeying even such Princes as those were, by doing whatsoever they commanded which God had not forbidden, willingly and chearfully, and by suffering meekly and patiently whatsoever they did wrongfully inflict upon them, for not obey∣ing them when they could not obey them and God too; as it undeniably appears by those Apologies that were made in the name of all the Primitive Christians of those times, by Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Athena∣goras, and others, who all of them tell their perse∣cuting Emperours, that it was not for want of force or courage, but merely for conscience sake and be∣cause their Religion had forbidden them to doe so, that they did not take up Arms to defend themselves against those Powers that God had set over them;
though the power they received from God were never so ill used or abused by them. Which having made appear from Precepts of Scripture, and from the Practice of those Precepts by the Primitive Christians, one would think there need no more to be said to justifie my exception a∣gainst this Aphorism of Mr. Baxter's, as being con∣trary to what was taught by Christ and his Apostles, and what was practised by the first and best of their Disciples. CHAP. VII. The Revolt of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam, if it were by special commission, no warrant to us. BUt yet because there is something in the Old Testament (which is the word of God as well as the New) which may seem to favour Mr. Bax∣ter's opinion; namely, That Tyrants have no right to their Government, or that Sovereign Princes by becoming Tyrants do lose or forfeit the right they had unto their Government; we will consider what can be alledged out of the Old Testament to prove that Assertion. There is no such Law I am sure, nor no such po∣sitive declaration of God's Will, that a King or Sove∣reign Prince ceases to be a king or Sovereign, when he is, or because he is a Tyrant; or that his Subjects shall cease to be his Subjects, or cease to acknow∣ledge and obey him as their Sovereign upon that
account, or indeed upon any other account whatso∣ever: much less is there any thing said in the Old Testament to warrant or justifie the deposing of So∣vereign Princes by their Subjects, upon any pre∣tence of male administration of their Government in any kind or any degree. And therefore if there were never so many Examples or Instances in matter of fact to the contrary, they would never prove the thing it self to be lawfull. But indeed there is but one Instance or Example in the whole Old Testament appliable to this purpose, and that is that of Reho∣boam, The ten Tribes revolt from Rehoboam examined. from whom the ten Tribes revolted, for but threatning he would oppress them more than his Fa∣ther had done. Now from this one Example onely, there be some that do conclude, that Subjects in case of Tyranny and oppression by their Sovereigns (especially if there be otherwise no hope of their being eased or freed from it) may lawfully doe as the ten Tribes did, revolt from them and set up others to reign over them. But as, à facto ad jus non valet argumentum, From matter of fact to matter of right is no good conse∣quence; so neither, à semel facto ad semper sic faci∣endum, From a thing's having been once done, to have it alway so done, is no good consequence nei∣ther. So that supposing, but not granting, that it was lawfull for Jeroboam and the Ten tribes to doe as they did, because Jeroboam had been formerly told by the Prophet Ahljah, That God would give him those ten Tribes to reign over them; and be∣cause God himself, speaking of the revolting of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam; saith 1 Kings 12. 24 expressly, that the thing was from him: supposing I say that upon these
considerations this fact of Jeroboam's and the ten Tribes in revolting from Rehoboam, and setting up Suppose what they did, might be by special Commission. Jeroboam in his stead to reign over them, had been no Rebellion of the People against their lawfull So∣vereign; but an execution of God's command a∣gainst him, who, though he was their Sovereign, was but God's Subject; and therefore might be punished by him, when, and how, and by whom, and to what degree he pleased; as having forfeited to him for his own and Father's sins all the power and dominion he had over his Subjects, as derived from him, and held of him, and that but durante bene placito, During his good pleasure, onely; what I say if, upon such considerations as these, that par∣ticular fact of Jeroboam and the ten Tribes were justifiable, would it follow that any other Subject or Subjects, without such a special or particular Commission from God, as they had, might doe as they did? Would it not follow as well that any The like cases of Abraham. man might commit Murther, and the most bar∣barous and the most unnatural of all murthers, I mean the murther of his own and onely Son, be∣cause Abraham was not onely permitted, but com∣manded by God to doe so, nay and commended by God for being so ready and so willing as he was to doe it? And would it not follow as well likewise, Of the Israe∣lites. that any man might rob, and spoil their Neigh∣bours, because the Israelites did so to the Egyptians and were blameiess, because God who is Lord Pa∣ramount of all mens lives and fortunes, (and to whom all men have forfeited themselves and all that they have by their sins) had given them a special and particular Commission to doe so? Whereunto I Of Phineas. might add the killing of Zimri and Cozbi by Phineas,
which was done no doubt by God's special inspira∣tion, because God was so well pleased with it, that the Plague in the heat and height of it presently cea∣sed; and Phineas was by God himself highly com∣mended and rewarded for it. And yet I believe, Those cases applied. that if any man were indicted and arraigned either for Robbery or Murther, though those that he rob∣bed were Egyptians, that is never so much his own or God's enemies, or if those that he killed were actually committing never so great a sin: I believe, I say, that one's pleading the Israelites robbing of the Egyptians to justifie his theft, or the other's pleading of Phineas his killing of Zimri and Cozbi to justifie his murther, would not save either of them from the Gallows: so neither will the pleading of what was done by Jeroboam and the ten Tribes, (supposing it done by God's special Command or Approbation) justifie or excuse any other for doing what they did, unless they could make it appear they have the same Warrant, that they had for the doing of it; which I am sure is not now to be ex∣pected, no more than it is to be expected that the Sun should stand still, as it did once at the com∣mand of Joshua; or go backward, as it did another time at the entreaty of Hezekiah. We are to be No warrant hence for us to do the like. governed, and to govern our selves by those Laws and Rules which God hath given to all mankind in general, and not by such extraordinary dispensa∣tions as God hath been pleased to give some men at some times in particular; and much less by any pre∣tended or fancied Enthusiasms or inspirations of our own; so that supposing this revolting of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam, and the setting up of Jero∣boam to have been lawfull, it will not prove it to be
lawfull for any other Subjects to doe so too upon the same pretence (viz. upon the pretence of being ne∣ver so grievously oppressed) unless they have the same special Warrant of God for it. But (2dly.) I affirm that what was done by Jeroboam and the ten Tribes was an unlawfull and The Revolt sinfull against the fifth Com∣mandment. a sinfull action, I mean their revolting from Reho∣boam their lawfull Sovereign notwithstanding his Fathers or his own oppression of them, because it was a transgression of an everlasting Statute or Or∣dinance of God (I mean the fifth Commandment of the Moral Law) whereby all mankind is obliged to honour and obey not onely their natural Parents, but all their lawfull Superiours, and especially him that is Supreme, who is Pater Patrioe, the Father as well as the Ruler of all his Subjects, and set over them by God to be so. And therefore, as a Father The case be∣twixt a King and his Sub∣jects the same as betwixt a father and his children. doth not lose or forfeit the authority of a Father, by being not so good, so carefull, and so kind a Father as he ought to be; nor are his Children there∣by discharged from paying him that duty and obe∣dience which they owe unto him, no not although they be never so harshly or hardly dealt with, or used by him: so neither do Kings or Supreme Go∣vernours lose the Authority they have over their Subjects, or cease to be their Kings, because they govern them otherwise than they ought to do; nor are their Subjects upon that account disobliged from their Allegeance and Obedience they owe unto them. For if Servants, as St. Peter saith, are to obey their Masters, and not onely such as are  and , Or betwixt a Master and his servants. 1 Pet. a. 18. good and gentle, but such as are  too, such as are froward and perverse, that is, such as are not onely hard to be pleased, but severe in com∣manding
and cruel in chastising them also; much more are Subjects to obey and to continue in obedi∣ence to their Sovereigns, though they be never so severely dealt with by them; and therefore the revolting of the ten Tribes from Rehoboam, being their lawfull Sovereign, upon the account of their having been oppressed by his Father, and upon his threatning them to be more oppressed by himself, was not lawfull; unless they had had a special Com∣mand or Commission from God for it; which it No such speci∣al commission for the Re∣volt as won supposed. doth not appear they had either by any express words of the Text, or by any necessary consequence that can be inferred from it, either in relation to what was done by Jeroboam, or what was done by the ten Tribes. CHAP. VIII. Jeroboam's Case stated, and his pretence enquired into. The Revolt called Rebellion by God him∣self. ANd first as to what was done by Jeroboam, though it may seem to be justifiable, as if it had been done by a special Commission from God, Jeroboam's case stated. because God had told him by the Prophet Ahijah, that he was to be King over the ten Tribes after they were rent off from the other two Tribes; yet did he not thereby give Jeroboam either Commissi∣on or permission to rend them off, or to doe any thing towards the rending them off himself. For
the words which God spake by Ahijah the Prophet to Jeroboam were not, Thou shalt rend, but, I will rend the Kingdom out of the hand of Solomon, and I 1 Kings 11. 31. will give ten Tribes to thee, and not, Thou shalt take ten Tribes unto thy self, by using either force or fraud, or any other sinister, seditious or unlawfull means, either for the getting or the keeping of the Kingdom which God had promised to give him. But Jeroboam did both. For first, whether out of a distrust of God's performance of his promise, or His distrust and impati∣ence. out of an impatience to stay God's own time for it, no sooner was Solomon dead, but home comes Je∣roboam out of Egypt, not called by God but by a discontented party of the People, to whom after in all probability he had aggravated their grievances, and thereby incensed them as much as he could a∣gainst the present Government, he offered himself to be their Head, and as such marched with them, to expostulate and capitulate with their King, ho∣ping they would receive an unsatisfactory answer, as they did, and thereupon would presently make him their King, as they did also: So that he had it not from God, who onely had power to dispose of it, (for by him, as he himself tells us, Kings reign) but from the People, the People that were then under an obligation of obedience to a lawfull Sovereign and consequently had no power to dispose of them∣selves, or to become Subjects to another, no more than he had a right to become their King, untill he that promised him he should be so, had made him so, which he could and infallibly would have done in his own good time, without any thing done on Jeroboam's part but the relying upon the promise of God onely; which he distrusting or being too
impatiently ambitious to stay for the performance of it, took his own seditious and rebellious way for the hastening, as he did afterwards for the keeping of himself to be a King. For as he caused the ten Tribes to revolt from Rehoboam in order to the ma∣king himself their King, so he caused them to revolt from God also by setting up other Gods, and other Priests, and other places of worship, thereby making a formal Schism in the Church, to prevent a possibility of re-union in the State. So that as he sinned and made Israel to sin for the getting, so he sinned and How he made Israel to sin. made Israel to sin much more for the holding and keeping of the Kingdom, which he might have had and kept much longer than he did, if he had stayed God's leisure for the having, and done no∣thing to displease God for the holding of it. Where∣as if he would have done as David did, he should have had the success that David had, without sin∣ning himself, or making so many Thousands to sin with him and for him, as hedid. David was not onely told by the Propet Samuel that he should be King, as Jeroboam was by the David's case alike and his different be∣haviour. Prophet Ahijah; but he was anointed too, which Jeroboam was not. And yet when it was twice in his power to have stept up into the Throne by destroy∣ing Saul (whom the men of these times would have said, as Abishai did, that God had delivered into his hand to be destroyed by him) he would not doe it, nor suffer it to be done, but said, God forbid that I should lay my hand on the Lord's anoin∣ted; 1 Sam. 26. 8, 9, &c. as the Lord liveth, the Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battel and perish; howsoever the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine hand against the
Lord's anointed. This was David's resolution, and this should have been Jeroboam's resolution also, to have expected God's performance of his promise in his own time, and in his own way; and not have snatched the Crown out of God's hand, and put it himself upon his own head, before God had anointed his head for it. Moreover it is observable, that is was not that The ground of Jeroboam's pretence. for which Ahijah the Prophet told Jeroboam, God was so angry with Solomon, that he would rend a∣way ten Tribes of the twelve from his Son (which was Idolatry) it was not that (I say) which Jeroboam pretended to be the cause of his rising and rebelling, and his stirring up the ten Tribes to re∣bell against Rehoboam; but it was a more popular pretence and such a one as the generality of the Peo∣ple is usually most concerned in, and concerned for; namely, the publick grievance by Taxes and Tri∣butes, which how necessary soever for their own de∣fence and safety, do always seem an insupportable burthen to the Subjects. And therefore the ambitious Aspirers of all times have always made use of this Topick, first to discontent the People with their pre∣sent His artifice to discontent the people. condition, though it be never so tolerable, nay never so good a one, and then to promise them a relief of all their imaginary grievances, if they will be ruled by them; which the foolish People belie∣ving first call them their Patriots, and afterwards (if they can) make them their Princes, who com∣monly prove the greatest of Tyrants; and then the People that raised them find and feel the fruits of their own folly, and when it is too late to help it, repent of it. And yet such is the incorrigible mad∣ness as well as folly of the multitude, that though it
hath been never so often entrapp'd, it always hath been, and still is and ever will be apt to be taken with the same bait, how dear soever it hath cost them formerly. It was not long before this, that Absalom by the counsel of Achitophel made use of the same artifice Absalom's rebellion rais∣ed by the same artifice. to stir up the people, and to make them to rebell against their King and his Father, by making them believe, first, that they were oppressed by David, and had not justice done them; and secondly, if he were in power every man should have right done him, and no man should have cause to complain amongst them. This they were so foolish as to be∣lieve, though their condition then was better than ever it had been before, or ever it was afterwards; for it was David a man after God's own heart that was then their King, and who as himself (or rather God's Spirit by his mouth) tells us, fed them with Psalm 78. 73. a faithfull and true heart, and ruled them prudently with all his power; and if prudently, then justly no doubt also: and yet it was his not doing of justice that was made the pretence of the rebellion against him; and by whom? by Absalom, one whom the People knew to have been a murtherer of his own brother, and therefore not to be a very likely man to govern them either more justly, or more merci∣fully than his Father did: so that as the pretence of their rising up against David was groundless, so their setting up of Absalom in his stead was folly and madness. And now one would have thought, the ill success they had in that action would have made them more wary than to be tempted and prevailed with again, so soon at least as afterwards they were, to
another rebellion against the Grandchild of David upon another, and that perhaps upon as groundless a pretence as the former; I mean this of Jeroboam, which we are now speaking of. For the pretence of Jeroboam and the ten Tribes rebellion against Re∣hoboam Jeroboam's pretence in∣quired into. was, because he would not ease them of the heavy yoke which they pretended Solomon his Fa∣ther had laid upon them: which had it been true to never so great a degree, would have been no just cause of the Rebellion of Subjects against their So∣vereign, as is already shewn. But I do not find in the History of Solomon's Reign, from the begin∣ning to the end of it, as it is very particularly re∣corded No mention of a yoke in So∣lomon's. reign. in the first book of Kings, and in the second of Chronicles, any mention of so heavy a yoke, or indeed of any yoke at all that was laid upon any of the Complainants, I mean upon any of the ten Tribes of Israel. I reade indeed in the fourth Chap∣ter of the first book of Kings, Verses 20, 21. That there was a great Tribute or Levy made by Solo∣mon, The great Tri∣bute was a Levy of men. for the building of that glorious Temple of God in Jerusalem, which was the wonder of the World, and for other his many and magnificent Structures; and that this Tribute and Levy was of the Persons of his Subjects for bond-service, that is to make them to work as slaves or bond-men under Task-masters, and that not for wages, but for meat and drink onely to maintain them in life and health and strength, to endure the hardship and toilsome labour they were put to. But what Subjects of Solomon's were these, And that, not of the chil∣dren of Israel. that this heavy Yoke was laid upon? They were, saith the Text, The People that were left of the A∣morites, Hittites, Perizites, Hivites and Jebusites,
which were not of the children of Israel. The Chil∣dren therefore of those aforesaid Nations, whom the Children of Israel were not able utterly to de∣stroy, were those upon whom Solomon Levyed the aforesaid Tribute of men for bond-service. But of the children of Israel, (saith the Text, verse 22 of the same Chapter) did Solomon make no bondmen, but they were men of War, his servants and his Princes, and his Captains and his Rulers of his Chariots and of his Horsemen: which certainly were all of them very honourable and very profitable Employments. And that this was so and no otherwise, we have it again attested, 2 Chron. 8. 7, 8, 9. where the Text repeating the former Narrative, that they were the Children of those Nations onely who were to be, and were not consumed, whom Solomon made bond-men, and made to pay Tribute; that is, he made some of them bondmen and the rest to pay Tribute. But of the children of Israel (saith the Text) did Solomon make no servants for his work, or to work in his building; neither did he for ought I can find make them pay any Tribute at all; nor indeed had he any need to doe so, having all the Nations from Euphrates to the border of Egypt his Tributary Subjects; so that not onely he but all Israel were so rich, that silver in Jerusalem was as stones in the street (saith the Text in one place) nay, it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon, saith the Text in another place. So that what this heavy yoke was that the ten Tribes complained of, I can∣not imagine, unless they were sick of a surfeit of plenty, or weary of being too well at ease. And People apt to grow weary of their hap∣piness. that there is such a sickness, such an Epidemical dis∣ease, and that the Common People of all times
and places are very apt to be infected with it, we have found by our own experience very lately; and I pray God we may not find it again very shortly; though never People had less reason to complain than we had then, or have now; or than the Israelites had (for ought appears from the History of those times) when Jeroboam and the ten Tribes complained of the heavy yoke they groaned under, which, had it indeed been as grie∣vous as they said it was, or as Rehoboam threat∣ned it should be, yet would not that have been cause enough to warrant or justifie them in doing what they did, I mean their renouncing his So∣vereignty over them, or their Rebellion against him; their Rebellion I say, for so God calls it, who always calls both Things and Persons by their right and proper names. Men may, and often do call evil good and, good evil; but God doth not; or if he do call some things or persons by better names than in rigour and propriety of speech they deserve to be called by; as when he calls those that are his servants good men, and the works which they doe in obedience to him, good works, because for Christ's sake he accounts them to be so, and accepts and rewards them as if they were so, In what sense some men and works are called good. though neither the Men nor their Works be ex∣actly and entirely good, or without any leaven or mixture of bad in them; and consequently God out of his gracious condescension, and to encou∣rage our sincere, though weak endeavours to please The Revolt is called Rebel∣lion. him, may and doth call some things and persons by better names than they deserve to be called by; 1 Kings 12. 19. 2 Chron. 10, 19. yet he never did call any thing or person by a worse name than in exact propriety of speech it was
worthy of: And therefore that which God called Rebellion (as he did this of Jeroboam's and the ten Tribes renouncing of Rehoboam's Sovereignty over them) was Rebellion; and what is Rebellion but the resisting or rising up against one whom we ought to obey? so that God by calling that which Jeroboam and the ten Tribes did, a Rebellion, doth thereby declare that Rehoboam (notwithstanding the unwise answer he gave them, and the hard usage his threatning made them believe they were to expect from him) was still their Sovereign, and still to continue to be so; otherwise their re∣nouncing of him and setting up another instead of him would not have been a Rebellion, and I am sure if it had not been so, God would never have called it so; for every resistance is not a Rebellion, but onely the resistance of one whom we ought to obey. We are commanded to resist the Devil, and to renounce the Dominion he usurps over us, be∣cause he is an Ʋsurper, and is not our lawfull Sove∣reign; and therefore, though we are often com∣manded to resist him, yet we are never said in Scripture to rebell against him.
CHAP. IX. The Arguments that God foretold it should be, and that the thing is said to be from God, answered. Jeroboam and Jehu compared together. AS to what may be said out of Scripture to justi∣fy what Jeroboam and the ten Tribes did, from being a Rebellion, or a sinfull and unlawfull action: as first, that it was but the fulfilling of a Prophecy or the doing of that which God had foretold he would Two argu∣ments to justi∣fie the revolt. have to be done; and secondly, that when Rehobo∣am had gathered together a very great army, in∣tending by force to reduce the ten Tribes to their former obedience and subjection; God forbad him by the Prophet Shemaiah to doe so, saying, Ye 1 Kings 12. 24. 2 Chro. 11. 4. shall not go up nor fight against your brethren the children of Israel; for this thing is from me. I answer first in general that God in plain and ex∣press The Answer in general. words having said it was Rebellion, nothing that can be gathered out of any other words of the Text can make it to be no rebellion; for the Col∣lection made out of God's word by men may be false, but God's words themselves must be true. Secondly, and more particularly to the first of the places before quoted, to justifie that which was done by Jeroboam, that it was but the doing of that which God by the Prophet Ahijah had foretold was to be done, I answer, that God's foretelling a thing God's foretel∣ling a thing to be done is not the cause of doing it. to be done, doth not justifie or excuse either the doers or the doing of it; if either the thing it self be evil, or if he that doeth it hath no Commission from
God for it; or doeth it with an ill mind, or by ill means, or to an ill end, a concurrence of all which circumstances there were in this fact of Jeroboam's, and all of them evil and sinfull, and therefore all of them from his own evil and sinfull disposition, and none of them from God, but by his permission onely; and as the bare permission, so the bare fore∣telling of a thing to be done is no way the cause of the doing of it; and consequently can neither justi∣fy nor excuse the doing of it, if it be evil in itself or done with an ill intention, or any otherwise in all respects than it ought to be done. The foretelling therefore of Jeroboam, by Ahijah the Prophet, that he should be King, and reign over the ten Tribes of Israel, can no more excuse him for the way he took to make himself King, nor the ten Tribes for assist∣ing him in it, than Elisha the Prophet foretelling Hazael that he should be King of Syria, did justifie or excuse him for murthering Benhadad his Master, The like case of Hazael, &c. that he might be king in his stead; or than God's foretelling the crucifying of Christ, did justifie or ex∣cuse either the malice of the Jews in accusing, or Pi∣late's injustice in condemning of our Saviour. As to the other place before objected, where God by the Prophet Shemaiah saith, the thing was from The evil of sin from God, one∣ly by permis∣sion. him; I answer, that the thing, namely, the Re∣bellion of Jeroboam and the ten Tribes, may be con∣sidered as it was malum culpoe, An evil of sin, or as it was malum poenoe, An evil of punishment; that is, as it was an evil of sin in those that were the actours in it; and so it was not from God but permissivè, or by his permission onely; or as it was an evil of punish∣ment justly inflicted upon the house of David for the sin of Solomon, not the sin which Jeroboam and
the ten Tribes did falsely (for ought appears in Scrip∣ture to the contrary) lay unto his charge, namely, the oppressing of his Subjects, but for his Idolatry, for his forsaking of his God, which as Ahijah told Jeroboam was the sin that God charged him withall, and for which God did not command or give Jero∣boam a Commission or leave to rebell against Rehobo∣am the Son of Solomon, but onely suffered him to doe so; for God (as St. James tells us) as he is , as he is not to be tempted himself with evil, so he doth , tempt no man to evil; but (as it follows in the same place) every one is tempted by his own lust; and so was Jeroboam; for it was not his zeal for God, but his own ambiti∣on that made him doe what he did to get the King∣dom, as appears by what he did, after he had got∣ten it, for the keeping of it; for it was the same lust, the same ambition that tempted him first to make Israel to sin by joyning with him in rebellion against his and their King, that tempted him after∣wards to make Israel to sin by joyning with him in Rebellion against his and their God, by setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel to be worshipped by them. Neither was the one of these actions of Jeroboam more or less from God than the other; for as they were both of them morally evil or sinfull in them∣selves, and intentionally and designedly evil in the doers of them, so neither of them were from God; because God is not nor cannot be the authour or accessary of any such evil; but as they were evils of punishment, the former an evil of punishment to The evil of punishment is from God. the House of David for Solomon's Idolatry, and the latter an evil of punishment to the house of Israel, for
the ten Tribes joyning in Rebellion with Jeroboam against their lawfull Sovereign; so they were both of them from God, as all evils of punishment are, whether inflicted immediately by God himself as Plagues, Famines, Droughts, Inundations gene∣rally are, and as the drowning of the whole World by Noah's floud, and the burning of Sodom and Go∣morrah by fire rain'd down from heaven, particular∣ly were: or whether they be executed by some men upon others, whether justly or unjustly, whether with or against God's command, whether by good men or bad, nay whether they be executed by Men or by Devils, (as those evils inflicted upon Job were) they are still from God, either as punishments and effects of his vindicativejustice to his Enemies, or as chastisements and effects of his fatherly care and kindness to his Children: so that whatsoever the evil be in it self, and how sinfully soever it may be contri∣ved and executed by men, yet it may be most justly made use of by the Divine Wisedom either for the punishment of his Enemies, or for the bettering of his servants. And thus, and no otherwise than thus, may Jeroboam's and the ten Tribes rebellion, or ra∣ther the rending off the ten tribes of Israel from the house of David by that Rebellion, be said to be from God; and God's forbidding Judah to fight with Israel upon that account doth not argue his appro∣bation of what had been wickedly done by those of Israel, but his own resolution to confirm and con∣tinue the punishment which he himself had justly inflicted upon those of Judah, who no doubt were the followers of Solomon in his sin of Idolatry and re∣bellion against God; as those of Israel were in being followers of Jeroboam in their rebellion against the house of David.
I have insisted the longer upon this particular, be∣cause it seems to be the onely Instance, that can with any colour of reason be alledged from Scripture to justifie the rebellion of Subjects against their lawfull Sovereign: For that which was done by Jehoiada against Athaliah was done for the lawfull King a∣gainst a most wicked Ʋsurper; and that which was done by Jehu against Jehoram, was done by a spe∣cial The case of Jehu and Je∣roboam un∣like. and particular command of God, such a one as Abraham had for the sacrificing of his Son, and as the Israelites had for spoiling the Egyptians, and as Elijah had for killing the Priests of Baal, as plainly appears from the second book of Chronicles Chap. 22. 7. where it is said, That the Lord anointed Je∣hu the son of Nimshi to cut off the house of Ahab: whereas Jeroboam was not anointed at all; and David though he was anointed, yet it was not to make him presently and actually King, but one∣ly a designing him to be King after the death of Saul, who continued to be the Lord's anointed and Da∣vid's lawfull Sovereign, as long as he lived, and was at several times and upon several occasions ac∣knowledged by David himself to be so; though Saul had forsaken God, and was forsaken of God long before. But Jehu when he was anointed was actually made King; for the Prophet who was sent to anoint him, when he poured the Oylon his head, (saith the Text) said unto him, Thus saith the Lord 2 Kings 9. 6, 7. God of Israel, I have anointed thee King over the People of the Lord, even over Israel, and thou shalt smite the house of Ahab thy master, that I may a∣venge the bloud of my servants the prophets, &c. And so what Jehu did against the house of Ahab, he had a special Warrant, and an express and positive com∣mand
from God for the doing of it; and as he had God's command to doe it, so he had God's approba∣tion of it, and reward for it, after it was done; for the Lord said unto Jehu (saith the Text, 2 Kings 11. 30.) Because thou hast done well in executing that which is right in mine eyes, and hast done to the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine heart, thy children of the fourth generation shall sit upon the throne of Israel. But Jeroboam had neither God's command to doe what he did before he did it, nor God's approbation for doing what he did af∣ter he had done it; neither were Solomon or Re∣hoboam usurpers, as Athaliah, and Ahab, and Jehoram were. To conclude, as the Examples even of the best mens actions recorded in Scripture do not make The general rule to be fol∣lowed, unless there be a spe∣cial dispensa∣tion. what they did to be lawfull, any farther than as they were agreeable to the general rule of all mens actions, the Moral Law of God; or as they had a special, a certain and a positive Dispensation from God the Lawgiver himself to doe something upon some oc∣casions otherwise than by the general Rule they were obliged to doe; and Exceptio in non except is firmat regulam, An exception to a Rule strengthens the Rule in things not excepted: So the doing of that which was justifiably done then, by virtue or war∣rant of such a Dispensation, is not justifiably to be imitated by any man or number of men now, when no such Warrant, no such Dispensation, from the Lawgiver himself, in so certain, so immediate, and so miraculous a manner as it was then, is to be ex∣pected, whatsoever our mad Enthusiasticks may pre∣tend to the contrary.
CHAP. X. A Recapitulation of the two former Arguments from the word of God and Primitive practice, against both Papists and Presbyterians. BY what hath been said already, partly from plain Precepts of Scripture commanding all Christians to obey, and forbidding them to resist, their lawfull Sovereigns, though never so unlimited in the Constitution, or never so Tyrannical in the exercise of their Government, (for who ever was, or could be more so, in both respects, than NERO was, in whose reign those Precepts were given?) and partly from the Practice and profession of all Christians, agreeable to those Precepts in the Pri∣mitive and purest times; together with the Answer to such Objections, as have been, or may be made from some few misinterpreted and misapplied exam∣ples out of Scripture to the contrary: though by what hath been said upon these heads, it hath (I say) been sufficiently proved, that Kings or Soveraign Princes and Governours do not lose their Right to govern their Subjects, though they be Ʋnlimited or Tyrants, and govern otherwise than by God's or their own Laws they ought or are obliged to govern; and consequently that their Subjects do not upon that account cease to be Subjects, so as to be disob∣liged from obeying even such Sovereigns; from obey∣ing To obey ac∣tively and passively, what. them (I say) either actively or passively, that is, by obeying them in all their lawfull Commands wil∣lingly and chearfully, and by suffering for not obey∣ing
them in their unlawfull Commands meekly and patiently, and never in any case, or upon any pro∣vocation, to resist, rebell, or take up either offensive or defensive Arms against them; there being nothing to warrant the one more than the other in the word of God or in the practice and judgment of the first and best of Christians; which one would think should be enough to convince all that are Christians now, of the unlawfulness of it. And yet of all Christians, those that seem to be most opposite to one another in all things else, (I mean the Papists and the Presbyterians, with other of our Sectaries) agree in this one thing, I mean in the lawfulness of Subjects taking up Arms Papists and Presbyteri∣ans agree in the doctrine of resisting Kings. against their Sovereigns: though the former, to wit the Papists, like the old Pharisees, hold nothing to be lawfull, for which they have not a Tradition from their forefathers, and the latter, to wit the Presbyte∣rians and their Complices, like the old Scribes hold nothing to be lawfull, for which they have not ex∣press Scripture. And yet, as both Scribes and Pha∣risees agreed in thinking it lawfull to oppose and fight against the Lord Christ, so both Papists, and Presbyterians, and other Sectaries agree in holding it to be lawfull to oppose and fight against the Christs of the Lord, I mean Kings; though as neither of those had then, so neither of these have now any Warrant either from Scripture or Tradition, that is, either from the written Word of God or from the practice of their primitive Predecessours, to plead for it.
CHAP. XI. An Objection from the Law of Nature, and that those Precepts were temporary and the Primitive Chri∣stians were too weak to resist, answered. The Church of England's judgment upon the case. BUt perhaps it may be said (though it cannot be said rationally by any that hold either of the The objection. aforesaid Principles) that though there be nothing to be alledged either from Scripture or Tradition, that is, either from the written word of God or from the prac∣tice of the Primitive Christians, to justifie the taking up either of offensive or defensive Arms by Subjects a∣gainst their Sovereigns, yet it may be lawfull by the From the law of Nature. Law of Nature, which is the unwritten word of God, or rather word of God written in mens hearts. And this Law of Nature, say they, is as truly the Law of God, as that which is written in Scripture; and there∣fore whatsoever is justifiable by the Law of Nature, may be and is lawfull, though there be no express War∣rant for it, either from Scripture, or from the prac∣tice of the Best of men in former times; because it being known by all men to be lawfull by the Law of Nature, it needed not to be declared to be so by Scripture, nor attested to be so by any Mens Practice or Example. Neither will it follòw, say they, that what was lawfully done at one time must necessa∣rily be done at all times, or that it should not be lawfull for Christians to doe that now which it was not expedient for the Primitive Christians to doe From their inability to resist. then; because being so comparatively few and fable,
as they were then, their taking up of Arms against their persecuting and oppressing Princes would rather have increased than lessened their sufferings. And what if it were upon that account, and upon that account onely (for so some of these , Despisers of Government and Blasphemers of Sovereign Princes, have dared to argue) that Christ and his Apostles did give those Precepts And that the precepts of not resisting were tempo∣rary. in Scripture of not resisting even the worst of Prin∣ces; and consequently that they were to oblige those to whom they were given, no longer than un∣till they were strong enough to resist, without fear or danger of being the worse for it. To this I answer, first, that to have such a thought of Christ or his Apostles, who wrote what they The Answer, That to think so is no less than blasphe∣my. writ, , As they were moved or inspired by the holy Ghost, (and for all ages and times as well as for those wherein they were written) is worse than with David's fool, to say in his heart, that there is no God. For to Blas∣pheme God is worse than to deny him; and how can a Man or the Devil himself blaspheme God more than to make men believe, that he who is Truth it self is a Lyar, or at least a deceiver, one that hath sent his Ambassadours the Apostles, nay his Son himself into the World with Credentials under his broad Seal, (I mean the doing of Miracles) in his name to assure the Christians, because Chri∣stians to be the best of Subjects. World and the Princes of the World, that those that were Christians, were, because they were Christi∣ans, to be the best of Subjects; such as how ill so∣ever they were used, or how much soever they were oppressed, nay how cruelly soever they were persecuted by their Princes, yet were indispen∣sably obliged by their Religion never to rebell, or so
much as to attempt to defend themselves by force against even such Princes; and consequently that the Princes and Potentates of the world, whatsoever Religion themselves were of, needed not to fear, nor consequently ought not in reason to persecute any of their Christian Subjects, who were obliged by their Christianity it self, because they were Christians, to be the best of Subjects, and to continue to be so, how numerous or how powerfull soever they might grow to be, or how heavy or hard the yoke might be which they groaned under, which being published and made known to the world to be the will of God, as it was by St. Peter his Apostle or Ambas∣sadour to the Jews, and by St. Paul his Apostle or Ambassadour to the Gentiles; for any that comes after them (whether it be a Bellarmine, a Buchanan, or a Baxter,) to endeavour to make it to be believed, that God and his Ambassadours St. Paul's and St. Peter's meaning was, to oblige Christians to be such Subjects to such Sovereigns, so long, and no longer than they were too weak to resist them; but assoon as they were able, that they were then left at liber∣ty, with God's good leave, not onely to revolt from them, but to revenge the wrongs they had suffered under them; for any men now I say to make it, or endeavour to make it to be believed, that this was Christ's or his Apostles meaning, what is it, but to make it to be believed that Christ was indeed such a one, as the High Priest falsely told Pilate he was, , A deceiver; and that his Apostles The Blasphe∣my made out. were Legati ad mentiendum missi, Ambassadours sent on purpose by him to deceive those they were sent to? as perhaps some Ambassadours may be sent from one earthly Prince to another. But to say
that Christ hath done so, or that he had, or could have any need to doe so, is in a very high degree to Blaspheme Christ himself as well as his Apostles, and to make whatsoever they taught besides to be sus∣pected of insincerity; and consequently the whole Christian Religion to be but a design or contrivance for worldly ends onely, as it is indeed by the Pa∣pists made to be, and by all such Protestants also as make Religion a Cloak for any kind of licentious∣ness in general, and especially for the lawfulness of the Rebellion of Subjects against their Sovereigns, as all they do, that would have those Apostolical Precepts against resisting of Princes by their Subjects to be but Temporary, and to be obliging not in point of Conscience but in point of Prudence and for fear of punishment onely, which is in terminis, directly to contradict the Apostle or rather the Holy Ghost speaking in or by the Apostle, who tells us in ex∣press terms, that there is , a ne∣cessity Subjects obli∣ged in Con∣science. for Subjects to be Subjects, and consequently by no means nor upon any provocation  to resist or rebell against their Sovereigns, and that not , (saith the Text) for wrath onely, not for fear of punishment onely, but , for Conscience sake, and especially for Conscience or for fear of offending God, more than for fear of offending man; and therefore if at all for fear of punishment, it must be more for fear of that punishment which the Text calls damnation, and which God will inflict hereafter upon those that re∣bell against his Viceroys and consequently against himself, than for fear of any punishment that can be inflicted upon them by Men here.
I will conclude this Topick with that saying of Gro∣tius in the fourth Chapter of his first book de jure Bel∣li A not able say∣ing of Groti∣us. & Pacis, and in the seventh Section of that Chapter viz, Certè Christianis Veteribus qui recentes ab A∣postolorum & Apostolicorum Virorum disciplina eorum Proecepta & intelligebant meliùs, & perfectiùs imple∣bant, summam ab iis injuriam fieri puto, qui quo mi∣nùs ipsi se defenderent in certissimo mortis periculo, vires putant illis non animum defuisse. Certainly there cannot (I think) be a greater injury done to the first Christians, who coming newly from the Discipline of the Apostles and Apostolick men, did better understand and more perfectly practise their Precepts, than there is done by them that think the reason why they did not defend them∣selves, when they were sure to die if they did not▪ was not because they would not have done so if they could, but because they wanted strength to doe so. Which saying of Grotius I desire the Reader to take special notice of, the rather, because Grotius himself in the very same Section seems to make it lawfull for Christian Subjects to resist the Supreme Magistate in several cases; and some of them such, wherein the Primitive Christians did not think it lawfull for them to doe so, as Grotius himself in his aforesaid saying tells us; and because it is upon the authority of Grotius, and what Grotius saith to justi∣fie the resisting of Sovereigns by their Subjects, that Mr. Baxter doth especially ground his justification of the Rebellion against our late Sovereign. Therefore whether those sayings of Grotius be true or no in themselves, or whether (if they be true) they be pertinently and rationally applyed by Mr. Baxter,
for his and his Parties doing what they did in the late War against the King or no, we shall examine hereafter. In the mean time to the Doctrine of the Scriptures, The judgment of the Church of England in the case. and the practice of the Primitive Christians, we will subjoyn the Judgment of our own Church, the Church of England, as of that, which of all Churches now extant in the World, is both for her Doctrine, Government, and publick form of Worship, the most Apostolical; whatsoever the Papists or any other Hereticks, or the Presbyterians or any other Schismaticks and Sectaries do or can say to the con∣trary. But what the Judgment of the Church of England Where the Churches judgment to be found. is, as to this, or any other particular (whether it be matter of Faith or Manners, Doctrine or Practice) it is not to be collected or concluded from the sayings or writings of any one or more particular Doctours of the Church, though of never so great eminency for Learning, or for Piety, or both, but from the Church her self, speaking to us as she doth, first, in her Articles, 2dly. in her Catechism, 3dly, in her Homilies, 4thly. in her Liturgy (which is a Conser∣vatory of Doctrines as well as a form of publick Wor∣ship) and 5thly. in her Canons. In all these I say the Church speaks to us her self (by her representative Body in Convocation) decla∣ring what her own Judgment is, and what she will have the Judgment of all those to be (whom she will admit to be of her Communion) as to matter of doc∣trine in the three former, and as to matter of practice in the two latter. Now as to this particular, of which we are now speaking viz. Whether it be lawfull for Subjects in
any case, or upon any provocation, forcibly, or by taking up of Arms, to resist their Sovereign: our Church hath clearly and fully declared her judg∣ment negatively in her Homily against Insur∣rection; which Homily being recited and appro∣ved Her judgment subscribed to by all that are ordained. in the Thirty fifth Article of the Book of Ar∣ticles is subscribed unto by all that subscribe un∣to those Articles, as all those do that are legal∣ly Ordained in our Church; and consequently, as Mr. Baxter himself did, if he were Ordained by a Bishop, as he saith he was. But perhaps Mr. Baxter will say for himself what I remember Mr. Jacomb said for Mr. Calamy, of whom when I had Mr. Cala∣my's frank subscription. said at the Conference in the Savoy, that he had at his Ordination not onely subscribed to what the Church required him to subscribe unto, but added Non invitus nec coactus, sed lubens libens∣que subscribo, (which was more than was re∣quired of him) to shew that he did it freely, willingly and heartily. True indeed (said Mr. Jacomb) Mr. Calamy did so then; but he hath since been heartily sorry for it; and repented of it. And so it seems Mr. Baxter hath done also. And therefore I do not subjoyn the Doctrine Why the judg∣ment of our Church quo∣ted. and Practice of Ours to the Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church, as thinking Mr. Baxter or any of the Dissenters from our Church will be moved at all by it; but to shew that the Doctrine and Judgment of our Church is in this particular (as it is in all other matters of any moment both doctrinal and practical) the same with that of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, and consequent∣ly that they who condemn or despise this doctrine
and practice of Ours do thereby or by so doing condemn and despise the doctrine and practice not of the Primitive Christians onely, but of the Apo∣stles and of Christ himself also. CHAP. XII. Mr. B's meaning in his Aphorism, that Tyrants have no right to govern at all. Tyranny not justified by forbidding resistance. The reproach Mr. B. casts upon the Bishop lights upon Samuel and St. Paul. Mr. B. a favourer of the Novatians. BUt perhaps Mr. Baxter may say that in this Aphorism of his, we are now speaking of, he What Mr. B's meaning, that Tyrants have no right to their govern∣ments. doth not say, that either Ʋnlimited Governours or Tyrants have no right at all to their respective Go∣vernments, simply and absolutely; but onely that they have no right to their Ʋnlimited or Tyran∣nical Governments, and consequently, that his mean∣ing is, that although (notwithstanding their being Ʋnlimited and Tyrannical) they may have a right to govern, yet they have no right to govern unlimitedly or Tyrannically. But as to the first of these, namely, That unli∣mited Governours have no right to their unlimited Governments; it is absolutely false, as I have more It is not; that they have no right to go∣vern tyranni∣cally. than sufficiently proved already. And although the second, namely, That no Governour hath a right to be a Tyrant, or to govern tyrannically, be true; yet that this truth is not the truth, at least not the
whole truth of Mr. Baxter's meaning, appears by many of his following Aphorisms and Comments up∣on them, especially by those wherein (as if he were totius mundi arbiter, The Ruler of the whole world, or Rex regum and dominus dominantium, King of kings and Lord of lords, that is, a Protestant Pope, or the Catholick moderatour and decider of all con∣troversies) Vid. his Tract of obedience to rulers and howfar resi∣stance is un∣lawfull àpag. 346. ad pag. 375. of his holy common∣wealth. he boldly and Magisterially defines and states the Cases wherein Subjects may or may not resist their Sovereigns. For as of his special grace and favour he gives Kings, even limited Kings, leave to transgress their bounds to such or such a degree, without forfeiting their right to their Crowns, and without being lawfully resisted by their Subjects for so doing; so if they pass the limits he assigns them (as if he should say to Kings, as the King of Kings Vid. ibidem à p. 375. ad p. 456. saith to the waves of the Sea, Hitherto, O ye Kings, ye may go and no farther) then (saith he) they depose themselves, and then their Subjects ceasing to be Subjects, their rising up or making war against them can be no Rebellion. Whereby it plainly appears, that when he saith But that they have no right to govern at all. Tyrants have no right to their unlimited Govern∣ments, his meaning is not that they have no right to govern tyrannically, but that they have no right to govern at all. For that Kings have a right to go∣vern tyrannically, or that they doe no injury to their Subjects, how much soever they do oppress them, I never heard of any Christian or Heathen, that was of that opinion but Mr. Hobbs onely. But I am as Mr. Hobb's opinion and Mr. Baxter's alike explo∣ded by the Bishop. far from Mr. Hobbs his opinion, namely, That Kings do not injure their Subjects, when they govern them otherwise than by God's Laws and their own they ought to govern them, as I am from Mr. Baxter's,
namely, That Kings do forfeit their rights to their Crowns, That Subjects may resist them, or defend themselves by force against them, when they doe so, to any degree whatsoever. In all therefore that I have said hitherto for the justifying of my exception against this Aphorism of Mr. Baxter's, there is nothing, I am sure, to justi∣fie either the Tyrannical Government of unlimited and despotical Sovereigns, or the illegal and arbi∣trary Government of limited and political Sove∣reigns; Lawfull So∣vereigns not to be resisted; but onely to prove that lawfull Sovereign Princes, whether limited or unlimited, are not to be resisted by their Subjects: which is no more than St. Paul asserts, speaking of the worst of Princes; nor no more than what may rationally, nay ne∣cessarily, According to the first insti∣tution of Kings by Sa∣muel. be collected from what Samuel said to the People of Israel, when they would needs have a King, as other Nations had, and when God bids him tell them the manner of their King, or what man∣ner of Kings they must expect to have sometimes, even such as all other Nations had sometimes, bad as well as good; and that they were to endure the one as well as the other, as all other Nations did al∣so. For when he had told them, not what all or any Kings ought to doe, or lawfully might doe, but what some Kings violently and wrongfully would doe; and which if any of their Kings should doe (as he foresaw many of them would doe) all that they were to doe to help themselves, was onely to cry unto God to help them; and consequently, that though Kings govern never so unjustly, or never so contrary to God's Laws or their own (as some of the Kings of Judah as well as those of Israel did) yet they must not forcibly be resisted by their sub∣jects,
but all that Subjects in that case can or ought to doe, is to cry unto God: Preces & lachrymoe, Prayers and tears, being the onely arms the Pri∣mitive Christians did use, or thought lawfull for Christians to use against such Princes. And now let Mr. Baxter lay his hand upon his heart, and consider, who it is that in one place he calls a defier of Deity and Humanity; and in ano∣ther Samuel and St. Paul, &c. blasphemed, as defiers of God and man. place, an Enemy to God, to Kings and to all mankind. It is not Bishop Morley, at least it is not Bishop Morley onely; but Samuel the Prophet, and St. Paul the Apostle, and St. Peter too; or ra∣ther the Holy Ghost himself that spake by them: so that what was intended by Mr. Baxter as a reproach to Bishop Morley, is become Blasphemy against God himself, whose truth it is; for the maintaining whereof Bishop Morley is so heinously reproached. And therefore as St. Peter said to Ananias, when Ananias thought he had lyed to St. Peter onely, Thou hast not lyed unto men, but unto God; so might I say unto Mr. Baxter, that he hath not reproach∣ed me, or not me onely, but the Holy Ghost him∣self, in calling that doctrine a defiance of Deity and Humanity, and an Enmity to God, to Kings, and to all mankind, which was by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost taught by Samuel the Prophet in the Old Testament, and by St. Paul and St. Peter in the New. But is it possible, will some say, that Mr. Baxter being so sober and discreet, and so meek a man (as he is thought to be) should publish in Print so ve∣ry severe a censure against Bishop Morley, or any man else that is called a Christian, because and onely because he maintains that and nothing but that
which was taught by Christ and his Apostles, and was believed and practised by the next and best of their Disciples? I answer, that Mr. Baxter hath censured Bishop Morley as a defier of Deity and Humanity, and as an Enemy to God, to Kings, and to all mankind, is evi∣dent from the places before quoted out of his printed Papers; and that he hath no other but the aforesaid cause for it, is evident likewise from what I have now said to disprove that Calumny: but the way he takes to induce his Readers to believe it, is worth the observation; it being the very same artificial jugling trick which I have observed him to make Mr. B's Jug∣ling. use of more than once before; I mean his putting a false Proposition of his own, instead or in the place of a true one of mine, and then inferring from the false one, what he knew could not be inferred from the true one, he chargeth me with what he in∣fers from it. Thus by misreporting what was affirmed by us and denied by him at the Savoy-Conference, he Some Instan∣ces of it. thence infers that I was grossly mistaken in the re∣port I had made of what he said at that Confe∣rence. And thus again, because I had excepted against that Aphorism of his as false, which affirms all un∣limited Governours to be Tyrants, and to have no right to their unlimited Governments, He makes me say, that all humane Powers are not limited by God, and then infers that I am a defier of Deity and Hu∣manity. And so here likewise, because I say that lawfull Sovereigns are not to be resisted by their Subjects, though they be Tyrants, or though they do govern
otherwise, than by God's or their own Laws they ought to govern, he would make his Readers to believe that I justify Tyranny it self, and that Kings may lawfully doe what they list to their Subjects, and take away what they list from them, their Lands, their Houses, their Wives, their Children, and their Lives also; and all this, because I say they are not to be resisted, if they doe so, by their Subjects. And doth not St. Paul say so too, when he chargeth the Christians upon pain of damna∣tion not to resist Nero? who did all these out∣rages, and more, and worse also; for he caus∣ed Nero's cruel∣ties. them to be impaled with stakes thrust into their bodies up to their throats, and then besmear∣ing them all over with combustible matter, set Pone Tigel∣linum tadi lucebis in illâ, Quâ stantes ardent qui fixo gutture fumant. Juven. Satyr. them on fire to burn like Flamboe's to give light to Passengers, as they went along by night in the streets of Rome. And dares Mr. Baxter say that St. Paul, because he forbad his Christian Subjects to resist this monster, did therefore approve all the horrible cruelties and outrageous crimes that he was guilty of, or that he did thereby encou∣rage all or any other Kings to doe as he did? and consequently was an Enemy to God, to Kings, and to St. Paul under the same charge of Mr. B. with the Bishop. all Mankind? I think he dares not; and yet if this Inference of his be good against me, it must from the same Premisses be good against St. Paul also; for the same Premisses will always infer the same Conclusion: and therefore St. Paul is, or Bishop Morley is not, upon this account, what Mr. Baxter saith he is, an Enemy to God, to Kings, and to all Mankind. But what is Mr. Baxter then in the mean time? certainly either not so good a Logician, or so good a Christian as he would be thought to be.
I am sure he is not such a Christian as those of the Primitive times were, who neither wanted The primitive Christians, fools in Mr. B's opinion. courage nor force to defend themselves against the strongest, as well as the cruellest, of their persecu∣ting Princes; and consequently in Mr. Baxter's opi∣nion, were no better than fools or madmen, to suffer so tamely and so patiently (as they did) not onely the loss of all they had, but death it self, and death with the most exquisite torments, under their Pagan persecuting Princes, and under some Chri∣stian heretical Princes also, rather than they would transgress those Precepts of St. Paul by so much as offering to defend themselves against their Sove∣reigns, whether Pagans or Hereticks, or against those that were commissioned or impowered by them. And this doctrine of the unlawfulness for Sub∣jects to defend themselves by force against the most cruel of their most persecuting Princes was univer∣sally believed and practised for diverse hundreds of years after Christ, without any one instance to the contrary, but once onely; and then, that was when an Heretical Arian Emperour was resisted by his Heretical Novatian Subjects; for whom (I mean the Novatian Hereticks) Mr. Baxter seems Mr. B's kind∣ness to the No∣vatians, ence. to have a very great kindness; but whether upon this account (I mean, because they were the first Christian Subjects that ever resisted their Sove∣reign) or because the first founder of them made himself a Bishop (in another man's Diocese) as Mr. Baxter and all Baxterians would be; or be∣cause they were the old  the first Puritans or pretenders to extraordinary purity and strict∣ness of life (as Mr. Baxter and his followers now
do) whether I say it be upon any or all of these accounts I know not: but this I know that Mr. Baxter as often as he mentions them, speaks very favourably of them, although they were (as much as the Orthodox Christians themselves were) for and yet they for Bishops. the Government of the Church by Bishops, and by such Bishops as the Orthodox Bishops then were and as ours now are, I mean Bishops of a different and Superiour Order to Presbyters, and exercising Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction and authority over them. And therefore there must be some particular and special reason, why Mr. Baxter is so kind to them. In the mean time it is observable, that as They were then, so are They now, the greatest preten∣ders to strictness and severity that then took and now take unto themselves a liberty which God ne∣ver gave them, nay which God by his Prophets and Christ by his Apostles hath forbidden them to take, I mean the taking up of Arms by Subjects against their Sovereigns, though but defensive onely.
CHAP. XIII. Sovereigns highly accountable to God. The doctrine of Non-resistance, to the advantage of Subjects as well as of Kings. Hobbists, Papists and Secta∣ries, censured. Mr. B's Aphorism justly excepted against, and the Bishop vindicated from being a Defier and an Enemy to God and Man. THe contrary doctrine whereunto which we maintain might have been suspected of flat∣tery to Kings, (as Mr. Baxter calls it,) if it had not been St. Paul's as well as ours; or if, because we teach that Kings are not to be resisted by their Sub∣jects, The Doctrine of non-resi∣stance, no flat∣tery to Kings, as Mr. B. calls it. it would follow therefore that we taught likewise, that such Kings as govern otherwise than by God's Laws and their own they ought to do, were not accountable to any, or not punishable at all for so doing. Whereas Mr. Baxter knows that we of the Church of England believe and teach that Kings the greatest of Kings, are as much nay more Kings ac∣countable to God and pu∣nished by him. accountable to God, and punishable by God, either here or hereafter, for whatsoever they doe amiss, than the meanest of their Subjects are to them or by them; and so much the rather; because they are not punishable but by God onely. And therefore as it would not onely be absurd but ridiculous, that because a man saith the Deputy Mr. B's ab∣surd conclusi∣on, set forth by a like in∣stance. Lieutenant or Viceroy of Ireland is not to be questi∣oned or punished by any in Ireland for what he doth amiss there; therefore he is not to be questi∣oned or punished at all; or that he whose Viceroy
he is, namely, the King of England may not or will not punish him, either there, or when he comes home: so it is equally absurd and ridiculous, to conclude (as Mr. Baxter does) that Bishop Mor∣ley, because he holds that Kings are not accounta∣ble to or punishable by their Subjects, therefore he must needs encourage them to be Tyrants, as if they were not, or as if Bishop Morley thought and taught they were not, answerable to God and punishable by God for their Tyranny, either here or hereafter; and that not onely for their oppres∣sion and ill usage of their Subjects, but for the dishonour they have done unto God, whose Vice∣roys and Representatives they are; and therefore should be as he is, not onely just and righteous, but mercifull and benign and gracious to all their Subjects. Thus we Believe and thus we Teach. And withall we believe and teach also, That Subjects who suffer wrongfully, and yet patiently, Subjects ad∣vantage from wrongfull suf∣ferings. under oppressing, Tyrannical and persecuting Prin∣ces, (as the Primitive Christians did, and re∣joyced when they did so) shall be sure to be ei∣ther the sooner delivered from sufferings here, or to be finally so recompensed and rewarded here∣after, that they shall find to their unspeakable and endless comfort and joy, that it was good for them that they were so oppressed and afflicted. Thus I say do we believe, and thus do we teach both Kings and Subjects; and if both Kings and Subjects did believe and doe as we teach them, neither would Subjects have cause to complain of their Kings, nor Kings to be jealous or afraid of their Subjects.
More to blame therefore are they (whosoever they are) that teach the contrary either in relation to Kings or Subjects. Such in relation to Kings are the Habbists and other the like Atheistical flatterers of Kings, who The Hobbists censured on the one hand. would make them believe, they may doe what they list, without doing any injury to their Subjects; and without being answerable to God for it; and that either because there is no God at all, or that there is no other life after this. And such in relation to Subjects are the Papists, the Presbyterians, Independents, and the rest of the Sectaries, who teach it to be lawfull for The Papists and Sectaries on the other; Subjects, when they are grieved and oppressed by their Sovereigns to such a degree, or (which is all one) when they think themselves to be so, to take up Arms against them; whereby they shew them∣selves to be much more such, as Mr. Baxter would have Bishop Morley believed to be, I mean Enemies to God, to Kings, and to Subjects, and consequently to all Mankind than Bishop Morley is. 1. For first. are not they Enemies to God, who teach men to rebell against God? and is it not re∣bellion As Enemies to God. against God to rebell against the Viceroy of God? who because he is God's Viceroy is accountable for what he doth, well or ill, to none but God. And therefore in this case, (if any) God may most Emphatically say, , Ven∣geance is mine, I will repay; it belongs to me and to none but me to call mine own Viceroys to an ac∣count, and to punish them when and how I think fit; and therefore for Subjects to take the sword in this case, is to take it, or rather to wrest it out of God's hand, as well as the King's; and to use it
against the King, is to use it against God; and there∣fore they that take it and use it, if they do not pe∣rish by the King's sword, I mean the sword of War or of Justice, here by bodily death; they shall un∣doubtedly, except they repent before they go hence, perish by the sword of God, Bodies and Souls too in the life to come. 2. Are they not Enemies to Kings, who teach Enemies to Kings, that Kings may be resisted and deposed by their Subjects for male-administration of their Govern∣ments, whether real, or but imaginary and preten∣ded onely, of which the Subjects themselves are to be the Judges? and consequently the best of Prin∣ces as well as the worst are to reign but precariò, Upon precarious terms, or durante bene placito, Du∣ring the good pleasure of the people. 3. Are not the Teachers of this doctrine Ene∣mies And enemies to all subjects. to all Subjects as well as to all Kings? first by making their Kings jealous and afraid of them, and therefore more inclined or perhaps necessitated to weaken and impoverish and keep them under; (as Pharaoh did the Israelites) by laying heavy burthens upon them, and oppressing them (more than otherwise they would have reason or perhaps a will to doe) that they may not be able to rise up against them, when such Demagogues as our Schis∣matical Preachers are, have a mind to stir them up to doe so: Who, secondly, doe what they can to rob Subjects of that inestimable reward, which God hath promised to all such as suffer wrongfully, and yet patiently, or as St. Peter phraseth it , as it becomes Christians: and not onely so, but thirdly, do engage them, instead of suffering less wrongfully, to hazard the suffering of more right∣fully
from their Princes, if they do not prevail in their Rebellion, and to a certainty of suffering infi∣nitely much more from God whether they prevail or not, if they die in or after their rebellion without repentance. And now I think I have sufficiently justified the reasonableness of my exception to that Aphorism of The Bishop's justification of his exception against Mr. B's Aphorism; Mr. Baxter's (which he saith he wonders Bishop Morley did except against) by having proved it to be false in both the particulars that are asserted in it. As first, That all unlimited Governours are Ty∣rants, and (2dly) That no unlimited Governour or Tyrant hath a right unto his Government; and con∣sequently that the Subjects of Ʋnlimited or Tyranni∣cal Governours are not obliged to obey them, but may resist them, at least for defending of them∣selves against them; both which particulars having proved to be false, I hope I have sufficiently vindicated my self also from that horrible calumny of being a defier of Deity and Humanity, and an Enemy And his Vin∣dication of himself from being a defier &c. and an enemy to God, &c. to God, to Kings and to all mankind, as Mr. Bax∣ter, out of his abundant Zeal and little charity, saith I am, and would make his unwary Readers believe me to be; not from any thing I say my self, but from what he is pleased to say for me; and then (as if I had said it my self) to infer from it the calumny which he before intended (but could not tell how to doe it otherwise) to fix upon me. Of which disin∣genuous and insincere artifice of his (as I said before) we have seen several Instances already, and shall see more hereafter.
CHAP. XIV. That Scripture, Rom. 13. for the unlawfulness of resisting, asserted.  properly rendred to Resist, and implies more than simply Not to obey. Our Translation Vindicated against Mr. B. and others, who censure it and vary from it, as he of∣ten doth. ANd yet before we proceed any farther, we are to take notice of and remove a shrewd Remo∣ra or obstruction out of the way, which Mr. Baxter hath laid, to take away from us the authority of one of the principal places of Scripture, where∣on we ground our doctrine of the Ʋnlawfulness of resisting of Sovereigns by their Subjects in any case or upon any provocation whatsoever; Rom. 13. for the unlawful∣ness of resist∣ing rescued. and that is the 13 Chapter of St. Paul's Epistle to the Romans, and in that Chapter especially upon the 2d. Verse, whereof the words in Greek are these, , which by our last and by our most authentical Translation are rendred in English thus; Whosoever resisteth the power, viz. the Sovereign Power or the  the higher power, (as it is called in the verse before) resisteth the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves dam∣nation. And it is against our Translation of some words, or rather of one of the words in this Verse, that Mr. Baxter makes this objection, not against the word power, nor as Sovereign power is meant by it;
(though contrary to St. Paul's meaning and the truth of the Roman History, he will have the Sove∣reign Power there meant, not to be in the Emperour alone, but in him and the Roman Senate also, as he The Senate of Rome had part of the Sovereignty with Nero. H. C. p. 353. faith it is in the King and Parliament here in Eng∣land (and one as truly as the other) neither doth he except against the translation of the word  by the word damnation, though it always doth not signifie so severe a judgment:) but he tells us that the word  is not properly transla∣ted by the word resisting: And why so? because Mr. B's ex∣ception a∣gainst our Translation. saith he, There is a Resistance contrary to Subjection, and that is forbidden, and there is a Resistance not contrary to Subjection, and that is not forbidden. H. C. p. 352. Might he not as well have said, there is an , to resist, contrary to , to be subject, and there is , to resist, not con∣trary to , to be subject? And therefore St. Paul did not speak properly, when he opposed the one unto the other; and yet St. Paul tells the Corinthians (who were Grecians) that he spoke more languages than they all, and no doubt under∣stood the propriety of them as well as they did. Howsoever we are sure that St. Paul understood Our Transla∣tion vindica∣ted. God's meaning and how to express it so as he would have it to be understood; neither is it to be doubted, but that a commissioned Company of so many learned men, as were employed in the last and most accurate Translation of our English Bi∣ble, did very well understand St. Paul's meaning, as he expressed it in Greek; and knew how to ren∣der it as properly in English, as any one private man ought in modesty to think he can or could have done, especially if he be no greater a Critick
in the Greek language than Mr. Baxter appears to Mr. B. no great Critick in the Greek. be by the several Instances a Vid. a vin∣dication of the Primitive Church in an∣swer to Mr. B's Church History. learned man gives of his many gross mistakes of the meaning of se∣veral Greek words quoted by him in his Church History; which I would not have observed, but that I find Mr. Baxter so full and fond of his mend∣ings of the magnificat, I mean his frequent and needless finding fault with our Churches Transla∣tion. And truly I could wish that even such as are more skilfull in the Original Languages in which A remark in general upon those who censure our Translation. the Scriptures were written, than Mr. Baxter seems to be, would forbear in their popular Sermons, and in their English Treatises, to censure so boldly (as some of them do,) such and such places of Scrip∣ture as they have or take occasion to speak of, as either not truly, or not properly translated in our Bibles, when there is no necessity for their so do∣ing; and when they may thereby give occasion to their unlearned Auditours or Readers, to doubt of any other, and perhaps of all other places of Scrip∣ture, as well as of those by them quoted, and cen∣sured, viz. Whether they be truly or properly trans∣lated or no: which may bring them at length to question and doubt of the truth of the whole written word of God; and whither that may bring them God knows; perhaps to Quakerism or some other kind of Fanaticism, or perhaps to downright A∣theism. And therefore I say I could wish, and if I had The danger and vanity of such bold cen∣sures. authority enough, I would take care, that neither in Sermons, (unless in the Ʋniversities and other like learned Auditories) nor in any of our ordinary English Books of Divinity, any sense or Exposition
should be given of any place, passage or word in the Scripture, other than is rendred in the allowed and vulgar English Translation which is used in our Churches; and that not onely (though chiefly) for the reason before specified, but also because (as it is commonly used) it is more for ostentation of a man's self, than for edification of the People; nay many times it is made use of also to countenance and abett some Heretical or Schismatical opinion of a Party, or to gratifie some Novel fancy or No∣tion of a man's own, contrary to or differing from the received doctrine or usage of the Church. And for one or both of these ends, I think I may, Some exam∣ples of Mr. B's thus doing. without breach of Charity, believe Mr. Baxter doth so often find fault with and vary from the allowed Translation of the Text, and will have another of his own devising preferred before it. For example; the word , as often as it oc∣curs in the New Testament, is rendred in our Trans∣lation by the word City, and most truly and pro∣perly, as being derived from the word  as consisting of many, or a multitude of People co∣habiting or incorporated together. But Mr. Bax∣ter  a city with him stands for a Market town. will have it (as he often tells us) to signifie not a City but a Market town; as if he thought the Noun  to be derived from the Verb  vendo, to sell; contrary to all Etymology or Analogy of derivation of one word from another, and con∣trary to the use, and sense, and signification of the word  in all Greek Writers profane as well as Sacred. And why then would Mr. Baxter have it signi∣fie a Market town? it could not be (if he knows any thing at all of Greek) out of ignorance onely;
but it was because being not able to deny (with∣out contradicting all Antiquity) that every Bishop even in that first age of the Church and so down∣wards was Bishop of a  a city, and conse∣quently of as many several Congregations, as were in or belonging to that  or City, he had no o∣ther way to make his own Novel fantastical no∣tion of a Congregational Episcopacy, or that no Bishop was or ought to be Bishop of more than one Because he would have no Bishop of more than one congregation. Congregation, possibly reconcilable with the Primitive Notion of Episcopacy, but by making the word  contra jus normámque loquendi, Against the right and rule of speech, to signifie not a City consisting ordinarily of many Congregations, but a Market town; which yet if it were true, would not serve his turn neither, because there be Market towns even with us here in England, that have some of them many, and many of them more than one Congregation, and consequently according to Mr. Baxter's Hypothesis ought every one of them to have more Bishops than one also. Another instance of Mr. Baxter's disliking our Translation is, because it doth not favour, or rather indeed, because it doth condemn his own opinion and practice, and not his own onely, but the opinion and practice of his whole Party, is that I named before, and am now more particularly to consider, I mean our Translation of the word  by the word resisting; which as he saith  not properly rendred, he saith, to resist. is not a proper Translation of the word : And why so, good Mr. Baxter? why! because He and his Party have resisted their Sovereign; and therefore some resistance of Sovereigns by their Subjects must be lawfull, and if lawfull, then not
forbidden by St. Paul, and consequently by Mr. Baxter's Logick  (which it seems he confesseth or implies at least to be forbidden by St. Paul to all Subjects in all cases) is not, cannot properly be translated by the word resisting, be∣cause resisting of Sovereigns by their Subjects is law∣full (say they) in some cases. And indeed it would be so, if not obeying were the first and chief resisting; or the proper and To resist is more than not to obey. primary signification of the English word resisting were simply not obeying, and no more, as Mr. Bax∣ter tells us it is. For not to Obey their Sovereign in Vid. Holy Common∣wealth p. 37. p 377. some cases is so far from being unlawfull, that it is the duty of all Subjects to doe so in all such cases wherein they cannot obey their Earthly Sovereign without sinning against their Heavenly Sovereign: and yet in those very cases (as I said before) though they may and must disobey their earthly Sovereign, yet they may not, they must not resist him; but meekly and patiently Submit to what punishment (though never so unjustly) he shall please to inflict upon them. Whereby it plainly appears that sim∣ply not to obey is not to resist, much less is it to resist in the chief and most proper signification of the word, as Mr. Baxter saith it is. But God forbid it should be so! for then sins of ignorance and sins of infirmity would be more pro∣perly a resisting of God than sins of wilfull obstina∣cy So to resist God is more than not to obey him. and presumption; and the best of God's servants might more properly be said to resist God than the greatest of his Enemies; because the best of his ser∣vants do not always obey him, nay do never obey him in all things, nor in any thing as they ought to obey him, though they be never so carefull and
desirous to doe so. And can such as these proper∣ly, nay most properly be said to resist God? can they who humble themselves under the mighty hand of God, because they cannot obey him as they would, be said to resist him? God forbid! for God resists them that resist him; and who are they? not the humble but the proud: for to the humble (saith St. Peter) he giveth grace, but he resisteth the proud,  saith the Text; God sets himself in Battel aray (as it were) against the proud to resist them, when they rise up (as it were) to assail and defie and provoke him, as Pharaoh and Julian the A∣postate did. For indeed the word  as well as the word , which are both of them used in the same sense in the aforesaid place (viz. Rom. 13. 2.) by St. Paul, (and are therefore both of them rendred by the same word in our Translation) are both of them Military terms; and the genuine, primary  and  to resist are both Mi∣litary Terms. and proper signification of the one as well as of the other, is to be in a military posture of resisting, that is of defending ones self against one that assails him, and therefore purposely used by St. Paul to teach all Christian Subjects, that though they were never so wrongfully or never so much oppressed or persecuted by their Sovereigns, they should be so far from assailing or making war against them, that they should not so much as defend themselves by a forcible resisting of them, though they were as∣sailed by them; as Mauritius and his Legion were, who being Six thousand six hundred well armed and very valiant men, suffered themselves to be all killed upon the place, without drawing a sword or
lifting up a hand in their own defence against any of them that were sent by their Emperour to be the Executioners of his most unjust and cruel commands: for it was for no other crime but because they were Christians, and would not sacrifice to Heathen Idols as the rest of the Army did. And for the aforesaid reason of St. Paul's did our Translatours render both the aforesaid words of St. Paul, Our Transla∣tours of St. Paul's judg∣ment, as Mr. B. is not. by our English word to resist, not onely be∣cause to resist in a military notion is the primary and proper sense and signification both of  and  the words in the Text, but because they were (as our Church is) of St. Paul's judgment, namely, That it is unlawfull for Subjects to take up defensive as well as offensive Arms against their Sovereign: of which Judgment, because Mr. Baxter and those of his party are not, therefore the word  must not be properly translated by the word resisting.
CHAP. XV. Subjects resisting their Sovereign irrational, as in∣consistent with all Government; wherein of ne∣cessity a Supreme Power, and that unquestionable. Monarchy the onely Government of God's making. Some false Assertions and self-contradictions of Mr. Baxter's taken notice of. BUt to leave this , or bickering a∣bout a word, (though I hope it was a Di∣gression What meant by Resisting. not altogether useless and impertinent) by resisting we mean a forcible resistance, or taking up of Arms by Subjects against their Sovereign, whether offensive or defensive, upon any pretence whatsoever: which I affirm to be unlawfull, not onely because it is impious and irreligious; but because it is irrational, and impolitick, and impru∣dent also. That it is impious and irreligious hath been pro∣ved already; first, because it is not onely not allow∣ed Resistance impious and irreligious. but contradicted and forbidden by God's word; and secondly, because it was not onely not practised, but disclaimed and declared against, by the Pri∣mitive and best Christians. I am now to prove it to be irrational, as well as impious, and impolitick, and imprudent, as well as irreligious. And first, I say, 'tis irrational because it is in∣consistent with the necessary, natural and essential Irrational al∣so, as incon∣sistent with the being of a Body Politick. constitution of all Government, in all National Socie∣ties, of any kind whatsoever; and consequently de∣structive to the very being it self of the body Politick.
For in all National Societies (I mean such as are  or independent upon any other So∣cieties) The necessity of a Supreme power in all Bodies Poli∣tick. there is, and of necessity always must be, some where or other an , that is, a Supreme Power, or a Supremacy of Power, whereunto all other powers in the same Society are Subordinate, as being derived from it, and sub∣servient and accountable to it, and overruled and punishable by it: the supereminent and Supreme Power it self, and whosoever is intrusted and in∣vested with it, being always, and in all cases, , unquestionable, and consequently un∣punishable: because to question, to judge, and to That Supreme power, unque∣stionable. punish, are all of them Acts of Authority and Juris∣diction, which cannot be exercised but by a su∣periour on his inferiour; but Supremo non datur su∣perior, The Supreme hath no superiour above him, in the same Body Politick; and where the Supre∣macy is, there can be no liableness to coercion. Now this ratiocination or dictate of Reason is grounded upon a dictate of Nature it self; namely, The reason of this, grounded upon Nature that in the Subordination of things and persons unto one another, thee cannot be Progressus in infini∣tum, A progression to infinity. And therefore that which Grotius saith to this purpose is evidently and necessarily true; namely, that in Imperiis quia non datur progressus in infinitum, omniuò aut in aliqua Grotius his testimony persona, aut Coetu consistendum est, quorum peccata queniam superiorem se Judicem non habent, ultori Deo sunt relinquenda: That is, In Governments, because there cannot be an infinite or endless progress, we must of necessity set a stop in some one person or company of men, whose faults or miscarriages, because they have no
Judge above them, are to be left to God the Avenger. O utinam vir ille magnus, &c. I wish that great man had said so always, and without exception; for any one Exception, (of which he hath divers) will make the whole Rule it self to be useless and insignificant, as we shall see here∣after. In the mean time that there is such an  or Sovereign Power in every National in∣dependent Government or Body Politick, Mr. Bax∣ter doth not deny; and that it may be not onely in one, as in Monarchy, but in more than one as in an Aristocracy or a Democracy, I will not gain∣say; though I must needs observe by the way that Ab initio non fuit sic, From the beginning it was not so. And that there is but one of these three forms or kinds of Government of God's making, and that was Monarchy. For as God made the first Man after his own Image, or after the Image Monarchy, God's govern∣ment. or likeness of himself, so he made the first Govern∣ment of mankind here on earth, that of Nations I mean as well as that of Families, and particularly that of his own People the Jews, after the Image or likeness of his own Government in Heaven; which was, and is, and ever will be, Monarchical: neither do we find in Scripture any Precept for obe∣dience to be given, or for prayers to be made for any Sovereigns, or Supreme Governours, but for Kings onely. The other two sorts of Government, (of which the last (viz.) Democracy is incompara∣bly the worst) are but Mens inventions, and shall have an end, as all other Inventions of men shall have also: but Monarchy, as it was from everlasting, so it shall be to everlasting.
But to let this pass; whether it be a Monarchy, or an Aristocracy, or a Democracy, the Sovereign Mr. B's just and loyal opi∣nion of the Sovereigns power. Vid. Holy Com. p. 72. or Those that have the Sovereign Power are (saith Mr. Baxter) above all the Humane Laws of the Commonwealth; that is (saith he) they have Power to make Laws, and to repeal them, to correct, add to them, and dispense with them, and pardon the breach of them to particular per∣sons; and the Sovereign (as he is Sovereign) is not bound to keep them, or to suffer by them. And the reason of this (saith he) is evident from the nature of Sovereignty (mark that,) because he that is the Sovereign is the highest, and there∣fore hath no higher to obey. Euge, Mr. Baxter! Well said, so far Loyal Mr. Baxter! And farther yet, namely, in the next A∣phorism to this, That a Sovereigns is not free from the obligation of the Laws of God, nor from the fun∣damental Contracts of the Commonwealth (he must mean where there are such fundamental contracts) nor from any of his own publick promises, nor to make Laws against God's Laws or the common good: whereunto if he had added, though he be free from being questioned or quarrelled with for it by his Subjects; hitherto I could have been content to have gone with him in his Politicks, but no farther; for Spoiled by his following A∣phorisms. as to what he adds in his next and some other of his following Aphorisms; as, 1. That the same natural Person may be both So∣vereign and Subject, and that as Sovereign he H. C. p. 73. may pardon others, and as Subject he may be punish∣ed himself.
2. That Sovereignty is divisible, so that some part of it may be in the King, and some part in others of the same Body Politick: or (as in his own words) A mixt Commonwealth is that in which the other two, or all three forms of a Commonwealth (viz. Monarchy, H. C. p. 87. Aph. 79. Aristocracy and Democracy) are so conjunct, that the Supremacy is divided among them, sometimes equally and sometimes unequally. 3. That it may be called a Monarchy, where one hath not the sole Sovereignty; and that England is such H. C. p. 87. 88. a Monarchy. 4. That the Existence of the natural Person or Persons of Sovereigns, or of such as have the Sove∣reignty, H. C. p. 74. is not necessary to the existence of a Com∣monwealth, but the natural existence of Subjects is necessary. So that there may be Subjects that are Subjects to no-body, and consequently Subjects that are no Subjects, or a Body without a Head which is really no body at all, either in a natural or poli∣tical capacity. These and the like Assertions of Mr. Baxter I take not onely to be falsities, but self contradictions: and Ʋpon these suppositions Mr. B. justifies the late Re∣bellion; yet upon some of these absurd suppositions, if not up∣on all of them, he endeavours to justifie the late horrid Rebellion or (as he calls it) the late War a∣gainst the King. And upon the same grounds he may, and consequentially dath (horreso referens, I trem∣ble at the thought of it) the cutting off his head also. For if he were not a Monarch but in name onely, And by con∣sequence the King's mur∣ther. as Mr. Baxter saith he was not, and therefore had but a part in the Sovereignty as Mr. Baxter saith he had not: And if he that hath but a part of the So∣vereignty be a Subject as well as a Sovereign (as Mr. Baxter saith he is) and as a Subject may be punished
(as Mr. Baxter saith he may) why might not the Democratical Independents justifie what they did to him afterwards, as well as the Aristocratical Pres∣byterians The Indepen∣dents as justi∣fiable as the Presbyteri∣ans. could justifie what they did to him before? I mean their making War against him, and their buying, selling and imprisoning of him, and taking away all that he had from him but his life onely: and that in all probability they would have done also, if he had not been taken away from them as he was by the Independents, who had been their Servants untill then, but then began to think of making themselves their Masters, by getting the King's Person out of their power into their own; but still proceeding upon the same Presbyterian Principles from the first to the last; I mean upon the aforesaid Assertions of Mr. Baxter, which are all of them inconsistent with the very being, or essen∣tial Constitution of any Body Politick whatsoever. For first there can be no Body Politick without Those Asserti∣ons of Mr. B's taken to task. some to govern as well as others to be governed; and of those that govern, (ne detur processus ad infinitum, That we may not run upon an endless errand) one or more that are Sovereign or Supreme: And there∣fore the Existence of the natural Person or Persons of Sovereigns, or him or them that have the So∣vereignty, is as necessary to the Existence of a Com∣monwealth or any Body Politick as the natural ex∣istence of Subjects is. Otherwise there might be Subjects which were Subjects to no-body, and conse∣quently no Subjects at all: which is as absurd as to say there may be the Existence of a Body without the Existence of the Head of that Body, which was one of Mr. Baxter's aforesaid Assertions.
Again in all Bodies Politick, He or they that have the Sovereign Power, are above all the rest of the body whereof they are Sovereigns, and therefore cannot be Subject to any or all of them; and if so, then the same natural Person cannot be both a So∣vereign and a Subject too, which was another of Mr. Baxter's aforesaid Assertions. Again, if he that is a Sovereign cannot be a Sub∣ject (as it is a contradiction in adjecto to say he can be) then he cannot be questionable or punishable for any thing he does, as Mr. Baxter saith he may be. Again, Sovereignty is a thing which is in its own nature indivisible, so that in whomsoever it is, it is Wholly, and in whomsoever it is not wholly it is not at all; and consequently cannot be divided ei∣ther equally or unequally, as Mr. Baxter likewise saith it may be. Finally, that it may be called a Monarchy, where One hath not the sole Sovereignty, is true, (be∣cause that which is not a Monarchy, may be called a Monarchy) but that it may truly be so called is false; as it is false likewise, that the Kingdom of England is such a Monarchy, as Mr. Baxter in the last of his aforesaid Assertions saith it is. But of the two last of these Particulars I shall have occasion to speak more at large, when we come to examine, whether the Body Politick of England be such a mixt Body Politick, as Mr. Bax∣ter saith it is; and whether the Sovereignty thereof be not in the King alone, but so divided, as he affirms it to be betwixt the King and the Parlia∣ment: upon which Supposition onely he justifies,
or presumes to justifie the late Rebellion to have been a just war against the late King. Whereby it plainly appears, that even in Mr. Baxter's own opinion, where the Sovereignty is not divided, but wholly in one and the same person (as it is not onely in all Despotical, but in all Kingdoms properly so called, whether Despotical or Political) or wholly in one and the same Coetus, or Assembly, (whether Aristocratical or Democratical) it ought not, it cannot be resisted without shattering in pieces the very essential constituting parts of the Common∣wealth, by dividing the members from the head, which is all that I am concerned to prove at pre∣sent; namely, that Subjects resisting their Sovereign, is inconsistent with the very being of a Body Politick, of what Species or denomination soever it is.
CHAP. XVI. Resistance inconsistent with peoples well being, as proving the occasion of Civil War. A case put by Grotius and several Instances proposed by him, which seem to allow Resistance, examined and cleared. AGain, suppose it were not Inconsistent with the Being, yet if it be inconsistent with the Well-being of the Body Politick or Common∣wealth, for Subjects to resist or rise up in Arms a∣gainst their Sovereign, that is enough to prove it to be unlawfull; and consequently the endeavouring to make the People believe it to be lawfull, by wri∣ting or preaching in defence of it, is dangerous and seditious, and such a thing as ought not to be en∣dured in a well-governed State, of any kind what∣soever. Now that this doctrine, That it is lawfull for Resistance in∣consistent with the well-being of Bo∣dies Politick. Subjects in any case to resist or rise up in arms against their Sovereign, is inconsistent with the Well-being of all Bodies Politick or Commonwealths of what kind or denomination soever, and consequently in∣consistent with the welfare or well-being of all Man∣kind here in this World, methinks should need no other Argument to make it to be believed, but this one onely; that it undeniably makes all Hu∣mane Societies to be always and unavoidably lia∣ble to the worst of evils, that can befall any State As being an occasion of Civil War, the worst of evils. or humane Society, and that is a Civil War; which besides the horrible mischiefs it brings with
it; it commonly ends in a more insupportable Tyranny and bondage of the whole body of the People, than what was pretended to have been the cause of it. For proof whereof I might appeal not onely to the Testimony of all Histories of all Ages and of all Nations as well as of our own, but to the personal Experience of many thousands yet living, who have all of them seen, and many of them felt, what I have said of a Civil War to be true; namely, that it is the greatest of Evils a State is subject unto, and consequently ought not to be engaged in for the preventing, avoiding, or remedying of any that are less. Nor are they (will Mr. Baxter say) the Pecca∣dillo's No small mat∣ter in Mr. B's opinion, that will excuse resisting. of the Prince, or the petite Grievances of Sub∣jects by their Sovereigns, that can excuse their re∣sisting or rising up in Arms against them: but they must be such as are of Publick Concernment; and such as against which by the Laws of Nature for Self∣preservation, men are not onely permitted, but ob∣liged to defend themselves. I know that Grotius (who is often, but not always Grotius puts a case, but contradicts himself and the Primitive Christians in his answer to it. pertinently cited by Mr. Baxter) in his answer to this question, An Lex de non resistendo nos obligat in gravissimo & certissimo discrimine, that is, Whe∣ther the Law of non-resistance doth oblige us in a most grievous and most certain hazard, seems to grant, that in such a case it may be lawfull for Sub∣jects De jure belli & pacis, lib. 1. c. 4 p. 104. to resist their Sovereigns. But then it is obser∣vable (first) that it is a contradiction to his own ge∣neral Rule viz. Summum imperium tenentibus re∣sisti jure non posse, That those who have the Su∣preme Power cannot lawfully or by right be re∣sisted. Secondly, it is a Contradiction to the judg∣ment
and practice of the Primitive Christians, and consequently to the doctrine of the Apostles, and of Christ himself. For as Grotius himself tells us in one place, Consuetudo veterum Christianorum est op∣tima legis Christianoe interpres, that is, The custom of the old Christians is the best Interpreter of the Christian Law, in the general; so in this very par∣ticular he tells us in another place, namely, in that before by me cited and which I desired to be obser∣ved; Nempe Christianis veteribus qui recentes ab Apostolorum & Apostolicorum virorum disciplinâ, A passage of his before ci∣ted, concern∣ing the Pri∣mitive Chri∣stians, compa∣red with this. eorum proescripta & intelligebant meliùs & perfecti∣ùs implebant, summam fieri injuriam puto ab iis, qui, quo minùs ipsi se defenderent in certissimo mortis pe∣riculo, vires putant illis non animum defuisse. In which saying of his taking it for granted, that the Primitive Christians, which did best understand the Apostolical Precepts, and did most perfectly conform their practice thereunto, would not nor did not defend themselves, no not in certissimo mor∣tis periculo, when they were sure to be killed if they did not: and that not because they wanted either strength or courage, but because they thought as they were taught that it was not lawfull for them to doe so. And there cannot (saith Grotius in that place) a greater injury be done to those Primitive Christians, than to think otherwise of them, that is, than to think that it was not for Conscience sake, but for want of strength that they forbore to defend themselves in certissimo mortis periculo, In the most certain peril of death; which is I think all one with in gravissimo & certissimo discrimine, In the most grievous and most certain hazard; so that if it be lawfull for Christians to doe that
now ingravissimo & certissimo discrimine, In the most grievous and certain hazard, which the Primitive Christians, who best understood (saith Grotius) the Apostolical doctrine, thought it not lawfull for them to doe then in certissimo mortis periculo, In the most certain peril of death, that is, in the very same case; it must be by virtue of some other Gospel, or of some special dispensation, that we have, and they had not; or that those Apostolical Precepts de non resistendo Supremam potestatem ha∣bentibus, Of not resisting those who have the Su∣preme Power, were to be no longer in force, than untill the Christian Subjects should have power e∣nough to resist their Sovereigns, or at least to de∣fend themselves against them. Which opinion, how derogatory it is to the simplicity, sincerity and veracity of the Gospel, and consequently how unworthy to be owned by any that owns himself to be a Christian, I think I have sufficiently proved already: nor can I suspect a man of so great Learn∣ing and Ingenuity, as Grotius was, ever to have been of this opinion, though I cannot see how he can be defended from leaning towards it, when he affirms, or seems at least to affirm, that may be done now by Christian Subjects, which was never done, nor never thought lawfull to be done in the very same case by the Primitive Christians, though they had strength enough to doe it, and though (saith he) they best understood the Apostolical Pre∣cepts, and did most punctually comply with the mean∣ing of them. He himself in effect disal∣lows his own Answer. And therefore lastly, it is observable, (and I am willing to observe it for that Great man's sake) that such a resistance of Sovereigns by their Sub∣jects,
even in such a case, in gravissimo & certissimo discrimine, In the most grievous and most certain hazard, is not to be allowed (saith Grotius) Nisi cum hoc fortè additamento, si fieri possit absque maxima Reipublicoe perturbatione aut exitio plurimorum inno∣centium, Unless it can be done without a very great perturbation or disturbance of the Commonwealth, and without the destruction of very many innocent Persons: which in effect is all one, as if he had said, it is never to be done at all. For how there can be a forcible resistance of Sovereigns by their Subjects, or how Subjects can rise up in Arms, and make use of them either offensively or defen∣sively against their Sovereigns, Absque maxima Reipublicoe perturbatione & exitio plurimorum in∣nocentium; Without a very great perturbation of the Commonwealth, or without the destruction of very many innocent persons, I cannot under∣stand: except we can imagine the Sovereign will have no Subjects to fight for him, (which Christ supposeth all Kings of this world have) on that there will be fighting without killing; or that none or very few of those, that are innocent of ei∣ther party, will be kill'd; which in a Civil War De jure Belli ac pacis p. 112. (which of all other Wars is commonly the most bloudy and most cruel) is not to be imagined. And consequently if Kings are not to be resisted by their Subjects, but in such a case as this, they are never to be resisted at all; because there can never be such a Case: so that Grotius his main Axiome, Summam potestatem tenentibus resisti jure non posse, That those who have the Supreme Po∣wer cannot lawfully he resisted, is still safe and without exception.
Neither is the truth of it impeached by any of those several Instances, which he (I mean Gro∣tius) Some instan∣ces of his, wherein Re∣sistance may seem lawfull, examined. subjoyns, and which seem (saith he) to be Exceptions to this Rule, but indeed are not. 1. For as to the first of those Instances, it speaks of such Kings, as were never Kings at all but in name onely, as the Kings of Lacedoemon were. 2. The second speaks of those that had been Kings, but ceased to be so by their own voluntary resig∣nations, as Diocletian did, and some of our Saxon Kings did also, and retir'd into Monasteries. 3. The third speaks of such Kings as would alienate their Kingdoms unto Strangers, whom the Subjects may refuse to obey without resist∣ing their own Sovereigns, and are bound to doe so, not onely in regard of the natural Allegiance all Subjects owe to their natural Sovereign and to him onely as long as he lives, or as long as he con∣tinues to be their Sovereign; but in regard that after his death or after he voluntarily ceaseth to be their King, they owe the same Allegiance to his legal Successour in all Hereditary Kingdoms: And therefore (saith Grotius) the act or at∣tempt of such an Alienation is null in it self and consequently is not at all obligatory to the Sub∣ject. 4. The fourth speaks of such Kings as Verè hostili animo in totius Populi exitium feruntur, that is, Such Kings as would if they could destroy all their Subjects, and endeavour to doe so; Sed vix vide∣tur (saith Grotius) id accidere posse in Rege men∣tis compote, But this (saith he) is hard to be ima∣gined of any King that is mentis compos, that is in his wits, or that is not stark mad: and if he be
stark mad, or not mentis compos, not in his right mind, then his case is the same with that of Kings that are Minors or Infants, and his Kingly Power is to be administred in his name by such, as by the Laws or Customes of his Kingdom, are to have the custody or care of him, while he continues in that condition, who are no more to be resisted by the Sub∣ject, than the King himself was before he was in that condition. 5. The fifth instance is of such Kings, as In ipsâ delatione imperii, In the very making of them Kings are made Kings upon this express condition, That if they doe this or that, so or so, Subditi omni obedi∣entioe vinculo solvuntur, The Subjects are discharged from all obligation of obedience to them: for then (saith Grotius) he that was King became a private person again. But I say, such a one was never a King at all, properly so called: because in the very Act, whereby he was made or rather called a King, he was indeed made a Subject to them (whomso∣ever they were) that had power to question whether he had done this or no, and to un-king him if he had, nay if he had not, if they should think he had, or say he had though they thought or knew he had not. 6. The sixth Instance is, when the King hath but a part of the Supreme Power; and the Senate and the People have another part of it. But then say I (as I said before) the King is no King properly so called. I mean is no Sovereign, but a piece of Sovereign (if there can be such a thing,) and it is the Sovereign, He or They, that have the Sovereignty or the whole Sovereign power, that I say are in no case to be re∣sisted by their Subjects.
7. The seventh and last is the same in sense with the fifth, though it differ in words or in the manner of expression, both of them speaking of one as King who is indeed no King, that is, no Sovereign, as no man or number of men in any Society of men can be said to be, that have others in the same Society equal with them, and much less superiour to them, as they must be to whom they are obnoxious and ac∣countable for their ill managery of their Government, and who have authority to deprive them of it, and depose them from it. And of none but such Kings as these, that is, such as are not Kings indeed but in name onely, are all Thse Instan∣ces of his are of Kings and n Kings. the aforefaid Instances (wherein Grotius seems to grant it to be lawfull for Subjects to resist their Kings) to be understood, but two onely, and those are the third and the fourth, in the former of The third In∣stance. which there is nothing either said or meant of the Subjects resisting of their Sovereign, but onely of their not obeying him, if he would have them be∣come Subjects to a stranger; which they cannot doe, if they would, without becoming injurious not one∣ly to him, but also to his Successours (as I said be∣fore.) And there is a great difference betwixt resist∣ing and not obeying of Sovereigns by their Subjects, though Mr. Baxter will needs have not obeying to be resisting in its primary and most proper signi∣fication. As to the other of these two Instances, which The fourth Instance. may be meant of Kings properly so called (I mean such Kings as are indeed Sovereigns) namely the fourth, wherein upon supposition there were such a a King as would doe and did what he could to ruine his own Kingdom, and to destroy all his
own Subjects; Grotius grants indeed, that in such a case Rex abdicat Regnum, or the King renounces his Kingdom, or doth ipso facto declare he will be no longer their King, because voluntas imperandi & voluntas perdendi non possunt simul consistere, Be∣cause a Will to reign and a Will to have none to reign over are inconsistent with one another. But withall he tells us, it is hardly credible, (he might have said utterly incredible) there should be such a King unless he were mad, and if he be mad, there be other ways (as I said before) to hin∣der him from doing himself or his People so horrible a mischief without their taking up of Arms or rebel∣ling against him. So that I do not see how it can be rationally con∣cluded Those Instan∣ces but seem∣ing Excepti∣ons. out of any of the aforesaid Instances, that it is lawfull to resist him or them that have the Sovereign Power. Neither indeed doth Grotius propose them to infer any such conclusion, but rather to establish the contrary, as appears plainly by the words immediately preceding, which are these; Diximus summum Imperium tenentibus resisti jure non posse; nunc quoedam sunt, quoe Lecto∣rem monere debemus nè putet in hanc legem delin∣quere eos, qui reverà non delinquunt, that is, We have said (saith he) that is, we have positively affirmed or concluded that those that have the Supreme Power may not lawfully be resisted; but now we are to give the Reader a Caveat, that he may not think those to be transgressours of this Law who indeed are not, or that to be a transgression of this Law which indeed is not. And then he proposeth all the aforesaid Instances, as seeming to be, but not being indeed inconsistent
with the Law (as he calls it) of not resisting the Su∣preme Power, wheresoever it is placed, or whoso∣ever they be that are invested with it; that Law of The Law of non-resisting, the foundati∣on and preser∣vative of hu∣mane society. not resisting the Supreme Power being the very foundation upon which all Humane Societies of all kinds are built and superstructed, and the Palladi∣um, The pledge of security, whereby they are pre∣served in their several forms or constitutions, so that from or against this Law there lies no ex∣ception nor any dispensation with it, by any humane Authority upon any pretence either of Civil or Religious Interest, or upon any either pretended or real Grievance of the Subject by their Sovereign, in any kind or degree whatsoever.
CHAP. XVII. Several other Reasons, to prove the Ʋnlawfulness of resisting, in any Case whatsoever. The Holy League in France and our late Rebellion brought in by way of Parallel. ANd the Reasons for this, besides what hath been already produced out of Scripture, are; First, Because the object of humane Prudence in the constitution of humane Societies, and Kingdoms Other reasons for non-resi∣stance. or Commonwealths, is not to prevent all such Grie∣vances as possibly may be; no nor all such as (con∣sidering the pravity and perversness of humane na∣ture) ordinarily will be, and of necessity must be, even in the best constituted and best managed State or humane Society whatsoever. For as St. Paul saith, Oportet esse Hoereses, There must be Heresies in the Church; not, as if it were not better there were none, but because as long as men are men, that is, such cross-grain'd creatures, and of such different Morals and Intellectuals from one another as they are, there cannot chuse but be some Heresies in the Church; so, and for the very same reason, oportet esse gra∣vamina, there must be, that is, there cannot chuse but be Grievances in the Civil State or Common∣wealth also. And therefore the object of humane pru∣dence (seeing it cannot prevent or provide against all evils that may or will be in all States) it is as much as may be to prevent or provide against those that are the greatest rather than the lesser, and those that are likely to happen often, rather than those that
are not likely to happen at all, or very seldome; and those that are inconsistent with the being, ra∣ther than those that are inconsistent with the well-being onely of a State or Body Politick. For as in the body natural, so in the body Politick, no reme∣dy is to be prescribed or applyed that is worse than the disease. And therefore, Secondly, Any gravamina, nay all the gravami∣na or grievances, that Subjects can suffer under their Sovereign, are to be endured, rather than they are to rebell or to rise up in Arms against him; because that will be the cause of more and greater evils, than any of these are, or can be, against which it can be made use of for a remedy: For no Tyranny can be so bad as Anarchy, and any Government, how Tyrannical soever, is better than none. And there∣fore it was the saying of one of the wisest Statesmen that ever was in the World, Iniquissimam pacem justissimo bello antefero, I prefer, said he, the most injurious Peace, that is such a peace wherein men are obnoxious to the greatest injuries, before the most just War; he means the most just Civil War, or such a Civil War, as may seem to have the justest or most justifiable causes for it: because indeed any Civil War, upon what grounds or pretences soever it be undertaken, puts the whole body of the Com∣monwealth into a much worse condition than it can be under any Government or any Governours what∣soever. For whilst there is a Government, though neverso unjust or injurious, there is some authority and execution of Laws for the protection of the in∣nocent, if not of the Subjects against the Sovereign, yet of the Subjects against one another; but Silent leges inter arma, When rebellion is up there is no
safety for any man against any man, not for Fathers against their Children, nor for Brethren against Bre∣thren, Non hospes ab hospite tutus, One friend is not safe from another. To conclude, Rebellion is the ingagement of the whole body of the Commonwealth against it self, and will if it be not suppressed make it at length Felo de se, A murtherer of it self, and to end either in the desolation or dissolution of it self. So that whereas all other evils are but prejudicial to the well-being, This, I mean Rebellion or a rebelli∣ous Civil War, is always in its tendency, though not always perhaps in the event, destructive to the very Being of all States and Humane Societies whatso∣ever; and consequently to the peace and welfare of Subjects as well as Sovereigns, that is, to all and every one of mankind. And therefore this being the greatest of all Evils, it is never to be made use of to prevent or redress any that are less, and con∣sequently never to be made use of at all; because all other evils incident to a Body Politick are less than this, and that not onely taken singly but joint∣ly also. And yet Thirdly, there is one Reason more, why in humane prudence and according to the dictates of right reason, the Rebellion of Subjects against their Sovereign ought not to be allowed; no, not though possibly it might so happen that (humanely speaking) there could be no other way or means to preserve the very Being of the Body Politick: as for example, in one of the aforesaid Instances or Cases which is put by Grotius (but put by him as hardly credible) supposing there should be such a King as would pro∣fess so implacable a hatred to his Subjects, that he would if he could destroy them all; and that he
will endeavour to doe so: The question is whether, because possibly there may be such a Case, there ought not to be some exception from the aforesaid general Rule of the unlawfulness of Subjects taking up of Arms to resist their Sovereign in any case whatso∣ever; I answer No; and that not onely because St. Paul in his prohibition to resist the Supreme Power hath made no such exception, though one of the Supreme Powers, whom he forbid the Christians to resist, did wish the whole body of the Roman peo∣ple had but one head, that he might cut it off at one blow; and another of them had set the capital City of his Empire on fire, commanding his Souldi∣ers to kill all the Citizens that endeavoured to quench the burning of their Houses; he himself in the mean while playing upon an Instrument all the time it was a burning: Neither will I insist upon the Judgment and Practice of the Primitive Christi∣ans, who though they knew their Sovereigns the Heathen Emperours had professed they would, and really did what they could to destroy all their Chri∣stian Subjects; yet the Christians did not think that either this profession or practice of their Sovereigns (which was an evident and undeniable demonstra∣tion of their implacable hatred against them) was sufficient to dispense with them for resisting of or for defending themselves against them: as was notably exemplified by what was done and suffered by Mauritius and his Legion according to that Heroi∣cal story before recited. But I will not insist, I say, upon any Argument drawn from any religious To∣pick, to justifie my denial of any exception to be made to the general Rule of non-resisting of Sove∣reigns by their Subjects, or for dispensing with Sub∣jects
to resist their Sovereigns in any case whatsoe∣ver, though possibly there may be such a Case (as Barclay, and Grotius out of Barclay, puts) even a∣mong Christians. But that which I insist on at pre∣sent is this, that abstracting from the consideration of what God hath either commanded or forbidden in his Word, as likewise from the consideration of Hea∣ven or Hell, or of any other life after this, where men are to be rewarded or punished for what they have done here; it is not onely prudent and conveni∣ent, but absolutely necessary to the peace and wel∣fare, and safety, and happiness of all mankind here in this world, that men should be taught and believe, that the resisting of Sovereigns by their Subjects is always and utterly unlawfull in any case whatsoever; Resistance unlawfull e∣ven in Groti∣us his Case. yea though possibly such might be the Case, as that they would all be destroyed, if they did not resist: and that for these reasons. First, Because it is not onely very improbable, but as Grotius himself saith scarcely credible, there should ever be any such Case. Secondly, Because (according to a Maxime of our own Law) A mischief is better than an inconve∣nience; that is, (as I conceive) it is better for a State to run the hazard of a greater future evil, which may either not happen at all, or (if at all) very rare∣ly, than for the avoiding of it to admit or submit to a lesser, whereunto it may always and must very often be obnoxious. Thirdly, Because, if it be allowed to be lawfull for Subjects to resist their Sovereign in such a Case as Grotius puts, or in any other case whatsoever; it will be always and altogether as dangerous both to Prince and People, as if it were granted in never so
many other cases also; because that one may alway be pretended to be the present case, and the People may be always made to believe it is so, though it be never so improbable to be so. As may appear by divers Examples besides those I have already quoted out of Scripture, especially that of David, who though he was the best of Kings that Nation ever had, yet his Son Absalom made the People believe that he neglected to doe them justice in hearing their complaints, and redressing their grievances, and thereby stole away their hearts from his Father, (saith the Text) and made them to rebell against him. But to instance in one Example or two more, nearer home and nearer our own times. It is not long since the Princes of the House of Lorrain, I mean the Guises, being excluded by An Instance, from the Ho∣ly League in France. Henry the Third of France from the chief managery of affairs, which they formerly had in that Kingdom, resolved to gain that by force, which they could not keep by the King's favour; and to that end, to stir up the People under some publick and plausible pretence to joyn with them in a rebellion against the King. But what that pretence should be, which the People should be baited withall, being debated by the chief of the Faction, and some being of one mind and some of another, Henry Duke of Guise, being head of the whole party, stood up and said; What need is there of any debate or consultation as to this particular? can there be a better, or more plausible, or more efficacious Motive to stir up the People to joyn with us against the King; than to The Catholick Religion, the pretence there. make them believe the Catholick Religion is in danger, and that the King is not onely a favourer of the Hu∣gonotts
but a Hugonott himself in his heart, and there∣fore that it is absolutely necessary for all good Catho∣licks to joyn in an Association or Holy League for the defence of the Catholick Faith, and to oppose the bringing in of Hugonott Heresie against all per∣sons of all conditions whatsoever, and consequent∣ly the King himself? It was easily agreed to by all the rest of the Conspiratours, that this was a very plausible pretence indeed, but withall so incredible as to the King's particular, as that it would not be ve∣ry difficult onely, but impossible to make the People believe it, and consequently to make them rise up against the King upon that account; it being gene∣rally known and believed that that King was as Bigott or zealous a Roman Catholick as any was in France; having been himself not a Spectatour onely but an Actour also in the Massacre of the Hugonotts at Paris not long before; and was still such a Devote, that he was never almost seen in publick but betwixt two Capuchins, with a Crucifix in his hand and his Beads at his girdle. Whereunto the Duke of Guise replied laughing, Let me alone (said he) with the managing of that part of the affair. I will undertake within one month by those I will set on work (mean∣ing the Jesuits, the Friars and other Popular Prea∣chers) to make the King to be believed over all France to be as arrant a Hugonott as any in Geneva. And so he did; whereupon that Rebellious Associa∣tion (which by its Godfather the Pope was called the Holy League) was made against the King, and as bloudy a War as ever was in France was raised and maintained by it; neither did it end with the death of the King (who was murthered by a Jacobin Friar) but continued against his Successour upon the same
pretence and with the same intentions: the deluded People in the mean time being made to believe by their Ghostly Fathers, that it was God's Cause they fought for, and that those that died or were killed in it, were sure to go immediately and directly to Heaven, without dropping into Purgatory by the way. Another Example of the same kind we had here The like In∣stance from our late Re∣bellion in England. of late amongst Our selves; that is of the Peoples being stirred up by their Preachers to joyn with a factious, ambitious and discontented Party of the Nobility, Gentry and Commons in a Rebellion against our late Sovereign Lord of ever blessed memory, upon as false and groundless a pretence, as that was against the King of France. For, as there the People were made to believe by their Popish Preachers, that their Religion was in danger, and that their King was an Hugonott or Presbyterian, though as I said before he indeed was (as he prosessed himself to be) a very zealous and rigid Papist, and had given more than proof enough that he was so: Even so our People here were by their Presbyterian and other their Schismatical Preachers made to believe, that the Pro∣testant Religion here was in very great danger, and The Prote∣stant Religion the pretence here. that Popery was very likely to be brought in, because the King was a Papist or Popishly affected at least; whereas it was evident to all the world both by his Profession and his Practice, that he was as truly a zealous and devout Protestant as any the best of his Protestant Subjects, and moreover as resolute a de∣fender of the Protestant Faith as it is setled and esta∣blished by Law in the Church of England against both Papists and Schismaticks, as any King could or ought to be; I might add, as knowingly so too as ever any
King was, but his Father onely. And yet thousands of his Subjects were made to believe that he was a Papist in his heart, and upon that account were per∣swaded and engaged to fight against him; nay many of them were made to believe, that the Protestant Religion it self, as it was established by Law, was but disguised Popery, and that the Common Prayer Book was but the Popish Missal or Mass Book trans∣lated into English, and that the Bishops with all the Episcopal Clergy were an Antichristian Hierarchy, and were or would be all of them Vassals to the Pope, as soon as they had an opportunity safely to pro∣fess themselves to be so. Now if the People could be made to believe (as we see they were) that such a King as He was, and such a Church as Ours is, were Popish or Popishly affected, against all Evidence both of reason and of sense to the contrary; what is there that they cannot be made to believe? and consequently what security can there be for Kings from their Subjects, either for their Power or their Persons? or for Subjects from their fellow Subjects, or for preserving of the publick Peace for a moment onely? If there be any one, I say any one case of any kind in any degree, wherein Subjects may be allow∣ed without scruple of Conscience to take up Arms against their Sovereign; that one (as I said before) shall always be pretended and believed to be the Case, as often as the contrivers and trumpeters of Sedition and Rebellion will have it to be so, though there be no ground or reason at all for it, as it is evident there was not in either of the aforesaid In∣stances or Examples. I know there were other pretences besides that of Other preten∣ces made use of for the late Rebellion. Religion, to justifie the Rebellion against the late King,
as his breach of Trust, his violation of Laws, his bringing or endeavouring to bring in Arbitrary Go∣vernment, and (as Mr. Baxter would have it to be believed, though Grotius thinks it incredible that any King in his wits should do so) his professing himself an Enemy to the whole body of the People by making War against them all, (as if he meant to be a King without Subjects) and finally what∣soever was thought to be most likely to make either his Person or his Government or both to be feared and hated by the whole Nation, though really and truly there was no more ground for any of them than there was for his purpose of bringing in Popery; which though the Grandees of the Faction knew well enough, yet they knew too that it would serve their turn as well as if it were true, if the People could be made to believe it was so, and withall that they might lawfully, nay that they were bound in con∣science with their Lives and Fortunes to defend them∣selves, their Wives and Children, from being made slaves (for that's the style it must run in) by the King or his Evil Counsellours, who ought to be brought to condign punishment by force, if it cannot be done by Law; against which the People were made to be∣lieve the King did protect those Evil Counsellours of his. And by this means was that Good, that Godly, that Gracious, that Just and every way Vertuous King of ours, brought first to be rebell'd against, and at last to be murthered by his own Subjects in his ca∣pital City, and before his own Palace gates. And thus may the best Prince that ever was, will be or can be in the World, be exposed, traduced and ruined; and the best Government in the World be brought to confusion and dissolution: and all the Subjects, for
fear of an imaginary slavery, be made Slaves indeed to those whom they helped to make them so; there being no way to secure any Prince, State or People, from being always obnoxious to these fatal mischiefs, but the maintaining of this Axiom or Maxim of true Policy, as Sacred and inviolable (viz.) That The doctrine of Non-resi∣stance recom∣mended. Sovereigns are not forcibly to be resisted by their Sub∣jects in any case or upon any provocation whatsoever. And that this Maxim may be kept Sacred and in∣violable, as being the Palladium, the Preservative of the publick peace, and of the very being, as well as of the well-being of Humane Society; it ought to be the special care of him or them that have the Supreme Power to forbid under very severe penalty, the printing, preaching, or any way infusing or in∣sinuating into the ears or hearts of the People any Doctrine to the contrary, as being not onely false and erroneous, but dangerous and Seditious also; so seditious and so dangerous, that if the Sovereign have not power to secure himself from the Pulpit and the Press, or if he do not make use of that power, I am afraid that it is not his Scepter nor his Sword, that will be able to secure him from his People, or his People from themselves, I mean from cutting the throats of one another. The End of the Second Section.
SECTION III. The late War in England against the King proved to have been a Rebellion, what∣ever Mr. Baxter plead or argue in defence or justification of it. CHAP. I. The late War proved to have been made against the King, and consequently to be Rebellion. The Par∣liaments Declaration discuss'd, together with the danger of Arbitrary Votes. The Judges opinion in the Earl of Essex his Case in Queen Elizabeths time. The Presbyterian Clergy charged with the Rebellion. AND thus having, as I conceive, sufficiently proved it to be unlawful for Subjects to rise up in Arms against their Sovereign, in any case or upon any provocation whatsoever; as being not only contrary to the Precepts of the Gospel, and the Practice of the Primitive Christians, but to the Dictates of right Reason also: I thought there would have been no need of saying any more to prove the The Bishops grounds to prove the late War unlawful. late War here in England to be Unlawful; because I took it for granted, that it was a War made against
the King, and that our King was our only Sovereign, and that those that made the War were but Subjects, meer Subjects, and no more than Subjects. But Mr. Baxter tells us, First, That the late War was not made against Mr. B's contra∣ry grounds to justifie it. the King. Secondly, That the King was not our Sovereign, at least not our sole Sovereign. And, Thirdly, That those that made the War were not meer Subjects, but had their share in the Sovereignty, and that in the chiefest part of the Sovereignty (namely the Legislative power) as well as the King had. And upon these grounds he builds his Babel of confusion; and of the solidity of these grounds he is so very confident, that he saith he will confess him∣self His confi∣dence of these grounds. to have been a Rebel, nay, a most perfidious Re∣bei, and that he will offer his Head to Justice as a H. C. p. 489, 490. Rebel, if these grounds of his can be solidly confu∣ted. Let us try therefore, whether they be so im∣pregnable, as he presumes they are or no. I for my part am so far from thinking them to be so, that they seem to me to have no solidity at all in any of them. We will begin with the first, viz. that the late The first of them confide∣red. War here in England was not a War against the King, and therefore could not be a Rebellion. The Consequence I confess to be good; But how doth he prove the Antecedent? why, he proves the Antece∣dent, namely, that the War was not against the H. C. 476. ad sinem istius pa∣gine. The Parlia∣ments Decla∣ration. King, because the Parliament declared it was not against the King, but only against his evil Counsellors, and his Delinquent Subjects, that misled him, and were his Enemies as well as the Commonwealths. And it was
upon this account, saith Mr. Baxter, that I served the Parliament; nor do I know (saith he) that I Ibid. ever fought against the King, unless every one of the Kings Soldiers was a King; or some one of them at Mr. B. perso∣nally ingaged in the War. least. From which saying of his, I observe by the way, that Mr. Baxter himself, in obedience to the Parliament, did himself personally fight against the Kings Soldiers, but not against the King, unless some one of those Soldiers he fought against was the King; as if no body can be said to fight against the King, but one that hath a personal Combat or Duel with the King. And perhaps the Parliament, not The Parlia∣ments design in that Decla∣ration. thinking it time yet to speak out, did hope to make the People believe, that they made War against De∣linquent Subjects only, and not against the King; be∣cause they did not, as the King of Syria did, 2 Chron. 18. v. 30. com∣mand their General and his Officers to fight with nei∣ther small nor great, but only with the King. It is true, the Parliament did not so: but it is true too, that they did not except the King from being fought with neither; nor consequently from being kill'd. For, as Mr. Baxter saith, it is to be suppos'd those that Mr. B's own confession in the case. H. C. p. 422. fight would kill those with whom they fight: and then what might have become of the King, if Mr. Baxter had hapned to encounter him when he was a fight∣ing with other of his Soldiers? But, to let this pass, as spoken of occasionally only, Mr. Baxter tells us, that he and those that engaged with him in the late War were obliged to believe the Parliaments Declarati∣on that it was not a War against the King, because the H. C. p. 471. Parliament were not only the most competent Wit∣nesses and Judges, but the chosen Trustees of the Peo∣ples Liberties.
But whom or what doth Mr. Baxter mean by such By Parliament Mr. B. means the House of Commons. Parliaments as the People are obliged to believe? surely not the King, Lords and Commons, which is the true notion of a Parliament; no, nor the Lords and Commons (who both of them together are but the Body of a Parliament without a Head.) For the reason which he gives, why they (the People) are obliged to believe them, is, because they are their chosen Trustees; but so are the House of Commons only, and not the Lords. So that whatsoever the House of Commons declare or remonstrate unto the People, is to be believed to be true, and just, and legal, and the People to act accordingly; and some there will always be that will do so. For Example, the House of Commons in the late The ground of Felton's Mur∣thering the D. of Bucking∣ham, a Vote of the House of Commons. Kings time Voted the Duke of Buckingham (this Dukes Father) to be an Enemy to the publick; and therefore Felton thought himself obliged to kill him, and did so, and for no other reason but that only. For being presently apprehended and ask't why he did it? Look (said he) betwixt the Crown and Lining of my Hat, and you shall find the reason why I thought my self bound in conscience to God, and in duty to my King and Country to do it. And there (as he told them they should) they found a Paper sticht to the inside of the Lining with the aforesaid Vote of the House of Commons written upon it. And this was told me by a very credible Witness Sir Tho. Alisbury, then one of the Masters of Requests, but formerly Secretary for the Admiralty to the afore∣said Duke, who was by when he was Murder'd, and heard the aforesaid Examination of Felton, and his justifying of what he had done upon that ac∣count of the aforesaid Vote of the House of Com∣mons,
which was taken out of his Hat, and seen and read by the aforesaid Sir Tho. Alisbury. I have repeated the Story of this matter of fact, The dange∣rous conse∣quence of such Votes. the rather, because there have been of late divers such Votes passed in the House of Commons against several Persons of eminent Quality and Dignity, who were all of them to be supposed to be innocent until they were proved to be guilty; and yet be∣fore any such proof made, or any proceeding a∣gainst them per legem terrae, or according to the Law of the Land; as some of them were, so all of the like quality, that is, all the Nobility, may be con∣demned by a Major party of a House of Commons, as Enemies to the Commonwealth, or of King and Kingdom; and according to Mr. Baxter's Doctrine, must by the People be believed to be so; and con∣sequently they that are so Voted, how many, how great, and how innocent soever they are, they are to be exposed to have their throats cut by any Fana∣tical Zealot, or (which is worse) to be torn in pieces by the inraged Rabble, as the two Dewitts were lately in Holland, and as Dr. Lamb was in London in the Reign of King James. For it is but giving of the Word in such a season, and down goes that Voted, or rather that Devoted Person, and is knock'd on the head before he can open his mouth to speak for himself, when perhaps he is not the Man they took him for neither. What is become in the mean time of Magna Char∣ta? No man safe in such cases. Where is the security thereby provided, for the Lives, Liberties and Properties of Free-born English-men? when an arbitrary Vote of the House of Commons, if it be believed (as Mr. Baxter saith it must be) by the People; and be put in execution
(as Mr. Baxter cannot deny but it may be, because it hath been) may take away any mans life, how innocent soever, without any farther process, or a legal proof of any crime against him. For who is there that can secure himself from such a Vote? or that can be secured after he is devoted by such a Vote, from being killed by the next man that meets him in the Streets? for there be more Feltons (saith Mr. Baxter) than one; neither will the hanging of one discourage all the rest from hazarding their lives upon the same account, as long as they are possessed and actuated with the same principle, (viz.) that it is not only lawful, but a glorious and meritorious deed, to kill any man that is an Enemy to the Pub∣lick; and withal that he is obliged to believe that any, or as many, as the House of Commons shall declare to be so, are so. It was high time therefore for the King to give a stop to such proceedings by dissolving the late Par∣liament, to prevent the proscribing of all that were about him and employed by him, and perhaps the remonstrating against himself also as their Predeces∣sors had done against his Father: which Remon∣strance The Remon∣strance of the House of Com∣mons made use of for the destruction of the Kings Person. made by the then House of Commons, as it was intended and made use of at first by the Presby∣terians to begin and carry on their Rebellion against the King and his Party; so was it made use of at last also by the Independents for the destruction of the Kings Person: the pretended male-administration of the Government (which was the matter of the Remonstrance) being that for which he was indicted and condemned and put to death by the Indepen∣dents. And yet that very Remonstrance it was that Mr. Baxter in the place before quoted saith, the Peo∣ple
were obliged to believe, and consequently to act thereupon as afterwards they did, and yet good man he was in the mean time far from being guilty of any hurt to the Kings Person, or destruction of his Hol. C. p. 489, Power. But why was he or the rest of the People obliged Parliaments not infallible nor impecca∣ble by Mr. B's own confessi∣on, to believe either that Remonstrance or his Declarati∣on of the House of Commons? were they infallible that they could not be deceived themselves, or were they impeccable that they could not deceive others? neither the one nor the other: For Mr. Baxter him∣self tells us, it is well known that Parliaments, quà tales, (as such) are not divine, religious, Protestant, or just: That sometimes the major part in either or both Houses may be the worst. And therefore I should think not always to be believed in what they declare, nor al∣ways to be complied with by the People (whose Trustees they are) in whatsoever they command or undertake. For if They be such as Mr. Baxter saith They may be, may They not betray their trust, and act contrary to the Interest of those that trust them? Yes, saith Mr. Baxter, they may, and consequently may (saith he) forfeit their power as well as Kings; nay, in some cases (saith Mr. Baxter) We are all, (that is the whole Nation) to take part with the King against the Parliament: as First, If they would depose Holy Com-w. pag. 437, 438. the King unjustly, or change the Government; or, Se∣condly, If they notoriously betray their trust in funda∣mentals, or in points that the Common good depends on (as if ever any Parliament did, That we are now And in some cases to be de∣ferred by the People. Ibid. speaking of did, and did it most notoriously) there (saith he) the Peoples duty is to forsake them and to cleave to the King against them. But who shall be Judg whether they do so or no? or if there be a di∣vision
betwixt those between whom the Sovereignty is divided (as Mr. Baxter supposeth it is betwixt King and Parliament here in England) and the one usurps, or is pretended to usurp upon the other; What then? why then, saith Mr. Baxter, it belongs Holy Com-w. pag. 439. to the People to judg whose cause is best and to resist the usurping party. But the People (as he tells us in another place) cannot themselves judg for themselves; Mr. B's incon∣sistence in the resolution of such cases. and therefore (saith he) the Constitution of the Go∣vernment having made the Parliament the Trustees of our Liberties, hath made them our Eyes by which We must discern our dangers: And therefore (as he saith a little before in the same page) We are obliged to be∣lieve them as the most competent Witnesses, and Judges, and the chosen Trustees of our Liberties. So that if there be a difference betwixt the King and the House of Commons, and the House of Commons would depose the King never so unjustly, or change the Government never so notoriously, or betray their trust never so perfidiously, yet if the House of Com∣mons themselves will not say they do so, but declare the contrary, the People are to believe them and to side with them against the King; yea, and against the House of Lords too, if they joyn with the King: which how it can consist with the Doctrine of Co-or∣dination, or with his own aforesaid Assertion, that in some cases the People are to cleave to the King against the Parliament, he were best to consider. In the mean time, thanks be to God, We have a The Law a sure Rule. better and a more certain Rule of right and wrong and to be guided in what We are to believe and do, than an arbitrary Vote of the major part of the House of Commons; and that is the known Law of the Land. For verissimum illud (saith Grotius) ubi semel
à jure recessum est, incerta esse omnia; In Prolegom. de jure Belli & Pacis. when we are once out of the road and rule of the Law, we know not whither We are a going, nor what we are a doing. If therefore the question be, Whether the late War The E. of Es∣sex his case in Q. Elizabeths time. was made against the King or no; it is not a Decla∣ration of the House of Commons, or of both Houses, either pro or con, that will decide the question; but Ad legem, ad legem, it is the Law that must do it, and the Law hath done it. For when the Earl of Essex in Queen Elizabeths time, at his Arraignment for Treason and Rebellion against the Queen, (be∣cause he took up Arms without her Commission) pleaded that he did it for the Queen and not against her; because his meaning was only to remove Cecill and Cobham and Raleigh and other evil Councellors that were about her, and were hers and the States Enemies as well as his; protesting then, as Mr. Bax∣ter does now, that he meant not any the least hurt to the Queens Person or diminution of her Power: upon which often reiterated protestation of the Earls, especially that of his meaning no hurt to the Queens Person; the Sages of the Law, that were Assessors to the Lords that were his Judges, being askt by the Lords, what was the Judgment of the The Judges Opinion in that case. Law in that Case; Pronunciarunt, si quis attentaverit ita se firmare, ut Rex resistere non potuerit, Rebellionis tenetur, &c. They pronounced or declared that Cambd. Eliz. ad Ann. 1601. if any man should attempt to make himself so strong that the King should not be able to resist him, he is guilty of Rebellion. Item that the Law interpreteth that in every Rebellion there is a con∣spiracy against the Life and Crown of the King; for a Rebell will never suffer the King to live or
reign, who may afterwards punish or revenge such his Treason or Rebellion. Which Interpretation of the Law of England they confirmed, First, By the Imperial or Civil Law, whereby to A threefold confirmation of that their opinion. do any thing against the safety of the Prince is repu∣ted to be Treason. Secondly, By the force of Reason; because it can∣not be but that he, which hath once given Law to his King, should never permit the King to recover his former authority, or to live, left at any time after he should revenge it. Thirdly and lastly, They confirmed it likewise by Examples drawn from our English Chronicles of Ed∣ward the II. and Richard the II. both which being once by force of Arms gotten by their Subjects into their Power, were not long after Deposed and made away also. I have repeated at large what was then said to be Three Obser∣vations drawn from thence. the Law of England by the authorised and sworn Ex∣positors of the Laws, I mean the Judges. And from what was said by them then in that particular Case, I observe, First, That Arms taken up, or Forces raised by Subjects of what condition or upon what pretence soever, without the Sovereigns leave or commission, are in construction of Law taken up and raised against the Sovereign. Secondly, That such Forces so raised, against whomsoever or to what end soever they are preten∣ded to be employed, are in construction of Law in∣tended not only to take away the Kings Power but his Life also. And, Thirdly, Because the Law presumes, that those that have taken away his Power will not let
him live, for fear he may recover his Power, and revenge himself of those that took it away from him; I cannot chuse but think that the Presbyterian Party, though they did not at first intend to take away the Kings life, yet after they had taken away his Power, and made him their Prisoner, and used The Presbyte∣rians would have done what the In∣dependents did, had they been let alone. him so barbarously as they did whilst he was their Prisoner, I cannot chuse but think, I say, that (had not the Independents taken him out of their hands) they would have taken away his life at last also, though not by a formal publick judiciary Tryal as the Independents did; but some way or other they would have done it. For who can believe they would have suffered him to live, or at least to live as a King, whom They could not chuse but think they had provoked beyond a capacity of being Par∣doned by him, if ever he should be in a condition to be revenged of them? And why should We think they would have stuck at making him away in the dark or in a Prison, whom before they had so often indeavoured to kill in the open Field? For it is to be supposed, saith Mr. Baxter, that those that fight would kill those they fight against; and therefore Holy Com. p. 422. it is to be supposed likewise (say I) that those that commissioned their Armies to fight against their King (as the Presbyterian Parliament did the Earl of Essex) did commission them likewise to kill the King if they could. For I never heard that the King was excepted from being fought against, and The Kings Person excep∣ted in none of their Commi∣ssions. consequently from being kill'd, in any of their Com∣missions: or that so much as any private Instruction or Intimation was given to my Lord of Essex or to any of his Officers, much less to all of them, to spare the King: such a one I mean as David gave to Joab and
the Officers of his Army for the sparing of Absolom. So that there was no more care taken by the Parlia∣ment for sparing of the King's life, than for sparing the life of any of those whom their Armies were commissioned to sight against and kill; and conse∣quently they were commissioned to kill the King as well as any of the rest They were to fight withal. And if so, then not only those that commission'd The Presby∣terian Clergy taxed, as to the late Kings Death. those that fought against the King, but those that stirred them up, and encouraged them to fight against the King, did stir them up and encourage them to kill the King also: and if so, how can the Presbyte∣rian Clergy of those times, especially the London and Parliament Preachers, be excused from being intenti∣onally guilty of the late King's death, before he was Fid. Evangil. Armatum. actually murthered by the Independents. But of all the rest how will Mr. Baxter excuse Mr. B. parti∣cularly char∣ged. himself who tells us it is to be supposed that those that fight would kill those they fight against, and consequently that those that encourage them to fight, do encourage them to kill those whom they fight against, and withal confesseth that he encoura∣ged thousands to do that which the Law calls fighting against the King; how will he, I say, excuse himself from being, consequentially at least, if not intentio∣nally, guilty of the late Kings Death? How then can he with any ingenuity or sincerity say, that he was never guilty of hurt to the Person or destruction of Hol. Com. p. 489, & 490. the Power of the King? And yet he doth say so, and that so confidently, that he professeth likewise that if either this or that (viz) that if either he was guil∣ty Notwith∣standing his confidence. Ibid. of hurt to the Person, or destruction of the Power of the King, can be proved against him, he will never gain-say them that call him a most perfidious Rebell,
and tell him he is guilty of a far greater sin, than Murther, Whoredom, Drunkenness, and such like. In the mean time he doth confess, and is convin∣ced, Rebellion, as Mr. B. owns, a greater sin than Murther, Whordom, Drunkenness, &c. it seems, that a Rebel is a worse man and a grea∣ter sinner, than a Drunkard, or a Whoremonger, or a Murtherer, if he be indeed a Rebel, though per∣haps he doth not think so; which is a severer sen∣tence than I durst have pronounced upon many of those that were indeed Rebels, but did not think Some were Rebels, who did not think themselves so. themselves to be so; but were misled by their spi∣ritual guides, who made them believe that to fight against the King was to fight for the King; and that all the while they were doing God and the King good service: which the greater diminution it was of their sin that were so deceived, the greater ag∣gravation it was of their guilt that did so deceive them. And yet those, that were the least sinners of these Rebels, were according to Mr. Baxter's account greater sinners than Drunkards, Whoremongers and Murtherers: so that if he could as truly (as he doth boldly and frequently) charge most of the Episcopal Party with Drunkenness and Ʋncleanness and Pro∣faneness, yet seeing he cannot charge them with Re∣bellion against their Sovereign, they will still be less evil, how bad soever they are, than the best of those of his Party, if They were Rebels, as I think They have acknowledged themselves to be, by suing for and taking out their Pardons for their Re∣bellion. Neither can the Bishops and the Episcopal Clergy be so answerable to God and the World for the dis∣soluteness, The Schisma∣tical Clergy under a just reproof. debauchery and Profaneness of those of their Party (were it as general and as great as Mr. Baxter would have it believed to be) as the
Schismatical Clergy are for the Rebellion against the King, their Sacrilege against God; and for the plun∣dering and murthering of their fellow Subjects by those of their Party; because none of them can say with any colour of truth or credibility, that any of our Clergy did ever incourage any of our Party to be dissolute, or debauch'd, or profane, or blasphemous, or Atheistical, in any kind or in any degree: much less did We commend them for being so, or pray to God to make them so, or thank God because they were so; but We can say and say it truly, that the Schis∣matical Clergy were not only Rebels and the greatest of Rebels themselves, but did what they could, by preaching and praying and fasting and thanksgiving, to make the whole Nation (as they did all that were their Proselytes) to be Rebels; if at least the fighting of Subjects against their Sovereign be Rebel∣lion; or if those that are guilty of hurt to the Person of the King or destruction of his Power be Rebels, as Mr. Baxter saith they are.
CHAP. II. The Destruction of the King's Power by the Presbyteri∣ans (as afterwards of his Person by the Indepen∣dents, &c.) proves the late War to have been made against the King (and consequently to have been Rebellion) whatever the Parliament declared to the contrary. NOW that all those, that fought and that com∣missioned and encouraged others to fight in the late War, were guilty of the Destruction of the The King's Power destroy∣ed in the late War. King's Power, is so undeniably evident and appa∣rent, that it needs no proof. Unless Mr. Baxter will say, that the King never had any Power at all; for I am sure they brought him to that pass by that War, that he had no power at all at last, witness his con∣dition at Holmby, where he was so far from having the Power of a King, that he had not the Liberty of a Subject, neither as to the liberty of his Person, or of his Conscience; For they would not allow him one of his own Chaplains to assist him in the service of God. And to this diminution or rather annihilation of power was that good King brought by those, who were all of them commissioned by the Presbyterian Par∣liament, and many thousands of them encouraged by Mr. Baxter himself (as Mr. Baxter himself con∣fesseth) The Presbyteri∣an Party who destroyed his Power, by Mr. B's own confe∣ssion, Rebels. so that if those that were guilty of the de∣struction of the King's Power were Rebels, (as Mr. Baxter saith he will not gainsay but they were) then Mr. Baxter and those of the Presbyterian Party
were all of them Rebels. For it was whilst that Par∣ty was in power, and it was by that power of theirs, that the King's Power was destroyed, and he left ut∣terly unable to defend himself against the Indepen∣dents, Anabaptists, and other Fanaticks, who after his Power was destroyed by the Presbyterians de∣stroyed his Person also. And therefore supposing, but not granting, that Nor consequent∣ly can they be: absolv'd from the guilt of the King's murther. neither Mr. Baxter, nor any other of the Presbyte∣rian Party had intended any hurt to the King's Person; yet that will not absolve them from being guilty of the hurt that was done unto his Person, or of the King's murther: no more than those Thieves, who (as Salmasius saith) having robbed and disarmed a man, and left him bound hand and foot to be devoured of wild Beasts, because they do not actually hurt or kill him themselves, can be said not to be guilty of his death, if afterward by a Lion or a Bear or a Wolf he be destroyed and devou∣red. And thus much for proof that the late War was The late War then was made against the King. made against the King, notwithstanding the Parli∣ament (as Mr. Baxter calls it) declared to the con∣trary; and consequently was a Rebellion properly so called; as likewise for proof, that those that were engaged or did engage others in that War, (what∣soever their intentions were or might be) they were all of them guilty of the destruction of the King's Power: and consequently perfidious Rebels, and worse than Whoremongers, Drunkards, and Mur∣therers in Mr. Baxter's own judgment, notwith∣standing his Protestation to the contrary. We have done skirmishing with Mr. Baxter's for∣dorn-hope, and a forlorn-hope it was indeed, if he
did hope he could induce any to believe, not only against their reason, but against their sence also, that which verily I believe he doth not believe him∣self; namely, that the late War was not made against And that though the Par∣liament decla∣red it was not. the King. I am sure he did not, at least he was not bound to believe it (as he saith he was) because his and the Peoples Trustees for their Liberties (that is the House of Commons) had declared it was not: unless he will say that the House of Commons is such a body of men, as is either infallible or impeccable; so that whatsoever they or the major part of them declare must needs be so as they declare it to be, and that the People are bound to believe it to be so, because they have no other way to inform them∣selves, but by their Trustees; and because these are such Trustees, as they are sure will not, cannot be∣tray the trust reposed in them: and yet Mr. Baxter himself saith, (as I noted before) that the Major part of both Houses may be the worst, and such as the People are bound to take part with the King against them. How then can he with any ingenui∣ty, or hope to be believed, say that he and the People were bound to believe, that the late War was not made against the King, because one or both Houses of Parliament had declared it was not? And yet this is the only Argument he brings for the proof of it. But truth will out sometimes before a Man is aware, and though he takes never so much care to suppress it. For whereas in the place before quoted, Mr. Baxter (though he confesseth he fought against the Kings Soldiers) yet he affirms he fought not against the King, thereby implying that he thought it unlawful to fight against the King, though not against those commissioned by him: yet in another
place he saith, it is no resisting of Power but of In∣justice, to fight against the King and his Soldiers for H. Com. p. 419. the common good; thereby implying, that to fight against the Kings Soldiers or his Army, is to fight against the King; or that it is as lawful to fight against the one as against the other; and conse∣quently it is evident that notwithstanding the Par∣liaments Declaration to the contrary, Mr. Baxter Mr. B. proved to believe so himself. himself did believe the late War to be made against the King, and must therefore have been (at least in this particular) an , one self-con∣demn'd, in pretending he did, and was bound to believe it was not made against the King, but against his evil Councellors, and other his Delinquent Subjects only.
CHAP. III. Another ground of Mr. B's justifying the late War, that according to our constitution the King is not sole Sovereign, disproved. The Act for the Rebel-Parliaments sitting, censured. All Kings (pro∣perly so called) not accountable to the People, but to God only. AND this doth farther appear by the little con∣fidence Another Topick of Mr. B's that the late War was not Rebel∣lion. he himself seems to have in this Topick. For supposing (as he had all the reason in the World to suppose) that the aforesaid Declaration of the Par∣liament (as he , abusively and falsly calls it) would signifie nothing with considering and un∣derstanding men, as to the justifying of the late War from being a down-right Rebellion, as indeed it was; he seems to quit this as an indefensible Out-work, and retires to that which he thinks to be a much stronger Hold; and which if he can maintain, he thinks, that though he should grant the late War to have been made against the King; yet it was not, could not be a Rebellion, because it was not made by Subjects against their Sovereign. For the King of England, (saith he) according to the constitution of Because the King, he saith, is not sole So∣vereign. our Government is not our sole Sovereign, but there be others that be partners with him in the Sovereignty it self; and of this he is so very confident, that he saith in positive and express terms, that if any man Mr. B's bold offer. Vid. Praef. to Holy C. prope finem. can prove that the King was the highest power in the time of those Divisions, He will offer his head to justice for a Rebel.
Which saying of his seems to require some animad∣version upon it, as not being an absolute denyal of the Kings Sovereignty, or of the Kings being the highest Power, but of his being Sovereign or highest Power, during those times of division only; which seems to im∣ply that he was (even in Mr. Baxters opinion) the So∣vereign or highest Power before those times of division. And if this be his meaning, as it must be, (if there What Mr. B's meaning is in denying the King to be the highest Power in the time of our divisions. be any meaning at all in those words) then it is not from the Constitution of the Government (as Mr. Bax∣ter saith it is) that the King, I mean our King of England, is not the Sovereign or the highest Power always and in all times and to all intents and purpo∣ses: but it was from the Alteration of the essential Constitution of our Government, and from the ini∣quity of those Times and Persons that made that al∣teration; that the King did not, nor could not then exercise those Acts of Sovereignty or Supreme Power, which was as legally invested and as inseparably in∣herent The King's Power taken from him, his Authority re∣mained good. in him, even then, as ever it was before. For though the , the Power, might and was, yet the , the Authority, was not nor could not be taken from him, but by taking away his Life also. Unless Mr. Baxter will say (and there seems to The Act, which the King past, for the Parlia∣ments sitting, be some such secret intimation in that saying of his I last quoted) that the King himself gave away his Sovereignty, or that he made his two Houses of Par∣liament partakers with him in it, when he passed an Act for their sitting until They themselves should be willing or content to be dissolv'd. I confess this was a very great alteration in the very fundamental constitution of the Government, and I confess the King passed such an Act: the very great streights he
was then in, together with the minatory importuni∣ty of the two Houses, backt by the insolent and tu∣multuous behaviour of the Multitude, necessitating him (as it were) to do that, which never any of his Predecessors did before him, (and I hope never any of his Successors will do after him.) I mean to pass such an Act as that was: Although that Act gave neither of the Houses singly, nor both of them Gave them no more Power, than they had before. jointly, any whit or jot of more Power (but only of sitting longer) than what They or their Prede∣cessors had before, or their Successors now have. And I hope Mr. Baxter will not say that is a Power to repeal Acts, to make Ordinances of equal validi∣ty and obligation with Acts without the Royal As∣sent to them, to raise Armies and Monies to maintain them upon their fellow-subjects and against their fel∣low-subjects and against the King himself also. Did the Act, that gave them a Power to sit until they thought fit to be dissolved, give them Power to do all, or any of these things before specified? and many other, as bold, as bad and as illegal as any of those were? or because they had leave to sit as long as they listed, had they leave to do what they listed also? No, no; it was their ingrateful and ungraci∣ous abuse of the Kings too gracious favour to them, that was the cause of all those evils, that afterwards upon that occasion befel Him and the whole Royal Family, and all his Loyal Subjects. And therefore The worst Act, that blessed King ever did. of all the Acts that ever that good King did, I take the passing of the aforesaid Act, for the sitting of the two Houses, not during his, but their own pleasures, to be the worst, not only in point of prudence and policy, as most prejudicial to the Crown and Govern∣ment in general; but in point of Right and Justice
also, to all and every one of the rest of his Subjects: I mean as many of them as were capable of chusing, and of being chosen Parliament-men; who were all of them by the passing of this Act excluded from ha∣ving what was due to them, in either of those capa∣cities; and consequently, from the Rights and Pri∣viledges of Free-born Englishmen, as long as those Parliament-Men, that were then in being, should please to sit; and that might be, ar was (as We saw afterwards) as long as they lived, or at least as long as they could; I mean till the Army, which they raised, made them to rise whether they would or no; and yet there want not some that say they are still in being. But to return from this digression, because it is Mr. B grounds his denyal of the Kings Sove∣reignty upon the constitution of the Government. not upon this particular occasional alteration of the Government, that Mr. Baxter doth openly and pro∣fessedly ground his denyal of the Kings Sovereignty here in England; but upon the fundamental and es∣sential constitution of the Government it self; and consequently he denies England to be a Kingdom and our King to be a King properly so called. For he himself defines a Kingdom to be such a Common∣wealth His definition of a Kingdom. H. C. p. 85. or body Politick as hath but one Person only for its Sovereign. So that according to this definiti∣on, all Kingdoms that are Kingdoms indeed are Mo∣narchies, and all Kings that are Kings indeed or Kings properly so called are Monarchs. I say Kings properly so called, because some have been called Kings, who were really no Kings, as the Kings of Sparta or Lacedaemon were; who were but Generals The Lacedae∣monian Kings, only titular. of their Armies only, the Sovereign Power of the State being in those that were called the Ephori or Overseers, to whom those they called their Kings
were legally accountable for all their actions, and by whom they were legally punishable, even with death it self, for their delinquencies; whereas the Ephori were accountable to none, nor punishable by any; and therefore the Sovereign Power of the State was in them, and consequently their Kings were Kings and no Kings, that is Kings in name and title only, but really and indeed no more than Subjects. So that the Government of Lacedaemon was not Regal The Government there Aristocra∣tical. or Monarchical, but Aristocratical: and so Thucydi∣des calls it. For as speaking of the Athenians, he calls them the , the Multitude, or Populace, because their Government was Democratical, so speaking of the Lacedaemonians he calls them the , the Best sort of People, or the Nobless, be∣cause their Government was Aristocratical; whereas if it had been truly Regal, or their Kings had been truly and properly called Kings, he should have cal∣led them , Royalists or Kings-men, or , the Subjects of Monarchs, because their Government would then have been Monarchi∣cal. For a Government to be Regal and to be Mo∣narchical is all one, there being no King properly so called but he is a Monarch, that is, one that go∣verns all and is subject to none, and consequentially accountable to none for any thing he doth in his own Kingdom. And this is true of all Kings properly so called, whether they be greater or less, Successive or Ele∣ctive, All Kings in∣deed unaccoun∣table to the Reo∣ple: and whether they be Despoticall or Politicall; for both Successive and Elective Kings properly so called may be either Despoticall or Politicall: for as the Successive Kings in the three first Monarchies were Successive and Despoticall, and are so still in
the East and South parts of the World and in both the Indies: so those of the fourth and last Monar∣chy also, (I mean) the Roman Emperors, whether Successive or Elective, were all of them Despoticall; and so in Europe are the successive Emperors of Turky and Russia and Tartary at this day, that is such as are not only Monarchs, that is such as have the whole Sovereign Power solely in themselves (as all Kings or Monarchs properly so called have also) but have and exercise that Sovereignty or Sovereign Power without being bounded or limited by any Laws or Rules to govern by, but as Lords over their Vassals absolutely and arbitrarily according to their own Will and Pleasures. Whereas Politicall Kings and Even Political Kings, who are obliged to go∣vern by Law; Princes, whether Successive, as the Kings of Eng∣land and of France and of Spain; or Elective, as the Emperor of Germany and the King of Poland; are obliged to govern according to the Political Constitutions and Laws of their several respective Seigniories and Dominions, but not so as to forfeit their right to their Crowns or to be accountable to any judicatory, or punishable by any Power here on Earth, if they do not do so; no, though they be Kings but by Election only; so they be And though Kings by Electi∣on only. elected to be Kings indeed, and not in name and title only, as the aforesaid Kings of Lacedaemon were, and as the Dukes of Venice now are, who are Subjects to the Senate there, as the Kings of Lacedaemon were to the Ephori in Sparta, though those were Successive, and these Elective. For it is not their succeeding or being elected, or being cal∣led Kings, that makes them to be Kings indeed; but their being invested with Kingly Power, that is to be over all and under none, whether they be born
or elected to be so; or by what name or title soe∣ver they be called, whether Kings, Emperors, So∣phies, Sultans, or but Dukes only. For the Duke of Florence is as much a Monarch in his own Do∣minions, as any of the former are in theirs. He therefore that is born or chosen to be such All such Kings accountable to God only. a King is not nor cannot, after he is such a King, be accountable or punishable for any thing he does, how unjustly or how much against Law soever it may be, but to God only, and by God: because all within his own Dominions are his Subjects, and none without his own Kingdoms and Dominions (though they be never so much greater or more powerful Kings than he) have any thing to do with him, and much less have They any authority over him, which they must have that can justly pretend to punish any man, how great a Delinquent soever he may be, or what wrong soever he hath done against others or against themselves.
CHAP. IV. A Query resolved, whether a King Elective may not be Deposed, upon non-performance of conditions? Our King proved from Mr. B's own Principles, to be a sole Sovereign. BUT may not the People, that chuse one to be their King upon such or such conditions, upon The Question. his non-performance of such conditions Depose him or take away that Power over them they gave unto him? I answer, that if they chuse him to be their King indeed, and not in name and title only, The Answer. then he did thereby become their King indeed, that is, their Monarch, or Sovereign Lord over all of them; and consequently they did all of them be∣come 1 Reason. The People upon their choice part with all the Power they had. his Subjects without any Power Civil or Mili∣tary left in themselves but subordinate to him or de∣rived from him, and consequently such as could not lawfully in any case, or upon any provocation be used against him: The People having by such an Election parted with all the Power they formerly had, without any reservation, and much less power of resumption. And this was well understood by Valerian the next Successor but one to Julian the Valerian's Re∣ply in the like case. Apostate, who being chosen by the Army to be their Emperor, and they crying out to him to name another to be Consors imperii, a Partner in the Em∣pire, or one to govern with him, he gave them this notable Answer.  Vid. Zozom. lib. 6. cap. 6.
. It was in your Power, O my Soldiers, said he, to chuse me to reign over you; but now you have chosen me, that which you demand belongs not to you but to me: and it becomes you as Subjects to be quiet (or not to meddle with matters of Government) and to me as your King and Emperor to consider what is fit to be done. Again I answer that, even in Elective Kingdoms, 2 Reason. A King so cho∣sen hath hic Kingly Power immediately from God, and not from the People, as Mr. B. grants. he that is chosen by the People to be their King hath not his Kingly Power from them that chose him, but from God: which is in express terms not only granted but asserted by Mr. Baxter, and he values himself upon it, as being upon that account a better friend to Kings than (as he saith) some Episcopall men are; and indeed if he were always and in all he saith consistent with himself he would not be so great an Enemy to Kings, as in this and many other of his Aphorisms (which I have colle∣cted out of his Book of a Holy Commonwealth) he hath shewed himself to be. For if it be not the People, who chuse him to be their King, that give him his Kingly Power, but that he hath it immediate∣ly from God, I wonder by what right or authority they can pretend to take that from him, which not they but God hath given to him. Surely they will not say they may do it whether God will or no; and of Gods Will that they should do so, or may do so, They can have no declaration or significati∣on, but either from some plain positive standing Rule in Scripture or from special extraordinary and immediate Revelation, such as Abraham had for the sacrificing his Son Isaac, or as Jehu had for the de∣stroying the House of Ahab. But as to this latter,
as I hope Mr. Baxter is not yet Fanatick enough to pretend, so I am sure he can find no such declarati∣on or signification of Gods Will for the former, I mean in the Scriptures either of the Old or New Te∣stament, as They were always and universally under∣stood by the first and best Christians. It is true indeed that in the Scripture God hath Nothing in Scripture, for People to con∣troul their Kings. commanded Kings or Sovereign Princes to govern according to his and their own Laws too that are conformable unto his, and threatned them if they do not, and punished them when they have not. But where or in what place of the Old or New Te∣stament hath God appointed or permitted all or any of the People to do so? I mean, to punish their Kings by Deposing them, or by taking any part of the Kingly Power he had given them, away from them? Surely God did not only foresee but foretell, that many of the Kings of his own People the Jews would be, some of them Idolaters, and some of them Murtherers and Adulterers, and some of them Tyrants and great oppressers of their Subjects, as appears by Samuels Speech unto them at the Election of Saul their first King; but he doth not give them, or any order of Men among them there or any where else any either commission or permission authoritatively to enquire into their Kings Actions or to call them to an account for them. And therefore the Kings of Juda and Israel were Kings indeed, and so are The state of the Jewish Kings. those Kings whether Despoticall or Politicall, whe∣ther Successive or Elective, which have no ordinary standing legal Power or Judicatory above them, whereunto they are Subject and accountable, as the Lacedaemonian Kings were unto the Ephori, and therefore were no Kings indeed but in name and in
title only. But there is no such legal ordinary standing Power or Judicatory here in England above our King (for Rex in regno suo non habet su∣periorem, imò nec parem, the King in his own Kingdom hath none above him, no nor equal to him, is a Maxim of our Law) and therefore our King must Our King, ac∣cording to Mr. B's own Prin∣ciples, a sole So∣vereign. needs be a Sovereign and a sole Sovereign, accor∣ding to Mr. Baxters own Principles and Concessi∣ons. For this is one of Mr. Baxters own Princi∣ples, that every Commonwealth or Body Politick must have a Sovereign; the form of a Commonwealth (saith Holy Com. p. 61. he) being the relation of Sovereign and Subjects to each other; as likewise this is another of his Apho∣risms or Principles that the Sovereign of one Common∣wealth Ibid. p. 62. must be one and but one: and by but one he must needs mean but one Person, or but one Caetus or Company of men; and consequently in which soever of them it is, it must be solely and wholly: so that to be Sovereign and not to be sole Sovereign seems to be a contradiction in adjecto. From whence I argue, that if there must be a Sovereign or Supreme Power in every State or Body Politick, and that be the Sovereign or Supreme Power which by the Legal Constitution hath no Superior Power above it, then the Regal is the Sovereign or Supreme Power in England; because accor∣ding to the Legal Constitution of this Kingdom there is no Power Superior to it or Predominant over it, but all other Powers are derived from it and Subordinate and Subject and Subservient to it. Again, if the Sovereign of one Commonwealth, State or Kingdom must be One, and but One on∣ly, then if the King of England be a Sovereign (as
having no Superior he must needs be) he must be a sole Sovereign also. Neither do I see how either of these Con∣clusions can with any colour of reason be deny∣ed, but by assigning some Power in some Per∣son or Persons, which by the Legal and Funda∣mental Constitution of this Kingdom is above the The King hath no Superior to judg him, nor Peers to try him. King, or at least equal to him. But as it is a Maxim of our Law (as I said before) that Rex in regno suo non habet superiorem, the King in his own Kingdom hath none above him; so it is a Maxim too that he hath not parem neither, none equal to him: so that according to our Law as there is none to judg him because he hath no Su∣perior, so there is no Way of trying him, because he hath no Peers; those whom We call Peers being his Subjects though They are Pares or Peers in relation to one another.
CHAP. V. The English Monarchy asserted against Mr. B. who would have the Kingdom of England to be a mixt Commonwealth. My Lord Chief Justice Cook's judgment on the point. THIS one would think were enough to prove the King of England not only to be our So∣vereign but our sole Sovereign; and consequently the Kingdom of England to be properly and indeed (as it hath always been accounted both at home and abroad) a Monarchy, or a Government in chief by one and by one only. No, saith Mr. Baxter, it hath not always been accounted to be so. For it hath been a Contro∣versie, Mr. B. starts a Controversie, which form of Government the English is. saith he (having spoken before of Monar∣chy, Aristocracy and Democracy) to which of these forms our English Commonwealth was and is to be reckon'd; and the uncertainty of this (saith he) was H. C. p. 87. one cause of our Wars. Whereunto I answer, that I never heard, nor I ve∣rily This Controver∣sie never heard of, till the late times. believe ever any body else did hear of any such Controversie here in England, at least as to the Civil Government. As to the Ecclesiastical Government indeed of the Church there hath been a Controver∣sie betwixt us and the Church of Rome, whether the King or the Pope be the Governor in chief of it; as likewise betwixt us and the Presbyterians, whether the King or a National Synod ought to have the Su∣preme managery of it. But as to the Civil Govern∣ment
of the State, there was never any question made (for ought I ever heard) by any of the other∣wise Dissenting Parties, but that it was Monarchicall, and that the King was the sole Sovereign of it and in it, before that Rebellious Parliament set up for a The Rebell-Par∣liament modest at first. share in the Sovereignty: which they did not at first neither; but did in all their Addresses to him acknowledg him to be their Sovereign, and that not as they were particular Persons only, but as they were the representative Body of all the Commons of England: neither did the House of Peers ever make the least doubt of doing so also; nor of taking the Oath of Allegiance as to their Sovereign. So that there being then no controversie of the Kings Sove∣reignty over the whole Nation, whether diffusively or representatively considered; nor consequently whether this Kingdom were a Monarchy properly so called or no; this Controversie, (I say, there being then no such controversie in being;) could not be one of the causes of the War, as Mr. Baxter saith it was; I am sure it was none of the causes then pre∣tended. And yet I am apt enough to think that the con∣trivers The secret design of some, from the first, to change the Go∣vernment. and promoters of the War that were then leading-men in the House of Commons, and some of them in the House of Lords also, did from the very beginning design and intend a real change and alte∣ration of the Government it self, though They open∣ly pretended but a reformation of abuses that were in it only. I mean they did intend to turn the Mo∣narchy into an Aristocracy, and to make a Duke of Venice of the King; as appears by the 19 Propositi∣ons, which when they thought themselves strong enough to own they made to him. But this They
concealed for a long time from the main Body of their Party, for fear it might alienate most or many of them, that had any thing of Loyalty or Consci∣ence, from them. Or if they did communicate this arcanum, this secret of their grand design to any, it was only to those whom they were sure of, as desi∣ring such a change of the Government as themselves did, and whose help they were to make use of for the bringing of it about; I mean the popular Pres∣byterian and other Schismatical Preachers; and per∣haps Mr. B. makes the Kingdom of England, a mixt Common∣wealth. Mr. Baxter was one of them: Otherwise I should wonder how he comes to say, as he doth, the Parliaments have affirmed it (namely the King∣dom of England) to be a mix'd Commonwealth. H. C. p. 87. For sure by Parliament he meant Parliament-men: for Parliaments say nothing but by Votes or Orders of the respective Houses, and I verily believe there never was any such Vote pass'd in either of them; if there were, he should have done well to have named those Parliaments or at least some one of those Parliaments that had affirmed the King∣dom or (as he calls it) the Commonwealth of Eng∣land not to be Monarchical, but a mixed Govern∣ment; which no doubt he would have done, if he could, being so desirous, as he seems to be, to have it so. My Lord Cook's judg∣ment in the Case. But I can tell him of one who was Speaker of the House of Commons, and as Learned a one in the Laws and Legal Constitutions of this Realm, & like∣wise as knowing what were the Powers and Privi∣ledges of both Houses of Parliament, as ever was be∣fore or since Him in the Chair; and that was my Lord Cook who saith and saith it positively as a known and undoubted truth, That this Kingdom of ours
is a Monarchy, and Monarchy successive by in∣herent In the Preface to his fourth Book of Re∣ports. Birth-right; adding that of all others it is the most absolute and perfect Form of Govern∣ments, excluding Interregnums and with it infinite inconveniences. His judgment to be preferr'd be∣fore foreign Lawyers and Divines. And now what say you, Mr. Baxter? Do you not think this Oracle of our Law (for so I think he is esteemed by those of his Profession) do you not think (I say) that he understood the Legal and Fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, as well as you do or any of those foreign Lawyers or Divines, whose judgments perhaps you may rely on and be misled by? I name Divines as well as Lawyers, because some of the Protestant as well as Popish Divines have done what they can to lessen the Power of Kings: the latter to make them , and , to make them accountable and subject to the Pope, and the former to make them accountable and subject to the People, to their own Subjects, which is as dan∣gerous and much more dishonourable than the other.
CHAP. VI. Calvin answered, who though he allows not private Persons to resist, yet requires it of some Magistrates, whom he supposes the Guardians of the Peoples Li∣berty. No such Magistrates, as he supposeth, nor doth he say there are, and if there were, they would be extremely inconvenient to the publick. This Opi∣nion taxed by Grotius, who yet himself, supposing the Sovereignty shared betwixt the King and Peo∣ple, in some case allows resistance. AND yet this so dangerous and so dishonoura∣ble a subjection of Kings to their own Subjects doth Mr. Calvin, the Patriarch of the Presbyterians, Calvin the Pa∣triarch of the Presbyterians. approve of; I call him the Patriarch of the Presby∣terians, because he was the first that after 1500 years Government of the Church by Bishops, invented and set up a Government of the Church by a Parity of Presbyters without Bishops; and this and this only can properly and truly be called Calvinism; What properly Calvinism. whatsoever he holds besides, even the most rigid of his Tenets, having been held by some of the School∣men and some of the Fathers also. But this Calvin I say (though otherwise a very Learned and (as our judicious Hooker saith of him) incomparably the wisest man that ever the French Church Calvin con∣demns Resistance of Kings by pri∣vate men, but obliges some sort of Magistrates to it. did enjoy since the hour it did enjoy him,) though he doth not allow of the resisting of Kings, even the worst and most tyrannical of Kings, by such of their Subjects as are but private men, and consequently
not by the generality of the People; yet, Si qui nunc sunt (saith he) populares Magistratus ad mode∣randam Regum libidinem constituti (quales olim erant qui Lacedomoniis Regibus oppositi erant Ephori; & quâ etiam fortè potestate (ut nunc res habent) funguntur in singulis Regnis tres Ordines, quum primarios con∣ventus peragunt) adeò illos serocienti Regum licentiae pro officio intercedere non veto, ut si Regibus impoten∣ter grassantibus, & humili Plebeculae insultantibus con∣niveant, corum dissimulationem nefariâ perfidiâ non carere affirmem; quia Populi libertatem, cujus se Tutores Dei ordinatione positos nôrunt, fraudulenter produnt. I have put down this passage of Calvins in his own words, which for the English Readers sake may be thus translated. If there be now (saith he) any such popular Magistrates constituted (I presume he meant legally constituted or appointed by Law) for the moderating or restraining the lust or unbrid∣led appetites of Kings) such as were of old time the Ephori to the Lacedaemonian Kings; and which Power also (as things now are) perhaps the three Orders or Estates have in several Kingdoms when they meet in Parliament) I am so far from forbid∣ding them (saith he) to interpose their Authori∣ty for restraining the raging licentiousness of Kings; that if they do but connive at them, when they impotently domineer and insult upon the poor Commonalty, I do affirm that connivence of theirs is a nefarious persidiousness, because they do fraudulently betray the Peoples Liberty, whereof they know they are made the Guardians by Gods appointment. In which passage of Mr. Calvins (wherewith he concludes his Book of Institutions) I observe that
he speaks not with that confidence and clearness as he useth to speak with, in declaring his judgment upon other occasions, nor as he doth in the Para∣graph preceding this, in which he doth positively and resolutely condemn the resistance of Kings by their Subjects in any case or upon any provocation whatsoever; and for this he brings undeniable ar∣guments and proofs out of Scripture, and answers clearly and solidly all objections to the contrary. But when he comes (with his deprivatis hominibus loquor, that is, I speak of private men) to tell us that by Subjects that are not to resist their Kings he means private Men only; what he gave with one hand he takes away with the other, by not only per∣mitting and allowing, but by obliging and injoyn∣ing some that are Magistrates to restrain their Kings from oppressing or insulting (as he calls it) over their People, and to bind their Kings as it were to the good behaviour; which how it can be done, if Kings have no mind to be so bound, but by force, he doth not tell us; and how it can be done by force without the assistance of private men, he doth not tell us neither; nor consequently without making private Subjects to resist their King, which as he told us before was utterly unlawful in any Case whatsoever. So that he seems, as to this point, to speak very doubtfully and warily. For first he doth not say there are now any such Magistrates, that are to be Umpires, as it were, betwixt Kings and their His wariness in expressing him∣self. Subjects, with Power to curb and restrain Kings from governing of their People otherwise than they ought to do; such as (saith he) were the Ephori in relation to the Lacedemonian Kings: but he saith si qui nuno sunt (if there be any such Magistrates
now, as the Ephori were then) and as fortè (saith he) perhaps he doth not say certé, for certain, or absque dubio without doubt, the Conventions of the three Estates are in those Kingdoms wherein are such Conventions, (meaning I presume the King∣doms of England and France and others, if there be any other of the like Constitution) so that if such a Convention or Assembly of the three Estates have no such Power as the Ephori had (as Calvin doth not positively affirm they have, but that fortè or perhaps they may have, and consequently that forté and per∣haps they may not have neither) then hath Calvin this to say for himself, that if such Conventions or The three E∣states have no such Power, as he supposeth. Assemblies have no such Power (as most certainly they have not, nor ever had where Kings were Kings indeed and not in name only, as the Spartan Kings were) he hath this (I say) to say for him∣self, that what he positively affirms afterwards, that such Magistrates or such Assemblies may and ought to do for the restraining and curbing of Kings, was only upon supposition that they were legally invested with the same Power over their respective Kings, as the Ephori were legally invested with over the Kings of Lacedaemon: which if it be not true (as he that saith but perhaps it is, doth thereby grant that per∣haps it is not neither) then is not he chargeable with that which follows; namely, with this Opinion or Doctrine, that such popular Magistrates (as he calls them) or such representative Assemblies of the Peo∣ple might and ought to do what the Ephori did. And thus these two little Adverbs Fortè and Ferè, Per∣haps and Almost do (as the Proverb saith) save Perhaps, a salvo for a Lye. many a Lye, and are of great use to insinuate that unto others as true, which we are not sure of our
selves; as also for the bringing men off from being answerable for what they so warily and doubtfully affirm, if they be questioned for it and undeniably convinced of the falshood of it. And truly that Calvin himself did doubt, whether Calvin himself doubts, whether there be any such Magistrates, as he speaketh of. there were any such Magistrates in any of those Kingdoms he seems to speak of, that had such Power and Authority in relation to their Kings as the Ephori had in relation to the Kings of Lacedaemon; I make no doubt at all: and that not only in regard of his Fortè, perhaps, which I have already spoke of; but also because he gives us not so much as one In∣stance of the , that there are any such Magistrates, nor one argument for the  of it, that there should be any such, either from Reason or from Authority either Divine or Humane, that is, from either any Example or Precept of Gods Law, or of any Hu∣mane Constitution in any Kingdom; though by saying (as he doth) that those Populares Magistra∣tus are the Tutores, the Guardians or Defenders of the Peoples Liberty against the violence of Kings, Dei Ordinatione by the Ordinance of God, he seem∣eth No such Magi∣strates, by God's Ordinance. to think that they are by Gods own appoint∣ment: which is very strange it should be so now, and was never so in the Kingdom of his own framing for his own People, for whom he professeth he had a greater kindness than for any other Nation; and therefore no doubt would have made such a provi∣sion for their security from being oppressed by their Kings, whom he foresaw would be such oppressors as many of them proved to be. But we see he did not. And therefore if there be any where such Magistratus Populares or Tutelares Populi, Guardi∣ans of the People, to protect the People against their
Kings; I conclude that it is not an Ordinance of God but an Invention of man, and such an invention as is likely to embroil States and Kingdoms in a Civil War, The inconveni∣ence and mis∣chief of such Magistrates, if there were any such. (which is the worst of Evils) rather than to pre∣serve the publick peace and quiet by keeping fair quarter or a good correspondence betwixt King and People. For quis custodiet ipsos Custodes? Who shall take care of the Keepers of our Liberties themselves? For who shall secure either King or People from these securers of the People from the King? May not they be as cruel, as covetous, as voluptuous, as self-seeking, and every way as careless of the publick good as the worst of Kings? Nay, are they not more likely to be so? all of them having a divided Interest of their own from that of the Publick, and each of them from that of one another. Whereas the Kings Inte∣rest, (if he be a King indeed and not a titular King only) is one and the same with the Publick, both in regard of himself and of his Posterity also, if his King∣dom be Hereditary; and consequently if he do that which is best for himself, he must needs do that which is best for his People also; so that supposing him to be Wise for himself there will be no danger of his doing any thing wittingly and willingly that will in∣danger the Peace and Prosperity of his People: be∣cause that which will endanger theirs will endanger his own also. But supposing the King, for the pre∣sent, as bad as bad may be, yet he may mend, or if he do not, he is mortal, and his successor may be better; or if not, yet at the worst, it is more tole∣rable to have one ill Governour in chief than many, and the worst of Monarchies is better than the best of Oligarchyes; because it is easier to satisfie the lust, the cruelty, the avarice or any other inordinate ap∣petite
of one, than of many; especially of many that have no body to controll them as the Ephori had not. And such it seems Calvin supposeth there are or ought to be in all Kingdoms: at least those that are his followers believe that to have been his meaning; namely, that though it be unlawful and damnable for private Subjects to resist the King or supreme Go∣vernour; yet it is not only lawful but laudable for such Magistrates as are supposed to be Guardians of the Peoples Liberties, redigere Reges in ordinem, to reduce their Kings, and that by force, (if it cannot be done otherwise) and to keep them within the bounds of Law and Equity according to their dis∣cretion. And no doubt they were the followers of Calvin, whom Grotius speaks of when he says, Inventi sunt This opinion of Calvin and his Followers tax∣ed by Grotius. nostro saeculo viri, eruditi quidem illi, sed temporibus & locis nimiùm servientes, qui sibi primùm (ita enim credo) deinde aliis persuaderent, ea quae jam dict a sunt locum habere in privatis, non etiam in magistrati∣bus inferioribus, quibus jus esse putant resistendi injuriis ejus, cujus summum est imperium, imò & peccare eos ni id faciant: Quae opinio admittenda non est. There are men (saith he) in this age of ours (which was next to that of Calvins) learned in∣deed, but too much serving the times and places wherein they live, who having first been perswa∣ded themselves, (for so I charitably believe) did afterwards perswade others that what I have be∣fore spoken of (meaning the unlawfulness of re∣sisting of Sovereigns by their Subjects) is to be un∣derstood of private men, and not of inferior Magistrates also; whose Right they think it is to resist the injuries of him that hath the supreme
Power; nay, that they sin if they do not. Which opinion, saith he, is not to be admitted; he might have said, is to be detested, as being such a  such a root of bitterness, as , when it springs up, will , turn all up-side down, wheresoever it is admitted. But what was Grotius his reason, why this opini∣on Heb 12. 15. His reason for it. was not to be admitted? Why because, saith he, though those Magistrates are in rela∣tion to their Inferiors publick Offi∣cers, Nam Magistratus illi inferio∣rum quidem ratione habità sunt publicae personae, at superiores si considerentur privati sunt. Grotius de jure Belli & Pacis. l. 1. cap. 4. sect. 6. yet in relation to their Superi∣ors they are but private Persons, especially in relation to the Supreme; from whom all inferior Magistrates derive their Power. And yet they were such Ma∣gistrates who drove their Bishop out of Geneva, who was their Prince, their Sovereign Prince, as well as their Bishop, before Calvin came thither in∣deed, but I do not find that ever he blamed them for it. But doth not Grotius himself allow of the resist∣ing of Kings by their Subjects in several Cases? Yes, Another passage of Grotius, wherein he al∣lows resistance of Kings. he doth so, but not without contradicting himself, and the Apostolical Doctrine and Practise in one of them, as I have already observed, and as to the rest I have spoken already also, excepting the last but one of them only. And that is, when the King hath but a part of the Sovereignty, and the People or the Senate hath a part of it also; for then (saith he) Si Rex habeat partem summi Imperii, partem alteram populus aut senatus; Regi in partem non suam involanti, vi justè opponi poterit quia catenus imperium non habet: quod locum habere censeo, etlamsi dictum sit belli potestatem penes Regem fore: id enim de Bello externo intelli∣gendum est, cùm alioqui quis∣quis Imperii summi partem ha∣beat, non possit non habere eam partem tuendi potestatem, quod ubl fit potest Rex suam Imperii partem belli jure amittere. Grot. Ibid. if the King invade that part which is not his, or which doth not belong to him, he may justly be resisted; because as to that his Power doth not
extend: which (saith he) I do think may be truly affirmed though the Power of the Sword or of making War be said to be in the King; for that is to be understood in relation to a foreign War only. Whereas otherwise whosoever hath a part of the Sovereignty cannot but have a right to defend his part of the Sovereignty, whereby it may so hap∣pen that the King may by the Law of Arms lose that which was his own part of the Sovereignty. I have set down this passage of Grotius both in his own words and mine at the full length, because it is upon Grotius's supposition and resolution in this case, that Mr. Baxter grounds the justice of the Par∣liaments War against the King, and the injustice of This passage the ground of Mr. B's justifying the late War. the Kings against the Parliament; and that with so great a confidence that he saith he is willing to forfeit his head if he be disproved in either. We will therefore, First, Examin whether there can be such a Case as Grotius supposeth or no; Secondly, If there be such a Case, Whether that be the case in England, as Mr. Baxter saith it is.
CHAP. VII. The Case, which Grotius supposeth, not possible. The Sovereignty not to be divided. Instances in the Ro∣man Empire. A King conditionally elected, no King indeed, but in Title only. In all the changes of the Roman State, no division of the Sove∣reignty. AND first as to the first of these Particulars (I mean the Supposition it self) namely the divi∣sion of the Sovereignty or Supreme Power; the No such Case possible, as Gro∣tius supposeth. very possibility whereof, that there should be such a thing in any Body Politick whatsoever, seems to be a contradiction in terminis in down-right terms, to what Grotius himself affirms to be an inseparable property of Sovereignty; namely, that it is quid per se indivisum, a thing of it self undivided, and by quid Sovereignty in∣divisible. per se indivisum a thing of it self undivided, he must needs mean id quod suâ naturâ est indivisible, that which in its own nature is indivisible, or something that cannot be divided; because otherwise to say that Sovereignty or Supreme Power est quid per se indivisum, is a thing of it self undivided, should not distinguish it from any other subordinate Power which may be actu or per accidens indivisum, actually or by accident undivided, though potentiâ and per se potentially or of it self it may be divisible into never so many parts or particles. Now if Sovereign∣ty be (as according to Grotius it is) per se indivi∣sum quid, a thing of it self undivided, or suâ naturâ
indivisibile, that which in its own nature is indivisi∣ble. I cannot see with what congruity of reason it can be said to be divided, as Grotius in the very same period saith it may be, sivè per partes potentia∣les sive subjectivas, either by its potential or its sub∣jective parts. For as for that division of the Roman The division of the Roman Em∣pire, no division of Sovereignty. Empire per partes subjectivas, by its subjective parts; when the Eastern part of it was governed by one and the Western by another, and the Northern per∣haps by a third, as it was by the three Sons of Con∣stantine, there was indeed a division of the Empire and a fatal one it was, but there was no divisi∣on of Sovereignty; for every one of the three was a Sovereign in his own part or portion of the Empire, just so as during the Heptarchy of the Saxon Kings Our English Heptarchy such. here in England, the Island was divided into seven several Governments, but every one of the seven was a Monarchy and had a Sovereign of its own in∣dependent upon any of the other, so that there was then no more a division of Sovereignty than there was afterwards when Edgar became Monarch of the whole Island, or than there is now by the addition of the Kingdom of Scotland and Ireland to it. I know the Roman Emperors did sometimes assu∣mere Partners in the Empire, upon what account. sibi socios in imperio, take to themselves part∣ners or companions in the Empire; but then the Sovereignty was either wholly and jointly in both of them, as it was in the two Consuls after the expulsi∣on of the Kings, or as it is in the whole Venetian Se∣nate at this day: or else he whom the Emperor as∣sum'd as his companion in the Empire was thereby designed only to be his Successor, as the King of the Romans is now in Germany, but continued a Subject and subordinate to him that assumed or adopted him,
as long as he lived. So that in this case there was no division of the Sovereignty it self no more than in the former. And much less can there be said to be a division of The Case, when a King is con∣ditionally ele∣cted. the Sovereignty per partes potentiales by its potential parts (as Grotius saith they are called) when a Peo∣ple that is sui juris Regem eligens, quosdam actus (scilicet potentiae) sibi servet, alios autem Regi defe∣rat, that is, when a free People in chusing them∣selves a King reserve some Acts of Power to them∣selves as well as they give others to their King; ne∣que tamen id fit quotiescunque Rex promissis quibus∣damque obligatur, but I would not have this (saith he) to be understood to be the case when Kings are obliged or oblige themselves by certain promises on∣ly; (mark that Mr. Baxter,) sed tunc id fieri intel∣ligendum est, si quid Populus adhuc liber futuro Regi imperet per modum manentis Praecepti, aut si quid sit additum Regem cogi aut puniri posse. But this (saith he) that is, this division of Sovereignty, per partes potentiales by its potential parts or acts of Power, is to be understood when the People being as yet free enjoyn their King that shall be (and that by a standing Law or Precept which they will have always to be continued in force) to do or not to do this or that; or if any thing be added to imply that the King may be or is to be compelled or punished if he do otherwise. Then or in this Case Grotius seems to think there is a divi∣sion of the Sovereignty it self betwixt the King (so conditionally elected) and the People so magisteri∣ally electing him. And upon this not only false but (pace tanti viri dixerim, let me speak it by favour and with leave of so great a man as he was) in my
opinion absurd supposition he adds, that in this case the People may not only defend by force their own part of the Sovereignty if the King invade it, but jure belli by right of War, take away his part also, if they over∣come him in the Contest. Which perhaps may be true upon the supposition of such a division of the So∣vereign Power, or rather (to say the truth) upon supposition of such a conditional Election made by the People of such a Magistrate as shall have the title of King and be entrusted with the managery of some part of the publick affairs either of War or Peace, but so as to be accountable to the People or to some judicatory appointed by the People, whe∣ther he hath kept or exceeded the bounds and limits of his delegated Power and Authority or no, and if he have, to be liable not only to the forfeiture of it, but to be punished for it also. And what is this but to be such a King as those of A King thus E∣lected, a King in title only. Sparta were? who as Grotius himself tells us were not Kings indeed, but in name and title only; be∣cause indeed (as he tells us also) they were subject to the People or to the Judicatory of the Ephori ap∣pointed by the People by whom, si peccarent Reges illi in leges ac Rempublicam non tantum vi repelli pote∣rant, sed si opus sit puniri morte, quod Pausaniae Lace∣demoniorum Regi contigit; and therefore (saith he) those Kings (and consequently, say I, all such Kings as those) if they offended against the Laws or against the Commonwealth they might not only be resisted by force, but if need were punished by death, as Pausanias one of their Kings was. And this he affirms to be the case of omnium Principum qui sub Populo sunt, of all Princes who are under the People; and if they be under the People, they cannot
be over the People too, but the People must needs be over and above or superior unto them. And then how can Grotius rationally or consistingly with him∣self No division of the Sovereignty in this Case, as being wholly in the People. say there is a division of the Sovereignty or of the supreme Power betwixt such a People and such Kings as these are? He might as well have said that the Sovereignty is divided betwixt the King and the General of his Army by Land or the Admiral of his Fleet by Sea or the Vice-Roy of any of his Provinces; for as the King reserves the whole Sovereignty or su∣preme Power unto himself, how great soever the Title or Power is which he delegates unto others: so in the aforesaid case put by Grotius the People re∣tained the whole Sovereignty unto themselves, not∣withstanding any Power or Title they are pleased to give to him whom they chuse to be their King. And this Grotius knew well enough, as appears Grotius inconsi∣stent with him∣self. by the inconsistency of what he saith in this place with what he saith in others, and especially by the inconsistency of his supposing that to be actually di∣vided which he had formerly affirmed to be per se indivisum or in its own nature indivisible, I mean Sovereignty or the supreme Power in every Body Po∣litick, of what kind or denomination soever, whe∣ther it be in personâ in a single Person, or in Caetu in a Company or Assembly of men; for it cannot be partly in the one and partly in the other, nor ever was, no not in the Roman State it self which had many Changes Indeed but never any Division of the Sovereignty betwixt the governing and the governed An account of the changes in the Roman States in none of which ever any Division of the Sovereignty. party in any one of them. For as, when the Kings governed, the Sovereignty was all of it in them; and none of it either in the Senate or in the People; so was it afterwards  Consuls,
and after that in the Consulls and the Senate; then for a short time in the Decemviri, and in none besides them; and often when they were in very great dan∣ger and extremity the Sovereignty was wholly in one man only, whom though they did not call a King, yet never any King was more or perhaps so much a Sovereign as he was, or had the supreme Power in a higher or so high a degree as he had; and therefore he was emphatically called a Dictator, because ejus dictum erat pro lege; his word was a Law as well to the Senate as to the People, and as well to the People as to the Senate; and this Government, though by the first institution it was but to continue six months at a time, yet when Julius Caesar got it, he made it perpetual, and so became the first of the last sort of Governours in the Roman State who from him were called Caesares, and might have been called Dictatores also, as well as Caesares and Imperatores; for they had always the same Power which the Dictators before Julius Caesar had but for a time only; of the last of whom before himself (who was Sylla) Caesar scof∣fingly was wont to say Scylla nescivit dictare, that Sylla did not-know how to dictate or act the Dicta∣tor, because he had laid down the Dictatorship when he might have kept it, and consequently of a So∣vereign became a Subject. But as the Government by Dictators in Rome be∣fore The changes of Government in that State, but three, properly speaking. Caesar was but temporary and extraordinary; so was that of the Decemviri and the Triumviri also; and therefore to speak properly there were but three Changes of the ordinary and standing Government in the Roman State, of which the first was Monarchical under the Kings into an Aristocratical under the Con∣suls and Senate; the second from Aristocratical into
Democratical under the People and their Tribunes, and the third into Monarchical again under their Emperors. And as when the Government was Ari∣stocratical, the whole Sovereignty was in the Senate, The Sovereignty not divided all the while. and as likewise when the Government was Democra∣tical, the whole Sovereignty was in the People; so likewise when the Government was Monarchical, as it was first under their Kings and at last under their Emperors, the whole Sovereignty was in those Kings and Emperors. For though there was a Senate when there were Emperors, as well as when there were Kings, yet those Senators were not Partners in the Sovereignty with either of them, but Subjects to them The Senate not Co-partners in it with the Em∣peror, as Mr. B. would have it. both; though Mr. Baxter will needs have the Senate as well as the Emperor of Rome to be understood by St. Paul, when he saith, Let every soul be Subject to the higher Powers; as if the Senate then were not any of those that were to be subject to the Emperor, but of those that were to be obeyed as well as the Em∣peror, as being Co-partners with him in the Sove∣reignty. But perhaps Mr. Baxter had never heard of the Lex Regia, the Royal Law, whereby the whole Power of the Senate and People of Rome was trans∣ferred unto their Emperors; and so his ignorance of that particular might lead him into that error, though I believe he had something of design in it also; as namely from the supposition of such Co-partnership of Sovereignty in the Roman Senate with the Empe∣ror of Rome, to infer the like Co-partnership of So∣vereignty in the Parliament of England with our King; though very illogically, as shall be shewed hereafter.
CHAP. VIII. The Low-Country War against the King of Spain, justified by Grotius, upon another account; in that the whole Sovereignty, he saith, was in the States, and King Philip had usurped it. Sovereignty is wholly, wherever it is, like the Soul in the Body. IN the mean time I cannot chuse but think that Grotius his de∣sign in his sup∣posed Division of the Sove∣reignty, to ju∣stifie the Ne∣therlands war against the King of Spain. Grotius had some design of his own to serve, when he supposeth there may be such a division of the Sovereignty betwixt such a Prince and such a Peo∣ple as he here speaks of; namely, when a free Peo∣ple in chusing one to be their King enjoyn him by a standing and perpetual Law to be content with such a part or parcel of the Sovereignty, reserving to themselves the rest, which if he invades they may not only resist him by force, but, if they can, depose him also; which if Grotius can prove to have been the Case of the Ʋnited Provinces when they took up Arms against the King of Spain, he thinks thereby to justifie the War, which his Countrymen have for so many years together made and maintained against the aforesaid King; or at least to excuse himself and them, not having been Rebels against the King of Spain, because neither he was nor any of his Predecessors had been, their Sovereign, at least not their sole So∣vereign; nor indeed (if what he says in his Book de Antiquitate Reipublicae Batavicae be true) not their Sovereign at all but their Subject rather. For the House of Spain (saith he) could have no more nor
no other Right to the Sovereignty of the Ʋnited A Book of his, wherein he states the Case. Provinces and the rest of the Netherlands or Low-Countries, than they derived from the House of Bur∣gundy, nor the House of Burgundy any more than what came to them by marrying with the Heirs of the several Princes of those respective Provinces, who could derive to their Husbands no more than was derived to them from their Parents; and that, as Grotius tells us in the aforesaid Book of his (which he Dedicates, Illustrissimis Hollandiae West-Frisiaeque Ordinibus, to the States of Holland and West-Friezland) was not the Sovereignty or supreme Power of any of those States and Provinces where∣in they and their Husbands in their Right succeeded, because none of their Fathers nor Fore-Fathers, from the very beginning of Government in those Countries, (particularly of Holland and West-Friezland) which he reckons to have been more than a thousand and seven hundred years before his writing of that Book, had ever any of them the So∣vereignty or supreme Power. For although some of them were at first called Reges (saith he) that is Kings, and some of them Duces or Dukes; yet had they no more Power than those who were after∣wards called Gravii or Comites, Graves or Counts, and that was none of the Sovereignty or supreme Power, which was always penes Ordines, in the States, just so as now it is (saith Grotius) that is as it was at the very time when he writ that Book, which was in the time of Grave Maurice, or when Maurice Prince of Orange was Grave of Holland and West-Friezland and Zealand under the States of those Provinces, quarum summa Potestas, of which the Sovereignty or supreme Power, as it was then,
so (saith Grotius) it had been always before in the He lodges the Sovereignty all along in the States, and makes K. Phi∣lip an Ʋsurper os it. States, until the House of Burgundy did first secretly begin to undermine, and Philip the II. of Spain did afterwards openly and violently and injuriously in∣vade and usurp the Sovereignty it self of those Coun∣tries, being Heir to them indeed, but not as Sove∣reign, but as Grave or Count only, the Sovereignty being still in the States, as it always had been. And upon this Usurpation of the Sovereignty by Lib. de Anti∣quitate Rei∣pub. Baravi∣cae. cap. 7. page 49. Philip of Spain (saith Grotius) it was that Holland and the rest of the Ʋnited Provinces took Arms, and at length, cùm Philippum nec preces nec monita ad saniorem mentem revocare poterant, when neither their intreaties nor admonitions could prevail with Philip to reduce him to a better mind, that is, to make him to be content with the same Power which his Predecessors (as Graves) had under the States: then (saith he) Foederatorum Populorum Ordines the States of the United Provinces, Pronunciarunt Philippum ob violatas Imperii leges ipso jure Principatu excidisse, did pronounce or declare that Philip for violating the Laws of the Government had legally forfeited his Right to the Principality or Graveship which he formerly had under the respective States of those Provinces. So that all that can be gathered out of this passage This, however it may perhaps, justifie his Countrymen, doth not reach the Case in hand. or indeed out of this whole Book of Grotius is but this, that he who invades the Sovereign Power where∣unto he hath no Right, may not only be resisted by those that have the Sovereign Power; but may for∣feit the Right, which he had before to any Office or Authority under them. Which though perhaps it may be enough to excuse the Ʋnited Provinces from being Rebels against the King of Spain, and to justifie
the War they made against him; as likewise for their taking away the Hereditary Lands which he held of them and under them, (it being indeed as much and all that can be said to that purpose) yet by Grotius his favour it is not enough to justifie what he saith in that before quoted place in his Book de jure Belli & Pacis (which was the occasion of this digression) namely, that either there may be such a division of the Sovereignty betwixt the King and Se∣nate, or betwixt the King and the States of his King∣dom, as he there asserts; or that the States that are under the King may not only defend their part of the Power they derive from the King, against the King, but that the King may forfeit his part of the Sovereignty to Them by his invading of Theirs. For first in this Narrative of his for the justifying This further made out. of the War made by the States of the Ʋnited Pro∣vinces against the King of Spain, there is not a word of any division of the Sovereignty of any of those Provinces betwixt him and the States: but the So∣vereignty or supreme Power is asserted to have al∣ways been and always is de jure, by right, in the States. Secondly, That by the Sovereignty or su∣preme Power he meant the whole Sovereignty or whole supreme Power, and not a part or the chief part of it only, it is evident; because he saith it was always the same that it was when he writ that Tract, The whole So∣vereignty, he saith, was al∣ways in the States. which was when Grave Maurice was their General, in whose Fathers time when the Confederate States be∣gan to make War against the Spaniards, Grotius tells us that ex eo tempore summa Ordinum Potestas, De Antiquitate Relpub. Batav. p. 52. quam postremorum Principum licentia non parum ob∣scuraverat, luci reddita palàm effulsit; from that time forward (saith he) the supreme Power or Sove∣reignty
of the States, which by Licence taken by the later of their Princes (he means the Burgundians Ib. p. 49. and the Spaniards) had been much obscured (he doth not say wholly extinguished) being restored to its former lustre did openly shine forth; especial∣ly after the Spaniard had treated with them as Sove∣reign and free Estates, and acknowledged them to be so, and that he claimed no right to them or autho∣rity over them: which though de facto he did, de jure according to Grotius he ought not to have done before, because though he was King of Spain, he was no more King of those Provinces, than their Duces or first Generals were, who though they were then called Kings, yet nihil manifestius est (saith Their Kings but Titular. Grotius) quàm Reges illos fuisse vel Laconicos nomine solo, reverâ ipsâ nihil nisi optimatium primos; There is nothing more manifest (saith he) than that those Kings were just such Kings as those of the Lacedaemonians, that is, Kings in name only; but really and indeed no more than the chief of the Optimates or the Nobility; as he that was called Princeps Senatûs was in Rome, whilst it was an Ari∣stocracy, or as the Duke of Venice or the Prince of Orange now is. So that if a People, who in chusing of a King (whom they may chuse whether They will chuse or no) reserve to themselves but a part of the Sove∣reignty, may justly resist their King if he invade that part which they have reserved to themselves, and in case they prove too hard for him take away that part of the Sovereignty from him, which they had before given him (as Grotius supposeth they may) then à fortiori, with much more reason, those that reserve the whole Sovereignty to themselves (as
Grotius tells us the States did) may justly do what The States, ac∣cording to Gro∣tius, in their war with the King of Spain, did but recover what was their own before. they can to maintain it, or to recover it from any that shall attempt to take it from them; especially from any one that is employed by them, and under them, how great soever his employment may be, or by what name or title soever they be dignified or distinguished from the rest of their ordinary Sub∣jects: And this saith Grotius was the case betwixt the States of the Ʋnited Provinces and the King of Spain as he stood related to those Provinces, when they first took up Arms against him to regain what was their own before, when it was usurped by him; and when afterwards to secure it for the future they took away from him that to which before he had by inheritance a just right and title to, I mean, the Pre∣rogative of being their Grave or their chief Magi∣strate though not their Sovereign. And consequently the Premisses (quorum penes sit Authorem fides, let our Author answer for that) being supposed to be upon these grounds, if true, that War no Rebellion. true, that War of the Hollanders against the Spa∣niard upon that account could be no Rebellion. Be it so, Non equidem invideo, nec repugno, I for my part am not sorry for it, nor do I gain-say it; but rather I am glad there is so much to be said for any of the reformed Religion to justifie their taking up Arms; and I wish there were as much to be said for the Protestants in France and for all other both Lutherans and Calvinists in all other places; namely that the Reformation in Religion had been made in every one of the several Countries and Cities by those that had the Sovereignty, as Grotius saith it was in the Ʋnited Provinces, and as we are sure it was in England, and where we are sure the Sovereignty is all of it in the King, as it is in all Kings that are
Kings indeed and not in title or name only; as all those Kings are, saith Grotius, qui subsunt Populo, who are under the People. From which one say∣ing of Grotius I think we may conclude, that there neither is nor can be any division of the Sovereignty betwixt the King and the People, as he supposeth there may be; for in all Kingdoms whatsoever whe∣ther properly or improperly so called the King doth either subesse populo, is under the People, and then The Sovereignty of necessity either wholly in the People or wholly in the King. the Sovereignty is wholly in the People, and none of it in the King, what Power or Authority soever is delegated unto him by the People; especi∣ally if it be delegated sub conditione & paenâ, con∣ditionally and upon penalty of forfeiture or any other punishment: or else the Populus, that is, all or the whole body of the People doth subesse Regi, is under the King, and then the Sovereignty is wholly in the King, what priviledges or immunities soever he may grant to all or any of his Subjects, or how∣ever he may oblige himself by promise or oath to govern them according to the Laws of his own or Predecessors making. So that the Sovereignty must either be Wholly in the People, and then he that is called a King, is indeed no King; or it must be Wholly in the King, and then the People have no∣thing to do with it, or with any part of it: Sove∣reignty Sovereignty or the supreme Power is that in the Body Po∣litick, which the Soul is in the natural Body. being such a thing in the Body Politick, as the Soul is in the Body Natural. For as the Soul animates or enlivens the whole Body Natural, not by being some of it, or some part of it, in one member, and some part of it in another, but by being (as the Philosopher saith it is) tota in toto & tota in quâlibet parie, by being all of it in all and in every one of the members, according to their
several capacities of receiving the several influences and operations of it, in order to the preservation of the whole Body Natural: so Sovereignty or the supreme Power, wheresoever or in whomsoever it is, it is that which animates and enlivens and actu∣ates the whole Body Politick, but not by being it self divided; but by dividing and deriving its in∣fluences into all and every part of the whole Body Politick, as the Sun doth its light by the dispersing of its beams or heat into and over the whole World and all the several parts of it, though it self in the mean time remains wholly and entirely in its own Orb. CHAP. IX. Grotius his Case hath no place in the English Monar∣chy, where the King is sole Sovereign. The Parli∣ament never declared otherwise, (as Mr. B. saith they did) but owned him ever to be so in their Ad∣dresses. Sovereignty intitles to Majesty. BUT supposing (though not granting) there No such division of the Sove∣reignty in Eng∣land. may be and hath been somewhere or other such a division of the Sovereignty betwixt King and People as Grotius supposeth; yet it is certain there is none such here in England: for if ENGLAND be a Monarchy, then (saith Mr. Baxter himself) the whole Sovereignty must be but in One only, If England a Monarchy, as it is, the King sole Sovereign. and if but in one I hope by that One he means the King and not the Pope, though some of his Parasites will have him to be the Monarch of the whole Chri∣stian
World in general; and though he lays claim to the Monarchy of England in particular as held in Fee of him ever since King John surrendred the Sove∣reignty thereof to his Holiness. But Mr. Baxter, I am sure, is not so much a Papist, (though in some especially of their Political opinions he doth symbo∣lize with them) as to acknowledg the Pope to be his Sovereign, for then neither he nor his , those that are like-minded, could be (as they fain would be) every one a Pope in his own Parish; neither do I think he is yet so far gone in Fanati∣cism, as that by the King, whom he grants to be the sole Sovereign in a Monarchy, he meaneth no other King but King Jesus; as the fifth Monarchy∣men do here in England, and the Presbyterian Whigs do in Scotland. No, I do willingly absolve Mr. Bax∣ter from being guilty of either of these extravagant absurdities; but that which I charge Mr. Baxter with is this, that he denies England to be a Monar∣chy, Both which Mr. B. denies, though sworn by him at his Ordination. and consequently that the whole Sovereignty thereof is in the King, though he himself hath sworn it is so, when he took the Oath of Supremacy as I am sure he did or ought to have done when he was Epis∣copally Ordained as he saith he was; but it seems he hath better studied the point since or is more enlight∣ned than he was then: Or perhaps the Parliament had not then, or he had not heard they had decla∣red The Parlia∣ments pretended Declaration a∣bout it, inqui∣red after. this Government of ours to be no Monarchy but a mixed Government, because the Sovereignty was not in the King alone, but in the King and Parlia∣ment, that is partly in the King, and partly in them∣selves. But when and what these Parliaments were, or how and when and to whom they made such a Declaration he doth not vouchsafe to tell us, which
is an uncivil neglect of his Readers if he can, and an impudent slandering of the King and both Hou∣ses of Parliament if he cannot; I say of the King and both Houses of Parliament, because it is the King and both Houses that constitutea Parliament, the King as the Head and the two Houses as the representative Body of the People: and he may as well and as properly call that Corpus integrum or a compleat Body that hath no Head, as call either or both of the Houses a Parliament without the King. Now I No such Decla∣ration to be heard of, from any Parliament. would fain learn of Mr. Baxter, when any Parlia∣ment properly so called, that is, the King Lords and Commons did ever declare this Kingdom to be no Monarchy or that the Sovereignty or supreme Power was not wholly in the King? Nay, taking the two Houses without the King or a Commissioner for the King to be a Parliament, as after the King left them or rather after they had driven the King away from them, they falsly pretended themselves to be; taking, I say, the Parliament in this notion for the two Houses only without the King, did ever the two Houses declare the Government of England accor∣ding to the legal constitution of it to be no Monar∣chy? or that the Sovereignty or supreme Power was not in the King? I confess I never heard they did so, I mean by any conjunct Declaration or by any concurring Vote of both Houses, no nor so much as by the single Vote of the House of Commons, which being but one and the lower of the two Houses, and who are always uncovered at their Conferences with The House of Commons, which with Mr. B. goes for the Parlia∣ment, how Re∣presentatives of the People. the Lords, are very often by Mr. Baxter called the Parliament, because as he saith they are the Repre∣sentatives or Trustees of the People of England; whereas indeed they are the Representatives and Tru∣stees
not of the People but of the Commons of England only, unless he will say that the Nobility and Clergy, or at least the Lords Spiritual and Tem∣poral are none of the People of England; for surely they are not represented by the House of Commons. And therefore if Mr. Baxter were to speak of it in Latin I think he would not (I am sure he should not) call it by the name of Domus Populi, the House of the People, but Domus Plebis, the House of the Commonalty, or as I think the Lawyers call it by the name of Domus Communium, the House of Com∣mons. I am sure Livy (who knew how to call things in Latin by their proper names as well as any man does now) tells us that in a contest betwixt a Consul and a Tribune, the Tribune bearing himself high upon the account of his Office; the Consul said, Scias te non Populi sed Plebis Romanae Magi∣stratum esse, You must know, Sir, that you are an Officer, not of the People, but of the Commonalty of Rome. And yet this may be said in excuse of Mr. Bax∣ter's mistake when he calls them the Representatives of the People, that he saith no more of them than the House of Commons, which he means, said of it self; for to the four first that Preached before them (of whom I my self was one) they gave each of them a piece of Plate with this Inscription, Donum Po∣puli Anglicani, the Gift of the People of England, (by order of the House no doubt) ingraven on it; which perhaps they meant not to be Grammatically but Prophetically understood, that is to be under∣stood of them not as they were then, but what they meant to be before they left sitting, and as we saw they were after they had put down the Lords as well
as the King, and made themselves the High and Of Representa∣tives at last they made them∣selves Lords and Masters. Mighty States of England and Ireland; and instead of Representatives and Trustees made themselves Lords and Masters of those that trusted them; un∣til He whom they had trusted with their Forces made himself Lord and Master of them also; the People in the mean time (the Free-born People of England) having been made or rather having made themselves as arrant Slaves and Vassals, as ever any People were, unto them both. But to return to what I was speaking of; I do not find (I say) that any Parliament properly so called, that is the King Lords and Commons, or that both or either of the two Houses joyntly or se∣verally did ever declare or vote the Kingdom of England to be no Monarchy, or that the King of England was not the Sovereign and sole Sovereign of and in this and all other his Kingdoms and Do∣minions. On the contrary I find that in all the Addresses In their Ad∣dresses they al∣ways acknow∣ledged the King their Sovereign. made to the King as well by both Houses jointly as by either of them severally, from the beginning of the War to the end of it, they always acknowledg∣ed the King to be their Sovereign, and themselves (even in their publick and Parliamentary capacity) to be his Subjects. And if in their Parliamentary notion and capacity they were his Subjects, I won∣der in what notion or capacity they can be said to be Partners or partakers with him in the Sove∣reignty. If the two Hou∣ses (either or both) have a share in the So∣vereignty, they would have a title to Majesty also. Besides he that will have either or both of the Houses to have a part of the Sovereignty must allow them a Title to Majesty also. For Majesty and Sovereignty are Termini Convertibiles, convertible
terms, as the Houses themselves confess, when they treat the King sometimes with the title of Sove∣reign, and sometimes with the title of Majesty, as signifying by both these Words but one and the same thing, namely the Supremacy of Power in the King. Now I would fain know of Mr. Baxter, whether if he were to Petition the House of Lords or the House of Commons or both of them, he would address it to their Majesty the House of Lords, or to their Majesty the House of Commons, or to their Majesty the Lords and Commons assem∣bled in Parliament: if he did I believe he would be laught at for his folly by them, and perhaps punisht for his presumption by the King. And yet if the Sovereignty be divided betwixt Them and the King (as he saith it is) I see no reason why the title of Majesty may not be given to Them as well as to the King; or at least partly to them, and partly to him, though but proportionably to the division of the Sovereignty betwixt them; of which if the Kings part be greater than that of the House of Lords, and that of the House of Lords be greater than that of the House of Com∣mons (which I am afraid Mr. Baxter will hardly allow,) then if Majesty be the proper attribute of Sovereignty, and Excellent a proper Epithet to Majesty, then (according to Mr. Baxter's di∣stinctness of notion and expression) the style of the House of Commons should be Their Excellent Majesty, and the style of the House of Lords Their More Excellent Majesty, as well as the Kings style is His Most Excellent Majesty; and then there may be Treason against the House of Lords, or against the House of Commons as well as against
the King, if laesa Majestas, the offending or inju∣ring of Majesty be Treason; nay then we have three Sovereigns and not one only: for whosoever hath any share in the Sovereignty is a Sovereign; and then I wonder why we do not take an Oath of Allegiance to the two Houses, as well as to the King: nay, I wonder much more why they of both Hou∣ses do all of them take an Oath of Allegiance to the King, and cannot sit in either House till they do so. Surely one Sovereign doth not owe Alle∣giance to another, no not the least of Sovereigns to the greatest; for as all Sovereigns, the greatest as well as the least are equally under God, so the least as well as the greatest are equally under none but God, at least quatenùs so far forth as they are Sovereigns, or in those things and places where and when they have a right to Sovereignty or to any part thereof.
CHAP. X. The King declared by an Act of Parliament (in∣joyning the Oath of Supremacy) to be the only Supreme Governour. Mr. B's sorry evasion of this Oath, and Queen Elizabeths Declaration concern∣ing it. BUT what need is there of making such Colle∣ctions or Inferences from the Addresses made to the King from either or both Houses of Parlia∣ment with their full subscriptions thereunto, to prove that they acknowledg the King to be their Sovereign, their fole Sovereign, and themselves to be his Subjects, his humble and loyal Subjects, even in their Parliamentary capacity? for in that capacity it was that they addressed themselves to him. What need is there, I say, of insisting upon such more re∣mote though very pregnant and concluding proofs, when several Parliaments properly so called, that is Parliaments consisting of the head the King, and all the integral members, that is, of the Lords Spiritu∣al as well as Temporal together with the House of The King decla∣red to be the on∣ly Supreme Go∣vernour, by an Act of Parlia∣ment. Commons, have in positive and express words, and that not by a Vote, Order, or Ordinance, but by an Act declared the King not only to be the Supreme but the only Supreme Governour of this Realm and of all other his Highnesses Dominions and Coun∣tries, and that as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things and causes as temporal. These, I say, are the very words of an Act of Parliament properly so
called, that is of a full and free, of a compleat and an intire Parliament, I mean the Act of Ʋniformity, To wit, by the Act of Ʋnifor∣mity. wherein the Parliament doth not only declare its own sense and judgment concerning the Kings sole Supremacy, but prescribes an Oath to be taken by all that are to be admitted to teach the People, what they are to think of the King; I mean all that are to be admitted into holy Orders, whereby they are injoyned to testifie and declare in their Conscience that the King is the only Supreme Governour of this Realm; and I hope Mr. Baxter hath more reverence for Parliaments than to say or think that the Parli∣ament did injoyn men to swear that which they did not themselves believe to be true, especially those of the House of Commons, who I think do all of them take the Oath of Supremacy. And yet this so clear, so evident and so irrefra∣gable a proof of the Parliaments acknowledgment of the Kings sole Supremacy, Mr. Baxter is pleas'd to slight as if it signified nothing, calling it a sandy H. C. 460. foundation: for though he be pinched to the quick with this Argument, yet he makes as if he felt it not; and perceiving there was no help for him in Logick or Metaphysicks, he makes use of a figure in Rhetorick, which is either not to take notice of Mr. B. slights what he cannot answer. what they cannot answer, or if they cannot chuse but take notice of it to slight or scoff at it, as if it were not worth the answering or taking notice of. And yet that he may not seem absque omni ratione insanire, to have no pretence or show of reason for his slighting or rejecting of it, he tells us that this Oath was made in relation to Papists only, and was in∣joyned to be taken for the discovery of those that were Ibid. suspected to be so.
Surely if we look to the first enacting of that The Oath of Su∣premacy not made against Papists only, as he saith. Oath and the primary or original cause of it, it was not for the distinguishing of Papists from Pro∣testants; for they were Papists in Henry the VIII's time, and as great Persecutors of the Protestants as any were in those times, that compiled and consen∣ted to the enacting and enjoyning of that Oath; but it was to distinguish Papists from Papists, Papists that would from Papists that would not acknowledg the Kings Supremacy. And for the same end and purpose, the same Oath The use, Q. Eli∣zabeth made of that Oath. was renewed in Queen ELIZABETHS time in the beginning of her Reign for the distinguishing of loyal from disloyal Papists, as appears by the reasons she gave why She did not impose that Oath upon any of the Barons or House of Lords, though many of them were then Papists, because she did not (as she said) make any doubt of their loyalty, but she cau∣sed it to be administred to the Popish Prelates, and other Ecclesiasticks, who had almost all of them (plerisque omnibus saith Cambden) taken it in her Father's time, but refusing it then were deprived of their spiritual promotions for so doing, lest they might teach the People to do so also, and perhaps do more than so; that is from denying her Supremacy in Spirituals to proceed to the denying of it in Tempo∣rals also, which we see they are now come to, not by their Popish but Presbyterian Teachers. For preventing whereof and for obviating the She justified her self in it by a publick De∣claration. scandalous interpretations that were made of it as that thereby she (the Queen) arrogated a Power unto her self sacrâ in Ecclesiâ celebrandi, of performing divine Offices in the Church, Illa edito scripto (saith Cambden) she published a Declaration, wherein she
affirms se nihil aliud arrogare quàm quod ad coronam Angliae jam olim jure spectavit, that she arrogated nothing to her self but what anciently belonged of right to the Crown of England. Scilicet se sub Deo Camd. Eliz. p. 39, 40. summam & supremam gubernationem & potestatem in omnes Regni Anglici Ordines (sive illi sunt Ecclesia∣stici sive Laici) habere: quodque nulla extranea pote∣stas, ullam in eos jurisdictionem vel authoritatem habeat aut habere debeat. Namely, that she under God had the supreme Government and Power over all orders of men in England whether Ecclesiasticks or Laicks: and withal, that no foreign Power had or ought to have any Jurisdiction or Authority over any of them. From which Declaration published by that pious Three things ob∣served from that Declaration of Hers. and prudent Prince it is observable, First, That the aforesaid Oath of Supremacy was intended by Her, as well for the asserting of her own Supremacy over all Orders of men in her own Kingdom in all their capacities, as it was for the disclaiming and re∣nouncing any foreign Jurisdiction, that was or could be pretended or claimed over all or any of her Sub∣jects in any capacity whatsoever. Secondly, From this Declaration of Hers it is far∣ther to be observed, that she will have her own So∣vereignty and Supremacy in omnes Ordines Regni, over all Orders and Estates of men here at home, to be asserted and sworn to before they shall swear to disclaim and renounce all foreign Authority and Juris∣diction. And with very good reason; because it would have done her, and will do her Successors very little or rather no good at all, for their Subjects to renounce all Sovereignty from abroad, as long as they are taught or suffered to be taught that there
are any other Sovereign or any other invested with any part of the Sovereignty here at home, but their Kings only. Lastly, From the aforesaid Declaration we may observe also that the Queen by the Injunction of the Oath of Supremacy professeth to claim nothing to be acknowledged or sworn to, but what de jure and jam olim, what anciently and of right did belong to the Crown of England; and consequently that the Supremacy or Sovereignty over all Estates or Orders of men in England was from all Antiquity, that is (as I conceive) from the beginning of Monarchy or ever since there were Kings in England, and that not ex dono Populi, by gift of the People or compact with the People, but jure by right; and by what Right? not jure Electionis but Hereditatis, not by right of Election but of Succession, and jure Coronae, by right of the Crown, as being inseparably annex∣ed to the Crown, or rather inherent in the Crown; there being none (as I have already proved) that can properly be called a King or Crowned Head (whether by Succession or Election) but he must be the supreme and sole Sovereign, over all in his own Kingdom. Which as to our Kings here in England, as it was The Supremacy, the chief Prero∣gative of the Crown. acknowledged by those Parliaments that enacted the Oath of Supremacy before the War; so is it by the Act of Ʋniformity since the War, or since the Kings return, and consequently since the Crowns restauration to those Prerogatives, that are of right belonging to it; of which the Supremacy or So∣vereignty over all in the Kingdom inclusively (as well as in relation to all without the Kingdom exclu∣sively) is the chiefest. For if there be any either
within or without the Kingdom either superior over him or equal to him, or partaker in any part of the Sovereignty with him, he cannot be said to be the only supreme Governour of this Realm, and of all other his Dominions and Countries, as by the Act of Ʋniformity those of the Kings Subjects that are to teach all the rest of their fellow Subjects are obli∣ged not only to say but swear he is: nor is it so much as to be imagined that the King Lords and Com∣mons would have obliged any to take such an Oath, if they themselves had not believed the whole sub∣ject matter of it to be true. CHAP. XI. The Oath of Supremacy further explained. The Kings being declared the sole supreme Governor, cuts off all pretence at home as well as foreign claim. I say the whole subject matter of it, for there be evi∣dently Two parts in the Oath of Su∣premacy; the one Assertory, the other Pro∣missory. two several distinct parts of that Oath, both of which every one of them that takes it is equally obliged to swear unto; of which the first is Asserto∣ry, and the second Promissory. In the former he that swears asserts the Kings Sovereignty affirmatively, affirming him to have the sole supreme power over all In the Assertory part two Clau∣ses, one Affirma∣tive, the other Negative. Persons, in all Causes, within his Realms and Domini∣ons, and then negatively by denying any foreign Pow∣er or any without his Dominions to have any Juris∣diction over any of his Subjects or to have any thing to do within his Dominions. And it is in regard of the latter of these two clauses only, that this Oath can
be said to be enacted and imposed for the discovery and conviction of Papists, and that not of all Papists The later Clause discovers Pa∣pists. neither, but such Papists only as believe the Pope to have the supreme Power over all Christians in Spiri∣tuals at least, if not in Temporals, whose Subjects so∣ever they may be in Temporals. But as to the for∣mer The former Clause asserts the Monarchy. of these two Clauses in the Assertory part of this Oath which affirms the King to be sole Sovereign, or that he is the Only supreme Governour in this Realm, it seems principally, if not wholly to be intended to assert the Government of this Kingdom to be Mo∣narchical and to make it be acknowledged to be so. For by swearing that the King is the only su∣preme What intended by swearing the King to be the only supreme Go∣vernour. Governour of this Realm, &c. they do virtually and by necessary consequence swear also that all other Governours within the Realm, as they do severally and joyntly derive their Power of go∣verning from him, so they are joyntly as well as severally subordinate unto him, and therefore none of them either severally or joyntly co-ordinate with him. Because, if any of them or all of them in any capacity were so, or believed by the Parliament to be so, the Parliament by enjoyning men to swear the King is the only supreme Governour of this Realm, must needs be chargeable with enjoyning Perjury, or which is worse, with compelling others to swear that to be truth which they themselves do not be∣lieve to be so; which cannot be avoided but by concluding that the Injunction of the Oath of Supre∣macy by Parliament is a Declaration of Parliament, that this Kingdom is a Monarchy properly so called, because the Sovereignty or supreme Power is in one Person only, namely in the King; and if in him only then in him wholly also.
And that this was the Parliaments meaning in The distinction, which the Ru∣brick makes be∣twixt those two Clauses. prescribing and enjoyning that Oath of Supremacy, may farther and (if it be possible) more undenia∣bly and demonstratively be made to appear, it is very observable that in the Rubrick prefixed before the Administration of that Oath, (which Rubrick is a part of the Act of Parliament as well as the Oath it self) it is said the Bishop shall cause The Oath of the Kings Supremacy, And against the Pow∣er and Authority of all Foreign Potentates, &c. Vid. The form and manner of making of Dea∣cons. to be administred, &c. It is observable (I say) that in the aforesaid Rubrick there is a clear and a very notable distinction made betwixt the two first Clauses of the Assertory part of the Oath, namely, betwixt the Clause affirming the King to be the only supreme Governor of this Realm, and the Clause deny∣ing any foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, or Potentate, to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm. The distinction (I say) by the Rubrick made betwixt the two Clauses is very notable; for it is the first of them only that is called by the Ru∣brick the Oath of the Kings Supremacy; whereas the The first Clause is called the Oath. latter is said to be against the Power and Authority of all Foreign Potentates, and therefore is more pro∣perly to be called an Abjuration than an Oath. And The second is rather an Abju∣ration. yet it is this Abjuration only that Mr. Baxter will have to be meant by the Oath of Supremacy; where∣as this abjuration is not the Oath of Supremacy it self, but a Deduction only from the Oath of Supre∣macy. For because the King is the only supreme Governour of this Realm, therefore neither Pope, nor any other foreign Prince, Prelate or Potentate can claim or pretend to any Supremacy or part of
Supremacy here in this Kingdom. So that he that can truly swear the one may safely per modum se∣quelae, by way of consequence, swear the other also. But though the truth of the former doth neces∣sarily infer the truth of the latter, yet the truth of The former Clause infers the later; the later not the former. the latter doth not necessarily infer the truth of the former. For though it be never so true, and never so undoubtedly acknowledged to be so, that no Foreigner or none without the Realm of what quality or denomination soever, doth or can justly pretend to the supreme or any part of the supreme Power either Civil or Ecclesiastical here in England; yet supposing the supreme Power to be divided (as Grotius supposeth it may be in some Kingdoms, and Mr. Baxter saith it is here in this Kingdom) it will not follow I confess that the King is, or that the Parliament that made this Act and enjoyned this Oath to be taken, did thereby ac∣knowledg the King to be, the only supreme Gover∣nour of this Realm. But the Parliament by injoyn∣ing the Oath to be taken, and those that take it not only abjurare to abjure or for swear all foreign juris∣diction, but jurare to swear positively and plainly, That the King is the only supreme Governour of this Realm over all Persons in all Cases and Capacities, do evidently declare that They themselves believe and acknowledg the King to be so, and consequent∣ly whatsoever division there may be of the supreme Power in other Kingdoms yet in this there is none. For the first, the most immediate and most na∣tural deduction from this Proposition, (viz.) The King is the only supreme Governour of this Realm, is the excluding all others in this Realm from having any thing to do with the supreme Go∣vernment
of it. And therefore the swearing to this Proposition alone is called by the Rubrick the taking of the Oath of the Kings Supremacy; the fol∣lowing abjuration of all foreign Authorities, being but a deduction and that not a primary but a secondary deduction from it. And therefore 'tis a vain and senceless shift of Mr. Baxter's for the avoiding of the dint of this The Kings being the only supreme Governor, ex∣cludes all pre∣tence to the Su∣premacy from any other, as well at home as abroad. Argument, which doth jugulum causae ferire, cut the very throat of his cause, to say as he doth, that the end of imposing and taking of this Oath was only for the excluding of all pretence to the Su∣premacy or to any part of the Supremacy here from abroad, and not for the acknowledging the Kings sole Supremacy here at home. Whereas it is in∣deed the Kings sole Supremacy here at home that is (as it is called by the Rubrick) the Oath of the Kings Supremacy, and not the excluding of all foreign claim or pretence to it; which to speak properly (as Mr. Baxter saith he loves to do) is as I said before an abjuration rather than an Oath, or at most but the negative and consequent part of the Oath; the affirmative and antecedent part thereof being the assertion of the whole supreme Power in the Government of this Kingdom to be in the King and King only, and consequently ex∣clusive of any pretence to it, or to any participa∣tion of it by any either at home or abroad, espe∣cially by any at home. Why not an ex∣press abjuration of the Suprema∣cies being in any at home, be∣side the King, as of its being in any abroad. But why then, will Mr. Baxter perhaps say, was there not annexed to the positive part of this Oath an abjuration or express disowning the supreme Power or any part of the supreme Power to be in any here at home, besides the King, as
well as there is an abjuration or an express dis∣owning of it to be in any abroad? I answer because there was no need at all of it, The 1 Reason. First, because he that hath sworn the Supremacy or supreme Power to be in the King only, hath eo ipso in that very thing, or by so swearing for∣sworn the being of it, or any part of it, in any other besides the King. If it be replyed, that upon this account there needed not have been any abjuration or disowning of any foreign Authority annexed to the other part of it neither. I answer, Secondly, That although really there The 2 Reason. was no need of an express or explicit disowning or renouncing of the one more than the other, be∣cause the swearing to the positive part of the Oath is implicitly and virtually a disowning or re∣nouncing of them both; yet because there had been antiently, and was then, and was like to be still, a claim to the Supremacy here in England (at There is a claim to the Supremacy from abroad, no such pretence at home. least in matters Spiritual and Ecclesiastical) by some that were abroad, I mean by the Pope for himself and his Successors; therefore the Parliament thought it meet and prudent and in some respects neces∣sary, to add or annex to the Assertion of the Kings sole Supremacy here at home an express and expli∣cit Renuntiation of all the Right that was or could be pretended to it from abroad, but did not think it to be at all necessary to add or annex the like express or explicit renuntiation of any such Power to be in any here at home: because there was none then here at home so impudent as openly and avowedly to pretend to it, or to any part of it. For here are no Ephori, no Overseers or Guardi∣ans
of the State, as there were in Lacedaemon, nor no such Senate as there is in Venice, nor no such High and Mighty States as there are in Holland. For we have but One high and mighty, and he is so high and mighty that there is none but the Almighty that is above him, and all others in his own Dominions, how much higher and mightier they may seem to be in relation to one another, are equally below him and subject to him. CHAP. XII. From the two Houses Petitioning the King, and his being free to grant or deny, is proved that there is no Co-ordination; beside the inconsistence of it with the Government. I know there was in the beginning of the late Re∣bellious times a Discourse written and published A Pamphlet in the late times taxed, which makes the two Houses Co-ordi∣nate with the King. to make the foolish part of the World believe, (for with wise and considering men I am sure it could have no weight) that the two Houses of Parliament were Co-ordinate with the King, and consequently not Subordinate to the King in relation to the making and repealing of Laws, and the determining of all things of publick concernment for the Government of the Kingdom; and consequently that according to the nature of Co-ordinates, where all three could not, or would not, or did not agree, the two that did agree were to over-rule the third that did not.
An excellent project or expedient, as the deviser The project of Co-ordination utterly inconsi∣stent with our Government. of it thought, to make a Triumvirate of a Monarchy, or a Republick of a Kingdom: but he did not consi∣der that it was liable to one little inconvenience, namely that it was utterly and absolutely unpracti∣cable, being altogether inconsistent with the funda∣mental Constitution of our Government; which is not to have the two Houses of Parliament always in being as the Senate of Rome was, and the Senate of Ve∣nice is, or to assemble and meet when and where they will and to continue as long together as they will, as (Grotius tells us) the Ordines or States of Holland of right did, even whilst They had a King. But our Parliaments here in England are so far from ha∣ving always an actual, setled, and constant being, that they have no being at all, but what the King gives them by his Writ of Summons; neither can they assemble or meet but when he calls them, nor either depart sooner or continue longer together than he will have them; neither while they do (by his leave and command) continue together, have they any Power to make any new Law or to repeal any old Law, but only to pray, propose or advise the making of the one or the repealing of the other by the King. And this being so, (as undeniably it is so by the The constitution the same now as ever. legal and fundamental Constitution of the Govern∣ment) I wonder when and by what Authority it came to be alter'd. For supposing but not granting that a Parliament truly so called may make such a change in the fundamental Constitution of the Go∣vernment, as to make an Aristocracy or a Democracy of a Monarchy, by the Monarchs own consent to it, (which I for my part think they cannot, the Mo∣narch
himself in an Hereditary Monarchy being but a Trustee for his Successors) but supposing (I say) such a change could be made by a Parliament pro∣perly so called, I demand when and by what Parlia∣ment such a Change was made, and whether the King did ever consent to it? if not, we are still where we were, whatsoever Power a legal or compleat Parli∣ament may be said or imagined to have, and conse∣quently there is not (as yet at least) any such Co∣ordination of King Lords and Commons, as the Au∣thor of the aforesaid discourse pretended there is. It is true indeed, that the two Houses of Parlia∣ment The two Houses Petitioning the King a proof, that there is no Co-ordination. in the year 42 did Petition the King, that he would be pleased to grant such things as they pro∣posed unto him; but hence it will not follow that he was bound to do so, nay thence it will follow that neither he nor any of his Predecessors were bound to do so: for then they that were the boldest in their demands that ever met and sate in Parliament, would have claimed it as of right and not Petition'd for it as they did; at least, if they had vouchsafed to have Petition'd for it, they would have called their Pe∣tition a Petition of Right, which they did not. So that by very Petitioning the King to grant those things, which they proposed as agreed on by both Houses, they acknowledged that the King was not bound by any Law, Custom, or Precedent from his Predecessors to consent to what both Houses had a∣greed on, and consequently that there was no such Co-ordination betwixt the King, Lords and Commons, by the fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom, as by the aforesaid Ahor was pretended to be. And therefo in his answer to the Peti∣tion The King free to grant or deny, as he pleaseth. of the  the 19 Propositions which
they pretend humbly to desire (but indeed peremp∣torily press) him to grant, tells them, That to say he is obliged to pass all Laws that shall be offered unto him by both Houses, (howsoever his own Judgment and Con∣science shall be unsatisfied wiih them) is to broach a new Doctrine, a point of Policy as proper for their pre∣sent business, as destructive to all rights of Parliaments; adding that it was out of a strange shamelesness that they would forget (for sure there being so many Law∣yers among them some of them could not chuse but re∣member it) a Clause in a Law still in force made in the second year of King Henry the V. wherein both Hou∣ses of Parliament acknowledg that it is of the Kings Regality to grant or deny such of their Petiti∣ons as pleaseth himself. And if it were so, and acknowledged by both Houses of Parliament to be so in Henry the V's time, I would fain know in what Kings Reign, or by what Kings consent that Act or the aforesaid Clause in that Act, which was in force so lately, comes to be re∣peal'd, or whether any Law or Act of Parliament can be either made or repealed without the Kings con∣sent.
CHAP. XIII. An Ordinance of both Houses, no Law; and conse∣quently no legal Authority for the late War against the King. The Militia or the Power of the Sword, acknowledged by the two Houses themselves to be in the King. A Sermon of Arch-Bishop Ushers in the Isle of Wight Preached to the same Purpose. NOT a Law perhaps (may Mr. Baxter say) properly so called, but an Ordinance of both Houses may, and that without the Kings consent to it, nay notwithstanding the Kings declaring and pro∣testing against it, oblige all the People of England to do or not to do what the two Houses will have them, as much as any Law consented to by the King ever did or can do; nay, and may repeal any Law made by the King, by the advice and with the con∣sent of both Houses, any Law or Custom to the con∣trary in any wise notwithstanding. But per quam Regulam, by what Rule, Mr. Bax∣ter? By what Law of God or man can this be done? Why, by an Ordinance of both Houses, which is equi∣valent at least to an Act of Parliament properly so An Ordinance of both Houses, with Mr. B. equivalent to an Act of Parlia∣ment. called; and so it had need to be, Mr. Baxter, and more too, to warrant the doing of such things; such horrible mischiefs and Villanies as have been done against God by Sacriledg, against the King by Re∣bellion, and by Subjects against their fellow Subjects by plundering, and imprisoning, and murdering one another, of which side soever they were; for all
will be put to the account of them that had no au∣thority, I mean no legal and just Authority, to war∣rant them to do what they did. And therefore Mr. Baxter, you were best be very sure that the two Houses had Authority to make such a War as they did, not only without Commission from the King, but against the King, and to engage you and by you to No legal Autho∣rity for the late War against the King. engage so many thousands as you say they did in it. You were best I say be very sure of it; for it is not your head or your neck only which you say you are willing to hazard upon that account, but your soul it self, and the Everlasting Woe or Welfare of it, that lies at stake for it. Be not deceiv'd, God is not to be mocked: It is not the Confederacy of the two Houses, it is not the Covenanting of the two Nations, that can justifie either their commanding, or their being obeyed in any thing which God hath forbid∣den or not allowed them to command or to be obey∣ed in by some known Law of his own or of the Land; neither of which I am sure can be produced by them. Moreover it is not the redressing of Grievances Nor can any pre∣tence justifie it. (had they been as many or more and as great or greater than the House of Commons in their virulent and malicious Remonstrance to the People represen∣ted them to be) nor the Reformation of Religion (though there had been much more need of it than there was) no nor the truly intending (as well as pre∣tending) never so good, or never so necessary an End for the publick Good either spiritual or temporal of the whole Nation, that can justifie the Means they made use of, if they had not Authority to make use of them: I mean in their taking of the Sword out of the Kings hands, where the Law of God and of
the Land had placed it, and taking it into their own notwithstanding Gods and mans Law to the contrary. For the proof of the first part of which Assertion Mr. B. himself appealed to. of mine I appeal to Mr. Baxter himself; for amongst his many false, and impious, and pernicious Apho∣risms, he hath this true one, that it is not lawful for a Nation to fight for the preservation of their Religion, Holy Com. w. p. 441. or their worldly goods and liberties, without just autho∣rity and licence: Whereunto he adds by way of ex∣position and illustration of his meaning, That it is but a delusory course of some in these times that write many Volumes to prove, that Subjects may not bear Arms against their Princes for Religion; as if those that were against them did think that Religion only as the end, yea, or Life or Liberty would justifie Rebellion, or that the Efficient Au∣thorizing Cause were not necessary as well as the Final. Where bearing Arms against Princes is warrantable quoad fundamentum, as to the ground of it, this will warrant it quoad finem, as to the end of it. A good End must have a good Ground. Again, for proof of the latter part of my Assertion; namely, that the Sword or the Power of making War was by Law in the Kings hand, and not in theirs, I appeal to the Acknowledgment of the two Houses The two Houses themselves ac∣knowledged the power of the Sword to be in the King. themselves, who after they had setled the Militia be∣fore the War was actually begun, yet knowing and being conscious to themselves that they had done it illegally and by usurpation of the Kings Authority without any Commission or leave from him for the doing of it, they make it one of the 19 Propositions they sent to the King when he was at York in the year 42. That his Majesty would be pleased to rest sa∣tisfied with that course that the Lords and the House of
Commons have appointed for the ordering of the Militia until the same shall be farther setled by a Bill: by which Proposition they do plainly confess, First, That they had taken the Sword, by having ordered Some Remarks upon that ac∣knowledgment. the Militia of the Kingdom. Secondly, That they had no Commission or leave from the King for it, by saying it was done by their own appointment. Thirdly, That they knew they had intrenched upon his Authority by so doing. Why else should they desire his Majesty would be pleased to rest satisfied with what they had done in that particular at least pro tem∣pore at the present, until the same (that is the order∣ing of the Militia) should be farther setled by Bill. Whereby, Fourthly, They confess that the Power of setling it, and consequently of making any use of it, was not in them as yet by Law, until by a Bill consented to by the King it were made a Law; and consequently that the Ordinances of both Houses as they call'd them, did not nor could not make any thing they ordered to be done, legal or obligatory to the whole Nation. And hence or from this con∣sciousness The invalidity of their Ordi∣nances made out. of the insufficiency of their own Autho∣rity to justifie either before God or the World the lawfulness of doing what they had done and meant to do, it was that they so earnestly and so often press'd the King to pass their Ordinances into Acts. For though they did what they could to make the poor deluded People believe that their Ordinances were as legal, as valid, and as obligatory as Acts, for the draining of their Purses and exposing of their Persons; yet by their being so desirous as they were, (even after their victory and when the King was their Prisoner) to legitimate their spurious Or∣dinances by turning them into Acts, it is evident
they did not themselves believe what they and their Preachers made the People to believe concerning the validity of any of those Ordinances, especially that for taking up of Arms; as if the Power of the Sword and ordering of the Militia of the Kingdom to fight for whom and against whom they pleased, and upon what account they pleased, had been in them: which by what I have said it doth not only appear it was not, but that they knew it was not, but was and always had been in the Crown as the King tells them The King asserts the Militia. in his answer to the aforesaid Proposition of the two Houses, telling them that he will no more part with Vid. the Kings Answer from York to the 19 Propositions. his Right in the Militia than with his Crown; and in∣deed when he parts with the one, he doth in effect part with the other also: for as the Crown upon his head is the Emblem of his Sovereignty, so the Sword and the Scepter, that are always when he appears as a King carried before him, are the Emblems of the two supporters of his Crown or of his Sovereignty; the Sword the Emblem of his supreme Military, and the Scepter the Emblem of his supreme Civil or judi∣ciary Power, and both of them signifie that he is the fountain of all Power; and that there is no Power that can be legally exercised within any of his Realms and Dominions but what is derived from him and exercised immediately or mediately by him, and for him. And that this is true in Divinity as well as by the A remarkable passage in a Ser∣mon of Arch-Bishop Usher at the Treaty in the Isle of Wight. Law of the Land in relation to our King, I will cite the Authority of a Casuist, whom Mr. Baxter seems to have a great reverence for and esteem of, though he were a Bishop and more than a Bishop; I mean Arch-Bishop Ʋsher, whose Reduction of Episcopacy Mr. Baxter seems to approve; though the Arch-Bishop
himself (as I have been informed) would not own it to be his. This Great and Good man (I say) preaching before the last King at the Treaty in the Isle of Wight, did in that Sermon of his positive∣ly and in plain terms more than once or twice affirm the King, our King, to be the fountain of Pow∣er under God within his own Dominions, and that therefore no Power could lawfully be assumed or made use of by any upon any pretence whatsoe∣ver, but as it was derived by Commission from the King. These were his very words, whereunto he added, This is true Doctrine, were the King a Pa∣pist, or a Pagan, and much more when he is (as our King is) a Christian King, an Orthodox Chri∣stian King; and that not in profession only, but in practice also. And then having somewhat in∣larged himself in speaking of the Kings personal Ver∣tues and Graces both moral and spiritual. Now (said he) some that hear me may think I flatter him; indeed I do not, but I confess that what I have said of him, I have said to comfort him; for never any man of his quality had more need of it, both in regard of the unworthy usage he hath had, and the unworthy condition he is now in; which I hope, said he, will last no longer. For this (as he then added) is the 49th year of his Age, and at the end of the 49th year began the year of Jubilee among the Jews; and then every bondman was made free, and every Prisoner was set at liberty; and every one that had been kept out of possession was restored to it. And if (said he) We be not worse than Jews, it will be so with us now also. Haec audivimus magnum illum virum, non magis verè quàm fortiter & animosè disserentem: these things we
heard that Great man discoursing of, with no less courage and resolution than with truth. And I have repeated it so often upon several occasions both at home and abroad for his honour, that I verily be∣lieve these for the most part were the very same words, or very near the very same numerical words, as well as the identical sence of that passage of his Sermon, which I have repeated. And although I cannot produce many Witnesses to Sir Phil. War∣wick a witness to that passage. attest the truth of what I have here said as to this particular, there being but one besides my self (at least that I can remember) now living that heard that Sermon; yet that One is one of that credit and reputation with the generality of good men that he is multorum instar, as good as a great many, to make any thing he attests upon his own knowledge to be believed; and this was so notable a passage to be delivered at such a time, and in such a place, by One that was nominated not by the King, but by the Commissioners for the Parliament, to be sent for thi∣ther, that I am sure Sir Philip Warwick could not chuse but take special notice of it (as I think every body did that heard it) and therefore I am sure he cannot forget it, or at least will remember it assoon as he is put in mind of it. And to him I appeal for the verifying of what I have said as to this particu∣lar. But if any man shall, notwithstanding Sir Phi∣lip An objection against its cre∣dibility answer∣ed. Warwick's attestation, think it to be incredible, that the two Houses of Parliament, being then in their Zenith, should indure any such thing to be said so much to their reproach and condemnation of their cause and of all their proceedings without any ani∣madversion upon him that said it; I answer, it was partly because they were then in their Zenith, so high
advanced and so highly elevated with the success God had (for our sins and for their obduration) permitted them to have, that they despised what any man did or could say against them; and partly be∣cause they could not have taken notice of it without inflicting some punishment or other upon him for it: which they could not have done (he being a man of such eminency not only in regard of his quality, but much more in regard of his learning and sancti∣ty, and in regard of the very great reputation he had thereby acquired both at home and abroad) without exposing themselves to the envy and hatred of the whole World, and without doing themselves any good by it; and therefore all things considered, they thought it best to take no notice at all of it, as for ought I ever heard they did not. Howsoever what I affirm that pious and learned Arch-Bishop said (whether he said it or no) is true; namely, that the Power of the Sword or the Power of making War, though for their own defence only, or for never so good an end, was not in the two The Parlia∣ments own ac∣knowledgment further made out. Houses, but in the King, and in the King only, as they did themselves acknowledg; because at that very time, and at that very Treaty, one of the prime Articles which they mainly insisted on, was to have the Sword for so many years to be put into their hands by the Kings passing of an Act of Parliament to that purpose, and for their raising of mony, du∣ring that time for the support and exercise of that Power in what proportion they thought or should think fit, upon their Fellow-Subjects; all which they had done before by virtue of their Ordinances only: which either they did or did not think to be a legal and sufficient Authority for their taking of the
Sword, and using it as they did; If they did think so, why might not the same authority have been suffici∣ent for the continuance of it? and if so, what need was there of an Act for the trusting them with it but for a time only? But if they did not think their own Ordinances to be a legal and sufficient Authority for their taking of the Sword, and taxing of the Peo∣ple; and the exercising all those other Acts of Arbi∣trary Power which they did for so many years toge∣ther, by vertue of their own Ordinances only; why then habemus confitentes reos, We have their own confession, not only that they took the Sword, which neither the Law nor the King had put into their hands, and therefore were Ʋsurpers of the Regal Authority: but had made use of it against the King, or, which is all one, against those that were com∣missioned by the King, and therefore were Tray∣tors and Rebels; as likewise that their own Ordi∣nances were not legally sufficient to justifie their so doing, and consequently that they have not such a Legislative Power as Mr. Baxter saith they have, and which he is so confident of, as that he offers his head to the Block, if the reasons he gives for the proof of it be disproved; which I am now in the last place to try whether I can do or not. The end of the third Section.
SECT. IV. England a Monarchy, and the Soveraignty solely in the KING, prov'd against Mr. Baxter; as also that neither the Parlia∣ments concurrence (as the Peoples Repre∣sentatives) to the making Laws, nor their being Trustees for the Peoples Rights, gives them any share in the Soveraignty. CHAP. I. The mischief of Schismatical Books. Mr. Baxter's Anti-episcopal and Anti-monarchical Aphorisms. The Soveraignty not divided (as Mr. B. saith) be∣twixt KING and Parliament. Prov'd by the Parliaments acknowledgments, and by the Oath of Supremacy. AND first thanks be to God and the King, that Mr. Baxter is not Lugdunensem cau∣sam dicturus ad aram, that he is not to plead his cause at the Kings-Bench Barr. For God knows that all the hurt I wish him is, that no more hurt may be done by Him; and for this end, and for this end only it was, that I silenced him
from preaching; and for this end, and for this end only it is, that I would have him prohibited from writing, or at least from publishing what he writes, until he is licensed by Authority to do so. For when he hath published such pernicious Princi∣ples Te mischie∣vousness of some of Mr. B.'s writings. against the legal constitution of the Church and State, as he hath done in divers of his Books, espe∣cially in that of the Holy Commonwealth, it is too late and to very little purpose to say as he doth say of some of them, that he would have them taken pro non scriptis, as if they had not been written. For, Serò medicina paratur, Cùm mala per long as invaluêre moras. that is, Physick comes too late, when ill humors through long delays have got too great a head. An Arch-Heretick may by Gods mercy be him∣self Heresie and Schism propa∣gated by Books, though the Au∣thors them∣selves repent their errors. reconcil'd to the Truth, and become Orthodox, and an Arch-Schismatick may by the same mercy be reconciled to the Church, and become Confor∣mable; and yet that Heresie that was broached by the one, and that Schism that was introduced by the other, may be propagated and perpetuated by their Books and by their Disciples from Generation to Generation to the Worlds end: and if Master Baxter will needs have a secondary Original sin, I think this is that which may most properly be so called. Our Countryman Brown (who would needs have our Church of England to be no Church) An Instance of Brown the Fa∣ther of the Brownists. was himself convinced of this error, so that he not only became a Member, but a Minister of the Church of England, and (as I have been informed) died
Parson of a Parish called A-Church in Northam∣ptonshire. But did Brownism dye with him? No; there are Brownists still, and will be, God knows how long, perhaps till Doom's day put an end to the World, and all the Divisions that have been, are, or shall be in it. So that as nothing can be more criminal than to be the Author of a Schism, Sect or Heresie; so nothing can be more dangerous than to suffer the spreading and growth of them, especially of such of them as are destructive in their natural tendency (whatsoever the intention of the Authors and Abettors may be) to the peace and welfare of the established Government either in Church or State. And such, say I, are Mr. Baxter's Anti-episcopal Mr. Baxter the Founder of the Baxterian Sect. Aphorisms in relation to the Church, and such are his Anti-monarchical Aphorisms in relation to the State; which will be Thorns in the sides of both Church and State, to trouble and molest them, if they be not Engines to undermine or overthrow them, as long as there be Baxterians in the World, as there will be no doubt, long after Mr. Baxter is dead; and though he himself before he dies, do truly and heartily (as I do truly and heartily wish he may, if he have not done it yet) repent of ha∣ving been the Author of some, and Abetter of all of them. As for his Anti-episcopal Aphorisms, and all other His Anti-episco∣pal Aphorisms past by. his Heterodoxies relating to the established Govern∣ment & Discipline of the Church, they have been so thoroughly canvassed, and so thoroughly confuted by so many, much more learned Pens than mine, that as I have said already in my Preface, so I say
again, I mean not to meddle with any of them. But as for his Anti-monarchical Aphorisms, because His Anti-mo∣narchical Apho∣risms justly ex∣cepted against. he saith I am a defier of Deity and Humanity, for taking exceptions against them, and for my justi∣fying the rights of Kings against the grounds he lays for justifying the resisting of Kings by their Subjects, and particularly of the late horrid Re∣bellion of the worst of Subjects against the best of Kings, the most groundless in its causes, and the most unchristian and the most inhumane in its effects, that ever was in this or perhaps in any other Kingdom: I thought my self concerned to enlarge my self in saying of what I have said to justifie my exceptions against those Aphorisms; some of which I have before printed and now re∣printed, and could have printed many more, and some of them as bad as the worst of those, and as destructive of the established Government in all Bodies Politick, especially to that of this in our Kingdom, which is and hath been always ta∣ken for a Kingdom, properly so called, that is, for a Monarchy, or for such a State or Body Politick, wherein the Soveraignty or Supremacy of power is in One only. Mr. Baxter, in order to justifying of the late The Soveraign∣ty, he saith, divi∣ded betwixt King and Par∣liament, and his Reasons to prove it. Rebellion, tells us, it is no Monarchy, because the Soveraignty is not in one only, namely not in the King alone, but divided betwixt the King and the two Houses of Parliament; which he endeavours to prove, First, by the Testimony of both Parties prin∣cipally concerned in it; namely, the Parliaments affirming, and the King's owning and acknow∣ledging of it.
And (2dly) by Reason or by Arguments drawn from the Constitution and Practice of the Govern∣ment it self. As to the King's own Acknowledgment, that there is such a division of the Soveraignty betwixt Of his first Proof. Him and the Lords and Commons, I shall speak of it hereafter. And as to the Parliaments affirm∣ing of it (which he only saith they do and have done without naming any time when, or what Parliaments they were that did so) I have answer∣ed at large already, and that not only negatively by denying that any Parliament properly so called, that is, consisting of King, Lords and Commons, did ever affirm or can in reason be supposed ever to have affirmed any such thing; but positively also, that all Parliaments even those that are improper∣ly so called, I mean the Body without the Head, or as the two Houses only are called the Parlia∣ment, even in this notion I say the Parliament hath The Parliament hath always acknowledg'd the King their Soveraign. always in all Addresses that have been made to the King by either of the Houses severally, or by both Houses joyntly, acknowledged the King to be their Soveraign, and themselves to be his hum∣ble and loyal Subjects; and that when they Ad∣dress themselves to Him not as so many several single Persons, or every one in his Personal capa∣city, but as in their representative or Parliamen∣tary capacity, as they were one or both of the two Houses; and how they be Soveraigns and Subjects, or partly Soveraigns and partly Subjects in one and the same notion, or under one and the same ca∣pacity, is too subtil and airy a speculation for me to comprehend. But that which I did then and
do now principally insist upon for proof of the Parliaments acknowledgments of the King's So∣veraignty, or that the Soveraignty here in this Kingdom is in the King alone, and not in the King, Lords and Commons joyntly, as Mr. Baxter would have it, is the Oath of Supremacy, The Oath of Supremacy proves it. whereby in as positive and as plain words as can be devised, several Parliaments (properly so called) have declared and caused it to be sworn that the King is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm and of all other his Highnesses Domini∣ons and Countries, as well in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things and causes as Temporal. Which I repeat again, because (which I did not observe before) the Parliament by enjoyning Men to swear that the King is the only Supreme Gover∣nour in Spirituals as well as Temporals, seems to sup∣pose or to take it for granted, that there were none that pretended to be the Kings Subjects, but would willingly and readily acknowledg the King to be the only Supreme Governour in Temporals, and consequently that there is no division of the Soveraignty betwixt the King and the Parliament, or betwixt the King, Lords and Commons. For it is the Soveraignty in Temporals only that Mr. Baxter would have to be so divided; for as to the Soveraignty in Ecclesiastical things or causes, I believe if Mr. Baxter would tell us what lies at the bottom of his heart, we should find that he thinks neither King nor Parliament have any thing to do with it; and consequently that there can be no division of that betwixt them. But of this we shall have occasion to speak more here∣after.
Now therefore having postponed the considera∣tion of what Mr. Baxter infers for proof of his pretended Division of the Soveraignty betwixt the King and Parliament from the Kings own concessions; I proceed to the examination of the Reasons he gives to prove this Kingdom to be no Monarchy, or that the Soveraignty thereof is not His second Proof from the Legislative power. in one only. Which reasons of his are all of them reducible to this one of the Legislative power, or the power of making and repealing Laws for the whole Nation, which (as he saith) is not only a part but a principal part of the Soveraignty; and therefore if this be not in the King alone, but di∣vided between the King and Parliament, as Mr. Baxter saith it is, the Soveraignty cannot be in the King alone, but must be divided betwixt the King and Parliament. CHAP. II. What is meant by the word Parliament. The two Houses being called together and dismissed at the Kings pleasure, are not co-ordinate or sharers with him in the Soveraignty. NOW this being the summ and substance of all Mr. Baxter hath said to prove the War made by the Parliament against the King was a
just War and no Rebellion, and whereon he so con∣fidently relies, that he is ready, he saith, to offer his Head to Justice if it can be solidly confuted, either as to the Truth of it, or as to the Inference he makes from it; we will therefore examine, First, whether the Hypothesis, namely that the Legislative Power is divided betwixt the King and the Parliament, be true or no. And 2dly, supposing, not granting it to be so; whether he doth rightly infer from thence, that therefore the War made by the Parliament against the King was a just War and no Rebellion. First then as to the Hypothesis it self, so far as The Legislative power solely in the King. it supposeth the Legislative Power to be a part and principal part of the Soveraignty, I grant it to be true; but as it supposeth the Legislative power to be partly in the King and partly in the Parliament, so as that the Laws are made by the Parliament as well as by the King, I affirm it to be false. For proving of which Assertion of mine, and consequently for disproving the contrary Asserti∣on of Mr. Baxters, We are first to agree what is meant by the word Parliament. 2dly, How that which is meant by the word Parliament comes to be a Parliament, or whence it hath its being what it is, and its meeting when it does meet, and its continuance after they are met: 3dly, What they do or legally can do in order to Law-making whilst they sit.
First then as to what is meant by the word By Parliament is meant, not King, Lords & Commons; Parliament in this Hypothesis, it cannot be the King, Lords and Commons, because the Legislative power which is supposed to be divided betwixt the King and the Parliament cannot be supposed to be divided betwixt the King and the King, as it must be if it be divided betwixt the King and the Par∣liament, as the Parliament signifies the King, Lords and Commons; and therefore by the word Parlia∣ment here must needs be meant the Lords and Com∣mons but Lords and Commons, that is, the two Hou∣ses. only, or the two Houses, as they make up that Body whereof the King is the Head. And in this sence the word Parliament is always taken, when the King and Parliament are spoken of to∣gether, as distinct from one another; as when the King is said to call, or prorogue, or dissolve the Parliament, or the Parliament to make Addres∣ses, or to grant Subsidies to the King. And in this sence I think Mr. Baxter would be thought to understand the word Parliament, when he saith the Legislative power is divided betwixt the King and Parliament, that is, betwixt the King and the two Houses of Parliament. Though there be many passages in this Book of his Holy Common-Wealth, Mr. B. by Par∣liament often understands the House of Com∣mons, where speaking of the Parliament, he must needs mean the House of Commons exclusively to the House of Lords; as when he tells us the Par∣liament is to be believed by the People, because they are the Peoples Representatives and Trustees, where by Parliament must needs be meant the House of Commons only, they and not the House of Lords being the Representatives and the Tru∣stees of the Commons. And so again when he
saith the King is obliged to pass such Laws quas Vulgus elegerit, which the People or Commonal∣ty shall make choice of; he must needs mean that the King must needs pass such Laws as the House of Commons will have him to pass; so that the whole Legislative power is to be in the House of and in effect lodges the whole Legislative po∣wer in them. Commons alone exclusively to the Lords as well as to the King, and to the King as well as to the Lords; the King being only to declare that to be Law, which the House of Commons without the concurrence of the Lords had voted to be so; and this we saw and felt it come to at last; and that it may not come to it again (for it seems to be furiously driving that way) it concerns the Lords as well as the King to consider. But I will not in this debate take advantage of this notion of a Parliament, I mean as it is often taken by Mr. Baxter for the House of Commons only; but I will consider it, as it is taken for both Houses, and that not only severally but as in conjunction with one another. And as thus considered, the next Inquiry is, how they come to be so, or whence they have How the two Houses come to be a Parlia∣ment. their Parliamentary existence and continuance, I mean their being and continuing to be two Hou∣ses of Parliament; and consequently whence they have the power of doing what they do, or legally can do, whilst they are two Houses. If the Lords Temporal say they are of the Lords House by their Birth-rights, because they are Lords; and the Lords Spiritual say they are of the House of Lords, because they are Representatives of the Clergy, or because they are Bishops: I
answer it is true indeed they are so, or have a right to be so, when there is a House of Lords, because they are constituting parts or members of it; but neither of them can be actually and existingly of the House of Lords, before there is a House of Lords, and there is not, nor cannot be actually a House of Lords, or any existence of such an House, until the King summons both the The Lords sum∣moned by the King. Lords Temporal and the Lords Spiritual to come and meet together at such a time, in such a place; and when upon such a summons, or by virtue of the King's command, they do come and meet together at such a time, in such a place appointed, and then and not till then they are a House of Lords. The like may be said as to the House of Commons. For if the Knights and Bur∣gesses shall say when they are met, that they are the House of Commons, because they are chosen The Commons chosen by the People, with the King's leave. by the People to be their Representatives; 'tis true they are so; but who gave the People leave or power to choose them to be their Represen∣tatives, or to be that Body which we call the House of Commons? Was it not the King? could the People have done it without the King's Au∣thority inabling them to do it, or could they refuse to do it when he commanded them to do it? If not; then though the choice of those that are to be of the House of Commons be from the People, yet the Peoples power to choose them being from the King, it is that which makes them after they are chosen to be the House of Commons when they meet together; which must be when and where the King pleaseth:
So that after they be chosen by the People to be the House of Commons, or to be the representative body of the People; yet are they not the House of Commons, nor the representative body of the People, till they meet at the time and in the place by the King appointed, at least so many of them as are agreed on to be sufficient to make them act as a House, or in their representative capacity. The like in proportion may be said of the House of Lords also. So that both Houses of Parliament The King gives the Parliament its being and continuance, as he pleaseth. (as such) have no existence or being at all until the King gives it them by calling them together, nor continuance in being any longer than he plea∣seth to continue them. For as when he saith unto them, Come, they must come; so when he saith unto them, Go, they must go, according to the le∣gal and established Constitution of our Govern∣ment. Which being so, I wonder how the two Houses The two Houses therefore, not co-ordinate, nor sharers in the Soveraignty, with the King. can be said to be co-ordinate with the King, or how the Soveraignty can be said to be divided be∣twixt the King and the two Houses, when neither of them are Houses till he makes them to be so, nor continue to be Houses any longer than he will have them to do so. Indeed if the two Hou∣ses of Parliament were Bodies that were always in being as the Senate of Rome was, and as the Senates of Venice and Genoa now are; or such as might assemble and meet together, when and as often as they pleased, and continue together as long as they pleased, as the States of Holland may and do now; and as Grotius tells us they might Vid. Grotium de Antiquitate Reipub. Ba∣tavicae. and did even then, when they had Kings, such
he means as were called Kings, but were no more Kings indeed than those of Sparta were, as Gro∣tius himself tells us in the same place; if I say our two Houses of Parliament were such a Senate as were always in being, or might be so when they pleased, and continue so as long as they plea∣sed, there might perhaps be some pretence for their having some part in the Soveraignty. But when they have no being at all till the King gives it them by calling them together, and are redu∣cible to what they were before, that is, to no be∣ing again, whensoever he pleaseth to dismiss them; I cannot imagine in what sence the two Houses of Parliament can be said, either to be Co-ordinate with the King, or to have any share in the Soveraignty or Kingly power. I am sure that according to the established constitution of our Government, as they have not yet, so it is and always will be in the Kings power to prevent their Usurpation of any such power, (as long I mean as he keeps the power of calling and dis∣missing, that is, of making and unmaking them in his own hands) and confequently of acting any thing in their Parliamentary capacity to the prejudice of the Crown or of the People: I say to the prejudice of the Crown, or of the People; be∣cause What hurts the Crown, hurts the People. what is really prejudicial to the Crown, is really prejudicial to the People also; howsoever or by whomsoever the People may be and are often made to believe otherwise, and are not to be convinced of their error but by their feeling only.
CHAP. III. The Legislative power solely in the King. How far the Parliament concerned in making Laws. Dr. Sanderson's judgment of it. Mr. B. ascribes the whole Soveraignty to the Ʋsurpers, upon the Kings loss of his Part, against a Thests of his own. BUT although it be the King's Summons of them or calling of them together that makes them to be the two Houses, and conse∣quently that inables them to act as the two Hou∣ses, or in their Parliamentary capacity; and al∣though they cease to be two Houses, or to have any power to act in a Parliamentary capacity, when the King pleaseth to dismiss them: yet be∣cause Mr. Baxter may say, that as long as they are two Houses, or as long as the King permits them to sit together in their Parliamentary capa∣city, they have a Legislative power or right of The Legislative power a branch of Soveraignty. making Laws together with the King for the whole Kingdom, and consequently are partakers of the Soveraignty with the King also, the ma∣king of Laws for the whole Nation being un∣doubtedly one of the Essentials of the Soveraign∣ty or supreme power. We are therefore in the How far the two Houses con∣cerned in that. 3d. place to inquire, what the two Houses do or legally can do as to the making of our Laws, and whether that be enough to entitle them to be
properly called Legislators, or if I may so speak Collegislators with the King. All that ever I heard that either of the two Houses severally, or both of them joyntly could legally do in order to Law-making, is but the fra∣ming and proposing or offering unto the King such Bills or materials as they think fit to be made Laws by the King, if he think them fit to They only pro∣pose Bills. be made Laws also. Here is the two Houses Non∣ultra, hitherto they may go but no further: And sure it is not the proposing of any thing to be made a Law, that is the making of a Law, or that can prove the Proposers to be the Law-ma∣kers; especially if he to whom they propose it may choose whether he will make it a Law or no; as there was never any doubt made but he might before the rebellious Parliament in the late Kings time broached the contrary, together with many other Anti-monarchical Paradoxes, to justifie their own Anti-monarchical and rebellious Practices, against the known Laws, Customs and Constitu∣tions of this Kingdom; of which this was one of the most essential, that as the Houses had a liberty to pass and propose Bills to the King; so the King might as he saw cause or thought fit, make or not make them to be or not to be Laws, The Royal As∣sent makes them Laws. by giving or not giving his Royal assent unto them. For it is the Kings Fiat or the stamp of Royal Authority upon them that makes those Bills to become Laws, obliging all the Kings Sub∣jects to the obedience of them, or for non-obedi∣ence to the Penalties appointed by them; So that the Bills are but the materia ex quâ, the
matter out of which Laws may be made; but the forma per quam, the formalis ratio, or intrin∣secal and specifical form, by which what were before Bills, become Laws, is the obliging power by giving them an ob∣liging power. which the King by his Fiat breaths into them, as God doth the Soul into the Body, to make it a living and a rational Creature. And therefore Mr. Baxter, who (being so Metaphysical a man as he is) as he must needs know that it is forma or causa formalis, the form or formal cause, per quam res est quod est, which makes every thing to be what it is; must needs know too, and (if he have any ingenuity) confess likewise that from whence and whence only the Laws have their ob∣liging power (which is formalis ratio Legis, that which makes Law to be Law) from thence and thence only those Laws must have their being also; and consequently if it be the King's Fiat The King alone our Lawmaker. only that gives those Bills, that are by the two Houses presented to him, an obliging power over the whole Nation, thereby making them of Bills to become Laws, the King and none but the King must needs be the sole efficient or maker of those Laws. For as Forma est causa per quam res est quod est, so Efficiens est causa à quâ res est quod est, As the Form is the cause by which the thing is what it is; so the Efficient is the cause from which the thing is what it is; by introducing that form, which makes it to be what it is. If therefore the Law hath its obliging power (which is its form, or that which makes it to be Law) from the King and the King only, the King and the King only must needs be the efficient and sole ef∣ficient
cause of Law, and consequently the whole Legislative power must needs be in him only: un∣less Mr. Baxter can prove that the two Houses of Parliament can of themselves, and by their own Authority only, make their Bills to be Laws, or at least that they joyn with the King in making them to be so. For if it be the Kings own arbi∣trary consent only which makes that to be a Law which was no Law before he consented to it, then must it needs be confessed that the King is the sole efficient of all Law, and consequently the only Law∣giver in his own Kingdom, according to the de∣termination of the very learned, judicious and truly pious, and conscientious Casuist Doctor Sanderson Bishop of Lincoln, who in his Le∣cture Dr. Sandersons judgment in the case. de Legum humanarum causâ efficiente, speak∣ing of our King, hath these very weighty and re∣markable words. Cùm illa sola censenda sit cujus∣que rei causa efficiens principalis & sufficiens, quae per se immediatè producit & in materiam praeparatam introducit eam formam, quae illi rei dat nomen & esse, etsi ad productionem istius effectûs alia etiam concurrere oporteat, vel antecedere potiùs, ad praevias dispositiones, quò materia ad recipiendam formam ab agente intentam aptior reddatur, omninò constat, quot∣cunque demùm ea sint quae ad legem recte constituen∣dam antecedenter requiruntur, voluntatem tamen principis (ex cujus unius arbitratu & jussione omnes Legum Rogationes aut ratae habentur aut irritae) esse solam & adaequatam publicarum Legum efficientem causam. Seeing (saith he) that is to be held the principal efficient and sufficient cause of every thing which of it self and immediately produ∣ceth
and introduceth into the matter prepared for it, that form which giveth name and being to that thing, though for the producing of that effect, other things also must concur or rather precede, as previous dispositions to make the matter fitter to receive the form intended by the Agent to be introduced into it; it is certain for all that (how many soever the things are that are antecedently requisite for the constitu∣ting of the Law) the Will of the Prince, on whose alone arbitrary consent or dissent the ratifying or rejecting of such Laws as are tendred unto him doth depend, is the sole and adequate effi∣cient cause of all publick Laws. This I say was the judgment of that very lear∣ned, His Commen∣dation for an excellent Ca∣suist. pious and very judicious Casuist Dr. Sander∣son, concerning the only proper adequate subject of the Legislative power here in England, who was Professor of Casuistical Divinity in the University of Oxford, as long as the Rebellious Parliament would suffer him to be so; and who would in all probability (if he might have been suffered to have continued some few years longer) have left us a truer and more exact and compleat body of Casuistical Divinity than any the World hath been so happy as to see yet, and in which the World hath more need to be truly and thoroughly instru∣cted, in order to peace here and happiness here∣after, than in any other part either of Polemical or Dogmatical Divinity, the Essentials of the Creed excepted only. But that very reason it was for which the Ʋsurpers of the Regal power in those times would not suffer so vigorously an
Opposer, and so strongly and clearly a Convincer of that Trayterous and Tyrannical Ʋsurpation of theirs to be a publick Professor and Standard of that truth, which they were concern'd the People should be kept ignorant of, or made to believe the contrary, as they were by such Preachers, as they who could not endure sound Doctrine heaped up 1 Ep. Tim. Cap. 4. v. 3. unto themselves after their own Lusts; and by such Casuists and Writers of Political Aphorisms (as Mr. Baxter was) whose business it was to make the People believe the Ʋsurpation of an Arbitrary power and Tyranny to be an Holy Common∣wealth; The design of Mr. B.'s Holy Common∣wealth. for such was the Government here, which Mr. Baxter in his Preface to that Book of his, calls the best Government in all the World, af∣firming those that were then the Governours, name∣ly the two Houses of Parliament without the King, not only to have a part of the Supremacy or So∣veraignty, but to have all the Supremacy or whole Soveraignty, and therefore such as whom to resist or depose is forbidden (saith he) to Subjects upon pain of damnation. They are his own words in the be∣fore-cited He intitles the Ʋsurpers to the whole Sove∣raignty; place, which one would think were hardly to be reconciled with what he affirms in the place we are now examining, (viz.) That the Supremacy or Soveraignty is divided betwixt the King and them, and consequently that they have not the Supremacy, but a part of it only. But for answer to this Objection perhaps he will say (as indeed in effect he doth say) that although be∣fore the War betwixt the King and them they had but a part of the Soveraignty only, yet the By the King's having lost his part: King having by force endeavour'd to take their
part from them, and being overcome by them he had lost his own part, which jure belli, by right Vid. H. C. Thes. 145. & 363. of War, did accrue to them, and so they became the Possessors of the whole Soveraignty, though the King was then living. But he had ceased to be King (saith Mr. Baxter) because he had entred in∣to Thes. 368. a state of War with his People, and consequently by Mr. Baxter's Logick had lost his part of the Soveraignty. But who was to have his part of the Soveraignty, (supposing him to be justly de∣prived of it) Those that had the other part of it by whom he was conquered? No, saith Mr. Baxter; for if (saith he) a Prince that hath not And this too against a Thesis of his own. the whole Soveraignty be conquered by a Senate that hath the other part, and that in a just defensive War, that Senate cannot assume the whole Soveraignty, but Thes. 374. supposeth that Government in specie to remain; and therefore another King must be chosen if the former be incapable. CHAP. IV. Mr. B.'s high strain in commending those for the best Governors in all the World, whom yet he owns to be Intruders and Ʋsurpers. His compliance with Richard remarkt. His high commendation tax'd and challenged. The Recapitulation. WHat he means by the last words of this Thesis, (viz. Another King must be chosen Mr. B.'s Thesis further exa∣mined. if the former be incapable) I know not, unless he
means, that the former King, though he had lost his part in the Soveraignty, and ceased to be King by being conquered by the Parliament in a just War; yet he might be capable of being King again, if the Parliament thought fit to choose him; which having used him as they had done, Mr. Baxter no doubt wished as heartily, as he thought it likely they would do. But whatsoever Mr. Baxter meant by these last words of this Thesis, it is evident that his meaning in the words before, was that the Parliament by their conquering of the King in defence of their own pretended part of the Soveraignty, did not gain that part which he lost; nor consequently could (as he saith) assume the whole Soveraignty to themselves. But they did assume the whole Soveraignty, even that Parliament did assume it, those Lords and Com∣mons did assume the whole Soveraignty, who, (as Mr. Baxter saith) were the Best Governours in all the World, and such as whom to resist or depose is Who in Mr. B.'s account the best Governours in all the World: forbidden to Subjects on pain of damnation. And why so Mr. Baxter? because (saith he) they had the Supremacy, that is, the whole Soveraignty. But whom doth Mr. Baxter mean by those the best Governours in all the World, and whom all the Subjects of England were forbidden to resist on pain of damnation, because they had the Supreme po∣wer; I mean (saith he) them whom you (speaking See the Preface to the Holy Common∣wealth. to the Souldiers) called the corrupt Majority, or the 143. imprisoned and secluded Members, who as the majority had you know what power, and the remain∣ing Members that now sit again as many of them as are living. Whereby it plainly appears that he
meant the two Houses, or the majority of the two Houses of Parliament in 47. and consequently that they were those that had then the Supreme power; and who, because they had the Supreme power, were on pain of damnation not to be re∣sisted. But how came they by that Supreme Po∣wer? not by having conquered the King, saith Mr. Baxter in that before quoted Thesis; for that, saith he, did not give them a right to more of the Soveraignty than they had before, which was (saith he) but a part of it, neither was that to make any change of the Government in specie, and consequently the Soveraignty was still, (accor∣ding to his Hypothesis) to be in a King, Lords and Commons; and therefore the two Houses of Parlia∣ment or Senate (as he calls them in the aforesaid Thesis) could not assume the whole Soveraignty; where by [could not] he must mean they could not de jure, by right, assume it, that is, they had no right or just title to it. And what are they that assume Soveraignty without any Right or just title to it? some (saith Mr. Baxter) call them Tyrants: Whom yet he owns to be In∣truders and Ʋ∣surpers. but what doth he himself call them? He saith they may be more fitly called (and you must know he loves to speak properly and distinctly) Inva∣ders, Intruders and Ʋsurpers; but are the II. C. p. 86. People bound to obey, or not to resist Invaders, Intruders and Ʋsurpers upon pain of damnation? No, (saith Mr. Baxter) when it is notorious they have no title to govern them, the People are not bound Thesis, 375. to obey them. Now what can be more notorious than that the two Houses had not the Soveraignty, at least not the whole Soveraignty, whilst the
King was alive, and whilst he was acknowledged and treated with by them as their King, as he was at that very time Mr. Baxter saith they had the Supreme Power, and consequently if they had it, (as indeed they had it de facto, in fact) they held it without any title or Right to it, and there∣fore by Mr. Baxter's own confession they had it as Invaders and Ʋsurpers. And if notwithstand∣ing they were Invaders and Ʋsurpers, they were the best Governours in all the World, and not to be His strange shuffling and self-contra∣diction. resisted on pain of damnation, (as Mr. Baxter tells us in one place) then are the People bound to obey notorious Invaders and Ʋsurpers; which in another place he saith they are not; but yet he saith it with such limitations and exceptions, as one may see he leaves a Latitude for any man to submit to any that are in the possession of the Su∣preme Power, whether they have any right to all or any of it, or no; or though they be never so much Invaders or Ʋsurpers of it; as all of them A short ac∣count of those Ʋsurpers. were that succeeded one another from the begin∣ning of the War with the late King until the Restauration of our present Soveraign. As first the two Houses governing arbitrarily and independently whilst the King lived. 2dly, The House of Commons alone after the Kings murder and Martyrdom, assuming to themselves the title of a free State, or Soveraign Common-wealth. 3dly, Cromvel the Father making himself Ma∣ster of all, and of servus servorum, a servant of servants, becoming Dominus Dominantium, a Lord of Lords: of whom Mr. Baxter saith in the same
Preface, That he did prudently, piously and faithfully, Mr. B.'s flat∣tery to Oliver. and to his immortal Honour, exercise the Govern∣ment. 4thly, Cromwel the Son, to whom he saith, he His compliance with Richard. was bound to submit, as set over him by God, and to obey for conscience sake, and to behave himself as a loyal Subject towards him; because, as he saith in the same place, a full and free Parliament hath owned him: Hereby acknowledging, First, That a full and free Parliament, meaning Three Remarks upon it. the two Houses only, may own or disown whom they will to be set over them by God, and conse∣quently whom in conscience they are bound to obey, whether he have an Hereditary Right to it or no: For Cromwel the Son could have no such Right from his Father, neither doth Mr. Baxter pretend he had any such right. 2dly, That without Writs issuing from the King, the People may meet and choose Knights and Burgesses to be their Representatives, and that they that be so chosen make up a full and free House of Commons, as likewise such as the Ʋsurper is pleased to call Lords, though they be no Lords, and have not so much as one Lord truly and pro∣perly so called amongst them, do make up a full and free House of Lords. 3dly, That two such Houses do make up a full and free Parliament. And such a Parliament was that with such a Summoner of it, and such a Head to it (as Cromwel the Son was) which were the Powers that Mr. Baxter saith were last laid by; and of which together with those that were laid by before (he means laid by or deposed by the
Souldiery to whom he addresseth his Preface to his Holy Commonwealth) he hath so excessively His Eulogy of the Ʋsurpers. high an opinion, that he saith Pref. to Holy Com. W. he should with great rejoycings give a thousand thanks to that Man that will acquaint him with one Nation in all the Earth, that hath better Governours in Soveraign Po∣wer (as to Wisdom and Holiness conjunct) than those that have been resisted or deposed in England. Where, by those Powers he so much magnifies that were resisted and deposed here in England, you may be sure he means not the King, nor the Kingly Government, (though that was the only Soveraign Power that was resisted and deposed) but for ought I see, or he saith to the contrary, he may and doth mean all others that successively usurped and exercis'd Soveraign Power both before and after the late Kings death, till his Son's com∣ing in; and consequently not only the two Houses of Parliament before the King's death, but the One House, I mean the House of Commons (pre∣sently after the Kings death; yea and both the Cromwels also, of which the former was resisted, though not deposed, and the latter was both re∣sisted and deposed, together with the several mock-Parliaments in both their times, and the last mock-Parliament of all, which by the admirable con∣duct and courage of that ever to be renowned, and ever to be remembred Souldier and Servant of God, the King and his Country (I mean Gene∣ral MONK) was shatter'd in pieces never to be sodred or re-united, in order to restoring of the Soveraign Power to its only true and right owner, the King. For as for all or for any of
the rest of those Soveraign Powers, as Mr. Baxter calls them, and which he magnifies so much, Mr. B. rebuked for his Extra∣vagance; and his best Gover∣nors challeng'd. they were as far from having any right to Sove∣raign Power, as they were from being the best Governours in all the World, as Mr. Baxter most falsly (and I had almost said most impudently) saith they were. For let him name that which he thinks to have been the best of those Govern∣ments or Governours, betwixt the assuming and usurping of the Soveraign Power by the two Hou∣ses of the long Parliament and the present King's coming home: And I will undertake (as old as I am) if God spare me life and health, to demon∣strate, that they were not only as arrant Traytors and Rebels as ever were in the World, but that in the managery and exercise of their usurped Pow∣er they carried themselves as hypocritically and blasphemously towards God, in the use of his Name and his Ordinances; as insolently, insult∣ingly and barbarously towards their King; not only in their buying and selling and imprisoning of Him, but even in their Addresses to him and treating with Him; and withal as arbitrarily, as despotically, as injuriously and every way as ty∣rannically towards their Fellow-Subjects, in taking away their Goods, their Liberties and their Lives, not only without but against Law, as ever any Governours did (whether justly or unjustly so cal∣led) either in this or any other Nation. But when I say this, I would not be understood to mean what I say, of all that sate in both or ei∣ther All that slaid and sate in Par∣liament, not censured. of the two Houses of Parliament, that made War against the King; for I do verily believe
there were many (and I know there were some) both of the Lords and Commons, that after the King was driven away, stayed and sate in both Houses, and did what they could to hinder the rebellious and outragious proceedings of the factious Party, which was predominant in the one House as well as in the other. But the Tyde was too strong, and those good Men too few to stemm the current, or to prevent the overflowing of it, as it did, over all the banks and boundaries of Obedience to the Laws, as well as of Allegiance to the King; And therefore, as Mr. Baxter, when he tells us the two Houses of Parliament were the best Go∣vernours in all the World, he tells us too, that by the two Houses he means the Majority of the two Houses; so when I say they were Ʋsurpers and Traytors and Rebels, and as ill Governours or Ma∣nagers of their usurped power, as ever were be∣fore them in this or in any other Kingdom, I mean the Majority of those two Houses only: Which it was not my purpose to say so much of, as I have said at present; but my just indignati∣on at Mr. Baxter's extravagant magnifying such men as they were, hath carried me out of the way I was in; which was to prove that neither those nor any other two Houses of Parliament can properly and truly be said to share with the King in the Soveraignty or Supreme Power, upon the account of theirs as well as the Kings Legi∣slative The Recapitu∣lation of the Legislative po∣wer being only in the King. Power in making Laws for the whole Kingdom; which (as I have already proved) is the Kings Act only by making Bills to be Laws by his FIAT or Assent to them, thereby giving
them that enlivening and obliging power, which they had not before, and which makes them to be Laws, and this being solely the King's Act without any Act of either or both of the Houses in conjunction with it, it is the King alone that makes the Law, or that makes that to be a Law which was not a Law before, how fit soever it might be to be made a Law, whereof the King is the only final Judge also; from whom there lies no appeal to either or both the Houses, so that whatsoever Preparatory Act or Acts of ei∣ther or both Houses may be necessary in order to the making of Laws antecedently to the King's Fiat, yet it is the King's Fiat only that makes them to be Laws, especially, it being at his choice whether he will make them to be Laws or not, after the two Houses have done what legally they can do towards it. CHAP. V. Ʋpon Mr. Baxter's grounds the KING may make Laws, in some Cases, without the consent of the two Houses. Ship-mony justified, upon the same grounds. It is the King's Assent that makes Laws. The Parliaments concurrence, wherein it lies. IF it be objected, that as the two Houses cannot make a Law without the Kings Assent, so nei∣ther An Objection. can the King make a Law without the Con∣sent
of the two Houses; and that therefore the two Houses as well as the King are the Law-makers. For answer hereunto, I will not say as Mr. Mr. B.'s opini∣on, that a So∣veraign, though limited by com∣pact, may act for the Peoples safety against their consent. Baxter seems to say, when he puts the Question, whether if the People will not consent to that which is necessary for their own Preservation, the Soveraign may not do it against their wills? and answers, he may do it though he be not an absolute but a limited Soveraign, and limited by Covenant, that is, (as he expresseth himself in other places) by an antecedent compact with the People, when they chose or admitted him to be their Soveraign; and consequently, that even such a Soveraign notwithstanding such a compact (as for instance, that he will not, nor shall not make any Law without the Nobilities, and Peoples consent) may of himself and without their con∣sents make such a Law, as is necessary for their And why not make Laws then for that end, without their consent? Preservation, or that he judgeth to be so; for in this case he is, and of necessity must be the only Judge whether it be necessary for their Pre∣servation or no; and therefore if he judge it to be so, he may according to Mr. Baxter's opinion, not withstanding any compact or Constitution to the contrary, make such a Law not only without, but against their consents, (as Mr. Baxter words it) because (saith he) that Soveraign is God's Offi∣cer His reason for that opinion. for the ends of Government, and therefore can∣not lawfully be restrained by the People from preser∣ving them; because the People have no power above God, and because it is still to be supposed that the People desire their own Preservation, and therefore mistakingly resist the means which else they would v. p. 119. Thes. 120.
consent to. This is one of Mr. Baxter's Political Aphorisms; which if it be true, my Answer to the aforesaid Objection might be this, That al∣though the Parliament, or the two Houses of Par∣liament The Answer according to that Opinion. cannot make any Laws without the Kings consent, yet the King may make Laws without their consent in some cases; namely, when the publick safety is concerned that such a Law or such Laws should be made, though one or both of the Houses will not consent to it. In such a Case I say (not according to mine own but Mr. Baxter's opinion) such a Law or such Laws may be made by the King without, nay, against the consent of both Houses; and à paritate rationis, for the same cause and by the like reason, Mony may be raised; if without raising of Mony, a Naval Force (for example) as may be sufficient for the preservation of the Kingdom from immi∣nent dangers by a foreign Invasion cannot be had; and then (according to Mr. Baxter's Hypothesis) Ship-Money justified, upon Mr. B.'s grounds. what can be said against raising of Ship-money by the late King? he being the Judge of the greatness and imminency of the danger, and that it could not stay for a Parliamentary Supply, there being no Parliament then sitting, and the greatest Extraparliamentary Judicatory of the Nation ha∣ving been advis'd with by the King, and given him their opinions that he might legally do what he did; certainly these things considered, if Mr. Baxter's Aphorism be true, the King's raising or indeavouring to raise Ship-Mony without consent of Parliament, was not so hainous a violation of the legal constitution, which he was obliged or
had obliged himself to govern by (especially after it was by his consent condemned in Parliament) as to be made (as it is by Mr. Baxter) one of the principal causes of his siding with the Parliament in Rebellion against the King. For if the King were maximè dignus istâ contumeliâ, indignus ille∣qui faceret tamen; if he did never so much deserve this affront, yet it did not become Mr. Baxter to give it him: not only because by the highest Ju∣dicature then in being it was declared to be legal; but because according to Mr. Baxter's own judg∣ment declared in this Aphorism, the King might have done it supposing it necessary for the Pre∣servation of the publick, though it had not been legal. But this shall not be my Answer to the aforesaid Objection. I remember what I have said before The Bishop's own answer. upon another Occasion, (viz.) that A mischief is better than an Inconvenience; which I think is a maxime of our Law, and the meaning of it is (as I conceive) that it is better to run the hazard of a very great Evil, which possibly may, but is very unlikely will, befall us, than for the avoiding or preventing of it to make use of such a Remedy, as frequently may be and probably will be made use of, when there is no such Occasion for it or need of it. And so that which was used as a Remedy for the present, may prove a Malady for the future, in the Consequence of it. And there∣fore for answer to the aforesaid objection, I will not say that the King can make Laws to oblige the whole Nation without the consent of both Houses of Parliament, though never so much for
the publick good, or never so necessary for the preservation of the whole Kingdom: but this I will say, that though such Laws cannot be made without their consent; yet it is not they, nor Though Laws are not made without the Peoples consent in Parliament, yet that consent doth not make them Laws. their consenting to them that makes them to be Laws. For then either the Bills would be Laws assoon as they were passed by both Houses, or the being passed by the two Houses must oblige the King to pass them also; but neither of these is true, according to the legal and fundamental constitution of our Government; as appears not only by the constant Practice to the contrary, but by the frequent and importunate Addresses made unto the late King by the two Houses of the rebellious Parliament, to make their Ordinan∣ces Ordinances of themselves not Laws. to be Laws by his consent to them; which cer∣tainly being so high as they were then, they would never have done, if they had thought that either their Ordinances were Laws, or had the Obliga∣tory power of Laws before the King gave it to them; or that he might not if he would, refuse to give it. So that it being not only the Kings consent, but his free, arbitrary and voluntary The King's As∣sent gives being to the Laws. consent that gives being to all Laws, the Legisla∣tive Power (properly so called) must needs be in the King and in the King only. The Legislative Power I say properly so called, I mean the very making of that to be Law which is Law, abstra∣cting from whatsoever it is that goes before, or that follows after it is made; for certainly neither of them can be essential to the making of it, and yet both of them may be very requisite for the making of the Laws to be such as may the more
willingly be obeyed by the People. Now by what goes before the making of Laws here with How the two Houses concur to the making of Laws. us, I mean the considering, debating and agree∣ing of both Houses what shall be proposed to the King by them, to be by him made to be Laws; and by what follows after the King by his Le Roy le veult hath made them Laws, I mean the solemn Preface or Preamble to them, whereby it is declared that there was a concurrence of the Lords and Commons to the making or enacting of them: because the subject matter of them was prepared and agreed on by the Lords and Com∣mons, and then and not till then proposed to the King by them to be made Laws by him; So that the subject matter of our Laws is and always must be from the two Houses, or at least from their The matter of the Laws from the Parliament, the Form from the King. agreement and consenting to it. And in this respect it is, that they may be said to concur to the making of our Laws, though they do not make them. For it is (as I said before) not the Matter, ex quâ res est, out of which a thing is made, which is prepared and proposed by the Houses, but the Form, per quam res est, by which a thing is what it is, which is wholly from the King, that makes what the Houses propose to him to be made a Law, to be a Law; which al∣though he may do or refuse to do as he pleaseth, yet because he can make nothing to be Law, but what by the Agreement of both Houses is pro∣pos'd to him to be made a Law by him; and consequently though our Laws are not nor can∣not be made by them, yet they are not nor cannot be made without them neither; therefore I say
they do concur to the making of them, though they do not make them. They concur to the ma∣king of them, because the Legislative matter, or the matter, whereof Laws are made and must be made, is from them; but they do not make them, because the form, whereby they are made to be what they are, is not at all from them, but solely and wholly from the King; and consequently he is the sole efficient or maker of them. And yet because he cannot make them but of Why the Laws said to be en∣acted by King, Lords & Com∣mons. such materials as are by the two Houses prepared and proposed unto him, therefore they are said in the common and modern stile to be enacted not by the King only, but by the King, Lords, and Commons, that is, by the King and the two Houses also, to the end that the People who are to be governed by them may (as I said before) the more willingly submit to them, when they know that although they are called the Kings Laws, as being made by him; yet the materials whereof they were made were first devised, debated, digested and agreed on, and then suggested to the King, not only by the Lords, but by the House of Com∣mons also, that is, by their own Representatives and Trustees, and consequently in effect by their own selves; when they know this, I say, they must needs be the more willing to submit to them.
CHAP. VI. The Preface of our Laws doth not prove the Legisla∣tive Power to be in the Parliament. The Old stile of enacting Laws why changed by Henry the VIII. and why since resumed. AND this, and no more than this, is the meaning of the modern form of prefacing The Modern stile of enact∣ing Laws. our Laws and Statutes which we call Acts of Par∣liament; when they are said to be enacted by the King, Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, and by the Authority of the same; which I call the modern stile, because antiently it was otherwise. And therefore Mr. Baxter laying so much stress (as he doth) upon this form of words to prove the Legislative Power, and consequently a princi∣pal branch of the Soveraignty, to be partly in the Parliament (meaning the two Houses of Parlia∣ment) doth well and wisely to say that he will not run to Records; for he knows (if he know any H. C. p. 46. thing in that kind) that this was not the stile that was anciently used in Prefacing the Acts or Sta∣tutes made by our Kings in Parliament; Ab initio non fuit sic, from the beginning it was not so. For from the first of our Parliaments (record∣ed by Poulton) which was in the 9th. of Hen. III. to the 15th. of Hen. VIII. this stile of Be it enact∣ed by the King, Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
was never used; but during all that long Inter∣val of Eleven Kings Raigns, and the very many several Parliaments held by them, the making, ordaining and passing of Laws, was in the Kings The Antient stile or form. name only, sometime with this addition, by or with the Advice and consent of his Bishops, Earls, Barons, &c. without naming the Commons: and sometimes by the advice of His Bishops, Earls, Ba∣rons, &c. at the request of the Commonalty, or at the special request of the Commons; and sometimes with consent of the Commons as well as of the Lords. But still and always the making or enacting of the Laws is said to be by the King alone; some∣times in these words, We of Our meer free will have given and granted, which is the stile of Magna Charta, or the great Charter it self; sometimes in these, The King willeth and commandeth; and sometimes in these, It is by the King made, provided and or∣dained. This I say was the stile all along, which was used in passing of Laws or Acts of Parliament until the 15th. of Hen. VIII. for about 300. years. And then indeed it began to be changed from, Be it When the change began. Enacted by the King, with the advice and consent of the Lords and Commons, to Be it enacted by the King, Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons; but not constantly. For in the very next King's time, his very first Act of Parlia∣ment The Old stile resumed after∣ward. Cap. 1. runs in the old stile, (viz.) Be it en∣acted by the Kings Highness with the assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Com∣mons. And again in the same Parliament, Cap. 4.
it is said that at the humble Petition and suit of the Lords and Commons in that Parliament assembled, the King did declare, ordain and enact by the Assent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and of the Com∣mons, &c. In the same old stile likewise runs the first Act of Queen Mary, (viz.) Be it ordained and en∣acted by the Queen our Soveraign Lady; with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and of the Commons, &c. The like we find in the Raign of Queen Eliza∣beth, as may be seen in the Act of Ʋniformity made by Her, and prefixed in our Common-Prayer-Book to another Act of the same kind made by our present King. For in that of Queen Elizabeth the stile is, Be it enacted by the Queens Highness, with the consent of the Lords and Commons in this Parliament assembled, &c. And in that of our present King it is, Be it enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by the advice and with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and of the Commons in this Parliament assembled, &c. So that the first of the two Proofs Mr. Baxter alledgeth for the Legislative power in the Parlia∣ment, Mr. B.'s Argu∣ment for the Legislative po∣wer in the Par∣liament from the Preface of our Laws, un∣conclusive. as well as in the King, and consequently their participating with him in the Soveraignty, is not so convincingly conclusive from the stile used in the Preface to Acts of Parliament, as he would have it thought to be; but that it may without immodesty be contradicted, though he tells Holy Com. p. 462. us it cannot; because, saith he, the Laws expresly speak their Authority, when they say: Be it enacted
by the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament and by the Authority of the same. It is not (saith he) upon their Petition or Proposal only, but by them or by their Authority. But did the Laws anciently speak thus at all? or do all of them speak thus All the Ancient and several Modern Instan∣ces against him. in all our modern and later Acts? I think I have given him Instances of both sorts to the contra∣ry; and such and so many Instances as must car∣ry the Question, if it be to be decided by the speaking of the Laws, either in regard of their Antiquity or Plurality. For (as I said before) all Laws made before Hen. VIII. speak and speak expresly the King, and none but the King, to be the maker of them; as may appear by the Instan∣ces before given, and of many more that might have been given, even as many more as there were Acts of Parliament during the Reigns of so many Kings for 300. years; during which time I cannot find so much as one single instance of any Law which is said to be enacted by King, Lords and Commons, but by the King, with the advice and con∣sent of the Lords and Commons, when most is as∣cribed to them, I mean to the Commons; for some∣times it is upon the request, and sometimes upon the humble Petition of the Commons, and with the ad∣vice and consent of the Lords, that the Law is said to be enacted by the King. So that if (as I said before) the question of who are the Law-makers be to be decided by the speaking of the Laws themselves (as Mr. Baxter calls it) as either they are more venerable for Antiquity, or considerable for Plurality, the King and none but the King must be acknowledged to be the Enacter or the maker of them.
And truly one would think that those Laws that are most ancient, and consequently nearest in time to the first Institution of Parliaments, though they were not the most in number, were most to be credited for speaking most properly of who they were that made them then, and consequent∣ly who it is that makes them now. Unless Mr. Baxter will say it was the King, and King alone indeed that made the Laws, in Parliament then; but it is the King, Lords and Commons, or the King and Parliament that makes them now; and conse∣quently that the King is not so much a King now as He was then, and that the constitution of the Kingdom it self is changed from Monarchical to Aristocratical. But then I must ask him by whom and when this great change was made? Was it by him that brought in this new stile of, Be it en∣acted by the King, Lords and Commons, &c. That was Hen. the VIII. who was not a Man likely to Why Henry the VIII. chan∣ged the Old stile. give away any of his Authority, or to part with any part of his Soveraignty to his own Subjects, who rescued it from the Popes incroachments: And yet perhaps even He meaning to make use of the Parliament for the countenancing whatever he had a mind to do, though never so extravagant in it self, though never so offensive to Foreign Princes his Allies, or never so injurious to his own Children, because he thought it would be serviceable to his own ends, (after he had forced the two Houses to consent to what he listed to enact) to joyn them with himself in the enacting of it, as well as by assenting to it, to make it so much the more plausible, or at least so much the
less grievous unto the People. Otherwise it is most certain that never any King of England after the making of Magna Charta, reigned so despoti∣cally and arbitrarily as he did; or whom the two His meaning in it could not be, to part with any of his So∣veraignty. Houses of Parliament stood so much in awe of, as they did of Him: as appears by his making them consent to the doing and undoing, to the enact∣ing and repealing of whatsoever he would have to be done or undone, to be enacted or repealed. And therefore it is not to be imagined that such a King as he was did mean by changing of the stile, to lessen the Legislative Power it self, which was in his Predecessors, by admitting those, whom he used as he did, the two Houses of Parliament, to a participation of any the least degree of Sove∣raignty. And as he never meant to do so, so they, Nor was it so understood, by either King or Parliament. the two Houses of Parliament, did not then, or ever since, (for ought I ever heard) understand that to be the meaning of the Alteration from Be it enacted by the King with the consent of the Lords and Commons, to Be it enacted by the King, Lords and Commons, to signifie that either the Kings power, as to the making of Laws, was less or the Parliaments greater than it was before this alteration of stile. For if it had been understood either by the King or Parliament to signifie any such thing; as the King, (especially such a King as Hen. VIII. was) would never have suffered the alteration of the former to the latter; So the two Houses who are jealous enough of their Power and Priviledges would never have suffered the al∣teration of the latter to the former again, (as it
was altered by King Edward, Queen Mary and Queen Elizabeth, King Henry's three immediate Successors; and as it is altered by our present King in the Act of Ʋniformity.) For as the alte∣ration of the former to the latter could not have been made without the Kings, so the alteration of the latter to the former, could not have been made without the consent of the two Houses neither. And therefore I verily believe that if any thing Most likely it was to please the People. at all was meant by the alteration of the former stile to the latter, it was only ad faciendum Popu∣lum, to gain the People, that the People might more willingly receive and submit to the Laws, when they were made, (especially such of them as might seem to pinch them in their Purses) when they were said to be enacted by the Lords and Commons, or by the Lords and their Repre∣sentatives, and consequently by themselves, as well as by the King; for Volentibus non fit inju∣ria, where there is consent, there is no injury. And yet again lest by this alteration of stile, Why the Old stile resumed since. and misinterpretation of it, the Kings Preroga∣tive of being the sole Soveraign, and consequent∣ly the sole Law giver, might be thought to be di∣minished, by being communicated to either or both Houses of Parliament; therefore the first, most ancient, and withal the longest continued stile of, Be it enacted by our Soveraign Lord the King, by the advice and with the consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, was present∣ly after the first alteration of it resumed by the three next succeeding Princes; as it hath been
also now of late by our present Soveraign, and by all of them with the consent of the Lords and Commons thereunto. CHAP. VII. The Laws enacted by the Authority of Parliament, in what sense. Why called Acts of Parliament. They provide the Matter of the Laws, the King gives the Form. BUT withal, (will Mr. Baxter perhaps say) with this Addition, and by the Authority An Objection. of the same; that is, by the Authority of the Par∣liament: so that according to this former stile, our Laws are said to be made and enacted by the Au∣thority of the Parliament, and consequently by the Authority of the two Houses, of Lords and Com∣mons, as well as by the Kings. For answer whereunto I might say in the first place, that it was not till after 200. Years from the first Parliament, that we read of in our Book of Statutes, namely, not until the Raign of Henry Those words, And by the Authority of the same, when added, and why. the VI. who owed his Title (such as it was) to the Parliament, and to the Parliament (as it sig∣nifies the two Houses only) without the King; for by the Authority of such a Parliament it was, (that is, of a Body without a Head) that Henry
Bullingbrook was made King, Richard the Second's surrender being neither voluntary, nor lawful, if it had been voluntary, as was acknowledged by the two Houses themselves, when Richard Duke of York claimed the Crown, as the right Heir to it; thereby acknowledging likewise that although they had de facto, yet they could not de jure, ex∣clude the right Heir. Howsoever their Autho∣rity being the only Title which the (then) pre∣sent King had and held the Crown by, as having not the courage either of his Grandfather or his Father to claim it by Conquest, and hold it by force, as they did; He was willing to acknow∣ledge he held it by Authority of Parliament, as the word Parliament is taken for the two Houses of Parliament without a King; And this perhaps might be the reason why at first in that weak King's time to Be it enacted by the King with the consent of Lords and Commons in Parliament as∣sembled, was added, and by the Authority of the same. But this is not the Answer I rely on, because this addition hath been continued ever since; whereas the alteration I before spoke of, did not, as I have already showed. And therefore 2dly to this Objection, that when it The Answer. is said, Be it enacted by our Soveraign Lord the King by the advice and with the consent of the King, Lords and Commons in Parliament assembled, it is said also, and by Authority of the same. My Answer is, that by the word Parliament, is not meant the By Parliament here meant, not Lords & Com∣mons only without the King. two Houses, or the Lords and Commons only, that is the Body without a Head, but the Body with
the Head to direct and govern it, as the natural Head doth the Body natural, and more than so; for the natural Head, though it directs and go∣verns, yet it doth not give its Being to the Body natural, but the Parliamentary Head gives its very Being it self to the Parliamentary body, as being made what it is by his Call, and dissolved into what it was at his pleasure, that is, into so many single and private Persons as they were be∣fore, as I have already shewed. And truly if we mark the words well, By the Authority of the same, cannot be meant the Au∣thority What meant, by the Autho∣rity of the same. of those that are assembled in Parliament, but of the Parliament it self wherein they are as∣sembled, which is as it is commonly truly and properly called the Kings great Council, or the Kings High Court of Parliament. It is by the Au∣thority The Parliament the King's great Council, and High Court. therefore of that great Council, or by the Authority of that High Court, that our Laws are said to be enacted: But whence is it that this great Council, or this High Court hath its Autho∣rity? Their Autho∣rity from the King. Is it not from the King? Is it not from Him that makes them to be such a Council and makes them to be such a Court by his calling and assembling them together? So that to say Be it enacted by the Authority of the Parliament, is no more in effect, than to say Be it enacted by the King in Parliament, or, Be it enacted by the Kings Authority in his great Council, or in his High Court of Parliament. For as all Inferiour Courts are, and Act by the Kings Authority, so is, and doth the High Court of Parliament it self also; for They act in that respect, as other Courts do. as it doth not, nor cannot make it self, no more
than the Inferiour Courts do or can (for if it did or could, it might meet as often, and subsist as long as they listed themselves) so their acting when they are a Court, is as the Actings of other Courts are (if they Act as they ought to Act) in and by the same Authority from whence they have their Being; for Agere sequitur esse, acting follows upon being, as Mr. Baxter often (but sometimes very impertinently) tells us. And therefore as in all other Courts, because they are the Kings Courts, the Judgments that are there given, and the Decrees that are there decreed, for interpreting, applying and moderating of Laws already made, are the Kings Decrees, and the Kings Judgments, because they are made by his Authority, or by an Authority derived from him and delegated by Him, and might if he plea∣sed be executed by him in Person, as some of them have been by some of his Predecessors; so in the High Court of Parliament, where Laws are to be made, the Laws that are there made are the Kings Laws, and that not only as being made Why our Laws called the King's Laws. in one of his Courts, but made in a formal and solemn manner, either by himself personally and immediately; or by special Commission granted and authoriz'd by him to do it for him. For it is the Le Roy le veult (whether pronounced by him∣self, or by any other authoriz'd by him) that makes the Law. So that it is the Kings Will and the King's will only to have it a Law that makes it a Law, and not any Act antecedent or sub∣sequent of either or both the Houses of Par∣liament.
But why then are our Laws called Acts of Why called Acts of Parliament. Parliament? Because, as I said before, they are made by the King in Parliament: Yea but they are said to be Enacted by Authority of Parliament; that is, say I, by the King's Authority in Parlia∣ment. But they are said to be enacted by the Lords and Commons, as well as by the King; but it is not said they are enacted by the Authority of the Lords and Commons, as well as by the Kings. So that by enacting by Lords and Com∣mons, is meant by the Lords and Commons, ad∣vising or consenting to the matter of them, as appears by the indifferent use sometimes of one of the forms, and sometimes of the other, as I observed before. Whereunto may be added, that Advice or consent some∣times intitles to the Act. it is not unusual to ascribe the doing of a thing to Him or them that are but the advisers of it, or consenters to it. Thus we call that an Order of Council, which is ordered by the King in Council, or by the advice of his Council. And thus St. Paul saith, The Saints shall judge the World, and 1 Cor. 6. 2. Christ himself saith, that his twelve Apostles shall sit upon twelve Thrones, judging the twelve Tribes of Matth. 19. 28. Israel. Yet it is certain (as Christ tells us in ano∣ther place) that the Father hath committed all judg∣ment Joh. 5. 22. to the Son, and hath joyned none in Com∣mission with him. So that it is Christ, and Christ done that shall absolve those that shall be absolved and shall condemn those that shall be condemned, which are the proper Acts of a Judge quatenus as he is a Judge, and therefore of none but him that is a Judge. How then can the Saints be The Saints judg∣ing the World, applied to this case. said to judge the World, or the twelve Apostles be
said to judge the twelve Tribes? Why they do it by consenting to and approving of the judgment which shall be given by Christ, whether it be the sentence of absolution or condemnation, upon whomsoever it is pronounced. So though it be the King, and the King only that properly speak∣ing doth make the Laws, yet because he never makes any Laws, but such as are agreed on and consented to by both Houses of Parliament; there∣fore the two Houses of Parliament may, in the same sence that the Saints are said to judge the World, be said to make our Laws, that is, by con∣senting to the King's making of them to be Laws: But yet with this difference (which is indeed no small one) that Christ's judging of the World The difference in the Case. needs not the approbation or consent to it ante∣cedently or consequently either of Saints or An∣gels: but the King according to the legally esta∣blished constitution of our Government cannot make a Law, but the matter of it must be ante∣cedently agreed on by both Houses of Parliament, as a fit subject for the King to make a Law of in their Opinions, if he please, and if it be so in his opinion also. So that the King is finally the only and sole Judge, whether what is agreed on and propos'd by them as fit to be made a Law be fit to be made a Law or no; and if he thinks it fit to be so, it is he and none but he, that by his Le veult makes it Law. So that to conclude this Point, the thing pro∣posed The four Causes of our Laws, viz. Efficient, Matter, Form and End of them, explain'd. (whether by King or either of the Houses) is the Matter or material cause, ex quâ, or out of which the Law is made; the Efficient or the
causa à qua, whereby or by whom the matter of the Law is made to be a Law, is the King and the King only; the Formal cause, or the cause per quam res est quod est, by which a thing is that thing which it is, or that whereby it actually be∣comes, and is effectually made to be a Law, is the Kings declaration of his Assent or Will to make it a Law by those Nomothetical or Legislative words pronounced by himself or in his Name, Le Roy le veult; the Final cause, or the cause propter quam Res est, for which or for the sake whereof a thing is, is Bonum Publicum, the Publick good. So that the consent of the two Houses to what is pro∣posed What kind of Cause, the Con∣sent of the two Houses is. to be made a Law, is but that which we call Causa sine quâ non, a Cause, without which a thing is not to be; which indeed is a condition rather than a cause, but such a condition as is so necessary for disposing of the matter to receive the form, that the efficient cannot introduce the form without it, though he be not necessitated to in∣troduce the form by it; that is, it is such a con∣dition, as without which the King cannot make what is so conditioned to be a Law, though it do not necessitate him to make that to be a Law which is so conditioned, so that as I said before, it is but Causa sine quâ non only, which is indeed no cause at all. And this I think enough to prove the Legisla∣tive The Legislative power and the Soveraignty in the King only. power to be in the King and in the King only; and consequently that the Soveraignty upon this account is not divided betwixt the King and the two Houses either equally or unequally, or that they have any part of it or share in it.
And yet upon this Supposition, and upon this supposition only, Mr. Baxter concludes, first that Two Conclusi∣ons of Mr. B.'s upon his suppo∣sition of the Soveraignty divided. the Kingdom of England is no Monarchy. And Secondly that the Parliament's defending of their own part of the Soveraignty against the Kings Invasion of it was a just War and no Rebellion. By the first of which Conclusions he seems to think that there is no Monarchy, but where the Government is Despotical and Arbitrary; ubi Ar∣bitria Principum (as Justin saith) pro Legibus sunt; where the Will of the Soveraign is the Law of the Subject: And such indeed were the first, especi∣ally the Eastern Monarchies of the World; and The Eastern Monarchs not altogether Arbitrary. yet not altogether so neither, as appears from the 7th. compared with the 15th. Verse of the 6th. Chapter of the Prophecy of Daniel; for as in the former of those Verses, we find there was a con∣sultation by a Senate or Parliament of all the Presidents, Governours, Counsellors and Captains of the Kingdom of Persia for the making of a De∣cree or Law by the King, which he did by his signing of it; so in the latter of those Verses we find also that it was a standing Law of, or amongst the Medes and Persians, that no Decree or Statute made by the King, with the advice of an Assem∣bly of the chief Men of his Kingdom, could be changed or repealed without the consent (as I presume they meant) of those that advised the King to make it. So that there were or might be some fundamental unchangable Laws or Rules even in the most absolute and most despotical Mo∣narchies; for such was the Persian, if ever there were any; and yet you see there was a Law by
which the King himself was obliged. And pro∣bably the like was in the former or first Monar∣chy that of the Chaldeans or Assyrians also: For as Darius here, so Nebuchadnezzar there, called all his Princes and great Men, when he made a De∣cree, that all that would not fall down and wor∣ship the Image he had set up, should be cast into the fiery Furnace, Dan. 3. 12, &c. CHAP. VIII. The English Monarchy asserted. The King under no Judicatory, Accountable to God alone. That Laws are not to be made without the Peoples con∣sent in Parliament, was from the favour of the Kings. THE Truth is, that it is not the Governing by Law or without Law that makes the Go∣vernment to be Monarchical, but the governing What it is, de∣nominates a Monarchy. of One over all; whether his way of Govern∣ing be Arbitrary, & Despotical, or Legal and Politi∣cal. Ours indeed is Legal and Political; but for all that it is Monarchical, because it is but One that governs us all. He governs indeed, and is obliged, and hath obliged himself, by his Coro∣nation Oath, to govern by Law: but it was not his Coronation Oath that made him King; for
all our Kings are as much Kings before they take the Oath, as they are after the taking of it. Nei∣ther is it their governing by Law that gives them their Right, nor their not governing by Law that can take away their Right they have unto their Crowns: for then there must be some Ju∣dicatory above them to judge betwixt them and No Judicatory above the King. their People, whether they have forfeited their Right or no; and if they have, to take the for∣feiture of it; And if there be such a Judicatory, it is indeed no Monarchy, though it may be cal∣led a Kingdom (as that of Sparta was) as I have proved at large already. Mr. Baxter therefore, if he will prove this Kingdom of ours to be no Monarchy, he must prove there is some such stan∣ding Judicatory here amongst us as the Ephori were in Sparta. If he saith the Parliament is such a Judicatory, He must prove it to be a The Parliament no such Judi∣catory. Court or Judicatory always in being, as that of the Ephori was, and as the Senate of Venice is, and not such a one as must not meet but when the King calls them; and must be gone when he bids them; and such a Judicatory is our Parlia∣ment, according to the Legal Constitution of this Kingdom. And how such a King as ours can be liable or obnoxious to such a Judicatory as this, (which he may make or unmake as he plea∣seth) so as to be question'd, or tried, or judged, or condemned by it, as the Spartan Kings might be, and were by the Ephori, and as the Dukes of Venice may be and have been by their Senate, let Mr. Baxter tell us if he can. For my part I cannot imagine the Practicability of it (I mean
the practicability of it de jure, as to right) in any Case, or upon any Provocation whatsoever. And therefore when our Law saith the King can do no wrong, the meaning is not (as I con∣ceive) The King can do no wrong, how meant. that the King cannot do that, or command that to be done, which is really a wrong or injury to any, or perhaps to many, or all of his Subjects, as David did, when he numbred the People, for which sin 70. Thousand of them were swept a∣way by the Plague in three days: But the mean∣ing of that Maxime in our Law I say (as I hum∣bly conceive) is, that if the King should do or cause to be done never so great a wrong, yet he is not legally accountable, or questionable, or pu∣nishable for it by any power on Earth, and much less by any of his own Subjects. Whereunto a∣nother Maxime of our Law seems to be a Witness, which tells us, that the Crown takes away all Another Max∣ime to that purpose. defects, or that he who is King, is not chargeable with or answerable for whatsoever he hath done amiss. And hereunto the Law of God bears wit∣ness also. For in this sence it was, that King David confessing those two great sins of Adultery King David accountable to God alone; and Murder unto God, saith: Against Thee Only have I sinned: not as if he thought he had not sin∣ned very highly and heinously too against Bath∣sheba and Ʋriah, by defiling the one and murder∣ing the other; but because he was not accoun∣table to, or punishable by any but God for it. Any other Man of the Nation, that had commit∣ted either of those Crimes, must by God's own Judicial Law have been put to death for it with∣out mercy. How came it to pass then that Da∣vid,
who was notoriously guilty of both those capital Crimes, was never called to account for either or both of them? The reason is plain, because there was none that had Authority to call him to an account for it: not any other King; for all Kings (properly so called) are equal, as to the right of non-subordination to one another, and Par in parem non habet Impe∣rium, a Peer or equal hath no right of Autho∣rity over his equal or Peer; and much less Infe∣rior in Superiorem, an Inferiour over his Supe∣riour: for such are Subjects, of all Qualities and in all Capacities, in relation to their Sove∣raigns. But did David then escape unpunished? No; for God, who is only their Superiour, and there∣fore and punished by him. the only Judge of Kings, did question and arraign and judge and condemn and punish him for it, though not by shedding his blood for the blood that he had shed; yet by shedding the blood of his darling Son Absolom, which was more grievous than the shedding of his own blood would have been to him, as appears by his so often and so passionately wishing he had dyed for him. Be wise therefore, O ye Kings; and be learned, O ye Judges; Ye that are Supreme Judges here David's Moni∣tion to Kings. on Earth; and think not, because you cannot be punished by Men, therefore you shall not be punished at all, if you deserve to be so: for Re∣ges in ipsos Imperium est Jovis, the Almighty God's rule and authority is over Kings them∣selves, could a Heathen man say. The exem∣ption
of Kings from being punished by Men doth make them the more obnoxious to be pu∣nished by God, either here or hereafter; and  (saith the Apostle) , it is a fearful and terrible thing to fall into the hands of the living God. But of the punishment which Kings are to ex∣pect from God, I have spoken before, as likewise why Kings, who are Monarchs or Kings indeed, cannot be question'd or called to account for any thing they have done, or may be supposed to have done amiss, because they have no Superiour. That which I am now doing, is to prove our King to be a Monarch, because he hath no Su∣periour; nor is ever a whit the less a Monarch, because, according to the legal Establishment or constitution of our Kingdom, our Kings cannot make Laws for their Subjects without the consent of their Representatives, that is, without their Subjects own consents in Parliament. For I demand, how comes it to pass that they The Peoples priviledge of consenting to their Laws, a favour at first of the Kings. cannot? Is it not because they did at first, out of their meer grace and favour to their Subjects, give away the Power they had formerly of doing otherwise? William the Conqueror, from whom our Kings ever since derive their Right and Title to the Crown, could and did make Laws William the Conqueror made Laws without their consent. for the People, without asking or having their antecedent consent to them. It is true, the Conqueror himself, when he was crowned King, took an Oath to govern justly, and afterwards he took an Oath to observe the Antient Laws of the Realm, established by his Noble Predecessors
the Kings of England, and especially those of Ed∣ward the Confessor (as Daniel tells us:) but it is true too (as the same Historian tells us) He brought in the Customes of Normandy, so that the main stream of our Common Law with the practice thereof (saith the same Author) flowed out of Normandy, notwithstanding all Objections that can be made to the contrary: And it was the Son of this Conqueror (Henry the First) who, be∣cause (saith the same Author) he would not wrest any thing by an Imperial Power from the Subjects, took a course to obtain their free consents to serve his occasions, in their General Assemblies of the three Estates of the Land, which he first convoked at Sa∣lisbury Parliament first so called in Henry I. time. in the Fifteenth Year of his Reign, which had from his time the name of Parliaments, according to the manner of Normandy. And in all probability, as this was the beginning of our Kings not raising of Money, so was it likewise of their not making of Laws, but with the con∣sent of the Representatives of their People in Parliament. But whether it began then, or sooner, or later, I am sure it must be the Kings granting of it that made it to be what it is; I mean the legal way of proceeding in order to the making of Laws by our Kings for the Go∣vernment of their People. A most excellent way indeed, but such a one, as whosoever may have been the deviser or ad∣visers of it, it could never have been established as it is, but by the King's voluntary and arbitra∣ry consent to it. I say his arbitrary as well as his voluntary consent to it, because it was in his
power (whosoever the King was that granted it first) not to have granted it, if he would. CHAP. IX. Mr. B.'s whimsey of an antecedent Compact between the King and People. Their consent to the ma∣king of Laws, when ever brought in, a thing of Grant, not of Contract. Their double Capacity, as Mr. B. fansies and states it. FOR to think there was any Government here in England before that of Kings, or that the People, when they were under no Government at all, did or could unanimously consent to be governed by one, whom they should choose to An antecedent compact of the People with the King, a political whim∣sie of Mr. B's. be their King, upon such or such conditions, and with such or such limitations, reserving to them∣selves such or such Rights, Liberties and Privi∣ledges, as it should not be in the King's power to take from them, and which it should be law∣ful for them to defend by force, if he attempted to do so; and all this by vertue of an Original antecedent compact or contract with their King, when they chose him to be so: This (I say) is but a Political whimsey of Mr. Baxter's, who thinks he sees Visions, when he doth but dream Dreams. For although those that are un∣der
one kind of Government may change it for ano∣ther (whether lawfully or unlawfully, for a bet∣ter or for a worse, I now dispute not) yet for a Multitude that are under no Government at all, (which is Mr. Hobbs his Hypothesis, as well as Mr. Mr. Hobbs and Mr. Bax∣ter agree. Baxter's) to meet all together at one and the same time, and in one and the same place, and then and there, all and every one of them, to agree upon one kind of Government, and upon the choice of the same individual Person or Persons to govern them, I think it (considering the va∣riety and contrariety that there is in several Mens The extreme unlikelihood of the supposition. Intellectuals and Affections) to be the next degree to impossible; for to say the Major part did con∣clude the Minor, is to suppose a Government be∣fore there was a Government; there being no∣thing in Nature (supposing all Men to be ori∣ginally and equally free) why any one Man should be deprived of his natural freedom without his own consent by never so great a plurality of others that are otherwise minded. The beginning therefore of all Dominion and Our Govern∣ment at first arbitrary. Government, next to that of the Paternal, was no doubt the subduing of the weaker by the stronger, who governed those whom they had subdued arbitrarily and despotically, as the Romans, Saxons, Danes and Normans, successively did the Inhabitants of this Island, when they master'd them at first, though afterwards they governed them by Laws, but by Laws imposed upon them, and not antecedently consented to or proposed by them.
When this way of proceeding was first brought in is not expresly set down, for ought I can find in any of our Historians: I am sure it was not so ab initio, from the beginning, as appears by the contrary practice during the Government of this Island by all the aforesaid Nations before the Con∣quest, nor by the Normans after the Conquest, until the Raign of the aforesaid Henry the First, if it were so then; for that is not expresly, (as to the making of Laws) recorded neither. But be∣cause it is expresly recorded, that it was that Tis likely the Custom of not making Laws without the Peoples consent began under Henry I. with that other, King, who did first call together such an Assem∣bly as was then first and hath been ever since cal∣led a Parliament (I mean an Assembly consisting of all the three Estates, and not of the Lords Spi∣ritual and Temporal only, as was the Custom in former times) and because his End in constitu∣ting and calling together such an Assembly, was to let the People see that he would not take away of not raising Mony without their consent. their Money from them, (as his Predecessors had done, when and how and to what degree they pleased) but would be content with what the People themselves should, by Representatives of their own choosing, willingly and freely of their own accord think fit to give him, believing that the Money so given, would be as much, and perhaps more, but certainly much more easily raised, and less grudgingly paid, than what might by force, against their wills, be extorted from them. This (I say) being one of the Ends, why that wise and prudent Prince did first constitute such an Assembly for the more easie and plausible pretence of raising of Money by the consent of
those that are to pay it, it is more than pro∣bable that another of his Ends was to make the People more willing to submit and to be obedi∣ent to the Laws (when they were made) by ma∣king such a Constitution as required the Peoples consent to the making of them, before they were made; which Constitution hath been continued ever since. But that it was at first by Grant from the King, after he was actually King, and not by any However it was, it was not by Compact but by Grant. antecedent Compact betwixt the People, before they were Subjects, and Him (whom they chose or meant to choose for their King) before he was King, is evident from the unanimous consent and testimony of all our Historians, who never make mention of any other form of Government here in this Island but that of Kings, and of Kings suc∣ceeding immediately one to another, without any Interval or Interposition of any other form of Government, wherein the People were at liberty to choose what Government, and what Gover∣nours, and upon what conditions they pleased. But as the Governours of this Nation were always Kings, so the People were always Subjects, and ne∣ver spoken of in any other capacity but of Sub∣jects; which I note, and desire the Reader to take special notice of, to convince him of the vanity and falshood of Mr. Baxter's distinction between Mr. B.'s vain and false di∣stinction of two capacities in the People, as Free and as Subjects. the two several Capacities, wherein (as he saith) the People are represented by the Parliament. For first, saith he, the Parliament representeth the People as Free, and (2dly) as Subjects. As the Parliament representeth the People as
Subjects; so (saith he) they can do nothing but humbly manifest their grievances and Petition for H. C. p. 459. Relief: but as the Parliament representeth the Peo∣ple as free, so they are to secure the People's Rights and Liberties as their Trustees. But what are those Rights and Liberties, that the Parliament as they are the Trustees for the People are to secure to them and to maintain for them? Why such (saith he) as when they were Free, and before they were Subjects, they reserved to themselves by an antecedent Compact or Covenant, upon a con∣ditional performance whereof they were content to become Subjects. For I take it for undeniable (saith Mr. Baxter) that the Government is con∣stituted H. C. p. 458. by Contract, and that in the Contract the People have not absolutely subjected themselves to Some Rights, he saith, reser∣ved by the People in their Contract, and the Parliament their Trustees. the Soveraign without reserving any Rights and Li∣berties to themselves, but that some Rights are re∣served by them and exempted from the Princes po∣wer; and therefore that the Parliament are their Trustees for the securing of those exempted Rights, and so represent the People as Free, so far as that Exemption signifies.
CHAP. X. Mr. B.'s Compact and Reservation of Rights can∣vassed. The Peoples Rights, by Donation of the Kings. They had no Representatives till Henry the First. THIS Mr. Baxter saith he takes for undeni∣able; but I say, and have already proved, that in saying so he is very much mistaken, whe∣ther by Government he means all Government in general, or the Government of this Kingdom of ours in particular. For first, as to Government in general, it is not true that it hath always been grounded upon Government not alway founded upon Contract, as Mr. B. saith it is. an antecedent compact or contract, or that the People have not sometimes subjected themselves absolutely to their Soveraigns, without reserving to themselves any Rights, Liberties or Pri∣viledges; for the contrary hereof is so certain and so evident that nothing can be more, as appears by what I have already said, not only of Paternal but of Regal Government, and that not only under the first Kings, quorum Arbitria pro Legibus erant, whose wills and pleasures past for Laws, but under all Kings that have ever since and do now govern arbitrarily and despoti∣cally, as many do in all parts of the World; none of which can be imagined to have made
any such contract with their People or their Peo∣ple with them, as Mr. Baxter speaks of. The like may be said of Conquerors, and the People sub∣dued by them. If Mr. Baxter replies that it is of such a People as are free and sui Juris, at their own disposal only, that he speaks when he saith, that there is no such People that do absolutely subject themselves unto their Soveraign without reserving any Rights or Liberties to themselves; I say this is false also, whether he mean that no such People can do so, or that no such People have done so. For first if a Man that is free may make himself a Servant to whomsoever he will, and such a A free People, as well as a free Man, may give up them∣selves to be go∣vern'd without any reservation of Rights. Servant as shall be wholly at the disposing of his Master, without reserving any thing of Liberty or Propriety unto himself, as we see it was ordinary for Men to do, not only among the Gentiles, but among the Jews themselves; insomuch that some of them chose to continue Bondmen, when by the Jubilee they might have been made free; And why may not any number of Men, (whether they be a City or a Nation) being free and sui Juris, or at their own disposing, give themselves up, if they will and think it to be best for them, to be arbitrarily governed by some other more power∣ful State or Prince without any antecedent compact, condition or reservation? 2dly, That any free People may do so, it is evi∣dent, because some free People have done so: for Several free People have done so. example, the People of Campania, a Province of Italy, being then a free State, subjected themselves to the People of Rome, in this form of words, Populum Campanum, Ʋrbemque Capuam, Agros,
Delubra Deûm, Divina Humanaque omnia, in ve∣stram, Grotius de jure Belli ac pacis. (Patres Conscripti) ditionem dedimus: We surrender and give up into your power, Lords of the Senate, the whole People of Campania and the City Capua, our Lands, the Temples of our Gods, in a word, all whatever concerns either Church or State, God or Man. Et quid obstat (saith Gro∣tius) what hinders why any other People may not subject themselves and all that they have to any one powerful Man or Prince in the same manner? Certainly (saith he) there were many Nations that did so and lived very happily under such a Government; so that if Mr. Baxter thinks that there never was any Government submitted unto by any free People, but upon an antecedent contract and a reserve of some Liberties and Priviledges to themselves to be always exempted from the Ju∣risdiction of Him or them to whom they became Subjects, He is much mistaken. But if by Government he means the Government of this Nation of ours in particular, when he saith Particularly in our Govern∣ment no such thing as Con∣tract or Re∣servation off Rights. he takes it for undeniable, that it was constituted by Contract, and that in the Contract the People have not absolutely subjected themselves unto the Soveraign without reserving any Rights and Liberties unto themselves, exempted from the Princes power, for the securing of which the Parliament are their Trustees. If this be his mean∣ing I say, I demand of Him first, when was this Nation of ours a free People, and when was it un∣der any Government but that of Kings? surely never since that of the Romans, who governed them as a Province, arbitrarily and despotically,
by their Lieutenants whom they sent hither; and so did their British, Saxon and Danish Princes for the most part for ought appears in any of our Hi∣storians to the contrary, or if some of them go∣verned by Laws, (as Ina, Alfred, and some others of the Saxon Kings, and Canutus the Dane did,) yet the Laws whereby they governed were all of them made by themselves after they were Kings, and not by way of compact with their Subjects. No more were the Laws of Edward the Confessor him∣self, which were the Subject matter of Magna Charta, or the great Charter, containing all the Rights, Immunities and Liberties of the People, but The Peoples Rights, not by bargain, but by Grants of their Kings. not as bargained for by them before their admit∣ting of any of their Kings to be Kings, but indul∣ged unto them and conferr'd upon them by the Donation and Concession of their Kings; who partly of their own accord, and partly by the Ad∣vice of the Lords and Bishops of their Council, did make those Laws in favour of the People, not only without being aforehand obliged by Compact or Contract with the People to do so, but without so much as advising with them or any Represen∣tatives of theirs when they did so; there being no such Parliaments, and consequently no such Repre∣sentatives of the People as there are now, until The People had no Re∣presentatives till Henry I. the Raign (as I said before) of Henry the First af∣ter the Conquest, for He was the first of our Kings (say our Chronicles) that instituted the form now in use of the High Court of Parliament: for before his time, only certain of the Nobility and Prelates of the Realm were called to consultation about the most important affairs of the State: but
he caused the Commons also to be Represented by Vid. Daniel's Hist. & Baker's Chron. Knights and Burgesses of their own choosing, and made that Court (saith the Historian) to consist of three parts, the Nobility, the Clergy, and the Common People representing the whole Body of the Realm. So that before this there were no Representatives of the Peoplé of their own choosing, to be their Trustees, for the securing to them their pretended reserved Rights and Exemptions by an antecedent contract or compact made betwixt them and him that was to govern them, whilst they were yet free, and before he was their Governour; and Mr. B.'s sup∣position, a meer fiction. therefore this supposition of such a compact or con∣tract betwixt the King before He was King, and the People before they were his Subjects here in this Kingdom (which Mr. Baxter saith he takes for undeniable) is undeniably a meer fiction of his own Imagination and Invention, and consequent∣ly whatsoever is by him grounded upon this suppo∣sition is not only fallacious but altogether false and fictitious also. CHAP. XI. Mr. B.'s Justification of the late Rebellion from this Compact, &c. The King's Coronation-Oath doth not prove any such Compact, &c. nor can it be pro∣ved by any authentick Record. The state of affairs during the Ʋsurpation. BUT true and undeniably indeed true it is that the People of England have now and have
had long, for many Generations, even from Henry The Priviledges and Represen∣tatives the People now have are not by any antece∣dent Compact. the First's time, such Priviledges, Liberties and Im∣munities, as are contained and specified in Magna Charta, and such Representatives in Parliament for the asserting of those Priviledges, and to see that no Laws should be made for them without their consent to them; but that they have or ever had them by an antecedent compact with the King be∣fore they were his Subjects, is that which I affirm to be false; and consequently that Mr. Baxter's distinction of the Peoples being represented in Par∣liament in a double capacity, namely, either as they are now, that is, as they are Subjects, or as they were as first, that is, as they were before they were Subjects, is frivolous and fictitious: for they never The Peoples be∣ing represented in a double ca∣pacity, as Mr. B. fancies, made an Argu∣ment by him, to justifie the late Rebellion. were, nor are now represented in Parliament any otherwise than as Subjects only. And as such Mr. Baxter confesseth that neither they nor their Re∣presentatives can do more than complain if they be grieved, and humbly Petition the King that they may be relieved. But as their Representatives in Parliament are the Peoples Trustees, they do re∣present them (saith Mr. Baxter) not as Subjects, but as they were before they were Subjects, when as Freemen they did contract for the reservation of such Priviledges and Immunities unto themselves, which the King was not to violate or take away from them, or if he did attempt to do so, those Represen∣tatives of theirs as Trustees were to do what they could even by force, if they could not by fair means, to maintain and preserve, or to vindicate and reco∣ver those aforesaid reserved Priviledges and Immu∣nities, and that the People were obliged to assist
them against the King in so doing. And upon this undeniable supposition (as he calls it) he endeavours to justifie the late Rebellion; insomuch that he saith he thought he should have been a Traytor to the Parlia∣ment, if he had not taken part with them. Holy Com. W. This supposition therefore being of so very great importance, as that upon the truth or falsity there∣of the justification or condemnation of the late War, and consequently of the Bodies and Souls of all those that were engaged in it, doth by Mr. Bax∣ter's own confession wholly depend, he ought to have been very sure, that it had been indeed un∣deniably true in point of Fact; and that it could by undeniable Records be demonstrably evidenced to be so. For it is not his taking it to be undeniable H. C. Thes. 361. (as he saith he doth) can prove it is so, or will make it believed to be so; neither are the Oaths of Kings, nor the Charters and Laws, in which they The King's Co∣ronation. Oath doth not prove any such com∣pact or Re∣serves, &c. as Mr. B. affirms. have expressed their consent to govern according to those Charters and Laws, together with the anti∣ent Customs of the Nation, that can prove there was either at first, or at any time since, any such compact or contract, as Mr. Baxter supposeth to have been betwixt the People before they were Subjects, and the King before he was King, and that there were such reserves of such and such Rights and Priviledges antecedently conditioned for by one of the Parties and consented to by the other upon penalty of forfeiture of the Crown upon breaking of the Covenant to such or such a degree, and that the Parliament were to be the Peoples Trustees for the securing of the performance of the antecedent Covenant or Contract, and might make War with
the King for the breach of it, and that the People were obliged to assist them in it. All which Parti∣culars Mr. Baxter supposeth to be the subject mat∣ter of his supposed antecedent Compact or Contract betwixt the Kings of England and their People, and thinks he hath proved it because our Kings swear at their Coronation, that they will govern ac∣cording to the Laws already made by the Kings their Predecessors, and that shall be made after∣wards by themselves in Parliament. But first, (as I have observed already) Are not our Kings Kings before the taking of the Oath? This made out in three Consi∣derations. Was not out present King so, de jure, by right, ma∣ny years before he came home? and was he not so de facto, in fact, as well as de jure, by possession as well as by title two years before he was crowned after he came home, and consequently before his taking of the Oath? 2dly, Is there any thing in the Oath obliging him to the keeping of it, upon penalty of forfeiture of his Regal Power and Dignity, or for the dis∣charging of his Subjects from their Allegiance to him if he do not keep it? 3dly, Is there any mention or Intimation in that Oath, of the Parliaments or any other Trustees for the People, to judge betwixt them and the King, whether he keeps the contract or no, and to questi∣on and punish him, if he do not, as the Ephori might do, and did punish the Kings of Sparta, be∣cause indeed they were no Kings but in name on∣ly; and no more than so would our Kings be nei∣ther, if there were any such antecedent contract as Mr. B. makes the King, a King in name only. Mr. Baxter supposeth there is, or if the Parlia∣ment
were such Trustees for the People as he sup∣poseth them to be. But it is not his supposing will serve the turn for the proof either of the one or of the other; but he must produce authentick and undeniable Re∣cords to verifie and evidence the truth and cer∣tainty of both. For example, he must in the first place produce some such authentick undeniable He hath no au∣thentick Record for such a Con∣tract, as he supposeth. Record, wherein it is averred that at such a time the People (being then free) did stipulate and contract with him whom they meant to choose to be their King, saying, as he supposeth them to say, We choose You and your Family successively to rule us on Holy Com. W. p. 377. these and no other terms: Accept these terms, or We accept not you. Upon which Terms consented to by him, and so being chosen by them, he obligeth Himself (saith Mr. Baxter) and all his Successors that will rule, that is, (if they will not be deposed) to H. C. p. 468. rule upon that foundation. And upon some such for∣mal contract as this it is that he takes it for unde∣niable, that the Government of this Kingdom of ours was at first constituted; which if he could make it appear by any authentick Record (as I am sure he cannot) yet that would be but one half of the work he hath to do. For supposing but not granting, that once upon a time, no Man knows when, there was such a contract betwixt the People, whilst they were free, and their King that was to be, that they should have such or such Rights, Priviledges and Immunities reserved to them, and that the King upon breach of his part of the Covenant should forfeit his Right to them; supposing I say but not granting all this to be true; yet if he
cannot produce some other as Authentick a Re∣cord to prove that the Parliament were by that Nor for the Parliaments being the Peo∣ples Trustees for their re∣served Rights. antecedent supposed compact or contract (agreed up∣on by both Parties) to be Trustees, and such Tru∣stees for the reserved Rights and Liberties of the People, as might in case they were to such or such a degree violated by the King or his Ministers, le∣gally do what the late Parliament did (namely, make Laws without the King, and make War against the King, or those that were commissioned by the King) he shall never be able to excuse them from being in the highest degree guilty of a most ille∣gal and insolent and impudent Invasion and Ʋsur∣pation of the Kings authority in the one, nor of a most Trayterous, avowed, and bold-faced Rebel∣lion against the Person as well as the Soveraignty of the King in the other; and consequently that all that assisted them (whether it were with their hands or with their tongues, with their Swords or with their Pens, with their prayers or with their Purses) were as arrant Traytors and Rebels as they were. Whereas if Mr. Baxter can make it evidently to appear that there was such an Original consti∣tution Were the Origi∣nal constitution such, as Mr. B. makes it, the King would not be sole Soveraign nor Soveraign at all. of Government by such a compact or contract betwixt the People on the one part, and the King and his Successors on the other part, and that by virtue of the said Original constitution the Par∣liament was appointed and agreed on by both Parties to be such Trustees for the People, as he saith the Parliament was, we are now speaking of; and that they might legally do what that Parlia∣ment did, for the discharging of their Trust; If
he can make this, I say, evidently appear from any authentick Record, I must and will confess that the Government here with us is indeed no Monar∣chy; and that not only for the reason given by Mr. Baxter, because the whole Soveraignty is not in one Person, namely in the King, but partly in the King, and partly in the Parliament; but also because (according to Mr. Baxter's supposition) the Soveraignty is not at all in the King, but whol∣ly in the Parliament, as it was in the Ephori in Sparta, and as it is now in the Senate of Venice. But thanks be to God it is not come to that yet, A brief ac∣count of the Government and its chan∣ges, during the Ʋsurpation, till the Kings Re∣turn. though it were once very near coming to it, when they had gotten an Act to sit as long as they listed, and took upon them to make Laws, to raise Mony, and to make War; and consequently to play REX (as we say) by exercising all the Acts of Sove∣raignty, and by pressing the King to devest him∣self of them, by making another Act not only to justifie what they had done, but to enable them to do the same things for one and twenty Years more. And by that time the Monarchy would have been like an old Almanack worn out of date, and either an Aristocracy or rather a Democracy not on∣ly set up, but setled instead of it, as we saw it was assoon as the Monarchy by the Murder of the then Monarch seemed to be quite down; the House of Commons assuming and usurping to themselves the whole Government of the Kingdom without King or Lords (which the Lords as well as the King ought to remember) calling themselves a free State, and behaving themselves as such both at home and abroad for the short time of their
Raign; which was until their Servant made him∣self their Master by making use of that Army for the pulling of them down, which they were for∣ced to keep in pay at the excessive charge of the People for the keeping of themselves up. And then They and the People too saw and felt the dif∣ference between a legitimate and legal Monarchy and the despotical Arbitrary Government of an Ʋsurped Tyranny, which made them wish and pray and long for the Return of the right Heir, and the restoring of the right Government, having found by woful experience that every change they had made, was first from good to bad, and then from bad to worse, and lastly from worse to worst of all (I mean the Rump-Parliament) that so having made tryal of them all, they might be the more careful to hold fast the best, if God should be plea∣sed to restore it to them again, which in his infi∣nite goodness and mercy he hath done, and that in a strange and almost miraculous manner by making the Thieves fall out amongst themselves in dividing of the spoyl, that so the true Owner might have, what they robb'd him of, again. The End of the Fourth Section.
SECT V. An Expedient proposed for the preservation of our Government and Religion, as now by Law Established, from Arbitrary Pow∣er and Popery or Presbytery, &c. with∣out Exclusion of the Right Heir. CHAP. I. People bugbear'd with Popery and Arbitrary Govern∣ment. The Priviledges of English Subjects by the Favour and Grants of their KINGS. Their Representatives in Parliament. Grotius thwarts Mr. B. in his main Principle. AND now one would have thought that being so lately delivered from so base and A serious Ex∣postulation with people for their uneasi∣ness. shameful as well as heavy and grievous a Bondage, we should not so soon have forgotten what we suffered under a Succession of various Tyrannies, nor so soon have been weary of our Quails and Manna, as to be so desirous, as many of us seem to be, to return to the same, or per∣haps (if it be possible) to a worse Bondage than that they were under before; and to that end
there be some that do as good as say one to another, as that rebellious backsliding and ever-murmur∣ing Generation of the Jews did; Let us us make us a Numb. c. 14. v. 4. Captain, and let us return into Egypt. And why so? why so soon so weary of well-being? Is there any Nation under heaven in a No reason for it, better, nay in so good a condition as we are? Are not we the only People of Europe that are in Peace, when all our Neighbours are in War with one another? Doth not every one of us from the highest to the lowest enjoy the Liberty of his per∣son, the Propriety of his gooods, and the fruit of his Industry, without having any of it without his own consent taken away from him? So that if ever it might be said of any, it may now most emphatically be said of us; Happy are the people that are in such a case. Yes! may some men say, if we were sure to continue always as we are; but we are afraid we The pretended ground of it. shall not; we are afraid of Popery, we are afraid of Arbitrary Government, which may take away all we have from us, that is or ought to be dear to us. But why should we fear, where no fear is? Is not our Religion, our Liberty, and our Properties The ill effect of causless fears. secured unto us by the Laws? and by such Laws as can never be repealed but by our own consents? Did not such a needless fear as this make us rebell against our late Gracious Soveraign Lord the King, and by that Rebellion make our fellow Sub∣jects, nay the basest and vilest and meanest of our fellow Subjects, to be Lords over us? And if ever we come into such a slavery, or any
slavery at all again, it must be by such a Rebellion produced by such a pretended fear, or by a Fo∣reign Invasion invited by our divisions amongst our selves, that must be the cause of it. Never was there a better Constitution of a Govern∣ment than ours is; nor ever was there better se∣curity The Constituti∣on of our Government. for the keeping of it as it is, than we have. Never were there Subjects that had more and greater, or so many and great Priviledges as The Subjects Rights and Pri∣viledges. the Subjects of England have; neither do our Kings deny them to be of right due unto them, as appears by the late Kings answer to the Peti∣tion of Right; but due unto them not by capitu∣lations and contracts with them, before they were Subjects; but either by Donations or by Concessi∣ons of our Kings to them, when they were and as they were their Subjects. Neither is it denied, but that the People now have and of right ought to have Representa∣tives Their represen∣tatives in Par∣liament. in Parliament of their own choosing: But that this was not nor could not be always so, and that it was by the Kings meer Grace and favour when it first began to be so, appears by what I have already observed concerning the first Parliament (properly so called) here in England, instituted by Henry the first, and as Daniel (one of the most judicious of our English Historians) tells us, after the manner of Normandy. But that ever since it hath bin so I deny not neither; namely, that the People have had, have, and ought to have such Representatives in Parliament of their own choosing, but to represent them, not as they were (no body knows when)
as Freemen before they had Kings or were under any Government at all, but as they are now and have been ever since, and were long before there were Parliaments, I mean as Subjects, and con∣sequently such as Mr. Baxter confesseth have no other lawful way of redressing their Grievances, if they have any (though never so great or so many) but their Representatives complaining and petitioning the King for the relief of them; and The duty of those Repre∣sentatives. that either by desiring him to put the Laws in execution, already made in favour of them (as they did in the late Kings time by the Petition of Right) or to Enact (if need be) new Laws for explanation and confirmation of the old ones, or to punish those, by whom the Legal Rights and Priviledges of the People have been Violated. All this I grant the Peoples Representatives in Par∣liament may, and if there be cause for it ought to do, and that not as they are the Peoples Repre∣sentatives only but their Trustees also: nay and How to act as Trustees also. more than this, namely, not to promote or give their consent to the making of any such Laws as may be prejudicial to the publick, though they may seem to gratify, or may seem to be service∣able to the People; nor to hinder the passing of such Acts as are really for the Peoples good, though perhaps to the Major, that is, the most un∣wise and least judicious part of the People them∣selves, they may seem to be otherwise. And therefore their Representatives and Trustees as they are to consent or dissent, so are they to judge for them what is or what is not to be consented to by them in behalf of them. They are not always
the best Husbands for the People that are most sparing of their Purses; especially when the refusing to part with some may hazard the loss of all. Neither is every thing that is got from the King, a gain to the Subjects; for the King's power may be too little to protect, as well as too great, to oppress them; and according to the present conjuncture, the former is much more to be feared than the latter: And therefore the best service that can be done for the People by their Representatives in Parliament is to keep the Balance even betwixt the Prerogatives of the Sove∣raign and the Priviledges of the Subject, by not An even Ba∣lance to be kept betwixt Pre∣rogative and Priviledge. indeavouring to intrench upon the one or to en∣hance the other, but always and above all things to remember that as they are themselves Subjects, so they are Representatives of Subjects, and Trustees for Subjects, as they are Subjects; and therefore are not to treat the King as if they were Coordinate or Copartners with him in the Sove∣raignty: but as it becomes Subjects and the Repre∣sentatives of Subjects, and such as have the ho∣nour of being there in that capacity, and have the liberty of promoting or hindring the Laws that are to be made for those they represent, from the meer Grace and Favour and Goodness of the King and his Predecessors; and therefore the King is not by them, nor by those they represent, to be esteemed to be less a King, or less their King, or less their Soveraign, than he was before; no The King com∣pared to a Fa∣ther and a Hus∣band. more than a Father is less a Father or hath less the Authority of a Father, the kinder and more in∣dulgent he is unto his Children; or a Husband
hath less of the Authority of a Husband the kind∣er or more indulgent he is to his Wife. And therefore it is well and prudently observed Two observa∣tions of Gro∣tius, by Grotius, first, Non desinere summum esse im∣perium, etiamsi is qui imperaturus est, promittat aliqua De jure Belli & Pacis, cap. 3. p. 81. subditis aut Deo, etiam talia quae ad Imperii rationem pertineant. Soveraignty or Soveraign power doth not cease to be Soveraignty or Soveraign power, though the Soveraign do restrain him∣self, either by promise to his Subjects, or by Oath to God, even in such things as are essen∣tial to the Government; And therefore (Se∣condly) he observes likewise that, Multùm fal∣luntur qui existimant, cùm Reges Acta quaedam sua lb. p. 83. nolunt rata esse, nisi à senatu aut alio coetu aliquo probentur, partitionem fieri potestatis. They are very much deceived (saith he) that think that because there be some Acts that Kings will not have to be ratifyed, unless they are approved or consented to by a Senate or some such assem∣bly, that therefore there is a partition of the Soveraignty. Mark that, Mr. Baxter, and tell me whether any thing can be more apparently Applied to Mr. B's. main principle. contradictory to your Main Principle of the Soveraignty's being divided, betwixt our Kings and their Parliaments, and to the main and only reason you give for it, namely, that our Kings do not, (or, if you will, cannot) make Laws for the People without their Parliaments, or with∣out the Peoples Representatives in Parliament consent to them. For the only reason why they How it came that Laws are not to be made without a Par∣liament. cannot is, because they have obliged themselves by promise to their People and by Oath to God
at their Coronation, that they will not. For ab initio non fuit sic, from the beginning of our English Monarchy it was not so, as I have at large shewed, and as I have proved likewise that this and all other Priviledges of the People had their beginning from the bounty and goodness of our Kings to their People, when they were their Subjects; and not from any bargain or contract of the People, before they were Subjects, with any of their Kings, as Mr. Baxter fondly as well as falsly imagins, without any proof or offer of proof out of any of our Historians or Records for it. Whereas the truth is, that all our Kings, except the Brittish (of whom we know nothing of certainty,) I mean all our Kings of the Saxon, Danish and Norman Races, coming in by Con∣quest, were not only Monarchs, but Despotical Mo∣narchs, that is, such as governed arbitrarily with∣out any Laws at all but that of their own will and pleasure; or by such Laws as they made with or by the advice of such as they thought fit to advise with, which were never any of the common People, or any Representatives for them, until after the Norman Conquest. And then indeed the Despotical began to be a Political Monarchy by When our Monarchy be∣gan to be Po∣litical. Henry the first's constituting of such a Parliament as we now have; and by his Successors granting and confirming the Great Charter, and by all of their obliging themselves successively to continue to the People the Priviledges granted unto them by that Charter; and to govern by such Laws as have been made by their Predecessors, or shall be made by themselves with the consent of the
Peoples Representatives in Parliament. By these Grants I say and concessions and condescensions of our former Kings, and by the confirmation of them by their Successors &c. the Monarchy which was at first Despotical, is become Political, being changed from an absolute and arbitrary to a regu∣lated and Legal Government; yet so as it is still a Monarchy; that is, it is still, the Government of one over all, and one who is accountable to Yet still a Mon∣archy. none under God; which are the only essentials requisite to the constituting of Monarchy; the Governing Arbitrarily or Legally, with, or without Laws, being but Accidentals to it only. CHAP. II. The English Government, a Monarchy, however managed. The excellency of our Constitution set forth. NO more is the subordinate Managery of it in such a manner as may seem to have something of Aristocracy or Democracy mingled with it, which, saith Grotius, was the cause of Polybius his Error; Qui ad mixtum genus reipub. A mistake in Polybius. Grotius de ju∣re Belli & pa∣cis, lib. 1. cap. 3. Sect. 19. refert Romanam rempub. quae illo tempore, si non actiones ipsas, sed jus agendi respicimus, merè fuit
popularis. Who will have the Roman Common∣wealth to have been a mixt form of Government when it was meerly popular or Democratical, be∣cause he looked at the managery of it only, and not at the Authority whereby it was managed; not considering that both the Authority of the Senate, quam ad Optimatum regimen refert, which Polybius refers to an Aristocratical, and that of the Consuls also, which he refers to a Regal or Kingly kind of Government; subdita erat Popu∣lo, were at that time equally subject unto the People; and consequently notwithstanding this shew of mixture in the managery of that Go∣vernment, the Government it self was not a mixt Government in relation to the Soveraignty We are to judge of a Govern∣ment, not by the Managery, but by the Sove∣raignty of it. of it, or to the fountain of Power in it, which gives not only the formal denomination, but the Essential specification to all Political Govern∣ments whatsoever: Grotius therefore, what he saith of the error of Polybius in judging the Ro∣man to have been a mixed Commonwealth when it was not, will have it be understood of all those Writers of Politicks, who upon the same grounds are mistaken, as Polybius was. For idem de alio∣rum Politica scribentium sententiis (saith Grotius) Ib. dictum volo, qui magis externam speciem & quotidi∣anam administrationem, quàm jus ipsum summi Im∣perii spect are congruens ducunt suo instituto. What I said of Polybius, saith he, I would have to be understood of other Writers of Politicks, who think the looking at the outward and ordinary administration of Affairs, rather than at the right it self of the Supreme Power, to be more agree∣able
and conducing to their end in writing, (that is) to the derogating from the Supreme Power of Monarchy, either by imbasing it with the mixture of some less noble species of Government with it, or to weaken and enfeeble it by dividing of it. For what other can be the meaning of these words of Grotius than this, either as they are in the Text, or in relation to the context? And if this be his meaning, what could he have said more pertinently to prove the Government here This Rule ap∣plied to the English Mo∣narchy. in England to be a mere Monarchy, and conse∣quently the Soveraignty to be wholly in one person, not withstanding any thing Mr. Baxter hath said or any man else can say to the contrary. And that it is not now, as it was at first, an absolute arbitrary and Despotical, but a regulated legal and Political Monarchy we owe to the meer grace and favour of our Kings; and I wish that as it was gratia gratis data, a grace freely given, on their parts; so it may be gratia gratos faciens, a grace that may make us grateful, on our parts also. And certainly it would be so, if the Subjects of England did but know or would but consider The happy condition of English Sub∣jects. in how much more happy a condition they are or may be if they will, (and would be if it were not for their seditious Preachers) than any other Subjects in the World are, or ever were, I had almost said or indeed can be, under what Govern∣ment soever, if they be not situated as we are: Because no Government upon the Continent can be safe from being suddenly invaded and over-run by its confining Neighbours, if he or they that
have the Supreme Power be not enabled to raise such Forces and Mony to pay them without staying for the advice or consent of his or their Subjects, as may be sufficient to defend them from their Enemies, and which being raised may be made use of for the oppressing of their Sub∣jects: Whereas we being Islanders intrenched and surrounded by the Ocean, and consequently not being in danger of being suddenly surprized and over-run by any from abroad, our Kings have obliged themselves to raise no Mony (without which no formidable Forces can be raised and maintained) by any Taxes or Impositions upon their Subjects without their own consent in Par∣liament, thereby securing both the liberty of their Persons, and Property of their Goods unto them, and that they shall never be put to any charge but for the necessary defence of themselves, and for their own safety and welfare, as well as for the Honour of the King and their Country. This, together with many other Priviledges which the Subjects of this Kingdom have above An Account of a Sermon, the Bishop preacht before the Long Parliament, in commendation of the English constitution, both in Church and State. all other Subjects in the World that I know or ever heard of, made me presume (when I was One of the four first that was appointed to preach to the House of Commons of the Long Parliament in the late King's time) to tell them and to en∣deavour to prove unto them that the Constituti∣ons both of Church and State, as they were here by Law established (abstracting from the ill managery which might be in either through the faults or frailties of some particular men) were both of them the best in their kind that were in
the Christian World: that of the State for the reasons before specified, and that of the Church because it was the only Church (now extant) that professed and maintain'd both the Apostolick Doctrine and Apostolical Government: All other Christian Churches in the World, East, West, North, and South, failing either in the one or in the o∣ther, or both of them; and besides, because the Government of our Church was more agreeable with Monarchy, and with such a Monarchy as ours is, than either Popery, or Presbytery, or Independen∣cy is, or any other that can be devised by the wit of Man is or can be. And therefore I did hope they would not think of making any change or alteration in the legal and fundamental Consti∣tution either of Church or State, but only to re∣ctifie what they should find to be otherwise than according to the legal Constitution it ought to be in either of them, by causing the Laws of the one and the Canons of the other to be put in ex∣ecution. This I say I presumed to preach to the then House of Commons, as fearing there were many amongst them that were given to change, though not such and so horrible a change as they made afterwards both in the Church and State: For truly could I have foreseen, and had told any of their Grandees then (though it had been Cromwel himself) as the Prophet Elisha told Ha∣zael that he and those that joyn'd with him should do such things as afterwards he did, he would I believe have answered me as Hazael did the Prophet, What, do you think I am a Dog, that I should do such horrible and barbarous
things as you speak of? And yet both of them I mean Hazael and Cromwel did such things after∣wards; so dangerous a thing it is to leave the Road and to wander in by-paths: For as Grotius well observes, Verissimum illud, omnia incerta esse simul ac à jure recessum est: No man knows whi∣ther he is going when he is once out of the right way, nor whither the Devil may drive him, when he will not be led by Gods direction. And there∣fore I concluded, that in my humble opinion the best and wisest prayer that any could make unto God in the behalf of this Church and State, was, that if either of them had swerved from what it was or ought to be according to its legal consti∣tution, it might be reduced to its right frame and temper according to the standard; and that never Alteration or Innovation might be made in the fundamental constitution of either of them. And this Declaration I thought my self obliged in conscience to make, though I knew well e∣nough that many of my Auditors would be dis∣pleased with it, as indeed they were, as I found by their usage of me afterwards, though then it was too early to make any shew of it; and there∣fore I was presented with a Piece of Plate with this Inscription, Donum Populi Anglicani, as the other first three Preachers were, but not desired, as they were, to print my Sermon. I repeat this matter of fact to let the World The reason, why this Account given. know that, though I was then by some thought and said to be a Puritan, as I am now by others thought and said to be a Papist, I was then, and
ever had been, as I am now; and am now as I was then, and by the grace of God ever will be, a true Son of the CHƲRCH of ENGLAND, as it was then and is now by Law established; and consequently a loyal Subject to the King, whatsoever either Papists or Presbyterians may think, or rather make others believe they think of me. I am sure mine own conscience bears me witness, that I was always what I pretended my self to be, and all that knew me heretofore, and do know me now (whether Protestants, Pa∣pists or Presbyterians) will I am confident bear me witness that I was always as I am now both in judgment and practice, in relation both to the Secular Government of the State and the Ecclesiastical Government of the Church, and to the Monarchical Government over them both. Over them both I say; for there being two main parts or members of every Body Politick, and Church and State both sub∣ject to the Monarchy. consequently of Monarchy (especially amongst Christians) namely the State Civil and the State Ecclesiastical; if both these Parts or States of the Body Politick be not governed in chief by one and the same Person, they cannot be said to be parts or members of the same Monarchy.
CHAP. III. A like danger to Monarchy from Popery and Presby∣tery. Our Church-government justly commended. Division-mongers or Separatists as justly censured. BOth these States are not nor cannot be gover∣ned by one and the same Person, where the Popery and Presbytery both destructive to Monarchy. State Ecclesiastical or Government of the Church is either Popish or Presbyterian, because the State Ecclesiastical, if it be Popish, will be governed in chief by none but the Pope; and if it be Presby∣terian (Presbyterian I mean in the heighth, as it was in Scotland, and would have been in En∣gland) it will be governed in chief by none but it self; the one, to wit Popery, introducing a∣nother Soveraign; and the other, to wit Pres∣bytery, introducing another Soveraignty into the same body Politick, and consequently they are both of them destructive unto Monarchy. Neither can a Prince be Soveraign so much as in civilibus, in civil affairs, as long as another besides himself (either abroad or at home) doth claim and exercise a Soveraignty over the same Subjects, though it be but in Ecclesiasticis, in Church-affairs only. Because those that pretend to a Soveraign Po∣wer in Ecclesiasticals, (as indeed both the Con∣clave and the National Synod do pretend) must
needs pretend likewise to a Soveraign Power of judging what is Ecclesiastical, and consequently by affirming what they please to be Ecclesiastical, they may govern how they please even in those things that are meerly Civil also. So that supposing two distinct Supreme Judi∣catories, one Civil and the other Ecclesiastical in Two Supremes in one King∣dom incon∣sistent. the same Body Politick or in the same Kingdom, (as there must needs be, if the Government of the Church be either Popish or Presbyterian) there cannot choose but be perpetual clashing betwixt those two Jurisdictions and the abettors of them, the one continually either affronting and under∣mining, or being affronted and undermined by the other. And then let it be considered how the People in the mean time (who in several respects must be supposed to be equally subject to them both) must needs in case of contrary commands (there being no Appeal from the one unto the other) be distra∣cted and confounded betwixt them both; it be∣ing impossible (as Christ himself tells us) for a man to serve two Masters, of the which one is not sub∣ordinate unto the other; and as impossible like∣wise it is (as the same Christ tells us) for a King∣dom divided within it self, and consequently against it self (as every Kingdom having two Soveraign Powers in it at the same time must needs be) to stand, that is, to continue firm and stable with∣out falling at one time or other into such terrible Convulsions of Schisms, Factions and Seditions, as will finally bring it to Dissolution.
Many sad Instances of this truth we read of in History and Ex∣perience have taught us the inconvenience of the one and the other. our Chronicles whilst the usurped and exercised Ecclesiastical Supremacy in this Kingdom was in the Papacy, but none so sad, as those we our selves have seen and felt of late, whilst the Presbytery exercised in Scotland, and in England laid claim to, the same power. For indeed Popery and Pres∣bytery (though they look divers ways with their Heads;) yet they are tied together like Samson's Foxes by their Tayles, carrying the same Fire∣brands of combustion, wheresoever they come, I mean the same Principles of Sedition and Re∣bellion against Soveraign Princes and Estates, if they will not be ruled by them. And therefore as our Kings Predecessors, to re∣deem themselves and their People from the slave∣ry No fear of either's Return. of the Papacy, did wisely and couragiously drive out Popery; so it is not to be doubted but his Ma∣jesty that now is, to prevent the same or a worse bondage to the Consistory, will with the same wis∣dom and courage keep out the Presbytery; as be∣ing indeed where it governs in chief (as it would do wheresoever it is) a bondage by so much worse and more ignominious than Popery, by how much worse it is to be subject to many Tyrants than to one, and by how much less it is ignominious for a King to be a Vassal to a foreign Prince, than to all or any of his own Subjects. But thanks be to God, we have no reason to fear that either our King or Parliament will ever think of introducing either Popery or Presby∣tery to be predominant here amongst us, having had so sensible an experience formerly of the one
and lately of the other; especially being already possessed, as we are, of such an Ecclesiastical A just commen∣dation of our Church-Go∣vernment. Government, as was instituted by Christ and his Apostles, universally received and approved by the Primitive Christians; and by Law establi∣shed amongst our selves: a Government pretend∣ing to no power at all above the King, nor to no power under the King neither but from him, and by him, and for him: a Government enjoyning active obedience to all lawful commands of law∣ful Authority; and passive obedience when we cannot obey actively, forbidding and condemning all taking up of Arms offensive or defensive by Subjects of any quality or in any capacity against their Soveraign (whatsoever he be either in re∣gard of his Intellectuals, or his Morals, or his Re∣ligion) in any case, upon any pretence, or upon any provocation whatsoever: Finally, such a Go∣vernment as hath no relation to any foreign Prince or State to protect or assist it from abroad, nor any foundation in the Body of the Common People to rise up for it or with it at home; but having all its dependence under God upon the Crown; and all its security in and by the Law; and conse∣quently if at any time it happens to transgress against either, (as some times by the faults or frailties of particular men, I will not deny but it may) yet even then or in that case it will easily be corrected and reduced into order; and that by the ordinary course of Justice, without char∣ging the Subject or endangering the Peace of the Kingdom by levying a War to suppress it; and without fear of an Invasion from abroad, or an
Insurrection at home in defence of it; which can∣not in the same case be probably affirmed of either of the former. Having therefore such an excellent constitution of Government both Civil and Ecclesiastical as we What duty we owe to such a Constitution. have, and both of them by Law established, that which we have to do in the first place, is to be thankful to God for it, who hath not dealth so with any other Nation, and then not only to live quiet∣ly and peaceably and contentedly under it for the present; but to do what we can in our several places and stations for the upholding and perpe∣tuating of it, that our Posterity may have cause to bless God for it and for us also. And to that end in the first place to mark those (as the Apostle advises us Rom. c. 16. v. 17.) that make divisions amongst us, by libelling the Government either of the Church or State, either in their Pamphlets, or in their Pul∣pits; and to mark them so, as to set a Mark upon A mark to be set upon Divi∣ders. them, as men not to be followed but avoided by us, though they pretend never so much care of us or kindness to us. For such as these they were, who (as the Apostle tells us in the aforesaid place) did then as these do now, , by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. And the way not to be deceived by them, is, not to hearken to them, by resorting to their illegal Conventicles, and forsaking our own Legal Assemblies and Congregations, as the manner of some is: (Hebr. 10. 25.) And what manner of Men those are that do so, another Apostle tells us, The Character of Separatists. Ep. Jude, v. 16. They are murmurers, complainers, walking after their
own Lusts, and their mouth speaketh great swelling words, having mens Persons in admiration because of advantage. Whereunto, to compleat the Cha∣racter of them, he adds, These he they that se∣parate themselves, sensual, not having the V. 19. Spirit; which is as much as if he had said, though there be none that do more or do so much pretend to purity or having the Spirit as the Se∣paratists do; the only cause of their separation being, as some of them say, the sensuality and want of the Spirit in those from whom they sepa∣rate: yet indeed the cause of their separation is because themselves are sensual, and have not the They are sen∣sual. Spirit, or because they know not what spirit they are of; for as there be many kinds of Spirits, so there be many kinds of sensuality also; for Pride, and Envy, and Malice, and Slander, and especi∣ally speaking evil of Dignities, and covetousness, and every other inordinate or immoderate Affe∣ction are sensualities, as well as carnal Lust and Drunkenness; and so is Separation it self also. For when one saith I am of Paul, and another I am of Apollos, are you not carnal? saith the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. 4.. And are not (say I) all that are carnal, sensual? So that it is not Mens saying or thinking they have the Spirit will prove they have the Spirit; nor their calling themselves the Godly Party, will make them to be the Godly party; but their very being of a Party proveth them to be Schismaticks; and their being Schismaticks proveth them to be ungodly. I am sure every one of the Parties ap∣propriating the Spirit unto it self, and being so What Spirit it is guides them? divided as they are both in Doctrine and Worship
amongst themselves, is a demonstration that they are not inspired or guided by one and the same Spirit; or that they have not the Spirit of Ʋnity, nor consequently the Spirit of Sanctity, nor of Holiness neither, how boldly or boastingly soever they may pretend to it. But Mundus vult decipi, the World hath a mind to be deceived: for as long as there are Broachers of lies, there will be Be∣lievers of lies; for as the Father of lies tempts some to be the Teachers, so he tempts others to be the Believers of them. And therefore unless the Spirit of falshood and division and sedition, be by The ill Conse∣quence, if that Spirit be not restrained. the Spirit of truth of unity and of concord, cast out of them, that seem to be possessed with him (which is above all things to be wished and prayed for) or those that are so possest be kept from infecting others by teaching and printing with that intolera∣ble licence as they do, and have done for so many years together, we are not to expect to be long without another Civil War; and whether the ef∣fects of that will not be as bad or worse than the former, no man can tell: I am sure we are not al∣ways to expect miracles; I mean such a miracu∣lous deliverance as we have once had from so ma∣ny several sorts of arbitrary and Tyrannical Go∣vernments as that War brought us to, or rather as we our selves brought our selves to, by that Re∣bellion, and as such a rebellion as that was may, and nothing but such a rebellion as that was can (pro∣bably and humanely speaking) bring us to again.
CHAP. IV. An Expedient proposed to secure the Government both in Church and State, viz. some such Law, as the Scotch Test. The Heir of the Crown's be∣ing a Papist or a Presbyterian, &c. comes much to the same pass. FOR the preventing whereof, why should not The late exam∣ple of the Scots recom∣mended. we follow the example of the Scots in that which is good, as well as we did follow their ex∣ample in that which was evil? We took such a Covenant as they did, in order to the making and helping us to make such a War against our King and theirs, as they did, and for the alteration of the Government and Religion established by Law in both Kingdoms. And why should not we make such a Law as they have now made for the preservation of their Government and Religion, as it is now by Law established amongst them? why should not we, I say, make such a Law for the maintenance and preservation of the Government and Religion established by Law amongst Ʋs al∣so? Their Test. I mean such a Law, whereby all Men are dis∣abled Vid. the Acts and Laws made in Scot∣land. when the Duke of York was the Kings Commissioner there. An. 1681. and made uncapable of any Office or Place of Power and Trust, either Military or Civil or Ecclesiastical; as likewise of being chosen them∣selves, or of choosing others, to be Members of Parliament, as will not take such a Test and Oath
as they have taken in Scotland; that is, never to give their consent to the Alteration either of the Religion or of the Government either in Church or State, as it is there by Law established. Such a Law as this, and no worldly means but such a Law as this, will secure us and our Posterity from all that we fear or pretend to be afraid of; especially from Arbitrary Government and Popery, and from Presbytery too. For the Heir of the Crown may be a Presbyterian, or an Independent, or an Antino∣mian, The Heir of the Crown being a Presbyterian, &c. all one case, as his being a Papist. or an Anabaptist, or a Socinian, and may be every whit as great a Zealot and as much a Bigot in any of those perswasions, as any Papist can be in his; and consequently be as zealous and indu∣strious to promote, bring in, and set up his Reli∣gion for the Only or at least for the Predominant, Religion of the State, as any Papist can be to bring in Popery; and consequently to suppress all of any other perswasion but his own, and that perhaps with as bloody a persecution as ever any Papist did, when he hath as much power to do it. Of this One of the Sects hath given us proof more than enough already, I mean the Presbyteri∣ans, who for the setting up of their Dagon instead of the Ark of God, and for the abolishing of Mo∣narchy in the State as well as Episcopacy in the Just Reflections upon the Pres∣byterian Cove∣nant. Church, entred into that Antichristian League and Covenant with the Scots, whereby both Na∣tions were ingaged in a bloody War with and a∣gainst one another, of which the execrable effects, as no Act of Oblivion can ever make to be forgot∣ten, so can they never be remembred without
horror, nor indeed should be remembred without detestation of the procatarctical or promoting causes of it; of which the most principal and most energetical was that Presbyterian Solemn League and Covenant, for the setting up that Idol of theirs, the Presbyterian Government; for which they were so peremptorily and pertinaciously zea∣lous and ambitious, that in all their Treaties with the late King, one of the conditions of Peace al∣ways was the abolishing of Episcopacy, and setting up Presbytery instead of it; without consenting whereunto, and without taking of the Covenant, as the Scotch Presbyterians did refuse the late King, so the English Presbyterians would, if they might have had their will, have refused the present King to reign over them; as might be made ap∣pear by the Consultation had amongst the Gran∣dees of that Party to that purpose, till they found General Monks conduct prais'd. it would be in vain to stand upon such terms, the Noble and never to be forgotten General, the late Duke of Albemarle, being resolved to bring in the King as a King, without condition; and therefore as well for that, as for his whole most prudent as well as loyal and couragious Conduct in that great affair, I think that which was said of Fa∣bius Maximus, may be as properly and truly veri∣fied of him. Ʋnus homo nobis cunct ando restituit rem. That is, One Man by his wary conduct hath restored our State and welfare. And I wish it were engraven in Golden Letters upon his Tomb, ad sempiternam rei memoriam, for an everlasting Memorial.
But to return unto what I was speaking of; what I have said already is enough to prove, that a Presbyterian Heir of the Crown would do what The Sectaries will not indure Ʋs nor one another. he could to bring in and set up the Presbyterian Government, (which can no more consist with Monarchy in the State, than it can with Episcopacy in the Church) and make us all Presbyterians; as well as a Poish Heir would to bring in Popery, and to make us all Papists. And that they would not suffer any that would not conform to them and comply with them is evident, not only by what they did against us, that were as they call'd us Cavaliers and Malignants, but against their own Brethren in Iniquity, the Independents and all the rest of the Sectaries, their Fellow-Rebels against the King, and Companions in Arms against Us; all of whom they would have suppressed as well as they did Us, if it had been in their power to do so; as appears by their Books, Sermons and Ad∣dresses to that (which they call'd a Parliament) against them. And what the Presbyterians did against us, and would have done against the Independents by the Parliament, the Independents did against them by the Army. And so no doubt would any other of the Schismatical Parties have done against all the rest that were not of their perswasion, if they had got the power into their hands. But none of them (may some of their Friends They and the Papists much alike, as to cruelty. say) would have been so cruel as the Papists, who hold it not only lawful but meritorious to put Hereticks, that is, all that are not Papists, to death.
Did not the Presbyterians and Independents, and the rest of the Sectaries that joyned with them in the War against the King, think so too, when they kill'd as many as they could of the Royal Party, and when their Preachers incourag'd them to do so, which he that doubts of let him read Evange∣lium armatum for his conviction. But that they will say was but in the heat of blood, whilst the War lasted; afterwards they suffered us to live amongst them. And so (say I) do the Papists too, and to enjoy not only their lives, but their liberties and their legal possessi∣ons and goods also, in many, nay in most places where there is no Inquisition; which was more than we of the Church of England (especially we of the Clergie) were suffered to enjoy here under the Raign of either the Presbyterians or Indepen∣dents. And whether they would not have pro∣ceeded Their Princi∣ples much what the same, to blood, as well as the Papists, upon the account of Religion only, I have reason to doubt; or rather I have no reason to doubt but they would; for as it is a Popish opinion that all Here∣ticks are to be put to death, and that all that are not Papists are Hereticks; so it is a Presbyterian opinion that no Idolater is to be suffered to live, and that all Papists are Idolaters, as likewise that all the Bishops and Episcopal Party of the Church of England are Papists, and consequently Idola∣ters, that is, such as by the Law of God are to be put to death. And if they did not put this doctrine in practice here, as they have done in Scotland (witness the And practices too, upon oc∣casion. murder of the late Primate there upon the account
of Religion only, whatsoever the first printed Narrative of that horrid Fact said to the contrary) it was because their reign was so short, and be∣cause they were not so well setled in their Domi∣nion, as to think it safe for them to proceed so far. The Church of Rome her self did not at first pro∣ceed with that extremity of Rigor against those she calls Hereticks, as she did afterwards. It is but of late that the bloody Inquisition was set up by the Church of Rome, and that but in some places. And was not that of the Tryers here The Tryers a kind of Inqui∣sition. in England, in order to the depriving Men of their livelihoods though not of their lives, some such thing? And who can tell whether it might not have proceeded to deprivation of life also, as well as the Roman Inquisition doth, if it had gotten po∣wer and authority enough to support it? We know that the Anabaptists, who made a great part of that rebellious Army against the late An Instance from the Ana∣baptists. King of blessed Memory, were a Sect that did pro∣fess at first that it was not lawful for them to de∣fend either their Goods or their Lives, though ne∣ver so injuriously threatned or attempted to be ta∣ken away from them by any, though not their Su∣periors, but even by Thieves and Pirates; insomuch as they would not carry Guns in their Ships, when they went to Sea, for fear of being tempted to make resistence in defence of their Goods or of themselves, by having wherewithal to do it. And yet I have been credibly informed, that there were none in that rebellious Army, whose feet were more swift and their hands more ready to shed blood than theirs of that Sect were, as fearing to offend
God by doing his work negligently; or that their own lives should go for theirs, if they spared or suffered any to escape, whom it was in their power to kill. So that now, as one of their Officers said lately, The Sword is become a good Ordinance of God in its season. And of the same mind with the A∣nabaptists (if they be not yet) may the Quakers The like may be judg'd of the other Sects. and all the rest of the Sectaries come in time to be also, together with those merely moral Philoso∣phical Christians (I mean the Socinians) themselves, how much soever they seem for the present to dis∣like the propagating of Religion by force; which there is no Sect but doth profess also, whilst they want power to practise it themselves; It being as natural for all sorts of Hereticks and Sectaries to endeavour the propagating of their opinions, by making as many Proselytes as they can, as it is for single Persons to desire and endeavour the propa∣gating of their kind by natural Generation. CHAP. V. The Exclusion of the right Heir, contrary to the Law of God, both Natural and Positive. SUpposing therefore (but not granting) the pre∣sent The danger, if the Heir of the Crown be of any other Religion, alike, as if he be a Papist. Heir of the Crown to be a Papist; as I will not deny but that he may (as long as he continues
to be so) wish and desire that all were of the same Religion; so they that would have him excluded upon that Account, must needs grant likewise, that if any Heir of the Crown after him, or at any time hereafter shall chance to be of any other Re∣ligion than that established by Law, and conse∣quently as desirous as a Papist can be to change or abolish that and bring in his own in the stead of it, which may be as bad or perhaps worse than Popery, (as I take not only Paganism (whatsoever Julian the Apostate saith to the contrary) but So∣cinianism to be also.) They must grant, I say, that upon the same account whosoever shall be of any other than the established Religion, must be excluded from succession to the Crown, for fear of the alteration he may possibly make of the establi∣shed Religion in the Church, and probably of the established Government in the State also. Which I confess to be a thing of such dangerous conse∣quence, that it ought to be prevented and provi∣ded against by any lawful effectual Means What Means to be used, to prevent this danger. that can be made use of to that purpose; especi∣ally where the present constitution of the Church and State is such as ours is, that is such a one, as I think (all things considered) there cannot be a better; and therefore I say it will become the wisdom of the State to prevent (as much as by humane prudence it may be prevented) any alte∣ration either of the Religion or of the Government (I mean as to the essentials of either of them:) but then it must be by the use of such Means as are lawful and effectual.
And first the Means that must be made use of to prevent such an alteration must be lawful, evidently and undoubtedly lawful, and that both in relation to the Law of God, and in relation to the Law of the Land also. But the excluding of the right Heir from his Inheritance seems to be contrary to both; and The Exclusion of the right Heir, against the practice of all Nations; by the right Heir, I mean the first-born, or him that is nearest in bloud to him that is, or was for, merly in possession. And that such a one hath a right of succession, from which God would not have him to be excluded, appears by the almost universal practice of all Nations in all Ages and in all Places, which Practice being every where and almost the same among those, that in all things else differ so much from one another, must needs proceed from some Principle common to them And conse∣quently against the Law of Nature. all; and what can that be but the Law of Nature? and what is the Law of Nature but the Law of God himself written in mens hearts? And therefore it was according to this Law (before there was any positive Law of God or Man in the case) that Jacob in blessing of his Children Jacob's three eldest Sons for∣feited their Birth-right. before his death did acknowledge Reuben's right of Primogeniture, by saying that his was the excel∣lency of dignity and the excellency of power, because Gen c. 49. v. 3, 4. he was his first-born, if he had not forfeited it by defiling his Father's Bed, and consequently by committing Incest as well as Adultery, crimes pu∣nishable by death, even in those days; as appears by Judah's condemning his Daughter-in-Law Thamar to be burnt, supposing her to have been an Adulteress. And it was for a crime punish∣able
by death also, that Simeon and Levi the two next eldest Sons of Jacob lost the priviledge of their Birth-right also; namely for being guilty of the horrible murder of the Inhabitants of the whole City of Shechem. And thus the dignity of Excellency and the dignity of Power came to be the Inheritance of Judah, Jacob's fourth Son, because the three Elder Brothers had forfeited their Right thereunto by being guilty of such Crimes as were punishable by death: which guilt of theirs being given by their Father Jacob as a reason why, or cause for which they were disinherited; from thence we may infer, first, that naturally or ac∣cording to the Law of Nature the Eldest; and con∣sequently the next in bloud hath a right to inherit before those that are younger, or those that are farther off: And (2dly) That they are not to be Two Cases of disherison. excluded from that right of theirs, but for some very great crime, or unless God, who disposeth of all things as he pleaseth, do prefer the younger be∣fore the elder, as he did Jacob before Esau, Ephraim before Manasses, and David the youngest before all his elder Brethren; though Isaac, and Joseph, and Samuel himself seem to wonder why he did so, it being contrary to the dictates of Nature and the general practice of all Mankind; and contrary to the general Positive Law of God himself also The Right of Inheritance, according to Gods positive Law. concerning the descent of Inheritances from Fa∣ther to Son; and if he have no Son, to his Daugh∣ters, and if he have no Daughters to his nearest Kinsman of his Family, as is set down at large, Numb. 27. from Verse the 8th. to the 12th. com∣pared with Deuteronomy the 21. v. 16. where it is
said that if a Man have a younger Son by a Wife that he loves better than he loved her by whom he had his eldest Son, he shall not make the Son of his beloved Wife the first-born, (that is, his Heir) before the Son of the Wife whom he hated, who is indeed the first-born or indeed his eldest, and therefore indeed and in right his Heir: which right it seems by the Text his Father could not deprive him of or take from him, unless he were so rebellious and incorrigible as that he was to be stoned by the People and put to death for it, as may be gathered from the Verses immediately following in the aforesaid Chapter. So that it seems it was not by the Positive Law of God, in the power of the Father to deprive his eldest Son of his Birth right for any thing less than would deprive him of his Life; neither was a younger Son to be preferr'd before the eldest, as to the Prerogatives of Birth-right, because he was a better Man or a better Son; because the Preroga∣tive of Birth-right was not founded in Grace, but in Nature; and therefore though Cain was grace∣less and impious, and Abel a righteous and reli∣gious Person, yet God tells Cain that he was to rule over Abel, which he could have no right or title to, but because he was his elder Brother; and so was profane Esau to rule over Jacob upon that Account only, if he had not sold him his Birth∣right, and with it his Right and Title to Lord∣ship over him. And as this was the way of succeeding in the Government of Families, so was it in the Go∣vernment The like in succession of Kingdoms. of Kingdoms also; generally amongst
the Gentiles as they were led by the light and in∣stinct of Nature only, and particularly amongst the Jews by the Positive Law of God, as ap∣pears by the Catalogue and Genealogy of the Kings of Juda, where the eldest of the Sons did always succeed his Father in the Kingdom with∣out interruption, unless God himself (who is King of Kings) was pleased to interpose, as he did in the succession of David to Saul, and of Solomon to Da∣vid, which were both of them Acts of God's Pre∣rogative, and not according to the ordinary course of Law amongst the Jews, as appears by Solomon's answer to his Mother Batshebah when she spake to him to let his Brother Adonijah have Abishag the Shunamite to Wife; Ask for him, said he, the King∣dom also; for he is mine elder Brother: which is a 1 Kings c. 2. v. 22. plain confession of Solomon himself that according to the ordinary course of Law then in force. Ado∣nijah A donijah his Case, and why Solo∣mon preferr'd to the Throne. should have succeeded David in the King∣dom, had not David (who was a Prophet as well as a King) known God's mind to the contrary: And indeed God had made known his mind unto David concerning Solomon by Nathan the Pro∣phet, when assoon as he was born he called his name Jedidiah, that is, beloved of the Lord, there∣by making David to understand that he was de∣sign'd to succeed him in the Throne. Whereunto may be added that perhaps Adonijah was confe∣derate with Absolom (whose Brother he was by the same Mother) in his rebellion against David, and consequently had forfeited what was due to 1 Kings c. 1. v. 6. him by his Birth-right, being guilty of what he deserved to be put to death for, though by reason
of his Fathers fondness of him he was not put to death for it. Ibid. But whether this, or God's Intimation of his pleasure to David by Nathan the Prophet, were the reason that Solomon the younger Brother was preferred before Adonijah the eldest to succeed Da∣vid in the Kingdom, it is evident by Solomon's aforesaid answer to his Mother, and by the con∣stant course of succession in that Kingdom, that there, as well as in all other Nations, the eldest Son or nearest in bloud was legally to succeed in Thrones as well as in Families, and do so still, and are of right to do so in all Hereditary Kingdoms: from which right grounded upon the Law of Na∣ture, attested by the general practice of all Man∣kind in all places, and in all ages, and ratified by God's positive Law to his own People; I see not how any man can be excluded without some kind of Violation of the Law of Nature, or without some kind of unbecoming Reflection upon the Positive Law of God it self, as if God had not made as good and as wise a Law to obviate all incon∣veniences for his own People, as any People could make for themselves.
CHAP. VI. Such Exclusion, against the Law of the Land also; and were there or could there be such a Law, it would be unjust in the present case, and of dange∣rous consequence. BUT if it be said that several Nations, accor∣ding Granting that the Judicial Law obligeth none but Jews; to several Climates they live in, may be of several Inclinations and dispositions, and there∣fore that a Law which may be very proper and useful for one sort of People may not be so conve∣nient for another, and consequently that the Ju∣dicial Law which God gave to the Jews, though it were best for them, it may not be best for us or for any other Nation: nay, because it was best for them it cannot be best for all other Nations or for any other Nation, that are naturally of a contra∣ry or of another kind of temper or constitution than they were; so that the Judicial Law of the Jews obligeth none but those for whom it was made, and to whom it was given, God having left it free to those that have the Legislative power in every Nation to make such Laws, as they think most proper and most effectual for the well governing themselves; so that they command nothing that is forbidden, nor forbid nothing that is command∣ed by the Moral Law of God.
Be it so, and be it supposed likewise though not granted, that there is nothing in the Natural or The Exclusion of the right Heir is contra∣ry to the Law of the Land. Moral Law of God against disinheriting of the right Heir of an Hereditary Kingdom: let us see whether there be any Law of the Land, or any legal way according to the constitution of this Kingdom of ours, that can warrant the doing of it; unless the Heir of the Crown be guilty of some such crime, as by Law is a forfeiture of his Life as well as his Birth-right; which one Case excep∣ted (wherein the present Heir of the Crown is not so much as pretended to be at all concerned) I demand first whether there be any Law now in being for excluding the right Heir of this Here∣ditary No such Law now in being; Kingdom, upon the pretence that is alledged but not proved against him: for if there be no such Law, there can be no such transgression, be∣cause every  must be (as St. John tells us) an , every transgression must be a transgressi∣on of some Law or other; and where there is no Law there is no Transgression, saith St. Paul. If it be said, that though he cannot be exclu∣ded, by any Law already made, yet a Law may be made by Act of Parliament which may exclude him; I demand again, whether according to the fundamental and essential constitutions of Parlia∣ment there can be any Act of Parliament, or any Law made by Act of Parliament, without the Lords and the Kings consent to it, as well as that Nor can be made, without the Kings con∣sent; of the House of Commons? if not, as yet there is not, so more than probably there will never be any such Act pass, or Law made, the King and
Lords having already declared their dissent from it. But (3dly) supposing the King and Lords should agree with the House of Commons to make a Law for the excluding of the next Heir of the Crown, up∣on such an accompt as never any Heir of the Crown was excluded before, nor by Law to be excluded; and consequently for which he could not foresee that he deserved or was to be excluded; I demand by what reason, justice, or equity that Nor, were it made, would be just, in the present Case. Law can be prejudicial to him, or to any right of his, all Laws being to look forwards, and not back∣wards, (that is) to enjoyn or prohibit something for the future upon such or such Penalties for the disobeying of them, but not for the punishing of any thing that was done before there was any such Law for the prohibiting of it; so that sup∣posing, but not granting that by such a Law the Heir of the Crown might justly be excluded from the succession for the future; yet he that is Heir at present, and was so before any such Law was made, cannot (as I humbly conceive) upon such a pretence be excluded without violence done unto the Law, as well as injury done unto himself. If it be said that Salus Populi est suprema lex, the safety of the People is the supreme Law, and that the safety of the Kingdom doth require that as such a Law should be presently made, so it should be presently executed also; I answer that the Su∣preme Law is, That no evil should be done that good may come thereof; and besides that, the safety and peace of the Kingdom would in all pro∣bability The dangerous consequence of such a Law. be much more indangered by the putting
or attempting to put such a Law in Execution, then it is yet, or I hope ever will be, for want of such a Law, the present execution whereof would for fear of but a supposed uncertain future evil (which many things we do see, and many more we do not see may hinder) put us into a real, a certain, and a present as evil a condition, as any we seem to be afraid of, and desirous to prevent; I mean a present Civil War; and perhaps a Fo∣reign War too. And then Dic mihi quis furor est ne moriare mori? Tell me, what madness is it to kill ones self for fear of being killed? I say, what a madness is it to run into a present greater evil, to prevent a less, that is to come, and probably may not come at all? CHAP. VII. Supposing such a Law, it would not be effectual for the keeping out of Popery and Arbitrary Govern∣ment. TO conclude, supposing such a Law should be justly made and justly executed upon the preset Heir of the Crown; and supposing too that Inconvenience from abroad and at home should not follow upon it for the present: How would this secure us from the bringing in of Popery for
the future, unless the Act or Law should be made to extend to the excluding all future Heirs of the Crown as well as the present, that might be suspe∣cted Such a Law, if made and exe∣cuted, would not be effectual against future Heirs. to be Papists, though not legally proved to be so? Would it not be easie for any future Heir of the Crown to defeat the efficacy of it, and to avoid the Execution of it upon himself, by concealing his being of that religion till he was King? And then it is a known Maxime of our Law, that the Crown takes away all defects in him, I sup∣pose it means, that is the rightful Heir to it, and against whom (after he is King) as no force can be used without a Rebellion, so no Law can be made without Ʋsurpution; the one being the ta∣king of his Sword, and the other the taking of his Scepter out of his hands: so that if such a Law be made to extend to the exclusion of all future Heirs of the Crown as well as the present, it would not be effectual for the keeping out of Popery, and much less for the keeping out of Arbitrary Go∣vernment; or for the securing of the Protestant Religion; unless we shall say that nothing but Popery can bring in Arbitrary Government, which is to lie against our late experience to the contra∣ry, Arbitrary Go∣vernment may be brought in by other ways, as well as by Po∣pery. when Tyranny, and Tyranny in the highest de∣gree, and under many several sorts of Tyrants, was brought in without Popery, and the Protestànt Re∣ligion of the Church of England was not only sup∣pressed and persecuted, but endeavoured to be quite extirpated, and for ever to be abolished, by the greatest pretenders of enmity to Popery; though indeed the greatest of its Friends, and the most likely to be a most effectual means to bring
it in, by their then endeavouring to overthrow, and by their now endeavouring to undermine the stron∣gest Bulwark, the Protestant Religion truly so called hath in the World against Popery, I mean the Protestant Religion of the Church of England. And as this Church of ours according to the present legal constitution of it, both as to Do∣ctrine A brief com∣mendation of the Church of England and the Civil Go∣vernment. and Government, is the best fenced of any Church in the World, not only against Popery, but all other Heresies and Schisms; some of them as bad if not worse both in their speculative and practical opinions than Popery it self is: So the legal constitution of our civil Government also is, (I verily believe) the best Government now ex∣tant in the World, or perhaps ever was or can be for the keeping out of Tyranny or arbitrary Govern∣ment; of what disposition or religion soever the Prince or Governour in chief (for the time) shall happen to be of, so the legal established constitution of the Government be not altered. CHAP. VIII. The Scotch Test an Assurance that there can no change be in Government, either of Church or State. The case of Protestants in Queen Maries time much dif∣ferent from what it is now. FOR preventing whereof the best, and (as I verily believe) the only effectual means, that can be devised and put in practice, is (as I said be∣fore)
the making of such an Act of Parliament here in England as is lately made in Scotland, viz. That for the future no Man shall be capable of any The Scotch Test proposed, to keep out Popery and Arbitrary Go∣vernment. place, power, trust or profit, Military, Civil or Ecclesi∣astical; or to choose or be chosen a Parliament man; but he that will take such a Test, as is there specified, (viz.) That he will never give his consent for the al∣teration either of the Religion or the Government by Law established in the Church and State. Which being once enacted, I for my part cannot foresee how either Popery or Arbitrary, I might add or any other Government or Religion prejudicial to the rights either of King or Subject, can be brought in amongst us, but by an absolute conquest of the whole Nation. For as for Popery and Arbitrary Govern∣ment Which upon the supposition of such a Law, cannot be brought in; (the pretended Objects of our present fears) that they will be brought in by a Popish Suc∣cessor, (supposing there be any such) if he be not excluded, the aforesaid Act after it is enacted will make it impossible for him to effect it, though he have never so strong an Inclination or desire to do it. For if he endeavour to do it, it must be either by force or fair means; if by force, it must be ei∣ther Neither by force, by an Army of his own Subjects or of Foreign∣ers; if by an Army of his own Subjects, it must be an Army of Papists only, which being not one to 500. in proportion to the rest of the Nation, and all of them excluded by the aforesaid Act from all places of Power or Trust, will make but a very inconsiderable handful of Men to attempt, and much less to effect any thing by force against the
Body of the Nation, whom we are to suppose to be obliged by the aforesaid Act not to consent to, and much less to assist the bringing in either of Popery or Arbitrary Government. So that if it be by force, it must be by an Army of Foreigners, and such an Army as shall be able to subdue the whole Nation; and then he that brings them in cannot choose but fear they will subdue us for themselves, and not for him; and therefore will take heed of running such a hazard for any consideration whatsoever. We are not therefore to fear it will be attem∣pted to be done by force: Nor that it can be ef∣fected if it should be attempted to be done by fair Nor by fair means. means neither, that is, by Law, or by making any Act of Parliament for the introducing of Po∣pery, when there shall be an Act before in force to prevent any Man's choosing or being chosen a Member of the House of Commons, that is not ob∣liged by Oath never to give his consent to the pas∣sing of such an Act, and all Popish Lords are alrea∣dy excluded from voting in the House of Lords. But why may not a Popish Successor cause both these Acts to be repealed? as Queen MARY did, An Objection from what Queen Mary did. for the Reducing of Popery, those that were made by Her Brother Edward the Sixth, for the Exclu∣ding of Popery? I answer, because of the vast difference between those times and these. Then the Protestant Reli∣gion The Case much different then, from what it is now. was but begun to be planted in this Kingdom, and had not taken root enough for the setling and growth and continuance of it, much the major part of the People being still Popishly affected in their
Hearts, though they were by the Laws then in force restrain'd from the open profession of it; as appear'd by their so readily and so gladly returning (as most of them did) to it, and by their not only accepting but desiring and purchasing the Pape's Absolution for revolting from it. So that it was ve∣ry easie for Queen Mary to make that Alteration which she did by repealing such Acts and Laws as she found in favour of the Protestant Religion, and to re-enact or restore such as were for the establish∣ment of Popery, which she found to have been re∣pealed by Her Predecessor. And to make this work of hers the more easie, she did and could without any legal impediment to the contrary bestow all places of Trust, Power and Profit, Civil, Military and Ecclesiastical upon such as were as zealous as she her self was for the suppressing of the Prote∣stant, and setting up of the Roman Religion instead of it. Whereas now the Protestant Religion has been setled here in England for above fourscore years before the Rebellion and above twenty years since, and the Popish suppress'd for twenty years longer, even during all the time of the Rebellion it self, whilst the Sectaries usurped the Supreme Power, and whilst the Protestant Religion of the Church of England was suppress'd and persecuted also. But all that while Popery was kept down and Presbytery was set up, and spread it self so much in and over all parts of the whole Kingdom, that we have much more reason to fear the alteration of Government both in Church and State by setting up of Presby∣tery Prebytery more likely to alter the Government than Popery. instead of Episcopacy in the one, and of a
Commonwealth instead of Monarchy in the o∣ther, than Popery or Arbitrary Government under a King in either; as long as the Laws we have al∣ready against both are in force, whereby all Papists are made uncapable of having any thing to do in the Government as it now is, and of doing any thing towards the alteration of it by repealing or giving their votes for repealing any of those Laws that are in force against Popery, or for the making of any new Laws in favour of it, being (as I said before) excluded from sitting in either of the Hou∣ses; without the consent of the major part of which Houses the King himself (though he be the sole Law∣giver or sole maker of our Laws properly speaking as I have proved at large already) can neither make nor repeal Laws; but is according to the legal con∣stitution of this Kingdom oblig'd, and has obliged himself neither to make any New Laws nor to re∣peal any Old ones, nor to Govern any otherways than by such Laws as are in force and have been or shall be so made, that is, with the consent of both Houses of Parliament, either by himself or by His Predecessors. So that there wants nothing to per∣petuate our happiness under the best Government that ever any People did or can live under, but to be assured that never any change (as to the species and essentials of it) shall be made in it; And such Such a Test will be an as∣surance of no change to be. an assurance (as far as any thing in this world can be assured) the making of such an Act here for the taking of such a Test (as is already made and taken in Scotland) will give us, of what Perswasion so∣ever in point of Religion, or of what Inclination soever in point of Government, the Successor to the
Crown at any time may chance to be, especially after he hath taken the Coronation Oath to Go∣vern no otherwise than by Laws made and to be made by Act of Parliament. CHAP. IX. The Coronation-Oath alike dispensable, whether the Successor be a Papist or a Presbyterian. Mr. B.'s judgment of our Government, and his wish for bet∣ter order in choice of Parliament-men; with the Bishops judgment what ought to be their main Qua∣lification. IF it be objected that if the Successor be a Papist, there is no Oath he can take, but he An Objection; that a Popish Successor will be absolv'd from his Oath. may be and will be by the Pope easily and willing∣ly absolved from the Sin in taking it, and from the Obligation to keep it. I answer first, that the same Objection will be as valid against a Presbyterian as against a Po∣pish The thing the same if a Pres∣byterian. Successor; for that the Classis as well as the Conclave can dispense with the obligation of Oaths, we have seen and felt too: For what was the im∣posing of the Solemn League and Covenant, but a discharging of those that took it, by those that perswaded them to take it, from being any longer obliged by the Oāths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which they had formerly taken? But Secondly, my answer is, that I do not ground The full ground of that Assu∣rance of no Change to be in the Govern∣ment. the Assurance of the continuance of our present Government either in Church or State, either wholly
or chiefly upon the Successors keeping of his Coro∣nation Oath (of what perswasion soever he is or may be) but upon the a version which 99. parts at least of an 100. of the whole Nation have from Popery and Arbitrary Government, and upon the Laws already in force against both, and upon the supposition of such a new Law to be made here as there is in Scotland for the preserving and securing of the old ones: viz. That no man be capacitated to choose or be chosen to be a Parliament-man, be∣fore He hath taken that or such another Oath as that, which by the aforesaid Act of Parliament in Scotland is prescribed and enjoyned to be taken. Which Oath why those that fear the bringing in of Popery and Arbitrary Government should not be very willing to take, I can see no reason, unless they would bring in something else as destructive to the present Government as Popery it self: and then I see no reason neither why they should not be excluded from choosing and being chosen mem∣bers of Parliament as well as the Papists are? For why should any that are Enemies to the Government, one way or other, be put in a capacity either to undermine the foundation or to weaken the props and the Pillars of it? or to make any substantial alteration in it? considering (as Mr. Baxter himself confesseth) That for ought he sees the Government of Mr. B.'s own commendation of our Govern∣ment. this Commonwealth (I presume he takes the word Commonwealth not as a specifical but a generical No∣tion, as it signifies any body Politick) is already ballanced with as much prudence, caution and equality, Vid. H. Com. p. 207. as the curiousest of the models that self conceited men would obtrude with so much ostentation.
And that by Government of this Common∣wealth What he means by the Govern∣ment of this Common-wealth. he means the Government of this King∣dom, not as it was governed by a State before the Usurpation of Cromwel the Father, or by the Ar∣my and Rump-Parliament, after the deposing of Cromwel the Son, but as it was to be Govern'd ac∣cording to the Legal constitution by King, Lords and Commons, that is, by a King Governing by Laws made with the consent of the Lords and Commons in Parliament. I take this (I say) to be Mr. Baxter's meaning by that which he calls the Government of this Common-wealth: because in o∣ther places he seems not only to dislike but abhor Vid. H Com. from 89. to the 104 page. the Government of a Common-wealth in a spe∣cifical Notion, that is, as it signifies a Democrati∣cal or popular Government, for no fewer than 20. several reasons; at the end of which (he saith) I conclude therefore that this Ignorant, impious, mutable, cruel, violent rout shall never have my consent for the Soveraignty: and in another place (as I have al∣ready observed) he saith that although the two Houses of Parliament, as having (he thinks) a part of the Soveraignty, may lawfully in defence of that part of theirs make War against the King, or those commissioned by the King; yet though in that contest they get the victory, they do not thereby gain the whole Soveraignty to themselves, nor can∣not alter the former constitution, but must have the same, or some other King in his stead; where∣by it plainly appears that by the aforesaid Govern∣ment of this Common-wealth, as he cannot mean a Democratical or popular, so he cannot mean an A∣ristocratical or a Parliamentary Government with∣out
a King. And therefore if he will sibi constare, hold to what he saith, and not contradict Himself (as he does in many other things) by that Govern∣ment of this Common-wealth, which he saith is alrea∣dy ballanced with so much prudence and caution, he must needs mean this political regulated Monarchy of ours, which we now enjoy; and consequently that it ought not to be chang'd for any other form, frame or model of Government, which the curiosity of self conceited men (saith Mr. Baxter) he might have said, or the Ambition of Proud, or the greediness of Covetous, or the malice of Discontented, or the Bigotry of Hereticks, or the peevishness of Schis∣maticks, may endeavour to obtrude upon us instead of it. For preventing whereof, I could wish (as he doth in the same place) that some better order were taken for the Exclusion of unworthy persons His wish for better order in Election of Parliament∣men. H. Com. W. Page 27. & 208. from Electing or being Elected members of Parlia∣ment, that so (says he) being out of danger of impi∣ous Parliaments, chosen by an impious Majority of the People, we should then build all the Fabrick of our Go∣vernment on a Rock, which else will have a foundati∣on of Sand: And then a multitude of errors would thus be corrected at once, and more done for our hap∣piness than a thousand of the new Fantastical devices will accomplish. Euge, well said again Mr. Baxter! No man can Wherein the Bishop agrees with him. more heartily say Amen than I can to this wish of yours, that none were to choose or to be chosen Par∣liament-men, but those that were worthy to choose and to be chosen; nor no man can more fully concur with you in this Opinion than I do, That such a Parliament so chosen would be more
effectual for the Establishment of our Government upon a Rocky or impregnable foundation, as like∣wise for the correcting of such errors and miscar∣riages, as by reason of the ill management of the best Government, are, or possibly may be in it, and consequently for the making of us more happy than any new Fantastically devised model of Go∣vernment can do. In all this, I say, I agree with Mr. Baxter; But in the Notion of who are worthy or unworthy to choose or to be chosen, I am afraid we shall differ very much; for perhaps Mr. Bax∣ter and those of his Party may think those that Whom Mr B. perhaps thinks worhty to choose or be chosen. are Dissenters from the Government of the Church are the only worthy men to choose and to be cho∣sen Members of the Parliament; I am sure by that stir and stickling they have made in the late Elections for Knights and Burgesses in all Counties and Corporations it appears they think so. Where∣as I am of opinion that none but such as are con∣formable Whom the Bi∣shop thinks such. in point of Judgment and well inclin'd in point of Affection to the present Government both in Church and State, as to the species or kind of either, (that is, as the one is Monarchical and the other Episcopal) is fit to choose or to be chosen a Parliament-man, and consequently that none of those that are not well affected to the present Go∣vernment are fit to choose or to be chosen, though they pretend never so much to be the Godly party; nay though they were indeed as good and Godly men as they say they are, and would have others believe them to be. For though as Moses wish'd, that all the Lords people were Prophets, and yet did not think them to be so; so I wish that all good
and Godly men were wise and prudent men also, but I cannot believe they are so; nor consequent∣ly that they are sufficiently qualified either to be Statesmen themselves, or to discern who are fit to be Statesmen. And unskilful though well meaning Workmen may be marring whilst they think they are mending, and pluck down more in a day than wiser men can build up again in a year. And there∣fore the Fabrick of our present Government being so good a one as that Mr. Baxter himself by prefer∣ing it before any new Fantastical mode or model that can be devised, or obtruded upon us, doth as good as confess there cannot be a better; certain∣ly the main care that is to be taken by the wisdom of the State is to prevent the alteration or change of it: And consequently the main Qualification The main qua∣lification of a Parliament∣man. to be required in those that choose and are to be chosen to be States-men, is their being obliged to maintain and uphold the present Government as it is by Law established (I still mean as to the species or kind of it) and then as wise and good men may find work enough (without medling with remo∣ving or moving of Foundations) to mend the faults that are, and to prevent those that may be in the superstructure: So those that are not so wise as they should be, nor so good as they would seem to be (and those are the men most likely to be medling) will not be able to do any great harm, so long as the foundations themselves are secured from being undermined or overthrown by them.
CHAP. X. The excluding some Persons from choosing or being chosen into Parliament, no injury. The Test re∣inforced upon this account that, if the Successor con∣sent to it, it cannot but hold good. IF it be objected that the making of such a Law would be the excluding of many of the Free∣men An Objection against the Test. and Free-holders of the People from one of the greatest of the priviledges of their Birthright, namely, the choosing and being chosen Members of Parliament. I Answer, that if the security of the Government and the Peace and Welfare of the Kingdom re∣quire A threefold Answer. it, and the Majority of the Peoples represen∣tatives (without which it cannot be done) consent to it, it is no more than in many other cases is done already. Secondly, I answer, that in this very case All the Papists (who if they be not a great number, I wonder why we should be so much afraid of them) all the Papists (I say) who are all of them Free-men, and as Freemen have a right to choose and be chosen into the House of Commons, and some of them by Birth to be Peers of the Realm, yet are all of them excluded from both Houses, and so are all Out-law'd and Excommunicated persons, and such are or should be all the Sectaries that will not come unto our Churches. Thirdly, Did not both Houses of Parliament make it one of the conditions of Peace with the
late King, that none that had serv'd him against them should be capable of sitting in either of the Houses for Twenty one years to come? And why might not the King with much more reason have demanded the exclusion of all those that had fought for the Parliament against Him from the same priviledge? Or why may not those that will not oblige themselves by Oath to maintain the Govern∣ment legally established by King, Lords and Com∣mons be much more reasonably, and much more justly and equitably excluded from having any thing to do in the Government, or in the making of our Laws than those that would not take the Oath of Abjuration and of being faithful to the Govern∣ment, as it was illegally set up without King and Lords, were excluded not only from choosing or being chosen into Parliaments, but from having any protection or benefit of the Laws by the up∣start Free-state, (as they call'd themselves) but were indeed no better than Rebels and Robbers. It is not therefore to be doubted but that such a Law, as is made in Scotland, may by the same Au∣thority A reinforce∣ment of the Test; respectively be made in England and in Ireland also; Neither is it to be doubted but that such a Law, if it were made, would be the best se∣curity that can be given against the bringing in of Popery or Arbitrary Government; especially if the rightful Successor will not oppose but pro∣mote the making of such a Law here, as I do verily believe, and as all reasonable men have reason to believe, he will; because he did not only consent to, but promote the making of that Law in Scot∣land. And if he be willing not only to Which if con∣sented to by the Successor, no reason to be∣lieve but it will be kept. consent to,
but to promote the making of such a Law here, why should we not believe that he intends and resolves to keep it and maintain it also, whatso∣ever his own private perswasion in point of Reli∣gion may be for the present (for God may and I hope will perswade Japheth to dwell in the Tents of Shem) or continue to be for the future? For if he did not intend and resolve it should be kept when it is made, and consequently that Popery and Arbitrary Government should be kept out by it, no∣thing could be more imprudent than to promote the making of such a Law, whereby all that have or are to have interest in the making and repealing of Laws, and in all places of trust and power, Ci∣vil, Military and Ecclesiastical, in both Kingdoms, are to be obliged by Oath never to consent to the alteration of the Government, as it is now by Law established, nor consequently to the bringing in ei∣ther of Popery or Arbitrary Government; which Oath when they have taken, as they cannot be dis∣pens'd with for the breaking it, if they would, so they would not if they could; being such as are to be supposed to be enemies both to Popery, and Arbitrary Government, and therefore such as would do, what legally they could, for keeping out of both, though they were not sworn, and much more being sworn to do so. And therefore it is not to be supposed that the Successor intends or means to attempt the bringing in of either of them, if he be willing such a Law should be made, as will make it exceedingly difficult, if not utterly impossible for him to do it. Let us try therefore whether He will not consent to the making of
such a Law here, as willingly as he has done in Scotland, and let the consenting or not consenting to the making of such a Law here, as there is there, and the taking, or refusing to take such an Oath, as by that Law is prescribed to be taken by those that are to choose, or to be chosen Members of Par∣liament for the future, be the , the mark of trial, whereby to Judge who are friends and who are enemies to the present Government, and who are most likely to desire and endeavour an alteration of it. CHAP. XI. Some of Mr. Baxter's Principles, grounds of Rebel∣lion. An unhappy Instance of difference about Pri∣viledge betwixt the two Houses of Parliament. AND thus I have done with what I thought my self especially concern'd to do, namely, the justifying of my Exceptions against those Po∣litical Theses in Mr. Baxter's Holy Commonwealth, whereby he endeavours to justifie the Rebellion A Recital of some of Mr. B's Principles, by which he ju∣stifies the late Rebellion; against the late King, and to countenance and en∣courage any Rebellion upon the same grounds a∣gainst this or any other of our Kings for the fu∣ture. For first, if the Soveraignty was divided then betwixt the King and the two Houses of Parlia∣ment, so it is now, and so it will be always as long as the present constitution of our Government shall continue. Secondly, if where the Soveraignty is divided they that have any share in it, may by force
of Arms defend their part of it against whosoever attempts to take it from them. Thirdly, if the two Houses are to be believed and assisted by the People, whensoever they shall declare that the King takes away or attempts to take away their part of the Soveraignty, (all which are Mr. Baxter's Politi∣cal Aphorisms or Maxims of State) doth it not follow that when and as often as there is a corrupt Majority in both Houses (as Mr. Baxter grants there may be, and we by woful experience have found there has been) doth it not follow, I say, from these Principles of Mr. Baxter's, that the and by which upon the like occasion Rebel∣lion is incou∣raged for the time to come. People not only may, but are obliged to rebel and take up Arms against the King, whensoever a fa∣ctious Majority in both Houses shall declare there is, though really there is no such cause as they pre∣tend there is to do so? Nay if there be but such a factious ill principled or ill affected Majority in the House of Commons only: For it is the House of Commons which Mr. Baxter means, when he talks of the Peoples Representatives and Trustees whom they are to believe, and whom they are to assist. And they are (says he) the Representatives and Trustees of the People not only in the Condition The Parliament how the Peoples. Representatives and Trustees, in Mr. B.'s sense. of Subjects as the People are now, but likewise in the Condition of Contracters, as they were before they were Subjects, and as such did by contract reserve to themselves such and such Priviledges and Exemptions from Regal Jurisdiction, which the House of Commons (as they are their Trustees in that Notion) are bound to defend, as they (the People) are bound to assist the House of Commons in defending of them. And the representing the
People by the House of Commons under this Noti∣on, together with their having a part of the Sove∣raignty as well as the House of Lords, is by necessa∣ry consequence from Mr. Baxter's principles, to justifie the Peoples making War not only against the King, but against the King and House of Lords also, if they shall not agree to whatsoever the House of Commons shall propose as an Original reserved right of their Representees as they were Contractors, and before they were Subjects. And of their Original reserved rights they may The Peoples Rights and Pri∣viledges. pretend to as many as they please; for it is but their saying they are so, and the People must be∣lieve them to be so; because they are not their Representatives only, but their Trustees also; and therefore it is by their Eyes (says Mr. Baxter) that H. Com. W. p 471. the People are to see, and by their Ears that the People are to hear, and by their Declarations that the People are to judge whether their Rights and Priviledges be invaded or no, and whether they be such rights and priviledges as were gran∣ted by our Kings, after they were Kings to their People, as graces and favours to their Subjects; or such as were contracted for with Him that was to be King before he was King by those that were to be his Subjects before they were his Subjects. For it seems by Mr. Baxter's distinction, that the People may take Arms against the King to defend or recover the one, but not the other: And there∣fore it were to be wished that we had an Authenti∣cal Catalogue of those we may fight for, that we may not be Rebels before we are aware; as like∣wise it were to be wished also that we had a Ca∣talogue
of the Priviledges of both Houses of Par∣liament, The Priviledge of Parliament. that knowing them we might take the better heed of offending against any of them; espe∣cially considering how great a crime it may be and how great a punishment it may deserve, if either or both the Houses are partakers of the Soveraign∣ty with the King. As likewise for another (and in my humble opinion) a very weighty and impor∣tant reason; namely to prevent the Kings not being able to govern by Parliament, though he be never so willing and desirous to do so; as when there is a difference betwixt the two Houses concer∣ning priviledge, there the order is that whatsoever business they are about, of what concernment or importance soever, it must cease, and nothing must be done until the difference concerning Privi∣ledge be decided; which being no other way to be decided but by one of the Houses yielding to the other, (for neither the King nor the Judges are admitted to umpire betwixt them) if after Confe∣rence upon conference they finally adhere on both sides (as they did in the case of Dr. Sherleys appeal∣ing An Instance of an unhappy dif∣ference betwixt the two Houses concerning Pri∣viledge. to the House of Lords from a Decree in Chan∣cery, wherein one of the House of Commons was concern'd) there is no more to be done that Sessions, though Hannibal were ad portas, knocking at the City-gates, though the business they were about before were of never so publick, or never so neces∣sary a concernment, as indeed that which we were about then was; namely the passing of an Act for securing the Government both in Church and State by taking such a Test, as the aforesaid Test that was lately enacted to be taken in Scotland, and
which would undoubtedly have past in the Lords House at that time, if some that desired an alterati∣on in both, had not thrown that , that stone of offence betwixt the two Houses; which as it was done to hinder what we were a doing then, so that or the like may be done at any time by either of the Houses to make any Parlia∣ment useless and fruitless, though there be never so present, or so great need of it, and though the King and the People do never so much desire the contra∣ry; unless there be some means devised and con∣sented to by both Parties to adjust the difference betwixt them, as there is betwixt all other differ∣ing Parties but these only; or unless the Privi∣ledges of each of the Houses be so particularly enu∣merated and cleerly stated by the consent of both of them, that there may not be any difference be∣twixt them upon this account for the future. If I have been too bold in saying what I have said in relation to either of the two Houses of Parli∣ament, I humbly beg pardon of them both; for Si peccavi, peccavi honestâ mente, if I have offended in it, I have done it out of an honest meaning; I am sure I did not intend to lessen the dignity, or power or priviledges of either of them; Good luck have they with their Honour! but all that I said upon this Subject hath been to vindicate the Kings Sove∣raignty over all His Subjects, of all denominations and in all capacities whatsoever; which I am sure may well enough consist with whatsoever Power or Priviledge can by the legal constitution of this Kingdom be claim'd by either or both Houses of Parliament.
CHAP. XII. The Kings making our Laws, no disparagement to the Parliament. The several ways of justifying the taking up Arms against the King. The danger of Mr. B.'s Principles that way. WHereunto if it be objected that by making In what sense the King sole Law-giver. the King sole Law-giver, or the sole Law∣maker, I seem to take away the greatest of all the Priviledges the two Houses have, and which it most concerns all the People of England they should have; I answer, it were true indeed that I did so, if by saying the King is the sole Law-giver or the sole maker of our Laws, I meant he could make what Law he pleas'd; but when I say withal, that although whatsoever is Law is made by the King to be Law, yet he cannot make any Law, or any thing to be Law without the consent of both Hou∣ses to it, or to his making of it; by giving to Caesar what is Caesar's, by giving to the King what belongs to the King, I take away nothing from either of the Houses that belongs unto them, or what is requisite for them to have for the securing of themselves and the People from Arbitrary Government; for which end it is abundantly sufficient, that the dissent of either of the Houses can hinder the making of any Law, though the consent of both of them cannot make a Law; for that would destroy the Monar∣chy, not by dividing the Soveraignty betwixt the King and the two Houses, which is really impossi∣ble, but by vesting the Soveraignty wholly in the
two Houses, and consequently by taking it wholly from the King; whereas the power to hinder the making of Laws without their consent being vest∣ed in the Houses, and the power of making Laws with their consent being vested in the King, the Soveraignty and Majesty that is due to a Monarch is reserv'd to the Prince, and as great power and Authority (as Subjects are capable of) is communi∣cated to the two Houses, and their Liberty and Pro∣perty which is due to them, is secured to all the Peo∣ple: which blessed frame and temper of our English The blessed frame of Eng∣lish govern∣ment. Government is such, as no wiser can be devised, nor no better can be desired, and such as no Nation but ours under Heaven is or can be (unless it be situ∣ated as ours is) so happy as to enjoy; and there∣fore such a one, as if it were well understood, and seriously considered by us, it would make us first to be truly and heartily thankful to God for it; Secondly, to live obediently, quietly and contented∣ly under it, and consequently not only to be con∣tent but desirous that such a Law as I before spake of should be made to prevent the alteration or change of it into any other form or frame of Go∣vernment whatsoever. And in the mean time not to give ear or credit to any of those seditious Preachers, or Pamphleteers, A caution a∣gainst seditious Preachers and Scriblers. who do what they can to disaffect the People to this excellent Government as it is by Law establi∣shed; and only to this end, that as they have once already, so they may now again make such an alte∣ration in this Government, as to turn the Monar∣chy into a State, and Episcopacy into Presbytery; which because they think it cannot be done now,
but as it was done then, namely by a Rebellion; therefore as they did always, so they do still main∣tain that it is lawful for Subjects in some cases to Several ways to prove it lawful to take up Arms against the King. take up Arms against their Soveraign, though some of them take one way to prove it lawful, and some another; for some will have a middle kind of power betwixt the King and People to be Ʋm∣pires or Arbitrators between them, whose Arbitre∣ment if the King will not submit to, they may by force compel him with the assistance of the People, and the People are bound to assist them in so do∣ing; this is CALVIN's way, whereunto he adds Calvin's way. that fortassè Ordines Regni in Angliâ, that perhaps the Parliament in England are this middle sort of Magistrates: Others will have the King and the two Houses of Parliament to be Co-ordinates, and Herl's way. that any of the two is to over-rule the third, and consequently the two Houses of Parliament to over∣rule the King if They agree and He will not; this was HERL's way, one of the Prolocutors of the Westminster Assembly, called together by the two Houses in the Rebellious Parliament: But Master BAXTER will have the Soveraignty divided be∣twixt Mr. Baxter's way. the King and the two Houses, or betwixt the King and the Parliament; and will have it to be lawful for either of the Parties to defend its own Right by force, if it be incroached upon by the other; and that the People are to take part with the Party encroached upon, against the Party en∣croaching; but with this difference, that They are always to believe what the Parliament declares a∣gainst the King to be true, because they are their Trustees, not only to defend their Rights, but to
inform their Judgments whether they be wrong∣ed or no: and because they are their Trustees, not only as they are Subjects now, but as they were originally or at first Contractors before they were Subjects; and did then by bargain reserve unto themselves certain Priviledges and Immunities to be exempted for ever from the Kings Jurisdiction; which if their Trustees whom they are to believe, declare to be violated, they may lawfully take Arms against the King to maintain or recover those Rights of theirs, and to defend that part of the Soveraignty which the Parliament have in the Go∣vernment. Now putting all these things together, and sup∣posing a corrupt Majority of Parliament-men in both Houses, as Mr. Baxter confesseth there may be, and we know there hath been, and therefore may be so again, who can secure the King, though he reign never so much according to Law, from being always in danger of a Rebellion, or the Ʋpon such Principles, the King in continual dan∣ger of Rebel∣lion. Kingdom from being always in danger of a Ci∣vil War! which being the worst of Evils that can happen to any Body Politick, they that sit at the helm ought above all things else to take espe∣cial care to prevent the broaching any such Prin∣ciples as tend to the stirring up of the People to Sedition and Rebellion, by making them believe that in some cases it is not only lawful but their duty to take up Arms against the King; and that they shall do God and the King too good service in so doing. Such are those Principles of Mr. Baxter before rehearsed, published and owned by Some of Mr. B.'s Principles peculiarly such. him in many of his Books, especially in that of
the Holy Common-Wealth: and amongst the rest especially two, of which he seems to be the Ori∣ginal Parent or very first Author: as namely first, That the Peole of England are represented by their Trustees in Parliament not only as Subjects to the King, but as Contractors with the King, before he was their King and before they were his Subjects; for which he brings no other proof, but that he takes it for undeniable. And (2dly) That the So∣veraignty here with us is not in the King alone (as the Oath of Supremacy saith it is) but that it is divi∣ded betwixt the King and the two Houses of Parlia∣ment; and for proof of this the only reason he gives is, That the Legislative Power which is essen∣tial to Soveraignty is in them as well as in the King; and the late King himself confessed it to be so. Whe∣ther it be so or no, I have already considered and examined at large, and I hope have proved, that the King, and the King alone is the efficient cause, or maker of our Laws, whatsoever the two Hou∣ses may antecedently do towards the making of them. CHAP. XIII. The late King's owning, that the Laws are made joint∣ly by King, Lords and Commons, how to be under∣stood. NEither do I think what Mr. Baxter saith the late King confesseth in his answer from York to the Parliaments XIX, Propositions, namely
That in this Kingdom the Laws are joyntly made by What the late King meant by saying, The Laws are jointly made by King, Lords and Commons. a King, by an House of Peers, and by an House of Commons chosen by the People, doth (being rightly understood) contradict what I have said of the ma∣king of our Laws by the King only: For although to say, the same thing is made solely by one, and joyntly by more than one, seems to be a contradi∣ction; yet if by making the same thing be meant the making of it, not in the same but several sences, it is no contradiction to say it is made by one and no more in one sence, and yet that it is made joint∣ly by more in another sence. For example, accord∣ing to an instance before given; It may truly be said that Christ alone shall judge the World, and yet it may truly be said that the XII. Apostles (for How Christ a∣lone will judge the World, and yet the Saints shall judge it too. so saith Christ himself) and all the rest of the Saints (for so saith St. Paul) shall judge the World toge∣ther with him: because the judging of the World by Christ is meant in one sense, and the judging of the World by the Saints in another. For it is Christ and Christ alone, or Christ and none but Christ shall judge the World, as a Judge properly so called, that is, authoritativè, or by his own inherent power and Authority: But the Saints are said to judge the World approbativè, by assenting to and approving of the judgment given by Christ, as just and righte∣ous; so that in propriety of speech, they are not to be called Judges, but Assessors and Assenters only. In like manner, as to the making of our Laws, it may be truly said, that the King alone is the maker How the Laws made by the King alone, and yet jointly by the King, Lords and Commons. of them; because it is by the King and by the King alone, that they are made to be Laws, which were before no Laws; and yet it may truly (though not
so properly) be said too, that they are made by the King, and the two Houses of Parliament; because they do consent to the Kings making of them to be Laws, and not only so, but also because they do not only con∣sent to the making and publishing of them after they are made Laws by the King, but they must consent to have them made Laws by the King, before the King can make them to be Laws. And yet for all that, it is the King and the King alone who by his LE ROT LE VEƲLT or his FIAT doth make them to be Laws. In which operative and ef∣ficacious words neither of the Houses concur with him; and yet it is by those words only, or alone, that what was before but a Bill, that is, an Embryo, or at most but materia disposita, matter fit to be made a Law of, is informed and enlivened with that obliging po∣wer and authority both directive and coactive, which makes it to be a Law. So that all the two Houses can be said to do towards the making of a Law, is to give it a posse fieri, a capacity to be made a Law, but it is the King, and the King only that gives it its factum esse, its being made so; and yet because the King can∣not by his Fiat give it its factum esse, till it be agreed on by the two Houses, and because the two Houses, by their agreeing on it, do give it its fieri posse, or make it ready and fit to be made a Law; therefore it may truly (though not properly) be said to be made joint∣ly by the King, Lords, and Commons; because though it be not made by the Lords and Commons, but by the King only, yet it cannot be made without them nei∣ther, that is, without their doing something antece∣dently, without their doing whereof the King cannot make Laws. And this was that, and all that, which the late King meant, when he said that the Laws of
this Kingdom were made jointly by the King, Lords, and Commons, that is, (according to the old Parlia∣mentary stile) by the King, with the consent of the Lords and Commons; or if you will, by the King, but not without the consent of the Lords and Commons. But I hope Mr. Baxter (who would be thought the Master of propriety and distinctness of speaking) will Some In∣stances ad hominem, to convince Mr. B of this mean∣ing. not affirm, that a thing can properly be said to be done by him or them, without whose consent it cannot be done. For I think it is one of the main matters, where∣in he differs or dissents from our Church, that a Priest or Minister of the Word and Sacraments cannot be or∣dain'd without consent of the People; will he there∣fore deny that it is the Bishop with his Presbyters that ordains him, or will he say that he is jointly ordained by the Bishop and the People? Certainly none but they that lay hands upon him have any thing to do in the Act of Ordination; So that it doth not follow, that be∣cause a Law cannot be made, without the precedent consent of both Houses of Parliament, that therefore they have any thing to do (properly speaking) in the making of it. Again, supposing Mr. Baxter is of the opinion of the Protestant Churches abroad, that there can be no marri∣age without consent of Parents, and supposing that o∣pinion to be true; yet I suppose neither Mr. Baxter, nor any of the Ministers of those Churches, will say Vid. M B's second Def. of meer Nonconf. p. 127. that it is the consent of Parents that makes the Mar∣riage, though it cannot be a Marriage without it. Many other Instances of the like nature might be gi∣ven; but this is enough to prove the thing we have in A brief Re∣bearsal of our Law-making. hand, namely, that though in some sence it may be said that our Laws are made by the King and Parliament, or by the King, Lords and Commons, because they can∣not
be made by the King, without the consent of the Lords and Commons; yet properly speaking, it is the King alone, who by his LE ROY LE VEƲLT makes them to be Laws, in which Law-making Act of his, neither of the Houses do joyn, or are joyned with him; and therefore the Laws so made cannot properly be said to be made by the King and them joyntly. And yet because they cannot be made by the King without their antecedent consent to them and pro∣posing of them, they may truly be said to concur To the making though not In the making of them. And this, and no more but this, was undoubtedly the late Kings meaning, when he said the Laws were made here in England by the King, Lords, and Commons, or upon their proposing such and such Bills, being first a∣greed upon by them, to be made Laws by him. CHAP. XIV. The making of Laws in the Roman State applied to Ʋs. Mr. B.'s division of the Soveraignty rectified. The King's Negative voice asserted, and the Enemies of Monarchy detected. THus when the Soveraignty was in the People of How Laws made in the Roman Common-wealth. Rome, the Senate did concur to the making of Laws for the Common-wealth, but did not make them; they concur'd to the making of them, by con∣sulting and debating what was fit to be made a Law by the People, as having no power to make it a Law themselves; the making of Laws being an Act of So∣veraignty; and the Soveraignty being then not in the Senate but in the People; and therefore the Senate did not so much as pretend to the making of Laws, but only to the proposing of Laws to be made by a higher power,
namely that of the People; as appears by the formal and solemn stile relating to the making of Laws in those times, which was this, Senatus rog at, Populus ju∣bet, the Senate requesteth or proposeth, namely, such or such a thing to be made a Law, but the People com∣mands or enjoyns it; (that is) the People maketh what was proposed by the Senate for a Law, to be a Law. And as this was the stile in relation to making of How in our Monarchy. Laws in a Democracy, when and where the Soveraign∣ty was in the People; so à paritate rationis, upon the like reason and account, in a Monarchy, where the Sove∣raignty is in One, the stile ought to be Populus rog at, Rex jubet; the People requests, and the King grants. And so indeed it was, (as I observed before) according to the ancient stile used in our Parliaments here in The anci∣ent stile of our Laws. England, in divers Acts and Statutes, wherein the King is said to give or grant sometimes at the special request, and sometimes at the humble Petition of the Commons. Neither doth the Alteration of the Stile (at the Re∣quest) to (with the consent) argue an alteration in the species of the Government; for the King is still the sole Lawmaker or Lawgiver, as much as he was before, and consequently as much a Monarch, though less De∣spotical, and more Political, in the managery and execu∣tion of his Kingly Power; having by his Predecessors and his own voluntary and gracious condescension ob∣liged himself not to exercise his Legislative power, or to make any Laws without the consent of those that are to be governed by them; which, though it do not make him cease to be a Monarch, or to have the Soveraignty or supreme power wholly and solely in himself; yet it makes him cease to be an absolute, arbitrary, and despo∣tical, Our King not an ab∣solute, but a legal Monarch. and to become a legal, regulated and Political Monarch, or a King that is to govern his People by
Laws; Laws indeed of his own making, but not with∣out their consent to them, I mean without their con∣sent by their Representatives in Parliament; together with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, which all of them jointly are the Representatives of the three Estates, or of that whole Body Politick, where∣of The three Estates. the King is the Head. And as it is he that governs the whole Body, so it is he that makes the Laws to go∣vern the whole Body: which because they are not made by the King without the consent of the three Estates re∣presenting that Body; therefore Mr. Baxter thinks they are made by the three Estates, as well as by the King, Whence Mr. B.'s errour of dividing the Sove∣raignty. and therefore that the Soveraignty is divided be∣twixt the King and them, and consequently, that this is no Monarchy, but a mix'd Government; which is the same mistake that Grotius (as I said before) observeth to have been the error of Polybius, in judging the Ro∣man to have been a mixed Government, and the Sove∣raignty or supreme power thereof to have been divi∣ded, betwixt the Consuls, the Senate, & the People, when (saith Grotius) the Government was indeed meerly po∣pular or Democratical. And the cause of this mistake in Polybius (saith Grotius) was his respiciens ad actiones ip∣sas, & non ad jus agendi; his looking at the things that were done, & not at the authority whereby they were done; whereas if he had consider'd that what was done either by the Consuls, or by the Senate, was done by an authority derived from the People, & signified nothing if it were not ratified by the People, he would have been convinc'd, that the Soveraignty or supreme power was wholly in the People, & consequently, that it was a meer Democracy and not a mixed Government. In like manner Mr. Baxter looking only at the things that are done by the 3. Estates in Parliament, as to their concur∣rence
to the making of Laws, & subordinate managery of other parts of the Government; & not considering by whose Authority they do what they do, and that all that they do signifies nothing, unless it be ratified by the King, erroneously at least (if not fallaciously) con∣cludes the Soveraignty or supreme power it self to be divided betwixt the King and the 3. Estates, or betwixt the King & the 2. Houses of Parliament; whereas their very Parliamentary being, & consequently the power of their Parliamentary acting, is derived from the Supre∣macy of power, inseparably and indivisibly and in∣communicably inherent in the King. But although the Soveraignty it self or original foun∣tain The Sove∣raignty how in its streams di∣vided, and in its acts limited. of all power in a Monarchy be indivisibly & incom∣municably in the person of the King, yet the streams that issue or flow from that fountain may be, and are, and of necessity must be divided & communicated, so as may be most serviceable for the several uses, the whole body Politick, or the whole body of the Kingdom may have of it. And as this Supreme or Soveraign Power (though it be always indivisibly inherent in the King, as the fountain of it) may have its several streams divi∣ded & communicated: so in the exercise of its several Acts & operations, it may be, & in all Political Kingdoms it is, limited & determined in some more, & in some less, but in none more nor so much for the good of the Sub∣ject without prejudice to the Soveraignty & Majesty of the King, than in this of ours; where the People by their Representatives, are not only admitted to propose what they would have to be made Laws; but where no Law can be made but what they propose or consent to, though they do not make it, & though it be in the Kings power to refuse the making of it; because the Laws, we have already, are sufficient to secure all their Rights unto
the People, as long as they are in force; & in force they will be, until the People themselves do consent to the repealing of them: For the King as he can make no new Law, so he can repeal no old Law without the consent of the Representatives of the People; who most certain∣ly will never give their consent for repealing of Mag∣na Charta, or the Petition of Right, or any other Law now in force, for the securing any of their just Rights and Privileges. So that the Kings Negative is not, nor cannot be prejudicial to the Interest of the People, but The King's Negative voice ne∣cessary to preserve Monarchy. it is absolutely necessary for the preservation of Mo∣narchy. For if the King could not refuse to make what the 2. Houses propose to be Laws, the Soveraignty would be wholly in them, & not at all in him; Nay he would be so far from having the Soveraignty of a King, that he would not have the liberty of the meanest of his Sub∣jects, that sits in the House of Commons, in giving his I or No, according to the dictate of his own Reason and Conscience, which as it is every private mans right by nature, as he is a reasonable Creature, so it is the Kings right by Nature and Prerogative too, as he is a King, it being impossible to be a King without it. And there∣fore those that say the King is bound to pass all those Laws, quas Vulgus elegerit, which the People or Com∣monalty shall make choice of; or that he is but one of the three Co-ordinates, & therefore may be overvoted by Who Ene∣mies to Monarchy. the other two; or that he hath but a part of the Sove∣raignty, and therefore cannot over-rule those that have their parts in the Soveraignty as well as he; or that he may not prorogue or dissolve Parliaments when he thinks fit to do so; All these are Enemies not only to the well-being, but to the very being of Monarchy; and that not of absolute or despotical Monarchy only, but of Political or Paternal Monarchy also. And there∣fore though they cajole and flatter the People never so
much, they are the greatest Enemies they have, and as such the People ought to look upon them, & would do so, if they were not like Beasts without understanding, nay worse than Beasts without sence and memory of what they have so often and so lately suffered by list∣ning to the same Songs of the same Sirens, or sweet Singers, that have so often deceived them. But if the People cannot or will not understand the things that belong unto their peace; yet Be wise O ye Kings, A Caveat to Sove∣raigns. and be learned O ye Judges of the Earth; be wise for the Peoples sake, & be wise for your own sakes also. For if you do not prevent the raising & raging of those waves, the Pilot as well as the Passengers will be swallowed up by them. And there is no way to prevent the raising of those Waves, nor the raging of them when they are raised, but by rebuking the Winds that raised them; for if it were not for those boysterous Winds that puff them up, there would be no such swelling Waves as we see there are. In the mean time (I hope) I have said nothing for the The Con∣clusion of this and the three foregoing Sections. justifying of my self from being a Defier of Deity and Humanity, and from being an Enemy to God, to Kings, and to all Mankind, (as Mr. Baxter saith I am, because I maintain it to be Ʋnlawful for Subjects to resist their Soveraigns in any cause, or upon any provo∣cation whatsoever:) and for the confutation of Mr. Baxter's erroneous and seditious Aphorisms or Princi∣ples to the contrary; I hope, I say, I have said nothing in order to either of these ends, that will give any just offence to such as are judicious and impartial Friends to Truth, and do really wish and desire the continuance of the Peace and welfare of their Country; and then for such as are contrary minded, I care not what they think, or say of me. The End of the Fifth Section.
SECTION VI. The rest of Mr. Baxter's Reflexions called to account; as concerning the Bishop's advising him to reade Hooker and Bilson; as also his helping effectually (together with the Bishop of Ely) to bring Mr. B. and his party under; and lastly his causing Mr. Jones to be put out of the Duke's Service. CHAP. I. The Reason why the Bishop advised Mr. B. to reade Hooker and Bilson; and Mr. B's fraud in giving the account laid open. THe rest of those things, he chargeth me withall, being of much less importance, I shall con∣sider with much more brevity, both for the Reader's sake, and my own. And I will begin with that which indeed would be of no importance at all, and consequently not worth the taking notice of, but that there is something of art and fraud concealed
in it, which ought to be detected to manifest Mr. Baxter's Mr. B's in∣sincerity of dealing. constant disingenuous and insincere deal∣ing with those he writes against, either by making them say what they did not, and then concluding what he lists from it; or by hudling things together that were said upon several occasions, and to seve∣ral ends and purposes, as if they had been said upon one and the same occasion, and to one and the same end and purpose. Of the former of those jugling Arts of his, I have given divers In∣stances already: I shall now give one of the latter also. For whereas he saith, I advised him to reade BILSON and HOOKER; it is very true, I did so; but whereas he adds, that he found in them more than he approved for resisting and restraining Kings, he would have it to be understood, that I advised him to reade both those Authours upon one and the same Subject; namely, concerning the resisting and restraining of Kings, which he knows to be false. For I did not advise him to reade either the one or the other of those Authours, or any Authour else upon that Argument, there being nothing at that time either in Debate or Discourse betwixt him and me; but of the Service and Ceremonies of our The true ac∣count of the Bishop's ad∣vising him to read thse s. Church▪ and of the Government of the visible Catho∣lick Church, in all Ages, and in all places. And as touching the former, I advised him to reade Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy, so touching the latter Bishop Bilson; but what Book of Bishop Bilson's? Not that of Christian Subjection, as he would make his Readers to believe it was; but his Book of the per∣petual Government of Christ's Church in defence of Episcopacy. So that in saying I advised him to reade Hooker and Bilson, and adding, that he found
more in them than he approved for resisting and restraining of Kings; it is evident, that he did fal∣laciously Mr. B's fallacious in∣tent in giving the account as he does. intend to make his Readers believe, First, That I advised him to reade both those Au∣thours for his better information in one and the same thing: whereas that for which I advised him to reade Mr. Hooker, was the justification of the Rites and Ceremonies, and outward form of worship in our Church; and that for which I advised him to reade Bishop Bilson, was to convince him that the Church of Christ had been always governed, as ours is, by Bishops. Secondly, By what he saith he would have it be lieved also, that the thing for which I advised him to reade the aforesaid Authours, was to inform him what he was to believe concerning the lawfulness or unlawfulness of Princes being resisted by their Sub∣jects; whereas in that Book of Bishop Bilson's, which I advised him to reade, there is nothing at all of that Argument, nor in Mr. Hooker neither. Thirdly, He would make his Readers to believe also, that I approve of what both or either of those Two Authours hold to the prejudice of Princes; but he himself doth not; and consequently that he is a better friend to Princes than either they or I am. For if I advised him to reade Hooker and Bilson, as he af∣firms, and I confess I did, and to reade them, as Au∣thours, whose opinion touching the resisting of Kings by their Subjects I approved of (as he insinuates,) but He did not; he must needs imply, not onely that Hooker and Bilson were, but that I am more for the lawfulness of Kings being resisted and re∣strained by their Subjects, than he is: Whereas if he had intended to have dealt fairly and ingenuously,
either with me or his Readers, he should have told them not onely that I advised him to reade Hooker and Bilson, but what Books of theirs I advised him to reade, and to what end and purpose I advised him to reade them, which was (as I said before) to reade Mr. Hooker for the justifying of the Service and Ce∣remonies of our Church, and Bishop Bilson for the justifying of the Government of our Church by Bi∣shops, and neither of them to that end and purpose which he would have his Readers believe I did, (viz.) touching the lawfulness of the restraining and resist∣ing of Kings by their Subjects; for which he saith there was more in them than he could approve of, and yet no more than I must needs be thought to approve, because I recommended the reading of them to him: and consequently that I (as I said be∣fore) was more for restraining and resisting of Kings by their Subjects, than he was; so that by conceal∣ing what Books of those Authours they were, which I advised him to reade, and upon what Subject, and to what end I advised him to reade them, and, which is worse, by substituting another Subject matter, in∣stead of that which I advised him to reade them for, (wholly foreign to it,) his fraudulent dealing with his Readers, as well as with me, is so apparent, that it cannot be denied, and so foul that it cannot be excused. But supposing it had been true, that I had advi∣sed him to reade both those Authours upon the same Argument, and that Argument had been concerning the restraining and resisting of Kings; yet I see no reason why he should say, that he found more in them for the restraining and resisting of Kings than He did approve.
CHAP. II. Mr. Hooker saith more in favour of Kingly Power, and of our King in particular, than Mr. B. can ap∣prove. FOr first, as for Mr. Hooker (supposing the three last Books of his Ecclesiastical Policy to be set forth without any alteration or Interpolation, as he left them, which many suspect they were not) but supposing, I say, they were all of them set forth as he left them, yet there is nothing to be found in a∣ny one of them, or in any of his former Books, for the lawfulness of resisting of Kings by their Subjects in any case, or upon any provocation whatsoever: but on the contrary in the Eighth or last of those three Books of his Ecclesiastical Policy, wherein ex instituto, On set purpose, he treats of the Power of Kings in the managery both of Civil and Ecclesi∣astical Mr. Hooker's judgment of Kingly power; whether he be King by choice, Affairs, though he supposeth most Kings to have been originally chosen by the People, as a Man is chosen by a Woman to be her Husband: yet as the Power of a Husband is not from the Woman that chuseth him, but from God; so the Kingly Power is not from the People that chuse such or such a Man to be their King, but from God onely: so that as the Woman cannot take away the power of a Husband from her Husband, after he is her Husband; so the People cannot take away the King∣ly power from their King, after he is their King. And therefore he concludes, That in case the Kingly
or supreme Power should be made use of to the pub∣lick Vid Hooker's Eccl. Pol. lib. 8. p. 456. detriment, he sees not how the Body (meaning the whole Body politick) by any just means should be able to help it self without the consent of him that hath the supreme Power. What could he have said more convincingly for the Declaration of his own Opinion, concerning the unlawfulness of the Peo∣ples using Force against their King, though he make use of his Kingly Power to the detriment of the publick, or of the People in general? And though he be such a King as he supposeth, to have originally derived his Title from the free choice of the People, or from the choice of a free People? much less if he come in by Conquest; For some mul∣titudes Or by Con∣quest. (saith Mr. Hooker) are brought into Subjec∣tion by force, Divine Providence it self so disposing; Vid. Hooker's Eccl. Pol. lib. 8. p 454. for it is God that giveth Victory in the day of Bat∣tel; and unto whom Dominion is in this sort derived, the same they enjoy according to the Law of Nations, which Law authorizeth Conquerours to reign as abso∣lute Lords over them whom they vanquish. Now this way, that is by Conquest, was their Do∣minion This of Con∣quest, our case at first. or Kingly Power over this Nation of ours originally derived to our present Race of Kings. But may they therefore now reign absolutely and at their own Will and Pleasure, as their first Pre∣decessours who came in by Conquest did, or might have done? No, Mr. Hooker doth not say so, nor I neither; but he saith, and so say I too, That by means of after agreement ( or rather by after condes∣censions, concessions and grants of Kings) it comes to pass in Kingdoms, that they whose ancient Predeces∣sours were by violence and force made Subject, do by little and little grow into the sweet of Kingly Go∣vernment, Vid. Hooker, p. 454.
that is a Government of Kings governing by Laws in a free and voluntary manner condescended Our Kings since have re∣strained themselves. unto. And thus this Kingdom of ours of Despotical became Political, by our Kings limiting and restrain∣ing themselves by Laws of their own and their Pre∣decessours making, and much more by restraining themselves from making any Laws at all, but such as the Lords and Commons in Parliament should con∣sent to. And this is all the restraint that Mr. Hooker acknowledgeth our Kings to be Subject to; and is this more than Mr. Baxter doth or can approve of? This doth not hinder the Government to be truly Monarchical, which Mr. Baxter saith it is not; nor the Supremacy to be wholly in one Person, both as to Ecclesiastical and secular affairs, as Mr. Hooker saith it is, and Mr. Baxter saith it is not. So that it What it is that Mr. B. doth not ap∣prove. was not Mr. Hooker's restraining, but his extend∣ing, or rather acknowledging and defending the ex∣tent of the Power of all Kings in general, and of the Kings of England in particular, that Mr. Baxter doth not, nor cannot consistingly with himself ap∣prove of. We will instance in what he saith of our own King onely, according as he himself desireth to be understood, when he tells us, that what he speaks of Kings, shall be in respect of the slate and nature of this Kingdom. And first he tells us, That this is an hereditary Mr Hooker's judgment of the descent of the Crown. Kingdom, and that in hereditary Kingdoms Birth gi∣veth right to Sovereign Dominion, and that the Death of the Predecessour putteth the Successour by bloud in Seisin: He adds, That if it should so hap∣pen, that a man without right of bloud be elected, and put into possession, with all the usual Ceremonies, and Solemnities, all such new Elections and investings
are utterly void; the Inheritour by bloud may dispos∣sess him as an Ʋsurper: the contrary opinion whereun∣to (he saith) is an unnatural conceit, and an insolent position, set abroach by seeds-men of Rebellion, onely to animate unquiet Spirits, and to feed them with pos∣sibility of aspiring to Thrones, if they can win the Hearts of the People. What say you, Mr. Baxter, More than Mr. B. ap∣proves. is not this more in favour of such Kings as ours is, than you approve? I am sure it is more than you did approve, when (as you tell us in your Holy-Com∣mon-Wealth) you were bound to submit to the pre∣sent Government, as set over us by God, and to o∣bey pag. 184. for Conscience sake, and to behave your self as a loyal Subject towards them. But what was that present Government? It must be one or other of those Governments betwixt the late King's Murther and his Son's Restauration, which in Mr. Hooker's judg∣ment were all of them Ʋsurpations, and conse∣quently all that voluntarily adhered and submitted to them Rebels and Traitours, because they did as much as in them lay to exclude and keep out the right Heir from the Crown in an hereditary King∣dom. So that I do not wonder if Mr. Baxter found more in Mr. Hooker than he could approve, as to this particular; but it was not for his too much re∣straining the Power of the King over his People, but for his restraining the Power of the People o∣ver their King, by setting up what Governours and what Government they please, contrary to the fun∣damental Institution of the Kingdom. Again, as Mr. Baxter might find more in Mr. Hooker Of the King's Supremacy. than he could approve or had approved, for limiting the descent of the supreme Power here with us, to the next in bloud, or the right Heir,
without exception: so in regard of the supreme Power itself as it is vested in our King, he might find more in Mr. Hooker than he did approve, not for the restraint but extent of it, and that in regard both of persons and of things. And first of Persons: For Mr. Hooker speaking of our King's Supremacy, saith, that thereby it is Over all per∣sons. intended and meant to exclude partly foreign Powers, and partly the Power which belongeth in several unto others, contained as parts in that politick Body over which the King hath Supre∣macy; in and by which words, all Persons, as well within as without the Kingdom, are excluded from having any part in the Sovereignty or supreme Power here in England; None without the Kingdom having any thing to doe with it, and All within the Kingdom being subject to it. And this is the true interpretation of the Oath of Supremacy; whereby (as I have proved before) the King is acknowledged to be the onely supreme Governour in as well as of this Kingdom, and by consequence exclusively not onely in relation to any that do pretend from a∣broad, but also from any that may pretend at home to have any part in or of the Supremacy with him. Whereas Mr. Baxter will have the Oath of Supre∣macy This again more than Mr. B. ap∣proves. to be understood as intending onely to exclude foreign Pretenders to any Supremacy here, name∣ly the Pope and his Successours; but not to exclude some that are at home, namely the Parliament from having a part of it. So that in respect (I mean in respect of the extent) of the King's Supremacy over all Persons in all capacities, Mr. Baxter might find more in Mr. Hooker than he could approve of (viz.) the King's Supremacy over all Persons in his King∣dom;
and consequently his being the onely Supreme Governour being utterly inconsistent with the divi∣sion of the Sovereignty betwixt the King and Par∣liament, which is Mr. Baxter's fundamental Princi∣ple, upon which he grounds his defence of the late Rebellion, and lays a foundation of the like Rebelli∣ons from Generation to Generation for the fu∣ture. Again, as Mr. Baxter might find more in Mr. Hooker Of the King's Supremacy, as to things. than he could approve, for the extent of the King's Supremacy in regard of the Persons over whom, so might he likewise in regard of the Things where∣unto it is extended: concerning which in the gene∣ral Mr. Hooker saith, Our Kings, when they are to Eccles. Pol. p. 457. lib. 8. take possession of the Crown, have it pointed out before their Eyes, even by the very solemnities and rites of their Inaugurations, to what affairs their supreme Power and Authority reacheth: crowned (saith he) we see they are, inthroniz'd, and anointed: The Crown is a sign of their military Dominion; the Throne, of se∣dentary or judicial; the Oil of religious or sacred power. So that according to Mr. Hooker, the jus gladii, the Power of the Sword, or the right of making War, as likewise of making Laws both Civil and Ecclesi∣astical belongs to the King's Supremacy. And to both those ends, (as he tells us afterwards) it is one of our King's Prerogatives to call and dissolve all solemn As∣semblies Lib. 8. p. 469. about our publick affairs, either in Church or State, so that there can be no such voluntary As∣sociations of Churches as Mr. Baxter would have, nor no such Associations of the People, without the King's leave, as others would have; no, nor no ma∣king of Laws neither, either in Parliament for the State, or in Convocation for the Church, when they
are called and met together, but by the King; and that not onely because no Law of any kind can be made without the Royal Assent, by reason of the King's Negative; without which (saith Mr. Hooker) Of his Nega∣tive voice. the King were King but in name onely: but because it is the Royal Assent that makes it to be a Law. For though (as the same Mr. Hooker observes) Wisedom p. 471. is requisite for the devising and discussing of Laws (he means the Wisedom of the Lords and Commons in Par∣liament, for the devising and discussing of Laws for the State; and the Wisedom of the Representatives of the Clergy in the Convocation, for the devising Of his ma∣king of Laws. and discussing of Laws for the Church) yet it is not that Wisedom, saith he, that makes them to be Laws, p. 472. but that which establisheth them, and maketh them to be Laws is Power; even the Power of Dominion: the chiefty whereof (saith he) amongst us, resteth in the Person of the King. Whereunto he adds, Is there any Law of Christ's which forbiddeth Kings and Rulers of the Earth to have such sovereign and supreme Power, in making of Laws either Civil or Ecclesiasti∣cal? Which question being virtually a negative Pro∣position, implies that there is no Law of God to prohibit any King to doe what our King doeth, that is (as he positively and clearly affirms) to make Laws for his own Subjects by that supreme Power that resteth in his own Person, and consequently is not divided betwixt him and the Parliament; no, not in the making of Laws, which is the onely instance given by Mr. Baxter to prove the Sovereignty or su∣preme This against Mr. B. Power in this Kingdom not to be in the King alone, or in the King onely; which (as I said before) is the Foundation on which he superstructs the building of his Babel, or the Justification of the
late Confusion and Rebellion. And therefore he had reason to say he found more in Hooker than he did And therefore not approved by him. approve; because, to approve all he found in Hooker touching the supreme Power, either of all Kings in general, or of our own Kings in particular, had been to condemn himself, who is much more for the restraining and resisting of Kings by their Sub∣jects, than Mr. Hooker; who (as I said before) hath not a word of resisting, nor of restraining them nei∣ther, any otherwise than as they have restrained themselves by Laws of their own making. So that Mr. Hooker may still retain that honourable title which learned Men have given him of judicious Hooker, whatsoever voluminous Mr. Baxter hath said upon this or any other occasion, to take it a∣way from him. CHAP. III. Bishop Bilson, though in an errour, yet saith not so much for the resisting of Kings as Mr. B. doth. The Case stated of Subjects rebelling upon the account of Religion, and of other Princes assisting them. AS for Bishop BILSON whom Mr. Baxter saith I advised him to reade, I confess I can∣not say He hath nothing for the resisting of Kings by their Subjects in any of his Books; but this I can say, that he hath nothing to that purpose in that Book of his which I advised Mr. Baxter to reade;
no, nor in any of his Books hath he so much for resisting of Kings, as Mr. Baxter himself in his Book of the Holy Commonwealth. And therefore I wonder he should say he found more in BILSON, for the resisting and restraining of Kings than he could ap∣prove. Bishop Bilson was one of my Predecessours in Bishop Bilson in an errour about resist∣ance. the Bishoprick of Winchester, and much more before me in Learning than he was in Time: but Bernardus non vidit omnia, and the lear∣nedst and best of Men are but Men, and there∣fore may err; and good men, very good men, may be the apter to fall into some kind of errours, both speculatively and practically, by indulging too much even to their good affections. And therefore The ground of his errour. I believe it was his Zeal for the true Religion, and his compassion to those that were persecuted for it, that made this Learned and Good Man say so much as he doth (which is more than I wish he had) in ex∣cuse of taking up of Arms by the French, Dutch, and Scotch Protestants in defence of themselves and their Religion, against their several respective Princes. And I think we ought to believe that it was for the same reason (and not for reason of State one∣ly) that Queen Elizabeth did at the same time assist with Men, Money and Arms, all the aforesaid Sub∣jects against their aforesaid Sovereigns. But yet, for all that, I do not think that either The censure of it. the Queen did well in doing what she did, or that the Bishop did well in writing what he writ in de∣fence of them; because I do not think they themselves, I mean the subjects of those Princes, did well in making that resistance, which they did, contrary to the Precepts of the Gospel, and to the
Practice of the Primitive Christians. And I remem∣ber that upon this consideration, during the time of our own troubles, I have often thought, and A Remark upon our late Rebellion. sometimes said to some of my familiar friends, that I was afraid that God had permitted the Peoples ri∣sing up in Rebellion against the Crown and the Church here, because the Crown had assisted, and so eminent a Church-man had excused the rising up of other Princes Subjects in Rebellion against them abroad. For though ours had not really the same provocation to rebell, as the Subjects of those Princes had (viz.) of being persecuted and oppressed for Conscience sake, and for professing the true Re∣ligion, as they were; yet they pretended them∣selves to be so, and so may Subjects of any Prince, or of any Religion, at any time, and whether truly or falsely it is all one, as to the endangering of the publick Peace and Welfare of all Kingdoms and States: which will be always in danger of a Civil War, if but in any one case onely it be allowed to be lawfull for Subjects to resist those that have the supreme Power; and of a foreign War also, if the Rebellious Subjects of one Prince or State may be lawfully assisted by another State or Prince, because they are of the same Religion, whether the true one or a false, (as I said before) it makes no matter: Religion, true or false, in∣spirits men alike. for it is not the trueness of any Religion, but Mens believing it to be the true, and onely true Religion, that makes men think they are obliged in Consci∣ence to contend for it, as appears by some Mens be∣ing as zealous for the maintaining and propagating of Judaism, and Mahometanism, as others are for Christianity; and amongst Christians, so many of them being as zealous, and perhaps more zealous
for Schism and Heresie, than others are for Ʋnity and Orthodoxy: And we see the Papists have their Confessours and their Martyrs as well as Protestants. And therefore if a Protestant King may assist Pro∣testant Not safe, nor lawfull for one Prince to assist ano∣ther's Rebel-Subjects. Rebels against their Popish Kings, because they are of his (which he believes to be the onely true) Religion: why may not a Popish King for the very same reason assist Popish Rebels against their Protestant Kings, because he believes the Popish to be the onely true Religion also? and consequently as long as there are diversities of Religion in the World (as there will be till the Worlds end) there will be no security of Peace or safety at home or from abroad, either for King or Subjects. The great and good God therefore, who is the Authour of Peace, and lover of Concord, as he will not have Subjects to resist their Princes, so he will not have one Prince to assist another Prince's Subjects in their Rebellion against him, in any case, or upon any ac∣count whatsoever. Mediate or intercede for their pardon, or for the mitigation of their sufferings he may; but encourage or assist them in resisting he may not. For the Rule, Quod tibi fieri non vis, al∣teri ne feceris, To doe as we would be done by, holds in Princes and States as well as in private per∣sons; and surely there is no Prince or State, that would have their rebellious Subjects to be assisted in their Rebellion by any other Prince or State, and consequently, they must needs be , condemned by themselves, when they doe that unto others which they would not have done unto them∣selves. What shall we say then? Are we not to help those that are persecuted for the professing of our
own and the true Religion? No, we are not to help them in resisting, and making War against How we are to help those who are per∣secuted for Religion. their Sovereign; but rather to admonish them to suffer patiently; and then to help them by our Prayers to be delivered by God, who can and will deliver them, if they suffer patiently and wrong∣fully; or if he do not deliver them here, he will a∣bundantly and superabundantly recompense them hereafter. In the mean time if they be banished or forced to fly out of their own Country, we are to receive them kindly, and to relieve them charita∣bly and bountifully, as we would be glad to be re∣ceived and relieved our selves, if we were in their condition. And this is all I have to say as to this particular, Mr. B's de∣sign in this reflexion defeated. of which I need to have said no more to discover Mr. Baxter's fraudulent and disingenuous dealing with me, and with his Readers, than what I said at first (viz.) That although I did advise him to reade Mr. Hooker and Bishop Bilson, yet I did not advise him to reade either of them upon that Argument, or to that end and purpose, as he pretends I did; there∣by to insinuate that there being more in them for the restraining and resisting of Kings, than he did ap∣prove, I, that advised him to reade them, must needs be more for the restraining and resisting of Kings than he was. This was that which he principally aimed at; but I hope I have made it appear, he hath missed his mark.
CHAP. IV. The Bishop charged with helping to bring Mr. B. and his party under. By his party he means not the Presbyterians, but all the Nonconformists. MR. Baxter in his Preface to his Book of Con∣cord, addressing himself to the Bishop of Ely and me, saith, You have above all men I know effectually helped to bring us under: but whom he means by Ʋs, or what he means by bringing them under, he doth not tell us, nor how We have done it effectually or more effectually than any he knows be∣sides. But sure it is some heinous crime or other (at least in his opinion) that he intends to charge us with. And therefore he should have done well to have expressed more fully and clearly, what he meant by it: But seeing it hath not pleased him to do so, we must guess at his meaning as well as we can, both in regard of the Thing he saith We have done, and of the Persons We have done it unto. And first for the Persons, whom he means by Whom he means by Ʋs. Ʋs; I should have thought he had meant the Pres∣byterians, but that by Ʋs must be meant some, of whom he himself is one, and he hath not onely dis∣claimed his being a Presbyterian, but takes it for an injurious and scandalous expression of an Episco∣pal Indignation against him, to be said to be the An∣tesignanus, or Standard-bearer of the Presbyterians, being no Presbyterian himself, and therefore could He disowns himself to be a Presbyte∣rian, not be their Antesignanus, or not theirs onely. But why might not he be a Presbyterian then, when I
thought he was so, though he was not so af∣terwards, nor be not now? For sure he hath not been semper idem, Always of the same O∣pinion. Time was when he was an Episcopari∣an, or he would not have been ordained by a Bishop (as he saith he was) nor would not have sub∣scribed to what he did; And yet whatsoever it is that he is for now, I am sure it is not Episcopacy in the controverted Notion and sense of it. And there∣fore his disclaiming his being a Presbyterian now, doth not prove he was not so then when I thought he was. But supposing I was mistaken in thinking And takes it for an affront to be thought so. him to be a Presbyterian, I know not why he should take it as an affront to be thought to be so: for be∣ing evidently and confessedly a Dissenter from the Government, and publick way of Worship, as it is established by Law in the Church of England, I thought it was more for his Honour to be thought and treated with as a Presbyterian, than as one of any other of the more novel and more igno∣ble Sects; which though they all of them have Pres∣bytery for their Mother, yet they had not all of them Calvin for their Father, but are the bastard issue of unknown Sires. Besides I had reason to think that Mr. Baxter Why called their Antesig∣nanus. was of the same persuasion that his Commilitones, his Fellow-Souldiers, in the Dispute at the Savoy were, who were always taken for Presbyterians, and did not take it for a Reproach, but rather for an Ho∣nour to be thought to be so. And if it be honourable to be of such, or such a party, it is much more honou∣rable to be the Antesignanus, or leader of such a party. And therefore thinking as I did, for the reasons aforesaid, Mr. Baxter to be a Presbyterian, and
hearing he had been a Souldier in the late War, and having observed how he had behaved himself as a Leader in the aforesaid Dispute at the Savoy, I thought I could not call him a more proper name in relation to both his Professions, I mean that of a Warriour, and that of a Disputer, than that of An∣tesignanus, a Standard-bearer. But perhaps I may be mistaken all this while in thinking Mr. Baxter takes it ill to be called either Antesignanus, or Antesignanus Presbyterianorum: Whereas it is his being called Antesignanus of the Presbyterians onely, and not of the other Sects as well as of that, which offends; it being a diminution of his just Title to be the Antesignanus but of one Sect onely, whereas he undertakes the defence of all the Nonconformists, so far forth at least as they refuse to conform to the Church of England, how much soever they may differ among themselves; as appears by the Title page of one of his last Books, published last Year, but written (as he saith) many Years before, and called, An Apology for the Non∣conformists Ministry, containing their Reasons for their Preaching, and an Answer to the Accusations urged as Reasons for the silencing about 2000 by Bi∣shop Morley, Dr. Saywell, Mr. Durell, &c. From which Title of that Book of his, it is manifest that Mr. B. an A∣pologist for all the Non∣conformists. he owns himself an Apologist for all the Nonconfor∣mists, at least for all their Preachers, and especially for all those that were silenced, which were all that had been Preachers before, (of what Sect or de∣nomination soever,) which would not subscribe and submit to the Act of Ʋniformity after the King's Restauration. And those were Anabaptists, Anti∣nomians, Quakers, Fifth monarchy men, as well as
Presbyterians and Independents: for all these were Nonconformists, and every of these Sects had their Preachers, who were all of them equally silenced by the Act of Ʋniformity; and therefore must be rec∣koned amongst those for whom Mr. Baxter pro∣fesseth himself to be an Apologist; and indeed if they be not, I think he will hardly make up one of his 2000 silenced Preachers. If he say that in the a∣foresaid Title to that Book of his, it is the Noncon∣formists Ministry, or the Ministers of the Noncon∣formists What his Nonconfor∣mist Mini∣sters are. that he pleads for; I demand whether by the Ministry he means onely such as have an out∣ward Call by publick Authority to the Work of the Ministry, or to the teaching of others; whether that calling be by the Episcopal or Presbyterian way of Ordination? If so, then not onely all those gifted men, that pretend to no other but an inward calling, are excluded from being any of his 2000 whom he pleads for; but the Congregational or In∣dependent Preachers also, who have no outward cal∣ling but from their own Congregations onely; and so perhaps have the Gifted men (whether Anabaptists, or Quakers, or any other of the Fanatical holders∣forth) from those that are their own Auditours also; so that Mr. Baxter must either leave out those (I mean the Independents) or take in these (I mean all the rest of the Sectaries) into the number of those he calls the Nonconformist Ministry, and for whom he professeth he maketh the aforesaid Apolo∣gy, and whom he would have restored to the same liberty or licence of preaching which they had for∣merly in the time of the Rebellion, and Usurpati∣on. A very sober and seasonable Proposal to be made to Bishops, and those Bishops whom he makes
it to, are very much beholding to him for the good opinion he hath of them, as the onely men of their Order that are likely to hearken to such a propo∣sal. In the mean time we may learn from hence, whom he means by the word (Ʋs,) when he tells the Bi∣shop of Ely and Me, that We two, of all he knows, have most effectually helped to bring Ʋs (that is, all the Nonconformists of all kinds) under. CHAP. V. How Mr. B. and his party have been brought under, and how they brought in the King. WE are therefore now in the second place to guess as well as we can, at what he means What he means by bringing them under. by bringing him and the rest of the Nonconformists Ʋnder. There is none of them, I believe, but would be uppermost if they could; for Pride is inseparable from Schism, and it is the downfall of Pride to be brought under. The Two chief Sects of the Non∣conformists, the Presbyterians and Independents, have had their turns in being uppermost; the Presbyterians whilst the Parliament, and the Inde∣pendents whilst the Army and Cromwell had the power: of which two Sects it may be said, as it Independents and Presby∣terians like Caesar and Pompey. was of Caesar and Pompey; the one, to wit, the In∣dependents, like Caesar, could not ferre priorem, could endure none to be above them; and the other, to wit, the Presbyterians, like Pompey, could not
ferre parem, must needs have all to be under them; and therefore each of them having been uppermost before, they must needs be very angry with all those who have helped to bring them both under, after they had domineered so long as they had done. And of those that have helped to bring them under, Mr. Baxter tells the Bishop of Ely and Me, that We two, of all men he knows, have been the chief. But under whom, or under what is it that We have helped to bring them? Sure it must be under some Person, or some Thing, that they would not wil∣lingly have been brought under; otherwise they would not have been angry with us, or complain∣ed of us for so doing. Ʋnder whom is it therefore that We have helped Ʋnder whom they are brought, viz. the King. to bring them? Is it not He under whom they ought always to have been under, namely, the KING, their natural Liege-Lord and Sovereign? But they had brought his Father under them, and therefore were the more unwilling to be brought under his Son, for fear he might remember and re∣venge what they had done unto his Father. And though they have found the contrary (to the praise of his incomparable Clemency be it spoken) yet (such is their Ingratitude) they seem to be as weary of be∣ing under the Son, as they and their Predecessours were of being under the Father; as appears by their taking the same ways, and using the same Arts to dissaffect and stir up the People against the one, as their Predecessours had done formerly against the other. But I hope, though the People now rage so fu∣riously, and some of the Rulers take Counsel together against the Lord, and against his Anointed, yet that which they imagine (namely, to break the bands of
their Allegiance asunder, and to cast away the cords thereof from them) will prove but a vain thing; for he that sitteth in Heaven shall laugh them to scorn, the Lord shall have them in derision; and will keep up him, whom he hath set up over us and them too, and will bring down those (how many and how mighty soever they may seem to be) that shall dare to rise up against him. But perhaps Mr. Baxter will say, that he and his How Mr. B. and his par∣ty brought in the King. Party, for whom he doth apologize, are so far from being concerned in what I have said, for the bring∣ing them under the King, that they were the Men that brought in the King to reign over them, and us too; and that if it had not been for them he had never been brought home as he was. The former clause of which saying of theirs I utterly deny; for they kept him out as long as they could, and would have done so for ever if they could have established any other Government; but that if it had not been for them he had not come home as he did, is true in one sense, that is, he had not come home from having been banished, and forced to live abroad so many Years together, which they were indeed the cause of; but in another sense, namely, that he came home as he did without any capitulations or conditions of restraint put upon him, They, I mean the Nonconformists were so far from being the cause of, that they did what they could to hinder it; and I could name the place where a Consultation was held by the Grandees of the Faction, to oblige him, before he came home, to consent to those very Pro∣positions which were made by the Parliament Com∣missioners to his Father at the Isle of Wight, which would have lest him but the Name of a King onely;
but the curst Cow had short horns; the Army was in better hands than it had been; and he that was Commander in chief of it, having purged out all that would not comply with his loyal Intention to bring in the King as a King, he frustrated the de∣signs of those that would have brought him in ma∣nacled, or not have brought him in at all; which were all the Nonconformists, and especially those of the Presbyterian Party, who though they did not, because they could not hinder the King's Restaurati∣on in that manner he was restored, nor consequent∣ly their being brought under him, so far as to own and acknowledge him to be their King, by taking a pardon from him for what they had done against his Father and himself; yet they do not, nor will not own him as all Subjects ought, and as all good Subjects do own their Kings, by obeying their Laws. And perhaps, that which Mr. Baxter means by the Bishop of Ely's and my helping to bring him and his Party under, is the bringing of them under the obedience of the King's Laws, by silencing such as will not obey them. What the Bishop of Ely hath done in that kind I know not; but this I am sure, that neither he An account of Ministers si∣lenced by the Bishop. nor I could have obeyed the Laws our selves, if we had not silenced those Preachers that would not con∣form to what they were enjoyned by Law; and which if they refused, We that were Bishops were enjoyned by Law to silence them as we did, how few or how many soever they were of them; though I verily believe they were not half the num∣ber Mr. Baxter speaks of. In the Diocese of Worces∣ter, whilst I was Bishop there, Mr. Baxter him∣self was the onely man whom I silenced; and since
I was Bp. of Winchester, which is now above 20 Years, I do not think the Nonconforming Ministers I have si∣lenced have been half so many, I mean half so many men silenced as there have been years since; which I do not say to ingratiate my self with the Noncon∣forming Party, as if I would not have silenced more if there had been more to silence; that is, if there had been more in possession of any Benefice or Cure of Souls in that Diocese, who refused to conform to all, that by the Act of Ʋniformity they were enjoyn∣ed to conform unto: but I say it, to shew the im∣possibility of the silencing 2000 in all, when there were so few silenced in that Diocese of Winchester; which is none of the least, though there be some greater. Besides, I presume Mr. Baxter means by his 2000, Intruders as well as Non∣conforming Ministers put out. not onely such as were put out of their Livings or Cures, for refusing to conform, or for their Incon∣formity onely; but such as likewise were put out be∣cause they were Intruders into other mens Livings (as Mr. Baxter himself was) and consequently were by Law compellable to yield possession to the right owners that were then living, who perhaps were some Hundreds of those Thousands. I am sure all We of the Clergy, that were abroad with the King, and all those that were at home, and had been put out, because they would not take the Covenant, and li∣ved till after the King's and the Church's Restituti∣on, by being restored to what was our own before, must needs dispossess many of those whom Mr. Bax∣ter would have thought to have been put out for Inconformity onely. But supposing all that were put out or silenced, had been put out and silenced for Nonconformity onely;
and supposing too that there were 2000 of them; yet how the Bishop of Ely and I did more to the bringing so many of them under that penalty than other Bishops did, or than all Bishops were bound to do, I do not understand; unless he means that We did it more effectually than any other of the Bi∣shops did; which is to cast an imputation of Conni∣vence at the breach of the Law in favour of the Non∣conformists upon all the rest of our Order, which I think none of them will own as a favour from him. For my own part, as I did willingly consent to the making of that Law, (I mean the Act of Ʋniformi∣ty) so I did as willingly put it in execution, where I was obliged to do so; as believing it not onely to be just and equitable, but in an high degree expe∣dient, if not absolutely necessary also. CHAP. VI. The Justice and Equity, as also the Prudence and Ne∣cessity of silencing the Nonconformists. The King's Promise at Breda, being onely conditional, ac∣quitted. ANd first, it was very just, and very equitable also, in relation to what was passed, I mean The silencing of the Noncon∣formists a just and equi∣table punish∣ment. if they had been enjoyned silence for the future by way of punishment onely, for the mischief they had done by Preaching formerly; which was such as I cannot think of without horrour, nor they should not think of, without a thankfull acknow∣ledging
it for a very great Mercy and Favour from God and the King, that they had onely the Liberty and opportunity of doing more mischief taken a∣way from them, when their Lives might most justly have been taken away for the mischief they had done before. For it is upon this account that Mr. Br. him∣self justifies Solomon's deposing Abiathar the High-Priest, Mr. B's own case the same as he makes Abiathar's to be. (who was the next person in dignity to the King himself amongst the Jews) because he might have taken away his Life (saith Mr. Baxter) as well as the Priesthood, for his siding with Adonijah in his Rebellion. And might not our King, upon the same account, have taken away Mr. Baxter's own Life, and the Lives of all the rest of the Non∣conforming Ministers (as Mr. Baxter calls them) namely for siding with the Rebellious Parliament, and not onely for siding with it themselves, but for stirring up all the People to side with it also against his Father and himself? And ought they not then to acknowledge the taking away of but their Livings, (which they had never any legal right to) and their liberty to preach, which they had so horribly abu∣sed; ought they not (I say) to acknowledge it to have been, at least a just, if not a very favourable punishment for their former offences; and equitable too, as well as just and favourable, it being but the doing that unto them justly and legally which they had most unjustly and illegally done before to all the Conformable Clergy, by thrusting them out and intruding themselves into their places? Again, as the depriving and silencing of the Non∣conformists The silencing of them pru∣dent and ne∣cessary also, by way of caution. considered as a punishment for what they had done before, was not onely just and equita∣ble, but favourable also: So, considered as a Caution
against what they might doe for the future, it was not onely prudent and expedient, but as things then stood absolutely necessary for the securing of the publick Peace both in Church and State, and conse∣quently the safety and welfare both of Prince and People. For We had reason to believe it was neither a , No thanks to them for the King's com∣ing home. nor a , it was neither a remorse for what they had done, nor a change of Mind, ei∣ther in their judgments or affections, in order to what they would doe, that made any of the Non∣conformist Parties give way to the King's coming home as he did; but onely their disability to hin∣der it; partly, by reason of the irreconcileable dif∣ferences among themselves, and partly because the Army was no longer in their Power, but especially because the over ruling Wisedom of the divine Pro∣vidence would have it to be so. And therefore as we were not to thank them for that blessed change that was made so much against their Wills, both in the Church and State; so, were we not to trust them neither, with having any thing to doe, either in the one or in the other; especially in the Church, without giving some assurance beforehand, that they would not preach and act as they had done for∣merly. And the Assurance, which by the King The security, the govern∣ment requi∣red of them. and his great Council, was thought fit to be given by them, was first a renouncing of the Covenant, and secondly to declare their Assent and Consent to whatsoever by the Act of Ʋniformity is required of them; either of which if they refused to doe, they did as good as tell us in plain terms what we were to expect from them, namely, that they thought themselves bound by their Covenant to pur∣sue
the ends of it whensoever there should be an op∣portunity for it, and in the mean time by their praying and preaching to disaffect the People as much as they could, to that way of publick Worship which they themselves refused to comply with and submit to. And can any man think it was safe for us, or consistent with the publick Peace, either in Church or State, to suffer such men to continue in their stations, or to be permitted to harangue the People as they were wont to do? They themselves (when they were in Power, Their own measure meted to them. though it was by Ʋsurpation onely) thought it not onely lawfull and prudent, but necessary also for the upholding of their illegal and usurped Authority, to deprive and silence all our Clergy that would not take their Covenant, and submit to their Directo∣ry. And is it not as lawfull, and prudent, and neces∣sary too for Us, in order to the securing of the le∣gal, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, Government, to deprive and silence those that will not renounce that Covenant, whereby they are obliged to ruine both; or that will not join with us in the publick Worship of God, as it is prescribed in the Book of Common-Prayer: Certainly, if it were prudent and necessary for Them in their Circumstances then to doe the one, it must needs be as prudent and ne∣cessary for Ʋs, in our circumstances now, to doe the other, even themselves being Judges: to say no∣thing of the unlawfulness of what they did unto Us, as being unjust in itself, and having nothing to war∣rant it, but an usurped Power; and the lawfulness of what we do unto them, as being just in it self, and being authorized and commanded to be done by that Power, which We are legally obliged to o∣bey.
I know Mr. Baxter, and others of the Dissenting Party, use often to alledge, and mainly to insist The King's Promise at Breda dis∣charged, upon what the King promised them at BREDA, and made them hope should be done for them, when he came home. But they know, or ought to know, that those promises (whatsoever they were) as they were meant by the King, so they were to be un∣derstood by them, to be obliging so far forth onely as they should be approved and consented to by his great Council, the Two Houses of Parliament, without whose Advice, Approbation and Consent, As being con∣ditional. they knew the King could repeal no old Law, that was in force against them, nor make any new Law, in favour of them: Either of which the two Houses were so far from advising him to doe, that the House of Commons gave him unanswerable reasons (lately reprinted) why nothing of that kind could be done, without hazarding a relapse both of Church and State into as bad, or perhaps a worse condition than that which it was newly come out of. For the preventing whereof it was the House of Com∣mons, the Representatives of the People, and not the Convocation, the Representatives of the Church, that upon mature deliberation, devised and drew up that Bill, which being assented to by the Lords, they presented to the King to be made a Law, (as it was by the King's Fiat) to oblige, and be impo∣sed upon all that are, or pretend to be of the Cler∣gy, before they be permitted to preach unto the People, or to have the Education of Youth here in this Kingdom: and this is the Law called the Act of Ʋniformity. After the making of which Law, by the Advice, and with the Consent of both Houses of Parliament,
it is to no purpose to alledge or insist upon any for∣mer Promise made by the King, and made by him but conditionally onely, that is, if he were or should be so advised by his Parliament, and not otherwise. And indeed for them, or any Agents of theirs, to desire any thing of the King before he came home, as to the repealing of any old Law, or the making Their carri∣age, an af∣front to the Parliament. of any new Law, without or against such Advice or Consent of Parliament, or any otherwise than con∣ditionally, if the Parliament would consent to it, was a high breach of the highest Privilege of both Houses of Parliament, in those that did desire it then, or do now complain it was not done, when they knew it could not be done by the King alone, and saw the Parliament would not consent to it; and there∣fore I say, still to insist upon any such promise made by the King, must needs be a very great Affront to both Houses of Parliament, unless they be of Mr. Baxter's opinion, (who as I have before observed) notwithstanding his magnifying the Power of Par∣liaments, by dividing the Sovereignty betwixt the King and them, affirms, that in some cases the King Mr. B's bold∣ness with Parliaments. may make a Law, not onely without, but against the consent of the People, if it be for their good: because it is to be supposed (saith he) they would have consen∣ted unto it, if they had known it to be so; which how far it may intrench on the Power of Parlia∣ments, I leave it to them to consider: I am sure, I dare not be so bold with them.
CHAP. VII. The Act of Ʋniformity, why made. Some other probable Reasons for Nonconformity, and not Conscience altogether, as Mr. Baxter saith it is. BUt to return to what we have in hand, the King having by advice, and with the consent of both Houses of Parliament, first passed an Act of Oblivi∣on to quiet mens Minds for what was passed; to pre∣vent The reason of the Act of Ʋniformity. our falling again into as bad or perhaps a worse condition for the future, if ill principled and ill af∣fected Preachers were permitted to blow the trum∣pet of Sedition and Rebellion, as they had done for∣merly, His Majesty did, by the Advice, and with the Consent of the said both Houses of Parliament, enact the aforesaid Act of Ʋniformity, thereby pro∣viding that none should be admitted or permitted to preach to the People, or to teach their Children that would not subscribe and conform to what was required to be subscribed and conformed unto by that Act. Which was no more than they have al∣ready consented to by their Representatives in Par∣liament, and consequently to the Penalties for refu∣sing to conform to it also; which was neither loss The penalty of not con∣forming. of Life, nor Limb, nor Liberty, nor any part of their Goods, but onely their forbearing to preach, untill they were better informed, and could bring themselves to comply both in Judgment and Pra∣ctice, with what their Duty and Obedience to the Law required of them, as some of the learnedst, and
generally thought to be as conscientious as any of them (namely, Bp. Reynolds, and Dr. Connant) did; Some have conformed. as perhaps many other learned and conscientious men did also. But they were not one of an hundred, will Mr. Baxter say, in comparison of those that Why the rest did not; whether for Conscience, as Mr. B. saith. did not, nor could not conform: True, I confess, as to those that did not, but whether all that did not, could not, is a thing, with Mr. Baxter's good leave, may be doubted, whatsoever he hath said to the contrary; as when he saith, that to think any that do not conform, would not conform, if they could with a good Conscience, is to think them all to be Fools or mad Men, for preferring Poverty before Plenty, Want before Wealth, Contempt before Ho∣nour and Respect, and Imprisonment before Liber∣ty, which no man in his Wits either would, or ought to do, if he might chuse whether he would so or no without sin. And therefore Mr. Baxter thinks we must needs grant it is nothing but fear of sinning against God that makes the Nonconfor∣mists, not that they will not, but that they dare not conform to what the Laws of the Land as well as of the Church require of them. As if all the Nonconforming Ministers that were put out of the Livings they were in, or that by rea∣son of their Inconformity are uncapable of any Pre∣ferment in the Church, are therefore all of them men of Conscience, and that whatsoever they ought to doe and will not, or will doe and ought not, it is for Con∣science, or for Conscience sake onely, or for fear of sin∣ning against God if they did what they doe not, or did not what they doe; that is, if either they did conform when they are commanded, or did not preach when they are forbidden. But is there, or can there be no
other cause of their not doing what they should doe, and their doing what they should not doe, but Consci∣ence onely? May it not be peevishness in some, and perverseness in others? May it not be Pride and Ambition in the Leaders, and Ignorance and Obsti∣nacy in those that are led by them? I remember, that when Bishop Brownrig (who is one of the few Bishops that Mr. Baxter vouchsafes to Bp. Brown∣rig's account of Mr Cala∣my's not con∣forming. speak well of) and I went together to the Treaty with the late King at the Isle of Wight, he being one of the Three Divines named by the Parliament, and I one of the Three named by the King, (though very unworthy I confess to be so,) when that lear∣ned Bishop (I say) and I went together in his Coach towards the Isle of Wight, (I remember not now upon what occasion it was, but) I remember very well that I ask'd his Lordship whether he knew Mr. Calamy, and he answered me he did, and had known him from his first coming to Cambridge. Pray, my Lord, said I, was he always a Nonconformist? No, said he, far from it in his practice, as well as in his judgment, even untill the beginning of these times. How came he then, said I, to be so suddenly, and so strangely changed from what he was? Why said the Bishop, he saw the Tide was turning, and ha∣ving a good opinion of his own parts, he thought if he was one of the foremost in coming in, he might be one of the foremost, if not the foremost of all the Leaders of the whole Party, as you see (said he) he is: adding that the hope to be head of a Faction was a powerfull Temptation. And why might not the same Temptation prevail with many others, that thought as well of themselves as Mr. Calamy did, and consequently might have the same hopes that he had.
But why then (may it be said) did not the same A probable reason why some refused offers of pre∣ferment, men, when the Tide turned again, at the King's coming home, turn with it; especially such of them as were invited by the offer of considerable Prefer∣ments, if by conforming they would make them∣selves capable of them? I answer that some of them did so; and that those that did not, might be kept from doing it for fear of losing the Reputation and Interest they had gotten in the Nonconforming Par∣ty; which though it were down for the present, yet it might, they thought, get up again, as it had done formerly, when it was lower than it was then. In the mean time, some of those few that had such Offers made them, and finally refused them, took time to deliberate whether they should refuse them or no: thereby plainly shewing that they were not then fully resolved in point of Conscience, that a man might not either be a Bishop or Dean of a Ca∣thedral without sin, though they had formerly con∣demned and covenanted against both. Neither did their finally refusing of them prove the contrary: for though they might, and did, think it lawfull to accept of those offers, and consequently lawfull to conform to the Act of Ʋniformity in order to their being capable of them, yet they might, (as I said To wit, to in∣dear them∣selves to their party. before) so value the Interest they had in their Par∣ty, (which as they knew they should lose by ac∣cepting, so they knew they should improve by re∣fusing those Offers,) that for that very reason onely they did finally refuse to accept of them; but not till they had made their advantage of such offers having been made unto them; namely, the indear∣ing of themselves by so much the more unto their Party, by how much the more they might have
had, if they would have gone off from them: which being made known to those that were their Disci∣ples, as it could not chuse but make them the more beloved and esteemed; so it could not chuse but make them to be more liberally and largely sup∣plied and maintained also, that they might not be altogether losers by the refusals of such Offers. Whe∣ther Mr. Calamy made any such advantage of his re∣fusal of the Bishoprick of Litchfield and Coventry or no, I know not; but this I am sure of, that at a meeting betwixt him and others of his Party, with Bishop Henchman, me, and others of our Party, at a Booksellers Shop in St. Paul's Church-yard, Mr. Calamy sitting next to me, did whisperingly ask me what the Bishoprick of Litchfield and Coventry was worth yearly, I told him it was commonly valued at 1500 l. per annum; whereunto he replied nothing, but that he thought it had not been worth so much. Why he asked me this question, and whether he made use of my answer in order to the improving the Interest he had before in his own Party, either in point of Credit or Profit, let others guess; but that he asked me such a question, and that I gave him such an answer, I averr verbo Sacerdotis. Hereunto I might add, that many would have conformed that did not, especially many of those Many stood out, in hopes of a Tolera∣tion. that were beneficed in the Country, if they had not been made believe by the Grandees of their Party in the City, that there would be shortly a Toleration granted upon easier terms than those required by the Act of Ʋniformity: and so much the rather, and the sooner, the more resolutely and the more generally they refused to comply with, and submit to the Act of Ʋniformity. Whether they that writ this, and
caused it to be dispersed among those that were pos∣sessed of Cures in the Country, did believe it them∣selves or no, or whether meaning to stand out them∣selves, they made use of this pious fraud to increase the number of those that stood out with them; they did by this means make many refuse to con∣form, who were afterwards heartily sorry for it, though most of them were ashamed to own they were so. CHAP. VIII. Mr. Baxter's Plea for Nonconforming Ministers may alike serve for Popish Priests. The peculiar ex∣cellency of the Churches Sermons, viz. her Homi∣lies, set forth. BUt supposing, though not granting, that all Supposing it is out of Con∣science they do not con∣form, yet they are justly si∣lenced. that did not conform, and were put out of their employments in the Church upon that account, did refuse to conform for Conscience sake onely; doth it therefore follow that having preached as they had, and done as they did, and refusing to give caution that they would not preach so, and doe so still, they might not in Justice, or ought not in prudence to be forbidden to preach either in publick or private any more, untill they should give such caution for their good behaviour for the future, as the Wisedom of the State, as well as of the Church, thought fit to re∣quire of them? Sure they will not say that there are none that ought not to be forbidden to preach
either in publick or in private, in Churches or in Conventicles; and yet I am sure they can name none, that do not, or may not pretend (and as tru∣ly perhaps, as any of those Mr. Baxter pleads for) to an obligation of Conscience for their Nonconformi∣ty, and for their preaching in Conventicles likewise, as well as any of Mr. Baxter's 2000. Nay, may not the Popish Priests themselves, (whom I think Mr. Baxter will not deny to be The Popish Priests have the same Plea as Mr. B's Nonconfor∣ming Mini∣sters, justly prohibited to exercise their Priestly Office here among us, and to be justly punishable if they doe so,) may not those Popish Priests themselves (I say) justifie their saying of Mass, and making of Proselytes by their preaching in Conventicles, by the self same Reasons that are made use of by Mr. Bax∣ter to justifie his own practice, and the practice of those he pleads for in his Book called an Apology for the Nonconformist Ministry? For first he cannot deny but that schismatical as well as Popish Dissenters or Nonconformists, are forbidden by the same Authority to exercise their Ministry both publickly and privately: so that the Popish Priests may truly say to the Dissenting Mi∣nisters, Hic sumus ergo pares, upon this occasion our case is much alike; we are no more transgres∣sours of the Laws than you are. Secondly, if doing what they doe out of Consci∣ence, or because they are obliged in Conscience to doe so, be a sufficient Plea to justifie the Dissenting Ministers in transgressing of the Law, why should it not justifie the Popish Priests for transgressing of it also? For that they doe what they doe out of Conscience, or because they think themselves bound in Conscience to doe so, cannot be denied, at least
there can be no proof to the contrary; and they think the World is bound to believe it of them, ra∣ther than of the other, because their Penalty for transgressing of the Law is much greater. Thirdly, besides this general Reason of being obliged in Conscience, which the Popish Priests as well as the Dissenting Ministers may alledge for transgressing of the Law, whereby both of them are forbidden to exercise their respective Functions, there is none of those Four particular Reasons which Mr. Baxter And that up∣on Mr. B's own Reasons. insists on in the aforesaid Book of his, to justifie himself and those of his Nonconforming Bre∣thren for preaching as they do, though the Law have forbidden them to do so, but the Popish Priests may pretend to also for their justification in the Exe∣cution of their Priestly Office in Conventicles of their own persuasion, or for the gaining of Prose∣lytes to their own Religion. I. As first, for example, may not a Romish Vid. Apology for the Non∣conformist Mi∣nistry, p. 14. Priest say, and say it truly, as Mr. Baxter doth, That he holds the sacred Office of the Ministry or Priesthood consisteth in an obligation to doe the work, and an Authority to warrant him therein, and that both these are essential to the Office? as likewise, That Kings and other Magistrates are not by Ordination to ibid. p. 15. give this Office, nor by Degradation to take it away? But what then? May not the King forbid a Po∣pish As from the Obligati∣on of holy Or∣ders. Priest to exercise his Priestly Function here in England, and punish him if he do, though he can∣not degrade him, or make him to be no Priest? And if this may be done to a Popish Priest without degrading him, why may it not be done by the same Authority to a dissenting or Nonconforming
Minister without degrading him also? Yea, and without taking away any thing that is essential to his Office? For it is not the obligation to doe, but to be qualified and willing to doe the work of a Mini∣ster, that is essential to his Office: neither doth his Ordination give him Authority to doe the work of a Minister any otherwise, or any longer than he do∣eth it as it ought to be done. So that this Argu∣ment drawn from the Obligation of a Minister to doe the work of a Minister after he is ordained, if it prove any thing, it proves either more or less than Mr. Baxter would have it, namely, that either Po∣pish Priests may and ought to exercise their Priest∣ly Office here in England, though by Law they are forbidden: or else, that the Nonconforming Mini∣sters may not, nor ought not to exercise their Mi∣nisterial Office, being forbidden to doe so by the same Authority, and especially for the same Rea∣sons also; namely for being Disturbers of the pub∣lick Peace, and holding such Principles as are de∣structive to Monarchy, the one teaching the Divisi∣on of the Sovereignty betwixt the King and another Foreign Prince, that is, betwixt the King and the Pope; and the other teaching the Division of the Sovereignty betwixt the King and the Parliament, that is, betwixt the King and his Subjects. II. Neither is Mr. Baxter's second Argument From their being conse∣crated to God's ser∣vice. for the Nonconforming Ministers being obliged to ex∣ercise their Ministry, though they are by Law for∣bidden to doe it, so peculiar to them, but that if it had any force in it, any man that hath been or∣dained, and thereby been consecrated and devoted to the Ministerial Function may lay claim to it, and
make use of it, though he have done or may doe never so much hurt by the exercise of it: because he will be guilty of Sacrilege (saith Mr. Baxter) if he do not, and of the highest degree of Sacrilege that can be, it being much more sacrilegious (saith he) to alienate consecrated Persons than consecrated Things from the Service of God. And for proof thereof he tells us, That our Canons enquire after all such as alienate themselves from the Ministry to which they were ordained, and turn to other Callings; adding, We dislike not that Canon, but we wish our observance of it might be thought but a pardonable fault. As if this Canon which forbids men to quit their Ministe∣rial Calling, and to betake themselves to any other Lay Profession, did oblige all those that are Mini∣sters, or have been ordained to be Ministers, to con∣tinue in the exercise of their Ministerial Function, though by lawfull Authority, and for never so just cause they are forbidden to doe so: because forsooth he will be guilty of Sacrilege if he do not: so that he that is once ordained, and thereby consecrated to serve God in the Ministry, though he be never so heretical, or schismatical, or fanatical in point of Opinion; or never so factious, or seditious, or rebel∣lious, or lewd, or debauched in point of Practice, he must not be forbidden to doe the work he was or∣dained to doe: or if he be forbidden, he must not forbear to doe it notwithstanding, because it will be the highest degree of Sacrilege, except Apostasie it ibid. p. 20. self, if he do: So that this Argument proves no∣thing neither, or as much for the worst, as it doth for the best that ever were ordained. III. The like may be said of Mr. Baxter's third
Argument also, which is a deduction from several Texts of Scripture obliging those that have taken up∣on From scriptu∣ral Authority. them the Ministry of the Gospel, to be diligent, and faithfull, and constant in the preaching of it. All which places must be understood with this excepti∣on, unless they be lawfully, and by their lawfull Superiours forbidden to doe it. Otherwise there will a Floodgate be opened for the bringing in all manner of Heresies and Schisms into the Church; and of Faction, and Sedition, and Rebellion into the State, as we have found by our own experience it hath done lately into our own Church and State; and will doe so again, if such Arguments as these can prevail with us to repeal our Laws, and to grant a Licence, or rather a licentiousness of Preaching, to Men so principled and so affected, as Mr. Baxter himself, and those he pleads for have shewed them∣selves to be; and will not yet give us any security, that they will not preach and doe hereafter, as they have done formerly. IV. But his fourth main Reason (as he calls it, From the guilt of mur∣thering souls if they do not preach. Pag. 45. Plea for Non∣con's Mini∣stry. why those he pleads for must preach, though they be forbidden) is a main one indeed (if it were a true one,) namely, That they should sin against the Law of Nature it self, nay even the great radical Law of Na∣ture, so far as to be guilty of the murthering of mens Souls, if they did not preach though they be forbid∣den; by what Authority or for what cause soever: for so he must mean, or else he saith nothing to the purpose, and if he means so, he condemns the King and Parliament for forbidding so many hundreds or thousands (as Mr. Baxter saith are silenced, because they will not conform,) and consequently for doing
what they can to make so many hundreds and thou∣sands to sin against the radical Law of Nature, and to be guilty of murthering God knows how many Mens Souls. But Kings and Parliaments, Mr. Baxter may say, are but Men, and Men that may err in comman∣ding what God hath forbidden, and in forbidding what God hath commanded, as they do (saith he) in this particular, and are not therefore to be obey∣ed: as the Apostles did not and professed they would not obey the High Priest and the Sanhedrim, when they did forbid them to preach any more in the name of Christ; the like, saith he, the Primitive and Orthodox Christians did, though the Pagan and Arian Emperours forbad them to doe so. But is there the same Reason, Mr. Baxter, or the No such ne∣cessity of preaching now, as in the primitive times. same necessity for your preaching now (supposing you would preach nothing but what you should preach) as there was for their preaching then; when Paganism had taken and kept possession of the World for 4000 years together, and Christiani∣ty was to be planted instead of it, when the Har∣vest was so very great, and the Labourers so very few? Whereas Christianity and Orthodox Christia∣nity (as you your self witness) is (thanks be to God for it) already planted here; and though every Pa∣rish be not so well provided for, either with main∣tenance for a Minister, or with so able a Minister as I wish they were, and hope they will be with∣out need of your assistance; yet there is none, or very few, if any, but such as can reade divine Ser∣vice, wherein are all David's Psalms read once a month, and all the rest of the Holy Scripture once a year, and the Creed and the Decalogue twice or
thrice a week, besides the teaching of the Church-Catechism, wherein is the Churches own Expositi∣on of the Creed, the Decalogue, the Lords-Prayer, and of the Nature, Use and Ends of both the Sa∣craments, together with how we are to be prepa∣red for the receiving of them, and the benefits we are to receive with them and by them. And I de∣mand of Mr. Baxter, whether this, (if there were no more than this) be not enough, by God's bles∣sing upon it, for the conversion and saving of Souls? But over and besides all this, there are, or may be, The Homi∣lies of the Church re∣commended for excellent Sermons. without their help, as good Sermons, as any they can make, read or preached, every Sunday, even by those that cannot make Sermons themselves; and Sermons upon such Subjects, or Heads, or Common places, as are most fundamental, and most necessa∣ry and profitable for the People to be instructed in, both for their belief and practice, in order to the making of them good Men, good Christians, good Subjects, and every way such as they ought to be in all their Relations; and that in so plain, so per∣spicuous, and so familiar a way of Expression, as that none that have any degree of common under∣standing, but may understand them; and if it be not their own fault, be edified by them. And all this without any danger of being led into any doc∣trinal or practical Errour, without being in danger of being made Hereticks, or Schismaticks, or Re∣bels, by hearing of them. This being the peculi∣ar excellency of those Sermons, I mean the Domi∣lies, above all other Sermons, that all men may be edified and made better, and no man can be cor∣rupted or made worse by them; for they are all of them clean corn, without any mixture either of
tares, or of chaff, either of noxious and hurtfull, or of vain and unprofitable Ingredients with it; which no man can be sure of from any other Sermons but these, or such as these are onely; which can have nothing of the frailty, nor the folly, or the malice of him that delivers them in them: which all other Sermons of every Man's own Composition have, or may have in a greater or less degree, and none had in a greater, than those that were preached in the late times by them, whose preaching again Mr. Baxter doth so earnestly plead for. But the reading of a Homily, will Mr. Baxter say, is not preaching, or if it may be called preaching, it The efficacy of those Homi∣lies main∣tained. is such kind of preaching as hath no Life nor Effi∣cacy in it to work upon Mens Minds and Affections that hear it: Not so much perhaps, Mr. Baxter, as if it were delivered vivâ voce, by word of Mouth, by him that was the Composer of it: but to say it hath not, nor cannot have any efficacy at all, is du∣rus sermo, a very hard saying, and such as doth not consist with their own practice; I mean their Re∣petitions, which they seem to think to be as ne∣cessary after a Sermon, as contracting or betrothing before Marriage. And do they think those Repe∣titions An Argument drawn from their own re∣petitions of Sermons. of other mens Sermons to be of no Efficacy to make them that hear them the better for them? If they do think so, why do they place so much of Re∣ligion in the use of them? If they do not, let them for shame grant as much efficacy to the repetition of the Church Sermons, (I mean the Homilies) or if not to the repetition of them, yet at least to the re∣petition of the Prophets Sermons in the Old Testa∣ment, and of Christ and his Apostles in the New, as they do to the repetition of those Sermons that are
preached by themselves; which though they may think to be better than our Homilies, yet I hope they will not prefer them before, or compare them with Christ's Sermon on the Mount, or with those Ser∣mons of the Prophets and Apostles, which were dic∣tated by the Holy Ghost, and are daily read or re∣peated in all and every one of our Churches, how meanly soever they are provided for otherwise. So that I do not see how so many thousand Souls, as Mr. Baxter speaks of, must needs be starved for Mr. B's mur∣ther of Souls, a phantasm. want of spiritual food, if the 2000 silenced Mini∣sters that he pleads for be not restored to the liber∣ty of Preaching; and much less, how any of those that are silenced, should be guilty of Murther for not preaching, though there were much more need of preaching than there is; for it is not for want of more Labourers, but for want of more maintenance for our Labourers, that our Churches are not so well supplied with Preachers as they might be, without taking in of those that are shut out: or if our Churches are too few, or our Parishes too great, ei∣ther of those inconveniences might easily be reme∣died, by building more Churches, and dividing those Parishes; and so might the maintenance of the Orthodox and Conformable Ministry be likewise, if the Parliament would give but as much to indi∣gent Churches as it did to indigent Officers; and then if they were not supplied by able, and industrious, and unblameable Incumbents, let us, that are the Bishops, be blamed for it.
CHAP. IX. Whatever need there may be of preaching, both Po∣pish Priests and Nonconformists ought to be restrai∣ned from preaching. BUt why in the mean time, untill that can be effected, should we not make use of their as∣sistance, The assistance of Nonconfor∣mists offered gratis. Apol. p. 16. which they offer us for nothing? For as for maintenance (saith Mr. Baxter) we expect not any. Speak for your self, Mr. Baxter. I remember the time when an eminent Man of your Party, that is, for the Parliament against the King, had more than twice as many Spiritual Cures at once, and some of them of greater value, than any conformable man hath or can have by Law: and his Apology for it in Print was, that he had but one Living of his own, and the rest he did but keep, untill good and godly Pastours could be provided for them; but he kept the Profits of them also, though he was not resident up∣on any one of them, no not so much as upon that which was his own, being an Intruder into the Headship of a College. I remember too when the Churches in divers great Towns, which had a great number of Souls, and but little maintenance be∣longing to them, were wholly neglected, and the neighbouring little Villages, where the Cures were small but the Tithes were great, were seized on by the Grandees of the Faction; which was an evident proof that they valued the Fleece more than the Flock; and that they would not then, as Mr. Bax∣ter saith they will now, serve God for nought. But
would not the Papists doe so also? Yes, perhaps Why not to be accepted. they would, will Mr. Baxter say, but it would be in order to the destroying and not the edifying of the Church: and have we not reason to fear that their offering to preach gratis is with such a meaning and Intention also? We are sure they have done so, and we are not nor cannot be sure they will not doe so again, as long as they continue at that distance, as they do, from us. In the mean time the Popish Priests being so The Popish Priests under a greater ob∣ligation of preaching. persuaded, as they are, namely, that all Protestants are in a State of damnation, have a more rational pretence for the necessity of their preaching to us than our silenced Ministers have, or can have, even upon this account, that unless they doe what they can to make us Roman Catholicks, they are guilty of our perishing everlastingly. But I hope our silen∣ced Ministers do not think us in such a state of Dam∣nation, as we cannot be delivered out of, but by their preaching, as the Popish Priests may and do think us to be. But whatsoever either of them may think of the Neither of them to be permitted; need we have of their preaching, and consequently of their own obligation to preach, though they be forbidden; we that do believe they would doe more hurt than good by their preaching, do believe like∣wise that we are obliged in Conscience to restrain them from preaching, though there were a greater want of Preachers and preaching than there is a∣mong us. For sure there was never more need of preaching, and scarcity of Preachers, than when the According to Christ's own Caveat, Gospel began first to be planted, when the Harvest was so great, and the Labourers so few, that Christ bad them pray the Lord of the Harvest to send
more labourers into his Harvest; and yet even then Christ would not have all to be hearkned unto that took upon them to preach, but bad his Disci∣ples beware of them and of their Doctrine, though they came in Sheep's cloathing, (that is) though they made a shew of nothing but harmlesness, and meekness, and simplicity, because they might be ravening Wolves for all that. And not long after that, when there was still need of a great many more labourers than there were, to carry on the great work of the conversion of the Gentiles; yet even then St. Paul commands Titus , to and S. Paul's order to Ti∣tus. silence some of the , of those that were Preachers: and why? because they were , unruly, such as would not be governed, or be brought under any rule or order, but did , subvert whole houses. And if such Prea∣chers as did but subvert whole houses were to be silenced or not suffered to preach then, when there was so much more need of Preachers and of prea∣ching than there is now, how much more reaso∣nable and necessary is it for us to silence those whose Principles tend to the subverting of whole Kingdoms? especially when we have more Preachers of our own than we can tell how to provide for. Again, as in the first plantation of the Church, when there was incomparably most need of Prea∣chers, The like prac∣tised at the beginning of the Reforma∣tion. the Apostles would not suffer such as were ungovernable or unruly themselves, especially if they taught others to be so also; so in the begin∣ning of the Reformation of our Church from Po∣pish Idolatry, Superstition and Corruption both in Doctrine and Practice, though there was a very great want of able and orthodox Preachers, not
onely in Edward the sixth's time, but in Queen E∣lizabeth's time also, for divers years together; yet none of the Popish Priests were suffered to conti∣nue in their stations, but very many Cures were supplied with men of very mean abilities, till they could be better provided for, rather than hazard a relapse into Popery by employing any that were Popishly affected in the work of the Ministry. And Mr. Baxter may remember when we of the Church of England as it was established by Law, Themselves serv'd the Church of England∣men so. were deprived and silenced for no other reason, but because we could not in Conscience conform to the illegal Government that was by an usurped power set up in the Church and State. I know there were other pretences against some; as disability, immorality and scandal: but the main reason why we were generally turn'd out of our Free-holds, and forbidden to exercise our Ministerial function was our Non-conformity to the then present Government in the State, and to the then present way of serving God in the Church, though both of them were illegal, and though there was then as much or more need of their being assisted by us, than there is now of our being assisted by them.
CHAP. X. According to Mr. Baxter's own opinion, the Mini∣sters he pleads for, ought to be silenced. The Act against Conventicles, why made; and what is meant by Seditious Conventicles and Preachers. Mr. Baxter, by his own confession, an incourager of the late Rebellion. BUt supposing the want of Preachers and of Prea∣ching to be much greater than it is, may there What Prea∣chers to be silenced by Mr. B's own sentence. not be a just cause to keep some from preaching and that without Sacrilege or robbing of God, though they have been consecrated to God by Ordi∣nation; if afterwards they prove such as are much more likely to doe harm than good by their prea∣ching? And such are not onely those that are ut∣terly unable to teach, or are notoriously scanda∣lous in their lives and conversations; but such as are heretical or schismatical in their opinions, such as are  unruly and ungovernable, and apt to stir up strife and Sedition, either in Church or State. Certainly such men as these ought to be silenced and punished too, if they will not forbear preaching, what need soever they may pretend there is for it; otherwise St. Paul would not have given so strict a charge for the silencing of such as he did to Titus. And truly that there are some such as ought to be silenced notwithstanding their consecration to God, Mr. Baxter himself cannot deny. For whom else doth he mean by those he calls intolerabiles Vid. True and onely way to con∣cord, part 3. that is, such as are not to be tolerated or suffered to Preach? Doth he mean none
but those who were never ordained? or none but those that are heretical in their opinions, or debaucht in their manners, or insufficient for the discharge of their duties? No; he confesseth that in the general all or any whose preaching is likely to doe more hurt than good, and particularly such as are against Third part of True and one∣ly way of conc. p. 121. & 122. Princes safety and honour, or whose Principles tend to overthrow the honour and safety of Governours, and to kindle the fire of contention and enmity; or such as draw their hearers Souls into any damnable errour or sin; or that perswade men against any pre∣cept of the Decalogue, and consequently against a∣ny of the precepts of the second Table, as well as of the first; all such as these, saith Mr. Baxter, are to be restrained from preaching; For, far be it (saith Mr. Baxter) from any sober man to think that the Magistrate must let all men doe the evil that they will but pretend to God and Conscience for. Which one saying of his makes all that he said before to justifie the preaching of his Noncon∣formists to signifie nothing, if they be silenced or forbidden to preach for any of the aforesaid causes by him specified and acknowledged to be such, as Preachers ought to be silenced for, notwithstanding any pretence of conscience to the contrary. So this being agreed on betwixt us; the next The Ministers Mr. B. pleads for, are such as, he confes∣seth, ought to be silenced. thing in question betwixt us is, whether those that are silenced are such as Mr. Baxter confes∣seth ought to be silenced or no; for if they be, he confesseth likewise, that no pretence of consci∣ence can warrant their preaching, and much less oblige them to preach. For the deciding of this question therefore, whether those that are silen∣ced are justly silenced or no; there remains one,
and but one question more, and that is who shall judge and finally determine whether they that are silenced, be or be not such, as ought to be silenced, or restrained from preaching. Surely they them∣selves must not be their own judges: but who must then? why, who but the Magistrate? (saith Mr. Baxter) who in Church cases and religion hath The Magi∣strate the Judge in this case, saith Mr. B. the onely publick judgment whom he shall countenance, maintain, or tolerate, or whom he shall punish or not tolerate nor maintain; but with this caution, so he Vid. Third part of Book of Concord, pag. 140. be not the executioner of the Clergy's sentence with∣out or against his own conscience and judgment. Where by the Magistrate, I hope he means the supreme Magistrate; and by his judgment, he means his judgment according to Law: For the Law and no∣thing The Law is a declaration of his Judg∣ment. but the Law, is the declaration of the su∣preme Magistrate's publick judgment, in giving whereof he neither is nor can be the executioner of any other man's sentence; but all subordinate Magistrates (whether Civil or Ecclesiastical) are the executioners of the supreme Magistrate's judg∣ment or sentence, and are no farther binding or to be obeyed than they are so. Now that the supreme Magistrate with the advice and consent of his great Council hath given his judg∣ment not onely who are, and who are not to be to∣lerated to preach in publick or in Churches, appears What kind of Preachers tolerated, what not, is there set down: by the Act of Ʋniformity; as likewise that he hath given his judgment also, that those who are not to be tolerated to preach in publick or in Churches, are not to be tolerated to preach in private, nor in Con∣venticles neither, appears by those other Acts of Par∣liament, whereby such preaching is forbidden, and such penalties as are therein specified are to be in∣flicted
upon the transgressours of them. Lastly, as those Acts of Parliament are undeniable evidences who are, and who are not to be tolerated to preach either publickly or privately, according to the pu∣blick judgment of the State; so the reasons why such preaching and such Preachers are prohibited With the rea∣sons of such restraint. are declared in the Titles and Prefaces of the afore∣said Acts: for example, the Title to one of those Acts, namely that of decimo tertio of our present King, is this, An Act for the safety and preserva∣tion of his Majesty's person and Government against treasonable and seditious practices and attempts: and in the Preface to the said Act it is said, that the Lords and Commons assembled in that Parliament deeply weighing and considering the miseries and cala∣mities of well nigh 20 years before his Majesty's hap∣py return, and withall reflecting upon the causes and occasions of so great and deplorable confusions; the growth and increase of which (they say) did in a very great measure proceed from a multitude of sedi∣tious Sermons, Pamphlets and Speeches published with a transcendent boldness, from which kind of distemper (say they) as the present age is not wholly free, so posterity may be apt to relapse into them if a timely remedy be not provided; Therefore (say they) We the Lords and Commons having duly considered the Premisses, do most humbly beseech your Majesty that it may be enacted, &c. By which Title and preface it plainly appears, A descant up∣on those rea∣sons. that the Lords and Commons did believe, that nei∣ther the safety of the King's person, nor of the Go∣vernment could be secured, if such kind of Prea∣ching and Preachers as had in the late times been the stirrers up of the People to rebellion were not
restrained from preaching for the future, unless they would give some such security as the Parliament should think fit to require, which was their renoun∣cing the Covenant and their subscription to the Act The security, which the Law requires from Prea∣chers. of Ʋniformity which was enacted by the King, by the advice and with the consent of the Lords and Commons, the year following. And it was for their not conforming to this Act of Ʋniformity, that is, for their not giving that security which the Law re∣quired, that they would not preach schismatically and factiously and seditiously, as they had done for∣merly, for which they were some of them depri∣ved, and all of them disabled to preach publickly in Churches, and consecrated places. But this Act not proving effectual enough to pre∣vent the danger, for preventing whereof it was enacted, because those that were forbid to preach publickly and in Churches, did preach the same doc∣trines in Conventicles and in corners, confirming The ground of the Act a∣gainst Con∣venticles. their old, and making more and more new Prose∣lytes, and being more and more followed because they were forbidden to preach in publick; There∣fore two years after this, there was another Act made by the same Authority, the Title whereof is. An Act to prevent and suppress seditious Conventi∣cles: and the Preface or Preamble thereof is, That for the providing of farther and more speedy remedies against the growing and dangerous practices of sedi∣tious Sectaries and other disloyal Persons, who under pretence of tender Consciences do at their meetings contrive Insurrections, as late experience hath shew∣ed. Be it enacted, &c. And then tells us first, what shall be taken for a seditious Conventicle, What are se∣ditious Con∣venticles. namely, any meeting or Assembly in any place
under colour or pretence of any exercise of Religion in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, where there shall be five Persons or more over and above those of the same house. Secondly, What are to be the Penalties for the first, second and third Offence; and lastly, who are to be the Executioners and Inflicters of these Penalties. Where you see that it is the Highest se∣cular Magistrate (whom Mr. Baxter will have to be judge in Church cases, and of whom he is to tolerate and countenance, and whom he is not to tolerate but to punish) it is he, I say, who by and with the ad∣vice and consent of his great Council of Lords and Commons hath judged all such aforesaid Assemblies to be seditious Conventicles, and consequently all the Preachers in them to be seditious Preachers; and I Who seditious Preachers. hope Mr. B. will not deny, because he hath granted it already, that all seditious Preachers are to be re∣strained; and if they are to be restrained, and restrai∣ned by those that are the proper Judges whether they ought to be restrained or no: certainly there can be no reason to excuse, and much less to justify the preaching of those that are so restrained after they are restrained, and during such their restraint; and therefore all those reasons alledged by Mr. Baxter in the aforesaid Book of his called An Apology for Mr. B's Apo∣logy for them falls to ground. the Nonconformist Ministers, are to no purpose as to the proving of that which they are alledged to prove, namely the obligation of those silenced Mi∣nisters to preach in Conventicles, whom he pleads for though they be silenced, and silenced by those whom he confesseth to have authority to silence them, and whom he confesseth likewise to be the proper judges whether they are to be silenced or
no; and though that for which they are forbidden to preach in Conventicles is because such meetings and such preachings are seditious and dangerous as to the safety of the King's Person, as well as of his Government; which Mr. Baxter confesseth (in a place before quoted) to be one cause why men may be justly restrained from preaching; and how they that are justly restrained from preaching can be obli∣ged to preach, Mr. Baxter is to prove when and how he can. In the mean time, all that I can imagine Master The very Con∣venticles, whatever people doe there, are se∣ditious. Baxter hath to say is, that though they preach in Conventicles, yet they do not preach Sedition, or any thing that may disaffect their Hearers either to the King or to the Government. But what if they that sit at the helm, and whose office and duty it is to take care nè quid detrimenti Respublica capiat, That the Commonwealth get no harm or come to no damage, do believe, and have reason to believe, that you do and will preach that in private now, which they know you have preached openly and often heretofore, and have no reason to think, but that you are the same men still that you have been always, even since the very beginning of the Refor∣mation; that is, such as have been always and ever will be undermining the established Government of the Church and State? may they not, I say, that sit at the Helm, in order to the securing of the pu∣blick peace of the Kingdom and safety of the King, may they not in point of justice, nay ought they not in point of prudence and conscience too, upon the aforesaid consideration to forbid such meetings?
And if they may and ought to forbid them, the very Meetings themselves after they are forbidden are seditious, whatsoever they say or doe when they are met; because by the Eye of the Law they are looked upon as meeting to doe that, for the do∣ing whereof the Law forbids them to meet. And whereas one of Mr. Baxter's chief reasons One main reason of for∣bidding them, to prevent the murthe∣ring of Souls. why they were obliged in conscience to preach though they are forbidden it, because they shall be guilty of the murthering of Souls if they do not; (the murthering of such Souls he means as might have been saved by their preaching, and do perish for want of it) one of the main reasons why the King by advice of his great Council hath forbidden them to preach, is to prevent the murthering of Souls and Bodies too by their preaching, I mean the Souls and Bodies of such as are by them and their prea∣ching disaffected to the Government both in Church or State, and made ready and resolute to undermine and overturn both, whensoever there shall be an opportunity of so doing, which they would never have thought of, if it had not been for such Prea∣chers and such preaching. Mr. Baxter confesseth he incouraged many thou∣sands to ingage in the late War: Holy Com. Wealth, p. 486. This Mr. B. charged par∣ticularly with, upon his own con∣fession.: which if it were a Rebellion (as no doubt it was, though perhaps he did not think it to be so) was to engage them Bo∣dies and Souls, whether they kill'd or were kill'd, in a damnable action: And who can tell whether he and those that are principled as he is, may not even now be encouraging many thousands more to
doe as they did then, when the like opportunity shall invite them to it? the rather, because Master Baxter himself hath told us, that as yet be cannot Ibidem. see that he was mistaken in the main cause nor dared to repent of it, nor forbear to doe the same if it were to doe again in the same state of things: that is, if there were, or if there should be such a War be∣twixt the King and the two Houses of Parliament as there was then, he would encourage as many thousands as he did then to engage against the King. And hath not the King, having such fair warning given him, good reason to prevent the making of Parties by men that are thus minded; and that not for his own sake onely, nor onely for their sakes, that may be endangered in their bodies and their goods for adhering to him, but even for their sakes also, who may by such Preachers and prea∣ching be persuaded and encouraged to rebell against him, and consequently not onely to a hazard of the loss of their lives, but to a certainty of the loss of their Souls without repentance, which is hardly to be hoped for those that dye in an Act of sin, espe∣cially so great as that of Rebellion? And therefore for this reason onely, if there were no other, those that are silenced, ought not to preach for fear of murthering of Souls by their preaching: which is all I have to say to this particular, and which if it be not enough, I hope one or other of those my re∣verend Brethren, the Bishops, to whom Mr. Baxter addresseth his Plea for the liberty of the Nonconfor∣mists to preach notwithstanding their being silen∣ced by Act of Parliament, will more fully and more at large examine and confute that Treatise of
his for this reason at least, if there were no other, nè si nullus ex ipsorum numero contradicat, omnes cum illo consentire videantur, Lest if none of their num∣ber should gainsay him, they may all be thought to comply and agree with him: and so he and those he pleads for will perhaps boast they do, if none of them say any thing to the con∣trary.
CHAP. XI. Mr. B's Reflexion upon the Bishop, concerning Master Jone's his being put out of the Duke's service, ta∣ken to task, and sent to Elymas the Sorcerer. One thing true in it, that the Protestant Religion may be preserved better without the Nonconformists than with them. AND now I am come at last to the considera∣tion of the last of those injurious Reflexions, which in the beginning of this Book I observed to have been made upon me by Mr. Baxter, and for the confutation of which I principally intended all that I have written; though many other things (which I thought not of at first) occasionally fal∣ling in, have made that which I meant should be but a small Tract to swell into a large Volume; but now I am in, and have gone so far, I must go through with it. The Reflexion therefore which I am now to speak of, is in Mr. Baxter's Answer to Dr. Stillingfleet's Sermon towards the end of it; the words are these: I must say, that when some Prelates made it their great business to silence, shame and ruine us, and drive The words of the Refle∣xion. us far enough from persons of power, undertaking to preserve the Protestant Religion better without us than with us, and after all cry out themselves that we are in danger of Popery, by their own Pupils and Disciples whose instruction they undertook, men will
have leave to think of this awake, and to judge of Causes by Effects. These, I say, are the words of that Reflexion, which I complain of as intentionally aimed at me (though obliquely and by circumlocution onely) e∣specially in the latter part of it. For as for the for∣mer The Bishop not peculiarly concern'd in the former part of those words. part of that saying of his, where he speaks of some Prelates that made it their great business to silence, shame and ruine them, that is, him and the rest of the Dissenters, though I doubt not but he means me for one of those Prelates, and one of the chief of them, because he tells me and the Bishop of Ely in plain terms, that we two of all he knows have effectually helped to bring them under; yet I do not take my self to be peculiarly concern'd in this whether it be truly or falsly averr'd by him; and therefore though I could tell him and tell him truly, and prove it too, that I never made it any of my business to shame or ruine him or any of the Dissenters, or to silence any more of them than by Law I was not onely allowed but obliged to silence; though I could say this (I say) and more too to prove that I never did any the least injury to any of them, but have shewed kindness to some that had dealt hardly with me, namely to Mr. Langley of Pembroke College, who having got∣ten into my Canonry of Christ's Church in Oxford never allowed me one penny out of it during above 12 years I was abroad, nor after I came home made me any recompence: yet thinking I was one would doe good for evil, he had the confidence to write to me, and to intreat me to befriend him for the renewing
of a Lease he held of Magdalen College, as being their Visitor I did it for him. Though, I say, I could make proof of this, yet I will not insist upon it; that which I except against is a false and injuri∣ous reflexion upon me particularly, being contained in the words that follow, (viz.) driving us (that is him and those of his Party) far enough from Persons The latter part of them particularly aimed at the Bishop. of power, undertaking to preserve the Protestant Re∣ligion better without us than with us, and after cry out themselves that we are in danger of Popery by their own Pupils and Disciples whose instruction they undertook themselves, and then concludes men will have leave to think of this awake, and to judge of causes by effects. This, I say, is the Reflexion I complain of as false and injurious, and as being my self more parti∣cularly aimed at in it than any other of the Prelates he before spake of For though here as well as there, he makes use of the plural number, as if he meant what he saith of more than one, yet that which he saith of them he knew would be understood by those, by whom he would have it to be understood, to be meant of me, or if not of me onely yet of me principally and especially; because he and others perhaps of his Party had heard from Mr. JONES and others from them, that I had caused the said Mr. Jones to be put out of the Duke of York's service, having been before a Chaplain to his Royal High∣nesses Family; to his Family I say, for he was never Mr. Jones a Chaplain to the Duke's Family, not to his Person. any of the four that were properly and  by way of eminence, called the Duke's Chaplains, but onely one of the two who were daily to efficiate in
the Duke's Chapel to the Houshold, whether He or the Dutchess were there or no; so that Mr. Jones was not so great a man either in place of attendance or in grace and favour with either of their High∣nesses, that either his stay could hinder, or his re∣move could further any design that I or any man else might have had upon the Duke or Dutchess, in order to the seducing or perverting both or either of them in matter of Religion. And yet this Mr. Jones was the man, and I ve∣rily Mr. Jones, the man in∣tended by Mr. B. believe the onely man, Mr. Baxter thought of, though he speaks in the plural number here al∣so, as if we the Prelates had driven them, that is, all or many of them, far enough from persons of Power. Now I would fain know of Mr. Baxter, what one man of their Party was ever driven away by any of the Prelates from any person of Power, or was ever said to be so, but this Mr. Jones onely: who was never thought to be one of their Party, whilst he was in the Duke's service; I am sure he profess'd the contrary; and if he had not, I am sure he could not have been admitted into the Duke's service, as no man else could either into the Duke's, or into any other persons of power, the Law (not made by the Prelates, but by the King in Parliament; I mean the Act of Ʋniformity) ha∣ving made all of that Party (as long as they were of that Party) uncapable of being Chaplains or Schoolmasters in Noblemens or in any great mens Houses, and therefore there was no need of the Prelates driving them farther from persons of power than the Law had driven them already.
Neither was it for his being one of them (though perhaps he was one of them in his heart) that Mr. Jones was put out of the Duke's service, but for behaving himself otherwise than he ought to have done in it; but how that was I forbear to say, because he is dead: onely I must say that I was neither Judge nor Witness, nor Plaintiff nor Defen∣dant, The Bishop no way concer∣ned in his be∣ing put out of the Duke's service. nor any way a party in the case, no nor knew not any thing of the matter it self or of the cause of it, untill after it was done, as Dr. Killi∣grew, then Clerk of the Closet to the Duke, and Dr. Turner then and now one of the Duke's Chap∣lains, will I doubt not be ready to testify if it were tanti, worth the while, to call them to it. But first Some rea∣sons, that Mr. Jones is meant by Mr. B. for one that was driven away. that it was this Mr. Jones that Mr. Baxter means for one and (as I verily believe) the onely one (though he speaks in the plural number) that was driven away from a Person of power by any of the Prelates is more than probable; because it is true (as I said before) that Mr. Jones was once in the Duke's service, and because it is true likewise that he was put out of the place he had there, and thereupon growing angry and discontented it is very likely that he applied himself to the discon∣tented Party, and to Mr. Baxter, as one of the most eminent of that Party, and told him that it was the Bishop of Winchester that had caused him to be turn'd out of the Duke's service; for that there was a good correspondence betwixt Mr. Bax∣ter and him after he was turn'd out of the Duke's service, appears by the great Encomium Mr. Baxter gives to a Book of his, which he calls An Excellent
Historical Treatise, and saith he is sorry that Book Vid. The Premonition to the true and onely way of Concord. is not more commonly bought and read; and so I be∣lieve is the Printer of it also. Again, as for the aforesaid reasons, Mr. Baxter And that the Bishop of Winton is meant by the Prelate who drove him away. must needs mean Mr. Jones for one at least (if not the onely one) that was driven away from a Person in power; so, secondly, by the Prelate that drove him away he must needs mean me, because speaking of the Persons of power from whom he was driven, he calls them the Pupils and Disciples of that Pre∣late or Person whosoever he was that drove him away from them. Now though I never had the honour to be Tutour to the Duke, yet it is true that I had undertaken the instruction of the Dutchess, even almost from her Childhood, and therefore she might properly enough be called my Pupil and my Disciple as long as she continued in the way which I had instructed her to walk in, which I am sure she did, with an extraordinary zeal to make others to walk in it also, as long as I continued with her. But, of this I have given the world a large and I hope a satisfactory account already. That for which I speak of it now, is onely to prove, that as Mr. Baxter means Mr. Jones by him that was driven away from the Duke and Dutchess, so he means me by him that drove him away from them. For farther proof whereof I appeal to Mr. Baxter himself, and desire him to name one man more if he can, that he thinks to have been of their Party, that was driven away by me or any other Prelate
from any Person of power since the King's return; which if he cannot (as I am confident he cannot) as he must needs mean Mr. Jones, and Mr. Jones onely, by the party driven away, so he must needs mean me by the Prelate that did drive him away; as likewise by the Persons of power, he must needs mean the Duke and Dutchess of York, from whom he was driven, or removed. But neither by me, nor for that cause, which Mr. Baxter would have it thought to be, was Mr. Jones discharg'd from officiating in the Duke's Family; for (as I said before) he was not then thought to be one of that Party, but professed him∣self to be a great zealot for the Church of England, as it is by Law established, and therefore his help to keep out Popery could not be refused upon the account of his being a Dissenter, if it had been so necessary and efficacious, as Mr. Baxter would have it thought to have been. And much less was that the cause of his removal, which Mr. Jones in that The false ac∣count, which Elymas the Sorcerer gives of Mr. Jones's removal. most false and scandalous Pamphlet of his (call'd ELTMAS the Sorcerer) pretends it was, name∣ly, That he the said Jones was removed, and re∣moved by the Bishop of Winchester, to the end that he might not hinder the said Bishop's design, which was the more easily to work upon the Duke and Dutchess in order to their quitting of the Protestant Religion, which it seems the Bishop thought he could not effect as long as so able and zealous a Champion for the True Protestant Religion as Mr. Jones was, was suffered to continue either in their Highnesses grace and favour, or in their Fa∣mily,
and therefore did artificially contrive the putting him out of both. And to make this to be believed was the scope and end of the writing and publishing of the aforesaid libellous Pamphlet, of Mr. B. per∣haps the God∣father of that Pamphlet. which I doubt not but Mr. Baxter had the perusal before it was published, and perhaps was the God∣father that gave it the name of Elymas the Sorce∣rer, thereby implying, that as Elymas the Sorcerer withstood Saint Paul, and sought to turn away Sergius Paulus the deputy Governour from the Faith which Saint Paul preached, so the Bishop of Winchester removed Mr. Jones that he might not hinder him from perverting the Duke and the Dutchess; which though Mr. Baxter doth not say in plain terms, yet he insinuates and intimates as much, when he concludes the Reflexion I am now speaking of with these words, Men that are awake must have leave to judge of causes by their effects, thereby implying that if the Pupils and Disciples were perverted, He whose Pupils and Disciples they were must needs be the Perverter of them. And then taking it for granted that the Duke and Dutchess were my Pupils and Disciples, or at least one if not both of them, he leaves it to be conclu∣ded from their change (which he takes for gran∣ted also) what is to be thought of me, who am supposed to have been their Tutour and In∣structour. So that I think I may without breach of Chari∣ty take Mr. Jones his Libel called Elymas the Sor∣cerer Elymas a Comment up∣on Mr. B's Text. to be a Comment upon or an Explanation of Mr. Baxter's Text in this (otherwise some∣what
obscure and oblique) Reflexion; and there∣fore what I have published in answer to that may serve to clear me from the imputation of this also. And yet there is one thing in this Reflexion of Mr. Baxter's, which I will not deny to be true, so far at least as I am concern'd in it, viz. That some (I think he might have said all) of the Prelates, nay and all of the Prelatical Party also, The Prote∣stant Religi∣on, to be pre∣served better without the Dissenters than with them. do believe, that the Protestant Religion may be preserved better without them than with them. For if by the Protestant Religion he means the Pro∣testant Religion as it is by Law established here in England (which is the Protestant Religion we would have to be preserved) nothing can be truer, than that we were better undertake the preserva∣tion of it (even against the Papists themselves) without than with the Dissenters from us; who the more and stronger they are, the more are we weakned, rather than strengthned by them; be∣ing forced to defend our selves against them with one hand, as well as against the Papists with the other, and sometimes to defend our selves against them both at once. For though I doubt not but the Papists and schismatical Protestants here amongst us do mortal∣ly hate, and mean to doe what they can to destroy one another at last, yet that which both of them agree in to be done first, is the pulling down of us, in order to the setting up of themselves afterwards. And hence it is that the Papists, who are much the cunninger Gamesters, do make the Sectaries to play their Game for them, by making as many
divisions as they can amongst us, to the end, that dum singuli pugnant universi vincantur, while we fight in single parties, we may all, the whole body of us, be beaten and worsted. And I pray God it prove not to be so at last. In the mean time the aid and assistance, which Mr. Baxter thinks we of the Church of England have from the Nonconformists for the inabling us to defend our selves against the common Enemy the The condition of the Church of England as to Dissen∣ters. Papists, puts me in mind of what the ingenious Boccalini saith of Spain, that when it was weighed by it self, the weight, that is, the power, wealth and strength thereof was very considerable; but when they put the Kingdom of Naples first, and then the Dutchy of Millain into the Scale, thinking thereby to add much to the weightiness of the Spa∣nish Monarchy, they found it to be much lighter, and the less considerable both in strength, power and wealth than it was before: And so no doubt the Church of England of it self alone would be more healthfull, more strong, more vigorous, and every way more able than it is to preserve the Pro∣testant Religion, and to defend it self against Popery and all other heretical opposition or invasion from without, if there were neither Presbyterians, nor Independents, nor Baxterians, or any other Dissen∣ters from it, lurking in it; who whilst they seem to be zealous to keep out Popery do effectually (though not intentionally) make way for the bring∣ing of it in. And therefore as a great Statesman in Queen Elizabeth's time was wont to say, That England would be the best Island in the World, if
Scotland and Ireland were drown'd in the bottom of the Sea (speaking I suppose of Scotland and Ire∣land as they then were, the one at enmity with us, and the other in rebellion against us, and therefore that it would be better for us, that they were not at all, than to be so near in place to us, and so far off in affection from us) so may I say of the Church of England, That as it is the best, so it would be the happiest of all Churches in the Christian world, if there were not so many tam propè, tam procúlque nobis, That are so near to us, and so far off from us, I mean so many among us that are not of us, who have been, and are, and will be always thorns in our Eyes, and goads in our Sides, unless they be ei∣ther wholly (as the Irish Rebels were) suppressed by us, or of Enemies become our Friends as the Scotch are, by being united to us, and that not one∣ly (as the Scots are) by becoming Subjects to the same King, but Subject to the same Laws also. The End of the Sixth Section.
THE CONCLUSION. Wherein two possible Objections, against the whole Design of this Writing, are Answered; Mr. Baxter's Recanta∣tion examined, his professions of Loy∣alty censured, and his Way of Concord disapproved. AND now having sufficiently, and (as I hope) satisfactorily, to all indifferent and impartial Readers, justified what I have truly said of Mr. BAXTER, in that Letter of mine with the Appendices thereunto so long ago Printed; and vindicated my self from all those false and injurious reflections, which in di∣verse passages of several of his Books, he hath either plainly and directly, or obscurely and obliquely made on me; which was all I intended to do; I should here make an end of giving my self or the World any more trouble, did I not foresee, that there might one or two Objections more de novo anew be made against me, which I think I ought to pre∣vent.
The former of which is, That supposing I have Object. 1. sufficiently proved, that Mr. Baxter did at the Con∣ference at the Savoy assert and maintain, what I in my long ago Printed and now reprinted Letter, do affirm he did assert and maintain, concerning things sinful by Accident; yet seeing that since then, he hath in a Treatise purposely written upon that sub∣ject, declared himself to be otherwise minded, than I say he was at that Conference: I ought in Charity to have forborn upbraiding him with what he said then. Whereunto I answer, that the difference betwixt The Answer. me and Mr. Baxter, as to that particular, being whether I had falsly charged him or no with what he had said at the aforesaid Conference (as he in an Address to his Parishioners at Kidderminster pre∣tends I had) I was necessitated in mine own defence to prove I had not charged him falsly, but that (howsoever his mind be changed since) he did then assert and maintain, what I in my Sermon at Kidderminster did affirm he had asserted and main∣tained at that Conference; as it was presently after that Conference attested in Print by the subscriptions of the now Bishops of Ely, and Chester, who were two of the three Disputants on our part, and are yet (God be thanked) alive to confirm and justifie the truth of their Attestation (if need be) which hath never yet, though it was Printed above 20 years ago, been excepted against either by Mr. Baxter himself or by any of his Party, and consequently, is as good as acknowledged and confessed to be true. And if that Attestation of theirs be true, all that I affirm to have been asserted by Mr. Baxter, of things sinful by Accident, at that Conference, must
needs be true also, whatsoever he hath said and published in any of his Books since to the contrary. Which I take for a sufficient answer to the former of the aforesaid objections, if any such shall be made by Mr. Baxter, or by any other in his behalf hereaf∣ter. Now as to the latter of the aforesaid Objections, Object. 2. which I foresee may be made against me also, (and which is of much more moment than the former) namely, that it was uncharitably done of me to pub∣lish such a Collection of Mr. Baxter's Aphorisms against all Monarchies in general, and this Monar∣chy of ours in particular, as I did at first with that Letter of mine above 20 years since; and much more uncharitably done of me now, not only to reprint, and publish those Aphorisms again with some others of the same kind out of the same forge, but to aggravate the hainousness and dangerousness of them in relation to Kingly Government, as I have done in this Book of mine, to make him more and more odious to those that are in Power at present, as one that is not only not to be suffered to Preach, or Write, but to Live in a Monarchy; and all this, after he hath disclaimed and recanted what he writ before, and what I except against in those Aphorisms of his. My answer therefore hereunto is, 1. That Mr. Baxter having been silenced by me The Answer. when I was Bishop of Worcester, and coming to me to know the cause of it; I told him it was, because he had Preached in my Diocese without asking my leave, or having any licence from me for it; and that now I could not give him such a Licence, part∣ly in regard of what he had asserted and maintained
at the Conference in the Savoy, but principally in regard of many of those Positions or (as he calls them) Aphorisms of his in his Book of the Holy-Commonwealth, which were inconsistent with Kingly Government: and this I told him in the presence of the then Dean of Worcester Dr. Warmestry, and of Mr. Isaack Walton, then my Steward, which he tak∣ing no notice of in his Narrative of the cause why I continued his suspension, and would not suffer him to Preach any more in my Diocese; but making his friends at Kidderminster to believe it was only for what he had asserted at the Conference in the Savoy (whereof he made a false relation also) I thought it neither improper nor unnecessary to annex to that Letter of mine (which I had written in answer to that Narrative of his) that Collection of Aphorisms out of the aforesaid Book of his, that the World might be judg whether the Author of such Maxims as those, were fit to be a Preacher in such a Kingdom as this, or no; and this (I say) was the cause why I Printed them at first. 2. The reason why I have reprinted those Apho∣risms as well as that Letter, with an Addition of some others to them and aggravations of them, was to justifie my exceptions against them, and to shew, that I am not a Defier of Deity and humanity, nor an Enemy to God, to Kings and to all man∣kind; (as Mr. Baxter would have me thought to be) because I do not think all unlimited Governours to be Tyrants because they are unlimited, or that lawful and rightful Kings, if they be Tyrants or govern tyrannically, may therefore be lawfully re∣sisted or deposed by their Subjects.
3. And lastly, if I have indeavoured to shew the falseness and dangerousness of this and other of his Aphorisms, subservient to the same end, it is not to make him, but those Maxims of his odious, not un∣to others only that may be hurt by them, but to himself also, that he may repent of them; which if he have done, and done it as he should do, and as himself professed he would do, if he were convin∣ced there were cause for it; I am sure he will not, he cannot be offended with the aggravating the hainousness and dangerousness of any of those opini∣ons or practises, which he himself hates and detests more than any body else can, if he have truly re∣pented of them; which if I should take for granted that he hath done since, yet if he had not done it before those Aphorisms of his, which I excepted against, were first Printed, it was neither unchari∣tably, nor impertinently, no, nor unnecessarily done of me neither, to let the World know upon what false grounds, and by what fallacious and seditious Maxims and Principles Mr. Baxter had undertaken to justifie the late horrid Rebellion, and to justifie himself and those Thousands, whom (as he confes∣seth) he had perswaded to do as He did (viz.) to Rebell and Fight against the King; which he was so far from having repented of, when I first Printed those Aphorisms, that he tells the World in Print, not above a year or two before, that he durst not repent of it, nor forbear the doing of the same, if it were to be done again, in the same state of things. Neither did the World or I hear any thing from him to the contrary till many years after; and whether what he published then, or hath published since, be a sufficient proof that He is not still of the
same mind he was, when he published those Apho∣risms, may well be doubted. In the mean time those Aphorisms of his being of so dangerous conse∣quence to the publick, and having upon that ac∣count been the main cause why I would not suffer the Author of them to Preach in my Diocese, until he had as publickly recanted, as he had asserted them, I thought my self obliged to publish them, when I did publish them first, to let the World see I had rea∣son to do what I did to Mr. Baxter, when I did it, how well soever he might behave himself after∣wards. And as this was the reason why I Printed them at first, so the reason why I have Reprinted them now, was partly to justifie my former exceptions against them, and the dangerous consequences of them; and partly to vindicate my self from being a Defier of Deity and Humanity, and an Enemy to God, to Kings, and to all mankind (for excepting against but one of them only) as Mr. Baxter saith I am; and partly likewise to show, that there is still just cause to doubt that Mr. Baxter may still be of the same judgment, as to the holding of the same Seditious and Rebellious Principles, as He did for∣merly, notwithstanding any thing He hath written as yet to the contrary. The two former would have been reason enough for my Reprinting of those Aphorisms, though it were never so certain or so evident, that Mr. Baxter had really and sincerely recanted them all. The third I add ex abundanti, over and above, and wish with all my heart there were no cause to doubt but that he had really and sincerely recanted them all, or at least those that are most dangerous and prejudicial to the safety, peace,
and welfare of our own King and Kingdom; which I am afraid he hath not done, either by what he hath said in that Paper, which he would have ta∣ken for a Recantation of some of those Aphorisms in his Holy Commonwealth, or by the professions he hath made of his Loyalty in the second Part of his Plea for the Non-Conformists. And first, As to the Paper which he calls a Re∣cantation, Mr. B's. Recan∣tation, as to the Time, very tardy. We are to observe the time when it was Printed, which was in the year 70, just 10 years af∣ter the Kings coming home. How long may we think it would have been, if the King had not come home at all, or if Richard the Son could have held by force, what Oliver his Father, (whom Mr. Bax∣ter magnifies so much) had gotten for him by mur∣thering of his Master? And truly if this Recantati∣on had been the effect of a true and hearty repen∣tance, I cannot imagine what should be the cause of its coming forth no sooner; unless he was so long before he was convinced that he had done amiss in writing what he had written, or in doing what he had done, during the time of the Rebellion; so that his heart indured as long a Siege as that of Troy, be∣fore it would give him leave to make any acknow∣ledgment at all, that he had writ or done any thing to be recanted or repented: But what if the King should have suspended his Pardon as long as Mr. Baxter did his Confession? What might have become of Mr. Baxter in the mean time? And yet surely Confession and Contrition ought to precede forgive∣ness both in foro Poli, and in foro Soli too, and as well with men as with God. And truly it would have been more for Mr. Baxter's own credit, and for the Kings and Churches satisfaction, if it had
been so; I mean, if he had publickly Recanted what he ought, and as he ought to have Recanted, both in point of judgment and practise, a great deal soo∣ner than he did; as either before the Kings coming home, (which had been indeed the , the most proper and most acceptable time) or at least assoon as he had the first opportunity for it after the Kings coming home. And such an op∣portunity he had, if he could have found in his heart to have made use of it; I mean that time when the King was graciously pleased (though he knew well enough what Mr. Baxter had written and done against his Father and himself) to give him leave to Preach before him in the Chappel-Royal. Then, then (I say) was the time, and there the place, for him publickly, and humbly, and solemnly upon his Knees to have prefaced his Sermon or ensuing Discourse His Sermon be∣fore the King. with a self-accusing, self-condemning Exomologesis, or Confession made in his own, and in the name of his whole Party; I mean the contrivers, abettors and promoters of, and actors in that most unchristi∣an and inhumane Conspiracy and Rebellion against the late King, and ended it with a quorum pars mag∣na fui, of which company I my self made a great part: which would have become him much better (speaking of sins inconsistent with a true faith) then the Harangue he made against drunkenness, and swearing, and Atheism, and profaneness, and loos∣ness of life, without saying any thing at all against Hypocrisie, or lying, or standering, or pride, or ma∣lice, or covetousness, or sedition, or rebellion; as if those sins were not inconsistent with true faith as well, or as much as the former. But those he knew were thought to be the sins of those of the Kings,
and these of those of his own party; as if our sins and not theirs, and consequently we and not they, the Kings and not the Parliaments Party, had been the cause of that unnatural War, and consequently of all those horrible mischiefs that were done in it; to∣gether with all the dismal consequences and effects of it; and so indeed in a late Book of his, he is not afraid nor ashamed to tell us in plain terms. But this Sermon of his was made, it seems, before he was convinced he had sinned in incouraging so many thousands (as he saith he did) to the War against the King: so that the time of his Recantation was not yet come, though I presume he stayed not so long before he sued out his Pardon. Well, but when the time was come, when he thought fit to publish that Paper which he calls a Recantation, (which was eight or nine years after he The manner of his Recantation. had Preached the aforesaid Sermon before the King) let us see what manner of Recantation it was, or whether it was such a one as can make an impartial and judicious peruser of it believe without doubt∣ing that it is so sincere, as an ingenuous and volun∣tary Recantation ought to be. For besides the tar∣diness of its coming forth, (which I noted before, and which argues some other motive besides convi∣ction of conscience for the publishing of it) it is farther observable. First, That the wording of it wants that clearness and plainness, which an in∣genuous Recantation ought to have; and, Second∣ly, That it is so clog'd and restrained and limited, and shackled as it were, with such and so many ex∣ceptions and conditions and proviso's, that such a muddy-brain'd man as I am cannot tell what to make of it.
And first as to the want of clearness in the word∣ing Not clearly worded. of it, when he speaks of all he pretends to Recant in that paper, he doth not say I profess my repentance, that ever I held it, but that ever I published it: he might have said as well and perhaps as truly, I am sorry that Bishop Morley's collection of so many false and pernicious Aphorisms out of that Book hath made me profess my repentance for the publishing of them. Howsoever it is not his professing his repen∣tance for the publishing of them can prove he repents the holding of them, or that he is not still of the same judgment, because though he be so it is not safe for him to profess himself to be so; every  is not a , there is a difference betwixt times and seasons: that may be safe or seasonable to be said or done, or written and published at one time, that can be neither seasonable nor safe at another. So that we cannot conclude Mr. Baxter to be of any other mind now, than he was before, from his say∣ing that he is sorry, no nor from his being sorry in∣deed, that he had formerly declared his judgment as he did. Again, as the want of clearness and plainness in Clog'd with Proviso's. the wording of that pretended Recantation, may make the sincerity, so the clogging of it with so ma∣ny proviso's may make the ingenuity thereof to be suspected, as if it had been extorted, and not volun∣tary. For it looks as if he that makes it were afraid he had overshot himself, and said too much, or might be thought by those of his own Party to have said too much in that little he had said before; and therefore he adds the subsequent proviso's, which, if what he had declared before was real and sincere, are all of them needless and impertinent, and worse
than needless and impertinent, if he means to limit and restrain what he said before by them, as he seems to do, especially by the first and last of them. For as in the first of those Proviso's he tells us he doth not reverse all the matter of that Book, which he told us before he did Recant, and that not only for some by-passages in it, but in respect of the very scope of it: so in the last of those Proviso's he protests against the judgment of Posterity, (which all sincere and ingenuous Writers do usually appeal unto) as likewise against the judgment of all others that were not of the same time and place (he should have said of the same Party and Perswasion also) as to the censuring either of that Book of his or the revocation of it; as being ignorant of the true causes of them both; and then concludes, that these things provi∣ded (viz.) if he may be allowed to except as much of the matter of the Book (he pretends to Recant) from being reversed, as he pleaseth, and upon con∣dition that neither the Book, nor the Recantation of it be censured by any but by whom he pleaseth, he did vouchsafe to publish that Paper which he would have taken for a Recantation: to which aforesaid Proviso's I wonder he did not add one more, That he might be allowed, whensoever he saw cause for it or had need of it, to substitute one Proposition instead of another, a false one instead of a true one, or a true one instead of a false one, and then to in∣fer what he pleased from it; for so as he hath done often in other places, so he hath done once in this scrap of a Recantation also, making me to say that there were some lawful Governors unlimited by God, and thence inferring that I was a defier of Deity and Humanity, when what I said was, that of lawful
Governors some were unlimited by men; but of this I have said enough before; and (as I think) I have said enough now touching the insufficiency of this recantation, to prove that Mr. Baxter is really and seriously otherwise minded in point of judgment than he was when he published these Aphorisms which I have now Reprinted. Neither can the contrary hereunto be concluded His vain-glori∣ous professions of Loyalty. from any, or all of those glorious, or rather vain∣glorious professions of Loyalty, he makes in behalf of himself, and of his own Party, in the fourth Chapter of the second Part of his Non-Confor∣mists Plea for Peace which can signifie nothing, unless he and they do renounce those disloyal and seditious Principles, which in his Book of the Holy Commonwealth he makes use of to justifie the War made by the two Houses of Parliament against the late King; as first, That this Kingdom of England Some of his dis∣loyal Princi∣ples. is not a Monarchy, and consequently that the Sovereign∣ty is not wholly in the King. Secondly, That the So∣vereignty is divided betwixt the King and the two Houses of Parliament. Thirdly, that the two Houses of Parliament may lawfully take Arms, and make War with the King in defence of their own part of the Sove∣reignty, and of the trust reposed in them by the People; and that the People may, and ought to assist them when they do so. Fourthly, That the People are represen∣ted in Parliament not only as Subjects, (for so he con∣fesseth their Representatives are only to complain and supplicate for them) but as Contractors, before they were Subjects, with him that was to be their King, before he was King, for the reservation of such or such rights, franchises, and priviledges, to be for ever exempted from the Kings and his
Successors jurisdiction; for the preservation of which (if they were invaded or indeavour'd to be taken away by the King or any of his Succes∣sors) the Parliament, not only as Representatives but Trustees also for the People, might by force (if they could not do it otherwise) resist and restrain the King from so doing. Finally, there be many other cases specified by Mr. Baxter in that Book of the Holy Commonwealth, wherein Kings may (as he saith) be lawfully resisted by their Subjects; whence he concludes the War made by the Parliament a∣gainst the late King to have been purum piumque He justifies the late War. Duellum, a just and a lawful War; and consequent∣ly, such a War, as may be made at any time hereaf∣ter upon the same Premisses, or by vertue of the same Principles; and therefore he tells us in plain terms, not only that he did not, but that he durst not repent of having been engaged in it himself, nor for having engaged so many thousands, (as he con∣fesseth he did) in it; not then perhaps; but hath he not repented of it since? Videtur quòd non: be∣cause Most likely that he is of the same judgment still. not having yet renounced any of those Prin∣ciples or Premises from whence he infers the Conclu∣sion, he is still to be supposed to hold the conclusion he infers from them; nay, and that he will hold it still, and do as he did then upon the like occasion; for so he tells us himself in the place before quoted, where he saith that as he durst not repent of what he had done in the aforesaid War; so he could not forbear the doing of the same (if it were to do again) in the same state of things. 'Tis true indeed he tells us in the same place, that if he were convinced he had sinned in what he had done, he would as willingly make a pub∣lick Recantation, as he would eat and drink when he
is hungry or thirsty. But neither he, nor any of the Non-Conformists, that ever I heard of, hath as yet made any such a publick Recantation; and therefore we may rationally, and charitably enough too, con∣clude that they are still of the same Judgment they were then, and consequently that their Practice will be the same it was then, when the like opportunity invites them to it; which though I hope it will ne∣ver be, yet we are not sure but it may be, and there∣fore ought not to be too confident and secure that no such thing will be. For mine own part, I must confess, as I always Two Plots car∣rying on. have been, so I am still of this opinion, that ever since the Reformation, there have been and are two Plots carrying on, sometimes more openly, and sometimes more secretly, the one by those that call themselves the only true Catholicks; the other by those that call themselves the only true Protestants; and both of them against the Government as it is established by Law both in Church and State: And as there always hath been, so there ever will be Plotting by both these Parties, until both of them be utterly disabled, and suppressed; for as for making Peace with either of them, I take it, by reason of the perverseness of the one, and peevishness of the other, and the pride of both, to be a thing not to be hoped for. I am sure the way proposed by Mr. Baxter in his Book called The true and only way of Concord of all Christian Churches, will never do it; which Book of his, though (as I said in my Preface) I did not intend to answer, as being abundantly, and superabun∣dantly Mr. B's true and only way of Concord. confuted before it was written; yet because in his Address of it to the Bishop of Ely and me, he seems desirous to know what we think of it, in refe∣rence
to the end proposed by it; I will tell him plainly, and in a few words, what is my opinion of it, (viz.) that it is so far from being what he saith it is, The true and only way of Concord in all Churches, that I verily believe that if all the Churches in the World were actually in as perfect Peace and Concord, both in themselves, and with one another, as ever they were or ever can be (hu∣manly speaking) here in this World, that which he calls the true and only way of Concord, (if it were or could be admitted) would in a very short time in∣troduce such and so many unavoidable and irrecon∣cileable differences and dissentions, both speculative and practical, as well in matter of belief as in man∣ner of worship, that there would be no such thing to be seen as order, or unity, or peace in all the Churches of any one Province or Kingdom, and much less, in all the Churches of the Christian World. This Na∣tional Church of ours therefore being according to the legal establishment thereof, of so sound, so health∣ful, so orderly and so well compacted a constitution as it is, and which by long experience we have found so agreeable to the established Government of the State, that we cannot make any alteration in the one without great disordering of the other; Let us not give ear to any of those Church and State Mounte∣banks or Empericks, who if we let them alone a lit∣tle longer, will never leave mending, till they have marr'd all.
Mr. BAXTER'S Recantation, (referred to page of the Conclusion,) Printed 1670. at the end of a Book of His, called The Life of Faith, after a Catalogue of Books Written and Published by the same Author. LET the Reader know, that whereas the Bookseller hath in the Catalogue of my Books, named my [Holy-Commonwealth, or Political Aphorisms] I do hereby recall the said Book, and profess my Repentance, that ever I published it, and that not only for some by∣passages, but in respect of the secondary part of the very scope. Though the first Part of it, which is the defence of God and Reason I recant not. But this Revocation I make with these Proviso's, 1. That I reverse not all the Matter of that Book, nor all, that more than ONE have accused; As e. g. the Assertion that all Humane Powers are limited by God: And if I may not be pardoned for not defy∣ing DEITY and HUMANITY, I shall pre∣fer that ignominy before their present Fastus, and Triumph, who defie them. 2. That I make not this Recantation to the Mili∣tary fury, and rebellious pride and tumult, against which I wrote it; nor would have them hence take any encouragement for impenitence. 3. That though I dislike the Roman Clergies writing so much of Politicks, and detest Ministers
medling in State matters without necessity, or a cer∣tain call; yet I hold it not simply unbeseeming a Divine, to expound the fifth Commandment, nor to shew the dependance of humane Powers on the Divine; nor to instruct Subjects to obey with judg∣ment, and for Conscience sake. 4. That I protest against the judgment of Poste∣rity, and all others, that were not of the same TIME, and PLACE, as to the (mental) cen∣sure, either of the BOOK or the REVOCA∣TION; as being ignorant of the true reasons of them both. Which things Provided, I hereby under my hand, as much as in me lyeth, reverse the Book, and desire the World to take it as non Scriptum. April 15. 1670. R. B.
ACT Anent Religion and the TEST. Au∣gust 31. 1681. Made in the Third PAR∣LIAMENT of Our Most High and Dread Sovereign, CHARLES the Second, Hol∣den at EDINBURGH the 28 day of July 1681. By his Royal Highness JAMES Duke of Albany and York, &c. His MA∣JESTIES High Commissioner for holding the same, Referred to Section V. OUR SOVERAIGNE LORD, With His Estates of Parliament Considering, That albeit by many wholsom Laws made by his Royall Grand-father, and Father, of glorious memory, and by himself, in this, and His other Parliaments, since His happy Restauration, the Protestant Religion is carefully asserted, esta∣blished and secured, against Popery and Phanati∣cism: Yet the restless Adversaries of our Religion, doe not cease to propagat their errours, and to se∣duce His Majesties Subjects, from their duty to God, and Loyalty to his Vice-gerent, and to overturn the established Religion, by introducing their Supersti∣ons, and delusions, into this Church, and Kingdom. And knowing, that nothing can more encrease the numbers and confidence of Papists, and Schismatical dissenters from the Established Church, than the su∣pine neglect of putting in Execution the good Laws
provided against them, together with their hopes to infinuat themselves, into Offices, and places of trust, and publick Imployment. THEREFORE, His Majesty, from His Princely and pious zeal, to maintain and preserve the true Protestant Religion, contained in the Confession of Faith, recorded in the first Par∣liament of King James the Sixth, which is founded on, and agreeable to the written word of GOD; DO∣ETH, with advise and consent of His Estates of Par∣liament, Require and Command, all his Officers, Judges, and Magistrats, to put the Laws made against Popery, and Papists, Priests, Jesuits, and all persons of any other Order in the Popish Church, especially against sayers and hearers of Mass; Venders and di∣spersers of forbidden Books; And Ressetters of Popish Priests, and excommunicat Papists: As also against all Phanatick Separatists from this National Church; Against Preachers at House, or Field-Conventicles, and the Ressetters, and harbourers of Preachers, who are Intercommuned; Against disorderly Bap∣tisms, and Marriages, and irregular Ordinations, and all other Schismaticall disorders, To full and vigo∣rous execution, according to the Tenour of the Re∣spective Acts of Parliament thereanent provided. And that his Majesties Princely care to have these Laws put in Execution, against those Enemies of the Protestant Religion, may the more clearly appear: HE DOETH, with advise and consent foresaid, STATUT and ORDAIN, That the Ministers of each Paroch, give up in October Yearly, to their re∣spective Ordinaries, true and exact Lists of all Papists, and Schismatical-withdrawers from the publick Wor∣ship, in their respective Paroches; which Lists are to be subscribed by them; and that the Bishops give in
a double of the saids Lists Subscribed by them, to the respective Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailies of Royalty, and Regalitie, and Magistrats of Burghs, To the effect the said Judges may proceed against them according to Law: As also, the Sheriffs, and other Magistrats foresaids, are hereby ordained to give an account to his Majesties Privy-Council in December yearly, of their proceedings against those Papists, and Pha∣natical Separatists, as they will be answerable at their highest peril. And that the diligences done by the Sheriffs, Bailies of Regalities, and other Magistrats foresaids, may be the better enquired into by the Council, the Bishops of the respective Diocesses, are to send exact doubles of the Lists of the Papists, and Phanaticks, to the Clerks of Privy Council, whereby the diligences of the Sheriffs, and other Judges foresaids, may be controlled and examined. And to cut of all hopes, from Papists, and Phanaticks, of their being imployed in Offices and Places of publick Trust. IT IS HEREBY STATUT and ORDAINED, that the following Oath shall be taken by all Per∣sons in Offices, and places of publick Trust, Civil, Ecclesiastical, and Military, especially by all Mem∣bers of Parliament, and all Electors of Members of Parliament, all Privy-Counsellors, Lords of Sessi∣on, Members of the Exchequer, Lords of Justici∣ary, and all other Members of these Courts; all Officers of the Crown, and State; all Arch-Bishops and Bishops; and all Preachers and Ministers of the Gospel whatsoever; all Persons of this King∣dom, named or to be named Commissioners for the Borders; all Members of the Commission for Church Affairs; all Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailies of
Royalties and Regalities, Justices of the Peace, Officers of the Mint, Commissars and their Deputs, their Clerks and Fiscals, all Advocats and Procura∣tors before any of these Courts, all Writters to the Sig∣net, all Publick Nottars, and other Persons imploy∣ed in Writing or Agenting; The Lyon King at Arms, Heraulds, Pursevants, and Messengers at Arms; all Collectours, Sub-collectours and Farmourers of His Majesties Customs and Excise; all Magistrats, Deans of Gild, Counsellers, and Clerks of Burghs Royall and Regality; all Deacons of Trades, and Deacon-Conveeners in the said Burghs; all Masters and Do∣ctors in Universities, Colledges, or Schools; all Chaiplains in Families, Pedagogues to Children; and all Officers and Souldiers in Armies, Forts, or Militia; and all other Persons in publick Trust or Office within this Kingdom, Who shall publickly swear, and subscribe the said Oath as follows, viz. The Arch-Bishops, Chief Commander of the For∣ces, and Officers of the Crown and State, and Coun∣sellers, before the Secret Council: All the Lords of Session, and all Members of the Colledge of Ju∣stice, and others depending upon them, before the Session: The Lords of Justiciary, and those depen∣ding upon that Court, in the Justice Court: The Lords, and other Members of Exchequer, before the Exchequer: All Bishops, before the Arch-Bi∣shops: All the inferior Clergy, Commissars, Masters and Doctors of Universities, and Schools, Chaip∣lains and Pedagogues, before the Bishops of the re∣spective Diocesses: Sheriffs, Stewards, Bailies of Roy∣alty and Regality, and those depending on these Ju∣risdictions, before these respective Courts: And Provests, Bailies and others of the Burgh, before the
Town Councill: All Collectors and Farmourers of the King's Customs and Excise, before the Exche∣quer; The Commissioners of the Borders, before the Privy Council; All Justices of Peace, before their Conveener; And the Officers of the Mint, be∣fore the General of the Mint; And the Officers of the Forces, before the Commander in Chief; and common Souldiers, before their respective Officers; The Lyon, before the Privy Council; and Heraulds, Pursevants and Messengers at Arms, before the Lyon. And His Majesty, with consent foresaid, STATUTS and ORDAINS, that all those who presently possess, or enjoy any of the foresaids Offices, pub∣lick Trusts, or Imployments, shall take and subscribe the following Oath, in one of the foresaids Offices, in manner before prescribed, betwixt and the first of January next, which is to be recorded in the Re∣gisters of the respective Courts, and Extracts there∣of under the Clerks hands, to be reported to His Majesties Privy Council, betwixt and the first of March next, One thousand six hundred eighty two, and thereafter in any other Courts, whereof they are Judges or Members, the first time they shall sit, or exerce in any of these respective Courts: AND ORDAINS, that all who shall hereafter be pro∣moted to, or imployed in any of the foresaids Offi∣ces, Trusts, or Imployments, shall at their entry into, and before their exercing thereof, take and subscribe the said Oath, in manner foresaid, to be recorded in the Registers of the respective Courts, and reported to His Majesties Privy Council, within the space of forty dayes after their taking the same: And if any shall presume to exercise any of the saids Offices, or Imployments, or any publick Office, or
Trust, within this Kingdom, (the King's lawful Brothers and Sons only excepted) until they take the Oath foresaid, and subscribe it, to be recorded in the Registers of the respective Courts, They shall be declared incapable of all publick Trust thereafter, and be further punished with the loss of their Move∣ables, and Liferent-Escheat, the one half whereof to be given to the Informer, and the other half to be∣long to His Majesty. And His Majesty, with Ad∣vice foresaid, recommends to His Privy Council to see this Act put to due and vigorous Execution.
Follows the Tenour of the OATH to be taken by all Persons in Pub∣lick Trust. I A. B. Solemnly swear in presence of the Eter∣nal God, whom I invocat as Judge, and Wit∣ness of my sincere intention of this my Oath, That I own, and sincerely profess the true Prote∣stant Religion, contained in the Confession of Faith, recorded in the first Parliament of King James the Sixth; and that I believe the same to be founded on, and agreeable to the Written Word of God. And I promise and swear, that I shall ad∣here thereto, during all the dayes of my lifetime, and shall endeavour to educat my Children therein: and shall never consent to any change, or alteration contrary thereto: And that I disown, and renounce all such Principles, Doctrines, or Practises, whe∣ther Popish, or Phanatical, which are contrary unto, and inconsistent with the said Protestant Religion, and Confession of Faith. And for testification of my Obedience to my most Gracious So∣veraign CHARLES the Second, I do affirm,
and swear, by this my solemn Oath, That the King's Majesty, is the only Supreme Governour of this Realm, over all Persons, and in all Causes, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil; And that no forraign Prince, Person, Pope, Prelate, State, or Potentat, hath or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Superioritie, Preheminencie or Authoritie Ecclesiastical or Civil, within this Realm. And therefore I do utterly re∣nounce, and forsake all Forraign Jurisdictions, Powers, Superiorities and Authorities, And do pro∣mise, that from henceforth, I shall bear Faith and true Allegiance to the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Lawful Successours. And to my Power shall assist and defend, all Rights, Jurisdictions, Prero∣gatives, Priviledges, Prehemineneies, and Authorities belonging to the King's Majesty, His Heirs and Law∣ful Successours. And I farther affirm and swear by this my solemn Oath, That I Judge it unlawful for Subjects, upon pretence of Reformation, or any other pretence whatsoever, To enter into Covenants or Leagues, or to convocat, conveen, or assemble in any Councils, Conventions, or Assemblies, to treat, consult, or determine, in any matter of State, Civil or Ecclesiastick, without His Majestie's special com∣mand, or express licence had thereto, or to take up arms against the King, or those commissionated by Him: And that I shall never so rise in Arms, or
enter into such Covenant, or Assemblies: And that there lies no Obligation on me from the National Covenant, or the Solemn League and Cove∣nant (so commonly called) or any other manner of way whatsoever, to endeavour any change or al∣teration in the Government, either in Church or State, as it is now established by the Laws of this Kingdom. And I promise and swear, that I shall with my utmost power, defend, assist, and maintain, His Majestie's Jurisdiction foresaid against all deadly: And I shall never decline His Majestie's Power and Jurisdictions, As I shall answer to God. And finally, I affirm, and swear, that this my solemn Oath, is given in the plain, genuine sense and meaning of the words, without any equi∣vocation, mental reservation, or any manner of evasion whatsoever; And that I shall not accept, or use, any dispensation from any Creature whatsoever. So help me God. FINIS.
THere are several Treatises of the same Right Reverend Author, written upon several occasions, con∣cerning the Church of Rome and most of the Doctrines in Controver∣sie betwixt us. Printed for Joanna Brome.
