M72B 99829362 33800
THE LIVES OF THE PROPHETS, Patriarchs, Apostles, &c. WITH The Interpretation of their Names: Collected into an Alphabetical Order, for the benefit of the Rea∣der. LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Rolls, at his Auction-House in Petty Cannon Hall near the North-side of St. Paul's Church, 1695.
TO THE CHRISTIAN READER. THE best learned, and wisest Philosophers, having received no taste or light of the Gospel of Christ, but only being led and directed by Nature and Rea∣son, held this for a Principle among themselves, that MAN was not born to himself only, but was framed of Nature such an excellent Creature as he is, to that end, that he might imploy those singular gifts wherewith he is beautified, as Wisdom, Reason, Memory, Discretion, and Judgment, not only to his own private commodity, but also to the profit of his Country, and others. This good opinion ingraffed in their minds by Nature, delivered from one to another by Instru∣ction, and so from time to time continued among themselves by consent: caused the best able Men among them, such as God and Nature had plentifully endued with knowledge and understanding, to leave such worthy Monuments as they did to Posterity: as Plato, and Tully, good Rules of life and government. Aristotle, the hidden secrets of Philo∣sophy: Ptolomy, the high mysteries of Astronomy: Eu∣clyde, the infallible Principles of Geometry. Varro, the
necessary observations of Husbandry, &c. Out of the which, so great commodities in all Ages have been reaped, (and as occasion and good wits have served) have also from time to time been encreased. If this Principle of theirs be sound and true (as indeed I take it to be) then of consequence, one other depending upon the same, must needs be as true, and that is this: That those Men do nearest approach to the Rule of uncorrupt Nature, and do best deserve of a Common-wealth, whose labours and travails are bestowed on those things which tend to the best end. For by the consideration of the end whereunto each thing leadeth, the goodness and excellency of the thing it self is to be known and esteemed. As for example: If health either maintained, or recovered be good: then Phy∣sick, whose chief end is to maintain and recover health, must needs be good also. If good government publickly, and peace∣able enjoying of our own privately, be a good thing, and to be commended: then the Law, for that it respecteth Justice in all actions, and quietness, as his chief end, must needs like∣wise be good, and deserve the like commendation. And as there be many things, which for this self same Reason that I have now alledged, are to be accounted good, and praise-worthy in their kind: So, I think there is no man so far from Rea∣son, but that he seeth, by the self same Argument it must needs be inforced, that though many Arts and Sciences be good, for that their ends be good: yet some one there is, that is to be accounted as best, for that its end is best. The chief end of Man in this World, what it is, I think no Christian man so slenderly instructed, that he maketh any doubt thereof.
For the very Philosophers themselves, of whom I spake be∣fore, were fully resolved, that it was to live well and vertu∣ously, and affirmed, that (whereas other Creatures are made groveling, and still beholding the ground as they go) Man was therefore framed streight and upright, that he might always behold Heaven and heavenly things, and so by the very shape of his body and countenance, be put in mind continually, that albeit he were here for a season, as a wandring Pilgrim upon earth, yet his end was, to be a free Citizen, and an in∣heritor of Heaven above: And as they by Reason and Con∣jecture were led so to think: so we by Faith, and express Commandment, are moved, so stedfastly to believe. If then the knowledge of God and heavenly things, be the chiefest end and mark whereat man ought to shoot, it must needs be concluded, that those Mens studies and labours deserve the greatest praise, which are employed to the attaining and di∣recting of others thereunto. Wherein, as God in all Ages hath always stirred up some, who have taken great pains therein, to the publick commodity of others: So, in my simple judgment, neither this present Work, neither the Au∣thor thereof deserveth the least commendation. And albeit I wot full well, that so the Work it self be good, it is not great∣ly material what the Workman be: yet, like as good Wine is then best, when it is drunk out of a clean Vessel, and good Meat then most delighteth, when the Dresser thereof is cleanly: So this Book, which of it self, I doubt not, to be such, that it will be liked of all those who delight in God and godliness, I trust, even for the Author's sake, it shall never awhit the
worse be welcome. Of whose sincere life, and great praises, although there is good cause why I should speak, for that he hath been of long time throughly known to me, and I am assu∣red his vertues and integrity to be such, that if I should say, there are few like him to be found, I trust, for saying the truth, no good man would be offended: Yet partly for that I am not ignorant, that no man delighteth less to hear his own praise than he doth: partly for that there be many cau∣ses why I should rather honour him, than for lack of suffi∣cient skill and ability, meanly praise him: I will leave him to thy particular judgment (gentle Reader) and to the testi∣monial of the whole World, who I doubt not, will say no less, but that he is a man without fraud or guile, and such a one as feareth God. As touching the Book it self, good reason it is, each man should use his own judgment and opinion. But if my simple Testimonial may prevail, I dare warrant it to be such, that what study soever thou shalt bestow in reading the same, it shall well requite thy pains. And though the Author be such, that he rather delighteth in good and vertuous life, than ma∣keth boast of any great learning: Yet such hath his pains been herein, that very good Clerks need take no scorn, to re∣ceive some light from this his Candel. In summ: the Book is of God, and his holy Saints, and therefore to be reveren∣ced: collected out of Scripture, and therefore no vain fable: written briefly, and therefore not tedious: set forth in plain and simple wise, and therefore the better for thy capacity:
truly reporting the life and death of such, as either for sin, (and those to be avoided) either for vertue, (and those to be imitated) have mention made in God's holy Book. All that is written therein, is written for thy help and instruction. Use it then to that end that the Author meaneth, that is: Not only to increase thy knowledge, and so to be made more learned: but also to increase thy vertuous life, and so to be∣come the better Man. R. M.
A BRIEF ACCOUNT Of the LIVES of the PATRIARCHS, PROPHETS, APOSTLES, and other HOLY MEN. AARON was the Son of Amram,Exod. 6. and Brother to Moses, and of the Tribe of Levi. His Mothers Name was Joche∣bed, Sister to Caath, the Father of Am∣ram. He was appointed of God to be Moses Interpreter, and also his Prophet, what time as God sent Moses to Pharaoh, to pour out his plagues upon him. He took Elisaba the daughter of Aminadab of the Tribe of Juda, to wife. He was the first High-priest of the Jews.Exod. 24. And left (with Hur) to go∣vern the People in the absence of Moses, while he was in the Mount with God.32. cap. And in the mean time the People (be∣ing yet infected with the Idolatry of Egypt) cried out a∣gainst Aaron to make them gods to go before them. Then Aaron (perceiving the People inclined to Idolatry, and also thinking they would rather forgo the same, than to forsake their precious Jewels) said unto them: Pluck off the golden Ear-rings in the ears of your Wives, your Sons, and of your Daughters, and bring them to me. The people did so, and Aaron made thereof a Calf. Which when the people saw and beheld, they were exceeding glad. And began now to worship and honour the Calf as a god, skipping and dancing for joy. But the Lord above, beholding their wickedness, told it to Moses, and sent him down post-hast to reform their wicked at∣tempts. Who then coming down from the Mount
with the Tables of God in his hand, and drawing near to the Host, he saw the Calf, and the people dancing before it. Which sight so kindled the wrath of Moses and grieved his heart so sore, that he threw the Tables out of his hands, took the Calf and burnt it in the Fire, and stampt it all into powder and ashes, which he threw in∣to the water, and forced the People to drink it. Then he demanded of Aaron, what the people did to him, that he had brought so great a sin upon them. Aaron said: Let not the wrath of my Lord wax fierce, thou knowest the people that they are set on mischief. For they said un∣to me, make us gods to go before us, for we wot not what is become of Moses, the Man that brought us out of Egypt. Then I required to have their Gold and Jewels, which they brought unto me, and I did cast them into the Fire,Idolatry pu∣nished. Nu. 12. cap. and thereof came out this Calf. Moses then under∣standing the matter, commanded the Children of Levi to fall upon the Idolaters, and slew of them about three thou∣sand persons. After this, it came to pass that Aaron and Miriam his Sister, did grudge against their Brother Moses because he had taken an Ethiopian to Wife, saying on this wise: Hath the Lord indeed spoken only through Mo∣ses? and hath he not spoken also by us?Disobedience punished. The Lord not content with this their contemning of Moses authority, was sore displeased, and stroke Miriam with a foul Le∣prosie. Which so much discomforted Aaron, to see his Si∣ster so foully arrayed and disfigured that he humbled him∣self to Moses, and said: Alas my Lord, I beseech thee put not the sin upon us, which we have foolishly com∣mitted and sinned. Oh, let her not be as one dead, of whom the flesh is half consumed, when he cometh out of his Mothers womb. And so thorow Aaron's intreaty, Mo∣ses prayed unto God,22.33. and Miriam was healed. Finally, when Aaron had lived one hundred twenty three Years, he died in Mount Hor, as the Lord had foretold. And his Son Eleazar succeeded in his room. Aaron, a Teacher.
Abakuck the Prophet, was of the Tribe of Simeon.Dan. 14. He prophesied of the taking of Jerusalem, by Nabuchodo∣nosor. This Prophet (on a time) had prepared pottage and other victuals for the Harvest-folks. And going to the fields, to bring the same to the Reapers, an Angel of God spake unto him, and said: Go, and carry the meat that thou hast prepared into Babylon, and give it to Da∣niel, which is in the Lyons Den. O Lord (quoth he) I never saw Babylon, and as for the Den, I know it not. With that, the Angel caught up the Prophet by the top of his head, and bare him to Babylon, and set him upon the Den. Then Abakuck cried to Daniel, and said: O Daniel, thou servant of the Lord, take here the break∣fast that God hath sent thee. Daniel hearing the voice of Abakuck, rejoyced greatly, and said: O Lord,Abakuck died six hundred years before the Incarnati∣on of Christ. Eliote. hast thou thought upon me? Well, thou never failest them that love thee. And so he rose up and did eat of such things as the Prophet had brought him. And immediately, after that Daniel had eaten, the Angel set Abacuck in his place again. Abakuck, a Wrastler. Abdy the Prophet, prophesied destruction to the Idu∣means, which came of Esau,Abdy 1. cap. and were utter enemies to the Israelites, which came of Jacob: as at the siege of Je∣rusalem it did most plainly appear, whereas they joy∣ned with Nabuchodonosor against their brethren, whom they ought rather to have holpen and defended against the Heathen. Abdy, a servant of the Lord. Abedmelech was a Morian born,Jerem. 38. and Chamberlain to Zedekia King of Juda. This Man had so great a confidence in God and love to his Prophets, that when he saw Jeremy so evil intreated, he went to the King and be∣sought his Grace, that Jeremy the Prophet might be taken out of the filthy Dungeon whereinto he was cast, lest he there should perish and dye for hunger. And so obtaining the Kings good will, he took his Men and went to the Pri∣son where Jeremy lay, and threw down unto him old rags
& clowts which he had provided, bidding him to put them under his Arm-holes, to keep the Cords from hurting and fretting his Arms in pulling up.Jerem. 39. Now, for this his kindness shewed on Jeremy,Kindness re∣compensed. and trust that he had in the Lord, he was delivered from captivity, and saved from the hands of Nabuchodonosor, at the destruction of Jerusa∣lem, when others perished. Abel was the Son of Adam,Gen. 4. born of his Mother Eve, next after Cain. He was a Keeper of Sheep and wholly dedicated to vertue and godliness.Abel and Del∣bora his Si∣ster, were born both at one birth, fifteen years after Cain. Cooper. In all his ob∣lations, he ever gave of the best things he had. Which, of the Lord was greatly accepted. And therefore Cain (per∣ceiving his Brothers offerings to be regarded, and his re∣jected) envyed him to death. And at the last (by a subtile train) slew him. Abel, Vanity. Abia,1 King. 15. the Son of Rehoboam, began his raign over Ju∣da in the xviii. Year of Jeroboam King of Israel. His Mothers Name was Maacha the Daughter of Abishalom. He walked not in the steps of David, but followed the ways of his Father before him. Yet (notwithstanding) for David's sake, God gave him a light, that is to say, a Son to Raign over Juda.2 Chron. 13. He overcame Jeroboam in Battel with an Army of four hundred thousand, not∣withstanding the other had twice so many chosen and picked Men. Of the which, Abia slew five hundred thou∣sand, and weakned the power of Jeroboam so sore, that he was never able to recover his strength again, so long as Abia raigned. This King had xiv. Wives, by whom he had xxii. Sons, and xvi. Daughters. He raigned but three years, and was buried in the City of David. Abia,2 King. 14. the Son of Jeroboam, being sick on a time, his Father called the Queen his Wife unto him, and bad her disguise her self, that in no wise she might be known what Woman she was. And so go thy way (quoth he) to Silo, and there shalt thou find the Prophet of God, called Ahia, which told me (long before Solomon dyed) that I should
be King of Israel. Make speed and take a Present with thee, and learn of him what shall become of the Child. The Queen did then as she was commanded, but all was in vain. For God had revealed the matter unto the Prophet before the woman came. Insomuch, that as soon as the blind old man heard the noise of her com∣ing and entring in at the door, he said: Come in thou wife of Jeroboam, why hast thou disguised and feigned thy self to be another woman? Thou art come to receive some comfort for thy son which lyeth sick, but I am commanded to tell thee heavy and sorrowful things. It repenteth the Lord that he hath exalted Jeroboam, and rent the Kingdom from the house of David, and given it to him, forasmuch as he hath forsaken the Lord, and not followed him in his heart as David did, but hath made him gods of his own: therefore the Lord hath deter∣mined to bring such a plague upon the house and posterity of Jeroboam, that he will not leave one alive to make water against the wall: Wherefore now get thee home, and as soon as thy foot shall enter into the City, the child shall die, and all Israel shall lament him and bring him to his Sepulcher. And so shall none of the house of Jerobo∣am thy husband enjoy the honour of his burial, but only this child, because the Lord saw in him some goodness toward. And so when the Prophet had done speaking, the wife of Jeroboam rose up and returned home to her house, and found her son dead, as the Prophet had foretold. Abia, Father of the Sea. Abia, the Daughter of Zacharia,2 King. 18. was wife to Ahaz King of Juda, and Mother to Hezekia. Which name signifieth thus. Abia, the will of the Lord. Abiathar, the son of Ahimelech Priest of Nob,1 Sam. 22. see∣ing the great cruelty of Saul, in putting his Father to death for refreshing of David, escaped his hands and
fled to the Forest of Hareth where David (at that time) lay, declaring to him the great murder that Saul had done to Ahimelech his Father, and to all the Priests of the Lord for his sake. Then, being comforted of David, he abode with him, and was his Priest and Counsellor, so long as he reigned. But in the end of Davids raign, he consented with Adonijah (who had exalted himself) to stablish him in the Kingdom,1 King. 2. after the death of David. But Solomon (being proclaimed, and the other deposed) as soon as he was possessed, deprived Abiathar and pla∣ced Sadock in his room: And so was the word of the Lord fulfilled, which he had spoken before, concerning the house of Eli, for Abiathar was the last of that line. Abiathar, Father of the Remnant, or excellent Father. Abigail,1 Sam. 25. the wife of Nabal the Carmelite, was a wo∣man not only beautiful, but of a singular wisdom with∣al. For when her husbands denial to Davids men for sustenance in their masters necessity was told her, she then (considering the great displeasure that might arise of the occasion offered) hasted to load her Asses with sundry kind of victuals, sending them forth before her, and fol∣lowing after with speed: And as she was going, the pro∣vidence of God was so, that she met David by the way, upon the side of an hill coming to Carmel, determined utterly to have destroyed her husband, and all that he had by the dawning of the day following. Then she (perceiv∣ing the fury of David) lighted down from her Asse, falling flat on the ground before him, and so began her petition, which was so pithily framed and done, that in the end she pacified his wrath, and stayed his hands from shed∣ing of bloud that day, for the which she was highly com∣mended and praised of David, who gently receiving her present, did clearly remit the churlish behaviour of Na∣bal her husband for her sake. Which being granted she took her leave and returned again. But when she
came home, and found Nabal her husband so far over∣charged with wine that his wits were gone, she thought it convenient to follow the wise mans counsel:Eccl. 31. not to re∣buke him in his wine, but to let the matter rest, till the drink were all out of his brain, and his memory fresh. And so on the next morrow, she declared to Nabal, the great and perilous danger he was in, for his unkind∣ness shewed to David, which when he heard it, did smite him so sore to the heart, that he never enjoyed himself, but dyed within ten days after. And then (in process,) this woman (Abigail) became David's wife,2 Sam. 3. and bare him a son called Chileab, which in the first book of Chroni∣cles (chap. 3.) is called Daniel. Abigail, The Fathers Joy. There was another woman called Abigail,1 Chron. 2. which was Sister to David, and wife to Jether an Ismaelite, unto whom she bare a son called Amasa. Abimelech, King of the Philistines,Gen. 20. was a man which had the fear of God before his eyes, as it may ap∣pear in the story of Abraham, by his godly entertain∣ment of his wife, whom he took to be his very sister and not his wife, as they had both confessed unto him. And having a mind to the woman, he took her from Abra∣ham, intending to have joyned with her in marriage, and not for any sinful desire. But when (by the voice of God) he knew she was Abraham's wife indeed, and he a Pro∣phet, and his house sore plagued for her sake, he was right sorry for that he had done, and also displeased with Abra∣ham for so dissembling with him in so weighty a cause, considering the dishonesty that might have happened unto his wife by some of his men, and the peril of Gods indignation on him and on his kingdom for the same: yet notwithstanding, when he knew the cause of Abra∣hams dissembling, he possest him with cattel, servants, and money, and delivered Sarah his wife unto him a∣gain,
giving him also free liberty, to dwell and inha∣bite where he would, within the precinct of his domi∣nion. Then Abraham prayed unto God for Abimelech, at whose petition the Lord removed his plague from the house of Abimelech, so that the women conceived and brought forth children, as before they had done. The like story is of Isaac, Chap. xxvi. Abimelech, The Kings Father, or a Father of Counsel, or the chief King. Abimelech,Judg. 9. the son of Jerubbaal, (otherwise Gede∣on) was a wicked Tyrant, and a proud ambitious co∣vetous man. For when his Father was dead, he (to be King of Israel) consulted with all his mothers kindred to perswade the people that it was better to have one man to reign over them, than all the sons of Jerubbaal (which were lxx. persons in number.) And also to consider that he was of their flesh and bloud, as well as the other were, which matter being moved to the people, they all consen∣ted to cleave to Abimelech, and to make him their King and Governour. And that he should be the better assured of their good wills and obedient hearts, they gave unto him a great sum of money, with the which he hired a sort of light brain'd fellows. And first of all, went to his fathers house, and slew all his brethren, save Jothan the youngest, who escaped his bloudy hands and fled. But by that he had raign'd two or three years, the fire of hatred be∣gan so to kindle between him and the Sichemites, with the house of Mello (who had preferr'd him before to the King∣dom) that at length it burst out into so great a flame, that it could not be quenched, till chance of war made an end of the Tyrant: for in the end (after divers victories) he forced the Sichemites to take the strong Tower of The∣bez for their refuge, and coming nigh to the same, to have set it on fire, a certain woman threw down a piece of a Milstone upon his head, and brake his Skull to the brain: who then (feeling himself sore wounded) called
his servant, and bad him draw out his Sword, and rid him out of his life, that it should not hereafter be repor∣ted, that a Woman had killed him, and so his servant slew him. Abinadab was a Man of Gibeah,2 Sam. 6. out of whose House David took the Ark of God, and had it from thence to the house of Obed. Jesse (the Father of David) had also a Son called Abinadab,1 Sam. 16. and King Saul another of the same Name, which was slain with him in Battel. Abinadab, A Father of a Vow, or of a free mind, or Prince. Abishag was a goodly fair young Damosel,1 King. 1. brought up in the City of Sunem. And (for her beauty and man∣ners) chosen to keep and nourish King David in his ex∣treme age:1 King. 2. After whose death (being still a pure Maid) She might not be suffer'd to marry with Adonijah the Kings Brother. Abisag, The Fathers ignorance. Abishai was David's Sisters Son, and Brother to Jo∣ab.1 Chron. 2. His Mothers name was Zarviah. He consented not with Absalom,2 Sam. 16. but stuck to David his Unkle in all his troubles. He was so grieved with the spiteful rebukes and railings of Shimei, which he made against his Unkle David in his adversity, that (if David had not staid him) he would have made Shimei shorter by the head than he was.2 Sam. 21. By his great strength and hardiness he rescued David out of the hands of a monstrous Gyant (the Iron of whose Spear weighed three hundred Sicles) and slew the Giant,2 Sam. 23. with three hundred Philistines more, for the which, he is counted as chief among the three Worthies belonging to David. Abishai, The Fathers Reward. Abner, the Son of Ner,1 Sam. 14. was Captain-General o∣ver the Host of King Saul, by whose wisdome, man∣hood, and fidelity, the House of Saul was chiefly held up
and strengthned, not only in the time of Saul's reign, but so long also as he served Ishbosheth his Son, Sam. 2. whom he set up and made King in his Fathers stead, and governed his Host, as he had done his Fathers before: But in the first Battel he made against Joab (David's Captain) fortune went so much against him, that he was put to the worse and fain to flie: In the which flight, Asahel, (Brother to Jo∣ab) followed Abner and overtook him, with whom Abner was loth to meddle, for fear of Joabs displeasure, and there∣fore intreated him gently to go his way, & not to force him against his will: But when he saw his words would nothing prevail, he fell upon Asahel, and smote him tho∣row the short Ribs with his Spear, and so departed, leaving him dead on the ground. Not long after this, it fortuned the King to fall out with Abner,2. Sam. 3. and to taunt and check him for that he was so familiar with Rizpa his Fathers Concubine, which check and taunt of the King so grieved Abner, that he forsook him and went to Da∣vid, with whom he made a secret bond, to stablish him in the Kingdom. And so departing secretly from David a∣gain, he came to the people which served Ishbosheth, & spake so much unto them in the praise and commendation of Da∣vid, that he wan their hearts and turned them quite from Isboseth to David. And when he had thus framed the peo∣ple somewhat according to his mind, he came again to David, to counsel farther with him, how the People might now be brought together, and be sworn unto him: which matter being determined, Abner returned from David, thinking to have been as faithful to him, as e∣ver he was to Saul. But Joab (who bare grudge and malice to Abner for the death of his Brother Asahel) hear∣ing how Abner had been with David, and let go again, and nothing done unto him, sent privily for Abner to come and speak with the King, who being come, Joab was ready to receive him, and under pretence of friendship, had him a little aside (as though he would have talked with
him about the secret affairs of the King) and suddenly smote him with his Dagger and slew him. Abner, The Fathers Candle. Abraham was the Son of Terah, born in Ur,Gen. 11. Abraham was the Son of Terah, begot∣ten of his se∣cond wife, and because of his dignity is counted be∣fore Nahor and Aran, born of the first Wife. a Town in Chaldee. A man so endued with faith and vertue, that when he saw the true religion and honouring of God to cease in the Land of Chalda, he departed from thence with Terah his Father, Sara his Wife, and Lot his Bro∣thers Son, to go into the Land of Canaan. And12 cap. being come to Haran (which is a Town of Mesopotamia) he re∣mained there, until the death of his Father Terah. Then God commanded Abraham, saying: Get thee out of thy Countrey, and from thy Kindred, and from thy Fathers House unto the Land which I will shew thee, and I will make of thee a great Nation, and will bless thee, and make thy Name great, and thou shalt be a blessing, and I will bless them that bless thee, and curse them that curse thee, and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed. Abraham now (having this promise made him of God) departed out of Haran, he and Sara his wife, with Lot his Nephew, and with all their substance that they had, to go and to sojourn in the Land of Canaan. And being there, the Lord made a promise to Abraham, that his Seed should possess that Land. Whereupon soon after, and in the same place, where God spake thus unto him he made an Altar, and offered Sacrifices thereon to the Lord. And so remain∣ing in the Land, there fell (at the last) so great a Famine, that he was constrained to flie into Egypt, where he (fear∣ing the Egyptians to be ungodly and vicious men) feign∣ed Sara to be his Sister,Abraham taught the Egyptians Astronomy and Geometry. Joseph. thinking that if she were known to be his Wife, they would (for her beauty) take her from him, and put him in hazard of his life. Then was it told to King Pharaoh, what a beautiful Woman Abraham had brought with him into Egypt. The King now knowing thereof, commanded the Woman to be brought unto him,
and with all gentle entertainment received her into his house, and intreated Abraham well for her sake. But when he saw so many plagues fall on him and on all his hous-hold, understanding that it was for with-holding ano∣ther Mans wife from him, he restored the Woman (with∣out dishonesty) to Abraham her Husband again. Giving also his Men a great charge concerning the Man and his Wife.13. cap. Then (soon after) Abraham returned from Egypt into the Country of Canaan where he had been afore And when he had lived some space in the Land, there fell such a strife between the Herdmen of Abrahams Cattel, and the Herdmen of Lots Cattel, that Abraham was fain to divide the Land between his Nephew Lot and him, and so they removed the one from the other. Abraham had now been so long without issue,16. cap. that he took (by con∣sent and advice of Sarah) one of his Maids, named Agar, to Wife, who conceived and brought him forth a Son, which was called Ishmael, Abraham then being at the age of fourscore years and six.17. cap. And when he was come to the number of ninety and nine, God gave unto him the covenant of Circumcision, which he received first in him∣self, and then made Ishmael and all the rest of his hous∣hold to receive the same.21. cap. The next year after, when A∣braham was just an hundred years old, Sarah conceived & brought him forth his long promised Son, named Isaac, whom he circumcised the eighth day following, & would (after that) have offered him up in sacrifice,22. cap. but that God (seeing his ready obedience) staid his hand. Finally, after the death of Sarah,25. cap. Abraham took him another Wife called Keturah, who bare unto him six Sons. Which Children he would not suffer to remain and company with his Son Isaac,Abrabam dy∣ed before the Incarnation of Christ, 1838. years. but (before he died) sent them away with great Rewards and Gifts, and made Isaac Heir of all his Goods. He died at the age of an hundred seven∣ty and five, and was buried beside Sarah his Wife, in the double Gave, which he bought of Ephron the Hittite.
Look more in the histories of Lot, Sarah, and Melchi∣sedeck. Abraham, a Father of a great multitude. Absalom, the son of David,2 Sam. 3. whom he begat on his wife Maacha the daughter of Thalmai, King of Geshur, was the goodliest personage in all Israel, for (as Scripture witnesseth) God had so framed the form and ornaments of his body, that from the soal of the foot to the crown of the head was no member amiss. And yet among all, the hair of his head excelled, which so increased daily, that the weight thereof compelled him at every years end, to shave it off. This Absalom had a brother named Amnon,2 Sam. 13. to whom he bare a privie grudge for defiling his sister Tha∣mar: And to be reveng'd on him for the same, he invited all his brethren unto a banket (made in the time of his sheep-shearing) to the which banket, Amnon came with the rest of his brethren, and in the midst of their cheer, Absalom killed Amnon, and fled to the King of Geshur his Grand∣father; with whom he abode three years. In the which space, by mediation of friends,14. cap. he was (at the last) call'd home again, and brought (by Joab his Aunts son) to Jerusalem, where he remained two years after. Then Absalom marvailing why Joab had not brought him to the King his Father in all that space, sent once or twice for him to come and speak with him: and when he saw that he came not, he commanded his men to go and burn up the field of Barley which pertained to Joab, and lay joyning to his ground. Then Joab hearing thereof, went to Absalom, demanding wherefore his men had destroyed his Corn: Because (quoth Absalom) I sent for thee twice and thou wouldest not come: wherefore didst thou bring me from Geshur? had it not been as good for me and better to have continued there still, than here to lye so nigh the King my Father, and cannot be suffered to see him? then Joab considering the matter, had him to the King, where he was joyfully received. After all this,15. cap. Absalom began
certain practices, to aspire to the kingdom, wherein he prospered so far, that (at length) he proclaimed him∣self King in Hebron. Causing his Father for fear to flie out of his Realm, against whom he called his counsel to devise what way he might best overcome his Father. But God (by whose providence all things are staid) so wrought with his Counsellors,17. cap. that the success of his en∣terprise turned to his own destruction: For when it came so to pass,18. cap. that both the armies were joyned in battel to∣gether, Absaloms men had the worst, and he himself a sudden mischance, for as he rode on his Mule through the wood to have escaped,Rebellion ne∣ver escapeth Gods punish∣ment. a twist of an Oak caught him so fast in the hair of his head, that it took him quite out of his Saddle. And so he hang'd on the tree, till Joab came with his spear and slew him, whose Carcass after, was taken down, and cast into a pit, and covered with an heap of stones. Absalom, A Father of Peace, or the Fathers Peace, or Reward. Achan,Josua 7. was the son of Charmy, and of the Tribe of Juda, who being at the winning of the City of Jericho, and hear∣ing Josua pronounce the City and all things therein to be excommunicate, and accursed of the Lord, took not with∣standing, certain jewels of the same and hid them privily under the ground in his tent. Then after, when Josua went about the taking of Hai, and had sent three thousand souldiers to win it, the men of Hai issued out of the ci∣ty and slew thirty and six of the Israelites, and chased the rest back again, whereat Josua was so discomfited that he rent his clothes, and called on God, to know the cause of their overthrowing, who made him answer that Israel could not stand before the men of Hai, foras∣much as some of them had transgressed his command∣ment, and told him the way and means how he should search it out: which thing being done, he found that A∣chan had taken of the spoil of Jericho, a Babylonish gar∣ment,
two hundred sicles of silver, and a wedge of gold, which being tried and brought forth before the whole congregation, Josua took Achan, his sons, and daughters, cattel, goods, and all that he had, and carried them out to the valley of Achor, where they were stoned to death, and consumed with fire. Achan, Troubling. Achab, the son of Amry,1 King. 16. began his raign over Israel in the 39th year of the raign of Asa King of Juda. He took Jezabel the daughter of Ethbaal King of the Sydo∣nites to wife, by whose means he fell into all wicked and strange Idolatry and cruel persecution, for the which God plagued him so,18. cap. that in three years space neither dew nor rain fell down from above, to moisten the earth, whereof ensued so great a Murren of men and beasts, that innumerable dyed thereof, and all the fault and cause of this plague, he laid on Elia the Prophet, and sought by all means how to destroy him.21. cap. This King was so wicked, that (Scripture saith) he had even sold himself to work wickedness, and yet notwith∣standing God gave him a marvellous victory of Benha∣dad King of Syria (who had in his company,20. cap. thirty two Kings) with whom he fought twice and beat him, and at the third time, broughtHere God (as he many times doth,) did punish one wicked by an∣other. him into so miserable a case, that he was fain to humble himself to Achab with a rope about his neck, who (nevertheless) had pity on that wic∣ked King, and made a bond with him, and let him go. Now for this mercy, which Achab had shewed to Ben∣hadad (whom the Lord had cursed, and put into Achabs hands to be slain) God was angry with Achab, and pro∣mised his utter destruction for the same.1 King. 21. This greedy Cor∣morant was not content with his Kingdom, and spoil of his victories, which God had given him, but caused Na∣both (that innocent man) to be murdered, only to have his vineyard, which lay so nigh his nose, whose bloud did cry for such vengeance of God, that word was brought
him by the Prophet Elia, that in the same place where dogs had licked the bloud of Naboth, should dogs lick his also: and that he would do unto Achab and his poste∣rity, even as he had done to the house of Jeroboam and Baasha, which terrible threatnings of God so frighted Achab, that heHis repen∣tance was not true, but plain hypocrisie. repented and humbled himself in sack∣cloth, for the which the Lord deferred his plague, and would not perform it in Achabs days, but in the time of his sons reign. Finally, it came in the mind of Achab to go into Syria,22. cap. to recover the City of Ramoth, which he claimed by inheritance. And trusting more to the counsel of four hundred false Prophets, than he did to Micajah, the true Prophet of God: he took his journey towards Ramoth, and being in battel against his ene∣mies the Syrians, he was shot with an arrow stan∣ding in his Chariot, of the which stroke he died. And then when his Chariot was had to the pool of Samaria to be washed, the dogs licked up the bloud that ran thorow the Chariot, and so was the word of the Lord fulfilled, which he had spoken before concerning the same. He reigned twenty two years. Achab, The Fathers brother. Achaicus,1 Cor. 16. was a faithful Christian brother, whom St. Paul sent with Stephanus and Fortunatus from Philip∣pi to the Corinthians with his Epistle. Achaicus, Mourning, or sad. Achaz, look Ahaz. Achior,Judith 5. was Captain and governour of all the Ammo∣nites under Holofernes, and had the spirit of Prophecie so plentiful in him, that when Holofernes demanded what manner of people the Jews were, he stepped forth before him and said: If it please thee (O Prince) I will tell thee of a truth what they be. They are a people which came of the generation of the Chaldees, and because they would not serve their gods, nor yet follow their cu∣stoms, they went and dwelt first in Mesopotamia, wor∣ship∣ping
one God that made Heaven and Earth, at whose commandment they went from thence, and dwelt in the Land of Canaan, where in process fell so great a Dearth, that then from Canaan they went down to Egypt, and dwelt among the Egyptians four hundred Years: In the which space they grew to a mighty number, and were sore oppressed of the King of that Land, but assoon as they cryed to their God for help, he sent down such Plagues upon the King and all his Land, that he was fain to suffer them to depart; yet when they were gone, and the Plague ceased, he then pursued, to have brought them back again into bondage: But GOD perceiving his People to be in a streight, opened the Sea before them, and brought them thorow on dry ground, and closed the Sea upon their Enemies, and so drowned Pharaoh with all his Host. And now being passed the red Sea, they came to the Wilderness of Mount Si∣nai, where the Waters being bitter, he made them sweet, and fed them Forty Years with Meat from Heaven. They had such power from their God, that they cast out before them the Canaanites, the Perisites, the Jebusites and the Hittites, with many great Na∣tions more. For so long as they stood in awe of their God, and did not offend him, so long was no Nation ever able to molest or hurt them. But if (at any time) they declined from his will and Ordinance, then were they quickly destroyed in Battel, and brought to capti∣vity and bondage. Wherefore (O Prince) let inquisiti∣on now be made, whether they have offended their God or no; and if they have, then let us go against them, for God shall deliver them into thy hand: But if they have not displeased their God, he will so defend them, that we shall not surely be able to stand before them, but become a reproach unto all the World.Judith 6. Now was Holofernes so mad with Achior, that he commanded his Men to carry him to the Jews, that he might perish with them in
their destruction. And as they went toward Bethulia with Achior, and saw they might not come nigh the City, without great peril of their lives, they went to a Tree, and bound him fast to the same, and so leaving him, went their ways: Then came the Jews to Achior, and loo∣sed his Bands, had him into the City, and set him before the Senators, who demanded the cause wherefore the Assyrians had so cruelly used him; to whom he declared the matter in order, as he had spoke it before to the Prince Holofernes; which being done, the whole Assembly gave praises and thanks to God, which had given to Achior (being an Heathen man) such boldness of spirit to set forth his power and glory. And from that time forth they comforted Achior, and had him in great estimation, who fell from his Heathenish belief,Judith 14. and put all his trust in the living God, and became a Jew, and was circumci∣sed and numbred among the People of Israel, he and all his Posterity for ever. Achior, the Brothers light. Achish was the Son of Maoth King of Gath,1 Sam. 21. who on a time, when David feigned himself to be madHere it is said, that David feigned himself mad before Achish, and in the 34 Psaim, be∣fore Abimc∣lech, which two were both one man: for here he is called by his proper name Achise, and in the other place by his general name Abimelech. be∣fore him, said unto his servants that brought him on this wise: What mean you Sirs, to bring this mad fellow before me? have I so great need of mad men, that ye have brought this man to play the mad Bedlam in my presence? Away with him (I say) out of my House. At this time Achish despised David and would not receive him: but the next time27 cap. he came again with his Band of Men and their Housholds, he retained them all, and gave unto David the City of Ziklag to dwell in, and had him in such estimation, that when he himself should go with the Philistines to Battel against the Is∣raelites, he then took David with him, and made him the Keeper29 cap. of his Person, for the which, the Philistines were sore offended with Achish, and would not suffer him to go in their company, so long as David was with him, where∣fore
Achish (for fear of the Philistines displeasure) in∣treated David to go home again, and so went Achish forth with the Philistines against King Saul. Achish, Even so it is. Ada,Gen. 4. There be two Women of this Name in the Bible, The one was Lamech's Wife, and Mother to Ja∣ball. The other was the Daughter of Elom the Hittite,Gen. 36. and Wife to Esau, Jacob's Brother. Ada, a Company, or Congregation. Adam was the first Man that God created,Gen. 1. and had dominion of all the Beasts and Fowls of the Earth, and to every Beast and Fowl he gave his proper Name. God set him at the first in a place of passing joy, full of all manner of fruitful Trees, pleasant both to the eye and in tast, whereof he might eat at will, and was not prohibi∣ted, save only from the tree of knowledg of good and evil, for whensoever he tasted of that Tree, God told him he should surely dye. Now Adam being in this goodly Pa∣radise of Pleasure, God thought it good to make him a Companion to bear him company. And so casting Adam into a sound sleep, he took out a Rib of his side, whereof he made the Woman, and brought her to Adam, who by and by confessed her to be of his Bone and Flesh, and from that time forth they lived together as Man and Wife, in all pureness and innocency of life, till that by the subtil∣ty of old Satan the Serpent, (who had deceived the Wo∣man) he was inticed by his Wife to eat of the forbidden Tree. Which thing he had no sooner done, but both their eyes were opened, to see in what case they were. And when they saw themselves all naked and bare, they were so ashamed, that they made them Garments to cover their privities, and hid themselves that the Lord should not see them. But Adam being found out of God, and de∣manded wherefore he had hid himself, alledged, because he
was naked. And also to excuse his transgression, he bur∣dened God with his fault, because he had given him the Woman, which had allured him to eat of the Tree. But nevertheless, for as much as Adam had obeyed the voice of his Wife, and neglected the Lords precept, God cursed the Earth for his sake, & drove him forth of that wealthy place, for to live in sorrow and care, and be subject to death and all other calamities and miseries of the World, both he and all his off-spring for ever. In the Bible is mention made, both of Sons and Daughters which Adam had of Eve his Wife, but none of their Names be rehearsed, save only Cain, Abel and Seth. He lived nine hundred and thirty years. Adam, Man, Earthly. Adonijah,2 Sam. 3. was a goodly young Man, the Son of Da∣vid, born unto him in Hebron of his Wife Agith. When Adonijah perceived his Father to be feeble and weak tho∣row extreme age,1 King. 1. he began to exalt himself, saying he would be King. And gat him both Horses and Chariots, and also Foot men to run before him even like a King, to the which his Father said nothing, nor would dis∣please him, but let him alone, and do what he would. And so Adonijah proceeded in his purpose and by the counsel of Joab the Captain, and Abiathar the Priest (who took his part) he made a great sacrifice of Sheep and Oxen, whereunto he called his Brethren, and also the Kings ser∣vants, who eating and drinking before him with great rejoycing, said: God save King Adonijah. But assoon as David had knowledge of Bathsheba Solomon's Mother, and Nathan the Prophet, how all the case stood, he command∣ed Sadock the Priest, and Nathan, to anoint Solomon, and to set Him upon his own Mule, and so to go forth and proclaim him King. Which news was no sooner come into the new Kings Court, but every Man shrunk away for fear, leaving Adonijah all alone. Who then (for his own safeguard) fled to the Tabernacle of
the Lord, and would not go from thence till Solomon granted him his pardon, upon condition that hereafter he would be quiet, and a good Man. And so being par∣doned, he departed quietly home to his house. But af∣ter this, when David his Father was dead,1 King. 2. Adonijah (ca∣sting his favour upon Abishag the Shunamite) went to Bathshcha, Solomon's Mother, requesting Her to speak unto the King, that he would give him Abishag to Wife. Then Solomon hearing his Mothers request, perceived that Adonijah (being the Elder brother) went about to as∣pire to the Kingdom, wherefore to prevent his purpose, he put him to death. Adonijah, the Lord is the ruler. Adonibeseck, King of the Canaanites,Judg. 1. was of such might and power, that he subdued seventy Kings, who being all brought into his Court, He cut off their Thumbs and great Toes, and made them gather their meat under his Table, which great cruelty he shew∣ed unto them, being puft up with pride and ostentation of his victory. This wicked King chanced to reign over the Canaanites, when Judah had the governing of the Host of Israel, against whom Judah began his Conquest, and slew the Canaanites, and put Adonibeseck to flight, but being sore pursued, the Men of Judah took him, and cut off both his thumbs and great toes, which thing the Ty∣rant confessed himself by and by to be the just judg∣ment of God, for as he had done to others, so had he wor∣thily received again. And so he was carried to Jerusa∣lem, and there dyed. Adonibeseck, the Lords Thunder. Adramelech, the Son of Senacherib King of As∣syria,2 King. 19. with his Brother Saresa, slew their Father in the Temple, as he was worshipping his God Nisroch, and fled into the Land of Armenia, leaving Asarhaddon their other Brother, to possess the Kingdom after their Father. Adramelech, the Kings Cloak, or his Greatness, or
Power, or the greatness of Counsel. Aduram was Receiver of all Rehoboams Tribute, and being sent in Commission to pacifie the People which were divided and fallen from the King,1 King. 12. 2 Chron. 10. they (for hatred they bare to Rehoboam) took this Man, and stoned him to death. Aduram, Their Cloak, or their power, or greatness. Agag was a very fat Man,1 Sam. 15. and King of the Ama∣lekites, which Nation God had commanded to be ut∣terly destroyed. And because King Saul had reserved Agag alive, and not killed him with the rest, the Lord was grievously displeased with Saul, and would not suffer Agag so to escape, but sent Samuel to execute his judgment upon him, who calling for Agag, he came out unto him very pleasantly, fearing nothing less, but that all bitterness of death had been past; but contrary to his expectation, Samuel said unto him: As thy sword hath made Women childless, so shall thy Mother be child∣less among other women; and with that he fell upon A∣gag, and hewed him in pieces before the Lord in Gil∣gal. Agag, An House, or cellar. Agabus was a certain Prophet,Act. 11.28. which came from Jerusalem to Antioch, where he prophesied of a great dearth that should be thorowout all the World, which came to pass (as this Prophet had said) in the Emperour Claudius's days. Also while Paul lay at Cesarea in the House of Philip the Evangelist pur∣posing to keep his Journey to Jerusalem,Act. 21.10. this Prophet chancing to come thither, took Pauls girdle, and there∣withall bound his own hands and feet, saying: Thus saith the Holy Ghost, so shall the Jews at Jerusalem bind the Man that oweth this girdle, and shall deliver him into the hands of the Gentiles. Agabus, A Grashopper.
Agar was Handmaid to Sarah, Abraham's Wife,Gen. 16. which Sarah (being long barren and childless) gave A∣gar her Maid unto Abraham to be his Wife, who being conceived, and feeling her self with Child, began to de∣spise and set light by Sarah her Mistress, for the which Sa∣rah complained to Abraham her Husband, who giving her power to correct the Maid at her pleasure, she began to deal so roughly with Agar, that in no wise she would abide it, but ran away into the Wilderness, and sitting there beside a Fountain of Water (not knowing whither to go) an Angel appeared unto her, and said: Agar, from whence comest thou? and whither intendest thou to go? I flee (said Agar) from Sarah my Mistress, who deal∣eth so hardly with me, that I am even weary of my life. Well (said the Angel) return to thy Dame again, and submit thy self under her hands, for the Lord will so encrease thy seed, that it shall not be numbred for multitude: Thou art with child, and shalt bear a Son, whose Name shall be Ishmael. Then Agar (giving God thanks for his consolation in trouble) returned home a∣gain to Sarah her Mistress, submitting her self unto her, and in process of time brought forth her son shmael, as the Angel had said.Gen. 21. But when it pleased God to visit Sarah, that she conceived and brought forth Isaac, a new contention arose between Sarah and Agar for their chil∣dren: for Sarah perceiving Ishmael to be a mocker and a despiser of Isaac, would not suffer Ishmael to compa∣ny with her Son Isaac, but made her complaint to Abraham, causing Him to put both Agar and her Son away: which thing, although it grieved Abraham so to do, yet being comforted of God that he would multi∣ply Ishmael, (because he was of his seed) he obeyed the voice of Sarah his wife, and with provision of victuals, sent Agar away with her Son to shift for her self. Then Agar being departed from Abraham, gat her into
the Forest of Beersheba, where she wandred so long up and down, till all her provision of Meat was spent and gone. And when she saw no remedy, but that both she and her child must needs perish for lack of sustenance, she laid down the child behind a bush, and went her self away, because she would not see it dye, and as she sat afar off, mourning and weeping for her Son, she was comforted again by the Angel of God, who had so provided for her and her son, that they were both relie∣ved, and lived together a long time after, to her great joy and comfort. Agar, A Stranger. Aggeus was one of the Twelve Prophets which prophesied in the time of Zorobabel,1 Esd. 5. King of the Jews, and rebuked them for that they were slack in the work of the Lord. Aggeus, Solemn festival, or winding and turning himself. Agrippa was a certain King,Act. 25. who (as Paul re∣porteth) had good knowledge in the Law and Prophets, but understood not the true applying of the same: Which King (on a time) came to Cesarea to see Festus and to welcome him into the Country, who was then but newly entred into his office. And being there a good while with Festus, and hearing of him what a-do there was about Paul, whom the Jews had accused unto him, was much desirous to see the Man, and to hear him speak. Whereupon the next day following, Paul was brought into the common Hall before Agrippa, and other Magistrates of the City there assembled to hear his cause. And when Festus had declared for what purpose he had brought forth Paul, that after examina∣tion had, he might have somewhat of certainty to write to Cesar,26 cap. to whom Paul had appealed, Agrippa per∣mitted the Prisoner to speak, and to say what he could for himself. Who then so approved his innocency by
rehearsing his conversation before the audience, that Agrippa (interrupting him) confessed and said unto Paul: Thou hast almost perswaded me to become a Chri∣stian. And when the Prisoner had ended his discourse, the King arose and all the Court, among whom was much secret talk of Paul, and for a final sentence, Agrippa said unto Festus: I see no worthy cause of death or of bands in this Man, but that he might have been loosed, if he had not appealed to Cesar. Agrippa, is a Latine word, and signifieth, That which hardly laboureth, or travelleth in childbearing, or delivering. Also he which at his birth cometh with his feet forward. Ahaz, the Son of Jotham King of Juda,2 King. 16. at the age of twenty years began his reign, in the xvi.2 Chron. 28. year of Pekah King of Israel, and did not walk in the ways of his godly Father, but gave himself to all kind of Idolatry and abominations of the Heathen, consecra∣ting his Children in the fire, and offering Incense on every Hill and Mountain. For the which (his wicked∣ness) the Lord forsook him, and delivered him into the hands and power of Razin King of Syria and Pekah King of Israel, which two Kings on the one side, with the E∣domites and Philistines (invading his Land, and spoiling his Cities and Towns) on the other side, brought him very low: And yet in all his adversity would he not once list up his heart to call upon God for his aid and help, but (contrary to the Prophets admonition) sought for the succour of Man. spoiling the Temple of God,Esay 7. and sen∣ding the Treasure thereof to Thiglath Pileser King of As∣syria, to come and deliver him out of trouble; by whose coming, Ahaz was nothing the more strengthned, but rather troubled and hindered. Then Ahaz measuring God's favour by the prosperity of his Enemies (not con∣sidering how God oftentimes doth punish those whom he loveth, and giveth to his Enemies good success for a
time) turned his heart wholly to the Syrians Gods, who (as he thought) had plagued him. And to the in∣tent he might serve them and worship them in all things, according as the Heathen did (to have their help also) he took the pattern of an Altar at Damascus, the which he sent toThere is no Prince so wicked, but he shall find flatterers and false Mini∣sters to serve his purpose. Uria his Priest, to make him the like against his coming home, who being such a Minister as was content to serve the King's turn, made it with all speed, on the which Altar the King at his coming home, offered to those Idols, abolishing all the holy Laws and Ordinances of God, to stablish his own wicked and ungodly proceedings, which turned to his utter confusion. He reigned Sixteen Years, and was buried in the City of David, but not among the Sepul∣chres of Kings, leaving Hezekia his godly Son to enjoy his place. Ahas, Taking, or Possessing. Ahazia the Son of Achab,1 King. 22. 2 King. 1. began his Reign over Israel, in the xvii. year of Jehosaphat King of Juda, and followed the steps of that wicked Idolater Achab his Father in all things, for the which the Lord punished him two manner of ways. First, the Moabites rebelled against him, refusing to pay any tribute. Secondly, as he walked upon his House (for his recreation) he fell down at a grate of the same, which was made to give light be∣neath. And being sore bruised with the fall, and in peril of death, he sent toBeclzebub was an Idol which the Philistines that dwelt at Ekron wor∣shipped, and signifieth the God of flies. Thinking that he could preserve them from biting of flies: or else he was so called, be∣cause flies were ingen∣dred in great abandance of the blood of the sacrifices that were offered to that Idol. This note I find in the Bible. Beelzebub the God of Ekron, to en∣quire of him, whether he should recover or no. And as the Messengers were going, Elia the Prophet (by the providence of God) met them, and said: Is there no God in Israel to ask counsel at, but your Master must send to Beelzebub? return and tell him, he shall not live. The Messengers returned and told the King. Who (percei∣ving by all the marks and tokens of the Man, that it was the Prophet Elia) sent forth a Captain with Fifty. Souldiers to bring him with violence, if otherwise he
would not come. And when the Captain came to the Prophet, he said: Thou man of God, come away, the King hath sent for thee. If I be the man of God (quoth the Prophet) Fire come down from Heaven, and consume thee and all thy men, which words were no sooner gone out of his mouth, but Fire fell down from Heaven and destroyed them all. The King sent again, and they were likewise destroyed. Then went the third, who fell down before the Prophet, and said: O thou man of God, let my life (I pray thee) and the life of these thy fifty servants, be precious in thy sight. With this Man, the Prophet went boldly to the King, and told him plainly he should not recover, and so he dyed in the second year of his reign, and for lack of issue, his Brother Jehoram succeeded. Ahazia, The apprehending, or possessing of the Lord, or the vision, or seeing of him. Ahasuerus,Esther 1. cap. (otherwise called Artaxarxes) King of Persia, reigned over an hundred andDaniel chap. 6. ma∣keth mention but of six score, leaving out the num∣ber that is imperfect, as the Scripture in divers places useth. twenty seven Provinces. This King, in the third year of his reign, made a Feast-royal in the City of Susan, to all his Prin∣ces and Nobles, which continued an hundred and four∣score days. And these days expired, he made another feast to all the People great and small, for the space of seven days, and in the seventh and last day of the Feast, the King (being merry and pleasantly disposed) sent divers of his Chamberlains to fetch the Queen named Vash∣ti, and to bring Her to Him with the Crown-Imperial upon her head, that the People might see her beauty. But for so much as she would not come at the King's com∣mandment, it was decreed that the King should put her away, and take another at his pleasure. And accor∣ding to the same decree, the King was divorced from Vashti, and took Esther in her place, for whose sake he shewed great kindness to her Nation the Jews, promo∣ting Mardocheus (which had preserved him from the dan∣ger
ger of Treason) and put down Haman whom he had (above all) exalted. Ahasuerus, a Prince, or Head. Ahimaaz,2 Sam. 17. the Son of Sadock, with Jonathas the Son of Abiathar, stood waiting without the City of Jerusalem, at the Well called Regell, to bear such news to David, as they should hear from their Fa∣thers, being within with Absalom. And when they were instructed of all things, by a certain Maid sent from their Fathers, what they should do and say unto Da∣vid, they departed with speed. But being espyed by a certain young Man, who went and told it to Absalom, Messengers were sent forth in post hast, which follow∣ed them so sore, that they were constrained to slip into a certain Mans house in Bahurim, which had a Well in his Yard, into the which they were conveighed: and being hid in the Well, the Wife of the House spred a Co∣verlet over the Wells mouth, and strowed Corn there∣on, whereby the Well was not seen. Then Absalom's Men coming into the House, demanded of the Woman where the two men were which came in before them. They be gone (said she) over the Brook of Water. The men believing her, went after and sought, and when they could not find them, returned home again. Then Ahimaaz and Jonathas were let out of the Well, who went to David and did their message,8. cap. as they were commanded. After this, when Absalom was slain, A∣himaaz desired of Joab the Captain, that he might bear news to the King of Absalom's death. Nay, said Joab, thou shalt be no messenger this day, because the King's Son is dead, but Cushi shall go. Then I pray thee (quoth Ahimaaz) let me go with Cushi. And where∣fore (quoth Joab) art thou so desirous to go, seeing for thy tidings thou shalt have no reward: whatsoever I have (quoth he) I pray thee let me go: Then go, said Joab. And Ahimaaz ran a nearer way than Cushi, and
so got before him. And as they were coming, the Watch-man spied them, and said to the King: I see two men running hitherward, and me-think the running of the foremost is like the running of Ahimaaz the Son of Sadock: Oh said the King, he is a good man, and brin∣geth good tidings. And so Ahimaaz came to the King be∣fore Cushi, and fell down before him and said: Blessed be the Lord thy God, which hath shut up the men that list up their hands against my Lord the King. Is the young man Absalom safe, said the King? Ahimaaz an∣swered: When Joab sent Cushi and me thy servant, I saw much a-do, but I wot not what it was: Well said the King, stand still. Then Cushi came and said: Good tidings my Lord the King, for the Lord hath delivered thee this day, out of the hands of all that rose against thee. Is the young man Absalom safe (quoth the King:) The Enemies of my Lord the King (said he) and all that rise against thee to do thee hurt, be as that young man is. And so the King departed, and mourned for his Son. Ahimaaz, Erother of Counsel. Ahimelech, the Son of Ahitob, the Son of Phi∣nehes,1 Sam. 21. the Son of Eli, was Priest of the City of Nob, in whose time it chanced David (being persecuted of King Saul) to flye unto him for succour, at whose com∣ing (with so few waiting on him) Ahimelech was fore astonied, and asked him wherefore he came so a∣lone. Then David bearing him in hand that the King had sent him of a secret business which might not be known, desired Ahimelech to give him of such things as he had in store, that he and his men might be refre∣shed and go about the King's affairs. Then Ahimelech (believing that all had been well between the King and David) gave him of theThe He∣brews had three kinds of Bread (as Lyra wri∣teth.) The first, Shew∣bread, which was set be∣fore the Lord. upon the pro∣pitiatory seat, and thereof might no man eat. but the Priests only. The se∣cond, bread offered upon the Altar of Holocaust, which was for the Le∣vites to eat. The third, was common bread, and of that might all men eat. hallowed bread because he saw his necessity great, and had no common Bread under his hand. Then David desired Ahimelech to lend him
either Spear or Sword, for I brought (quoth he) nei∣ther weapon not harness, the King's business required such hast; and by and by he fetcht out the Sword of Goliah, and gave it to him. Now22. cap. for this great kind∣ness which Ahimelech had shewed to David, Doeg a Servant of King Sauls, accused him to his Lord, of Treason. And being brought before the King with all the Priests of the Lord; it was objected against him, how he had conspired with David the King's enemy, and asked counsel of God for him, and aided him both with victual and weapon: To the which, Ahimelech answered and said: Oh King, who is so faithful a∣mong all thy servants, as David is? or had in more ho∣nour in all thy house? Is he not the King's Son-in-law, and doth whatsoever thou commandest him? have I not at other times as well as now, asked counsel of God for him? Let not my Lord the King impute any such wickedness to me, or to my Fathers house, for truly thy servant knew nothing of all this that thou layest to my charge, either less or more. Well (quoth the King) thou shalt surely dye. And so was this innocent Man put to death, with lxxxiv. Priests more, and the City of Nob destroyed. Ahimelech, a Kings Brother. Ahijah,2 King. 11. was a Prophet born in Shilo, and chan∣cing to meet with Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, with∣out the City of Jerusalem, in the plain Fields, having a new Cloak upon his back, he caught the Cloak from him, and rent it in twelve pieces, delivering ten pieces thereof to Jeroboam, saying: Thus will the Lord rent the Kingdom out of the hands of Solomon (because he hath forsaken the Lord and served strange Gods) and give ten Tribes unto thee. Therefore take heed (when thou art King) that thou walk in the ways of the Lord thy God, for so long as thou keepest his statutes and holy commandments, so long will the Lord pros∣per
thee in the Kingdom. Read more of this Prophet in the story of Abia the Son of Jeroboam. Ahijah, Brother of the Lord. The Father of King Baasha, was called Ahijah,1 King. 15. of the house of Isachar. Aholah and Aholibah, were two Sisters,Ezech. 23. under whose names is set forth, the fornication, that is to say, the Idolatry of Samaria and Jerusalem.The Bible note. Aholah, sig∣nifieth a mansion, or dwelling in it self, meaning Samaria, which was the royal City of Israel; and Aholibah signifieth my Mansion in her, whereby is meant Jerusalem, where Gods Temple was. Aholibama was the Daughter of Ana;Gen. 36. and Wife to Esau, who brought him forth Children, which became great Men in the World. Aioth, the Son of Gera,Judg. 3. was the second Judge of the Hebrews, a Man of great strength, and valiant of cou∣rage, and had equal strength and aptness in both his hands. He slew Eglon King of the Moabites on this wise: When Eglon had long warred on the Jews, and taken from them divers Cities, and kept them in much misery, this Aioth came to him to Jericho, bringing unto him certain Presents, which liked him well, and desired to speak with him privily, which was granted, and all others being commanded to withdraw, Aioth stroke Eglon to the heart twice. The last time with such puissance, that the Knife with the hilt remained in the wound, and so leaving him dead, departed with∣out suspicion, and came unto his People, declaring what he had done, who being glad, armed them and fell up∣on the Moabites, and slew of them ten thousand, and drave all the residue out of their Country. And so the Jews being delivered by the wisdome and vertue of
Aioth, after made him their Judge and Prince. Who governed them lxxx. years in peace, and died a very old man in much honour. Aioth, Praising, or confessing. Alexander,1 Mac. 1. This King at 2 Sapper in Babylon was poysoned by drinking out of a cup made of an horses hoof, suppo∣sed to be the device of A∣ristotle some∣time his Ma∣ster, and An∣tipater Lieu∣tenant of Macedonia. the Son of Philip, King of Macedo∣nia, slew Darius King of the Persians and Medes, and conquered the most part of all the World, in less than twelve years space, whereof he became so proud that God was displeased with him. And being visited with sickness so sore, that he must needs die, he called all his Lords and Princes before him, and divided his kingdom among them: So that they (after his death) were crowned, and reigned as Kings, every one severally in his own Dominion, as was to them ap∣pointed. He reigned xii. years. Alexander, An aid∣er, or a helper, manly, or very valiant. Alexander,1 Mac. 10. the Son of Noble Antiochus, took the City of Ptolemais, and after that, moved War a∣gainst Demetrius, who (to prevent Alexander) sent Ambassadours to Jonathas (Governour of the Jewes) to have his friendship, promising him as many fair and large offers, as he could devise. But forasmuch as Jonathas had experience of his deceitful dealings, and how cruel an Enemy he had always been unto the Jews Nation, he refused the offer of Demetrius, and joyned in League with Alexander, knowing him to be a faithful Prince, and ever his friend. And so Alexander having the Jews aid, joyned Battail with Demetrius, in the which conflict, Alexander slew Demetrius, and overcame all his Host. Now when Alexander had con∣quered the Land, and was set in the Throne of his Proge∣nitors, a marriage was concluded between Him and Cleopatra, the Daughter of Ptolemy King of Egypt, which was finished at the City of Ptolemais, at the which triumph, Alexander made Jonathas a Duke, and
Partner of his Dominion, and after that (for his worthi∣ness) gave him the City of Accaron.11 cap. Alexander now lying at Antioch, and hearing how the Cilicians had re∣belled against him, marched toward them with a great power, to suppress the Rebellion. And being there bu∣sied with his enemies, Ptolomy in the mean season, de∣feated him of his kingdom, and took his Daughter Cleo∣patra, and gave her to Demetrius, the Son of Demetrius, in marriage. Alexander hearing of this, returned home with all his Host, but Ptolomy being too strong for him, chased Alexander out of his Realm, who for succour, fled into Arabia, where the King of that Land (against all Law of Arms) smote off his head, and sent it to Ptolomy for a present. Alexander, a Jew born, and a Ruler at Ephesus,Act. 19. what time as Demetrius the Silversmith, moved Sediti∣on in the City against Paul for the Goddess Diana, was (in the rage) drawn out of the Common Hall, and go∣ing forward, beckoned with his hand to have spoken, but till the Town-Clark had ceased the noise (which lasted two hours) he could not be heard. And then, to pacifie the people, more by worldly wisdom, than for any respect he had to Religion, he said: Ye Men of E∣phesus, what Man is he, that knoweth not how that the City of the Ephesians is a worshipper of the great Goddess Diana, and of the Image which came from Jupiter? Seeing then that no Man gain sayeth it, ye ought to be content, and to do nothing rashly. For, ye have brought hither these Men, which are neither robbers of Churches, neither yet despisers of your God∣dess: Wherefore if Demetrius and the Crafts-men, which are with him, have any matter against any Man, the Law is open, and there are Rulers, let them accuse one another. But if ye go about any other thing, it may be determined in a lawful Assembly. For we are in jeopardy to be accused of this days uproar, forasmuch
as there is no cause whereby we may give an account of this concourse of People. And when he had thus spo∣ken, each Man departed. Alexander the Coppersmith,1 Tim. 1. forsook the faith, and became such an Enemy unto the Gospel,2 Tim. 4. that he with∣stood Paul's preaching, and did him much displeasure, for the which, Paul delivered him unto Satan, that is, ex∣communicated him out of the Church, desiring the Lord to reward him, as he had deserved. Alcimus was a Jew born,1 Mac. 7. and come of the Seed of Aaron, who notwithstanding, became so wicked a Man, that he forsook the Laws of his own Nation, to maintain the abominations of the Heathen. And for the hatred he bare to Machabeus and the Jews, he took unto him a sort of loofe and ungodly Persons, and went to Demetrius, unto whom he made a grievous complaint upon Judas Machabeus, seigning that he had slain all the King's friends, and driven him and his com∣pany out of their own Land, wherefore he willed Deme∣trius to choose out some Noble Captain, to go and a∣venge the King's quarrel on Judas. Upon the which complaint of Alcimus, the King sent Bachides against Judas, and made Alcimus the High-Priest, who was such an enemy unto the Jews, as the like was not among the Heathen, for all his study was, how he might (either by word or deed) work their utter confusion. And fi∣nally, to manifest his great malice towards his own Country-men, and the Laws of God, he commanded the Walls of the inmost Sanctuary (with the Monuments of the Prophets) to be cast down and destroyed. But as this wicked Apostate went about his devilish purpose, the hand of God fell upon him, and smote him with such an incurable Palsie, that his mouth was shut up, and so like a miserable wretch he dyed. Alcimus, Strong.
Amaleh was the Son of Eliphaz, the Son of Esau,Gen. 36. born unto him of Thymna his Concubine, of whom came the Kinred of the Amalekites.Exod. 17. This King when Moses had brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, and were come into the Wilderness of Raphidim, where they both lacked water, and were wearied with their long journey, would not suffer them to pass quietly tho∣row his Land, but came forth with weapon, and waged Battel against them. In the which Battel, Joshua guided the Host of Israel, while Moses went to pray. And so long as Moses held up his hands and prayed, so long had Israel the better, but when he let them fall, Amalek had the better. Then Aaron and Hur perceiving Moses hands to be weary, gat them up to Moses, and staid his hands, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side, so long till Joshua had discomfited Amalek with all his Host. And for this cruelty of Amalek, God sware unto Moses, that he would utterly put out the remem∣brance of Amalek, from under Heaven.1 Sam. 15. Which pro∣mise he performed in the days of King Saul. Amalek, a licking people. Aman, look Haman. Amasa, was the Son of Jether, and Abigail,2 Sam. 17. Da∣vid's sister, was his Mother. This Amasa what time as Absalom rose against his Father David, was made Cap∣tain over Absalom's Host, and after the death of Absa∣lom, David received him to favour,19. c. swearing he should be Captain over his Host, in the room of Joab, which office he did not long enjoy: for when Sheba the Son of Bichri had begun a new commotion, and that David had sent Amasa to gather the Men of Juda together,20. c. and to bring them to him by the third day, it chanced Joab to meet Amasa by the way (which was somewhat after the
time the King had appointed) and saluting him with all gentleness, he took him by the Chin with one hand to kiss him, and with the other hand he smote him under the short Ribs with his Dagger, and killed him. Amasa, Sparing the people. Amasiah,2 King 14. the Son of Joash King of Juda, began his Reign at the Age of xxv.2 Chron. 25. Years, in the beginning where∣of he did indifferently well observe the Laws of God, but in the end he became an Idolater. He prepared an Host of thirty thousand Men to go against the Edomites, and yet to make himself the stronger; he hired an hun∣dred thousand more, out of the ten Tribes of Israel, for an Hundred Talents of Silver. But as he was going with both the Hosts of Juda and Israel, he was com∣manded by the Lord's Prophet, to send the Host of Is∣rael home again, (forasmuch as the Lord was not with them) or else he should not stand before his enemies. How then (said the King) shall I do for the hundred Talents, which I have given for them? Take no thought for that (quoth the Prophet) for the Lord is able to give thee as much more. And so he sent the Host of Israel home a∣gain, who for anger they were dismissed, fell upon the Cities of Juda as they went, and did much harm. Then Amasias with his own Men set upon his Enemies, and slew ten thousand, and discomfited the rest. After which Victory, whereas he ought to have given all praise unto God for the same, he fell from God, and most vilely disho∣noured him in worshipping the Idols of the Edomites, de∣spising theThis was Amos the Prophet, whom Ama∣siah caused many times to be beat. His Son caused 2 Nail to be thrust into his temples, and being half dead. he was carried into his own country, where he soon after dyed, Cooper. Prophet's admonition sent unto him from the Lord. And so persisting in his obstinate mind and proud heart, he wrote to Joash King of Israel; commanding Him and his People (by a Parable of the Cedar-tree and Thistle) to be under his subjection. But Joash after de∣fiance gathered an Army, and went against Amasiah, whose Host being discomfited, Amasiah was taken and
brought to Joash, who carried him to Jerusalem, where (notwithstanding the Gates being opened to him) he caused four hundred Cubits of the Wall to be beaten down, and entred into the City that way, leading Ama∣siah with him as a Prisoner, and took all the treasure of the Temple, and of the Kings house, & caused it to be brought into Samaria. Afterward being delivered, his own People slew him. He reigned xxix. years, and Azariah his Son succeeded. Amasiah, the Strength of the Lord. Amnon, the Eldest Son of David, had a fair Si∣ster called Thamar,2 Sam. 3.14 cap. with whom he was so far in love, that he could eat no meat that did him good, but pined himself away marvellously for her sake. Then Jonadab (his Fathers Brothers Son) a friend and fa∣miliar of his, and a worldly wise man, perceiving Am∣non to be sore changed, and every day more and more, went to him and said: How happeneth this (Amnon) that thou being the King's Son, consumest thy self so away, and dost not tell me? Oh said Amnon, I am in love with Thamar, my BrotherThamar was Absa∣lom's Sister, both by Fa∣ther and Mo∣ther, and Amnons by the Fathers side only. Absalom's sister, and except I may have her company, I shall surely die. Now to further this wicked purpose of Amnon, here was a counseller ready at hand: I will tell thee (said Jona∣dsb) what thou shalt do, lay thee down upon thy Bed, and feign thy self sick, and when David thy Father cometh to visit thee, desire him to let Thamar thy Si∣ster come and dress thee such meat as thou hast a lust unto. Amnon did so, and when Thamar was come, and had dressed him meat and brought it into his Chamber, he commanded all to avoid, and never rested until he had (by force) gotten his pleasure: which done, he fell into such an exceeding hatred of Thamar, that he could not suffer her to be in his sight, but caused his servant to thrust her out of his house, and to bolt the doors after her. For this shameful incest of Amnon, Absalom two
years after at a Banquet, slew Him. Amnon, A People. Lot had a Son called Ammon,Gen. 19. which was born him of his youngest daughter, and of him came the Ammonites. Amon,2 King. 21. the Son of Manasses, was xxii. years old when he began his reign over Juda,2 Chron. 33. and walked not in the ways of the Lord, but gave himself more to wicked Idolatry, and worshipping of stinking Idols, than ever his Father did, and would never turn unto God. Where∣fore (at last) certain of his own Men conspired against him and slew him, which Conspirators the People of the Land (notwithstanding) put to death, and made Josiah his Son King in his stead. Amon, Faithful. Amos,Amos 1.2, 3, &c. was an Herdman or Shepherd, of a poor Town called Tekoa, and one of the Twelve Pro∣phets, which God raised up to admonish the Israe∣lites of their wickedness and Idolatry, and to threaten them with his Plagues and Punishments, if they did not repent. Read of his death in the story of Amasiah. Amos, a Burden. The Father of Jesse,Esay 1. David's Father, was called A∣mos, and there the word signifieth, Strong. Amram,Exod. 6. Numb. 26. the Son of Caath, the Son of Levy, took Jochebed his FathersThis kind of marriage was after in the Law for∣bidden. Le∣vit. 18. Sister to Wife, who bare unto him two Sons, Aaron and Moses, and also a Daughter called Miriam. He lived an hundred and thirty eight years. Amram, a mighty, or an high people, or a band of them. Amraphel,Gen. 14. was King of Shinar, and one of the four Kings, which fought against five other Kings in the Valley of Siddim, where he and his party had the Victory. Amraphel, Speaking destruction: or speaking secrets.
Amri,1 King. 16. was the Chief Captain and Governour of the whole Army of Elah the Son of Baasha King of Isra∣el. And lying at the siege of Gibbethon (a City of the Philistines) the whole Host there (hearing of the death of Elah) constituted Amri King in his stead: But the resi∣due of the Israelites, which abode at home and were not with Amri at the siege, made Tibni the Son of Ginath King. So that the People were divided and in great contention for their King, which continued for the space of three years, till Tibni chanced to dye, and then the whole multitude received Amri for their King, who be∣gan his reign in the xxxi. year of the reign of Asa King of Juda, and reigned most wickedly of all others before him xii. years, and dyed, leaving his Son Achab to suc∣ceed him. Amri, a Band, or handful, a power, or a bit∣ter and rebellious people. Anah, the Son of Zibeon,Gen. 36. as he sed and kept his Fathers Asses in the Wilderness, was the first that found out the monstrous generation of Mules, between the Asse and the Mare. He had a Sister also, called Anah, whose daughter Aholibamah was Wife to Esau the Son of Isaac. Anah, Afflicting, answering, or singing. Ananias, was a certain Man,Act. 5. who to be counted one of the Christian Religion, sold his possession (with his Wives consent) and (notwithstanding) kept away part of the price thereof, and brought the rest, and laid it down at the Apostles seet, whose dissembling hypocrisie being revealed unto Peter, he said unto him: Ananias, how is it that Satan hath filled thine heart that thou should∣est lye unto the Holy Ghost, and keep away part of the price of the possession? Pertained it not unto thee only, and after it was sold, was it not in thine own power? how is it that thou hast conceived this thing in thine
heart? Thou hast not lyed unto Men, but unto God. And when Ananias heard these words, he fell down and dyed. Ananias, the Cloud of the Lord. Ananias,Act. 9. the Disciple of Christ, dwelling at Da∣mascus, had a Vision appeared unto him, saying: Anani∣as, arise and go into the street which is called Streight, and seek in the house of Judas for one Saul of Tarsus: for behold he prayeth, and hath seen a Vision, a Man na∣med Ananias coming unto him, and putting his hands on him, that he might receive his sight. Then said Ana∣nias, Lord, I have heard by many of this Man, how much evil he hath done to thy Saints at Jerusalem, and that he hath authority from the High-Priests, to bind all that call upon thy name. Well (said he) go thy ways, for he is a chosen Vessel unto me, to bear my name be∣fore the Gentiles and Kings and the Children of Israel. For I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my names sake. Then Ananias went to Saul, and laid his hands on him, and said: Brother Saul, the Lord that appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And so by the hands of Anani∣as, Saul received his sight again. There was another Ananias,A. 23. who being High-Priest, commanded Paul to be smitten on the mouth, as he was answering for himself before the Council. Andrew,Matth. 4. John 6. a poor Fisherman, was called (with his Brother Peter) to be an Apostle. When Christ deman∣ded of his Disciples,Andrew suf∣fered Mar∣tyrdom in the City of Achaia. where they might buy Bread to satisfie the People that followed him; Andrew made an∣swer and said: There is a little Boy here, which hath five Barly Loaves and two Fishes, but what is that a∣mong so many? Andrew, Manly.
Andronicus, being a Man of authority and in great favour with Antiochus King of Syria, was left in Jew∣ry,2 Mac. 4. and made Lieutenant over the Jews until the re∣turn of the King, who was gone to pacifie a certain commotion made by the Tharsians and Mallacians. And in the mean time, being corrupted with bribes & rewards of that ungracious man Menelaus, to dispatch the good and godly man Onias, (whom he so hated) out of the way, he went to Onias, who for his safeguard had taken the benefit of Sanctuary, and with fair words per∣swaded him to come forth, binding himself with an oath, he should have no harm: And when he saw that Onias suspected him, he fell upon him incontinently, & without any regard of righteousness slew him. Whose innocent death so offended the People, that they made a grievous complaint of Andronicus to the King at his coming home, who caused that wicked murderer to be stripped out of his purple cloaths, and led most villanously thorow the City to the place where he had committed his ungra∣cious act, and to suffer a most shameful death. Androni∣cus, a Conquerer, or Victorer. Andronicus, the faithful Disciple of Christ,Rom. 16.7. to whom Paul sendeth commendations on this wise: Salute Andronicus and Junia my Kinsmen, and Fellow-prisoners with me, which are of note among the Apostles, and were in Christ before me. Aner, Mamre and Eschol were three Brethren,Gen. 14.13, &c. which (when Lot was taken Prisoner among the Sodomites, and carried away by Kedorlaomer, and other Kings that took his part) joyned themselves with Abraham, in the rescuing of Lot his Brothers Son; for the which their saithful assistance at that present, Abraham dealt liberal∣ly with them, in the parting of the spoil won at that Ex∣pedition. Aner, an Answer, or a song of the Candle, or light, or that which troubleth, or hurteth the Candle.
Anna,1 Sam. 1 cap. the Wife of Elkanab was long barren and without Child, which barrenness, her Companion and Mate Peninnah did daily cast in her teeth to her great re∣proach. Wherefore Anna was so full of heaviness (that God had made her such a railing stock) that she could eat no meat. And being thus tormented and troubled in her mind, she gat her into the Temple, making there her hearty prayers to God, to give her a Man child. And as she prayed, it fortuned Eli the Priest as he sat in the Temple, to mark her mouth, and perceiving her lips to move and no voice heard, thought she had been drun∣ken, saying: Thou Woman, how long wilt thou be drun∣ken? put away thy drunkenness from thee: Nay my Lord (quoth she) I am a Woman troubled in spirit, and have drunken neither Wine nor strong Drink, but pour out my Soul before the Lord; count not thine Handmaid to be a Daughter of Belial, for out of the abundance of my heaviness and grief have I spoken hitherto; and so desi∣ring Eli to pray for her, she departed chearfully home to her House, and shortly after conceived by Elkanah her Husband, and bare him a Son whose Name she called Samuel. And when she had brought up the Child, and weaned it, she prepared a sacrifice, and went to the Tem∣ple, presenting both it and her Child to Eli the Priest, putting him also in remembrance that she was the same Woman which stood before him (of late) and prayed unto God for that Child, and that now (according to her pro∣mise) she was come to dedicate him unto the Lord. And so (after praise and thanksgiving) she departed, lea∣ving the Child with Eli to minister in the Temple of God. And every year after would Anna make a little Coat for Samuel her Son, and bring it up, when sheOnce a year they accusto∣med to ap∣pear before the Lord with their Family. came with her Husband to offer the Yearly Sacrifice. And thus God took away her rebuke of barrenness, and blessed her with children, so that after Samuel, she
had three Sons more, and two Daughters. Anna, Gra∣cious, or Merciful. Anna,Tobit 2. the Wife of old Toby (her Husband being blind and in poverty) took weaving work of Women, and laboured sore for her living. And when (on a time) she sent home the work to the owners, one sent her a Kid, more than her wages which she had earned. And when Toby heard the Kid bleat, he said to Anna: From whence came that Kid? Is it not stollen? re∣store it to the owners again, for it is not lawful to eat any thing of theft. Then was Anna angry with Toby, and rebuked him, as one whose trust in God was all in vain. After this,5. it fortuned old Toby to send young Toby his Son, to the City of Rages to receive certain money, which (in his prosperity) he had lent to one Ga∣belus. Then Anna being full of heaviness for the depar∣ture of her Son, burst out and said to Toby: Oh what hast thou done? why hast thou sent our Son away? I would to God that money had never been required of us, but that we had been content with our poverty, and kept our Son at home: What ailed us to send him in∣to a strange Country, which was the only staff of our age, and comfort of our life, and the hope of our genera∣tion? Then said Toby, leave thy weeping, and be not dis∣comforted, for the Man that went with our Son is so faithful,10. that he will bring him to us again safe and sound. Yet could not Anna with this be perswaded, but would daily go out to the top of an Hill, and sit there to spie his coming. And when (at the last) she saw where he came a far of, she ran home with great rejoycing and told her Husband. And so waiting to receive her Son, she wept for joy when she saw him. Anna,Luke 2.6. the Daughter of Phanuel (of the Tribe of A∣ser) was a Prophetess, and had been married to an Hus∣band
seven years, and after continued a Widow four∣score and four years, serving God in the Temple with fasting and praying day and night And when Christ was brought into the Temple, she cameforth at that present, praising the Lord, and prophesied of that Child, to all them that looked for the redemption of Israel. Anna the Wife of Raguel, was Mother to Sara the Wife of young Toby. Annas,John 18.13. had the first examination of Christ, and sent him from him to Caiaphas his Son-in-law, who was High-Priest for that Year. Annas, Afflicting, or bringing low. Antiochus,1 Mac. 1. c. 6. c. 8. the great, being King of Syria, and of such puissance and strength, that he thought himself in∣vincible, was at last overcome of the Romans, and fain to relinquish to them all his interest in Europe and Asia, and to leave his Son Antiochus in Hostage, and so departed, being contented with those Countries that were left him,2 Mac. 1. till at last of a covetous mind, he went to Per∣side the chief City of Paersia, thinking there to have rob∣bed the Temple, and to have had great treasure therein. And as he himself (with a few more) was in the Temple about his business, the Priests at a privy door came in upon him, and cut him all to pieces, and cast him out to be devoured of the Birds and Fowls of the Ayr. Antiochus, For all agon, or Chariot. Antiochus Epiphanes,1 Mac. 1. the Son of Antiochus the great, being stablished in his Kingdom, warred against Ptolomy King of Egypt, until he had brought his Land in subjection. And having so good success there, he went a∣gainst Israel, and at last took and spoiled the City of Jerusalem, and robbed the Sanctuary of all the precious Jewels and treasure therein: subverted all the holy Laws
of God, compelling the Jews to worship Idols, and to do as the Heathen did in all things: he burned the Books of the Law, and whosoever had a Book of the Testa∣ment, or were found to be a favourer thereof, did suffer death.2 Mac. 9. Thus this ungracious and wicked subverter of all true religion and godliness, persecuted the true People of God, and so long persisted in his great tyranny, that God at last smote him with an incurable Disease in his Body, which was so eaten with Worms and Vermine, that they fell quick out of his flesh, whereof ensued so great a stink, that neither he himself, nor none that were about him, might abide the smell. And so this wicked Tormentor of others was justly recompenced with a miserable end. Antiochus Eupator, the Son of Antiochus Epi∣phanes,1 Mac. 6. being but young, and under the governance of Lysias, went into Jewry with a great Army to subdue the Jews, who so manfully resisted Antiochus, that he was fain (considering the decrease of his People, and the strength of the place besieged) to offer them peace, and to grant them liberty to live according to their own Laws, whose Covenants being received, the Jews came out of the Castle of Sion, to give place to Antiochus, who (notwithstanding his oath) when he saw the defence ther∣of, commanded the Walls round about, to be cast down and destroyed, and from thence departed to Antioch, where he fought with Philip, which was come out of Persia, and wan the City out of his hands. And lying there,1 Mac. 7. Demetrius the Son of Seleuchus came to Antioch, and took Antiochus and Lysias, and put them both to death. Antiochus, the Son of Alexander, being but a child,1 Mac. 11. was first under the governance of Emascuel the Arabi∣an, and removed from him, to the tuition of one Triphon,1 Mac. 13.3 of whom he was most traiterously murthered.
Antiochus,1 Mac. 15. the Son of Demetrius, for as much as Triphon had been his Fathers utter enemy, made a covenant of friendship with Simon the High-priest, and Prince of the Jews, that he might the better overcome Triphon, whom he persecuted and drove to the City of Dora, lying by the Sea side, which City he besieged with an hundred & twenty thousand Foot-men, and viii. thou∣sand Horsemen. And lying there, Simon sent him two thousand chosen Men, with Silver and Gold, and much furniture to help him. Who (notwithstanding his bond of love he had made with Simon before) refused now his friendship, and sell at defiance with him and all the Jews, and was ever after that their continual enemy. Antipas,Apoc. 2.13. was a faithful Martyr of Christ. Anti∣pas, For all, or against all. Antipater,1 Mac. 12. c. 14. the Son of Jason, first by Jonathas, and after by Simon, was sent Ambassador to Rome, to renew the old friendship between the Jews and Romans. Antipater, For the Father, or against the Father. Apame,3 Esd. 4. was Daughter to that famous King Bar∣tacus, and Concubine to a certain great King, who was of such power and might, that all Lands stood in awe of him. And whereas no man durst presume to lay hands upon this King, yet Apame sitting by his side upon the right hand, took off his Crown from his Head, and set it upon her own head, and smote the King with her left hand, who in the mean time did nothing but gape and look upon her: if she laughed upon him, he laughed, if she were angry, then he flattered, to win her favour again. Apame, Expelling, or driving forth. Apelles,Rom. 16.10. was a faithful Christian Brother, and one
(as it seemeth) that had sustained trouble for the Gospel sake. For Saint Paul sending salutations to the Chri∣stians at Rome, saith thus: Salute Apelles approved in Christ. Apelles, Expelling, or driving away. Apollonius, the Governour of Syria,1 Mac. 3. came a∣gainst Judas Machabeus, with a great Host of the Hea∣then, and in the end was slain. Whose Sword pleased Judas so well, that he kept it for a memory, and used it for his Weapon all the days of his life, in time of War. Apollonius, Undoing, or destroying. Apollonius, the Son of Thersa,2 Mac. 4. c. 5. Governour of Celosyria and Phinehas, (a Man set all upon Tyranny) was sent to Jerusalem against the Jews (whom he ha∣ted) with an Army of twenty thousand Men, and com∣manded by the King Antiochus, to kill all that were of perfect age, and to sell the Women Maidens, and Chil∣dren; who at his first coming to the City, made a shew of peace, and lay still till the Sabbath-day. And then (knowing the Jews would not break their Law to make resistance) he fell upon them, and did his commis∣sion with all extremity. Apollos, was an eloquent man, a Jew born at A∣lexandria,Act. 18.24. and well instructed, and had but as yet the first principles of Christian religion, which was the Baptism or doctrine of John only. The same being somewhat en∣tred in the way of the Lord, began to be fervent in the spi∣rit, and to speak boldly at Ephesus, where Aquila and Priscilla chanced to hear Him; and perceiving he was not fully instructed in the precepts of the Gospel, theyThis great learned and eloquent man disdained not to be taught of a poor Crasts∣man. took him home with them, and expounded unto him the way of the Lord more perfectly, which was the way to salvation. And when he was christened in the Name of Jesus, and had received the Holy-Ghost, he was desirous
to go into Achaia, where (at Corinth) he did valiantly set forth the Gospel, confounding the Jews with plain e∣vident Testimonies of Scriptures, that Jesus was the same Messias whom the Jews had so many hundred years looked for. Aquila was a certain Jew born in Pontus,Act. 18. cap. late∣ly come out of Italy with his Wife Priscilla to Co∣rinth, because the Emperour Claudius had command∣ed all Jews to depart from Rome. His Craft was to sow together Skins to make Tents and Pavillions withal. Paul (who was of the same occupation) when he came to Corinth, lodged in this Man's house, and wrought with him. And after a year and a half, they de∣parted from Corinth, and went together to Ephesus, where Aquila and Priscilla made their aboad. And remaining there behind Paul (who had taken his Journey to∣wards Jerusalem) it fortuned Apollos (an Alexandrian born) an eloquent Man and well learned, to come to E∣phesus, and preached Christ, so much as he had learned of him by John's Baptism, for more he knew not. And when Aquila and Priscilla had heard his preaching, and perceiving him not to be (as yet) fully instructed in the knowledge of Christ, they took him home with them and severally taught him more perfectly the mysteries of the Gospel. Aquila, an Eagle. Aran,Gen. 11.28. was the Son of Terah, Brother to Naher and Abraham, and Father to Lot, and the first Man that Scrip∣ture maketh mention of that (by the course of nature) died before his Father. Aran, an Hill, or hilly. Archelaus,Matth. 2.22. was the Son of Herod, King of the Jews. In whose time JosephThis King reigned ix. years over the Jews, and finally was banished into France, through his insolency with Glafira his Brother Alexanders widow, whom he had mar∣ried. Lanquet. returned out of Egypt with the Child Jesus, to go into the Land of Israel. But when he heard that Archelaus did reign in Jew∣ry
in his Fathers stead, fearing left he had succeeded in his Fathers cruelness, like as in his Kingdom, durst not go thither, but turned aside into the parties of Gali∣lee, and dwelt there in a City called Nazareth. Ar∣chclaus, a Prince of the People. Archippus, was theCol. 4.17. Instructor of the Colossians, and admonished by Paul, to take diligent heed to the office which was committed unto him, to perform it, whereof he should yield an account to the Lord at the last day. Archippus, the Chief, or Master of Horses. Arefna, look Ornan. Arioch, was King of Ellasar,Gen. 14.1, 9. and one of the four Kings that fought against Bera King of Sodom, and o∣ther four more in the Vale of Siddim, and the lesser num∣ber overcame the greater, and so took all the spoil of Sodom and Gomorrha, and went their ways. But being pursued by Abraham and his Confederates, they were all taken and slain. Arioch, Long, or tall, or fulness, or the drunkenness, or the lyar. Arioch, was Captain of Nabuchodonosor's Guard,Danicl 2. and being sent by the King, to destroy all the Wise men and Soothsayers in Babylon, because they could not inter∣pret his Dream, Daniel went to Ariech, and desired him a little to stay, until he had obtained of the King some leisure to shew unto Him the Interpretation of his Dream. Daniel's request being granted, and the thing revealed unto him by God; he (after thanks given unto God for the same) went to Arioch, and said: Destroy not the wise men of Babylon, but bring me before the King, and I shall shew him the Interpretation of his Vision. Then Arioch brought Daniel before the King in all hast, and said thus unto him: I have found a Man among
the children of Juda that were brought captives, that will declare unto the King, the Interpretation of his Dream. And so the wise men of Babylon were saved. Aristarchus,Act. 19.29.20.4.27.2. Col. 4.10. was a Thessalonian born, and one of Paul's companions, and in great hazard of his Life with him at Ephesus, through the sedition of Demetri∣us. But that overcome, he accompanied Paul into A∣sia, and so forth to Rome, where he was his Fellow-prisoner, and never shrunk from him. Aristarchus, The best Prince. Aristobulus, Mac. 1. King Ptolomies Schoolmaster, came of the Generation of the anointed Priests, unto whom the Jews which dwelt at Jerusalem, sent an Epistle, exhorting all the Jews which dwelt in Egypt, to give thanks and praises unto God, for the death of Antiochus, which had been so cruel unto them. Aristobulus,Rom. 16.10. of whom Paul maketh mention in his Epistle. Aristobulus, The best Counseller, or the best Coun∣sel. Arius,1 Mac. 12. was King of Sparta, which People were come of the Generation of Abraham, as the Jews were, wherefore the Jews called them Brethren.The Spar∣tians came of Abrahams seed. But in all the Wars the Jews had with the Heathen, they never sought the Spartians help, more than with Letters of Recommendation one from another of brotherly love, glad of each others prosperity. Arpharad,Judith 1. cap. King of the Medes, was so mighty a Prince,Of Arphaxad the Son of Sem, came the Chaldeans. Lanquct. that he subdued many People unto his Domini∣on. He built a City called Ecbatane, which for strength was thought unpossible to be won. But at last, he (putting too much confidence in his own power) was subdued of Nabuchodonosor King of the Assyrians, in the X. Year of
his reign. Arphaxad, That which healeth, or saveth. Arphaxad the Son of Shem,Gen. 11.12, 13. lived four hundred thirty eight years. This was a common name to the Kings of Persia, as Pharaob was to the Kings of Egypt, or Cesar to the Emperours.Artaxerxes, King of Persia,1 Esd. 7. cap. licensed Esdras to take his Companions the Children of Israel with him,3 Esd. 8. and to depart from Babylon to Jerusalem again, com∣manding all his Officers in all places, to aid Esdras, not only with the King's Treasure, but with whatsoever was needful to him, for the re-edifying of the Lord's Temple. Artaxerxes, The light, or maleaiction and curse. He that causeth silence: Also that maketh haste or speed: also the earnestness of rejoycing. Artaxerxes, King of Persia,3 Esd. 2. having a sore complaint made unto him by Belemus, Mithridates, Tabelius, Rathumus, Beeltethmus, and Semellius the Secretary, with other more, against the Jews for building of the Temple, wrote to them again on this wise: I have read the Epistle which ye sent unto me: therefore I comman∣ded to make diligent search, and have found that this City hath ever resisted Kings: that the same People are disobedient, and have caused much War, and that migh∣ty Kings have reigned in Jerusalem, which also have raised up Taxes of Celosyria and Phenice; wherefore I have commanded to forbid those Men, that they shall not build up the City, and heed to be taken that there be no more done in it, and that they proceed no further in those wicked works, for so much as it might be occa∣sion of trouble unto Princes. Artemas, was one of Paul's Disciples,Tit. 3.12. and lay with him at the City of Nicopolis, what time as Paul sent to Crete for Titus to come unto him, but not before he did send Artemas or Tychicus unto him to tarry in his stead, lest that Crete should be destitute of an Overseer.
Asa,1. King 15.8, 9. 2 Chron. 14, 1, &c. & 15 cap. His Mother is called Maacha, and is taken for his Grand∣mother. was the Son of Abijah, and began his reign o∣ver Juda, in the xx. year of the reign of Jeroboam. He honoured God: cleansed his Land of Whorekeepers, Idols, Images, Groves, and many other Abominations. Yea, he abhorred Idolatry so much, that he would not suffer it unpunished in his own Mother, but put her from her E∣state, because she had made an Idol in a Grove, which he burnt, and cast the Ashes into the Brook Cedron. And for his upright heart, the Lord sent peace and quietness in all his Land, by the space of ten years: In the which time of rest; he built Cities and Holds, and made his Realm very strong. At last, it fortuned the King of E∣thiopia to come against him with an Host of ten hundred thousand, and three hundred Chariots, whereas the o∣ther had but half so many. Then Asa putting his hope in God,The Prayer of Asa. made first his prayers to him on this wise: O Lord it is no hard thing with thee, to help either by many or by few, help us therefore, O Lord our God, for we trust to thee, and in thy name we go against this multitude, thou art the Lord our God, and no man shall prevail against thee. And after he had ended his prayer, he went and joy∣ned battel with his enemies, & the Lord overthrew them, and left not one undestroyed.2 Chron. 16. After this, it chanced Baasha King of Israel to invade him, of whom Asa was so afraid, that he fetcht out of the House of the Lord much Trea∣sure, and sent it to Benhadad King of Syria, desiring him to break his League with Baasha, that he might de∣part out of his Land. And when Baasha had broke up his Camp, and was gone to resist Benhadad (which had got divers of his Cities in Israel) the Prophet Hanani came to Asa, and said: Forasmuch as thou hast trusted in the King of Syria, and not in the Lord, therefore is the Host of Syria escaped thee. Had not the Ethiopians an ex∣ceeding great Host? and yet because thou did'st put thy trust in God, they were delivered into thy hand. For the
eyes of the Lord behold all the Earth, to strengthen them that are of perfect heart towards him: And now seeing thou hast done so foolishly, thou shalt from hence∣forth have War. The King hearingHere we see that it is not enough for a man to begin well, unless he continue to the end. this, was sore dis∣pleased with the Prophet, and (disdaining his admoniti∣on) sent him to Prison.He was before the Incarna∣tion 973 years. Cooper. Wherefore the Lord, to plague his rebellion smote him with a disease in his feet (which could not be cured by any Physician) whereof he dyed, after he had reigned years forty one. Asa, a Physician. Asahel, was the Son of Zervia, David's Sister.2 King. 2. His Brethren were Joab and Abishai. This man Asahel for his lightness on foot, is compared to a Roe buck. Read of his Death in the story of Abner. Asahel, God hath wrought. Asaph, the Son of Barachiah,1 Chron. 6.39.16.5. was one of the chief Singers among the Levites, appointed by David in the House of the Lord. Asaph, Gathering. Ashur. (the Father of Tekoah) was the Son of Hes∣ron,1 Chron. 2.25.4.5. the Son of Phares, the Son of Juda. His Mothers name was Abia, he had two Wives, and by them Chil∣dren. Asher, was the Son of Jacob.Gen. 30.12, 13, 1 Chron. 7. Num. 1. His Mothers name was Silpah. His brother of father and mother was Gad. He had four Sons, and one Daughter, of whom came many Noble men and Captains. Asher, Blessedness. Asyncritus,Rom. 16.14. was one of the faithful Congregation of Christ in Rome, unto whom (among other) Paul sendeth salutations in his Epistle, saying thus, salute A∣syncritus. Asyncritus, Peerless, or without Comparison. Assur, was the Son of Sem.1 Chron. 1.17. Lyra writeth upon
Gen. x. That Assur because he would not rebel against God with Nimrod in the building of the Tower of Ba∣bel, fled out of the Land of Shinar into a far Country, where he inhabited, which Countrey took its name of him, and was called Assyria, and there he builded a City, which afterwards was called Niniveh. Assur, Blessed, or Travelling. Asubah,1. King. 22.42. was Mother to Jehosaphat King of Juda, and daughter to Shilhi.2 Chron. 20. Asubah, Forsaken. Asubah,1 Chron. 2.18. Wife to Caleb the Son of Hesron, bare unto him three Sons: Jesher, Shobab, and Ardon. Athalia,2 King. 11. 2 Chron. 22. Athalia in the 2 King. ca. 8. is called both the daughter of Achab, and the daughter of Amri, which (saith Lyra) is meant thus: After the death of Amri her na∣tural Father, she was brought up with Achab her Brother, and so in pro∣cess called his daughter, or else by im∣mitating his manners in all kind of Ido∣latry. was the daughter of Amri, and wife to Jo∣ram King of Juda. When Joram died, her Son Ahazi∣ah succeeded, whom she enticed to all wickedness, and after his death she ruled, and killed all the rest of the seed of Joram, only Joash excepted, which was stollen away, and hid from her. And when she had ruled the Land (most cruelly) vi. years, In the vii. year, Joash was brought forth by Jehojada the Priest, and proclai∣med King: She hearing that, ran into the Temple of the Lord with her cloaths rent, crying out treason, trea∣son. But at the commandment of Jehojada, the Cap∣tains and Souldiers took her out of the Temple, and slew her. Athalia, Time for the Lord. Azariah, the Son2 King 15.1, &c. of Amaziah King of Juda, began his reign in the xxvii. year of Jeroboam King of Israel, and was 16. years old when he was made King. And so long as he gave ear to Zacharias the Prophet, and walked uprightly, so long did the Lord prosper him with great Victories both of the Philistines and Arabians, and made the Ammonites also tributaries unto him. HeAzariah, is in the same Chapter called also Ʋzziah. repaired Jerusalem. He loved husbandry well, and had great
plenty of Cattel. At length he became so mighty, that in his strength his heart arose to his destruction. For in his pride, he went into the Temple of the Lord to burn Incense, which although he seemed to do of a zeal and good intent, yet forasmuch as he usurped the Priests Of∣fice, he was justly resisted of Azariah the Priest, and plagued of God, who smote him with such a Leprosie, that he went out of the Temple a Leper, and so remain∣ed all the days of his life. He raigned LII. years, and was buried in a part of the same Field where his Prede∣cessors lay, but not in the same Sepulchres, because he was a Leper. Azaria, Help of the Lord. B. BAAL, the Son of Reaia, was a Prince of the Reu∣benites,1 Chron. 5.5. andIn the days of Pekab, King of Israel. carried away with other his Kinred into the Land of Assyria, by Tiglath Pileser, King of the Assyrians. Baal, an Idol, or a Ruler.2 Kings 15. Baanah, with his Brother Rechab,2 Sam. 4. cap. (the Sons of Rimmon) were two Captains in the Host of Ishbosheth King of Israel, who (when Abner their chief Captain was dead) went into the House of Ishbosheth, seeming (saith Lyra) they had gone to fetch Wheat, for the King (saith he) had great store of Wheat, which he sold to Mer∣chants a-far off, wherefore these two disguised them∣selves like Merchants that came to buy, and so entring into the House, they found where their Lord and Ma∣ster lay upon his Bed (in the heat of the day) fast a-sleep,There is nothing so vile and dan∣gerous which the wicked will not en∣terprise, in hope of lucre and favour. and slew him, and took his head, and carried it to Da∣vid, thinking for the same to have had a great reward: But for their most shameful and trayterous act, they were both put to death, and their Quarters hanged over the Pool in Hebron. Baanah, In affliction. Baasha, the Son of Ahijah,1 King. 15.27, &c. 16.1, &c. conspired against Nadab King of Israel, and reigned in his stead. In the third
year of Asa King of Judah, began Baasha to reign over Israel, and walked most wickedly in all the ways of Jeroboam,1 King 10.14. whose House and Posterity (notwithstanding)God stirred up one Tyrant to punish the wickedness of another. he utterly destroyed, and left not one alive, for so it was prophesied, that God would stir him up one (which was this Baasha) for that purpose. And now for as much as Baasha (whom God had exalted even out of the dust) would still maintain Jeroboam's Idolatry, and cause his People to sin, he sent him word by the Prophet Jehu, that as he had rooted out the whole Posterity of Je∣roboam, so should his be served likewise. Great War was between Baasha and Asa King of Juda.2 Chron. 16. And for to stop the passage of Juda, that none should pass out nor in safely, Baasha went to build a strong hold called Rama, which he was fain (at length) to leave unfini∣shed, and to lose all his cost and pains, to go against Benhadad, which had broken covenant with him. He reigned xxiv. years, and was buried in Thirza, which was a place where the King remained, leaving Ela his Son to succeed him, in whose days the foresaid Pro∣phecy of the rooting out his Posterity, took place. Baasha, in folding together, or pressing together, or to search out and take away. Bachides,1 Mac. 7.9 cap. was a Man of great power in the Domi∣nion of Demetrius the Son of Seleucus. And being the Kings faithful friend, he sent him with a great Host against Judas Machabeus to revenge him of the injury he had done unto his People, and in the end slew him. Af∣ter whose death, many of the wicked Jews turned to Bachides, whereof he made some Lords and Rulers of the Land, which (of envy) outed the friends of Judas, and brought them into great vexation and trouble. When Bachides had given this overthrow to Judas, he sought how he might kill Jonathas also, whom the Jews had appointed in his Brothers room. And meeting with Jo∣nathas
about the border of Jordan, there was a great Battel fought between them, in the which Bachides lost a thousand of his men. After which conflict, Bachi∣des (by occasion of Alcimus the wicked Priests death) de∣parted for that time, so that Jonathas lay at rest two years after, till a sort of ungodly men conspired against him, how they might bring Bachides upon him una∣wares; which matter being between them and him con∣cluded, Bachides returned with a great power, but ere he came, Jonathas had gotten knowledge of the Treason, and put certain of the chiefest Conspirators to death. Then, when Bachides came, and had besieged the City of Bethbessen long, and saw he was not able to resist the power of Jonathas, he was marvellously displeased with those wicked counsellers, which had caused him to travail in vain, and made him ready to depart again, whereof Jonathas having knowledge, he sent Ambassa∣dors to Bachides, to make peace with him, to the which he gladly consented and restored to Jonathas all his Pri∣soners, which he had taken in the Land of Juda, and so re∣turned home, and never vexed Israel more. Bachides, One that holdeth of Bacchus, or a drunkard. Balaam. the Son of Beor (or Bosor,Num. 22. cap. as S. Peter saith) was a covetous Prophet, and (for lucre sake) went to the King of Moab, to curse the Host of Israel, which thing God would not suffer him to do, but turned his curse into a blessing. Yea,2 Pet. 2.15. he was so far overcome with covetousness (saith S. Peter) that he could not see his iniquity, when the tame Beast speaking in Man's voice, rebuked him, and forbad his madness.Num. 31.8. He caused the Israelites through his counsel to commit Whoredome with the Daughters of Moab, and to worship Baal Pe∣or their false God, and was slain among the Midianites, whom Israel subdued. Balaam, The ancient of the People.
Balac,Num. 22. & 23 cap. the Son of Zippor King of Moab, was so a∣fraid of the Children of Israel, which were pitched in the fields of Moab, and all about his Country, that he thought he could never be able to overcome them, unless they were cursed of God: wherefore he sent for Balaam the Prophet, promising to promote him to honour and digni∣ty, so that he would come and curse his enemies. And when the Prophet was come, Balac brought him up to the high place of Baal, where he might see and discern the uttermost parts of the Israelites, that he might be sure to curse them all. But when the Prophet went about his purpose: God would not suffer him to curse his People, but rather to bless them. Then said Balac: Did not I send for thee to curse this People, and why hast thou bles∣sed them? I told thee (quoth Balaam) that I could speak nothing, but that which the Lord would have me to speak. Well, said Balac, I will bring thee where thou shalt see but a portion of them, and not all, I pray thee curse that part for my sake: But notwithstanding, the Prophet blessed them again. Then said Balac, Neither curse them, nor bless them at all. Well yet, quoth Balac,The wick∣ed imagine of God, that that which he will not grant in one place, he will do it in another. I will bring thee once more to another place, peradventure it shall please God thou mayst curse them there for my sake: But when he saw in no place the Prophet would curse the People of God, he was angry with him, and said: I sent for thee to curse mine enemies, and thou hast blessed them now three times, therefore get thee quickly out of my sight, for the Lord hath kept thee back from promotion; and so he departed. Balac, In wrapping, or destroying, or with him that licketh. Balthasar,Dan. 5. cap, was the Son of Nabuchodonosor, and the last King of Babylon. This Prince (on a time) made a great Banquet to all his Lords and great Estates, in the which he so abused the Holy Vessels of the Temple of the
Lord (which his Father had brought from Jerusalem) making them common Vessels for all his Guests to drink in, that God was sore displeased with him. And as he sate at his Banquet, praising his Gods of Gold, Silver, Cop∣per, Iron, Stone, and Wood, he saw the Palm of an Hand write upon the Wall before him, which thing so disquieted him, that all the Joynts of his Body shook. And being in that great anguish, he sent for all the Char∣mers and Conjurers in Babylon, to know the meaning thereof, but none of them all could read it, neither yet tell what it meant. Then was the King so sore afraid, that his colour began to change, and his Body to be sore vex∣ed, for the which the Lords and all the Estates present were sore opprest with heaviness, to see the King in that case. Then the oldShe was Nabuchodo∣nosor's Wife, which for her age, was not before at the feast, but came thither when she heard these strange news. Queen his Mother (hearing of all that was happened) came up to the Feast and cheared the King, bidding him to take no thought for the matter, so long as Daniel was in his Kingdom, Send for him (quoth she) and he will tell thee what the Writing mea∣neth. Then was Daniel sent for. And being come, he told the King, that forasmuch as he neither remembred the fall of his Father, who for his pride and high stomach, was turned from the shape of a Man to the shape of a Beast for certain years, neither would submit his heart, but magnifie himself above the Lord of Heaven, and had abused the Vessels of the house of God, and set his love upon Idols (which neither heard, saw, nor under∣stood) more than upon God, in whose hand consisted his breath and all his ways, therefore had God sent this hand, in token of his great displeasure towards him. And these be the words (said Daniel to the King) which the hand hath written: Mene: Tekel: Peres. And this is the meaning: Mene, God hath numbred thy King∣dom, and brought it to an end. Tekel, Thou art weighed in the Balance, and art found too light. Peres, Thy Kingdom is dealt in parts, and given to the Medes and
Persians. And the same night was Balthasar slain, and his Kingdom removed to Darius King of Media, whose Sister was Balthasar's Mother. Balthasar, Without Treasure, or searcher of Treasure. Balthemus, or Beeltethmus, look Belemus. Banajah,2 Sam. 8. ult. 20.23. or Bananiahu, the Son of Ichojada was a valiant Man, and Ruler over theThe Che∣rethites and Pelethites, were as the King's Guard, and had charge of his person. Cherethites and Pe∣lethites. He slew two strong Men in the Country of Moab, and slew a Lyon in the midst of a Pit, in the time of Snow. He sought also with an Egyptian (whose Spear was like a Weaver's Beam) and slew him with his own Weapon. And for these Acts and such like, he gate him a Name among the Worthies. He was one of Da∣vid's Counsellers, and proclaimed Solomon King, at David's commandment. He slew Adonijah at Solo∣mon's commandment,1 King. 2.25-29-35. and also Joab, into whose room he was promoted. Banajah, in the answer in affliction, or in the song. Barnabas,Act. 4.36. (called also Joses) was a Levite, born in the Country of Cyprus, who of a liberal mind, sold his Land in Cyprus, and brought the whole price thereof, and laid it down at the Apostles feet, with whom he was of such credit,Act. 9. that when he brought Paul unto them (after his conversion) and declared how boldly he had done at Damascus in the Name of Jesus, they recei∣ved him as a Brother, of whom before they were afraid. This Man being full of the Holy-Ghost and faith,11 22, &c. was sent to Antioch to Preach, and to stablish them in the Faith of Christ. From thence he departed to Tarsus to seek Saul, and brought him to Antioch, where they two con∣tinued together one year. And because of a great dearth which was prophesied to be thorow out all the World, the Antiochians made a Collection for the poor Brethren
in Jewry, which they sent by the hands of Barnabas and Paul, at whose return to Antioch again, they brought a Disciple with them called John Mark.13.5. After this (by the mind of the Holy Ghost) they were sent to preach among the Heathen, where (by the power of God) they did wonders, and turned many to Christ. And be∣ing taken (at Lystra) for Gods,14.11, &c. because (God working in them) they had made a Lame man to go, they rent their cloaths, and would not suffer themselves to be called by that Name. Finally,15.37, &c. when Barnabas and Paul had been long Companions together and Workers in the Lord's Vineyard, they chanced to fall at variance, about one John Mark, who had been their Minister before: And because Barnabas would now in this Journey, (go∣ing to visit their Brethren again) have had him with them, and Paul refused him, because he forsook them at Pamphilia, the dissention was so sharp, that the one brake from the other. And so Barnabas took Mark with him, and sailed into Cyprus, his own Native-Country. Barnabas, the Son of Consolation. Barabbas, was a notable Robber,Matth. 27.16. Matth. 15.7. Luk 23.18, 19. John 18. ult. which for a cer∣tain Insurrection he had made, and in the same commit∣ted Murther, was cast in Prison. It was a custome a∣mong the Jews, to have a Prisoner delivered unto them at the Feast of Easter: wherefore when Pilate sat in Judg∣ment upon Jesus, he asked of the Jews whether they would have Barabbas or Jesus: and they (by the coun∣sel of the High Priests) said, Barabbas. And so was the Thief and Murtherer delivered, and the Innocent put to death. Barabbas, the Son of Confusion. Barsabas,Act. 1.29. (sirnamed Justus) was one of the two Disciples appointed to be chosen in the room of Judas the Apostle. And when the lots were cast, the lot fell on Matthias his fellow. Barsabas, the Son of Returning,
or of Converting. Bartholomew,Matth. 10.3. Mar. 3.18. Luk. 6.14. was one of the twelve Apostles. Bartholomew, the Son of him that suspendeth waters. The other Evangelists mention two, but Mark nameth him that was most known.Bartimeus,Mar. 10.46. the Son of Timeus, was a certain blind begger, which sate begging by the high-way side, of the people as they went by: And when he heard Jesus of Nazareth pass that way, he began to cry and say: Jesus the Son of David have mercy upon me; and the People spoke to him to hold his peace, but the more he was rebuked, the more he cryed. Then being called and comforted of the Apostles, he threw away his Cloak for joy, and came to Jesus, who demanded of him what he would have him to do: Master, said he, that I may have my sight and see. Go thy way (said Jesus) thy faith hath saved thee; and by and by this blind Bartimeus received his sight and followed Jesus. Bartimeus, a Blind son: or the son of blindness. Baruch,Jer. 36. cap. the Son of Neriah, wrote in a Book (at the mouth of Jeremy the Prophet, as he did indite) all the curses against Juda and Israel, which Book he read first to the Common-people, and after to the Rulers, who be∣ing astonied at the words thereof, caused Baruch to hide himself out of the way, till they had shewed the Book un∣to Jehojakim the King, who (when he had heard three or four Leaves thereof) caused the Book to be cut in pieces, (notwithstanding the great intreaty thatThe godly among the Princes gave this counsel. certain of his Lords made for the preservation of the same) and cast it in the fire and burnt it. Then Baruch wrote another Book at the mouth of Jeremy, wherein was much more added than was before. Baruch, Blessed. Bathuel,Gen. 22.23.28.2. was the Son of Nahor, his Mothers name was Milca, the Daughter of Aran, Brother to Nahor and
Abraham. This Bathuel, was Father to Rebecca and Laban. Bathuel, the Son begetting of God, the Measure of God. Bela, the Son of Beor reigned in Edom,Gen. 36.33. 1 Chron. 1.44. after whose death, Jobab the Son of Serah succeeded him. Bela, Swallowing down, or destroying. Bela, the Son of Benjamin, whose Sons were,Num. 26.40. Ard and Naaman, and in the first Book of Chronicles 7. these are said to be the Sons of Bela: Ozban, Ozi, Oziel, Jerimoth and Iri. And in the 8. Chapter, these: Adar, Gera, Abiud. Belemus, Mithridates, Tabelius, Rathumus, Be∣eltethmus,3 Esd. 2. and Semellius the Secretary, with other more, wrote a sore complaint to Artaxerxes King of Per∣sia against the Jews, which were a building of the Tem∣ple at Jerusalem, through the which they were com∣manded to cease, and to build no more. Read Artax∣erxes and Rathumus. Benhadad, the Son of Tabrimon King of Syria,1 King. 15.18, &c. made a covenant with Baasha King of Israel, which (for lucre sake) he brake at the request of Asa King of Juda, and turned his Host against the Cities of Israel, to the great displeasure of Baasha. This Benhadad was a mighty Prince, and glorying much in his own power, sent messengers to Achab King of Israel, commanding him to send his Silver. Gold, Wives, Children, and all that he had unto him, or else he would come and de∣stroy him, which thing being denyed him, he came a∣gainst Achab with xxxii. Kings in his company, and be∣sieged him in Samaria. And while he trusted too much in his great strength and multitude, and was banquet∣ting with the Kings that came with him in their Pavili∣ons,
without any regard of the small power of the Isra∣elites, the Host of Samaria issued suddenly out of the Ci∣ty, and came so couragiously against the Syrians, that they put them all to flight, and slew a great number of them. Then the Syrians which were escaped, said to Benhadad: The Gods of the Hills be their Gods, and therefore have they now gotten the better of us: But let us sight once more with them in the Plain, and thou shalt see us have the better of them. Then Benhadad ga∣thered his Host together, so many as filled the whole Country, and Israel pitched before them like two little Flocks of Kids, and so stood the two Hosts one against the other vii. days, and in the seventh day, they joyned Battel, in the which, an hundred thousand of the Syrians were slain, and the rest fled to the City of Aphek, where they began to make a Wall without the City for their de∣fence, which building fell upon them, and killed xxvii. thousand more, whereof the King was in such a fear, that he fled from Chamber to Chamber, to find out a se∣cret place, to hide himself in, to whom his servants went, and said: O King, we have heard say, that the Kings of Israel be merciful Kings, let us therefore put Sackcloth about our Loins, and Ropes about our Necks, and go and humble our selves before Achab, and see if he will save thy life. Benhadad did so, and was pardoned, and never troubled Israel more in Achab's days. But afterward in another King's days, he came again, and besieged Samaria so long, till an Asses head was sold for fourscore silver pence, and the fourth part of a Cab of Doves dung for five sicles, and till Women were con∣strained to eat their own Children. Finally, Benha∣dad fell sick, and sent his servant Hasael to Elizeus the Prophet (which was come to Damascus) to know whe∣ther he should recover his Disease or no, and having his answer of the Prophet, he returned and slew his Ma∣ster Benhadad, as in the story of Hazael ye shall see
how. Benhadad, the Son of a Sound, or of Noise and Crying. Benjamin was the youngest Son of Jacob,Gen. 35.18, &c. Of the Sons of Benjamin. Read Gen. 46.21. his Mother was Rachel, who dyed in travail, and therefore called his name Benoni, the Son of sorrow: But Ja∣cob his Father called him Benjamin, Son of the right hand.1 Chron. 7 & 8. His Brothers name (of Father and Mother) was Joseph, who loved Benjamin above all the rest of his other Brethren, as in his story appeareth. Benjamin, Son of the right hand. Berjesus,Act. 13.8. (which by interpretation is as much to say, as the Son of Jesus) was a Jew born, and a great Sorcerer, which Name he had taken upon him, to deceive the People, whereas his right name was Ely∣mas, which word in the Syrians Language betokeneth an Enchanter, and a false Prophet also. This false Sor∣cerer was got into the City of Paphos, and there being crept into favour with Sergius Paulus, Ruler of the Countrey, withstood the Doctrine of Barnabas and Paul, seeking by all means to turn the Rulers heart from the Faith in Christ. But Paul (being full of the Holy Ghost) perceiving the devilish and subtile craft of this Sorcerer, looked stedfastly upon him and said: O full of all subtilty and mischief, the child of the Devil, and enemy of all righteousness, wilt thou not cease to pervert the streight ways of the Lord? Now therefore behold, the hand of the Lord is upon thee, and thou shalt be blind, and not able to see the Sun for a sea∣son. And when Paul had pronounced these words, the Enchanter was stricken with blindness, so that he (as one amazed) wandred up and down, seeking for some Man to lead him by the hand. Berjesus, a Sorcerer, or Conjurer.
Berzillai was a Gileadite born,2 Sam. 17.27. who considered the necessity of David so much, being fled out of his own Realm, for fear of his own Son Absalom, into the Wilderness of Mahanaim, that he brought all things ne∣cessary for Beds, Meat, Drink, and Cloth (out of Ro∣glim) to refresh him and his Men, and provided so for him, all the while he lay there, that he lacked nothing, and at his return again, he helped also, to convey both the King and all his Men over Jordan. Then David seeing the great kindness of Berzillai, was much desirous to have him home with him to Jerusalem, promising that all the days of his life, he should eat and drink with him at his own Board, and fare no worse than he fared. To whom Berzillai (being a very old Man) said: O my Lord, I am a Man of four-score years of age, and cannot discern between good and evil, neither yet tast any thing that I do eat or drink, wherefore if I should then go with my Lord the King, I should be but a bur∣then unto him: Therefore I beseech thee, let thy servant turn back again, that I may dye in mine own Coun∣try, and be buried in the Grave of my Father: But here is thy servant Chimeam my Son, let him go with my Lord, and do unto him whatsoever it shall please thee. And so David and Berzillai kissed each other, and depar∣ted, but Chimeam went with David, who did not only recompence his Fathers kindness in him so long as he lived, but at the day of his death, declared to Solomon his Son, the great fidelity he had found with Berzil∣lai in the time of his exile, charging him therefore to shew no less favour to the Sons of Berzillai (for their Fathers sake) than ever he himself had done. Berzillai, Made of Iron, or as hard as Iron. Bethsheba was the Daughter of Eliam,2. Sam. 11.3. and Wife to Urias, which was with Joab in the King's Wars. On a
time as Bethsheba was washing her self in her privy Garden alone, it chanced King David to look out at a Window in his Palace, and saw her, whose beauty so ravi∣shed the King, that (forthwith) he sent for the Woman, and committed adultery with her, and so sent her home again. Then (shortly after) she perceiving her self with child, sent the King word thereof, who then, partly to hide his own fault, and partly to save the Woman from danger of the Law, sent for Urias to come home. But when David saw that Urias would not company with his Wife Bethsheba, he returned him back again to Jo∣ab with a Letter, which caused Urias quickly to be dis∣patched out of his life, after whose death, Bethsheba be∣came David's Wife, and brought forth the child conceiv∣ed in adultery, which lived not long, but dyed. After that,12.24. she conceived again, and brought forth Solomon. Lastly, when David was fallen into extreme age, and that she saw Adonijah the Son of Agith begin to aspire to the King∣dom of his Father yet living, she went (by the counsel of Nathan the Prophet, who had taught her her Lesson) unto David her husband. And making her humble obeysance unto the King as he sate in his Chamber, and Abishag the Shunamite ministring unto him, he said unto her, what is the matter? She answered, my Lord, thou swarest by the Lord thy God unto thine Handmaid, saying, as∣suredly Solomon thy Son shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my Seat. And behold now is Adonijah King, and thou my Lord the King knowest it not. He hath offer∣ed Oxen, fat Cattel, and many Sheep, and hath called all the Kings Sons, and Abiathar the Priest, and Joab the Captain of the Host: But Solomon thy servant hath he not bidden. And now my Lord, O King, the eyes of all Israel wait on thee, that thou shouldest tell them who ought to sit on the Seat of my Lord the King after him: for else when my Lord the King shall sleep with his Fathers, I and my Son Solomon shall be sinners.
The Queen had no sooner done speaking, but the Pro∣phet Nathan came and confirmed her words. Where∣upon the King assured Bethsheba, that Solomon her Son should be that day proclaimed to reign in his stead. The Queen then humbling her self with thanks, desi∣red of God that her Lord King David might live for e∣ver. Look more in the history of Adonijah. Bethsheba, The seventh daughter, or the daughter of an Oath. Bezaleel,Exo. 31.2.35.30.36, 37. & 38. cap. the Son of Uri of the Tribe of Juda, and Aholiab of the Tribe of Dan, were two cunning Work∣men, most specially endued with the Spirit of God, to work all manner of curious work that was to be wrought in Gold, Silver, Brass, Wood, Stone, or with Needle∣work, so that by these two, the Tabernacle of witness, with all things pertaining thereunto, was most artifi∣cially made. Bezaleel, in the shadow of God. Bilha,Gen. 29.29.30.3.35.25. was a young Damosel, which served Laben the Father of Rachel, and when Rachel should be mar∣ried to Jacob, Laban gave Bilha his Maid, to Rachel his Daughter to be her servant. And when Rachel per∣ceived she could bear Jacob no children, she gave Bil∣ba her Maid unto him to be his Wife, who conceived by Jacob, and brought him forth two Sons, the one Dan, and the other Naphtali. Bilha, Old, or fading. Birsha,Gen. 14.2. was one of the four Kings that fought a∣gainst five other Kings in the Vale of Siddim. Birtha, in evil, or in iniquity, or condemned, or a son that looketh back. Read Arioch. Boaz,Ruth 2, 3, 4. the Son of Salmon, was a great rich Man, dwelling in a City called Bethleem, within the Land of Juda. Who on a time going to the Fields to look upon his Reapers, and finding there a young Damosel a glean∣ing,
demanded of his Workmen what she was: To whom answer was made, she was a stranger come with Naomi out of the Country of Moab. Then went Boaz to the Maid and said: Hearest thou my Daugh∣ter?Here is a no∣table example for all rich Farmers which be so unmerciful, that they will not suffer their needy neigh∣bour to glean in their ground, whereas Boaz was so merciful to this stran∣ger, whose Nation were enemies to God's People. go to no other Field a gleaning (I charge thee) so long as Harvest time endureth, but to mine: tarry here by my Maidens, and gather as much as thou wilt, and spare not, for no Man shall lett thee, neither hurt thee. And when thou art hungry and a thirst, go with my Mai¦dens, and eat and drink such as they have, for they shall not deny thee. And so departing from her, he went to his Men servants, commanding them to intreat her gently, and to let fall some handfuls on the ground (for the nonce) for her to take up without shame. Now after this, it chanced Boaz to have knowledge, that this young Damosel was his Kinswoman, and that it was his lot to marry her, which he was well content to do, consi∣dering her to be a Woman of good report, and of much vertue. But yet, for as much as he knew another to be more near of Kin to her than he, he could not defraud him of his right: therefore to know what he would do in this matter, he went and called his Kinsman before the Congregation, and said: Sir, we have here a Kins∣woman lately returned out of the Land of Moab, one Naomi, and she will sell a piece of Land, which was our Brother Elimelech's: If thou be disposed to buy it, do: if not, then tell me, for there is none to challenge it, save thou, and I next unto thee. Then said he to Boaz, I will purchase it. Well (said Boaz) look what day thou buyest the Land of Naomi, thou must also takeHe would have the Land; but not the Woman. Ruth the Moabite to Wife, to raise up the Name of the dead upon his Inheritance. Then he (revoking his word a∣gain) said that he could not purchase it, for marring of his own Inheritance. Therefore take thou my right, and purchase it, and so drew off hisThe manner of purchasing. Shoo, and gave it to Boaz, for that was the custome of old in Israel, con∣cerning
purchasing and changing of Inheritance, to pluck off his Shoo, and give it to his Neighbour, in wit∣ness that the thing between them was truly bought and sold. Then Boaz having his Kinsman's shooe, said unto the People: ye are witnesses all this day that I have bought all that was Elimelech's, and all that pertained to his two SonsChilion, perfect, or all like a Dove. Chilion and Mahlon of the hand of Na∣omi, and also have purchased Ruth the Maobite, the late Wife of Mahlon to be my Wife, to raise up the Name of the dead upon his Inheritance, that his Name be not put out among his Brethren: And all the People witnessed the same, praying unto the Lord for Ruth, to make her as fruitful, as he did both Rachel, Leah, and Thamar. And so Boaz married Ruth, who in process conceived, and bare him a Son called Obed. Boaz, in Power, or strength. C. CAATH was the Son of Levi,Exod. 6.18. 1 Chron. 6.1, 2. and had four Sons, whereof the Eldest was Amram, the Fa∣ther of Moses and Aaron. He lived 133. Years. Ca∣ath, A Congregation. Cain was the first Son that Adam and Eve brought forth between them,Gen. 4.1, &c. and of an unhappy disposition, gi∣ven to all ungraciousness. He was the first tiller of the ground, and would always offer the worst and the vi∣lest of the fruits of the Earth unto God. Wherefore the Lord had no respect to his offering. And because God preferred his Brother Abel's offering before his, he was so stirred with malice and envy against him, that he fell upon him in the Fields and slew him. Wherefore the Lord promised to withdraw the increase of the Ground from Gain, and so being in desperation, he wandred about like a Vagabond in every corner, with much fear and trem∣bling, lest any Man should kill him, and at lastLyra saith, that as La∣mech was hunt∣ing in the fields, his ser∣vant spyed Cain where he lay hid in a bush, and (thin∣king it had been a beast) pointed his Master unto him, who shot off his Arrow, and slew him. La∣mech
slew him. Cain, A possession. Caiaphas, was Son-in-law to Annas,John 18 cap. and the High-Priest in the time of Christ's apprehension, of whom he prophesied, that it was expedient for one Man to dye, rather than all the People should perish. Which thing he spake not of himself, but God made him (at that time) even as he made Balaam, to be an Instrument of the Ho∣ly Ghost. And Christ being sent from Annas to him (bound) to be examined, was so carried from him to Pi∣late, that he by the Temporal Laws might judge him to death. Caiaphas, a Searcher. Caleb was the Son of Jephunneh (otherwise called Kenes) of the Tribe of Juda, and one of those whom Mo∣ses sent out to search the Land of Canaan,Numb. 13. and 14 cap. what manner of Country it was, at the which time of going out, he was about the age of xl. years. And when he and his com∣pany had viewed the Land, and were returned home a∣gain, certain of the Explorators made an evil report to their Brethren of that good Land, saying it was a Country of strong and fierce People, and such a Land as did eat up the Inhabiters thereof, and with like perswasions made them both astonished and afraid, and to murmur and grudge against Moses and Aaron, saying they would make them a Captain, and go into Egypt again. Then Caleb and Joshua, seeing their Brethren so discom∣fited, rent their cloaths for sorrow, and said: Oh dear Brethren, be ye not discouraged at these false surmised tails, neither yet rebel against the Lord, for we have seen the Land as well as they that have discouraged you, and know it to be a better Land than they report, a Land that floweth with Milk and Hony: And as for the People therein, fear them not, for they be but Bread for us, their shield is departed from them, and God is with us, therefore pluck up your hearts, and fear not. With
these, and the like comfortable sayings, Caleb and Je∣shua withdrew the fury of the multitude (which were rea∣dy to destroy them) and also ceased their murmuring, which murmuration of the People so grieved the Lord, that he swore to Moses, that not one of them all should see that good Land, save Caleb and Joshua, although their children should see it: But first (said God to Moses) they shall wander in the Wilderness Forty Years, and suffer for their FathersWhich is their infide∣lity and dis∣obedience. whoredome, until their Fathers Carkasses be wasted, a Year for a Day, according to the number of days in searching the Land, which was for∣ty days. And because Caleb followed the Lord conti∣nually, God swore to Moses, that Caleb and his Seed should inherit that Land, which came so to pass, for after xlv. years,Josh. 14, 10, 11. Caleb (then being at the age of lxxxv. years, and as lusty as he was when Moses sent him first to search the Land) required of Joshua his Heritage, who ap∣pointed out unto him, the City of Hebron with the Countries thereabout, out of the which City he drove out the three Sons of Anak.Joshua 15.14. Judg. 1.13. This Caleb had a younger Brother called Othoniel, to whom he gave his Daughter Achsah to Wife, for taking of a certain City called Ki∣riathsepher. Caleb, as a Hart. Carpus,2 Tim. 4.13. was a certain godly Man dwelling at Croada, with whom Paul left his Cloak with cer∣tain Books, which he desired Timothy to bring with him, when he came to him again. Carpus, Fruit, or fruitful. Cendebius,1 Mac. 15. cap. 16. was Captain-General of Antiochus's Host. And when he had done much harm in the Land of Jewry, and built up Cedron, and fortified it with Men of War, he was (at the last) by the Sons of Si∣mon discomfited, and put to flight. Cendebius, Zeal, or the possession of sorrow, or grief.
Cereas, was Brother to Timotheus,2 Mac. 10. and Captain of a strong Castle called Gazar, into the which, Timo∣theus (being overcome of Judas Machabeus) was fain to flie for succor. Now Cereas and they that were with him in the Fort, trusted so much to the strength of the place, that they fell to railing and cursing of their Ene∣mies without, who (notwithstanding) set so manfully up∣on the Hold, that (at last) they wan it, and took the blasphemers, and burnt them quick, and slew this Cereas and his Brother Timotheus, with another famous Cap∣tain called Apollophanes. Cereas, Glad, or rejoycing. Centura, look Ketura. Chedorlaomor, look Kedorlaomor. Cis, was the Son of Abiel, of the Tribe of Benja∣min,1 Sam 9.1, &c. and Father to King Saul. Whose Asses (on a time) being strayed abroad, he said unto Saul his Son: Take one of the Lads with thee, and go and seek out mine Asses that are lost. This Cis is called also, the Son of Ner, 1 Chron. 8.33. Cis, Hard, or stubble, or a place where Cucumbers are. Cis, The Son of Jehiel,1 Cor. 8.29, 30.9.35, 36. his Mother was called Maacah. Cis, the Son of Mahli, Son to Merari.1 Chron. 23.21. His Bro∣ther's name was Eleazar. Whose Daughters (he being dead) the Sons of this Cis took to their Wives. Claudia, was a certain godly Brother,2 Tim. 4.21. who being with Paul at Rome, sent (as many more did) greetings to Timothy in Paul's Letter. Claudia, a proper name.Act. 11.28. He was poisoned of his Wife A∣grippina. that Nero her son might succeed in the Empire.Claudius, was an Emperour, in whose time (the
fourth Year of his reign) was a great Dearth thorow∣out all the World, whereof Agabus the Prophet, prophe∣sied aforehand. Claudius, a proper name. Cleopatra,Cooper. 1 Mac. 10. chap. 11. the Daughter of King Ptolomy, was mar∣ried to Alexander the Son of Noble Antiochus. And a∣gain (for displeasure) taken from Alexander her law∣ful Husband, and given to Demetrius the Son of De∣metrius. Cleopatra, the Glory of the Country. Cleophas,Luk. 24.13.18. was the Husband of Mary, Sister to Ma∣ry the Mother of Christ, and one of the two Disciples, which (after the death of Christ) went to the Town of Emaus talking and reasoning together of all things that had happened to Jesus: and as they were reasoning the matter, Jesus joyned himself personally with them, as a wayfaring man, desirous to know whereof they tal∣ked so sadly: To whom Cleophas made answer, and said, Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things which have chanced there of late? What things, said Jesus? Of one Jesus of Na∣zareth which was a Prophet mighty in deed and word, before God and all the People; and how the chief Priests and our Rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him, but we trusted that it had been he that should have delivered Israel:They under∣stood not yet, what was the deliverance that Jesus Christ pur∣chased for us. and besides all these things, to day is the third day since they were done. Then Jesus opened the Scriptures to Cleophas and the other, and being known of them (at the last) by breaking of Bread, they returned to the Apostles at Je∣rusalem, and told them all what they had heard and seen of Jesus, by the way to Emaus. Cleophas, All manner of glory. Clement,Philip. 4.3. was one of Paul's Fellow-labourers in the Gospel among the Philippians, as Paul himself re∣porteth,
saying: And I beseech thee faithful yoke-fellow, help the Women which laboured with me in the Go∣spel, with Clement also, and with other my Fellow-la∣bourers, whose Names are in the Book of Life. Cle∣ment, Meek. Crescens, what time as Paul sent for Timothy,2 Tim. 4.10. was departed from Rome into Galatia for business he had there, whereof he certifieth Timothy, saying: Cre∣scens is gone to Galatia, and Titus unto Dalmatia. Crescens, a Latine word, Encreasing. Crispus, the chief Ruler of the Synagogue at Co∣rinth,Acts 18.8. after he had heard Paul's preaching, believed in the Lord, he and all his Houshold, and were bapti∣zed in the Name of Christ Jesus. Crispus, a Latine word, curled or crisped. Cornelius, was an Heathen man dwelling in Cesa∣rea,Acts 10. cap. and a Captain over a Band of Men which were in Italy. This Man notwithstanding he was a Gentile born, and in office a Man of Arms, yet he was a good liver and feared God, as it well appeared, chiefly in two points, which was in liberally relieving the poor and needy, and his continual praying unto the Lord. In the which prayer, as he was (on a time) occupied about the ninth hour of the day (which was a little before Sup∣per time) he saw in a Vision an Angel of God coming to him, and calling him by his Name, saying: Cornelius, thy Prayers and thine Alms-deeds are come up into re∣membrance before God, wherefore send to Joppa for one Simon whose Sirname is Peter, he lodgeth with one Simon a Tanner, whose house joyneth upon the Sea∣side, and he shall tell thee what thou oughtest to do. Then Cornelius sent for Peter, against whose coming he had called together all his Kinsmen and special friends. And
when Peter was come, Cornelius met him and fell down at his Feet to worship him, which thing Peter would not suffer, forasmuch as he was but a Man as Cor∣nelius was. And so going in with him, he found a great company gathered together, unto whom he said: Ye know how that it is an unlawful thing for a Man that is a Jew born, to company with or come to one that is of an∣other Nation: But God hath shewed me, that I should not make any Man common or unclean. Therefore came I unto you without saying nay, assoon as I was sent for. I ask therefore, for what intent have ye sent for me? Then Cornelius said: Four days ago, and even about this same hour I fasted, and at the ninth hour I prayed in my House, and behold, a Man stood before me in bright clothing and said: Cornelius, thy Prayer is heard, and thine Alms deeds are had in remembrance in the sight of God, send therefore to Joppa, and call for Simon whose Sirname is Peter, he is lodged in the House of one Simon a Tanner by the Sea-side, the which, assoon as he is come, shall speak unto thee. Then sent I for thee immediately, and thou hast well done for to come: Now therefore are we all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded unto thee. Then Peter preached the Word of God unto them, and while he was yet preaching, the Holy Ghost fell upon them all, so that in the end, Cornelius with all his Company there pre∣sent, were Baptized in the Name of Christ Jesus. Cor∣nelius, a proper name. Chore,Numb. 16. cap. was the Son of Jezehar, the Son of Caath, the Son of Levi. This Chore out of a stout and proud heart, envied and detested Moses the true servant of God, and raised up a sedition against him and Aaron, having with him Dathan, Abiram and On, three great Cap∣tains, beside 250. other Noble-men that took his part; which Insurrection by the power of Man was unsuppres∣sible.
But Almighty God caused the Earth to open, and swallow them up, with their Wives, Children, and all their substance. Here is a question to be moved:This is the exposition of a certain learned Man named Ri∣chard Tur∣ner Bacheler of Divinity, and Reader in the Col∣ledge of Windsor, in the days of King Edward the sixth. If all the substance of Chore with his Wife and Children were swallowed up of the Earth with them, how can that be true which is written in the Title of the 41. Psalm, that the children of Chore were either the makers, or the singers, or the setters forth of that godly Psalm? Answer is made Numb. 26. where it is written, that when Chore was swallowed up of the Earth, God miraculously preserved certain of his children, of whose off spring there came ve∣ry excellent learned and notable wise men, and specially these four, Ethan1 King. 4.31. the Ezrahite, to wit, that was born in the Town called Ezrahi, Heman, Chalcol and Dar∣da, which four so far excelled all other in wisdome and learning, that the wisdome of Solomon was com∣pared to be as great as theirs. These four are called the Children of Chore, not that they were the natural chil∣dren of Chore, but that they came of the off spring of the children of Chore, which God had miraculously preser∣ved from the great gulph and gaping of the Earth. For it is well known that Chore lived in Moses's time, and that he was the Chief in stirring up of Rebellion a∣gainst him: whereas Ethan, Heman, Chalcol and Darda lived and flourished in Solomon's time, which was 480. years (or thereabout) after that Chore was killed. So that these Men could not be the natural children of Chore, but are called his Children and his Sons, because they came of his Progeny and off-spring. Chore, Bald, or baldness: lce or frost. Cyrus, King of Persia,1 Esd. 1. (in the first year of his reign) delivered the People of Israel out of Captivity, and gave them liberty to go and build theCyrus be∣ing insatiable in coveting Countries, was slain of To∣miris Queen of Seythia. with 200000 Persians. who caused his Head to be cut off, and cast into a Vessel of blood, saying: Satisfie thy self with bloud, which thou hast al∣ways thir∣sted. Lanquet. City of Jerusa∣lem, and the Temple of God again (which Nabuchodo∣nosor
had destroyed) and sent with them all the Vessels of Gold and Silver pertaining to the House of the Lord, which were in number 5400. And the number of the whole Congregation that returned from the captivity of Babylon, were XLII. thousand three hundred and three score, beside their Servants and Maidens, which were 6337. and among them also were 200. singing men and women. And of this Cyrus it was prophesied by the Prophet Esay, long before Cyrus was born, that he should deliver the children of Israel out of captivity. Cyrus, as it were a miserable man: or as it were an heir, a belly. Chushan Rishathaim, wasJudg. 3.10. King of Mesopotamia, into whose hand God delivered the Children of Israel, because they turned from him to serve strange Gods, which King kept them in Bondage Eight Years, till at last (they crying to the Lord for help) God raised up Othoniel, which delivered them out of his hands. Chu∣shan Rishathaim, Seeing, or prophesying. D. DALILAH was the Wife of Samson,Judg. 16.4. &c. who (thorow the perswasions of the Philistines) flattered him so long, until she had got knowledge where all his strength lay: that known, she so dallyed with him that he laying down his Head upon her Lap, and there falling a-sleep, she caused the Hair of his Head to be shaven off, and so be∣trayed him to the Philistines. Dalilah, a Bucket, or Con∣sumer. Damaris,Act. 17. ult. was a certain godly Woman, dwelling at the City of Athens, whom (among others) Paul con∣verted. Damaris, a little wife. Dan,Gen. 30.6, &c. was the Son of Jacob, born him of Bilha Rachel's Maid. His Brother's name (of Father and Mo∣ther)
was Nephtali. Jacob before his death, prophesied of him, saying: Dan shall judge his People,Gen. 49.16, &c. as one of the Tribes of Israel. Dan shall be a Serpent by the way, and an Adder by the path, biting the Horse heels, so that his Rider shall fall backward. O Lord,Num. 1.38, 39. I have waited for thy salvation. The generation of the Danites grew to such a number, that the portion which Joshua gave them, was not sufficient for all their Tribe, wherefore they went out to seek them an inheritance to dwell in: And coming to the quiet City of Laish (which mi∣strusted nothing) they fell upon it, killed the People,Joshua 19 47. Judg. 18. cap. and burnt the City. And in the place thereof, they built them∣selves another City, and called it Dan. And set up the Idols therein, which they had taken from Micah, and worshipped them, and so continued in their Idolatry, till the Ark of God was taken. 1 Sam. 4. Dan, Judging, or judgment. Daniel, was an holy Prophet of the Tribe of Ju∣da,Dan. 1. cap. who being a comely stripling, without blemish, and of good erudition, was (among others of the children of Israel) brought to Babylon, and there found at the Kings charges to learning, and to profit in the Chaldee Tongue; and for the better nourishing and bringing up of these young striplings, he appointed to them (for three years space) a portion of his own meat every day, and of his own Wine which he drank, to the intent, that by their good treatment and learning of his religion, they might rather favour him than the Jews, and to be able to serve him as Governours in their Land. But Daniel be∣ing determined in his heart, that he would not de∣file himself with the King's meat and drink, desired his Keeper, that he, and his three companions, to wit, Ana∣nias, Misael, and Azarias, might not defile themselves, but that he would give them nothing else but Pulse to eat, and Water to drink, which thing he was afraid to
do, lest when the King should call them before him, they might seem in worse liking than the rest of their fellows, and so he to be in danger of his life. Well, said Daniel, prove thy servants for ten days. Then the Keeper (whose heart God had moved to favour Da∣niel) proved them ten days, and when he saw them fat∣ter in flesh, and in better liking than the other, he took away their portion of meat, and served them daily with Pulse and Water. And to these, God gave great know∣ledge and understanding in all learning and wisdome: But to Daniel only, he gave the gift of Prophesying, and opening of Visions and Dreams. Now when the time was expired, that all the children whom the King had so long nourished, should be brought before him, he found Daniel and his three associates in matters of wisdome and understanding that he required of them, ten times better than all the learned men of his Realm, so that the King had Daniel in great estimation. After this, Daniel expounded the King's Dreams, and shewed him the true interpretation and meaning thereof (which none of the Chaldeans could do) for the which the King rewarded him with great Gifts, and made him Gover∣nour over the whole Province of Babylon, wherewith the other Princes and Rulers were sore offended, and sought occasion against him concerning the Kingdom; but Daniel was so faithful and upright in all the King's matters, that they confessed, and said: We shall find no occasion against this Daniel, except it be concerning the Law of his God: Therefore let us perswade the King to make a Decree, that whosoever shall ask a Petition of any God or Man for thirty days, save only of the King, the same may be cast into the Den of Lyons. And when the King had consented to this wicked Decree, and sealed the Writing, Daniel (that all Men might see, that he would neither consent in heart nor deed for these few days, to any thing that was contrary to God's glo∣ry)
went home to his House, and set open the Window of his Chamber toward Jerusalem, and fell down upon his Knees to give thanks and praise unto God, as his custome was three times a day to do. And thus making his prayers and supplication to his God, his Adversaries came upon him and found him, whereupon they went to the King and said: Hast thou not sealed a Decree, that whosoever shall make re∣quest to any God or Man within thirty days save to thee (O King) shall be cast into the Den of Lions? True it is, quoth the King, and it cannot be broken. Then said they: This Daniel one of thy Prisoners of Juda, regardeth neither thee nor thy statute, but maketh his Petition thrice a day unto his God. When the King heard this, he was sore displeased in himself, and sought by all means to have excused Daniel, and when he saw no intreaty would serve, nor any way be found to alter the Law, he suffered Daniel to be cast down to the Lions, which were seven in number, and were kept fasting that day from their ordinary diet, to the intent they should have de∣voured Daniel: But God had so stopped the mouths and fury of the Lyons, that they did him no harm, and lest he should perish there for hunger, God sent his Pro∣phet Abakuck with Meat and Drink to feed him, and also moved the King's heart to take such care for Daniel, that the seventh day after, he went to the Den to see if he were alive or dead, and finding him not perished, but whole and sound, he rejoyced greatly, and caused Daniel to be taken out, and his Accusers with their Wives and Children cast down among the fierce greedy Lyons, who tore them all in pieces before they came at the ground. Thus being delivered, he afterward prophe∣sied of the coming of Christ, and of the Empire of Ba∣bylon, Media, Persia, Grecia and the Romans. Read more of him in the story of Bel and Susanna. Daniel, Judgment of God.
Darda,1 King. 4.31. the Son of Mahol, was one of the four, which came of the off-spring of the children of Chore, and so far exceeded all other in wisdome and Learning, that Solomon was compared unto them. Darda, The house of knowledge: or the generation of knowledge. Darius,1 Esd 6. cap. Dan 5. 30 3. in taking ofHe is called also Ahasuc∣rus, Eer 1. and was (as some thnk) the Son of Hystp is, called also Artaxerxes. Babylon, slew King Baltha∣sar, and possessed his Kingdom. In the second year of his reign, he granted the same licence unto the Jews to build again the City of Jerusalem, and the House of God, that King Cyrus had granted to them in the first year of his reign. And for so much as the work had been much hindered from the first year of Cyrus unto the second year of this King Darius, he gave a strict commandment, that whosoever did (from hence∣forth) hinder or lett that work, a Beam should be ta∣ken from that Man's house and he hanged thereon, and his House made a Dunghill. And so the building went forward with speed, and was perfectly finished in the sixth year of his reign. Darius, Requiring, or inqui∣ring for. Dathan and Abiram,Num. 16.1, &c. were the Sons of Eliab, and two of the chief Captains with Chore in the Insurre∣ction against Moses, on whom God took such vengeance, that he caused the Earth to open and swallow them up quick. Read the story of Chore. Dathan, Statute, or Law. David was the youngest Son of Jesse,1 Sam. 16.11. and by God's commandment anointed King of Israel (Saul yet reigning) by the Prophet Samuel. Wherefore Saul, fearing that David would defeat him of his Kingdom, vexed him with continual persecution, during the which time, David shewed notable examples both of patience and true obedient service to Saul his Soveraign Lord.
And first,17. cap. to shew his obedient and faithful heart to his Prince, and love he bare to his Country, he put himself in danger, to fight with that great Monster Goliah and slew him, of whom the King, and all the Host of Israel stood in great fear. And after this act also,18.6.11. when Saul (of envy that the Women in their dance had given to David more praise than to him) threw his Javelin at David (as he stood and played on his Harp before him) to have nailed him fast to the wall, David avoided and armed himself with patience, and never sought other means of revenge: In so much,24.3. that when Saul (by the providence of God) came into the Cave to ease him∣self, in the which Cave David lay hid for fear of Saul, he would not (being provoked) put forth his hand to hurt his Master: But cut off a piece of the Hem of his Coat, in token that he might have killed him. And yet after that, it sore repented him that he had done so much injury unto his Soveraign Lord and Master, although he was his mst grievous enemy, and every hour sought his death. Also,26.7.12. when he came into the Host of Saul and found the King and his Man fast asleep, he would not for his own private cause (though Jehu slew two Kings at God's commandment) lay his hand upon the Lord's anointed, but only (that he should know that David was there and might have been revenged) took his Spear and Pot of Water which stood at his Head,2 Sam. 1. cap. and went his way. Finally, when it pleased God to rid him of his enemy in Battel against the Philistines, one (to get thanks of David) brought unto him Saul's Crown, and the Bracelet that he wore on his Arm, certifying him of the King's death, and that he with his own hands had killed him: whose act David did so much abhor, that he thought the Man not worthy to live, but put him to death out of hand Read more of David's patient suffering and obedient service, in the story of Michol, Jonathas, Ahimelech, Achish, and Absalom his Son. Now when
Saul was dead,2 Sam. 2.11. David was admitted King and reigned over Juda vii. years, after which time expired, he reign∣ed both over Israel and Juda, xxxiii. years. And did that which was good in the sight of God, and put his trust and confidence in the Lord God of Israel, so that before nor after him, was not his like. He cleaved so unto the Lord, that God bare witness of him, that he had found a Man according to his hearts desire. To him, God made a pro∣mise that Christ should come of his Seed, for the which cause, Christ of the Prophets is called the Son of Da∣vid. To this holy Prophet, God gave many victories and excellent gifts (which are touched in other stories) and yet mong all his vertues, he suffered him to fall into the abominable Vice of Adultery and Murder,1. cap. and most grievously punished him for the same, who notwithstand∣ing after  repentance, was received again into the favour of God, and never after offended in that sin more. King .10, 11.  after many conflicts with his Ene∣mies, he died,  had reigned xl. years, leaving Solomon his Son to succeed him. David, Beloved. Deborah,Judg 4. cap. the Wife  Lapidoth, was a Prophe∣tess, and the fourth Jud and Governour of the People of Israel: who, by the power and pleasure of God (and help of Barak the Captain of her Army) delivered them from the Tyranny of King Jabia, and of Sisera his Captain General, putting the King to a great foil, in slaying of his Captain Sisera. Thorow the which vi∣ctory, the Israelites were restored to liberty, and their enemies the Canaanites utterly confounded. She jud Israel xl. years. Deborah,  Bee. Demas,Col. 4.14 Philem. 24. 2 Tim. 4, 10. was Christ's Disciple a great while, and a faithful Minister to Paul, and never shrank from him nor his Doctrine, so long as all things prospered well with Paul: But when he saw Paul cast in Prison, and
in danger of his life for the Gospels sake, He forsook both him and his doctrine, and (imbracing the World) conveighed himself to Thessalonica. Such there be, that so long as pleasure, profit, favour, honour, glory or ri∣ches do follow the Word of God, so long will they fa∣vour the same: But when affliction, persecution, loss of goods, riches, lands, possessions, or such like adversi∣ties do come, then they do as Demas did, forsake the Gospel and follow the World. Demas, Favouring the People. Demetrius,1 Mac. 7. cap. the Son of Seleucus came from Rome with a small company of Men to a certain City of his own, lying upon the Sea-coas and prepared an Army to go to Antioch (the City of his Progenitors) where he found Antiochus and Lysias,  he caused to be slain, and being stablished in his Kingdom, he began (through the wicked commer of cimus,9. cap. whom he had made High Priest) to seel  obstruction of the Jews, sending forth divers mies again them, in the which he sped diversly ally,10. cap. the Son of Noble Antiochus moved War again and in Battel slew him. Demetrius. coming of  whom the Heathen thought the Goddess of Gorn. Demetrius, the Son of Demetrius,1 Mac. 10. being in the Land of Creta at his Fathers death, made haste home∣ward to take possession of his Kingdom. And being sta∣blished therein, he began to Wax mighty, by reason  Ptolomy King of Egypt had withdrawn his favour from Alexander  in law, and taken his Daughter Cleopatre from him and given her to Demetrius. And also for as much as Prolomy and Alexander, lived not long after the strife begun between them, Demetrius (for a space) had great rest. The Captain of Demetrius's Host, was Apollonius (a great enemy of the Jews)
whom Jonathas discomfited at the first conflict between them. Upon the which, Demetrius perceiving Jona∣thas power to be strong, was content to be at peace with him, and to make all Jewry free. Which being done, all the Land was in such quietness, that Demetrius sent a∣way his Host, all save a few strangers, whereat the Host was displeased. Then Tryphon (who had been a∣foretime of Alexander's party) perceiving Demetrius Host to murmur against him, moved Antiochus the Son of Alexander to War against Demetrius, who being now in great fear of the Men of Antioch (with whom he had somewhat to do) sent to Jonathas to have his aid, who sent him three thousand of such picked Men, that delivered Demetrius out of danger, and slew an hundred thousand of the Antiochians, so that the rest were fain to cast down their Weapons and to yield them to Demetrius: who (notwithstanding the great fidelity of Jonathas, and the benefit he had done him) after he was at rest again, did not reward him accordingly, but most deceitfully dissembled, and withdrew himself from Jonathas, and vexed him and the Jews very sore. After this came Tryphon with all the Host which Demetrius had put away, and fought against Demetrius, and put him to flight, and made him fain (at the last) to go in∣to Media to seek aid and help, where Arsaces King of the Land took him,1 Mac. 14. and kept him in ward as a Prisoner during his life. Demetrius:Ad. 19.24, &c. This Man was a Silversmith by his occupation dwelling at Ephesus, which made silver Shrines and Tabernacles for Diana the Goddess. And forasmuch as Paul (by the space of two years) had preached there, against Images made with Man's hand, saying that they were no Gods: He (lest his profit should decay) called together all such as had advantage by making Images of Diana, and all Craftsmen of
the same occupation, who he knew would favour his cause, and began to say unto them on this wise: Ma∣sters, ye know that by this Craft we have our living: moreover ye see and hear, that not only at Ephesus, but almost thorowout all Asia, this Paul hath perswa∣ded and turned away much People, saying, That they be no Gods which are made with hands. So that not only this our Craft cometh into peril, and to be set at naught: But also that the Temple of the great God∣dess Diana should be despised, and her magnificence de∣stroyed, which all Asia and the World worshippeth. With this seditious Oration made by Demetrius, the People were in such a fury, that they cryed out, saying: Great is Diana of the Ephesians, and with that, rushed into the common Hall with one assent, where they (missing of Paul) caught two of his companions, in the which rage, some cryed one thing, and some another, and were so far out of order, that the most part knew not the cause of their concourse together, so that with great difficul∣ty, the matter was pacified. Read the story of Alexan∣der the Jew, born in the same place. Demetrius: This was a faithful Christian,3 John 12. v. ha∣ving for a testimony thereof a good report as well of Paul himself as of all other to be an earnest favourer of the Gospel of Christ. Denis, or Dionysius, was a certain Senator,Act. 17. ult. whom Paul converted at the City of Athens, and insti∣tuted him Bishop thereof. In Fasciculus temporum, it is written that this De∣nis was martyred in France, whereby it may evident∣ly be gathered that the Gospel of Christ our Saviour was preached in France in the Apostles time, or very near thereto.
Diana,Act. 19.28. was a Goddess whom the Ephesians most superstitiously worshipped. Diana, Latinum est. Read Demetrius the Silversmith, and Alexander the Jew. Diotrephes,3 John, 9 vers. was so wicked a Man, and so mali∣cious an enemy unto the Christian Brethren, that he could not speak well of them, nor yet abide to hear other give them good report: he would neither receive them himself, nor suffer those that would, but thrust them out of the Church. Diotrephes, Nourished of Jupiter. Dives,Luk. 16.19, &c. the rich and covetous Glutton, so much delighted and gloried in his great abundance of Treasure, fine and costly apparel, sumptuous and delicious fare each day, that his whole felicity and pleasure was only in pampering up of himself, having no compassion (were his misery never so great) on the poor and needy, as it did appear by Lazarus the Begger lying at his gates, and looking for some relief of the scraps that fell from his board. But when this glutton was dead and his body (with pomp) brought to his Grave, and his Soul also in the torments of Hell: He then lifting up his eyes, and beholding Abraham a great way off, and the Beg∣ger with him in joy, cryed out to Abraham, requesting him that Lazarus might now come down, and dip the tip of his finger in water, to slake the great heat of his Tongue, for I am (saith he) most grievously tormented in this ardent flame. But to this and his other most vain and fantastical request he made for his Brethren, to have them admonished by one that came from the dead: Abra∣ham made answer and said. That for so much as he had consumed and spent away the time of his life volup∣tuously in the pleasures and delights of the World (and would at no time repent) he therefore was now most justly condemned to suffer perpetual pain in the fire of
Hell. Dives, Rich. Doeg, an Edomite born, was King Saul's Ser∣vant, and the Master of them that kept his Cattel.1 Sam. 21.7.22.9-19. When David came to Ahimelech the Priest of Nob, and had received the Shew-bread, with the Sword of Goliah: This Doeg wasBv Doeg (saith Saint Ausin) is signified An∣richrist, which with false sig and seigned Miracles shall move all the World be∣fore the com∣ing of the Lord to Judg∣ment. And as Doeg wrought wick∣edness for the pleasing of King Saul, by whom is signified the Devil: So shall Anti∣christ move and stir the World unto sin, for the pleasing of the Devil, and advan∣cing of his name. there present the same day, tar∣rying to worship before the Lord, and saw and heard all things that were done between them. And when he was returned home, and had waited his time when he might best pleasure the King, he accused Ahime∣lech, of all that he had done unto David: And when the King had judged that good and godly Man to dye, this Doeg, at the King's commandment (all other refusing that wicked deed) fell upon Ahimelech with his Sword, and slew both him, and all the Priests of the Lord, to the number of 85. Doeg, Careful, or vehemently moved. Dorcas, was ‖ a certain godly Woman, and a Disci∣ple of Christ, dwelling at Joppa, who in her life time had been vertuously occupied, and specially in the works of mercy, relieving the poor and needy. And while Pe∣ter was preaching and doing his office at Lydda (which was not far from Joppa) it was her chance to fall sick and dye. And when her friends had done with wa∣shing the dead Corpse, and laid it forth in an upper cham∣ber to be anointed, they sent for Peter to come unto them, who being come, Act. 9. they had him up to the Chamber where the dead Corpse lay, where the Widows came about him weeping, and laying forth the Coats and o∣ther Garments which she had prepared in her life time for the poor, before him. Then Peter put them all forth of the Chamber: And being alone, kneeled down and prayed, and turning him to the body, said: Tabitha, a∣rise, at the which word she arose and looked upon Pe∣ter, who then gave her his hand, and lift her up, and cal∣led
the Saints and Widows, and restored Dorcas unto them alive. Dorccas, a Do. Dositheus,2 Mac. 12. was a certain Noble Captain with Judas Machabeus, who (by the help of Sosipater ano∣ther Captain) defended the Jews manfully against Timotheus, and slew Ten Thousand of his Men which were left in a strong hold, and after that, took Timo∣thy himself in Battel, and (notwithstanding) let him go again, upon his promise made unto them, that he would restore all the Jews home again which he had in Prison, thinking that, the best and most surest way, to save the Lives of their Captive brethren. After this, it chan∣ced that Dositheus (a mighty Man on Horseback) encoun∣tred with Gorgias, another great Captain, and enemy of the Jews, and took him, intending to have carried him away alive: But an Horseman of Thracia fell upon him, and smote off his Arm, and so Gorgias escaped, and fled into Moresa. Dositheus, Given to God. Drusilla,Act. 24.24. was a Jew, and Wife to Felix, by whose counsel (saith the Note in Geneva's Bible) he called for Paul, and heard him of the Faith in Christ. Dru∣silla, Bedewed, or sprinkled with bloud. E. EBER,Gen. 10.21.11.14, &c. was the Son of Salah, of the Generation of Shem. He had two Sons, the one Peleg (in whose days the Earth was divided) and the other Joktan. This Eber lived before and after he begat Peleg 464. years. Eber, Passing, or passage. Of Eber came the Ebrews, which were afterward called Israelites of Israel, which was Jacob, and Jews of Juda, because of the excellency of that Tribe. Elah, King. 16.8. the Son of Baasha, began his reign over Is∣rael,
in the xxvi. year of Asa King of Juda, and walked in all the wicked ways of his Father before him. In the second year of his reign (or thereabout) Zimri his servant (and Captain of his Chariots) conspired against him, and finding him drunken in the house ofDrinking (as some say) till he was drunken in the Temple of Arza the I∣dol, by his House in Tirza. Arza the King's Steward, he fell upon him, and slew him. E∣la, an Oke. Elam, was the Son of Shem. Elam, a young Man,1 Chron. 1.17. or he that is hid, or the world. Eleazar, the Son of Aaron,Exod. 6.25. Num. 20.25, &c. was constituted High Priest, after the decease of his Father, and so was the se∣cond High Priest over the Jews. He took to Wife one of the Daughters of Putiel,Josh. 24.33. which bare him a Son called Phinehas. Finally, he dyed, and was buried in a Hill that pertained to Phinehas his Son, which Hill was gi∣ven him in Mount Ephraim. Eleazar, the help of God. Eleazar, the Son of Saura,1 Mac. 6. was a worthy Cap∣tain with Judas Machabeus, what time as Antiochus Eupator came into Jewry with a mighty strong Army, both of Men and Elephants: which Beasts being xxxii. in number, were strongly fenced, and surely harnessed, and well exercised to Battel. And when the Hosts were joyned together, Eleazar beholding one of the Elephants deckt with royal Harness, and far excelling all the o∣ther Beasts, he supposed the King himself had been up∣on him, wherefore he jeoparded himself to deliver his People, and with a good courage ran to the Elephant in the middest of the Host, slaying all about him as he went, and at last came unto the Beast, and gat himself under his feet, and smote him in the belly, and slew the Elephant. The weight of whose dead body crushed Ele∣azar in pieces, and so he dyed.
Eleazar,2 Mac. 6. was one of the principal Scribes among the Jews, and an aged Man, of a well favoured counte∣nance, who (when that cruel King Antiochus had sent his Commissioners to compel the Jews to transgress the Laws of their God) was constrained to gape with open mouth, and to eat Swines slesh, but he desiring rather to dye grievously, than to live with hatred, offered himself willingly to the torment, and spit it out. Then they that had the charge of the Kings wicked act, for the old friendship of the Man, took him aside privily, and prayed him that he would take such flesh as was law∣ful to eat, and dissemble as though he had eaten even of the things appointed by the King, even the flesh of the Sacrifice, that in so doing, he might be delivered from death, and that for the old friendship that was among them, he would receive this favour. But he began to consider discreetly, and as became his age, and the ex∣cellency of his ancient years, and the honor of his gray hairs, whereunto he was come, and his most honest conversation from his childhood, but chiefly the holy Law, made and given by God: therefore he answered them accordingly, and willed them straightways to send him to the grave: for it becometh not our age (said he) to dissemble, whereby many young Persons might think that Eleazar being 90. years old, were now gone to another manner of life. And so thorow mine hypocrisie (for a little time of a transitory life) they might be deceived by me, and I should procure male∣diction and reproach to mine old age. For though I were now delivered from the torments of Men, yet could I not escape the hand of the Almighty, neither alive nor dead. Wherefore I will now change this life manfully, and will shew my self such as mine age requireth. And so will leave a notable example for such as be young, to die willingly & couragiously, for the honorable & holy laws:
and when he had said these words, immediately he went to torment. And as he was ready to give up the ghost, he sighed and said: The Lord that hath the holy knowledge, knoweth manifestly, that whereas I might have been delivered from death, I am scourged, and suf∣fer these sore pains of my Body, but in my mind I suf∣fer them gladly for his religion. Thus this Man ended his life, leaving his death for an example of a noble cou∣rage, and a memorial of vertue, not only unto young Men, but unto all his Nation. Eli was the next Judge after Sampson,1 Sam. 1.9.2.12.27, &c. that judg∣ed Israel, and the High-Priest descended from Aaron. He had two Sons, the one called Hophni, the other Phinehas, which were so wicked that every Man com∣plained of them. And because that Eli did not punish them according to their deserts, God sent him word by his Prophet, that for as much as he had not ministred due correction unto his Sons for their great offences, he would surely remove the High Priests office from his house for ever, and raise him up aMeaning Sadoc, who succeeded Abi∣athar. and was the fi∣gure of Christ. faithful Priest which should do according to his hearts desire. And this shall be to thee (said he) a sign and token that shall come upon thy two Sons, even in one day they shall both dye. And so it came to pass; for when the Philistines went out to Battel against Israel,1 Sam. 4. the two Sons of Eli (which waited upon the Ark of God) were both slain, and the Ark taken and possessed of strangers. Then Eli (being at that time 99. years of age, and also blind) hearing of the Ark to be taken of the Philistines, was stricken into such a sudden fear, that he fell backward off his stool, and brake his neck, after he had judged forty years. Eli, my God. Eliab, was the eldest Son of Jesse,1 Sam. 16.6. and so goodly a Man of stature and personage, that when all the Sons
of Jesse were brought before the Prophet Samuel to choose out a King among them, Samuel thought Eliab to be the meetest for that office, but God refused him, and accepted David his youngest Brother, who seemed to have more skill in keeping of Sheep, than of War, notwith∣standing, after that, he proved a better Warriour than Eliab, or all the rest of his brethren, when he fought with Goliah, and slew him. And for that great enterprise of David,1 Sam. 17.28. Eliab (being with King Saul in the Host) was fore offended, and began to rebuke David, saying: Wherefore art thou now come hither? with whom hast thou left thy Sheep in the Wilderness? I know thy pride, and the malice of thine heart well enough, and that of an haughty stomach thou art come hither to see the Battel, and with such taunts and checks he reproved his Bro∣ther David, for taking upon him to fight the Philistine, whom he, nor none of all his fellows durst look in the Face. Eliab, God my Father, or the God of my Father. Elijah,1 King. 17. The Father of this Prophet was called Sobac. Coo∣per. was a Prophet born in the City of Thes∣ba, who (for the wickedness of Achab) prophesied that it should not Rain upon the Earth, in the space of three years and an half, and fled from the King (who sought his Life) and hid himself in a little Brook before Jordan, where God commanded the Ravens to feed him with Bread and Flesh both Evening and Morning.The Ravens sed Elijah. And when the Brook began to wax dry, the Lord sent him to the City of Sarepta in the Country of Sydon, where he had ordained a certain Widow to sustain him, and when he was come to the Gate of the City, the Widow was there gathering of a few sticks for her Oven, to whom he called, and said: Woman, set me (I pray thee) a little Water to drink:The Widow sustaineth Elijah. And as she was going, he cryed unto her again, saying: Bring me (I pray thee) a morsel of Bread in thine hand also: she said again, as truly as the Lord thy God liveth, I have no Bread ready, but e∣ven
an handful of Meal in a Barrel, and a little Oyl in a Cruise, and am now going to dress it for me and my Son, that we may eat and dye. Well (said Elijah) do as thou hast said and fear not: But first of all, make me a little Cake thereof, and bring it to me, and afterward make for thee and thy Son: for neither shall the Meal in the Barrel, nor yet the Oyl in the Cruise be wasted or diminished, till the Lord have sent Rain upon the Earth. And so the Widow did as the Prophet bad her, and all things came to pass as he had said. And during the Prophets abode in the Widows house, he restored her Child to life, which was dead. After this,1 King. 13. he was commanded by God, to go and shew himself to Achab. And when the King saw Elijah, he said: Art thou he that troubleth Isracel? No, said the Prophet, it is not I that have troubled Israel, but thou and thy Fathers house, in that ye have forsaken the com∣mandments of God, and served Baal: Therefore let all the People of Israel with the Prophets of Baal be brought before me to Mount Carmel, and I will tell thee what the Lord saith. And when the King had called the People together: The Prophet said unto them, how long will ye halt between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him: But if Baal be God, then go after him. And now to know who is the true God, said the Prophet, let there be two Bullocks brought, and give the one to me (which am but one Prophet of the Lord's) and the other to Baal's Prophets which are 450. let them dress the one with Wood and no Fire under it, and I will dress the other likewise: And call ye on the name of your God, and I will call on the name of my God, and then the God that answereth by Fire, let him be God. To this the Prophets of Baal agreed, and dressed their Oxen,Elijah mock∣eth the Pro∣phets of Baal. which being done, they cry to their God Baal, but they cried so long without answer again, that Elijah mocked them, saying: Cry out aloud, for it may be that your
God is busie in talking, or occupied in following his ene∣mies, or is in his Journey, or else faln a-sleep and must be waked with your cry. And so they cryed on still from morning to night, cutting themselves (as their manner was) with Knives and Lances, till the bloud did follow, and yet their God would not answer. Then Elijah took his Bullock and dressed it, and laid it upon the Wood, and made a Ditch round about the Altar whereon the Sacrifice was laid, and poured Water upon the Sa∣crifice until the Ditch was full: And assoon as he had called on the Name of the Lord, Fire fell down from Heaven, and consumed the burnt Sacrifice, the Wood, the Stones, the Dust, and all the Water that was in the Pit. And when the People saw that, they turned to Elijah, and fell upon all the Prophets of Baal, and slew them at the Brook Kyson. Now when Elijah had thus destroyed Baal and his Prophets,1 King. 19. he durst not abide the menacing of Jezabel, but fled to the Wilderness of Beersheba. And having gone a days Journey therein, he sate him down under a Ju∣niper Tree, and desired God that he would take his life from him. And as he fell a sleep under the Tree, the An∣gel of God touched him, and bad him arise and eat, wherewithal he awaked: And seeing a baken Cake and a Pot of Water standing at his Head, he refreshed himself therewith, and laid him down again to sleep. The Angel touched him once more, and bad him arise and eat, telling him that he had yet a great Journey to go, then he arose and did eat again, and with the strength of that Meat,Elijah fasteth forty days and forty nights. he walked Forty Days and Forty Nights, till he came to Horeb the Mount of God, and hiding him∣self in a Cave all Night, the Voice of the Lord came to him, and asked him what he did there: I have (said he) been very jealous for the Lord God of Hosts: For the Children of Israel have forsaken thy Covenant, broken down thine Altars, and slain thy Prophets, with the
Sword, and I only am left, and they seek my life, to take it away. Then the Lord commanded him to come out of the Cave, and sent him to anoint Hazael King over Syria: And Jehu King of Israel, and Eliseus in his room. Read more of this Prophet in the stories of these three aforesaid, in Achab, Ahazia and Obadiah, and Eliseus. Elijah, God the Lord. Eliakim, was the High Priest among the Jews,Judith 4. cap. at what time Holofernes went about to subdue them, who sent Letters all about to the Jews, to take in the Mountains, and to stop all the ways and passages to Jerusalem, that their enemies the Assyrians might have no recourse thither. That done, he exhorted the People to earnest prayer and fasting, assuring them that the Lord would hear their Petitions, if they continued stedfast in the same, and give them such power to overthrow the Assyrians, as he gave to Moses the servant of God, which overthrew the Amalekites (trusting in their own strength) not with weapon, but with holy prayer. Eli∣akim, The Resurrection of God, or Gods affirmation, or the God of resurrection, or the God of strength. Elimelech, was an Ephraimite born,Ruih 1.1, 2, &c. dwelling in the City of Bethleem Juda, in whose days there fell such a dearth in the Land of Juda, that he with his Wife and two Sons (the one Mahlon, the other Chilion) went into the Land of Moab, where in process; he and his two Sons died. Elimelech, My God the King, or the counsel of God. Eliphaz, was the Son of Esau,Gen. 36.4. and his Mothers name was Ada. Eliphaz, the sight of God, or his intent, or endeavour. Eliphaz, the Temanite,Job 2.11. was one of those that came
to Job in his extream afflictions to comfort him.Job 4. And yet (notwithstanding) he blamed Job for impatience, injustice,Job 15. and for the presumption of his own righte∣ousness. Also he reproved him,Job 22. because he challenged wisdome and pureness to himself. Affirming also that he was punished for his sins, and accused him of un∣mercifulness, and that he denied God's providence, and therefore exhorteth him to repentance. But the Lord was angry with Eliphaz,Job 43.7. and with his other Compa∣nions, because they had condemned Job by the outward afflictions, and not comforted him with his mercy, and therefore commanded them to take seven Oxen and seven Rams, and to go and offer a burnt-offering for their offence, and his servant Job should pray for them. And they did as the Lord had commanded them. Elisa,1 Chron. 1.7. was the Son of Javan, his Brethren were Tharshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. Elisa, it is God, or the Lamb of God, or God that doth good. Eliseus,2 King. 19.19. was the Son of Shaphat. And being at the Plough with Twelve Yoke of Oxen before him, Elijah coming by him cast his Mantle over him, and went his ways. Then Eliseus (being inspired with the Holy-Ghost) left his Plough, and ran after Elijah, desiring him that he might first go home and take his leave of his friends, and then he would come and follow him, which thing being done, he returned and ministred to Elijah, and went with him to Bethel,2. King 2. and from thence to Jericho, where the Children of the Prophets came to Eliseus and said: Knowest thou not that the Lord will take thy Master from thine Head this day? Yes (quoth he) I know it well, hold ye your peace and be still. And so forth from Jericho, they went to Jordan, where Elijah smote the Waters with his Mantle which divided them∣selves, so that they two went over on dry Land.The Waters divided, And when
they were on the other side of Jordan, Elijah said to Eliseus: Ask what I shall do for thee, ere I be taken away from thee: I pray thee (quoth Eliseus) let thy spi∣rit be double upon me. Thou hast asked (quoth he) an hard thing: Yet if thou see me when I am taken from thee, thou shalt have it so, if not, it shall not be. And as they were walking and talking together,Elijah is ta∣ken up in the fiery Chariot. Elijah was ta∣ken up in a Whirlwind of Fire, and in a Chariot of fiery Horses, which sight Eliseus saw and cryed: My Father, my Father, the Chariot of Israel and the Horsemen there∣of, and saw him no more. Then Eliseus rent his own Cloak in two pieces, and took up Elijah's Mantle, which he had let fall from him, and returned to the bank of Jordan and smote the Waters, saying: Where is the Lord God of Elijah; and he himself? and at the second smiting, the Waters divided, so that he went over on dry Land to the other side again. Then the Chil∣dren of the Prophets perceiving the Spirit of Elijah to be upon Eliseus, came and fell down before him, saying: We doubt lest the Spirit of the Lord hath taken thy Ma∣ster and cast him upon some Mountain, therefore let us send forth our Men to go and seek him. But Eliseus (knowing assuredly that he was taken unto God) willed them not to do so: yet they, not therewithall satisfied, intreated him so much till he was ashamed, and so let them go. And when they had sought three days and three nights and could not find him, they returned to Eli∣seus, who said unto them: Did not I say, ye should not find him? Now, as the Prophet lay at Jericho, the Men of the City came unto him, saying: Sir, the situation of this City (as thou seest) is pleasant,The Waters are healed. but the Water is so evil and the ground so barren, that it killeth the In∣habitants thereof. Then said Eliseus, bring me a Cruise, and put Salt therein. And when they had brought him the Cruise, he took it and went unto the Spring of the
Waters, and cast the Salt therein, saying: Thus saith the Lord, I have healed this Water, death shall no more come thereof, neither barrenness to the ground. After he had thus healed the Water at Jericho,2 King. 3. cap. and was departed thence to go to Bethel, there came little Chil∣dren out of the City, who in mockery said unto him: Come up thou bald head,The Children for mocking the Prophet, are devoured with Bears. come up thou bald head. The Prophet then turned back and beheld the Children and perceiving their malicious hearts, he cursed them in the Name of the Lord, which Curse was no sooner pronoun∣ced out of the Prophets mouth, but two Bears came out of the Forest and ran upon the Children, and tore in pieces 42. of them: And so went he forth to Mount Car∣mel, and from thence to the City of Samaria. It came to pass that when Jehoram the King of Israel, and Jehosaphat King of Juda with the King of Edom, in their progress toward the King of Moab, lacked Water, for them and their People, they went (by the counsel of Jehosaphat King of Juda) to Eliseus the Prophet, be∣seeching him to make Intercession for them, that they might have Water to sustain their Host, which else were in jeopardy of perishing: And when the Prophet saw the Kings, he said to the King of Israel: What have I to do with thee? Get thee to the Prophets of Achab thy Father, and to the prophets of Jezahel thy Mother: as truly as the Lord of Hosts liveth. in whose sight I stand, if it were not that I regard the presence of Je∣hosaphat King of Juda, I would not have looked to∣ward thee, nor seen thee: But now bring me aThis was no such Min∣strel, as uses to fill the Peo∣ples eares with Songs of ribauldry: but one that sang Songs to God's glory, and so stirred up the Pro∣phets heart to prophesie. Min∣strel, and when the Minstrel plaid, the hand of the Lord came upon Eliseus, that he began to prophesie of Water, and of the overthrow of the Moabites, which came to pass on the next morrow, as the Prophet had said, for the Moabites being deceived by the Sun's shining upon the Water that fell, which made it seem as red as bloud, thinking it had been the Bloud of the Kings
Host that had slain one another, but when they came, they found the Host of Israel ready, who fell upon the Moabites, and destroyed and put them to flight every one. Eliseus. God's salvation, or a God which saveth. There was a certain Woman,2 King. 4.1, 2, &c. late Wife to one of the Prophets, which came and complained to Eliseus, that her Husband had left her so far in debt, that her Credi∣tors were come to fetch her two Sons away to be their Bondmen. What hast thou in thy house, said the Pro∣phet? Nothing (quoth she) but a little Pot of Oyl:The Widow lest in debt. Well (said he) go thy way home, and borrow of thy Neighbours, as many empty Vessels as thou canst get, and pour out the Oyl of the Pot into the empty Ves∣sels, until thou hast illed them all. And when the Wo∣man had done all as the Prophet had commanded her, she came back again, and told him how mightily her Oyl was encreased. Now go (said the Prophet) and sell so much of the Oyl as will pay thy Creditors, and then live thou and thy Children of the rest. There was a certain Woman of great estimation in the City of Shunem,2 King. 4.8, 9, &c. who hearing tell that Eliseus was come to the City, invited him home to her house, and made him great chear. And whensoever after that, he came into that quarter (which he haunted much) he would ever take that Gentlewoman's house in his way. Then she seeing that. said unto her Husband, I perceive that this is an holy Man, that cometh so oft by our place, let us make him a little Chamber with all things necessary for the same, that when he cometh this way, he may lodge there, and be quiet therein. And when the new Chamber was made, and finished, the Prophet at his next coming was brought into the same, there to take his rest. He then (considering the great provision the Woman had made, and how careful she had been for him) said unto Gehazi his Man: Go and ask of her what she will have me to do for her? whether it be to
speak unto the King, or to the Captain of the Host, or any thing else, and I will do it. The servant went and brought him word again,Eliseus ob∣taineth a Son for the Sbu∣namite. that she had no Child, and her Husband was old. Well, said the Prophet, she shall have a Son, which in process she had indeed. And when the Child was a few Years grown up it had a desire to go and see its Father and the Reapers in the Field, and being there in the heat of the day, it fell sud∣denly sick,The Sbuna∣mite's Son restored from death to life. and was carried home to his Mother, and dy∣ed: But for the Woman's sake, the Prophet restored her Son to life again. On a time Eliseus commanded his Cook to make a great Pot of Pottage for the Children of the Prophets which boarded with him,2 King. 4.38. and as one went out for Herbs, he gathered (unawares) his Lap full of wild Gourds, and came and shred them into the Pot of Pottage.He maketh the Pottage sweet. And when the Children of the Prophets had tasted a little of the Pottage, they (fearing lest they had been poison∣ed) cryed out, saying: O thou Man of God, there is death in the Pot. Then the Prophet called for Meal, and threw it into the Pot, and all was well, and no more harm in the Pot. A certain Man (the dearth being great in the Land) came from Baal Shalisa,2 King 4.42. and brought to Eliseus twenty Barley-loaves of the first fruits of his new Corn, the which he commanded his Man to give to the People to satisfie their hunger.The Loaves are multi∣plied. How shall I (said he) set this before so many, will it satisfie an hundred persons? Well, said Eliseus, set it before them, for thus faith the Lord, they shall eat, and there shall remain: And so the Loaves were set before the People, and they did eat, and left o∣ver, according to the Word of the Lord. Eliseus had so many of the Prophets children with him at Board and Bed,2 King. 6.1, &c. that his House was too little for them all, wherefore they said to him, that they would go to Jordan, and build them a bigger House to
dwell in, desiring him to go with them. And as a certain Man was felling down a Tree to serve for the building, the Axe head slipt off the Helve, and fell into the Water. Then the Man cried to Eliseus, and said: Alas, Ma∣ster, help me to have it again, for it was lent me. Where fell it in, said the Prophet? and when the Man had told him, Eliseus cut down a piece of Wood,Iron swim∣eth. and cast it into the Water, and immediately the Iron did swim. And then the Man stretched forth his hand, and took it up. He prophesied unto the Shunamite (whose Son he had raised from death) of a great dearth which should come and continue upon the Land seven years,2 King. 8.1, &c. giving her counsel therefore to go and sojourn in some other plentiful Countrey, till these years were expired, whose counsel she followed, and went with all her Houshold in∣to the Philistines Land, where she remained these se∣ven years of dearth, which being ended, she returned home again. And when she came to her House, another having possession thereof, withheld it from her, where∣fore she went to the King to make her complaint, at which time it happened the King to be talking with Ge∣hazi the servant of Eliseus the Prophet,The Sbuna∣mite is resto∣red to her house and Land again. who was decla∣ting unto the King what great and notable deeds his Master Eliseus had done, and among all, declared of a dead Body which he had raised up from death to life, and as he was telling of these things unto the King, the Woman came with her Son, and required her House and Land again: And when Gehazi saw the Woman, he said: O my Lord and King, this same is the Woman that I told your Grace of even now, and this is her Son that was raised from death. Then the King com∣manded her House and Land to be restored her again, with all the Rent and Profits thereof, from the first day she left it, till that present time. Finally, when the time drew nigh,2 King. 13.14, &c. that Eliseus the
Prophet should dye, Joash King of Israel came to visit him, and as he stood before him, and considered what a loss he should have of that good Man, which had been so great a defence unto his Realm, the tears ran down his cheeks, and he said: O my Father my Father, the Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen of the same. And when the Prophet saw the King, he bad him take his Bow and Arrows in his hand, and make him ready to shoot. The Prophet put his hands upon the King's hand, and caused a Window to be opened Eastward, (which was toward Syria) and bad the King shoot, and he shot: The Arrow of the Lord's deliverance, (said Eliseus) and the Arrow of deliverance from Syria. For thou shalt smite Syria in Aphck, till thou have made an end of them. Now take thine Arrows in thine hand (said the Prophet) and smite the ground, and he smote thrice and ceased. Then was the Prophet angry, that he had smitten the ground no oftner, for if (said he) thou hadst smitten five or six times, thou hadst smitten Syria until thou hadst made an end of them, whereas now thou shalt smite them but thrice, and so Eliseus dyed, and was buried. The same year came the Moabites into the Land of Israel, and as some of the Israelites were burying of a Man, and had spied the Souldiers, they cast the Man into the Sepul∣chre where Eliseus the Prophet was buried, and when the dead Man was let down, and touched the Body of Eliseus, he revived, and stood up upon his Feet as lively as ever he was. Elizabeth,Luk. 1.24, &c. was the Wife of Zachary the Priest, and came of the Daughters and Posterity of Aaron. She was long barren, but at last she conceived by Zachary her Husband (according as the Angel of God had said unto him.) And being great with Child, Mary the Wife of Jo∣seph (which was also conceived by the Holy Ghost) came to visit Elizabeth her Cousin, who had no sooner heard
the salutation of Mary the Mother of God, but the Babe sprang in her Belly, whereupon she was filled with the Ho∣ly Ghost, and cried out with a loud voice, saying: Bles∣sed art thou among Women, and blessed is the fruit of thy Womb: And whence happeneth this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? For behold, as soon as the voice of thy salutation sounded in mine ears, the Babe sprang in my Belly for joy: And blessed is she that believed, for those things shall be performed, which were told her from the Lord. And when the time was come that Elizabeth should be delivered, she brought forth a Son, which her Neighbours and Kinsfolks would have named Zachary after his Father, but Eli∣zabeth would none of that, but said his Name should be John. Elizabeth, the Oath of God, or the fulness of God. Elkanah, the Son of Jeroham, an Ephraite born,1 Sam. cap. 1. had two Wives, the one named Hannah, and the other Pe∣ninnah. By his Wife Peninnah he had Children. But by Hannah he had none. It was his manner every Festival day to go up and pray, and to offer unto the Lord of Hosts in Shilo (where the Ark of the Lord was at that time) And in one solemn Feast day (among all other) as he offered unto the Lord, he gave unto Peninnah his Wife, and to her Sons and Daughters, portions: but un∣to Hannah (whom he loved) he gave a worthy Portion. And on a time when he saw his Wife Hannah weep in the House of the Lord for sorrow she could have no child, he said: Hannah, why weepest thou? and why is thy heart so troubled that thou canst not eat? Am not I better to thee than ten Sons? as though he should say, Is it not enough for thee, that I love thee, no less than if thou hadst children? This he said to comfort her. And at the last, God gave him a Son by her, named Samuel, after whose birth he went up to offer unto the Lord, and to give him thanks. But Hannah would not go with him un∣til
she had weaned her Son. Elkanah, the Zeal of God, and the possession of God. Epaphroditus,Phil. 2.25. was a certain godly Brother, whom the Philippians sent to Paul (being in Bonds at Rome) with their charitable relief. Who being there, ministred unto him in his need, and was so faithful a fellow-souldier with Paul in setting forth the Gospel of Christ, and put himself in such hazard, that he fell sick and was like to have dyed. Now Paul, to comfort the Philippians, which were full of sorrow and heaviness for Epaphroditus their Apostle, because they heard he was sick, was the more desirous (after his recovery) to send him home again in the company of Timotheus, with his Epistle that they might be the less sorrowful, and rejoyce the more at his coming, willing them to receive him with a loving Christian affection in all joy∣fulness, and not to make much on him only, but on all such as were like unto him. Epaphroditus, Pleasant. Epaphras,Col. 4.12. was a faithful Servant, by whose labour and preaching the Colossians heard the Gospel, and be∣lieved it, and being in Prison with Paul at Rome, pray∣ed for those Colossians, that they might be perfect, and fil∣led in all the will of God after true knowledge. He bare a fervent mind to them of Laodicea and them of Hiera∣polis. Epaphras, Frothing. Epenetus,Rom. 16.5. was the first that Paul brought to the Christian Religion among them of Achaia, unto whom Paul had him saluted. Epenetus, Worthy of praise. Ephraim,Gen. 48. , &c. was the youngest Son of Joseph, and born in Egypt. His Mothers Name was Asuath the Daughter of Potipher Priest of On, and his eldest Bro∣ther was Manasses, which two being brought before
their Grandfather Jacob to receive his blessing, he pre∣ferredGod pre∣ferreth that (many times) which Man despiseth, and despiseth that which man alloweth. Ephraim the younger, before Manasses the el∣der, yet putting Joseph their Father in comfort that Ma∣nasses should be great, but Ephraim should be greater. Of the Genealogy of Ephraim, read 1 Chron. 7. E∣phraim, Fruitful, or encreasing. Ephron, the Son of Zoar, dwelt among the He∣thites,Gen. 23. cap. having a piece of Land which Abraham had a mind to buy, to bury Sarah his Wife therein. And when the matter was broken to Ephron (by Abraham) to sell his Ground for so much Money as it was worth; Ephron willingly offered to give it him freely to bury his dead, and to do withal what he would. But not∣withstanding, Abraham forced him so much to know the price thereof, that Ephron said: My Lord, the Land is worth four hundredThe common Sicle is a∣bout the va∣lue of twen∣ty pence. Sicles, but what is that be∣tween thee and me, take it freely (I beseech thee) and bu∣ry thy dead at thy pleasure. And so he received of A∣braham for his Land the Summ aforesaid. Ephron, Dust, or low on the ground. Er, the Eldest Son of Judah, the Son of Jacob,Gen. 38.7. was married to a Woman called Thamar, and for his great wickedness, the Lord slew him. Er, VVatchful, and ma∣king bare, or pouring forth. Erastus, was the Chamberlain,Act. 19.22. Rom. 16.23. 2 Tim. 4.20. or Receiver of the City of Corinth, and one of Paul's Ministers, whom he sent from Ephesus into Macedonia, with one Timo∣theus (intending himself to follow after) to gather Mens alms for the relieving of such as were needy and poor at Jerusalem. Erastus, Amiable. Esay,Esay 1.1.42.1.45, & 53. cap. the Son ofAmos the Father of Esay, was Brother to A∣zariah King of Judab, and Esay was Fa∣ther-in-law to Manasses, who put him to death. Amos was an holy Prophet of the Tribe of Judah, in whom was such abundance of the
spirit of Prophecie, that he prophesied so much of Christ, that he seemed rather to be an Evangelist, than a Prophet. He was of such holiness, that in the time of King Ezechias, when a City was besieged, he by his Prayer obtained of God, that Water sprang up in little quantity, so that the People did not perish for lack of Water, and when the Enemies had won the City, and be∣sieged Seloum, as often as the Jews came for Water, the Water ran out of the Earth abundantly, and they took Water: But the strangers when they came, could not find it. This holy Man for his liberty of speech, in rebuking of the sin of the Princes and the People, and for the prophesying of the vengeance of God upon that Coun∣trey and People, was cut in two pieces with a Saw, and buried under an Oke, but asterward he was translated and buried by the Sepulchre of Kings. He was before the coming of Christ 800. years. Eliote. Esay, the health of the Lord. Esau,Gen. 25.25. was the eldest Son of Isaac, born with his Brother Jacob at one birth of their Mother Rebekah. Ja∣cob was smooth of body,Of Esau came the E∣domites. E∣sau was cal∣led Edom, that is red, because he fold his birth∣right for a mess of red Pottage. and Esau rough and hairy, who became a great hunter, wherefore his Father loved him the better, because (now and then) he did eat of his Ve∣nison. On a time coming from hunting, he was so weary and faint for hunger, that he was almost dead: And seeing his brother Jacob to have sod a Pot of Pottage, he prayed him to give him a few thereof to eat. Sell me now thy Birthright (quoth he) and I will. Then Esau esteeming mere his Belly, than the benefit of his Birth∣right, sold it to Jacob for a Mess of Pottage. And when he had filled his Belly well, he went his way and passed forth,26.34. till he came about the Age of Forty Years. And then he took him two Wives, the one Judith the Daugh∣ter of Beri; and the other Bashemath the Daughter of E∣lon, both which Women were disobedient to their Father
and Mother-in-law.27. cap. After this (his Father being old and blind for age) he went out to kill some Venison for his Father, that he might eat thereof, and bless him before he died: But when he had dressed it, and brought it for his Father to eat, Jacob had prevented Esau, and gotten his blessing from him, for the which he hated Jacob, and threatned to kill him, wherefore Jacob was sent away into Mesopotamia, partly to avoid the malice of Esau,28.1, 2, &c. and partly to get him a Wife there, because his Father would not have him marry with the Canaanites. Then E∣sau perceiving that the Daughters of Canaan displeased Isaac, he (to please his Father) took to Wife the Daugh∣ter of Ishmael, Abraham's Son. And so these two Bre∣thren being thus separated the one from the other, in pro∣cess became both very rich. And in the end, when (by the providence of God) they met together again, God had so altered and changed the mind of Esau, that he most lovingly embraced his Brother Jacob, ministring to him such kindness, as though he had never born him any displeasure at all: And so in fine, departed as loving friends, Jacob toward Succoth, and Esau to Mount Seir his own possession. Esau, VVorking. Eshcol, was Brother to Mamre and Aner,Gen. 14.13.24. which three were Abraham's confederates, and his partakers in the rescuing of Lot his Brother out of the hands of Kedorla∣omer. Eshcol, a Cluster. Esdras, the Son of Saraia,1 Esd. 7.8 cap. was a notable Scribe in the Law of Moses, and long in captivity at Babylon, but at last by the licence of Artaxerxes, he came from Ba∣bylon to Jerusalem again, with the Jewes to repair the Law and City of God, and to teach the People the right way of the Lord. He gathered and brought in or∣der all the Books of the Laws of God, which were by the Chaldees scattered and destroyed.9 and 10 cap. This Man's living
was so upright and holy, and so esteemed among the Peo∣ple, that when they had offended the Lord in contracting themselves with the Gentiles, at his godly preaching and counsel, they repented, and put away their strange Wives, and turned to the Lord again. Esdras, an Helper. Esther,Esther 2 cap. the Daughter of Abian a Jew born, was a goodly young Damosel, and (after the death of her Fa∣ther and Mother) nourished and brought up in the house of Mardocheus her Fathers Uncle: During which time, Vashti (for her disobedience to Ahasuerus the King) was deposed from her Princely state: And then to have ano∣ther placed in her room, certain fair young Damosels and Virgins (among which Esther was one) were taken up by Commission, and brought to the Court, and there found at the King's charges for the space of xii. Moneths with all manner of sumptuous Deckings, to the end the King might choose one of them (whom he fancied best) to be his Queen. And when the time of choosing came, he liked Esther above the rest, and made her Queen in the room of Vashti.Esther 3. cap. It happened after this, that a mischief was devised against the Queens Nation the Jews, by one in great authority about the King, called Haman: and be∣ing certified thereof by Mardecheus her Uncle, she was so sore astonied, that she wist not what to do: for no help in that matter was to be had,4. cap. but only in the King, to whom she durst not go, because he had given a command∣ment, that whosoever should presume to come unto him before they were called, should suffer death. Where∣fore Esther not being called in thirty days before, was afraid of the danger. Nevertheless, she considering with her self, that either she must put her life in hazard, or else suffer the whole Nation of the Jews to perish, cast all fear aside,5. cap. and went to the King: And presenting her self before him, he put forth his golden Scepter in to∣ken
of his special favour towards her, demanding what she would have: Nothing (quoth she) but that it would please your Majesty, and Haman, to come to the Banquet which I have prepared. To the which he went, and being there, demanded of Esther, what thing it was she requi∣red. Oh (quoth she) if it shall please your Highness to give me my petition, and to fulfil my request,7. cap. then let my Soveraign Lord and Haman come again to morrow, and I will certifie your Grace of all. And on the morrow when the King was come, he said to Esther: Now what is thy request, I pray thee speak. Then spake Esther and said: If I thy poor Handmaid have found so much favour in thy sight (O King) to have my Petition granted, then I most humbly beseech thee to grant me my Life, and the Lives of all my People the Jews, which are not only sold to be Bond-servants, (for I would to God it were so) but to be slain and ut∣terly destroyed all in one day. Who is he (said the King) that dare presume to do such a deed? Oh said Esther, and if it shall please your Majesty to know the truth, our great Enemy and Adversary that hath conspi∣red our deaths, is even this wicked Haman, whom your Grace hath exalted so high. Upon the which complaint of Esther, the King's indignation was kindled so sore a∣gainst Haman, that he was hanged, and the Jews re∣stored for Esther's sake. Read the story of Mardocheus. Esther, Hid. Eubulus,2 Tim. 4.21. was one of the faithful Congregation at Rome with Paul, when he sent his Epistle to Timothy. Eubulus, VVise, or of good Counsel. Evil-merodach, was Nabuchodonosor's Son.2 King. 29.27, And being King after him, he delivered Jehojakim King of Juda out of Prison, wherein he had lain by the space of Thirty Years, and exalted him above all the Princes in
Babylon, assigning him a certain portion every day from his own Table as long as he lived. Evil-mero∣dach, Bruising, or beating in pieces the fools bitterness. A fool bitterly bruised, or contrite. Eunice,2 Tim. 1.5. was the Daughter of Lois, and the Mother of Timothy, which Women (both the Mother and the Daughter) are highly commended of Paul for their sin∣cerity of faith, which he desireth Timothy earnestly to follow. Eunice, a good Victory, or Conquest. Euodias,Phil. 4.2. was a certain faithful Preacher of Christ, to whom Paul sent commendations, desiring him and Syntyche to agree in one true concord of minds, in promoting the Gospel of Christ. Euodias, a good savour, or well smelling. Eutychus,Act. 20.9, &c. was a certain young Man, which when the Disciples were gathered together upon one of the Sabbath days (as their custome was) to break Bread, that is to say, to celebrate the Lord's Supper, gat him up into one of the Windows of an upper Chamber (where were many Lights set, because it was Night) to hear Paul preach, who continued his preaching so long, that the young Man waxed sleepy, and at the last, sleep came so sore upon him, that he fell out of the Window down to the ground three floors high. And when the people ran to take him up, they found him dead, and brought him into the house: when Paul perceived that he was dead, he went down to the young Man, and embraced him, and said to the Disciples: Be ye not troubled with this chance, for there is life in him. And so Paul went up again, and made an end of his Sermon. And in the morning after Paul's departing, the young Man was brought up into the Chamber alive, to the great comfort of all them that were there. Eutychus, Fortunate.
Ezechiel, the Son of Buzi the Priest,Ezek. 1.3. was a Prophet of the country Sareta in Syria, and of the line of Priests. He had many revelations and visions, and by him God shewed many great miracles, for in the time of a great scarcity, he by prayer obtained of God abundance of fish, whereby the people were sufficiently refreshed. Also when the people were oppressed,This story is drawn out of Master Eliots Dicbionary, with the story of Esay before. he stood and made their enemies so abashed with miracles and won∣derful sights, that they left off their enterprise. Being in the countrey of Chaldea, he told the people of many things done in the Temple of Jerusalem. He brought the people out of Chaldea to Jerusalem, to the reproach of the Infidels. He being in Babylon judged the Tribe of Dan and Gad, for that they had wickedly done against the Lord, in persecuting them which believed on the Law. And he shewed unto them a terrible token, for Adders devoured their children, and all their cattel. At the last, he was slain at Babylon by the Duke of the people (who caused him to be drawn with wild horses, which beat out his brains) because he reproved him for Idolatry, and he was buried in the field of Mamre, in the Mount of Sem and Arphaxad, progenitors of Abraham. He prophe∣sied of the return of the children of Israel, and also of the coming of Christ. He lived afore the Incarnation of Christ 617. years. Ezechiel, Strength of the Lord. F. FELIX,Act. 24. chap. was the high President at Cesarea under the Emperor, to whom Lysias the chief Captain sent Paul prisoner to be examined before him. And when he had brought Paul forth before his accusers, and heard his accusation made by one Tertullus an orator, Felix beckoned to Paul, that he should answer for him∣self, and when he had heard Pauls answer, he deferred the examination of the matter until another time, saying
unto Pauls adversaries, that for as much as Lysias the chief Captain did know the whole matter as it stood, he would at his coming, hear them further. And so gave commandment unto his under Captain, that he should in the mean season keep Paul in ward, but yet so, that he might be gently ordered, and be sometime at liberty, and that his familiars might freely repair unto him, and bring unto him such things as he lacked. It was not long after this before Felix (being returned to Cesa∣rea again with his wife Drusilla a Jew born) called forth Paul, being desirous to have further knowledge of him as concerning the Sect that he professed. And as Paul preached unto him of Righteousness, of Temperance, and of Judgment to come, Felix trembled for fear, and sent him away for that time, saying, that at a conveni∣ent leisure he would send for him again. This corrupt Magistrate gaped for bribes and rewards to loose Paul, and therefore called him the oftner, thinking that Paul would have given him a piece of money to be delivered, but when he saw that none would come, and Portius Festus was sent from Nero the Emperor to succeed him in his room, than willing rather to shew the Jews a plea∣sure, than to deliver Paul, left him in prison bound. Felix, Happy. Festus,Asts 25. cap. Portius (by Nero the Emperor) was made President in the room of Felix. Which Festus within three days after he came to his Province, went up from Ce∣sarea to Jerusalem, where the High Priests and Elders of the Jews, informed him of Paul, desiring his favour against him, and that he would send for him to have the matter pleaded there. Whose request if Festus had granted, they were fully bent to have slain Paul in the way coming to Jerusalem: But Festus made an∣swer that the prisoner should remain at Cesarea un∣til his coming, whither (said he) I intend shortly to
repair, and if there be any among you that is able to accuse him, let them go down with me, and they shall be heard. And so when Festus was come to Cesarea, the next day after he sate in judgment upon Paul. A∣gainst whom the Jews laid many grievous complaints, which they were not able to prove, so long as Paul an∣swered for himself. Then Festus (willing to do the Jews a pleasure) said unto Paul: Wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be judged of these things before me? Then said Paul; I see no cause wherefore I should go thither, but may be judged as well here as there. But forasmuch as the Jews seek my condemnation against all right and Justice, I appeal to the Emperor. Well (said Festus) thou hast appealed to the Emperour, and to him shalt thou go. Within a few days after this it chanced that King Agrippa with Bernice his wife, came unto Cesarea to salute and welcome Festus the new President. And during the Kings aboad there, Festus (on occasion) rehearsed Pauls matter unto him, saying: Felix my Predecessor left here a certain man in hold, whom the chief Priests and Elders of the Jews at Jerusalem, complained of, desiring me for their sakes to give sentence against him. To whom I answered, that it was not the custom of the Romans, to give sentence against any man, before his accusers were brought before him, that he might make answer for himself. And so when his accusers were come hi∣ther, I on the next day sat in judgment, and command∣ed the prisoner to be brought forth before me, against whom his accusers brought no accusation of such things as I supposed they would have done, but demanded cer∣tain questions of him concerning their own superstiti∣on, and laying to his charge one Jesus which was dead, whom he affirmed to be risen from death to life again. And forasmuch as I wist not well what to say in this mat∣ter, I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and
there be judged. And when he had refused that, and ap∣pealed to Cesar, I commanded him to be kept in prison, until I might have occasion to send him to Cesar. Then said the King to Festus: I have heard much of that same Jesus and his Disciples, and therefore am much desirous to hear the fellow speak my self, before he go to Cesar. Whereupon, Festus on the next morrow brought forth Paul into the common hall before Agrippa the King, saying on this wise: King Agrippa, and you all that be here present, ye see this man, whom all the Jews have complained on to me, both at Jerusalem and here, crying that he ought not to live any longer; and yet have I made inquiry, and can find nothing worthy of death that he hath committed: nevertheless, for as much as he hath appealed to the Emperour, I am determined to send him thither; and yet because I have no certain thing to write unto his Majesty, I have brought him forth before you, and specially to thee King Agrippa, that after examination had, I might have somewhat to write, for me-thinks it standeth with no reason, to send a priso∣ner, and not to shew withal what is laid to his charge. And when Agrippa saw Paul stand before him,Act. 26. cap. he said: thou art permitted to speak for thy self, if thou hast any thing to say in thy defence, say on. Then be∣gan Paul to speak, and made such a pithy declaration of his former life, and of his calling to Christ, that Festus (which was not skilful in the Jews religion) thought all his sayings to be but madness, and cryed out with a loud voice, saying, that he was beside himself, and that much learning had made him mad. Then after sentence given by King Agrippa that Paul should be sent to the Emperor,, Festus delivered him and certain other prisoners in bonds to the Emperours Centurion named Julius, who conveyed them into Italy. Festus, Solemn, or Holy-day.
Fortunatus, was a faithful Soldier of Christ,1 Cor. 16.17. whom Paul sent in the company of Stephanus and Achaicus with his letters from Philippi to the Corinthians. For∣tunatus, Lucky. G. GABELUS,Tobi. 1. c. was a certain man of the Kinred and Tribe of Tobias, dwelling in the country of Media in a City called Rages. And being fallen into poverty, Tobias lent him ten Talents of silver upon a bill of his hand, whereby Gabelus was greatly holpen,9. cap. and in process paid the same again to Tobie when he had need, with great thanks. Read Toby the younger. Ga∣belus, The end, or border, or threshold, and entrance. Gad, the son of Jacob and Zilpah.Gen. 30.11. Num. 32. cap. When the Tribe of Gad had long journeyed with the rest of the Is∣raelites their brethren, toward the land of Canaan; Gad and Reuben with the half Tribe of Manasses, desi∣red of Moses to have their possession on this side of Jor∣dan Eastward (and not on the other side) because it was a land meet for Cattle, whereof they had great store. To whom Moses answered, saying: Shall your bre∣thren go harnessed before the Lord, and ye sit still and do nothing? wherefore will ye discourage the hearts of the people? so did your Fathers when I sent them from Cadesh Barnea, to search and see the land, discouraging the hearts of the people, reporting so much evil of the land, that they were ready to return into Egypt, whose doings did so provoke the Lord to anger, that he sware that none of them all should see that good land, save Caleb and Joshua. Therefore (said he) if ye do now leave your brethren, and will not go harnessed before them until the Lord hath cast out their enemies, ye do so
much sin against the Lord, that he will surely find it out. And when they heard Moses say so, they an∣swered, saying: We do not intend to leave our brethren, our meaning is nothing less than so to do, but rather that we might be suffered to make in this place sheep∣folds for our cattel, and houses for our wives and chil∣dren, to leave them therein, which being done, we our selves will go forth before our brethren harnessed, and will not return home to our houses, until we have brought them to their places, and that every one of them be possessed in his inheritance. Then Moses contented with this answer, granted their request. And so they builded sheep-cotes for their Cattel, and houses for their families, wherein they left them, and went forth with their brethren, until they had performed their promise, and then returned home again.Joshua 22. cap. And when they had rest∣ed a while at home, they went and built an Altar near Jordan, and that a very great one. And when the rest of the children of Israel heard that the children of Reuben, Gad, and Manasses had built them an Altar inThis country also was calied. Canaan. because the Amorites dwelling there, were called Canaanites. Gilead beside Jordan, even on the same side that they were of in the land of Canaan, they were sore of∣fended, and so angry, that they gathered themselves to∣gether to battel against them. And being ready prepared, they sent Phinehas the son of Eleazar the Priest, and with him ten Princes, of every chief house one, to know for what purpose they had made them an Altar, and whe∣ther it were to rebel against the Lord or no. And when they had done their commission, the other answered, and said, that God was their witness, that they had done it for no evil purpose, either to rebel against the Lord, or to swerve from his laws and ordinances in any point, but rather for this consideration, to be a wit∣ness between us and you, and our generations after us, lest it should chance another day, that your children should say unto ours: what have ye to do with the Lord
God of Israel (ye children of Reuben and of Gad) the Lord (ye see) hath made Jordan a border between us and you, and therefore ye can have no part in the Lord with us; and so should your children make our chil∣dren cease from fearing the Lord. And therefore to pre∣vent such an inconvenience, we took advice, and made this Altar, that if any such kind of talk should be ministred of your children to ours in time to come, that then our children might answer and say again: Behold the fashion of the Altar of the Lord, which our fathers made, neither for burnt-offerings nor sacrifices, but for a witness between us and you, that our part is in the Lord as well as yours. And when Phinehas and the other Princes had heard their answer, they were well content, and returned, and so the matter ended. They called the Altar, Our witness that the Lord is God. Gad, a Band, or Garison. Gad the Prophet came to David lying in the land of Moab, saying: Abide not in hold,1 Sam 22.5. but depart and go into the land of Judah.2 Sam. 24.13. At another time when David had offended the Lord in numbring his people, Gad was sent unto him, to give him choice of three things, whe∣ther he would haveThree years of famin were past for the Gibeo∣nites matter, and this was the fourth year, to the which should have been added other three years. 1 Chron, 21.11, 12. seven years famin, or three months to fly before his enemies, or three days pestilence in the land. Gaius, a certainAct. 19.29.20.4. faithful brother dwelling in Derbe, was one of Pauls companions, and in great jeopardy of his life at Ephesus, thorow the sedition of Demetrius the Silversmith; but after the business was ended, he accompanied Paul into Asia. To this man St. John wrote his third Epistle. Gaius, the Lord, or Master of the tongue. Gallio was Proconsul of Achaia, to wit,Act. 18.1, &c. the Lord
Deputy under Cesar the Emperor in the Countrey of Achaia. In this time, it hapned the Jews which had made a conspiracy against Paul, to bring him before the place of judgment where Gallio sate as Judge, ac∣cusing Paul unto him, of new doctrine. But when Gallio perceived the controversie between the Jews and Paul was concerning Jewish Religion, he sought to rid his hands of them: and preventing Paul (who was ready to speak in his own defence) said: O ye Jews, if it were a matter of wrong, or an evil deed, reason would that I should hear you, but if it be a question of words, or names, or of your law, look unto it your self, for I will be no Judge in such mat∣ters. And so caused them to depart the place. Gallio, giving Milk, or having Milk. Gamaliel,Act. 5.34. &c. one of the ancient Pharisees, was Pauls Shool master, and in high estimation among the people, both for his excellent knowledge in the law, and for his singular wisdom. When the Apostles were brought by some of the Council for preaching in the name of Christ, whose lives (he perceived) the Council sought: he desired that for a while the Apostles might depart out of the Council-house. And when they were gone, he said: Ye men of Israel take heed to your selves what ye intend to do as touching these men, for be∣fore these days rose up one Theudas boasting himself, to whom resorced a number of men, about 400. who was slain, and they all which believed him, were scattered abroad, and brought to nought. After this man rose up one Judas of Galilee, in the time when Tri∣bute began, who drew away much people after him, he also perished, and all that obeyed him were scattered a∣broad. And now I say unto you, refrain your selves from these men, and let them alone: For if this Coun∣sel, or this work be of men, it will come to nought: but
if it be of God, ye cannot destroy it, lest ye be found to strive against God. Gamaliel, God's reward. Gedaliah, the Son of Ahikam,2 King. 25.22. &c. was a great Cap∣tain under Nabuchodonosor, whom he made Gover∣nour of the Land of Judah to rule the People which he had left behind him at the destruction of Jerusalem,Jer. 42. c. who intreated the People so gently and so friendly, that all the Jews which were scattered about in the Land (hearing of his gentleness) resorted unto Gedaliah, and sound great favour at his hand, for the which they bare unto him their hearty good wills. Insomuch that when Baal King of the Ammonites had sent one Ishmael (un∣der pretence of friendship) to slay him,Murder com∣mitted under pretence of friendship. the Captains of the Jews (having knowledge thereof) were so sore a∣fraid of Gedaliah, lest any misfortune should chance him, that they told him of Ishmael's conspiracy. And one among the rest named Johanan, offered himself to dispatch Ishmael out of the way so secretly, that the deed should never be known. But Gedaliah not crediting their words, neither yet mistrusting Ishmael, would suffer nothing to be done unto him.Jer. 41.2. And so forsaking the counsel and admonition of his friends, and trusting too much to Ishmael, he was of him (in fine) most treache∣rously slain in his own house. Gedaliah, the Greatness of the Lord, the hem, or skirt of the Lord. Gedeon, the Son of Joash,Judg 6. cap. was of the Tribe of Manasses. To whom the Angel of the Lord appear∣ed as he was threshing of Wheat, saying: The Lord is with thee thou valiant man. Then said Gedeon, If the Lord be with us, why is all this evil come upon us? We have heard (by our Fathers) of all the miracles which the Lord did for his People in Egypt, and now hath he forsaken us, and given us over into the hands of the Midianites. Well (said the Angel) go thy way in
this thy might and strength which I have given thee, for thou shalt deliver Israel out of the hand of their ene∣mies. Oh Lord (quoth Gedeon) wherewith shall I save Israel, seeing my Kindred is but poor, and I the least of all my Fathers house? With my help (saith the Lord) shalt thou save Israel, for I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the Midianites as if they were but one man. Then I beseech thee, O Lord (quoth Gedeon) shew me a sign that thou talkest with me, depart not hence till I come again with mine offering. Which offering be∣ing brought and dressed accordingly, the Angel had no sooner touched it with the end of his Rod, but fire came out of the stone whereon the Sacrifice lay, and consumed it altogether, and so the Angel vanished out of sight. The same Night following (at the Lords command∣ment) Gedeon went and destroyed the Altar of Baal which his Father had made, and cut down all the Grove about it, for the which deed, the People (having know∣ledge thereof) would have stoned him to death: ThenBy this ex∣ample of Jo∣ash we ought to justifie them that are zea∣lous of God's cause, though all the mul∣titude be a∣gainst us. Joash (to save Gedeon his Son) said unto them: what will ye do, will ye plead Baal's cause, or will ye be his defenders? If Baal be a god, let him revenge his own cause upon him that hath done the deed: And from that day forth, Gedeon was called Jerubbaal, that is, let Baal plead for himself, because he hath broken down his Altar. At this time, the Midianites and the Amalekites had pitched themselves in the Valley of Jez∣reel, and the spirit of the Lord came upon Gedeon, so that he called his People together to go against them.Judg. 7. cap. And to be the better confirmed in his Vocation, he took a fleece of wool, and laid it in the threshing place, and made his request unto God, saying: Oh Lord, if thou wilt let the dew (this night) fall upon the fleece only, and be dry on all the ground beside, then shall I be sure that thou wilt save Israel by my hands, as thou hast said: And on the morrow when Gedeon came to
take up the fleece, it was full of dew, and the ground dry all about. Then said Gedeon, O Lord, be not an∣gry, if I prove thee once more: let now the fleece be dry only, and dew upon all the earth; and so in the mor∣ning, the fleece was dry, and the ground all dewy. Ge∣deon now, being thus confirmed, pitched his Host to fight with his enemies. But when the Lord saw the number of his Army, he said to Gedeon: The People that thou hast with thee, are too many, therefore make a pro∣clamation thorowout all thine Host, that whosoever is timorous or fearful, let him depart home again; and there returned XXII. thousand, and ten thousand remai∣ned. Then said the Lord to Gedeon, the People are yet too many: Bring them down to the water side, and I will appoint them that shall go with thee. So many as do lap the Water with their Tongues as Dogs do, shalt thou take with thee, and the rest that kneel down upon their Knees to drink shalt thou refuse, as men un∣meet for this purpose. And when it came to tryal, all kneeled down to drink, saving 300. which lappedThis story here of Gedcon. and Jo∣nathan, 1 Sam. 14. and of Scnnacherib, 2 King. 19. doth manifestly shew that no King (as the Prophet Da∣vid saith) is preserved by the multitude of his Men, or strength of his Armies, but is staid and holden up, by the providence of God. wa∣ter with their hands and those Gedeon took with him, and sent the rest away. Then the Lord to strengthen Gedeon (lest he should faint in so great an enterprise) bad him take Phara his servant with him, and go down that Night to the Host of the Midianites, and hearken what they did say. And when they came near to the Host they heard one Man say to another: I have dreamed a dream, and methought a loaf of Barley bread tumbled into the Host of Midian, and came unto a Tent and smote it, that it fell and lay along on the ground. This is nothing else (quoth his fellow) save the Sword of Ge∣deon the Son of Joash a man of Israel: for into his hands hath God delivered Midian, and all the Host. Then Gedeon (hearing this) praised God, and returned to his men, who were so animated with his joyful ty∣dings, that most couragiously they fell upon the infinite
number of the Midianites, and overthrew them, and put them to flight every one, in the which flight, the Ephrai∣mites (on the other side of Jordan) took Oreb and Zeeb (two mighty Captains of the Midianites) & sent their heads to Gedeon,Judg. 8. cap. who was following the chase after Zeba and Zal∣munna (Kings of Midian) which two (at the last) he took and led them back to the Men of Succoth & Phanuel (who had denied him sustenance before) and said unto them: Behold, here be the men by whom ye upbraided me, say∣ing: Are the hands of Zeba and Zalmunna already in thine hands, that we should give bread unto thy weary People? I told you then, that when the Lord had delivered them into my hands, I would return and tear your flesh with Thorns and Briers of the Wilderness, and break down the Tower of Phanuel: And so to perform his promise, he fell upon the Men of Succoth and Phanuel, and put them to most painful torments and death, and slew Zeba and Zalmunna, with his own hands. Thus he delivered Israel out of the hands of the Midianites which had kept them seven years in subjection. And when he had judged them forty years, he dyed, leaving behind him 70. Sons (for he had many Wives) beside Abimelech, which his Concubine bare unto him in the City of Sichem. But when Gedeon was dead, the Is∣raelites turned from God again, and went a whoring after Baalim, and made Baal-berith their God, forget∣ting the Lord their God, which had delivered them out of the hands of their enemies: neither shewed they mer∣cy on the house of Jerubbaal, according to all the goodness which he had shewed unto them: But contrariwise (like men unthankful, and void of all faithfulness) consen∣ted to the utter destruction of all his Posterity. Gede∣on, a Breaker, or destroyer. Gehazi waited upon Eliseus the Prophet, and was his servant.2 King. 5. cap. On a time, there came to his Master out of
the Land of Syria, a certain Prince named Naaman, to be cured of his Leprosie. The which Prince being re∣stored to health, offered to Eliseus a great reward, which he refused. And when Gehazi saw the Noble man gone, and that his Master had received nothing, he then (be∣ing stricken with covetousness) followed after Naaman. And when the Prince saw the Prophets servant come running so fast after him, he (for the reverence he bare to his Master) descended from his Chariot to meet him, and asked of him if all were well with his Master or no. Yea (said Gehazi) all is well: But even now there is come to my Master from Mount Ephraim, two young Men of the Sons of the Prophets, wherefore he hath sent me to desire thee to let him have one Talent of Silver, and two change of Garments. Then the Prince (of his liberality) gave him two Talents, and made his Men to carry the Money and Stuff after Gehazi. And when the Men had brought it nigh unto the place where he would have it, he took it of their hands, and let them depart, and conveighed it privily into his own Chamber. And as soon as Gehazi came into the presence of his Master, he demanded where he had been. No where, quoth he. No? (said Eliseus) went not my heart with thee when the man turned again from his Chariot to meet thee? Is it now a time to receive Money or Garments? Well, forasmuch as thou hast offended in this, the Leprosie of Naaman shall cleave unto thee and to thy Seed for ever. And so he went out from his Master a Leper as white as snow. Read more of Gehazi, in the Stories of Eliseus his Master. Gehazi, Vally of vision. Gershon, the Son of Moses, had a Brother called Eli¦ezar.Exod. 2.22, 18.2. Their Mothers name was Zipporah the Daughter of Raguel. But of Gershon the Son of Levi came the Ger∣shonites,Exod. 6.17. Num. 3.17, 26.57. who had the governance of the habitation within the tabernacle. Gershon, his banishment, or the strangers change.
Gibeonites:Joshua 9. The Gibeonites hearing of the great destruction that Joshua had made at Jericho and Ai, were in such fear that they wist not how to save their lives, but by this policy. When they perceived Joshua to draw nigh unto Gibeon, they chose out certain Men among them to send as Ambassadours to Joshua, and made their provision of dry and mouldy Bread: And put their Wine into old Bottles all rent and torn: and shod themselves with old clouted shooes: and put on their backs old garments, and so sent them forth to Joshua to obtain peace. And when Joshua looked upon them, and beheld their simple state: he asked what they were, and from whence they came: They answered, from a far Countrey are thy Servants come because of the name of the Lord thy God: for we have heard of his fame and power, and what he did in the Land of Egypt, and in all other places till now. And long have we tra∣vailed to come hither as ye may see; for this our food, the day we came forth was hot, our bottles, shooes, and garments all new, and now are they old and torn, and our Bread dry and mouldy, wherefore we shall desire your favour and peace. Then Joshua (believing it had been so) swore unto the Gibeonites, and made a covenant of peace with them, and let them go. Within three days after it fortuned the Israelites to come to the City of Gibeon, thinking to have destroyed it. But when they saw that they were the People, which (a little be∣fore) had obtained peace at their hands, they would not slay them, because of their oath, but went to Joshua and told him. Then Joshua sent for them, & demanded where∣fore they had so deceived him. They answered, it was told us, that God commanded Moses, to give you this Land, and to slay all the Inhabitants thereof, and therefore were we sorced to make this provision for our lives. And now we be in your hands, to do with us as shall please
you. Well (said Joshua) for our oath sake ye shall have your lives. But for as much as ye have so craftily de∣ceived us, the Lord hath determined, that ye shall be in bondage under Israel, all the days of your lives, and be Hewers of Wood, and Water-drawers for the Con∣gregation and House of God continually: And so the Is∣raelites took their Cities, but saved their lives. After this,Joshua 10.5, 6, &c. the Kings of the Amorites (hearing how the Gibeonites had made peace with Israel) came upon them, and be∣sieged Gibeon, which was the greatest City in all the Kingdom of the Amorites, whereupon, the Gibeonites were constrained to send to Joshua for his aid, who came from Gilgal, and with a great power rescued them, and took the Kings of the Amorites (which were five in number) and hanged them on five several Trees, and de∣stroyed all their People and Countries.2 Sam. 1, 2; &c. Thus the Gibeo∣nites continued in Bondage under the Israelites with their lives, until the time of King Saul, who then for a zeal he had to the Children of Israel and Juda, slew a great number of them, which deed God punished in the days of King David, at what time he sent a Famine upon the Land, which continued for the space of three years, for when David enquired at the Lord, the cause of that Plague, answer was made him by God, that it was for Saul and his bloody house, who had killed the Gibeonites, which Gibeonites were none of the Seed of Israel, but a remnant of the Amorites, with whom the Children of Israel had made a bond of peace. Then Da∣vid asking the Gibeonites what he should do for them, and wherewith he should recompence them, they said: we will neither have Silver nor Gold of Saul, nor of his House, nor that any Man of Israel be killed for our sakes, but the Man that hath consumed us, and imagined to bring us to naught, him will we destroy. Therefore let his seven Sons be delivered unto us, that we may hang them up before the Lord. Then David caused the
two Sons of Rizpah (Saul's Concubine) and the five Sons ofHere is Michol taken for Merob, which was Wafe to Adri∣el, as appea∣reth, 1 Sam. 18.19. For Michol was the Wife of Phalti, and had never child, as ap∣peareth, 1 Sam. 25.44. 2 Sam. 6.23. Michol whom she bare to Adriel, to be de∣livered unto the Gibeonites, who took and hanged them upon an Hill before the Lord. And thus were the Gibeo∣nites revenged on Saul. Gilead, was theNum. 26. Son of Machir, and his Children were these, Jeezer, Helek, Asriel, Shechem, Shemida, and Hepher. Gilead, an heap of witness. Godolia, look Gedaliah. Golias, was a1 Sam. 17. mighty strong Gyant, whom the Philistines had brought with them to Battel against the Host of Israel. His stature was six cubits and a span. His Helmet upon his head was of brass, and the Boots on his Legs of the same. His coat of Male weighed 5000. shekels of brass. The shaft of his Spear which he bare in his hand was like a Weavers beam. And the head upon the same weighed 600. shekels of Iron. This man being thus armed, came out from the Philistines (one bearing his shield before him) and standing between the two Hosts in a Valley, he cryed to the Host of Israel, saying: Why are ye come to set your Battel in aray? am not I a Philistine, and you the servants of Saul? choose you out a Man, and let him come down to me. And if he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your servants: and if I can overcome him, and kill him, then shall ye be our servants, and serve us. Thus came he day by day defying the whole Host of Israel for the space of forty days, wherewith the Israelites were sore afraid and discomfited, and durst not abide his sight. But God (who by his secret providence had appointed out a Man to match him) caused Jesse to send his young son David to the Host of Israel to see his Brethren how they did. And as he stood with them, and heard the despite∣full
words of Golias which he spake against the holy Host of Israel: The spirit of God (even at that instant) put such a courage into the heart of David, that he slipt away from his Brethren unto the People, (whom he saw in great fear) and said: What shall be done to the Man that killeth this Philistine, and taketh away the shame from Israel? and what is this uncircumcised Heathen, that he should thus revile the Host of the li∣ving God? David uttering this bold manner of speech once or twice, he was (at the last) brought before King Saul, to whom he said on this wise: Oh King, let no Man's heart fail him, or be afraid this day, for I thy Servant will go and fight with yonder Philistine. Thou art not able to stand in his hands (quoth the King) for he is a Man brought up all the days of his life in feats of War, and thou art yet but a Child, without experience or knowledge thereof. Then David to strengthen the weak faith of the King, said thus unto him: As thy Servant was keeping his Father's Sheep, there came a Lion and a Bear likewise, and took a sheep out of the Flock. Then I (not fearing the force of these two cruel Beasts) ran out, first after the Lion, and took the prey out of his mouth, and in spite of his Beard I slew him. Likewise I served the Bear. Wherefore I have no doubt, but as the Lord did aid me then, so will he now against this bragging Phili∣stine, that hath so railed on the Host of the living God. Then Saul (perceiving the power of God to be with David) put his Armour upon him. But David (not be∣ing wont to such) put it off again, and took him to his old accustomed Weapon, which was his Sling. And so, having that in his hand, and his Shepherds Bag about his Neck, with a few little Stones provided therein, he gat him down to the place where the Philistine stood waiting for a Man to encounter with him. And as he saw David draw near, and beholding the manner of his
Weapon that he bare in his hand, he disdained him great∣ly. And cursing David by all his gods, he said in a great fury: Am I a Dog, that thou comest to me with staves, come hither my Child, and I will give thy flesh to the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Field. Nay (quoth David) thou comest to me with Sword, Spear, and Shield, but I am come unto thee, in the Name of the Lord of Hosts, the God of the Host of Israel, whom thou dost despise and blaspheme. He shall this day de∣liver thee into my hands, and I shall smite thee, and take thy Head from thee, and give the Carkasses of all your Host to the Fowls of the Air, and Beasts of the Field to devour and eat, that thou, and all the World may know, that there is a God in Israel. The Philistine now was in such a chafe, that he began to buckle him to his Weapon, thinking to have dispatched David with no great ado. But David having his Sling prepared rea∣dy in his hand, slang out the stone at his Face (the Lord directing the same) and smote the Philistine so even, and deep in his Forehead, that he fell down groveling un∣to the Earth, and then ran David and smote off his. Head. Thus was this monstrous Gyant confounded, and all the Host of the Philistines put to flight and slain. Golia, a Departing, or going away: or a heaping together, a turning, or opening and detecting. Gomer:Hos. 1.3. The Lord appearing to Hosea the Prophet, said: Go thy way, and take an Harlot to thy Wife, and get Children by her, for the Land hath committed great whoredome against the Lord. So he went and tookNot that the Prophet did this thing in effect, but he saw this in a Vision, or else was com∣manded by God to set forth under this Parable. or figure, the Idolatry of the synagogue, and of the peo∣ple her chil∣dren. Gomer the Daughter of Deblaim, who bare unto him two Sons and one Daughter. The first Son was called Jesreel: the Daughter Lo-ruhamah: and the second son, Lo-ammi. Gomer, a Consumer. Gorgias, a Man of great1 Mac. 3. chap. 4. experience in War, was
Governour of Idumea, and one (among other Noble Cap∣tains) whom Lysias (the Overseer of all the Kings bu∣siness) sent against the Jews to destroy them. And think∣ing by his policy to have stollen upon Judas Macha∣beus by night, and so to have overcome him, he was pre∣vented, so that he durst not meet Judas in the Field,2 Mac. 8. but fled into the Land of the Heathen. And when Josephus and Azarias took upon them, in the absence of Judas (contrary to his commandment) to go out against the Heathen to get them a name, Gorgias issued1 Mac. 5. out of the City of Jamnia, and slew two thousand of their men, and chased Josephus and Azarias to the borders of Jew∣rie. Finally, after many conflicts with the Jewes,2 Mac. 10. chap. 12. a certain Captain named Dositheus had almost taken him, if rescue had not been, thorow the which he escaped. and fled into Moresa, and was never seen more. Read the story of Dositheus. Gorgias, Terrible. H. HADAD,1 King. 1 1 14, &c. being but a little Boy born in the Land of Edom, and sprung of the King of Edoms seed (what time as David went about to destroy all the Men Children in Edom) fled with certain Edomites of his Fathers servants into the Land of Aegypt. Where (in process) he gat such favour with Pharaoh King of the Land, that he gave him great possessions, and married him to the Queens Sister, who bare unto him a Son called Genubath, which Child was brought up in King Pharaoh's House, among his Children. But when tidings was brought to Hadad of the death of David and Joab, he went to the King, and besought him to let him depart into his own Countrey again. Why said the King, what hast thou lacked here with me, that thou wouldest now so fain return home again? Nothing said Hadad, but that I have a mind to see my Countrey, and therefore I pray thee let me go. And so he departed
out of Egypt from Pharaoh; forThe Lord had reserved this Idolater to punish and scourge his People for their sins. the Lord had stirred him up to be an adversary to Solomon, who had turned his heart from the Lord his God, and served strange gods. And so Hadad reigned over Syria, and abhorred Israel sore, and vexed them so long as Solomon reigned. Hadad, Joy. Hadarezer,1 Sam 8.3. &c. 10.16. the Son of Reob King of Zoba, had long War with Thoi King of Hamoth. And at the last as he went to recover the Borders by the River Pherar, David met with him, and took 1700 Horsmen of his Host; and twenty thousand Footmen, and cut off the hoofs of all his Chariot-Horses, saving an hundred which he reserved to himself. And took away his shields of Gold and brought them to Jerusalem. And took out of his Cities exceeding much Brass, whereof Solomon afterward made all the Brasen Vessels in the Temple of the Lord. Again, when this Hadarezer (with all the Kings that served him) went to rescue Hanon King of the Ammonites against David, he lost 700. Chariots, and 4000. Footmen, and his Captain-General slain. Then the Kings which served Hadarezer, being so discomfited, made peace with David and served him, and never would help the Am∣monits more. Hadarezer, Beautiful help. Ham,Gen. 9.18. was the second Son of Noe. Who (on a time) seeing his Father lye unseemly discovered in his Tent, laughed him to scorn: And in derision and con∣tempt of his Father, brought Sem and Japhet his two Brethren to see the uncomely sight: But they, moved with shamefastness and honesty, covered their Fathers secrets, and would not look upon them. And when Noe was awaked out of sleep and perceived what Ham had done: He would not curse him whom the Lord had blest, but said toOf this Canaan came the Canaanites, that wick∣ed Nation, who were al∣so cursed of God. Canaan his Son (which had also, as some suppose, derided his Grandfather Noe:) Cur∣sed
be Canaan, a servant of servants shall he be unto his Brethren. Ham, Indignation, or Heat. Haman, was the Son of Amada,Esther 3. cap. and served Aha∣suerus King of Persia, who so highly promoted him, that every Man bowed the Knee to Haman, and did as much honour unto him (in a manner) as they did to the King himself. And being thus exalted above all other Princes about the King, and honoured of all men, there was notwithstanding a certain Jew born, named Mar∣docheus, which would neither bow nor bend unto him as others did, which being marked of Haman, he took so great indignation against Mardocheus, that he sought his utter destruction, and purchased a licence of the King, for ten thousand talents of Silver, to have him and all the Jews destroyed in one day. But while the Writings were a making, and Posts sent into all Quarters for the Jews dispatch, Mardocheus gat knowledge of all Haman's wicked intents and purposes, and found the means to have the same uttered unto Queen Esther. Who then (to save Mardocheus and all the Jews) did hazard her self to go to the King, and found the means to bring him and Haman to a Banquet, which she had pre∣pared. Now was Haman so proud and joyful of the Queens favour, that he went home to his House and called all his friends together, making great boast to them of his glory, riches, and authority: But chiefly what special favour Queen Esther bare unto him above all Men, insomuch she had invited no Man to her Banquet with the King, save only him: And to morrow (quoth he) I must be there again. But yet all this doth not satisfie me, so long as I see Mardocheus the Jew sitting at the King's Gate. Then said Zares his Wife, Let there be a pair of Gallows made of 50. Cubits high, and speak to morrow unto the King, that Mardocheus may be hanged thereon. And so Haman following his Wives
counsel, caused the Gallows to be prepared, and on the morrow gat him to the Court, and standing there wai∣ted when the King would call for him, that he might speak to dispatch Mardocheus. The King (who the night before had looked the Chronicles and found out the fidelity of Mardocheus) sent for Haman, and said What shall be done to the Man, whom the King would honour? Then Haman thinking the King had gone a∣bout to honour none but him, said: Let the Man whom the King intendeth to bring to honour, be arrayed in such Royal Apparel as the King useth to wear, and set upon the King's Horse with the Crown Imperial upon his Head, and command one of the King's Princes to carry him about the streets of the City with a proclamation before him, saying: Thus shall it be done to the Man, whom the King pleaseth to bring to honour. Then said the King: take the Rayment and the Horse, and go thou to Mardbeheus the Jew which sitteth at my Gate, and fail not to do unto him, all that thou hast faid. Then went Haman about the King's commandment, and per∣formed all things according to his mind, which being done, he gat him home with an heavy heart, to his Wife and friends, declaring unto them what things had happened unto him. Then said they? If Mardochens be of the seed of the Jews before whom thou hast begun to fall, thou shalt not prevail against him, but shalt surely fall before him. And while they were thus talking, a Messenger came for Haman to go with the King to the Banquet: at the end of which Banquet, Esther opened all the wickedness of Haman before the King, who took the matter so grievously that he rose from the Board, and went into the Garden in a great anger. Then Haman (perceiving a mischief towards him) went and fell down at the Beds-feet or Couch whereon the Queen fate, and besought her grace for his life. And when the King came in again, and found him with the Queen,
he said: Will he force the Queen also, before me in the house? Which word was no sooner gone out of the Kings mouth, but Haman'sIt was the manner of the Persians, when one was out of the Kings favour, to co∣ver his face. face was covered, and so had out, and hanged upon the Gallows, which he had prepared in his own house for Mardocheus. Read the story of Esther, and of Mardocheus. Haman, Troubling: or making burly burly, or preparing. Hanani, was a Prophet sent of God to Asa King of Juda, declaring unto him,2 Chron. 16, 7, &c. how greatly he had displeased the Lord, for making a Covenant with Benhadad King of Syria, and for doing his message was cast into Prison. Read the story of Asa. Hanani, Gracious, or Merciful, or Giving. Hananiah, the Son of Azur, was a false Prophet,Jer. 28. cap. which prophesied unto the People of Israel, that God would break the yoke of Nebuchadnezzar King of Ba∣bylon, from the neck of all Nations within the space of two years, and in token thereof took the yoke from the Prophet Jeremies neck and brake it. But Jeremy the true Prophet of God, reproved the false prophecie of Hananiah, saying: That in stead of the yoke of wood which he had taken from his neck, the Lord would put a yoke of Iron upon the necks of all these Nations that they should serve the King of Babylon, and that the false Prophet Hananiah himself should dye the same year: which things came truly to pass, as Jeremy had spoken. Hananiah, Grace of the Lord. Hanun, was the Son of Nahash King of the Ammo∣nites,2 Sam. 10.1. unto whom David most gently sent to comfort him upon the death of his Father, which gentleness was most ungently and unthankfully taken, of the Lords and Councellors of the young King Hanun. Who perswaded the young King, that David had not sent to comfort him
upon the death of his Father: But had rather sent a sort of spies (under the colour of friendship) to seek the means how to destroy his Cities and whole Realm. Upon the which false and unhonest surmise of his wicked Counsellers, Hanun caused the one half of every Mans Beard to be shaven, and their Garments to be cut off hard by the Buttocks, and so sent them home again to Da∣vid, with much shame and disgrace.Ingratitude punished. Upon which occasion David became his utter enemy, and made such sore War against him, that in conclusion Hanun was taken, and lost his Regal Crown, which David put upon his own Head, and wore it before Hanun's face, and carried away all his Treasure and Jewels, took his People, whereof some he sawed in two pieces: over other some he caused Carts new and sharp shod with Iron to be driven: some he took and shred their flesh, as Cooks do Pye∣meat, and cast other some in hot burning Ovens. Thus was Hanun rewarded, for his ingratitude. Hanun, Faithful, or true, a Schoolmaster, and the Mothers Son, or Child. Hazael,2 King. 8, 8, &c. was a certain great Man, which served Benhadad King of Syria, which Benhadad fortuning to fall sick, sent Hazael to Eliseus the Prophet to know whether he should recover of his disease or no. And when the Prophet saw Hazael, he could not look him in the face for shame, but cast his Head aside and wept. Then Hazael marvelling at the Prophets behaviour towards him, demanded of Eliseus wherefore he wept: I weep (quoth the Prophet) to see the great evils that thou shalt do to the Children of Israel: Thou shalt break down their strong Cities and set them on fire, and slay their young Men with the Sword, and dash the brains out of the sucking Children, and rent in pieces the Women with Child. Then said Hazael, dost thou make thy Servant a Dog, that I should lack so much huma∣nity
and pity, to do these things? Well (said the Prophet) thou shalt do as I have said, for the Lord hath shewed me that thou shalt be King of Syria. And so Hazael departed home to the King his Master, and told him that he should recover, for so the Prophet had said unto him. But on the next morrow, when Hazael saw his time, he took a thickUnder the pretence to refresh or ease him, he stifled him with this cloth. 2 King. 8. 28, 2 Chron. 22. cloth and dipt it in Water; and spread it so on the King's face that he dyed: After whose death Hazael raigned in his stead. And being sta∣blished in his Kingdom, he made War with Joram King Ahab's Son, and was a cruel adversary to Israel, all the days of his life. Hazael, seeing God. Helkiah, was the High-Priest in the days of Josias,2 King. 22.8. who in repairing the Temple of the Lord, chanced (by the providence of God) to find the Book of the Law,The Copy that Moses left them, as appeareth 2 Chron. 34.14. the which he sent to the King by Shaphan the Scribe, which he read unto him. Helkiah, the Lords portion, or part, the Lords lenity or gentleness. Heliodorus, being in great favour with Seleucus,2 Mac. 3. cap. King of Asia, and Steward of his House, was sent to Jerusalem to fetch away the treasure out of the Temple, which one Symon the Governour thereof had betrayed unto the King. And being come to Jerusalem, he was lovingly received of Onias the High-Priest into the City. But when Heliodorus had uttered the cause of his com∣ing, and that his Commission was to bring the Money unto the King, there was no small fear thorowout the whole City. For then all men from the highest to the low∣est were so oppressed with sorrow and heaviness, that they knew not what to do, but fell to prayer, lifting up their eyes to Heaven, and calling upon him which had made a Law concerning stuff given to keep, that he would safely preserve the same, which was there committed in custody. And while the Priests and People were thus
lamenting and crying upon God, and on the other side Heliodorus personally with his Men of War about the Treasury: There appeared an Horse with a terrible Man sitting upon him deck'd in Harness of Gold, which Horse smote at Heliodorus with his fore-feet to beat him from the place. Also there appeared two fair and beautiful young Men in goodly apparel, which stood on each side of Heliodorus and scourged him, so long that he fell down to the ground as dead and so was carried out of the Tem∣ple, without speech or hope of life, whereby the great power of God was manifest and known. Then certain of Heliodorus friends, besought Onias to call upon God to give him his life, who was even at that time giving up the ghost. Then Onias (lest the King should suspect the Jews had done him some harm) called upon God and obtained his life. And being revived to health a∣gain, the two young Men which had scourged him be∣fore, appeared and said: Thank Onias the High Priest for thy life, at whose prayer the Lord hath restored thee, and now that God hath scourged thee for thine offences, give him praise and thanks, and make his might and power manifest and open to all Men. And when the Men had spoken these words and were vanished away, He∣liodorus made his Oblation to God, and gave hearty thanks to Onias for his life, and so returned home a∣gain to the King, declaring unto him the great and manifest works of God that were done upon him. The King (after this) being yet desirous of the treasure that was in the Temple, asked of Heliodorus, whom he thought meet to send once again to Jerusalem for the money: He answered, saying: Oh King, if thou hast any enemy or Traitor unto thy Realm, send him thi∣ther, and thou shalt be sure to have him well punished, and hardly to escape with his life. For doubtless, (said he) In that place there is a special power and working of God, for he that dwelleth in Heaven, visiteth and defen∣deth
deth that place, and none escapeth unpunished or plagued, that cometh to do it harm. Thus did Heliodorus mag∣nifie the power of God, and would no more enter into such danger. Heliodorus, the Gift of the Son. Henoch, the Son of Jared, at the age of 65.Gen. 5.18. years, begat Mathusaleh, and after that, he lived 300. years, and begat both Sons and Daughters, and walked al∣ways before the Lord in an upright and godly life. And when he had lived 365. years, the LordTo inquire where He∣noch became, is meer cu∣riosity. took him away, that he was no more seen. Henoch, Taught, or dedicate. Hermas, was a faithful Christian,Rom. 16.14. unto whom Paul sent commendations from Corinth to Rome. Herman, A prop, or upholder, or an earing. Hermogenes,2 Tim. 1.15. was a faint hollow-hearted Gos∣peller of the Country of Asia, which forsook Paul and gave him over, whose unfaithfulness Paul pronounceth to Timothy. Hermogenes, Begotten by Mercury, or the generation, or increase of lucre, or the refuge. Herod, was an Idumean born,Matth. 2. cap. and the first stran∣ger that reigned over the Jews. In whose time Christ the Saviour of the World (by the will of God) came into this World, of whose birth he had first knowledge of the Magi, or wise men, which came from the East to Jeru∣salem, demanding there, for him that was born King of the Jews, saying that they had seen his Star, and were come to worship before him. Which news trou∣bled Herod so sore, that he sent for all the chief Priests and Scribes of the People, to know of them where Christ should be born. And being of them perfectly in∣formed, that he should be born in the City ofFor there is another Bethlchem, in the Tribe of Zabulon. Beth∣lehem in Jewry, he sent for the Wise men, and after inqui∣sition
made what time the star appeared unto them, he bad them go to Bethlehem, and make diligent search for the Child, and when they had found him, to bring him word again, that he might go and worship him also. But when they had found the Child, and had made their offering, they were warned of God to break their pro∣mise with Herod, and to return home another way. Which thing beingEusebius saith, that Herod for this slaugh∣ter done. would have killed him∣self, but be∣ing lett by his servant, he dyed within five days, when he had reigned 37. years. told to Herod, he fell into such a rage (for being so mocked) that in his madness he sent forth Ministers to Bethlehem, which killed all the Infants that were in the City, and in the coasts thereof, of the age of two years, or under, for whose great cruelty shewed upon those Innocents, God payed him home soon after. Herod, the glory of the skin: or boasting, and glorying in skins. Herod,Mattb. 14.1, &c. Luke 3.1. the Tetrarch of Galilee, was Brother to Philip Tetrarch of Iturea, and being reproved of John Baptist for keeping his Brother Philip's Wife, he cast John in Prison, where he remained until Herod's birth∣day was come, in the which solemn Festival day, it chanced that the Daughter of Philip and Herodias dan∣ced before Herod, and pleased the King so well, that he sware unto her, that whatsoever she would ask him, it should be granted, not thinking she would have asked John Baptist's Head,Mar. 6. cap. for (as Saint Mark saith) Herod knowing John to be a just and an holy Man, did both fear and reverence him, and heard his preaching, and did many things thereafter, and was very sorry the Maid had asked none other thing. But nevertheless, for keeping his Oath, which he had made before so many Noble-men, he caused the innocent Man's head to be cut off, and given to the Damosel. This Herod and Pilate (Lieutenant of Jewry) had been long at variance. And for the pleasure that Pilate shewed to Herod, in sending Jesus bound unto him to be examined, he was at one
with him again. For Herod had long desired to see Je∣sus. And hoping now to have seen some Miracles done by him, he demanded many questions of Jesus, to the which he would make no answer at all. Then Herod, perceiving that Jesus would neither speak nor do a∣ny thing at his pleasure, he began to despise and revile him, and (in mockery) arrayed him in a long white Gar∣ment, and sent him to Pilate again. Herod:Act. 12. cap. This Man was a great Persecutor of the Apostles. He beheaded James the Brother of John: and seeing that deed to content and please the Jews well,This Herod was called Agrippa the Son of A∣ristobulus: he was nephew unto Herod the great, and Brother of Herodias. he took Peter also, and cast him into Prison, intending af∣ter Easter (which was at hand) to have him put to death also. Finally, upon a certain day appointed to shew himself in his pomp and glory, he made such an Oration before the Assembly, that (for the pleasantness of his speech) the common people at the end thereof, gave a mighty shout, saying, it was the voice of a God, and not of a Man. And because he gloried in their boasting, and took that honour unto himself, which he ought to have given to God, he was immediately smitten by the Angel of God, and eaten of Worms, whereof he most mi∣serably dyed. Herodion, was Paul's Kinsman,Rom. 16.1. unto whom he sent commendations from Corinth on this wise: Salute Herodion my Kinsman. Herodion, the Song of a young Virgin, or of a Woman conquering. Herodias, was Wife to Philip, Herod's Brother,Matth. 14.3. to whom she brought forth aWhich Daughter (as Josephus writeth) was called Salo∣mon. Daughter. This Woman being more familiar with Herod than honesty requi∣red, grew into such favour with him, that he (contrary to the Law of Moses) married her, his Brother being a∣live. Against which unlawful marriage, John Baptist spake so much to Herod's reproof, that she fearing
lest John would make Herod break off the incestuous marriage, counselled her Daughter (which danced before him) to ask the Head of John Baptist. And so by the wicked device of this unchast Woman, John lost his Head. Herodias, signifieth that, that the word Herod before doth. Hesron,Gen. 46.9. Num. 26.6. was the Son of Reuben, and of him came the Kindred of the Hesronites. Hesron, the Arrow of rejoycing. Hesron,1 Chron. 2.9. the Father of Caleb, being come to the age of threescore years, took to Wife the Daughter of Ma∣chir, who bare unto him a Son called Segub. Hezekiah,2 King. 18. and 19. cap. the Son of Ahaz, was xxv. years of age when he began his reign over Juda. He was the godliest Prince that ever reigned before or after among the Kings of Juda. He cleansed his Country from all I∣dolatry, and brake down the brasen Serpent (which Moses had set up) as soon as he saw it abused. He brought in again the true honouring of God, and renewed the Passeover. He had such a sure trust and confidence in God, that at his Prayer the Angel of the Lord slew in one Night of the Assyrians (which were come to destroy Jerusalem) an hundred fourscore and five thousand, and smote the rest into such a fear,20. cap. that they ran away. After this he fell sick, and was admonished by the Pro∣phet Esay, to set his house in order, for he should sure∣ly dye. Then he turned his face to the wall, and made his petition to God, saying: Oh Lord remember (I beseech thee) how I have walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, & have done that which is good in thy sight; and speaking these words, heHe wept, not so much for his own death, as for fear that Ido∣latry should be restored, which he had destroyed. wept very sore. The Lord then moved with his tears, returned the Pro∣phet again, to comfort him with these news, that he
should receive his health, and be able the third day to go up to the House of the Lord, and that he had added to his days, xv. years more, and to assure him of this his pro∣mise, he would cause the Sun to return his course, ten degrees backward. At this time, Berodach sirnamed Baladad King of Babylon, sent to Hezekiah Ambassa∣dours, to signifie unto him, how glad and joyful he was of his recovery, which kindness was so greatly e∣steemed of Hezekiah, that he thought he could not do them too much pleasure, but made them privy to all his trea∣sure, silver and gold, and whatsoever he had in his House, or in any other part of his Realm, heBecause he was moved with ambiti∣on and vain glory, and see∣med also to rejoyce in the friendship of him that was God's enemy, the Lord was displea∣sed. shewed it freely unto them. Wherefore the Lord (not content there with) commanded Esay the Prophet to go and tell Hezekiah, That forasmuch as he had made the messengers of Ba∣bylon privy to all the commodities of his Land; The days should come that all things which he had in his House, and whatsoever his Fathers had layed up in store before him, should be carried to Babylon. Then Heze∣kiah knowing the Prophet to be the true messenger of God, humbled himself and said: Thy word (O Lord) is welcome unto me, but yet I shall desire thee, not to send those evils in my days, but rather peace and truth. He raigned xxix. years and died. Hezekiah, the strength of the Lord: or the Lords holding. Hymeneus,1 Tim. 1.20. after he had tasted of the word of God and been a Professor of the same, he fell away and be∣came an utter enemy, and a spiteful railer against the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, denying the chiefest point and foundation of the Gospel, which is,2 Tim. 2.17. that the Re∣surrection is past, wherewith he destroyed the Faith of many Persons. For the which errour, and other his rail∣ing and jestings against the truth of GOD's Word, Paul excommunicated him, that he thorow correction might be ashamed of his fault and turn again to
Christ. Hymeneus, a Marriage-song: or Bride-song. Hiram,2 Sam. 5.11. King of Tyre, favoured David so much, that he (hearing that David went about to build him an House) sent him both Timber and Workmen to finish the same. Also, when Solomon (after the death of Da∣vid his Father) sent to this King for Wood and Timber to build the Lord's Temple,1 King. 5 cap. cap. 9.11, &c. he praised God that had sent David so wise a Son, to sit in his Seat, and gran∣ted him Timber of Cedar, Firr and other precious Wood, so much as he would desire. Wherefore Sole∣mon to gratifie Hiram again, sent him twenty thou∣sand Quarters of Wheat, and twenty Butts of Oyl, and gave him also twenty goodly Cities, which Cities Hiram called the Land of Cabul, forasmuch as when he saw them, they pleased him not. After this, Hiram gave to Solomon, six-score Talents of Gold, and sent him Ships and Men who had knowledge of the Sea, to go with his Navy into the Countrey of Ophir, which Ships brought unto SolomonIn the 2 Chron. 8.18. is mention made of 30. Talents more, which seem to have been employed for their charges. four hundred and twenty Talents of Gold. Hiram, The height of Life. Hiram:1 King. 7.13. This Man was a certain Widow's Son dwelling in the Countrey of Tyre, and of the Tribe of Nepthali, and did so excel in all manner of Workman∣ship, that Hiram King of Tyre, sent him to Solomon to work and finish all things that pertained to the Temple of the Lord, which Solomon went about to edifie. Hobab,Num. 10 10. was the Son of Raguel, whoseSome think that Raguel, Jethro, Ho∣bab, and Ke∣ni, were all one: Kimehi saith that Raguel was Jethro's Fa∣ther: So Hobab was Moses Father in-law. Company Moses his Father-in-law would so fain have had into the Land of Canaan, that he intreated him on this wise, saying: We are now going to the place which the Lord said that he would give us, therefore (I pray thee) go with us and we will do thee good, for the Lord hath pro∣mised good unto Israel. Then Hobab made answer,
saying: I will not go, but I will depart to mine own Countrey and Kindred. Nay (quoth Moses) I pray thee forsake us not, but go with us, and be our guide, for thou knowest our camping places in the Wilderness, and whatsoever goodness the Lord shall shew unto us, the same will we shew unto thee: But all this could not move Hobab, but that he would depart. And so retur∣ned home into his own Countrey again. Hobab, Beloved. Holofernes,Ja 2. cap. was the Chief and most terrible Cap∣tain of all Nabuchodonosor's Host, sent of him to subdue all the World.Ja 14 cap. And coming to the City of Bethulia (where all the Jews lay in great fear of him and his Power) he was there (by God's provision) slain, by the hands of an holy Woman called Judith. Read her story. Holofernes, A stout and valiant Captain. Hophni and Yhinchas, the two Sons of Eli,1 Sam. 2.12-22, &c. were the Lords Priests, and became so wicked, that they abused the Women that waited at the Door of the Tabernacle of witness. And whereas the Law was, that whensoever any Man did make any offering, the Priests boy should come while the flesh was a seething (and not before) with a Flesh-hook in his hand having three teeth, which he should thrust into the Pan, Kettle, or whatsoever Vessel it were, and so much as the Flesh-hook brought up, was the Priests part, and no more: yet notwithstanding this Law, the Priest's boy would come before the Flesh was sod, and require flesh to rost for the Priest, and say unto him that made the offering, that his Master would have no sod flesh, but raw. And if he would not give it him, then would the Boy take it by violence. By the which abusing of the Law, the Lord's offering was had in such contempt among the People, that they began to abhor it. Wherefore the
Lord plagued the Sons of Eli, permitting the Phili∣stines to slay them both in one day.4. cap. Hophni, a Fist, or as much as one may comprehend between his thumb and two fingers, or covering. Hoshea,2 King. 15.30.17. cap. the Son of Elah (by treason) slew Pekah the Son of Remaliah King of Israel, and possessed his place, and began his Reign in the XII. year of Ahaz King of Juda,This was the last King that raigned over Israel. and did evil in the sight of the Lord, but not so evil as other Kings before him. He denied to pay Tri∣bute to the Assyrians, and sent to the King of Egypt, to have his aid against them: wherefore Salmanasar King of Assyria, came against Hoshea, and besieged him in Samaria three years, and in the end wan the Ci∣ty, destroyed his Kingdom, and led Hoshea and all his People captive into Assyria. Thus was Israel now delivered into the hands of spoilers, for their wicked∣ness, which the Lord had long suffered. Hoshea, a Sa∣viour, or health. Huldah,2 King. 22.14. the Wife of Shallum, was a Prophetess dwelling in Jerusalem, in a place called the house of do∣ctrine. To whom Josiah King of Juda sent certain Mes∣sengers to inquire of the Lord for him and his People, concerning the Book of the Law which was found in the Temple, and read before him, and when they had done their message, the Prophetess made answer, saying: Go and tell the man that sent you to me: Thus saith the Lord, behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon the Inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the Book which the King of Juda hath read, because they have forsaken me, and have burnt Incense to other Gods to anger me with all the works of their hands. My wrath also shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be quenched. But to the King of Juda who sent you to in∣quire of the Lord, so shall ye say unto him: Thus saith
the Lord God of Israel, the words that thou hast heard, shall come to pass. But because that thine heart did melt, and thou hast humbled thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and a∣gainst the Inhabitants of the same (how they should be destroyed and accursed) and hast rent thy Cloaths and wept before me, I have also heard it, saith the Lord. Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and thou shalt be put in thy Grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this place. And so the Messengers departed, and told the King. Huldah, the World, or a Weesel. Hur, came of the Tribe of Juda,Exod. 17.10.24.14.31.2. andThis is not that Hur which came of the Kinred of Calcb (al∣though they came both of the Tribe of Juda) but an∣other of the same name. Lyra upon 1 Chron. 2. This Hur was Husband to Miriam, Sister to Mo∣ses. was one of the principal Fathers and Rulers under Moses. He and Aa∣ron stayed up the hands of Moses, while the Children of Israel fought with King Amalek: And was also ap∣pointed with Aaron (afterward) to hear and determine all matters of controversie among the People, till Moses came down from the Mount again, whereunto he was ascended. Hur, Liberty, whiteness, or a hole. Hushai, the Arachite, was2 Sam. 15.32.16.16. Man of great wisdome, and one of David's chief Counsellers & his assured friend, as it well appeared when he came unto him (being fled from Absalom his Son) with his Cloaths rent, and ashes upon his Head, declaring thereby the great sorrow and heaviness he was in to see his Lord and Master in that case, by whose coming David was greatly comforted. But forasmuch as he thought he should do him more plea∣sure otherwise, than to go with him now, he said: Oh my most dear friend Hushai, if thou dost go with me now at this time, thou shalt be but a burthen unto me: But if thou wilt return into Jerusalem, and say unto Absalom, I will be thy servant (O King) and serve thee as I have done thy Father, thou mayst for my sake destroy the coun∣sel
of Achitophel, and thereby do me great pleasure. So Hushai gat him to Absalom, saying: God save the King: God save the King: What (quoth Absalom) is this the kindness thou shewest to thy friend? How chanceth it that thou wentest not with him? Nay said Hushai, but whom the Lord and this People, and all the Men of Israel hath chosen, his will I be, and with him will I dwell: to whom shall I do service, but to his Son? as I served before thy Father, so will I serve thee. Then when Absalom had retained Hushai to be of his Counsel, he said unto him: Achitophel hath coun∣selled thus and thus to do, shall we do thereafter or not? Hushai answered, the Counsel that Achitophel hath given, is not good at this time. For (said he) thou know∣est thy Father and his Men, how they be strong, and now being chafed in their minds, are even as a Bear rob∣bed of her Whelps in the Field. And also thy Father is a Man practised in War: and maketh no tarrying with the People. Behold, he lurketh now in some Cave, or in some other strong place, and though some of his Men be overthrown at the first brunt, it will be said that thy People is overthrown, and so shall the best Men thou hast (whose hearts are as the hearts of Lyons) shrink thereat. For all Israel knoweth thy Father to be a Man of great might, and his Warriors stout Men. Therefore my counsel is, that all Israel be gathered together unto thee, from Dan to Beersheba (which are in number as the Sand of the Sea.) And that thou go to Battel in thine own Person. For so shall we come upon him in one place or other, where we shall find him, and fall upon him as thick as the dew falleth upon the ground, and of all the Men that are with him, we shall not leave him one. Moreover, if he be gotten into a Town, then shall all the Men of Israel bring Ropes to that Town or City, and we will draw it into the River, until there be not one stone sound there. This Counsel of Hushai pleased Absalom
and the People, better than Achitophel's: which was even the Lord's determination, to destroy the good counsel of Achitophel, that the Lord might bring evil upon Absa∣lom. And so when Hushai had done according to David's request, he caused Sadoc and Abiathar the Priests, to send David word of all that was done, whereby he es∣caped. Hushai, Sense, or making hast, or holding his peace. I. JABES,1 Chron 4.9. was so namedThis was Othonicl. Ca∣leb's Brother, as Lyra re∣porteth. of his Mother, because she bare him in sorrow. He (being more honorable than the rest of his Brethren) made a conditional Vow unto God, saying:Jacob made the like vow Read his story. If thou wilt bless me in∣deed, and inlarge my Coasts, and if thine hand be with me, and thou wilt cause me to be delivered from evil, that I be not hurt. Thus far goeth his request, which was granted. Jabes, Sorrow. Iabyn, was the King of Canaan,Judg. 4.2. whose Captain of War was Sisera. Twenty Years he troubled Is∣rael very sore. But at the last he was overcome of the Israelites, and brought to nought. There was another King called Jabyn also, whom Joshua slew, and destroyed his City calledWhich Ci∣ty being burnt of Jo∣shua, was af∣terward built a∣gain of the Canaanites. Hazor, as ye shall read in Joshua, Chap. 11. Jabyn, Understanding. Iacob, was the youngest Son of Isaac,Gen. 25.26.27. cap. and Brother to Esau, whose Birth right he bought for a Mess of Pot∣tage, and afterward (by the counsel of Rebekah his Mother) got away his blessing. And then, to avoid his Brothers displeasure,Gen. 28. cap. he was sent into Mesopotamia to Laban his Mother; Brother to get him a Wife. And chancing to come to a place where he was benighted, he took a stone and laid it under his Head, and fell a∣sleep. And in his Dream he saw aChrist is the Ladder whereby God. and man are joyned toge∣ther, and by whom the Angels mi∣nister unto us, all graces by him are given unto us, and we by him ascend into Heaven. Ladder stand up∣on the Earth, reaching up to Heaven, and the Angels of
God ascending and descending upon it, and God himself standing upon the Ladder, said: I am the Lord God of Abraham thy Father, and the God of Isaac: the Land which thou sleepest upon, will I give to thee and thy seed, and thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth, thou shalt spread abroad to the West, to the East, to the North, and to the South. And thorow thee and in thy seed shall all the Kinreds of the earth be blessed. Behold, I am with thee, and will be thy keeper in all places where thou goest, and will bring thee again into this Land, neither will I leave thee, until I have made good all that I have promised. Then Jacob awaking out of sleep, said: Surely the Lord is in this place, and I was not aware. Oh how fearful is this place! it is none other but the house of God, and the gate of heaven. Then Jacob gat him up early in the Morning, and took the stone which he slept upon, and set it up as a Pillar to be a remembrance of that Vision, and poured oyl upon it, and called the place Bethel, which before was called Luz. And before his departing, he vowed, saying: If God will be with me, and keep me in this Journey which I go, and will give me Bread to eat, and Cloaths to cover me, so that I come again to my Fathers house in safety, then shall the Lord be my God, and this stone which I have set up for a Pillar, shall be God's house, and of all that thou givest me,29. cap. will I give the tenth unto thee. And so Jacob going on his Journey, came into the East Coun∣trey, where (in beholding the Land) he saw certain Herdmen lying with their Flocks of Sheep beside a Well (at the which they commonly used to water their Sheep) to whom he went & demanded whence they were. They said of Haran. Do ye not know (quoth he) one La∣ban the Son of Nahor? Yea, said they, we know him well. He is in health: And behold, yonder cometh his Daughter Rachel to water her Father's sheep: who was no sooner come, but Jacob went to the Well, and rolled
away the stone from the Wells mouth, and watered all her sheep. Which done, he kissed the Damosel, and wept for joy. And when the Maid had knowledge what he was, she ran to her Father, and told him, who being joyful thereof, went to the Man, and brought him into his house. Now when Jacob had opened the cause of his coming to Laban, it was agreed that Jacob should serve Laban seven years for Rachel his Daughter. But when the day of Marriage came, Leah the elder wasThe cause why Jacob was deceived was, that in old time the Wife was co∣vered with a Vail when she was brought to her Husband, in sign of chastity and shamefastness. Gen. 30, 25, &c. put in her stead, for so much as it was not the custome, that the younger should be first married (as Laban alledged.) Then Jacob tarried seven days, and took Rachel up∣on condition that he would serve other seven years for her, which being fulfilled, he desired Laban that he might depart with his Wives and Children into his own Country again. Nay tarry, said Laban, for I perceive that the Lord hath blessed me for thy sake, appoint thy wages, and I will give it thee. Thou knowest (quoth Ja∣cob) what service I have done thee, and in what taking thy Cattel hath been under me: for the little that thou hadst before my coming, is now increased to a Mul∣titude. But when shall I make provision for mine own House also? Well, what shall I give thee, said Laban. Then Jacob (having knowledge aforehand by the Angel of the Lord what his wages should be) said: Thou shalt give me nothing at all, if thou wilt do this thing for me. I will go again and feed thy sheep, and keep them, and will separate all the sheep of thy Flock one from another, and so many as be black, speckled, or of party colour, let that be my wages, and whatsoever I take of the rest unspotted, let that be counted theft with me. Content (quoth Laban.) Then went Jacob and took out all the Males and Females of the Sheep and Goats that were black, spotted, or of party colour, and put them in the keeping of his Sons, which lay three days Journey off from Jacob, and the rest, which were white,
and of one colour, JacobJacob here∣in used no de∣ceit, for so much as he did it at God's commandment. kept himself. And when he had made this division of Laban's sheep, he took Rods of green Poplar, of Hasel, and of Chesnut-trees, and pilled white strakes in them. Which Rods (in the con∣ceiving time) he laid before the Sheep, in the gutters and Watering-troughs when they came to drink. And the sheep that conceived before the Rods, brought forth Lambs, straked, spotted, and party-coloured, so that Jacob's Flock increased exceedingly, whereat the Sons of Laban grudged,31. cap. and made so heinous a com∣plaint to their Father of Jacob, that Laban began to dis∣favour him. Then Jacob perceiving Laban's counte∣nance to be changed, he sent for his Wives, and said: I see your Fathers countenance, that it is not towards me as it was wont, and yet ye know that I have ser∣ved your Father truly, which hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times, but God suffered him not to hurt me. For when he said, the spotted should be my wages, then the sheep brought forth spotted. And when he said, the party-coloured should be my re∣ward, then the sheep brought forth party-coloured: And thus hath God taken away your Fathers sheep and given them to me, which thing he shewed me in a Dream should even so come to pass, and hath now comman∣ded me to depart out of this Country into the Land where I was born: The Women said, we have no portion in our Fathers house, seeing he counteth us but even as strangers, and hath sold us, and eaten up our money: And now that God hath taken away our Fathers riches and made it ours and our Childrens, do whatsoever God hath said unto thee. Then Jacob, assoon as he had prepared all things for his Journey, fled from Laban his Father-in-law towards the Land of Canaan to I∣saac his Father, and being pursued of Laban seven days, and at last overtaken at Mount Gilead, he laid many things to Jacob's charge, whereof he discharged himself
of all, and in the end said: This twenty years have I served thee, xiv. Years for thy Daughters, and six Years for thy sheep, which have not been barren, and yet in all that space, have I not eaten one Ram of thy Flock, but whatsoever was stolen or torn of Beasts, I made it good unto thee. Thou changedst my wages ten times, and wouldst surely have sent me away with no∣thing, if God (which saw my tribulation and the labour of my hands) had not been the better unto me, which rebuked thee yesterday. Then Laban made a covenant with Jacob and so departed.Gen. 32. cap Jacob then going forth on his Journey, came into the Land of Seir, and hearing of his Brother Esau's being there, was sore afraid of him, lest he had continued still in his malice towards him, wherefore he sent Messengers before unto him, with three great Droves of Cattel for a present, trusting thereby to mitigate his wrath. And as Jacob himself tarried be∣hind to set his Wives and Children in order to meet his Brother Esau, an Angel wrastled with him all Night and at last smote him under the Thigh, and brake the sinew of his Leg, whereon he halted ever after. Yet never∣theless Jacob (which had wrastled with the Angel un∣til the breaking of the day) would not let the Angel depart, before he had blessed him, who called his Name Israel: for as a Prince (said he to Jacob) hast thou wrastled with God and with Man, and prevailed. And so, after the brotherly meeting of Jacob and Esau,Gen. 33. cap. and great amity shewed by one to the other, Jacob took his Journey into the Land of Canaan, where he remai∣ned until he was of the age of an 130. years. And then went down into Egypt with all his Houshold (which were three-score and six souls) to see his Son Joseph,Gen. 46. cap. where he continued xvii. years. And then dyed,Gen. 49. ult. being 147. years of age, and from thence was conveighed to the Land of Canaan,Gen. 50, 1, 2, &c. where he was by his Children sumptuously buried. Jacob, a Supplanter.
Iaktan,Gen. 10.25. was the Son of Heber, and his Brothers name was Peleg. Jaktan, a little one, or loathsomness, or contention. Iael,Judg 4.11-18, &c. was the Wife of one Heber the Kenite, which was of the Children of Hobab, Moses Father-in-law. And when she had heard of the great overthrow of Sisera, and how he fled, she went and met him, saying: Turn in my Lord, turn in to me and fear not. And being come into her House, he asked her a little water to quench his thirst, and she brought him a Bottle full of Milk, and when he had well drunk thereof, he laid him down to sleep, and as she was covering him with cloaths, he prayed her to go and stand at the door of her Tent, and whosoever doth come andNow was the prophecie of Deborah fulfilled, which she prophesied to Barak, say∣ing: this jour∣ney that thou takest upon thee now, shall not be for thine honour, for the Lord shall sell Si∣sera into the hand of a Wo∣man. ask for any man, say there is no man here. And so when Sisera was fast asleep, Jael went softly unto him with an Hammer in the one hand and a Nail in the other, and smote him thorow the Tem∣ples of his head, and nailed him fast to the ground. Which done, she went and stood in her Tent-door, and seeing Barak pursuing Sisera, she went and met him, saying: Come and go with me, and I will shew thee the Man whom thou seekest; and so he followed Jael, who brought him into her Tent where Sisera lay dead. Jael, a Doe, or ascending. Iair,Iudg. 10. cap. was a Gileadite born. He had xxx. Sons, which were Men of Authority, for they rode upon xxx. Asses colts: And they had xxx. Cities lying in the Land of Gilead, which Cities were called the Towns of Jair. He reigned xxii. years. After whose death the Children of Israel fell to wickedness again, and served Baalim and Astharoth the gods of Syria and other strange gods, for the which the Lord was wroth with Israel, and sold them into the hands of the Philistines and Ammonites,
which oppressed them so sore by the space of xviii. years, that they were sain to cry for help of the Lord. Who then said unto them: Did not I (when ye cryed unto me) deliver you from the Egyptians, the Amorites, the Ammonites, the Philistines, the Sidonians, the Ama∣lekites and the Moabites, which Nations had oppressed you? And yet have ye now forsaken me and serve their gods. Therefore cry unto these gods whom ye have cho∣sen, and let them help you in your tribulation, for I will deliver you no more. Oh Lord (said they) we have sinned, do unto us whatsoever pleaseth thee. Then had the Lord so great compassion and pity on the misery of Israel, that he stirred up a Man one Jephtah, who (by the power of God) saved them. Jair, Lightened. Iames, the Son of Zebedee, and Brother to John,Matth. 4.21. Mark 3.17. He was put to death by Agrippa, who was also called Herod. Act. 12.2. Cooper. was a poor Fisherman, and being in the Ship with his Fa∣ther mending of his Net, Jesus came by and called him: who immediately left his Ship, his Father and all, and went after Jesus, and was one of his Apostles, and re∣ceived with his Brother, the Name of Boanerges, which is to say, The Sons of Thunder. James, a Tripper, or Deceiver. An heel, the sole of the foot, a foot-step. Iames, the less,Matth. 16.3. He suffered martyrdom in the vi. year of Nero. was the Son of Alpheus and Ma∣ry (Sister to Mary the Lord's Mother.) And being Bishop of Jerusalem, he wrote to the Jews that were scattered abroad after the Persecution and death of Stephen, In∣structing them with sundry Precepts how to order their Lives. Iannes,2 Tim. 3.8. Exod. 7.11. and Jambres were two false Soreerers of Egypt, who in the time of Moses (with their enchant∣ments) went about to put those miraculous wonders out of credence that Moses by the power of God did. And e∣ven as they withstood Moses, so do the Adversaries of the
Gospel at this day (and ever will) resist the truth, under a certain false pretence of godliness. Iapheth,Gen. 9. The Nations that came of his children. Of Gomer came the I∣talians. Of Magog the Scythians, and of them the Turks Of Madai the Medes. Of Javan, the Greeks. Of Tubal, the Spaniards. Of Mosoch, the Mosco∣vites, and of Tiras, the Thracians. Lanquet. was the youngest of Noah's three-Sons, who being informed of his Fathers unseemly lying a∣sleep in his Tent, took a Garment, and bare it between him and Shem on their shoulders, and coming toward their Father (ashamed to look on his nakedness) tur∣ned their Faces backward, and so covered their Father's privities. For the which deed, Noah (having knowledge thereof) blessed them, saying to Japheth on this wise: God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be their servant. Japheth, perswading, or enticing. Iairus, wasMark 5.22. one of the Rulers of the Synagogue among the Jews, whose Daughter of the Age of twelve years, lay sick and at the point of death. And hearing of the fame of Jesus, he went and fell down at his feet, be∣seeching him that he would come home to his house, & lay his hand upon his Daughter, that by the touching there∣of, she might be safe, and live. Luk 8 41. And while there was an occasion given, whereby to strengthen the unperfect faith of the Ruler, and that by the ensample of a Woman dis∣eased with an issue of blood xii. years, there came cer∣tain Messengers from the Ruler's-House, which said unto Him that his Daughter was dead, wherefore it should not need to trouble the Master any further. Then Jesus perceiving the Ruler to be as a Man in de∣spair, said unto him: Be not afraid, for although thy Daughter be dead indeed, only believe, and thy Daughter shall live. And so Jesus went home to the Ru∣ler's house, and raised up his Daughter from death to life. Jairus, Lightning, or being lightned. Iared,Gen. 5.15, &c. was the Son of Mahalaleel, who lived an
hundred sixty and two years, and then begat Henoch, and lived after that eight hundred years, and begat Sons and Daughters. And when he had lived in all, nine hundred, sixty and two years, he dyed. Jared, Com∣manding, or descending. Iason, was a wicked Man, and so desirous of honour,2 Mac. 4 cap. that he wrought his own Brother Onias out of the High Priest's office: promising Antiochus the King to give him for the same, three hundred and three-score Talents of Silver, and of another rent four-score. And also if the King would license him to set up a place for exercise, and a place for the youth, and to name them of Jerusalem Antiochians, he promised an hundred and fifty Talents. And when these things were granted to Jason, and that he had got the superiority, he began immediately to draw his Kinsmen to the customes of the Heathen, a∣bolishing the Laws and Priviledges of the Jews, he brought in new statutes, contrary to the Law of God: So that thorow the exceeding wickedness of this un∣godly man Jason, the People had a great desire to follow the manners of the Gentiles. The Priests also had no delight in serving the Lord, but in casting the stone, and such wanton sports. Now after three years, when Ja∣son should pay the King his money, which he had pro∣mised for his Brother's office, he sent it by one whom he most trusted, called Menelaus, who gat the office from Jason (as appeareth more plainly in his story.) Then Jason being thus deceived by Menelaus, was fain to flie into the Land of the Ammonites, remaining there till he might spy a time to be revenged. And when he heard the rumour that went abroad of Antiochus death, he gat him a Band of Men to the number of a Thousand or more, and came suddenly upon the City, killing and slaying his own Citizens without mercy, regarding neither Kin nor Friend. But nevertheless, when he
could not speed of his purpose, he fled into the Land of the Ammonites again. Where in the end it came to this point, that he was accused to Areta King of the Arabians, and so abhorred of all Men, that he was pur∣sued from City to City, and driven into Egypt. And go∣ing from thence to the Lacedemonians, thinking by rea∣son of Kinred to have had some succour of them, he was not regarded, but suffered to perish in a strange Land, no Man mourning for him, nor putting him into his Grave. Jason, He that maketh whole: a Physician. Jecksan, look Jocsan. Iehoahaz,2 King. 23.31, &c. the Son of Josias, was xxiii. years old when he began to reign over Juda, and had not reign∣ed three Moneths before Pharaoh Necho, King of Egypt came and put him down, and set up his Brother in his stead. And put the Land to a tribute of an hundred Ta∣lents of Silver, and one of Gold, and carried Jehoahaz away into Egypt where he dyed. Jehoahaz, The pos∣session of the Lord. Iehojakim,2 King. 23.36.24.1, &c. the Son of Josias, was xxv. years of age when he began to reign over Juda, and did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. His name was changed from Eliakim to Jehojakim by Pharaoh Ne∣cho, King of Egypt, which came and deposed his Bro∣ther Jehoahaz, and made him King in his stead, and taxed the Land,This King dyed in the way, as they led him Pri∣soner into Babylon. Read Je∣remy 22.18. as before is said in Jehoahaz. For the payment of which money. Jehojakim taxed the Land, and levied of every Man according to his ability, and paid the money to Pharaoh. After this came Nabucho∣donosor King of Babylon, and besieged Jerusalem, to whom Jehojakim yielded, and served Nabuchodonosor three years, and then rebelled against him, into whose hand the Lord delivered him, so that the King of Ba∣bylon
took him, and bound him in two Chains, and car∣ried him and all the Vessels of the Lord's house into Ba∣bylon. This King reigned xi. years. Jehojakim, the Rising, or avenging of the Lord. He is called also Jechoni∣as, Matth. 1.11.Iehojachin, was the Son of Jehojakim,2 King. 24.6, &c. who at the age of xviii. years, began to reign over Juda, and did evil in the sight of the Lord as his Fathers before him. He had not reigned three moneths ere that the King of Babylon came and deposed him, making Mattaniah his Fathers Brother King in his stead, changing his Name from Mattaniah to Zedekiah, and carried Jeho∣jachin away into Babylon, where he remained in Prison xxxviii. years after, even until the coming of Evil∣merodach King of Babylon, after Nabuchodonosor his Father, who had such a mind to Jehojachin, that he de∣livered him out of Prison, and exalted him above all the Princes in Babylon, and fed him at his own Table all the days of his life. Jehojachin, the Resurrection of the Lord. Iehoahaz, the Son of Jehu,2 King. 13.1, 2, &c. began his Reign over Israel in the xxiii. year of the Reign of Joash the Son of Ahaziah King of Juda, and walked so wickedly in the sins of Jeroboam (by worshipping the Calves which he had erected) that God delivered him into the hands of Hazael, and his Son Benhadad, Kings of Syria, which destroyed the People of Israel, and vexed them so sore, that they made the Israelites like threshed dust: yet nevertheless, when Jehoahaz humbled him∣self, and besought the Lord, he heard him, and had such pity and compassion on the misery of Israel, that he delive∣red him out of the Syrians subjection, which had brought him so low, that they had left him but fifty Horsemen, ten Chariots, and ten thousand Footmen. He reigned xvii. years, and then dyed, and was buried in Sama∣ria,
leaving behind him his Son Joash to Reign in his stead. Jehoahaz, Apprehending, possessing, or seeing. Iehojada,2 King. 11. was the High-Priest in the days of Ahaziah King of Juda, whose Daughter he married, named Jehosheba. He preserved Joash the youngest Son of Ahaziah his Father-in-law six Years in the Lord's House, and in the seventh Year he brought him forth, and proclaimed him King. And (being his Gover∣nour and Protectour) trained him up in all godliness and vertue.2 Chron. 24. So that so long as Jehojada lived, the King walked in all the ways of the Lord, from the which he swerved after the death of this good Priest Jehojada. Who lived 130. Years, and (for his faithfulness to∣wards God and his People) was most honourably bu∣ried in the City of David among the Kings. Jehoja∣da, the Knowledge of the Lord. Iehosheba,2 King. 11.2. 2 Chron. 22. was the Daughter of Ahaziah King of Juda, and Wife to Jehojada the High-Priest of the Jews. And when Athalia her Grandmother went about to de∣stroy the King's seed, she stole away Joash her youngest Brother from among the King's Sons, and hid both him and his Nurse, in her own Chamber (with her Husbands consent) the space of six years, and so preserved him that he perished not, with the rest of her Brethren. Jeho∣sheba, the fulness of the Lord. Iehu,2 King. 9. the Son of Nimshi was anointed King over Israel by Eliseus the Prophet, for to destroy the House of Ahab his Master: And being commanded to go a∣bout it with speed, he began first with Joram which lay at Jezreel to be healed of his wounds, which the Syrians had given him. And as Jehu was coming thitherward, the Watchman espying a company coming toward the City, told the King, who then sent out an Horseman to
meet them, and to know whether they came peaceably or no. And when the Messenger came to Jehu, he said: The King would know whether it be Peace or no? What hast thou to do with Peace (quoth Jehu) turn thee behind me: and so the Messenger turned behind Jehu, and went back no more, and likewise the second. Then the Watchman told the King that he thought by the driving of the Chariot, it should be Jehu that was coming, for he driveth (quoth he) furiously. The King hearing that, made him ready to War, and took Ahaziah King of Juda with him, and went toward Jehu, and met him in the portion of Naboth, saying: Is it peace Jehu or no?There was a Prophet al∣so called Je∣hu, the Son of Hanam. which pro∣phesied of the destruction of Baasha King of Israel and his Posterity. Read 1 King. 16.1, &c. 10. cap. What peace should it be (quoth he) so long as the whoredomes of thy Mother Jezebel, and her witchcrafts are so great? and so in the Battel, Jehu shot Joram to the heart with an arrow, and killed him. And fell upon Ahaziah and slew him also. And so proceeding forth to Jezreel, he came thither and found Jezebel looking out at a Window. And as he demanded of the company a∣bout her, who was on his side, and would (for his sake) cast her down, two or three of her Chamberlains threw her out at the Window, and brake her Neck; notwith∣standing, because she was a King's Daughter, he caused her to be buried. Then he sent his Letters to Samaria, commanding those which had the governance of Ahab's seventy Sons, to kill them all, and to bring their heads on the next morrow to Jezreel. And when they (for fear) had fulfilled his commandment, and brought their heads to him, Jehu fell upon the Murtherers, and slew them also And in the way to Samaria, he slew the Brethren of Abaziah (even forty and two) which were going to visit Ahab's Sons. Finally, he trained all the Priests of Baal into the Temple of Baal, and there slew them every one, & converted the Temple to a Jakes house. And now when Jehu had left neither Priest. Kinsman, nor any that favoured Ahab alive, the Lord (for his well
doing) made him this promise, that his seed should sit on the seat of Israel, until the fourth Generation. But notwithstanding that Jehu had thus severely punished the Vice of Idolatry in Ahab's Posterity, yet he himself committed the same in worshipping the Golden Calves, and caused Israel to sin, as others before him had done. He reigned xxviii. years. Jehu, He himself, or that which i. Iephtah,Judg. 11. cap. was the Son of Gilead, base born, whose Brethren (which were legitimate) thrust him out of their company, and so hated him, that they would not suffer him to remain among them: wherefore Jephtah depar∣ted and fled into the Land of Tob: where resorted unto him all naughty and light persons. Now in the mean time that Jephtah was thus a stranger from his Bre∣thren, the Ammonites made sore War against the Is∣raelites, so that they were in great jeopardy and fear to be overcome of them. Then the Elders of Gilead con∣sidering Jephtah to be a strong and a valiant Man, went to Tob where he lay, to intreat him to be their Cap∣tain against the Ammonites. How cometh this (quoth Jephtah) that ye come to me in the time of your trouble: did ye not hate me, andOften∣times those things which men reject, God chooseth to do grea∣ter enterpri∣es by. expel me out of my Father's house? Therefore (said they) are we turned to thee, that thou mayest go with us, and be our head and Ruler. But will ye promise now (quoth Jephtah) that when the Lord shall deliver the Ammonites into my hand, ye will make me then your Head and Governour? They said yea. And so he went with the Elders, who brought him to Mizpah. and being there made and confir∣med their Head and Ruler, he sent his Messengers to the King of Ammon, demanding what cause he had to strive with Israel: who answered, and said: Because they took away my Country, when they came from Egypt, which if they will now restore again, I will cease from
War. Then Jephtah sent him word again, that Is∣rael took not his Land from him, but coming from Egypt, and passing through the Wilderness, even to the red Sea, they remained at Cadesh; and sent to Sehon King of the Amorites, to suffer them quietly to pass thorow his Country: And because he would not shew them this kindness, the Lord delivered both him and his Land into their hands, and shall they dispossess them∣selves of that which the Lord hath given them? Nay not so. Look what People Chemosh thy God driveth out, that Land possess thou & whatsoever Nation the Lord our God expelleth, that will we enjoy. Art thou better than Ba∣lac King of Moab? did he not strive with Israel, and fight against them all the while they lay in Heshbon (and thereabout) 300. years: and why didst thou not re∣cover thy Land in all that space? Thou dost me wrong to War against me, for I have not offended thee, and therefore the Lord be Judge between thee and me. But when Jephtah perceived the Ammonites not to regard his words, he prepared his Army to set upon them. And before his going, made this Vow unto the Lord: That if he did deliver the Ammonites into his hand, the first thing that met Him out of his Doors at his return home again, should be the Lords, and he would offer it up unto him for a burnt-offering. And when he had subdued the Ammonites, and was coming homeward to his house, the first thing that met him out at his Doors, was his own Daughter, who for joy of her Father's Victory, came to meet him with Timbrels and Dances. Then Jephtab seeing his only Child come toward him with a company of Women after her, he rent his Cloaths and said: Alas my Daughter, thou hast brought me low, and art one of them that do trouble me, for I have ope∣ned my mouth unto the Lord, and cannot go back. To whom she said: Oh my Father, if thou hast promised to the Lord, then (forasmuch as the Lord hath avenged
thee, and given thee victory over thine enemies) do with me according to thy promise. But yet, this one thing I shall desire of thee, to spare me for two Moneths, that I may go down to the Mountains, and there (with my fellows)For it was counted as a shame in Is∣rael to dye without chil∣dren. bewail my Virginity. Which done, she returned to her Father, who did with her according as he had vowed unto the Lord. After this, the Ephraimites fell at defiance with Jephtah, because he had not called them to take his part against the Ammonites: and for this matter was a Field pitched between them and the Gileadites, and a great Battail fought, in the which, the Ephraimites were put to flight, and seeking to have es∣caped over Jordan, the Gileadites had prevented them, and stopped the passage, that no Ephraimite should escape that way. And to know who was an Ephraimite, and who was not, the Gileadites used this policy: if any pressed to go over the Water, they would bid him saySchibbo∣leth signifi∣eth the fall of waters, or an car of corn. Schib∣boleth, and as many as could not say Schibboleth, they slew him, for by that they knew he was an Ephraimite, for the Ephraimites could not sound nor say Schibboleth, but Sibboleth. And so were slain of the Ephraimites that Day, two and twenty thousand. Jephtah ruled Israel vi. years, and dyed. Jephtah, Opening. Ieremy,Jer. 1.1. was the Son of Hilkiah, whom some think to be he, that found out the Book of the Law, and gave it to Josiah. He was born in a City called Anathoth, in the Country of Benjamin,Epiphanius writeth, that this Prophet Jeremy was slain of his People at a City in Egypt called Taph∣. and (by the command∣ment of God) began very young to prophesie, that is, in the xiii. year of Josias, and continued xviii. years under the said King, and three moneths under Jehoahaz, and under Jehojakim xi. years, and three moneths under Jehojachin, and under Zedekiah xi. years, unto the time they were carried away into Babylon. So that the time amounteth to above forty years, beside the time that he prophesied after the Captivity. This story is drawn
out of the Geneva Bible, in the Argument before the Book of Jeremy the Prophet. Jeremy, the Majesty, or highness of the Lord. Jerubbaal,Judg. 6.32. is a Name which was given to Gedeon the Son of Joash, after he had broken down the Altar of Baal, and cut down all the Grove about it. Jerub∣baal, That which resisteth an Idol, a destroyer of Idols. Read Gedeon. Ieroboam, was the Son ofSome say that Nebat and Shimei, whom So∣lomon put to death, were one person: of whose death Zervah the Mother of Jeroboam, put him oft in remem∣brance. Nebat,1 King. 11.26, &c. and of the Tribe of Ephraim, who being nourished and brought up of Zervah his Mother in her Widowhood, after the death of his Father, became King Solomon's Servant, and was made Overseer of Solomon's Works for the Tribe of Ephraim and Manasses. And on a time as he walked a∣broad in the Field alone, the Prophet Ahijah came to him and said, that after the death of Solomon, he should Reign and be King over Ten Tribes of Israel; which words of the Prophet did so animate Jeroboam, that he began to murmur against King Solomon his Ma∣ster, who (therefore) sought to kill him, but Jeroboam fled into Egypt, where he remained with Shishak King of that Country, until the death of Solomon. Then (being sent for) he returned home again,12. cap. and had so much fa∣vour of the People, that they all forsook Rehoboam (save the Tribe of Juda and Benjamin) and made Jeroboam their King. Who being surely stablished in his King∣dom, began to think thus in his heart: If this People go up, and do sacrifice in the house of the Lord at Je∣rusalem, as they were wont to do, then shall their hearts turn to Rehoboam, and seek to kill me. Wherefore he (by the advice of his Counsel) made two golden Calves, and set the one up at Dan, and the other at Bethel, per∣swading the People that they were the Gods which brought them out of Egypt, and therefore they should not
need any more to go up to Jerusalem, and worship so far off, but should do it nearer hand, and with less travail and pain. And when he perceived the People to incline to his purpose, he made a Temple to build Hill Altars therein for Idolatry, and placed a sort of ignorant Ministers (which were not of the Sons of Le∣vy) in Dan and Bethel, to train up the People in worshipping of these Calves. And the more to stir up the Peoples devotion, he commanded a solemn offering to be made in the honor of these Calves, the xv. day of the eighth Moneth, and the same yearly to be observed in remembrance of this new kind of Idolatry: which in continuance was so rooted in Israel, that it could ne∣ver be clean extinguished, till it had brought all Israel to utter destruction.13. cap. Now as the King was standing be∣side the Altar at Bethel doing of sacrifice, there came a Man of God, which cryed out against the Altar, say∣ing: O Altar, Altar, Thus saith the Lord: behold, a Child shall be born unto the house of David (Josiah by name) and upon thee shall he offer the Priests of the Hill-Altars that burn Incense upon thee, and they shall burn Mens bones upon thee. And this is the token that the Lord hath spoken it: Behold, the Altar shall rent, and the ashes that are upon it, shall fall out. The King was so angry with this, that he stretched out his hand against the Prophet, commanding to lay hands on him, and by and by the Kings hand was dried up, so that he could not pull it to him again, the Altar clave asun∣der, and the ashes fell out, as the Man of God had spoken. The King seeing now God's judgment fallen upon him, humbled himself to the Prophet, by whose intercession to God his hand was restored again.2 Chron. 13. Great and con∣tinual War was between this King and Rehoboam King of Juda, but this ever prevailed, till Abijah the Son of Rehoboam reigned, and then he lost as much honour and more than he wan before. He reigned two and twenty
years, and dyed, leaving Nadab his Son to succeed him. Read more of this King, in the story of Abijah, King of Juda, and in the story of Ahijah the Prophet, and of Baasha King of Israel. Ieroboam, the Son of Joash King of Israel,2 King. 14.23. began his Raign in the xv. year of Amaziah King of Juda, and worshipped the Golden Calves which Jeroboam the Son of Nebat had set up, as others did before him. He was a great Warrier and victorious. He restored the Coasts of Israel from the entring of Hemath unto the Sea of the Wilderness (according to Jonas Prophecie) And was stirred up of the Lord to help Israel (being exceedingly afflicted) out of all their trouble. He reigned xli. years, and dyed, leaving Zacharias his Son to succeed him. Jeroboam, Increasing the People. Iesebel, the Daughter of Ethbaal King of the Sido∣nians,1 King. 16.31.19.2. was a wicked Woman. She enticed and pricked forward Ahab her Husband to all kind of Idolatry, she slew the Prophets of the Lord, and persecuted Elijah.21. cap. She caused Naboth to be stoned to death, that her Husband might enjoy his Vineyard. Finally, as she lay at Jes∣reel, and hearing of Jehu his coming,2 King. 9.30. she trimmed her self in gorgeous attire, and lay looking out at a Window, and as he came in at the Gate, she said unto him: Had Zimri peace which slew his Master? As who should say: Can a Traytor, or any that riseth against his Superiour have good success? But forasmuch as this was even God's determination that she should be destroyed, she was cast out at the Window with such violence, that she was dashed all to pieces, and so betrampled and trodden with the feet of Horses, that when they came to take her up to be buried, they found no more of her, save the Scull, the Feet, and the Palms of her Hands. And then was the Prophecie of Elijah fulfilled, which said: In the Field of
Jesreel shall Dogs eat the flesh of Jezebel, and the Car∣kass of Jezebel shall lye as dung upon the Earth, so that none shall say, this is Jezebel. Jezebel, an Island, or an habitation. Iesus,Luk. 2. cap. the Son of God was born of the Virgin Marry in Bethlehem, a City of Juda, (in the year after the Creation of the World 3962. Lanquet.) whose birth immediately was honored by the glorification of Angels, the agnition of Shepheards, the veneration of the wise∣men, and the Prophecies of holy Symeon and Anna. And at the age of xii. years, was had in admiration among the Doctors in the Temple at Jerusalem, where his Parents found him, and brought him to Nazareth; but what he did from that time forth till he came to the age of thirty years, the Evangelists make no mention. He was then Baptised of John in Jordan. And to wit∣ness that he was the very Messias sent of God,5. cap. the Holy Ghost descended down from Heaven, in the likeness of a Dove, and lighted upon him, and also the voice of the Father was heard from Heaven, saying: This is my be∣loved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear Him. And after he had finished the Legacy of his Father and o∣pened the Doctrine of eternal lise to the People, and con∣firmed the same with Miracles, he was at the age of xxxiii. years (or thereabout) betrayed of his own Disciple Ju∣das, and by the Jews his own peculiar People,Matth. 26.14. most cruelly put to death, at what time of his Passion was a great Earthquake, and at six a Clock of the Day, such a terrible Eclipse of the Sun, that (for Darkness) it seemed to be very Night.Matth. 28.6. The third day he arose again from Death to Life, In token he conquered Sin, Death and Satan.Act. 1.9. And on the sortieth day (to declare himself to be a mighty and a puissant Conqueror) he ascended in∣to Heaven, where he sitteth at the right hand of the Fa∣ther. And the fiftieth day (according to his promise) he sent
down the true Comforter the Holy Ghost, which should lead the Apostles into all truth. At the end and last day of the World, he shall come again with glory, to judge the quick and the dead. He suffered his Passion in the year after the Creation of the World 3994. or thereabout. Jesus, a Saviour. Iesus, the Son of Sirach,Ecclus, 1. cap. being among the Cap∣tives in Egypt, in the time of King Ptolomy Euergetes, got liberty to read and write many good things, which Jesus his Grandfather had gathered and left them with Sirach his Son, which things this Jesus took and put in order in a Book, which is called Ecclesiasticus, or the wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach. Iesus, otherwise called Justus, was a Jew born,Col. 4.11. and one of Paul's Workfellows in preaching and set∣ting forth the Kingdom of God, whom he commended to the Colossians, desiring them, that if he or any such did come unto them, they should receive and entreat them with all gentleness. Iethro, the Priest of Midian had seven Daughters,Exod. 4.18.18. cap. of the which one was called Zipporah, whom he married to Moses. And when that Jethro had heard of all the mighty deeds which God had done for Moses, and how he had delivered the Children of Israel out of Egypt from the Bondage of Pharaoh, and brought them thorow the red Sea, he met Moses in the Wilderness, and brought to him his Wife and two Children (which he had sent back before) at whose coming, Moses was exceeding glad. Then as Jethro abode with Moses and saw the great pains he took in judging the People from Morning to Night, he said unto him: What is this that thou dost un∣to the People? Why sittest thou thy self alone, and all the People stand about thee from morning unto even? When
the People (quoth Moses) have any matter, they come unto me, and I judge between one and another, and declare unto them the Statutes and Laws of God. Thou dost not well (quoth Jethro) for thou both weariest thy self,The counsel of Jethro Moses Fa∣ther-in-law. and the People that is with thee: The thing is of more weight, than thou art able to perform alone. Therefore hear my counsel, and God shall prosper thee. Be thou for the People to God-ward, and report the cau∣ses to him: Admonish them of the ordinances and laws, and shew them the way wherein they must walk, and the work that they must do. Moreover, seek out among the People men of courage, and such as fear God, true dealing men, hating covetousness, and appoint them to be Rulers over thousands, over hundreds, over fifties and over tens. And let them judge the people at all seasons, and every great matter let them bring it to thee, but all small causes, let them judge themselves, and so shall it be ea∣sier for thee, when they shall bear the burthen with thee: If thou shalt do this thing (and God so command thee) thou shalt be able to endure, and all the People shall go quietly to their place. Jethro, Excellent, or remaining, or searching forth, or a little cord. Ioab, Sam. 2. cap. was the Son of Zerviah David's Sister (and the chief Captain of all David's Host.) In the first Bat∣tel he made against Abner (King Saul's Captain) he was the Victor, and put Abner to flight, and of malice afterward, by treason slew him, for the which deed, Da∣vid was sore offended,3.27, 23, &c. that he besought God to avenge it on Joab, and that his House and Posterity might al∣ways be plagued with the bloody-flux, leprosie, feebleness of Body, the Sword, or Famine, for the death of Abner. Joab also was the death of Absalom, Sam. 38.15. and slew him as he hanged by the hair of his head, upon the bough of a tree: And when it was told him of the great lamentation the King made for Absalom his Son, he went unto him and
said: Thou hast this day shamed the faces of all thy ser∣vants,19.5, &c. which this day have saved thy life, and the lives of all thy Sons and Daughters, and the lives of thy Wives and Concubines, in that thou lovest thine enemies and ha∣test thy friends: For thou hast declared this day, that thou regardest neither thy Princes nor servants: There∣fore I do perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had been slain this day, that then it had pleased thee well. Now therefore up, and come out and speak com∣fortably unto thy servants, for I swear by the Lord, except thou come out, there will not tarry one Man with thee this Night, and that will be worse unto thee, than all the evil that fell on thee from thy youth hitherto.20. cap. Also in persecuting of Sheba (which had made a new insurrection against David) he met Amasa his Aunts Son by the way andLyra supposeth that Joab slew A∣masa of envy, because Da∣vid had made an oath (in the Chapter before) that Amasa should be his Cap∣tain in Jo∣ab's stead. slew him, and leaving him dead on the ground, he followed Sheba, and besieged him in a City called A∣bel, where the Governess of the City, (being a wise Wo∣man) cried unto Joab, demanding why he went about to destroy that City which was a Mother of Israel, and to devour the Inheritance of the Lord, before he had offered peace: To whom he answered, saying: That he went about no such matter, but I come (quoth he) for Sheba the Son of Bichri, deliver me him, and I will be gone, and as soon as the head of Sheba was thrown over the Wall to Joab, he departed. Finally, after the death of David (who had ordained Solomon to Reign in his stead) Joab took part with ddonijah, Solomon's Brother which usurped the Kingdom, and went about with all his power to stablish him in David's seat. But when he heard Solomon proclaimed by David's authority, he fled to the Tabernacle of the Lord, out of the which he would not depart, but (catching hold on theThe holi∣ness of the place ought not to save the wilful murtherer, Exod. 21.14. corners of the Altar) said he would even in that place dye. Then Solomon (hearing thereof) commanded Benai∣ah to go and kill him even there, for the bloud of Ab∣ner
and Amasa, which he had shed causlesly. And so was Joab slain in the Tabernacle, and carried out and buri∣ed in his own House in the Wilderness. Joab, willing, or voluntary. Joanna,Luk. 8.3.24.10. the Wife of Chuza Herod's Steward, was a godly Woman, and ministred unto Christ of her substance, while he lived. And after he had suffered his Passion, she went with other Women to seek him at his Sepulchre. And being told by the Angels that he was not there, returned to the Apostles to bring them tidings of his Resurrection, which seemed to them but feigned things, and therefore believed them not. Joanna, the grace of the Lord, or the Lord's gift, or the Lord's mercy. Joash,2 King. 11. & 12. cap. the youngest Son of Ahaziah King of Ju∣da, was stollen away from the hands of Athaliah, his Grandmother, by his Sister Jehosheba Wife to Jehojadah the High-Priest, and hid in the Lords house, and brought up in the Chamber where the Priests and Levites lay, the space of six years, and in the seventh year, Jeho∣jadah brought him forth, and proclaimed him King, who in all things sought the Lord, so long as Jehojadah lived. He repaired the Temple. He slew Mattan the Priest of Baal, and brake down his Altars, with many other good things.2 Chron. 24. But after the death of Jehojadah, he fell so far from God, that no admonition of the Prophets (which were daily sent him) could turn him. And last of all, when Zacharia the Son of Jehojadah came unto him to call him again unto the Lord, he (notwithstand∣ing the great kindness and faithfulness of Jehojadah his Father before him) caused Zacharia to be put to death, for the which cause, the Lord stirred up the Syri∣ans against him, which slew a great number of his Peo∣ple, and in the end his own Servants conspired against him (for his ingratitude) and slew him upon his own
Bed, after he had reigned forty years, and buried him in the City of David, but not among the Kings. Jo∣ash, the Lords fire, or the Lords oblation. Joash,2 King. 13.9, 10, &c. the Son of Jehoahas began his Reign over Israel in the xxxvii. year of Joash King of Juda, and did evil in the sight of the Lord, grieving him with the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat.2 Chron. 25.17, 18, &c. Of the great Victory the Lord gave Joash against Amasiah King of Juda, read his story: And how he visited Elizeus the Pro∣phet in his sickness, read the last end of his story also. This King reigned xvi. years, and dyed, leaving Jeroboam his Son to take his place. Job,Job 1. cap. was a perfect just Man dwelling in the Land of Hus, and one that feared God, who gave unto him seven Sons and three Daughters, and also endued him with great riches. His substance was 7000. sheep, 3000. Camels, 500. yoak of Oxen, 500. she-Camels, and a very great Houshold. So that he was one of the most princi∣pal Men among all them of the East-Country. He was so careful over his Sons, lest in their banquetting they had committed some offence, or been unthankful to God in their hearts, that he daily would sanctifie them, and offer for every one a burnt-offering unto the Lord; he was a Man also replenished with such patience, that Sa∣tan with all his temptations could not move him out of the same, for when word was brought him how that the Sabeans had taken away his Oxen, and slain his Ser∣vants, and that the Lord had consumed all his Sheep with fire, and that the Chaldees had taken away his Ca∣mels, and how that all his Children were slain in their eldest Brother's house, which the wind blew down up∣on them, he made no more a do but said: Naked came I out of my Mothers Womb, and naked shall I return again: The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken a∣way,
even, as it hath pleased the Lord, so is it come to pass,2. cap. blessed be the name of the Lord. Also when Satan (by the permission of God) had plagued Job with ex∣treme sores, even from the sole of the Foot to the crown of his Head, so that he sat upon the ground in dust and ashes, scraping off the filth of his sores with a Potsherd: and being also inwardly afflicted with the sharp temp∣tation of his Wife, which tempted him to blaspheme God, he took all in good part, reproving his Wife for her foo∣lish talking: for shall we (quoth he) receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? not so, I am as well content to suffer this adversity sent of the Lord, as I was to receive the prosperity he gave me before: And so Job continued in his uprightness,Job 42. and was (at the last) restored to as many Children as he had before, and to double riches. He lived an hundred and forty years, and saw his Childrens children to the fourth generation be∣fore he dyed. Job, Sorrowful, or hated. Jochebed,Exod. 6.20. Num. 26.59. was the Daughter of Levy, andShe was Amram's Fa∣ther's Sister, which kind of marriage was after in the Law for∣bidden, Le∣vit. 18. born in Egypt. Her Husband's name was Amram, to whom she bare three Children, Aaron, Moses, and a Daughter called Miriam. Jochebed, Glorious. Jokshan, was the SonGen. 25.2. 1 Chron. 1.32. of Abraham, begotten of his Wife Keturah: his two Children were called, the one Sheba, and the other Dedan. Jokshan, Hardness, or Of∣fence. Joel, the Son of Phatuel, wasJoel 1, 2, & 3. cap. an holy Prophet, and prophesied against the Jews, exhorting the Priests to prayer and fasting, for the misery that was coming at hand. And giving them warning of the coming and cruelty of their enemies, moved them to turn and convert. And last of all, he setteth out the Judgment of God against the enemies of his People. Joel; willing, or beginning.
Johanan,Jer. 40.13. the Son of Kareah Prophesied to Geda∣liah (whom Nabuchodonosor King of Babylon had made Governour over the People that he left at Jerusalem) that Ishmael the Son of Nethaniah (by the procurement of Baalis King of the Ammonites) should kill him, which came so to pass indeed, as ye shall read in the story of Gedaliah. After whose death,41. cap. 42. cap. Johanan with the rest of the Captains over the Jews, persecuted Ishmael, and recovered from him all the People which he had carried away, and put Ishamael to flight. Then Johanan (fearing the Chaldees, because of the death of Gedaliah) consulted with the rest of the Captains, and agreed to conveigh themselves & all the People into Egypt, and asked counsel of Jeremy the Prophet (who had dwelt quietly in the Land under Gedaliah) whether it were best so to do or no? who made them answer, that if they went into Egypt they should perish, but if they tarried still in the Land, God would surely so defend them,43.5, 6, &c. that the Chal∣dees should not hurt them: yet they of a proud mind (despising the counsel of Jeremy and taking his words for lies) led the People away into Egypt to their utter destruction. John Baptist, the Son of Zachary,Luk. 1. cap. was sancti∣fied in the womb of Elizabeth his Mother, and ordain∣ed of God to be an abstainer, and to go before the Lord, in the spirit and power of Elias, to prepare his way and make ready a perfect People unto him thorow prea∣ching the amendment of life,Luk. 3.3, 4, &c. and baptizing in the water of repentance: And was a Man of so great perfection and holiness of life, that the People stood in a doubt whe∣ther that he were Christ or no. And being asked the que∣stion, denied plainly that he was not Christ, nor Elias, neither that Prophet whom they dreamed so much up∣on, but only the voice of a cryer in the Wilderness to
make streight the way of the Lord. For I do Baptise (saith John) in water only, but there is one now come among you who although he came after me, was before me, whose Shoo latchet I am not worthy to unloose, and he it is that shall Baptise you with the Holy Ghost. John was a constant Man and lived austerely. His Gar∣ment was course Cloth made of Camels hair. His Meat was Locusts and wild Hony. He was a Prophet, and (as Christ reporteth) more than a Prophet.7.24, &c. For John pro∣phesied Christ to be come; pointing him with his finger unto the People, saying: Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the Sins of the World, whereas all the other Prophets did but prophesie of his coming long before he came.Matth. 14.3. Finally, John using his liberty in rebuking Vice without any accepting of Persons, repro∣ved King Herod, for keeping his Brother Philip's Wife, for the which he was cast into Prison, and soon after lost his Head. Read the story of Herod the Tetrarch, and of Herodias. John the Evangelist,Matth. 4.21. was the Son of Zebedee, and Brother to James, and called from his Fisher-boat to be an Apostle of Christ,John 13.23.19.26.21.20 and was of all other most en∣tirely beloved of Jesus, who commended his Mother un∣to him at the hour of his death. He wrote his Gospel against Cerinthus and other Hereticks, and chiefly a∣gainst the Ebionites, which did affirm, that Christ was not before Mary whereby he was constrained to set forth the Divine Birth of Christ. In the time of the Em∣peror Domitian, he was exiled into an Isle called Pat∣mos, where he wrote the Revelation, and after the death of Domitian, in the time of Pertinax, he returned to E∣phesus, remaining there till the time of Trajanus, and did raise up and set in order, many Churches in Asia, and did three-score years after the death of Christ, and was buried at Ephesus.
John Mark:Act. 12. ult. When Paul and Barnabas had been at Jerusalem to distribute the Alms sent by the Antiochians, in their return they brought this Man John (sirnamed Mark) with them to Antioch. And when the Holy Ghost had separated Paul and Barnabas, from the other Disciples, to the intent that they should go and spread abroad the Gospel among the Gentiles, and those that were far off, they took this John Mark with them to be their Minister and Companion, who bare them company from Antioch until they came to Pam∣philia,Act. 13.5. &c. and farther would he not go, but left them there, and returned to Jerusalem again, notwithstanding the Apostes went forth and fulfilled their office. And when it came in their minds to go and visit these places again, wherein they had sowed the Word of God, Barnabas gave counsel to take John with them which had been their Minister before, to whose mind Paul would not consent, forasmuch as John (of his own accord) had forsaken them at Pamphilia, before they had finished their work. And so reasoning and disputing about this matter, the contention was so sharp between these two Holy-men, that the one forsook the others company. And so Barnabas taking John Mark with him, sailed into Cyprus. Jonadab, was the Son of Shimeah, David's Bro∣ther,2 Sam. 13.3. and a very subtil Man. He loved Amnon his Un∣kle David's Son, above the rest of all his Brethren. Of the counsel he gave to Amnon, concerning his Sister Thamar, Read the story of Amnon. Jonadab, Volun∣tary, or Willing. Jonas, the Son of Amittai was an holy Prophet,Jonas 1. cap. 2 King. 14.25. commanded of God to go to Niniveh (that great City) to tell the People of their wickedness, whoThe Mo∣ther of this Prophet, was the poor Wi∣dow of Sa∣repta, whose Meal and Oil Elias encreased, and restored her Son from death to life again. notwithstan∣ding,
perswaded himself by his own reason, that he should nothing profit there, seeing he had so long Pro∣phesied among his own Country-men (the Jews) and done no good at all: Wherefore he (minding to flye to Tarsus) got him to Joppa, where he found a Ship ready, payed his fare and went with them. And being on the Sea, a tempest rose so vehemently, that the Mariners were sore afraid, crying every Man unto his God, and to lighten the Ship, they cast all the Wares into the Sea, which nothing availed. Then went the Master of the Ship down under the hatches, and finding Jonas fast a∣sleep, awoke him, saying: O thou sleeper, what meanest thou, arise and call upon thy God, that we perish not. And when no remedy could be had, they agreed to cast Lots, that thereby they might know for whose cause they were troubled, and so doing, the Lot fell on Jonas: They seeing that, said: Tell us for whose cause we are thus troubled? And what thine occupation is? And what thou art? And whence thou comest, and whither thou go∣est? And what Country-man thou art, & of what Nation? I am (said Jonas) an Hebrew born, and fear the Lord God of Heaven, which made both the Sea and dry Land, and am fled from his presence. And when they heard that, they were more afraid than before, and said: what shall we do unto thee, that the Sea may cease from troubling of us? Take me (quoth Jonas) and cast me into the Sea, and ye shall have rest, for I wot it is for my sake, that this evil is come upon you: Nevertheless, the Men (be∣ing loth to commit such a deed) assayed with rowing to bring the Ship to Land. And when they saw the Sea so troublous against them, that it would not be, they cryed unto the Lord and said: O Lord, let us not perish for this Man's death, neither lay thou innocent bloud unto our charge: For thou, O Lord, hast done even as thy pleasure was. And so they took Jonas and cast him into the Sea, which incontinent was calm and still. And a
certain great Fish (prepared of the Lord) received Jo∣nas, and swallowed him up into his body, where he lay (in prayer) three Days and three Nights. And being then cast out again on dry Land. The Lord commanded him straight-way to go to Niniveh, and do as he had charged him. And when he came to the City & was entered a days Journey in the same, he cryed out, saying: There are yet forty days, and then shall Niniveh be overthrown. But when his Prophecie came to none effect, by reason of the Peoples great repentance, he was sore displeased, and in his prayer, said: O Lord, was not this my saying (I pray thee) when I was yet in my Countrey, and the cause of my flying to Tarsus, that thou wast a merci∣ful God, full of compassion, long suffering, and of great goodness, and wouldest repent thee of the evil? And now O Lord, forasmuch as I am found false in my sayings, take (I beseech thee) my life from me, for I had rather dye than live. And so Jonas got him out of the City, and made him a Booth on the East side thereof. And as he sat under the shadow of his Booth, to see what should become of the City: the Lord caused a wild Vine to spring over his Head, to give him more shadow to defend the heat of the Sun from him, whereof Jonas was very glad. But on the next morrow, when he perceived the Vine withered away, and that for lack of the shadow there∣of he waxed faint thorow the fervent heat of the Sun which burned him so sore, he wished in himself that he might die. Then said the Lord to Jonas, dost thou well to be angry for the wild Vine? Yea said he very well, even unto death. If thou then (quoth the Lord) hast had pity upon the wild Vine, whereon thou bestowedst no labour, nor madest it grow, which sprang up in one Night and perished in another; how much more ought I to have pity upon Niniveh that great City wherein are six score thousand Persons, that cannot discern be∣tween their right hand and their left, beside much Cat∣tel?
And thus was Jonas reproved of God, for his dis∣obedience. Jonas, a Dove. Jonathan,1 Sam. 13.2.14. cap. the Son of King Saul, was a valiant Man in all his acts, who helped his Father so mightily a∣gainst the Philistines, that at the first brunt he beat down the strongest hold they had. And after that (the Philistines being pitched in Michmash, into the which passage lay two sharp Rocks) He said to his Armour-bearer, Come, and let us go over toward the Philistines Garrison, peradventure the Lord will work with us, for it is no hard thing with him, to save with many, or with few: we will go over and shew our seleves to these uncircumcised.Jonathan spake this by the spirit of Prophecie. And if they say on this wise unto us: Tarry until we come unto you, then will we stand still, and not remove: But if they say, come up unto us, then will we go up, for the Lord hath surely delivered them into our hands, and this shall be a sign unto us. So they went (without the knowledge of Saul) and shewed them∣selves unto the Philistines, who (when they saw them) said in derision: See how the Hebrews are crept out of the holes wherein they had hid themselves: but the Watchmen said unto them, Come up unto us, and we will shew you a thing. Then said Jonathan to his Ar∣mour-bearer, come up after me, for the Lord hath de∣livered them into the hands of Israel. And so Jonathan climbed up the Rock upon his Hands and Feet, and his Armour-bearer after him. And when the Philistines saw the face of Jonathan, they were so suddenly smitten with fear, that they fell down before him, so that Jo∣nathan and his Man, slew twenty of them, and put all the rest to flight. And when the Watchmen of Saul saw the Philistines scattered abroad, and smitten down as they went, they told it to the King, who caused a search to be made, to know who was gone out of the Host, and not a Man was found lacking, save Jonathan and his
Armour-bearer. Then Saul with all his Host, followed after the Philistines, charging the People (which had long been without sustenance) on pain of death, not to touch any food, until he were that day avenged on his enemies. And so the People being sore opprest with hun∣ger, and coming into a Wood where much Hony lay upon the ground, durst not for their lives comfort them∣selves with one drop thereof. Then Jonathan being faint (and not knowing the charge of his Father) tasted a little Hony with the end of his Rod, and was greatly comforted and refreshed therewith. And being told what-danger he had incurred, for breaking his Fathers com∣mandment, he said: My Father hath troubled the Land, in making such an extreme Law: for seeing that I have received my strength again, by tasting a little of this Hony, how much more should the People (if they had eaten of the spoil of their enemies which they found) have been the stronger, and more able to have made a greater slaughter among the Philistines than they have done? But nevertheless, for this offence of Jonathan Lots were cast, and Jonathan judged to suffer death; whereupon the People cryed out to Saul, saying: Shall Jonathan dye, which hath so mightily defended Israel? God forbid, as truly as the Lord liveth, there shall not one hair of his head fall unto the ground, for he hath wrought with God this day. And so the People delivered Jonathan. After this, Jonathan fell into such love and a∣mity with David (whom Saul his Father persecuted) that he made a Bond with him, which was never dissol∣ved between them: And at his first acquaintance with David, he put off his Robe, and gave it to him, with his other Garments, even to his Sword, Bowe, and Girdle, And whatsoever (from that day forth) was said, done, or wrought by Saul his Father against David, that would Jonathan find the means to stay and pacifie; whereby (many times) he saved David from the cruelty
of Saul, and so continued his faithful friend, during his life. Finally, in Battel with his Father against the Philistines, he was slain. Jonathan, the gift of the Pigcon, or Dove. Jonathas,1 Mac. 2.9. cap. the youngest Son of Mattathias, and Brother to Judas Machabeus, did so valiantly behave himself in the Wars, that the Jews (after the death of Judas his Brother) made him their chief Governor, who (at length) vanquished Bachides.10. cap. Whereby his fame so encreased, that both Demetrius and Alexander sought to be in League with him: But for so much as De∣metrius had vexed Israel before, Jonathas (mistrusting Demetrius) forsook his offer, and agreed to Alexander, who had always been his friend, and so continued, as his story declareth. After this, he vanquished Apollo∣nius, Captain of Demetrius Host, burnt the City of Azotus, with the Temple of Dagon, subdued Ascalon, and with great Victory returned to Jerusalem, where (for his worthy prowess) he received a Coller of Gold from Alexander.12. cap. 13. cap. Finally, (after long prosperity in Wars) he was betrayed by one Triphon in the City of Ptolemais, and afterward most piteously put to death. Of Jonathas, Son of Abiathar the Priest, look in the sto∣ry of Ahimaaz the Son of Sadoch. Jonathan,2 Sam. 21.20, 21. the Son of Shimea David's Brother, en∣countred with a mighty Gyant, who had on every hand six fingers, and on every foot so many toes, and slew him. Joram,2 Kings 3. cap. the Son of Ahab began his Raign over Is∣rael (after his Brother Ahaziah) in the eighteenthIn the first Chapter of the fourth Book of Kings, it is said that this Man began his reign in the second year of Jcho∣ram the Son of Jchosaphat, which is thus to be understood: Jchosaphat going to Bat∣tel against the Syrians, made his Son Jchoram King in the xvii. year of his reign, and in the xviii. year, which was the second year of his Son, this Man began his reign. 6. cap. year of Jehosaphat King of Juda, and wrought evil in the sight of the Lord, but not like unto his Father, for he took away the Image of Baal, which his Father had made, neverthe∣less
he sacrificed to the golden Calves still, which Jero∣boam had made. The King of Moab was wont yearly to render to the King of Israel an hundred thousand Lambs, and so many Rams with the wool, and because he now refused to pay this tribute to Joram, he warred against him, having to take his part, Jehosaphat the King of Ju∣da, and the King of Edom, by whose help, and chiefly Eliseus, (read the place in his story) he overcame the Moabites. Also the Syrians could lye no where, but Jo∣ram had knowledge by Eliseus who told him of all their secret lurking places, by which means Joram ever sa∣ved himself: Wherefore, the King of Syria sent and besieged the Town round about where the Prophet Eli∣seus lay. And as his Servant was going forth in the Morning about his Master's business, and saw the Town so compassed with enemies, he ran ‖ in again, crying: Alas, Master; what shall we do, for the Syrians are come upon us. Fear not (quoth Eliseus) for they that be with us, are more than they that be with them. And by and by the eyes of his Servant were so opened, that he saw the Mountains lye full of Horses and fiery Chariots to de∣fend his Master. And now, when the Syrians were come to Eliseus, and thought themselves surest of him, they were (at his prayer) smitten with such blindness, that they could not know the Prophet when he spake unto them, saying, that that was not the Town where the Man lay which they sought, but follow me (quoth he) and I will bring you to the place where he is, and so he led them forth and brought them into the City of Sa∣maria where Joram lay, who seeing now his Enemies to be in his power, said to Eliseus: Father, shall I smite them? No, said he: Smite those which thou takest with thine own Sword and Bow, but rather set Bread and Water before them, that they may eat and drink, and so depart to their Master. Then the King prepared a great refection for the Syrians, and filled their Bellies
well, and sent them home again, for the which gentle in∣treaty of Joram, the King of Syria never troubled him more. After this, when Benhadad King of Syria had be∣sieged Samaria, so long till Women were constrained to eat their own Children, Joram took such displeasure with Eliseus (laying the cause upon him) that in his fu∣ry, he sent to take away his Head: Which thing being revealed to the Prophet, he said to his Friends that were with him in his House: See ye not how this Mutherer's Son hath sent to take away my Head? Take heed and be circumspect when the Messenger cometh, and keep him at the Door, for the sound of his Masters feet is be∣hind him; which was even so, for the King's mind al∣tered, he followed the Messenger, and came to the Pro∣phet himself, saying: This evil is of the Lord, and what more shall I look for of him?2 King. 7, 1, &c. No more said the Prophet: For to morrow this time, shall a Bushel of fine Flowre be sold for a shekel, and two Bushels of Barley for another shekel in the Gate of Samaria; which came so to pass the next day; for the great Host of the Syrians at the sound of the feet of four Lepers, were run away, and had left all their Tents behind them.9.24, &c. Finally (to ful∣fil the word of the Lord concerning the destruction of Ahab's Posterity) Joram was slain with an Arrow shot by Jehu, and his Body cast into a Plat of Ground that was Naboth the Jesraelite's, after he had reigned twelve years. Joram,2 King. 8.16. 2 Chron. 21. the Son of Jehosaphat, was two and thirty years old when he began to reign over Juda. He mar∣ried King Ahab's Daughter, whose wicked steps he fol∣lowed. He slew all his own Brethren, with divers of his Nobles. The Edomites which had been subject from Da∣vid's time hitherto, rebelled now against Joram. Also Libna (which was a certain City in Juda, given to the Levites, Josh. 21.13.) would no more be under his hand,
because he had forsaken the Lord God of their Fathers. Finally,The Pro∣phet's Letter. the Prophet Eliseus (to admonish him of his wickedness) wrote to Joram on this wise: The Lord saith, because thou hast not walked in the ways of Jeho∣saphat thy Father, nor in the ways of Asae thy Grandfa∣ther, but in the ways of the Kings of Israel, and hast made Juda to go a whoring after the House of Ahab, and hast also slain thy Brethren, even thy Fathers house, who were better Men than thy self: Therefore, with a great Plague will the Lord smite thy Folk, thy Children, thy Wives, and all thy Goods: And thou shalt be diseased in thy Bowels, which day by day shall fall out of thy Bo∣dy. And so the Lord stirred up against Joram, the Phi∣listines, the Arabians, with the Ethiopians, which wa∣sted his Countrey, and carried away his substance, his Wives, and all his Sons (save Ahaziah the youngest) and smote him with an incurable Disease in his Bowels which held him two years, till all his Guts fell out, and so he died, after he had reigned eight years. Joram, the highness of the Lord. Jehosaphat, the Son of Asa,1 King. 15.24. began his Reign over Judah in the fourth year of Ahab King of Israel, and walked in the old ways of his Father David, and in the Commandments of God, and not in the ways of Israel. This godly King to have the fear of the Lord renewed among his People, in the third year of his Reign sent certain of his Lords thorowout all his Realm, and with them godly, learned and ancient Fathers of the Levites, with the Book of the Law: whose Com∣mission was to see all Idolatry and superstition suppressed, and the Laws of God purely and sincerely taught and followed, which was so diligently done, that the fear of the Lord fell so upon all the Kingdoms round about him, that no Man troubled him, but presented him with gifts: The Philistines with Tribute-money, the Ara∣bians
with Cattel, so that within a while, he grew into great riches and honor. And being thus endued with a∣bundance of treasure and substance, he joyned affinity with Ahab, taking his part against the Syrians, where (notwithstanding) the Lord preserved him, and brought him safe home again. But forsomuch as in his absence, the People were somewhat swerved from the Lord, the Prophet John came to him, and said: Because thou hast helped the ungodly, and loved them whom the Lord doth hate, the wrath of God is come upon thee, neverthe∣less good things are found in thee, because thou hast ta∣ken away the Groves out of the Land, and hast prepared thine heart to seek God. Then Jehosaphat fearing the Lord, went about all his Realm, to bring the People again unto the Lord: And when he had set godly Jud∣ges and Levites in every City (the one to judge in tem∣poral causes, and the other in matters of the Lord) he gave to either of them his charge, saying first to the Judges on this wise: Take heed (ye Judges) what ye do; for ye execute not the judgment of Man, but of God, which is with you in judgment: wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you, and take heed and be doing the thing that pleaseth him, for there is no un∣righteousness with the Lord our God that should have any respect of Persons, or take rewards. Then he tur∣ned to the Levites, and said: Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord, faithfully, and with a pure heart, what cause soever come unto you of your Brethren, between Bloud and Bloud, Law and Commandment, Statute and Ordinance, ye shall warn them that they tres∣pass not against the Lord, that wrath come not upon you, and upon your Brethren, thus do, and you shall not offend: Take courage to you, and do manfully, and the Lord shall be with such as go about to main∣tain the Laws of the Lord. After this, the Lord gave Jehosaphat a marvellous Victory against the Moabites,
and the Ammonites, whose Armies fell at such strife and variance among themselves, that one killed another, and left not one alive undestroyed before Jehosaphat came at them. And the fourth day after he had gathered up the spoil, he assembled his People in the Valley of Blessing, and went to Jerusalem with great triumph, where he gave all praise and thanks to God for his miraculous Victory. Finally, he joyned himself with Ahaziah King of Israel, and made ten Ships to go with his Ships to Tarshish for Gold: And because he hadThe true Christians ought not to joyn in soci∣ety with I∣dolaters. joyned him∣self with so wicked a Man, the Lord brake his Ships, and would not suffer them to go. He reigned xxv. years, and was buried with his Fathers in the City of David, leaving Joram his Son to occupy his place. Jehosaphat, the Lord's judgment, or the judgment of the Lord. Joseph, the Son of Jacob and Rachel,Gen. 30.24.37. cap. was in his youth beloved of his Father above all other, in so much, that he made him a Coat of many colours: But his Bre∣thren hated him, because his Dreams signified unto them, that he should be Lord over them all, and they his Servants. And being at the age of xvii. years, he was sent to them with Victuals, where they lay with their sheep at Dothan, who seeing him come afar off, began to deride and mock him, saying: Behold, where the Dreamer cometh, and counselled together to kill him, but Reuben (the eldest Brother) would not consent to that. Wherefore at his coming they stripped him out of his Coat, and cast him into an empty Pit. And as cer∣tain Ishmaelites passed by, they sold Joseph to them for twenty pence of silver, and took his Coat, and dipt it in Goats bloud, and had it home to their Father, bearing him in hand they had found it by the way: Then Ja∣cob seeing his Son's Coat, cryed out and rent his Gar∣ments for sorrow, thinking surely that wild Beasts had devoured and torn Joseph in pieces: But he being
safe and sound carried into Egypt,39. cap. was there sold again to a certain great Lord of King Pharaoh's Court na∣med Potiphar: and became so lucky a Man with him (by God's providence) that his Master made him chief Ru∣ler over all his House. And so continued in great favour with his Lord, until his Master's Wife began to cast her love upon him, and would have had him to lye with her: Then Joseph to disswade his Mistress from her inordinate love, said: Behold, my Master know∣eth not what he hath in the House with me, but hath committed all things he hath into my hands. There is no Man greater in this House than I, neither hath he kept any thing from me, save only thee, because thou art his Wife. How then can I do this great wicked∣ness, and so sin against God? And thus he put her off, and shunned her company (from that day forth) as much as he could possibly do. But one day as Joseph ente∣red into the House to do his business, and finding his Mistress there (by chance) alone, she caught him by the Cloak to have him lie with her, which he denied and would not consent to her mind, and when he saw her so importune upon him that he could not honestly part from her, he wound himself out of his Garment, and so depar∣ted: Then she called to her Men, declaring to them that Joseph would have ravished her, and when I began to crie (quoth she) he left his Garment behind him for hast, and ran away: which tale being told to Potiphar at his coming home, Joseph was cast in Prison, where (by God's provision) he found such favour with the Keep∣er, that he committed all things under his hand to do whatsoever he would.Gen. 40. cap. Now in this Prison where Joseph was, lay two of King Pharaoh's Officers: The one his chief Baker, and the other is Butler. Which two Men chanced to dream both in one Night, and telling their dreams to Joseph, he told the Butler that within three days, he should be restored to his Office again, but the
Baker should be hanged: Wherefore he desired the But∣ler to think upon him to the King when he was restored, who (notwithstanding) forgot Joseph,41. cap. and never remem∣bred him till two years after that Pharaoh the King chanced to have certain Dreams, which none could be found to tell him the meaning of: and then the Butler calling Joseph to remembrance, told the King all things of him, who being sent for, and come to the King, he ope∣ned the Dreams, declaring to Pharaoh, the seven plenti∣ful years that were to come, and the seven barren and hard years which should ensue and consume the abundance of the years preceeding. Then the King perceiving Jo∣seph to be a Man endued with wisdom and knowledge, made him Regent of his Realm, and called him the Sa∣viour of the World, for by his politick provision, Egypt was relieved in the hard and dear years, and the King greatly enriched. At this time was Joseph about the age of thirty years, and took to Wife Asnath the Daughter of Potiphar Priest of On, and had by her two Sons, Manasses and Ephraim. Now when the time of Dearth was come, all Lands being sore oppressed with Famine, sent into Egypt for Corn, among the which, Jacob sent ten of his Sons,42. cap. who (at their coming before Joseph their Brother and Governour of Egypt) fell down flat be∣fore him. Then Joseph beholding his Brethren (whom he knew very well, but they not him) demanded strange∣ly from whence they came. They said from the Land of Canaan. Then Joseph remembring his Dreams, spake roughly to them, and said, they were spies. Nay my Lord (quoth they) we are all one Man's Sons and mean truly. Nay, nay, (quoth he) your coming is for none other purpose, but to spie out the Land where it is weakest. Truly my Lord, quoth they, we are no Spies, we are twelve Brethren, the Sons of one Man, and the youngest this day, remaineth with our Father, and one, no Man woteth where he is. Then I will prove you
(quoth he) whether ye mean truly or no, let one of you go fetch your youngest Brother hither, for by the life of Pharaoh ye shall not depart till I see him, and so kept them in ward three days. And then (considering with himself) he agreed they should all go home again with food to their Father, save one, which should remain bound for the rest, till they had brought their other Bro∣ther: And at their going away, commanded every Mans sack to be filled with Corn, and every Mans money to be put into the Sacks mouth, and so departed, leaving Simeon behind them in pledge for them all.Gen 43. Now being returned again with Benjamin their youngest Brother, they were all had into Joseph's house, and most gently en∣tertained. And when Joseph came in and saw all his Bre∣thren, he demanded, saying: Is your Father the old man of whom ye told me, in good health and yet alive? Yea (quoth they) thy servant is in good health and merry: And is this your youngest Brother, of whom ye told me? God be merciful unto thee my Son (quoth he) and with that his heart began so to melt, that he hasted into his Chamber and wept. And coming forth again with a chearful countenance, he went to Dinner with his Bre∣thren, commanding each one to be set down in order ac∣cording to their ages, whereat his Brethren (within them∣selves) marvelled. And during the time of refection, he sent to every one from his own Mess, but most of all to Benjamin.44. cap. And when he had thus feasted his Brethren, so long as pleased him, the Night before their departing, he commanded their Sacks to be filled with Corn, and every Man's money put into his Sacks mouth as before, and his Silver-Cup into Benjamin's sack. And in the morning, as they were departed a little out of the City, a Messen∣ger overtook them, saying: Wherefore have ye rewar∣ded evil for good? Is not that the Cup, in the which my Lord drinketh? and in the which he doth Prophesie? Ye have done evil in so doing. The Men hearing this
were marvellously astonied, denying utterly that they ever thought any such deed against their Lord: but when their Sacks were searched, and the Cup found, then they rent their Cloaths, and yielded themselves, and re∣turned with the Messenger to the Governours house a∣gain, and coming before him, he looked angrily on them, saying: What an unkind deed is this ye have done? Know ye not that such a Man as I, can Divine and Prophesie? And now when the Men had made the best excuse they could make,Gen. 45. Joseph could no longer re∣frain, but with weeping tears said to his Brethren: I am Joseph, Doth my Father yet live? With that they were so astonied with his presence, that they could not answer him one word: I am Joseph your Brother (quoth he) whom ye sold into Egypt, now therefore be not grieved with your selves that ye sold me hither, for God did send me before you for your preservation, for this is the second year of Dearth, and five more are be∣hind, wherefore God sent me before you, to make pro∣vision for you in this Land, and to save your lives by a great deliverance: So now it was not you that sent me hither but God, who hath made me a Father unto Pha∣raoh, and Lord of all his house, and Ruler thorowout all the Land of Egypt. Therefore now go and tell my Father, and bid him come with all his Houshold to me,Gen. 46. and I will make provision for him. Thus when Joseph had received his Father into Egypt,Gen. 50. and governed the Land four∣score years, he dyed at the age of an hundred and ten years, and was buried in Egypt, whose Bones were af∣terward translated into the Land of promise, as Jo∣seph had bound them to do in his Death-bed. Joseph, Increasing. Joseph, the Son of Jacob, the Son of Matthan,Matth. 1.16. a poor honest Man, and a Carpenter by his occupation, was espoused to the Virgin Mary, the Mother of Christ,
and dwelt in Nazareth a little City in Galilee, and came of the same Tribe and Kinred that Mary came of, that is to say, of the Tribe of Judah, and of the progeny and stock of David, of whose Seed it was promised that Christ should be born.13. He had four Sons, James, Joses, Sy∣mon and Judas, which the Jews (of ignorance) called the Brethren of Christ. Ioseph,Matth. 27.57. a Man of honour, and of great power and substance, born in the City of Arimathea, which was a Disciple of Jesus, but not openly known because of the Jews, which had made a Law, that whosoever did o∣penly confess him to be Jesus Disciple, the same Person should be cast out of the Synagogue. This Joseph came to Pilate, and desired licence of him, to take down the Body of Jesus from the Cross and to bury it, and having obtained his petition, he bought a fine piece of Linnen cloth, and therein wrapped the Body, and laid it in a new Sepulchre hewed out of the Rock, and rolled a great stone before the Door of the Sepulchre, and so went his way. Iosephus,1 Mac. 5. the Son of Zachary, and one Azarias, were two Captains under Judas Machabeus, which two, Judas left in Jewry to keep and govern the rem∣nant of the Host left there, while he and Jonathas with Simon their Brother, went into the parts of Galilee and Gilead to deliver their Brethren which were then besie∣ged of their enemies: giving them a great charge not to War with the Heathen, but to lye still, till he and his Bre∣thren were returned home again. But nevertheless, when Josephus and Azarias had heard of all the great acts done by Judas and his Brethren, they said one to another: Let us go out and fight against the Heathen that lye round about us, that we may get us a name al∣so. And being agreed, they went out, and pitched their Host before the City of Jamnia, who had not lain there
long, or that Gorgias issued out of the City with his Men, and joyn'd Battel with Josephus, and slew of the Jews two thousand, and chased Josephus and all the rest of his Company to the Borders of Jewry. And thus Josephus and Asarias, neglecting the commandment of Judas their Lord and Governour, purchased in the stead of ho∣nour and fame, great dishonour and shame. Ioses, a certain Levite born in the Countrey of Cyprus, sold his Land there,Act. 4.36. and brought the whole price thereof, and laid it down at the Apostles feet, of whom he was sirnamed Barnabas. Joses, going out, or thrust out. Iosias, the Son of Amon, being at the Age of eight years when he began his reign over Juda,2 King. 22. cap. 2 Chron. 34. was a ver∣tuous and just Prince, for he sought the Lord God of his Father David, even from his Childhood to the end of his life. He caused the Book of the Law of Moses, which had been long lost, and found again by Hilkiah the Priest, to be had in great reverence, and diligently read unto the People. He cleansed his Land from all witchcrafts, and sor∣cery, and from Idols, Images and Groves. He brake down the Hill altars, and burnt the Bones of the Priests of Baal, and left no wicked thing undestroyed, nor Mo∣nument standing in the Cities of Manasses and Ephraim, or other places of his Realm, where any abomination had been committed. He kept a Passeover (in the eigh∣teenth year of his raign) the like never seen, and repair∣ed the Temple. Finally, he made War upon the King of Egypt, in the which he was wounded with a Dart (at a place called Magiddo) whereof he dyed. Whose death was much lamented, for like unto him was never none before nor after. Jehoahaz his Son succeeded him. Jo∣sias, the Lord's Fire, or the Lord burning.
Iotham,2 King. 15.32. 2 Chron. 27. the Son of Azariah or Uzziah at the age of xxv. years, began his Reign over Juda, in the second year of Pekah King of Israel, and did that which was right in the sight of the Lord in all points, as did his Father Azariah, save thatHe went not into the Temple of the Lord to burn Incense as his Father did, contrary to the word of God, which is spoken to the commen∣dation of Jo∣than. he came not into the Temple of the Lord, neither caused the Hill-Altars to be taken away, by which occasion the People ceased not to do wic∣kedly. He builded the sumptuous Gate of the Temple and many Cities, Castles, and Towers, in the Mountains of Juda, and other places. He subdued the Ammonites, who payed him three years together, an hundred talents of silver, ten thousand quarters of Wheat, and so much of Barley. He reigned xvi. years, and was buried in the City of David, leaving Ahaz his Son to enjoy his place. Jotham, Perfect. Ioshua,Num. 27.18, &c. the Son of Nun, was first called Osea, which name Moses changed, and called him Joshua, who was Moses Minister, and ordained of God to rule and govern the People after him.Exod. 17.9. &c. He discomfited King A∣malek while Moses held up his hands, and prayed. He was one of those Searchers which were sent by Moses, to search the Land of Canaan,Num. 13. cap. 14.6, &c. and to bring the People word again what manner of Countrey it was: at whose return the People were ready to stone both him and Ca∣leb, for well reporting of that Land; wherefore, the Lord (being angry with the People) sware that none of them all should see that good Land, but Joshua and Caleb. Af∣ter the death of Moses,Joshua 1. cap. the Lord encouraged Joshua to invade the Land of promise, and gave him command∣ment to exercise himself continually in reading the Book of the Law called Deuteronomy. Which he duly ob∣served, and read it to the People, that they thereby might the better learn to love and fear God, and to obey him, the Lord's Minister. He destroyed the City of Jericho, only reserving Rahab and her Houshold. He burnt the
City of Lodi, and hanged the five Kings of the Ammorites on five Trees, at whose discomfiting, it rained stones from Heaven, by the which more were slain than with the Sword, and the Sun also stood still in his place, and prolonged the day, till Joshua had utterly discomfited his enemies. He slew in all, first and last xxxi. Kings and brought the Children of Israel into the Land of promise, and divided the Land to the Tribes of Israel. He dyed at the age of an hundred and ten years, in whose stead Juda was made Governour of the Lord's Army. Jo∣shua, the Lord Saviour. Isaac was the Son of Abraham by his Wife Sa∣rah, and a figure of Christ,Gen. 21.2, 3.22. cap. for when his Father went to26. cap. offer him up in sacrifice, and coming to the Altar, and place where he should dye, he willingly offered him∣self to death, that his Father might (in him) fulfil the Lord's will. But being preserved of God till he came to the age of forty years, he then took to Wise25.20. Rebekah the Daughter of Bethuel his Fathers Brother, who being long barren, at the last (by the pleasure of God) brought forth Esau and Jacob at one birth. After this,Some say that Isaac was sacrifi∣ced of his Fa∣ther in the xiii. year of his age, but Josephus af∣firmeth it to be done in the xxv. year. there fell such a Dearth and Famine in his Country, that he depar∣ted into the Land of the Philistines, where Abimelech was King. And as he remained in Gerar, the Lord ap∣peared to Isaac, bidding him to remain still in that place, and not to remove into Egypt, and he would mul∣tiply his Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and bring it so to pass, that all Nations of the Earth should be blessed therein. And so Isaac removed not: But for so much as he doubted of the fear of God to be in that place, he durst not avouch Rebekah to be his Wife, but said she was his Sister. Read the story of Abimelech King of the Phi∣listines, for the plainer declaration of this matter. And now, while Isaac remained in the Country of Gerar, God so encreased him with abundance of Cattel and Ri∣ches,
that the Philistines began to envy and hate him, and stopped all the Wells which his Father Abraham had made, that he should have no commodity thereby: But notwithstanding, he digged up the Wells again, and called them by the same names, that his Father had given them before, and became so mighty that Abime∣lech made a League with Isaac, who feasted the King and departed friends.27.1, &c. Finally, with Age he became blind, and so was deceived in giving his blessing to Jacob, which he thought to have first bestowed on Esau, but both (by the will of God) being blessed of their Father I∣saac, he fell sick and dyed, at the age of an hundred and lxxx years, and was buried in Hebron. Isaac, Laughter. Ishbosheth,2 Sam. 2.10.4. cap. the Son of King Saul, at the Age of for∣ty Years, began his Reign over Israel. Whose only stay and upholder of his Kingdom was Abner: after whose death, two of his own Captains slew Ishbosheth by treason in his own house, after he had reigned two years. Read the story of Baanah. Ishbosheth, a Man of shame. Ishmael,Gen. 16.12. was the Son of Abraham and Agar, and had his name given him of the Angel before he was born.Of Ishmael came the Na∣tion of the Ishmaclites, which after were called Saracens. For when his Mother Agar fled from Sarah her Mistress, an Angel found her, saying: Return to thy Mistress again, for thou art with Child, and shalt bear a Son, and because the Lord hath heard thy tri∣bulation, thou shalt call his name Ishmael. He will be a wild Man, and his hand will be against every Man, and every Man's hand against his. And so she returned and brought forth Ishmael, at whose birth Abraham his Father was lxxxvi.17.23. years old. And at the Age of xiii. years was Ishmael circumcised, and the year following both he and his Mother cast out of his Fathers house, and sent away to shift for themselves. But nevertheless,
the Lord which had promised Abraham to bless, en∣crease, and multiply his Son Ishmael, so preserved him, that he became a great Archer, and dwelt in the Wilder∣ness of Pharan,25.12, &c. and took him a Wife out of the Land of Egypt, and begat twelve Princes, so that the Lord made of him a great Nation. He lived 137. years. Ishmael, God hath heard. Of Ishmael the Son of Nethaniah, which slew Geda∣liah, read the stories of Johanan, and Gedaliah. Ittai, was a Gittite born,2 Sam. 15. and bare such love to David, that he left his own Countrey to come and see him, and the fashion of his Court;Lyra saith that Ittai was the Son of Achish King of Gath. and as he continued there, and saw into what danger Absalom had brought his Father David, either to flee his Realm, or to have lost all, he would take no part with Absalom, but sol∣lowed David, and lest him not in this extremity. And when David saw him, he said unto him: why comest thou with me Ittai? return (I pray thee) and abide with the King, for thou art a stranger, and come but yester∣day, and therefore I would be loth to disquiet thee. Therefore return and carry again thy Brethren, and the Lord shall shew thee mercy and truth. Nay, said It∣tai, as truly as God liveth, and my Lord the King li∣veth, in what place my Lord the King shall be, whether in life or death, even there also will thy servant be. And so he went forward with David, and had rule over the third part of David's Host, in the suppression of Absa∣lom. Ittai, Strong. Iudah, was the fourth Son of Jacob and Leah,Gen. 29 ult. 37.26. who would not consent to the death of Joseph his Brother, but gave counsel to sell him, saying: What shall it avail us my Brethren, to slay our Brother, and to keep his bloud secret, let us sell him to the Ishmaelites, and not lay our hands upon him, for he is our Flesh and Bloud.
After this,38. cap. he departed from his Brethren to a place cal∣led Adullam, where he remained with a friend of his called Hirah, and in process fell in love with a Man's Daughter called Shuah (a Canaanite born) and married her, who (in time) brought him forth three Sons. The first Er: The second, Onan: and the third, Shelah. The two first (one after another) he married to a certain Wo∣man called Thamar, but for their horrible sin and wickedness, the Lord slew them both. Then Judah fea∣ring to marry the third Son unto her, lest he should dye also, said to his Daughter in law: Remain a Wi∣dow at thy Father's house, till Shelah my Son be grown: she did so, during which time, the daughter of Shuah died, and Judah became a Widower. Now when the days of mourning were ended, he went to a place called Tim∣nath (taking his friend Hirah with him) to see his Sheep∣shearers. Then Thamar hearing thereof, and seeing Shelah not given her in marriage, laid away her Wi∣dows Garment, and disguising her self like a common Harlot, went and sat her down in an open place by the High-ways side going to Timnath. And as Judah passed that way, and saw one sit muffled like an Whore, went unto her, and said: Come I pray thee, let me lye with thee. What wilt thou give me then (quoth she?) I will (quoth he) send thee a Kid from the Flock. Then leave me a pledge (quoth she) till thou send it. What pledge shall I leave (quoth Judah?) Thy Signet (quoth she) up∣on thy Finger, thy Cloak, and thy Staff. He did so, and lay with her. And coming to his Flock, he took a Kid, and sent it by his friend Hirah to receive his pledges a∣gain. Who being come to the place, and not finding the Woman, he asked of the Men thereabout, where the Whore was which sat in the way as they came: They made him answer again, there was no Whore there. Then he returned to Judah and told him. Well, said Judah, let her take it to her, lest we be ashamed. Now
was Thamar conceived with Child, and when she had gone three Moneths, the thing was espied, and told to Judah, that his Daughter-in-law had played the Whore, and was with Child. Then bring her forth (quoth he) that she may suffer according to the Law: And as she was led to the fire, she sent the pledges to Judah her Fa∣ther in law, saying: By the same Man to whom these things do pertain, am I with Child. Then Judah knowing his pledges, said: she is more righteous than I: for she hath done this deed, because I gave her not to Shelah my Son. And so was the Woman delivered, and brought him forth two Sons at one birth,Gen. 49.10. Pharez and Zarah. Of this Man Judah, it was prophesied, that the Scepter should not depart from him, nor a Law-giver from between his feet, untilwhich was Christ. Shilo came. Judah, a Praising, or Confession. Iudas Machabeus: the third Son of Matta∣thias the Jew, was a valiant Man in his Faith,1 Mac. 2. and of an invincible courage. In so much, that he overcame A∣pollonius and Seron, two mighty Princes of Syria,3. cap. which came against him. And with three thousand Men, he put Gorgias to flight which stole upon him by night and van∣quished Lysias the Lieutenant of King Antiochus and his Sons, and with them Forty Thousand Foot-men,4. cap. and seven thousand Horsemen and slew of them five thousand. Afterward, in Galilee,5. cap. he slew of the Host of Timo∣theus (another of the King's Captains) first three thou∣sand, and afterward eight thousand.7. cap. After that by a Valley called Adarsa, he with a thousand fought with Ni∣canor a Captain of King Demetrius, and nine thou∣sand with him, at the which Battel Nicanor was slain, and of the nine thousand almost none escaped. Finally,9. cap. too much trusting in his prosperity in Wars, in going a∣gainst Bachides (a Captain of King Demetrius, who had a great Host) and taking with him but two thousand,
of which at the last remained with him but only viii. hun∣dred, he fought till it was night, and made a wonderful slaughter of enemies. But while he forced himself to come to Bachides, the which was on the right Wing of the Battel, he fought so nobly that he escaped that Wing, slaying many about him. Finally, being environed with the left Wing, and stricken with many wounds he was slain with much difficulty. Judas, A praising, &c. Iudas,1 Mac. 16. the Son of Symon the Son of Matta∣thias, did manfully assist John his Brother against Cen∣debeus, Captain of Anticchus's Host, and was at the same time sore wounded, and afterward, most traiterously murdered with Symon his Father at a Banquet which Ptolomy made them at his Castle called Doche. Iudas,Luk, 6.14-16. the Son of Alpheus, and Brother to James, is called in the tenth of S. Matthew, Lebbeus, and is sirna∣med Thaddeus.John 14.12. When Christ said unto his Disciples, that he would shew himself unto them and not unto the World, Judas asked him the cause why he would shew himself unto them,Jude 1. cap. and not unto the World. He made an Epistle in the which he admonsheth all Churches gene∣rally to take heed of Deceivers,The last part of this histo∣ry I find in the arguent before the Episde of Jde. Ge∣neva. which went about to draw the hearts of the simple People from the truth of God, whom he setteth forth in their lively colours, shew∣ing by divers examples of the Scriptures, that horrible vengeance is prepared for them. Finally, he comforteth the faithful and exhorteth them to continue in the Do∣ctrine of the Apostles of Jesus Christ. Iudas Iscariot,Matth. 10.4. the Son of Simon of Canaan one of the Apostles (of whom it was afore-hand written to be the Son of perdition) had a great conscience in the precious Ointment that Mary poured upon Christ's Head,John 12.4. that it was not sold for three hundred pence and
given to the poor, but to sell his Master for thirty pence,Matth. 26.14. &c. and to be guide to them that took him and to betray him with a kiss, he had no conscience at all, until he saw his Master condemned, and then he repented and had the thirty pence again unto the High Priests and Elders,cap. 27.3, &c. saying that he had sinned in betraying the innocent bloud, and so departed in great desperation, and hanged him∣self,Act. 1.18. whose Body burst asunder in the midst, so that all his Bowels gushed out. Iudas, of Galilee rose up after Theudas,Act. 5.37. what time the whole World was taxed by the commandment of Augustus Caesar, and taught the People that for as much as they were dedicated unto God, they ought not to pay Tribute to Emperours which were worshippers of false Gods, whereby he drew to his faction a great part of the Commons, who at the last were all brought to nought, and Judas himself slain. Iudas, a Citizen of Damascus,Act. 9. to whose house the Lord sent Ananias to seek Saul of Tharsus, who was hosted there. Iudith, the Daughter of Merari,Judith 8. cap. was a beautiful Wo∣man, unto the which was joyned such vertue and godli∣ness, that all Men spake good of her. Her Husbands name was Manasses, who at the day of his death, left her great riches. She dwelt in the City of Bethulia, and was a Woman of great Chastity. Now during the time of her Widowhood, it chanced-Holofernes to come and besiege the City of Bethulia, of whom the Jews were so a∣fraid, that they wist not what to do, but commit themselves to God, for he had destroyed all their water Conduits, so that they must either be forced to starve or yield. Then ran the People to Osias the High-priest, crying upon him to yield and give over the City to Holofernes,
lest they should all perish, who exhorted them to tarry five days longer for the mercy of God, and if he helped them not in that space, he would do as they had said. Then Judith (who all this while had kept her house in prayer and fasting) hearing what promise Osias had made to the People, sent for him and all the Elders of Bethu∣lia, and said: How happeneth this that ye have promi∣sed to deliver the City to the Assyrians, unless within these five days, the Lord turn to help you: what Men are ye, that ye tempt the Lord? your device obtaineth no mercy of God, but rather provoketh him to wrath and displeasure: Will ye set the mercy of the Lord a time, and appoint him a day at your will? exhort the People to repentance and prayer, and put them in remembrance of this: That with much tribulation the Friends of God are tryed, and that all these things which we now suffer, are far less than our sins have deserved: And that this correction is come upon us (as to the servants of God) for the amendment of our lives, and not for our destruction. Now hear my device (I pray you) and be∣seech the Lord to bring it to good end. Ye shall stand this Night in the Gate of Bethulia, and I will go out with Abra my Maiden: Pray ye unto the Lord that with∣in the days that ye have promised to deliver up the City, he will visit Israel by my hand. But inquire not of me the thing I have taken in hand, for I will not de∣clare it, till God have finished the act. Then every Man went their ways, and Judith departed home to her secret closet where she made her hearty prayers unto God for the Peoples deliverance. Which being done, she cast off her mourning Garments, and decked her self most bravely, to allure the eyes of all Men that should behold her, which she did not for any voluptuousness or pleasure of the flesh, but of a right diseretion and vertue: And so going out of her house with Abra her Maid, she came to the Gate of the City, where the Elders stood waiting her
coming: And as they beheld her wonderful beauty, which God at that present had given her, they were mar∣vellously astonished. She then commanding the Gates to be open, took her leave of the People, who most heartily besought the Lord to be her defence, and well to perform the device of her heart, that they might safely and joyfully receive her presence again: And so (committing her to God) shut the Gates, and looked over the Walls after her, so long as they could see her. And as she was going down the Mountains, the first Watch of the Assyrians took her, demanding what she was, and whither she went. I am (quoth she) a Daughter of the Hebrews, and am fled from them, because I know that they shall be given unto you to be spoiled: Wherefore I am going to the Prince Ho∣lofernes to tell him all their secrets, and how he shall win the City without the loss of one Man. And when the Men had pondered her words and considered well her beauty, they put her in good comfort of her life & brought her to Holofernes, whose Majesty so abashed Judith, that she fell down as one almost dead for fear. But being re∣vived again, Holofernes demanded the cause of her coming, to whom she made answer on this wise, say∣ing: O my Lord, if thou wilt receive the words of thine Handmaiden, and do thereafter, the Lord shall bring thy matter to a prosperous effect. For as thy servant Achior gave counsel unto my Lord, to make search whe∣ther they had sinned against their God or no: It is ma∣nifest and plain that their God is so angry with them for their sins, that he hath shewed by his Prophets, that he will give them over into the enemies hand. Where∣fore they are sore afraid, and suffer great hunger, and at this present (for lack of water) are in a manner as dead Men, and in this extremity brought to kill their Cattel and drink the bloud: And also purposed to con∣sume all the Wheat, Wine and Oil, which are reser∣ved and sanctified for the Priests, and not lawful for the
People to touch. Wherefore I thy Handmaid knowing all this, am fled from their presence, for God hath sent me to work a thing with thee, that all the Earth shall wonder, for thy servant feareth the Lord, and wor∣shippeth the God of Heaven day and night: And now let me remain with thee my Lord, and let thy servant go out in the Night to the Valley, and I will pray unto God that he may reveal unto me, when they shall commit their sins, that I may shew them unto thee, and then mayest thou surely go forth with thine Army; for no Man shall resist thee, and I will bring thee to Jerusalem in such safety, that there shall not so much as one Dog bark against thee. Now was Holofernes so well pleased with the words of this Woman, and so far in love with her beauty, that he commanded her Lodging to be made in the Tent where his Treasure lay, and to prepare her Diet of the same that he himself did eat and drink of, but notwithstanding she told the King, that she might not eat of his Meat, lest she should offend her God, but I can satisfie my self (quoth she) with such things as I have brought. Then how shall we do (quoth Holofernes) if these things that thou hast brought do fail: where shall we have the like to give thee? As truly as the soul of my Lord liveth (quoth she) thine Handmaid shall not spend all that I have, till God have brought to pass in my hand, the thing that I have determined. And so be∣ing licensed to go out and in every night at her pleasure to pray, she went three nights together into the Valley of Bethulia, calling upon God to prosper her device, for the deliverance of his People, and at each time returned to her Tent again. And upon the fourth day as it happen∣ed Holofernes (by God's providence) to make a great Banquet unto his Lords, he sent Vago his Chamber∣lain to Judith, to counsel her to come and keep Com∣pany with him that Night: for it were a shame for us (quoth he) if we should let such a Woman alone and not
talk with her; we will allure her, lest she do mock us. And when the Messenger had done his message, & brought Judith to Holofernes, his spirit (by and by) was moved and ravished with her beauty: Sit down now (quoth he) and drink with us and be merry: I will drink now my Lord (quoth she) and rejoyce, because my state is exalted more than ever it was before. And so she eat and drank before him, of such things as her Maid had pre∣pared. Then Holofernes rejoyced so much in Judith, that he drank more Wine at that time, than ever he had done in one day before. Now when the evening was come, and every Man departed and gone to their Lodging: Vago the King's Chamberlain, shut the Chamber-door and went his way to Bed, leaving none but Judith in the Chamber with Holofernes, for her Maid was comman∣ded to stand without the Chamber-door, to wait her Mistress coming forth to pray. And as Holofernes lay stretched along upon his Bed overcome with Wine, Ju∣dith stood by his Beds side and prayed on this wise: O Lord God of all power, strengthen me, and have respect unto the works of my hands in this hour, that thou mayst set up thy City of Jerusalem, like as thou hast pro∣mised: O grant, that by Thee I may perform the thing which I have devised, and so took down his Sword, and holding him fast by the hair of his Head, said: Streng∣then me, O Lord God of Israel, in this hour; and with that smote off his Head, and rolled the dead Body aside, and got her forth to her Maid, and put the Head in her Wallet, and went forth together, as though they had gone (as their custome was) to pray. And so passing by the Host, and coming nigh to the City of Bethulia, she called to the Watchmen to open the Gate, for God is with us (quoth she) and hath shewed his power in Israel. And when the Gates were set open, the People received her (young and old) with such joy as never the like was seen. Then said Judith: Oh praise ye the Lord, and
give thanks unto our God, which hath not taken away his mercy from the house of Israel; but hath destroyed our enemies this Night by my hand: And behold here his Head, whom the Lord hath slain by me his Mini∣ster, and returned his Handmaid without any reproach of villany, wherefore give praise and thanks to our God, whose mercy endureth for ever. Now take the Head, and hang it upon the highest place of your Walls, and in the morning when the Sun appeareth, go forth with your Weapons like valiant Men, and make as though ye would set upon your enemies, who will then prepare them to Armour: But when they shall go to raise up their Captain, and find him without a Head, there will such a fearfulness fall upon them, that every Man will seek to save himself by flying, then do ye follow them without all care, for God hath delivered them into your hands. And so the Israelites followed the Assyrians (which kept no order) and slew them down right. And when they had slain all their enemies, and gathered up the spoil, they gave the Tent of Holofernes, and all that belonged to him, unto Judith, by whom God had so mightily wrought their deliverance, and had her in great honour, all the days of her life, who at the Age of an hundred and five years dyed, and was most honorably buried in Bethulia beside her husband. Judith, he that praiseth or confesseth. Judith the Daughter of Beeri the Hittite,Gen. 26.34. was Wife to Esau the Son of Isaac. Iulius,Act. 27.1. was a Centurion of the Band of Augu∣stus, to whom Paul (with other Prisoners) were committed to be carried to Rome, and of him gently intreated. Julius, Down, or downy, and full of fine beares.
K. KEDORLAOMER, was King of Elam. Who,Gen. 14. with three Kings more that took his part, fought with the King of Sodom, and the King of Gomorrha,Four Kings against five. and other three on their parts (which five Kings had been xii. years in subjection under him) in the Valley of Sid∣dim, and put them to flight, and spoiled the Cities of So∣dom and Gomorrha, where they found Lot, Abraham's Brothers Son, and carried him away with all the Goods of Sodom and Gomorrha: which Goods with Lot also, were recovered again by Abraham. Kedorlaomer, the generation of servitude: or the house of bondage. Keturah, was Abraham's Wife, who bare unto him six Sons. Keturah, smelling sweet like spice,Gen. 25.1. or perfu∣ming, or bound. L. LABAN, the Son of Bethuel (called also Nahor) Abraham's Brother, had two Daughters,Gen. 29. cap. the one named Leah, and the other Rachel, which two he mar∣ried to Jacob his Sisters Son, as in the story of Jacob is at large set forth. Laban, White. Lamech, the Son of Methuselah,Gen 4.19, &c. came of the Gene∣ration of Cain, and was the first Man that took him two Wives, whereby the lawful Institution of Marriage (which is that two should be one flesh) was first in him corrupted. His two Wives were called Adah and Zillah. By Adah he had two Sons, Jubal and Tubal. By Zillah, one Son called Tubal-Cain, and a Daughter called Naamah, He slew Cain, but not willingly, and told his Wives, say∣ing: I have slain a Man unto the wounding of my self, and a young Man unto mine own punishment: If Cain shall be avenged seven fold, truly Lamech seventy
and seven fold.5.28, &c. When Lamech had lived 182. years, he begat a Son, and called his name Noah, of whom he prophesied saying: This shall comfort us concerning the works and labours of our hands in the Earth which the Lord hath cursed. He lived 777. years, and dyed. Lamech, Poor, or smitten. Lazarus,John 11. cap. was a certain Man dwelling in the Town of Bethanie, which Town pertained to him and his Si∣sters called Martha and Mary Magdalene. And being sick on a time, his Sister Mary sent unto Jesus, saying: Oh Lord, behold he whom thou lovest is sick. At whose request, Jesus (when he saw his time) took his journey into Jewry to visit his Friend Lazarus, who was dead and buried four days before his coming. Then Jesus (who was not ignorant of that which was done) went to his Grave wherein they had laid him, and said: Lazarus, come forth. And forthwith he came out of his Grave, bound Hand and Foot with his Grave∣cloaths upon him, and a Napkin bound about his Face, who being untied, came forth of his Cloaths, as whole and as lusty as ever he was in all his life. For the which Miracle the Jews sought not only how they might put Jesus to death, but Lazarus also, upon whom the Mi∣racle was done, because that for his sake many of the Jews went away and believed on Jesus. After this (a∣bout six days before the Feast of Easter) came Jesus to Bethanie again,John 12.1, 2. where they had prepared him a Supper, at the which, Martha served him, but Lazarus sat at the Table with him as others did. Lazarus, the Help, or succour of God, or Gods Court. Lazarus,Luk. 16.20, &c. the poor Begger, which lay at the great Man's Gate full of botches and sores, even ready to die for hunger, could not be relieved with so much as one crum of the Scraps which fell from the Rich man's Board,
when he made his earnest petition for them, whereas the Dogs were fed with great Lumps of good Bread: yea, he found more favour and gentleness with the Dogs, than with the Rich man. For whereas the rich Glutton would refresh the poor Begger with nothing of all his de∣licious and sumptuous fare, yet the hungry Dogs came and licked his sores. But when it chanced that this Begger died, he was carried by the Angels intoSoe do understand by Abraham's bosom, the faith of A∣braham. And some, the place where those do rest which die in the faith of A∣braham. Which place is not expres∣sed in Scrip∣ture. Abraham's bosom. And contrariwise, the rich Man then dying also, and being sumptuously buried, was carried into Hell: where in his torments he lifted up his eyes, and saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom, unto whom he cryed, saying: O Father Abraham, have mercy upon me, and send Lazarus hither, that he may but dip the tip of his finger in water, to cool my Tongue, for I am sore tormented in this Flame. Nay, said Abraham, forasmuch as in thy lise time thou receivedst thy pleasure, and hadst no pity on the poor, now art thou punished. And contrariwise, Lazarus which re∣ceived pain, and took it patiently, is now comforted. Leah, was the Eldest Daughter of Laban the Son of Nahor, Abraham's Brother, and somewhat blear-eyed.Gen. 19.33, &c. She prevented her Sister Rachel in marriage, being brought to Jacob's Bed in her Sisters stead, and so became Jacob's first Wife, and bare unto him (one after another) these four Sons, Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah,30.14, &c. and so ceased, till it chanced Reuben her Eldest Son in the time of wheat Harvest to go out into the fields and findThe Man∣drake is a kind of Herb, whose Root hath a certain likeness of the figure of 2 Man. Mandrakes, and brought them home to his Mother. Then Rachel hearing thereof, went to Leah her sister, desiring to have her Sons Mandrakes: who said to Rachel: Is it not enough that thou hast taken away my Husband, but wouldest take away my Son's Mandrakes also? Well (quoth Rachel) let him sleep with thee this Night, for thy Sons Man∣drakes. And so Jacob coming out of the Field at Even, Leah met him, and said: Come in unto me, for I have
bought thee with my Sons Mandrakes, and that night she conceived of Jacob, and brought him forth the fifth Son, and called his name Isachar. After that, she con∣ceived again, and brought him forth the sixth Son, and called his name Zebulun. Last of all, she conceived and brought him forth a Daughter, and called her name Dinah. Leah, Painful, or wearied. Levi,Gen. 29.34.34. cap. the third Son of Jacob and Leah (with his Brother Simeon) slew Hemor and Sichem his Son, for ravishing of their Sister Dinah. And therefore were they called of Jacob their Father, Cruel Instruments. Levi had three Sons, Gershon, Kalath, and Merari. The Tribe of Levi,Num. 18.20, &c. Deut. 10.8. Joshua 13.33. the Lord chose unto himself, and appointed them to serve in the Tabernacle of witness with Aaron, to bear the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, to mi∣nister and bless in his name, and had no Inheritance a∣mong their Brethren, but the Lord, who was their In∣heritance. He lived 137. years.Exod. 6.16. Levi, Joyned, or coupled. Levi,Luke 5.27, &c. Mar. 2.14. Matth. 9.9. otherwise called Matthew, the Son of Al∣pheus, was a Toll-gatherer, or a receiver of Custome: who, at the voice of Jesus, when he said, Follow me, left his office, and all things behind him, and followed the Lord. And became of a sinful Publican, a true Disci∣ple of Christ. He invited Jesus to his house, and made him a great Feast, at the which were many Publicans, beside other of his acquaintance, which sat at Meat with Christ and his Disciples, wherewith the Pharisees were much offended. Levite and his Wife: There was a certain Levite dwelling on this side of Mount Ephraim which took to Wife a Concubine out of Bethlehem Juda, which Woman played the Whore by him, and went away from him to her Fathers house, where she remained four
Moneths. And at last, her Husband being desirous to have her again, went to intreat her friendly, and to fetch her home, and was gently entertained of his Father-in-law, by the space of three days. And on the fourth day, when he would have departed, his Father-in-law would not suffer him so to do, but with gentle entreaty, compel∣led him to tarry that day also until the next morrow. Which being come, he prepared himself to depart. And about the mid-day (notwithstanding the great intrea∣ty of his Father, to have him yet to tarry one day lon∣ger) he took his Concubine, his Servant, with two Asses laden, and so departed, going forth till they came as far as Jebus, and because it drew toward night, his servant counselled him to go into the City, and to tarry there all night, but his Master would not, because it was a strange City, and pertained not to the Children of Is∣rael. And so passing by, they came to Gibeah a City belon∣ging to the Benjamites. And coming thither somewhat late, they went in, and sat them down in one of the streets of the City. And as they were sitting there, a certain old Man (which was of Mount Ephraim also, and dwelt there as a stranger) came out of the Field from his work. And when he had spyed the Levite (and those with him) sitting in the street as wayfaring per∣sons he went unto them, demanding from whence they came? The Levite answered how that they came from Bethlehem Judah beside Mount Ephraim, and were going to the house of the Lord, and because that no Man recei∣veth us into his house, we sit here, having all things neces∣sary with us, both for our selves, and Cattel. Well (quoth the old man) abide not here in the street, but go home with me, and whatsoever ye lack, ye shall find it there. And so he had them home to his house, and used them very friendly. And as they were making merry to∣gether, the wicked Men of the City came and beset the House round about, and thrusting at the Door to have
been in, they called unto the old Man, to bring forth the Men out of his house, that they might know them. The good old Man, perceiving the great folly of those ungra∣cious persons, went out unto them, and said: Oh my good Brethren do not prosecute to accomplish so wicked an act as this ye intend: yet rather than ye should so wickedly abuse these men, which are come into my House, I will bring forth my Daughter (which is a Maid) and this Mans Concubine. But they in no wise would hearken unto them. The Levite seeing that, put forth his Concu∣bine unto them: who so shamefully abused her that night, that on the morrow (when the Levite her husband came to open the Door) he sound his Concubine lying with her hands stretched out upon the Threshold, stark dead. Then he took her up upon his Ass, and carried her home to his house, and took a Knife and divided her into twelve pieces, and sent her into all the Quarters of Israel, desi∣ring them, that forsomuch as there was never such a deed done, nor heard of, since the Children of Israel came out of Egypt, that they would consider the mat∣ter, and take advisement therein. Now the Children of Israel seeing this most evident token of the Benjamites wickedness, and having the whole matter revealed unto them by the Levite himself, they assembled together as it had been one Man, to the number of four hundred thousand fighting Men, and came to Gibeah to fight a∣gainst the Benjamites, who in the first day had the bet∣ter of the Israelites, and slew of them xxii. thousand, and in the second day xviii. thousand, but the third day, the Israelites had the better, and slew of the Benjamites xxv. thousand, and burnt and destroyed all their Cities they could come by, with Man, Woman and Child, on∣ly six hundred of them fled to the Rock of Rimmon in the Wilderness, and saved themselves there. Then Isra∣el sware unto the Lord in Mizpeh: that whosoever did give his Daughter to any of the Benjamites to Wife, he
should be accursed, and he that came not up to the Lords offering, should surely die. And when they had reared up an Altar in Bethel, and made their offering, it was known that the Inhabitants of Jabesh Gilead came not up to the offering. Wherefore the Israelites sent thither xii. thousand Men, commanding them to slay all the Males, with all the Women also, saving such Women as had never known Man fleshly. And they saved four hun∣dred Damsels, Virgins that never lay with Man, and them they brought to the Host of Shiloh, which is in the Land of Canaan. Then the Israelites having pity on their Brethren the Benjamites (because that God had made such a gap among them) went peaceably unto them that were fled unto the Rock of Rimmon, and gave them Wives which they had saved of the Women of Gi∣lead, but they sufficed them not. Then the Children of Is∣rael were very sorry for the breach that the Lord had made in the Tribes of Israel, and took great care for the Ben∣jamites, how to replenish them with Wives, forsomuch as their Women were all destroyed, and that they might not give their Daughters unto them: And at last, remem∣bring the yearly custome of the Daughters of Shiloh they said unto the Benjamites: There is a Feast of the Lord yearly kept in Shiloh: Go ye thither, and lie in wait a∣mong the Vineyards, and when ye see the Daughters of Shiloh come dancing a row, then come ye out of the Vine∣yards, and catch you every Man a Wife. And if their Friends complain unto us, we will excuse the matter, and say ye have done it, because we did not reserve to each one of you his Wife, in the time of War. And the Children of Benjamin did even so, and took them Wives of the daughters of Shiloh, and went to their Inheritance, and made them Cities to dwell in, and so were friends with their Brethren the Children of Israel again. Lydia,Act. 16.14. was a certain Woman and a seller of Purple
in the City of Thyatira, and a worshipper of God, whose heart the Lord so opened at the preaching of Paul, that she with all her Houshold were converted and baptised, saying then to Paul and the other Disciples: If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my House, and abide there, and so she constrained them, who found so much faithfulness then in the Woman, that af∣terward (being cast in Prison and delivered again) they returned into her house to comfort the brethren which re∣sorted thither. Lydia, Nativity, or generation. Lysias,1 Mac. 3. being a great Man with Antiochus and of his bloud, was such an enemy unto the Jews, that the King made him Captain of his Host, who with for∣ty thousand Foot-men and seven thousand Horse-men, went to fight against Judas Machabeus: But Judas overcame him, and slew three thousand of his Men. Then Lysias being fore grieved at Israels prosperity,4. cap. came at another time with three score thousand Foot-men, and five thousand Horsemen, at which time Judas overcame him again, and slew five thousand of his Men. Finally, as he lay with Antiochus the King,7. cap. at the City of An∣tioch, Demetrius came upon them and slew them both. Lysias, Dissolving. Lysias,Act. 22.24, &c. was a chief Captain under the Emperour, and having Paul committed unto him as Prisoner, was afraid to punish him, because he was a Ro∣man. And therefore to know the certainty where∣fore the Jews had accused him,25. cap. he brought him forth before the Council, where in the end, fell such dissen∣tion and debate among them, that Lysias (fearing lest Paul should have been pull'd asunder of the Jews) took him and had him into the Castle. And having know∣ledge how the Jews had conspired Paul's death, he sent him away secretly by night, to Felix (being at that time
the Emperour's Lieutenant) to whom he wrote on this wise: Claudius Lysias unto the most mighty Ruler Felix sendeth greeting: As this Man was taken of the Jews, and should have been killed of them, I came upon them with Souldiers and rescued him, perceiving he was a Roman. And when I would have known the cause wherefore they accused him, I brought him forth in their council: There I perceived that he was accu∣sed of questions of their Law, and had no crime worthy of death or of bonds. And when it was shewed me, how that the Jews laid wait for the Man, I sent him straightway unto thee, and commanded his Accusers, if they had ought against him, to tell it unto thee, Farewel. Lysimachus, was made the High-Priest of the Jews,Macc. 4. in the room of Menelaus his Brother, by whose Coun∣sel he robbed the Temple and did much mischief: whose wickedness was so manifest unto the People, that they rose up against him, and made a great uproar in the City. Whereupon Lysimachus (perceiving wherea∣bout they went) got unto him three thousand unthrists well armed for his defence: Against whom the Multi∣tude fought so furiously with Club and Bats, and with hurling of stones, and such Weapons as they could get, that they wounded many, slew some, and chased the rest away, and at the last killed the wicked Church-robber himself, beside the Treasury. Lysimachus, dissolving Battel. Loammi,Hosea 1.9. was the Second Son of Gomer the Daughter of Diblaim. And when she brought him forth the Lord said: Call his name Loammi. For why, ye are not my People, therefore will not I be your God. Loammi, not my People. Lois,2 Tim. 1.5. was a faithful godly Woman and Grand∣mother
to Timothy, who always brought up her Chil∣dren and Family, in the fear of God, and knowledge of Christ's Doctrine. Lois, Better. Lo-ruhama,Hos. 1.6. was the Daughter of Gomer the Daugh∣ter of Diblaim. And when she brought him forth, the Lord said: Call his name Lo-ruhama, for I will have no pity upon the house of Israel but forget them, and put them clean out of remembrance. Lo-ruhama, not obtaining Mercy. Lot,Gen. 11.31. was the Son of Haran, Brother to Abraham, with whom he went out of Egypt toward the south Coun∣trey to come into the Land of Canaan. And when they were come to a place called Bethel, they had such abun∣dance of Sheep and Cattel between them, that (the Land not being able to receive them both) their Herdmen be∣gan to strive together. Whereupon, Abraham (to a∣void contention) desired that Lot and he might break companies. And that he would take and occupy what part of all the Land he would, and he to take the other. Then Lot chose the Countrey about Jordan, because it had plenty of Water, and dwelt in Sodom, till Chedorlao∣mer came and spoiled the City and carried Lot away Prisoner, who being rescued by Abraham his Uncle, was brought to Sodom again. And as he remained among the filthy Sodomites, the Lord sent his Angels to destroy the City and Countrey about, which Angels Lot received into his house. And before his guests and he were gone to rest, the Men of the City, (replenished with all kind of wickedness) had compassed the house round about, and called to Lot, saying: Where are the Men which came in to thee this night? bring them forth to us that we may know them. Then Lot went out unto them and said: I pray you my Brethren, do not so wickedly, yet rather than ye should so do, I have two Daughters
which never knew Man, them will I bring out unto you, and do with them as seemeth you good, only to these men do nothing, for therefore are they come under the sha∣dow of my Roof. And as the Sodomites threatned Lot, and were pressing upon him to break open the Door, the Angels within put forth their hands, and pulled Lot into the House, and shut fast the Door: At the which instant the Sodomites without were so smitten with blindness, that they groped for the Door and could not find it. Then said the Angels to Lot: If thou hast any Sons or Daughters or whatsoever thou hast in the City, bring it out with thee, for we are sent to destroy this place, be∣cause their sins is great before the Lord. Then went Lot to his Sons in-law, who had married his Daugh∣ters and told them, but they (thinking their Father had mocked) tarried still. And so as Lot made haste (for the Angels could do nothing till he were gone) with his Wife and two Daughters to the City of Zoar, which he had requested of the Lord to flye unto, his Wife looking behind her (contrary to the Angels precept) was turned into a Pillar of Salt. Then Lot fearing to abide in the City of Zoar, (after the Cities were destroyed) got him into the Mountains, where he dwelt in a Cave, with his two Daughters, who (forasmuch as their Father was old and not a Man left in the Country thereabout, where∣by they might have Children) consulted together and a∣greed to make their Father drunk with Wine, and so to lye with him, that they might raise up Seed unto their Father. Which matter being performed and they both with Child, the eldest brought forth Moab, which was the Father of the Moabites, and the youngest Ben-Am∣mi, which was the Father of the Ammonites, both which Nations were most vile and wicked. Lot, Wrapped, or Joyned. Luke, was a Physician, born in the City of Antioch,Col. 4.14. 2 Tim. 4.1.
and became Saint Paul's Disciple and Companion in all his travels.Luke lived 84. years, and was bu∣ried at Con∣stantinople. He wrote the Volume of his Gospel, as he had learned of Paul and of the other Apostles, as he re∣porteth himself in the beginning of the same work, say∣ing: As they have delivered them to us, which from the beginning saw them with their eyes, and were Ministers of the things that they declared. But the Volume called the Acts of the Apostles, he composed as he had seen, the story whereof came even to Paul's time, being and tarrying two years at Rome, where the Work was fi∣nished. Luke, his Resurrection. M. MAACAH,2 Sam. 3.3. 1 Chron. 3.2. 1 King. 15..10. the Daughter of Talmai King of Ge∣shur was King David's Wife, and Mother to Ab∣salom. Maacah the Daughter of Absalom was Wife to Rehoboam, and Mother to Abijam, which Abijam, his Father Rehoboam ordained to raign after him, for the love that he bare to Maacah his Mother, above all the rest of his Wives. Read the story of Asa. Maacah, a Woman pressed, or bruised. Machabeus,1 Mac. 2, 3. was the third Son of Mattathias, and after his Fathers death, he was made Ruler over the Jews. Who (in the defence of the holy Laws) fought most manfully against God's enemies during his Life. Machabeus, a Striker, a Fighter. Read Judas Ma∣chabeus. Machir,2 Sam. 9.4. Ammiel was Father to Bathshebah King Da∣vid's Wife. was the Son of Ammiel of Lodebar, and a great friend to Mephibosheth the Son of Jonathan, who kept him in his House till King David sent for him, to his preferment. Machir, Selling, or knowing. Manahem,2 King. 15.14, &c. the Son of Gadi, besieged Shallum King of Israel in Samaria, and slew him, whose King∣dome
he possessed; and began his Raign in the nine and thirtieth year of Azariah King of Juda. And because the City of Tiphsah would not receive him as theirs, he de∣stroyed the City, and all that was within it. And for this great wickedness and tyranny God stirred up Pul, King of Assyria against him, unto whom Manahem gave a thousand Talents of Silver, to break up his Wars, which Money he exacted of his People, taking of every Man of substance fifty Sicles. He raigned ten years, leaving Pekahiah his Son to succeed him. Manahem, a Comforter, or Leader of them, or a preparing of heat. Manaen,Act. 13.1. which was brought up of a Child with Herod, at the last forsook him and followed Christ. Manasses, the Son of Hezekiah,2 King. 21. 2 Chron. 33. was twelve years old when he began his raign over Juda, and wrought much evil before the Lord.Manasses put Esay the Prophet (who was his Fa∣ther-in-law) to death. For he built up the high pla∣ces again which his Father had destroyed. He erected up Altars for Baal, and made Groves as Ahab did, and worshipped all the Host of Heaven and served them. He offered his Children in fire,Read the annotation in the story of Esay. as the manner of the Gentiles was, and gave himself to Witcheraft and Sorcery, and favoured Soothsayers, and such as used familiar spirits. He set the Image of the Grove in the House, where the Lord said he would put his Name for ever. Over and beyond all these evils, he shed so much innocent bloud, that all Jerusalem was replenished from corner to cor∣ner, and he wrought more wickedness than did all the A∣morites: Wherefore the Lord gave him over into the hands of the King of Assyria, who took Manasses and bound him with two Chains, and carried him to Baby∣lon. Where at the last, he so humbled himself to the Lord, that he had compassion upon him, and restored him to his Kingdom again. Who after that, became a
good Man, and put down all such abominations, as he before had maintained, and reigned five and fifty years, leaving Amon his Son to succeed. Manasses, Eorget∣ful, or forgetfulness. Mardocheus,Esther 2. cap. the Son of Jair, was a Jew born, dwelling in the City of Shusan, and one of them which were carried away from Jerusalem with Jechonia King of Juda (by Nabuchodonosor) into Babylon. This Man had a fair Damosel in his house named Esther, his Un∣cles Daughter, whose Father and Mother being dead, he brought up as his own Daughter, so long till at last (for her beauty and fairness) she was taken up by the King's Commission (with other more) and had to the Court, there to be brought up at the Kings charges, in an house appoin∣ted, for that purpose the King had called them for. And every day would Mardocheus walk before the Womens house, to hear and know how Esther did, and what should become of her, whose Lot in process was to be made Queen in the stead of Vasthi late deposed. And on a time as Mardocheus sat in the King's Gate, he heard an inkling of certain Treasons conspired against the King's own Person, by two of his Privy-Chamber, Bigthan and Theres, which treason, he caused Esther to open un∣to the King, and to certifie his grace thereof in his name. Upon whose certification, inquiry being made and found true, the Conspirators were put to death, and the matter Registred in Chronicle for a remembrance of their act. After this, because Mardocheus would do no reverence to Haman, both he and the Jews should all have been slain in one day. Whereof Mardocheus having know∣ledge, he rent his Cloaths, and put on mourning Apparel, and so ran thorow the City of Shusan (where their de∣struction was devised) Crying out until he came to the King's Gate, where he might not be suffered to enter, in that array. Then Esther hearing thereof, was sore asto∣nished,
and sent him other Rayment to put on: But he refusing the Rayment, declared unto the Messenger the whole effect of Haman's commission and working, and took him a Copy of the same, to give to Esther, char∣ging her to go unto the King, for the Lives and safeguard of her People: For who can tell (quoth he) whether God hath called her to the Kingdom for that purpose or no, it may be that he hath: And therefore if she now hold her peace, the Jews shall have help from some other place, and so shall she and her Fathers house be utterly destroyed. And so while Esther went about the deliverance of the Jews, Mardocheus was exalted into the King's favour,Mardocheus lived 1 98. years, as Philo wit∣nesseth. to the great rejoycing of all the Jews, whose Wealth he sought so long as he lived. Read the story of Esther and Haman. Mardocheus, a bitter contrition, or repentance. Mary, the Virgin,Matth. 1.161 Luk. 1.27, &c. and Mother of God (whose Pa∣rents are not expressed in Scripture) was affianced to a certain good Man of her own stock and Tribe (which was of Juda) named Joseph. And before she came to dwell with him, the Angel Gabriel being sent of God, came and saluted her, saying: Hail full of Grace, the Lord is with thee, blessed art thou among Women. The Virgin seeing the Angel, was sore abashed at his words, and mused much in her mind, what salutation that should be. Then said the Angel, Fear not Mary, for thou hast found favour with God, for lo, thou shalt con∣ceive in thy Womb, and bear a Son, and shalt call his Name Jesus &c. Then Mary, because she would be resolved of all doubts, to the end she might the more surely embrace the promise of God, said: How shall this be, seeing I know no Man? The Holy Ghost (quoth the Angel) shall come upon thee, and the power of the Most Highest shall overshadow thee. Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son of God, &c. Then said Mary: Behold the Hand∣maid
of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy Word, Upon this, she prepared her self with speed, to go and visit her Cousin Elizabeth, with whom she remained three Months, and returned home again: And shortly after, went with Joseph her Husband from the City of Nazareth, to the Land of Jewry to a City called Beth∣lehem, there to be taxed (according to the Emperour Au∣gustus commandment) because they were of the House and Lineage of David.In the Book called Fasci∣culus tempo∣rum, it is said that this Virgin was the Daughter of Joachim and Anna: and was a∣bout the age of xvi. years, when she brought forth Christ. And being forced to lye in the sta∣ble, for lack of room in the Inne, her hour came to be delivered, and there she brought forth Christ Jesus the Saviour of the World. And when she was purified, and had been at Jerusalem with her Child, and performed all things there according to the Law, she returned with Joseph her Husband, home to the City of Nazareth a∣gain. And being accustomed yearly she and her Hus∣band to go up at the Feast of Easter to Jerusalem, she chanced one time to leave her Son behind her, and when she had turned back, and sought him out, and found him, she said: Son, why hast thou thus dealt with us? thy Father and I have sought thee with heavy hearts. Another time as she was with her Son at a Marriage, in Cana, a Town in Galilee, when the Wine failed at the Feast, she told her Son that they lacked Wine, and receiving his answer meekly, bad the Mi∣nisters to do whatsoever he commanded them. Final∣ly, as she stood by the Cross, whereon her Son shed his bloud, as well for her as all other Christians, sorrow pierced her heart like a Sword, according to Simeon's prophecie. Mary, the Wife of Cleophas, was her sister. Mary,Mar. 15.40.16.1. Salome was a certain godly Woman, who (among other) ministred of her substance to Jesus, and followed him from Galilee, and after he was crucified, bought sweet odors to anoint his Body, and was a Wit∣ness of his Resurrection.
Mary, the Mother of John Mark,Act. 12.12. into whose House Peter came (after the Angel of God had delivered him out of Prison, from the hands of Herod) where many were gathered together in prayer. MaryMagdalen signifieth magnified, or exalted. Magdalene, dwelt in Bethany,John 12.12. Luk. 7.37, &c. and was a sinful Woman. And in token of her great repen∣tance, she went to Jesus as he sat at Meat in one of the Pharisees houses, with a Box of Ointment in her hand, falling down at his Feet weeping and washing them with the tears distilling down from her eyes, and wiped them with the hairs of her head, and also kissed them, and anointed them with sweet Ointment. Then Jesus seeing the great faith of the Woman, said unto her: Mary, thy Faith hath saved thee, go in peace. Then Mary feeling her self much bound to Christ, which had forgiven her so many sins, fell in so great love,Luk. 10. that all her whole meditation and study was upon him. Inso∣much that when Martha her Sister was cumbred about much serving of Christ at the Table, Mary (choosing the better part) sat at Jesus feet, to hear his Preaching. And when he suffered his Passion,John 19.25. she stood by the Cross with Mary his Mother to see the end. And the morrow after the Sabbath-day, when she came to the Sepulchre,20.1, 2, &c. and saw the stone taken away from the Tomb, she ran to Peter and John, and told them, who ran to the Grave, and tryed the matter, and returned back a∣gain, leaving Mary standing at the Grave weeping. And as she bowed her self into the Grave, she saw two Angels sitting in white clothing, who said unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? They have taken away my Lord (quoth she) and I know not where they have laid him. And turning her self about, she saw Jesus standing, but knew him not, to whom he said: Wo∣man, why weepest thou? whom dost thou seek? She
(supposing it had been the Gardiner) said: Sir, if thou hast born him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will fetch him: Then said Jesus, Mary: with that she turned her self, and said, Rabboni, which is to say, Master, and fell down to the ground to have kissed his Feet. But to withdraw her from that, Jesus said: Touch me not: but go and tell my brethren that I ascend to my Father and your Father, to my God and your God. Then went Mary to the Disciples, and told them that she had seen the Lord, and what things he had said unto her. Read the story of Martha her Sister, and of La∣zarus her Brother. Mark, the Evangelist, is thought to have been Peter's Disciple, and to write his Gospel, according as he heard Peter preach, and shew every thing by mouth, and to have planted the first Church in Alexandria, where he died in the eighth year of the reign of Nero, in whose place succeeded Anianus. Of this Mark, speaketh Pe∣ter, in his first Epistle, the fifth Chapter, saying: The Congregation of them, which at Babylon are compani∣ons of your Election, saluteth you, and so doth Mark my Son. Mark, Filed, or rubbed. Mark,Act. 12.12. otherwise called John the Son of Mary, was Minister to Paul and Barnabas, what time as they were sent by the Holy Ghost from Antioch, to preach the Gospel unto the Heathen,14.21. which Mark at Pamphylia, departed back from them again. For the which cause, Paul (the next Journey that he and Barnabas made) would not suffer Mark to go with them,15.37, &c. wherefore Barnabas departed from Paul, taking Mark (who was his Sisters Son) with him into Cyprus. Martha,Luke 10. and Mary Magdalene, were two Sisters, dwelling in the City of Bethany, which two had a Bro∣ther
named Lazarus. This Martha (on a time) invited Jesus to dinner. And being cumbred about much serving, and seeing her Sister Mary sit still at Jesus Feet, said unto him: Dost thou not care, that my sister hath lest me to minister alone? Bid her come and help me. To whom he answered: Martha, Martha, thou carest and art troubled about many things: verily, one is needful, Mary hath chosen the best part which shall not be taken from her. On a time as Jesus was coming to Betha∣ny to heal her Brother Lazarus, she met him, saying:John 11 cap. Lord, if thou hadst been here, my Brother had not died. Nevertheless now I know, that whatsoever thou dost ask of God, he will give it thee. Then said Jesus, Thy Brother shall rise again. Yea (quoth Martha) I know that he shall rise again in the Resurrection at the last day: I am (said Jesus) the Resurrection and the Life, he that believeth on me, yea though he were dead, yet shall he live, and whosoever liveth and believeth in Me, shall not dye: Believest thou this? Yea Lord (quoth Martha) I believe that thou art Christ the Son of God, which should come into the World. After this when Je∣sus came to the place where Lazarus was buried, and had commanded the stone of his Grave to be taken away, Martha said: Lord, by this time he stinketh, for he hath been dead four days. Said not I unto thee (quoth Jesus) that if thou didst believe, thou shouldst see the glory of God? And so she saw her Brother Lazarus resto∣red from death to life, to the glory of God and her great comfort. Martha, Bitter, or Provoking. Mattathias, the Son of Simeon the Priest,1 Mac. 2. which was of the stock and kinred of Joaris, had five valiant Men to his Sons, and dwelt in Modin, remaining sted∣fast in the Laws of God, notwithstanding the great cala∣mities that were come upon the People of Juda and Je∣rusalem, for the which Mattathias made piteous la∣mentation,
crying upon God to strengthen him and his Sons against the Heathen, that had so wasted the Peo∣ple, and defiled his Sanctuary. And while he and his Sons were thus mourning in Sackcloth, for the destruction of the holy City: Antiochus the King, sent certain Com∣missioners to the City of Modin, to compel such Jews as were fled thither, to forsake their own Laws, and to serve the Idols of the Heathen. Who (after they had tur∣ned the heart of many) spake to Mattathias on this wise: Thou art (said they) a Noble man of high reputation, and great in this City, and hast many Children and Bre∣thren: Come thou first of all and fulfil the King's com∣mandment, like as the Heathen have done, and the Men of Juda, with such as remain at Jerusalem, and so shalt thou and thy Sons be in favour with the King and greatly enriched. Nay said Mattathias: Though all Nations under the King's Dominion, fall away every Man from the Law of their Fathers, yet will I, my Sons and my Brethren, walk in the Laws of our Fathers. God forbid we should forsake the Laws and Ordinances of God, we will not, for no Man's pleasure, transgress our Religion, or break the Statutes of our Law. And as he had spoken these words, a certain Jew came forth, and openly in the sight of all Men, did sacrifice unto the Idols upon the Altar in the City of Modin ac∣cording to the King's commandment, which thing so grieved Mattathias, that (for very Zeal he had to the Laws of God) he started him up, and ran upon the Jew, and killed both him & the Commissioner, that compelled him so to do, and ran his way crying thorow the City, and saying to the People, whosoever is fervent in the Law, and will keep and stand by the Covenant, let him fol∣low me. So he and his Sons fled into the Mountains, and many other godly Men, with their Wives and Chil∣dren, and all that they had, got them into the Wilder∣ness. And being there, the Heathen went against them
on the Sabbath day, and slew Man, Woman and Child, for on that day the Jews would make no resistance, but would dye in their innocency: Then Mattathias hea∣ring of this, was very sorry, and counselling with his friends, said: If we do as our Brethren have done, and do not fight for our Lives, and our Laws, the Heathen will soon root us all out of the Earth, whereupon they con∣cluded, that whosoever did bid them battel on the Sab∣bath day, that they would rather manfully fight for their Laws, than dye as their Brethren had done be∣fore. Upon the which conclusion, came the whole Syna∣gogue of the Jews (with all such as were fled for Persecu∣tion) to Mattathias: And being gathered together, they were so great an Host, that they feared not their enemies, but fell upon them and slew a great number. And by their force and strength, they went about the Coasts of Israel and destroyed the Altars, and circumcised their Children and kept their Laws in spight of them all. Finally, when the time of his death drew nigh, he called all his Sons before him, exhorting them to prefer the Laws and wealth of their Countrey, before their own Lives, and ordained Simon his eldest Son, to be as it were their Father, and Judas Machabeus to be their Cap∣tain, and so giving them his blessing he dyed, and was buried in his Fathers Sepulchre in the City of Modin. Mattathias, the gift of the Lord. Mattathias, the Son of Simon,1 Mac. 16. was killed with his Father at a Banquet, which Ptolomy his Brother-in-law had prepared for them, in a Castle of his called Doche. Mathattias, the Son of Absalemus stuck by Jo∣nathas,1 Mac. 11. when all his Men forsook him and fled the Field, save Judas the Son of Galphi. Matthew, the Evangelist. Read the Story of
Levi. Matthew, Given. Matthias,Act. 1.23. was a faithful Disciple of Christ, and one that had his conversation always among the Apostles, even from the beginning of Christ's preaching to the last end. And now, for as much as Judas the Traytor was fallen from Christ: he (with another godly Man called Joseph or Barsabas) was appointed to stand in election, which of them two should succeed in the place of Ju∣das. And when the Apostles had made their prayers to God,Lots. and given forth their lots, the lot fell on Mat∣thias, and so he was counted with the eleven Apostles. Matthias, the Lords Gift. Methuselah,Gen. 5.21, &c. was the Son of Henoch, and lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begot La∣mech. And after that he lived seven hundred and eighty two years, and begot Sons and Daughters; and when he had lived in all, nine hundred three-score and nine years, he died. Methuselah, be sent his death, or the weapons of his death. Melchisedek,Gen. 14.18. Heb. 7.1. is called King of Salem, and the High Priest of the most High God. When Abraham had rescued Lot his Nephew out of the hands of the Assyri∣ans, and was returned from the slaughter of the Kings, Melchisedek met him with Bread and Wine, to refresh Abraham and his Souldiers, and blessed him, saying: Blessed be Abraham of the most High God possessor of hea∣ven and earth, and blessed be the most High God which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand: And Abra∣ham gave him tythes of all things. The Scripture report∣eth Melchisedek to be, without Father, without Mother, without Kin, and hath neither beginning of his days, nei∣ther yet end of his life, but is likened unto the Son of God, and continueth a Priest for ever. Melchisedek,
King of Righteousness. Menelaus,2 Mac. 4. was Brother to Simon and Lysima∣chus, two as ungracious as himself. This ambitious Man by deceit, got the High-Priest's Office from Jason on this wise: When that good and godly Man Onias had the superiority, Jason his Brother found the means to corrupt Antiochus the King with Money, and so got the Office out of his Brother's hands. And when the time came that Jason should pay the Money to Antiochus, he sent it by the hand of Menelaus, in whom he had great confidence. But when Menelaus was come to the King, he so craftily handled the matter with flattery and fair promises, that he both defrauded the King of his Money, and Jason of his Office: which when he had obtained, he return'd with an high stomach, more like a cruel tyrant, and the wrath of a wild brute beast, than any thing that beseemed a Priest. But when the King had knowledge of all his deceit and falshood, he discharged him again, putting Lysimachus his Brother in his room. Then Menelaus being thus thrust out of Office, waited his time to be revenged. And when he had spied the King a∣bout his weighty affairs (as in the suppression of cer∣tain Rebels) leaving Andronicus behind him to be his Lieutenant, and supposing then to have a convenient time, he went and stole out of the Temple certain Ves∣sels of Gold, and gave them to Andronicus. And after he had made him his assured friend, he ministred such wicked counsel both to Andronicus and Lysimachus his Brother, that the one murdered Onias, and the other spoi∣led and robbed the Temple of God. Wherefore the King at his return again, caused Andronicus to be put to death, and the other, the People furiously fell upon him and killed him. And forsomuch as Menelaus was great∣ly suspected to be the chief causer of all this murther, a Court was called, and many sore complaints laid a∣gainst
him. The Menelaus (perceiving himself in the King's displeasure, and danger of his Laws) went to Ptolomy (one of the three Ambassadours) and with Mo∣ney made him his friend, who went to the King, and so laboured the matter, that he brought Menelaus into such favour with the King again, that he was quite dischar∣ged from all accusations, and his Accusers condemned to death. Thus through covetous Magistrates, Menelaus remained still in Authority, being now more malici∣ous unto the Jews (his own Nation) than ever he was, as it appeared afterward, what time as he aided Anti∣ochus, and was his guide to the spoiling of the Temple. But at the last, his falshood came to a foul end, for Ly∣sias which was Lord-Steward to Antiochus, and Chief Ruler of all his matters, so informed the King of his ungraciousness, that he commanded Menelaus (who had done so much mischief against the Altar of God, whose fire and ashes were holy) to be cast into a tower of fifty cubits high, heaped up with ashes, and so miserably ended his life. Menelaus, Strength of the people. Merab,1 Sam. 18.17. was the Eldest Daughter of King Saul, who promised her in marriage to David: But ere the time came that David should enjoy her, Saul gave her to an∣other Man named Adriel, by whom she conceived, and bare him five Sons.2 Sam. 21.8. Merab, Fighting, or chiding, or multiplying. Mesa,2 King. 3. cap. the King of Moab was a great Lord of Sheep. And whereas the Moabites had of long time payed Tri∣bute unto the Kings of Israel, every year one hundred thousand Lambs, with so many Rams or Weathers in the Wool, with their Fleece upon their backs, this King would pay none to Joram the Son of Ahab, for the which Joram made War against him, and over∣came him. Mesa, Health, or the water of health, or looking
upon the Water. Micah,Judg. 17. cap. was a certain Man dwelling in Mount Ephraim, whose Mother made him an Idol of Silver, which he set up in the House of his Gods, and made an Ephod, and consecrated one of his own Sons to be his Priest, and so continued, until it chanced a young Le∣vite came from Bethlehem Juda to seek service: Which Levite Micah hired for ten silverlings by the year, two garments, and meat and drink. And when he had hired the Levite, he was glad, saying: Now am I sure that God will love me, seeing I have a Levite to my Priest. At this time,18. cap. the Tribe of Dan (forasmuch as the portion which Joshua gave them, was not suffici∣ent for all their Tribe) went to seek them a place to dwell in. And as they were going to the City of Laish, they came by the house of Micah: And being enformed by those Men, whom they had sent before to spie out the Land, how there was in the house of Micah, a graven and a molten Image, they turned in thither, and saluted him peaceably, but at their departing they took his I∣dols against the Levite's will, perswading him, that it was not so good to be a Priest unto the house of one Man, as it was to be a Priest unto a whole Tribe or Kinred in Israel, and so took him away with them also. And being gone, Micah made a great out-cry, and followed after the Children of Dan with all the power he could make to rescue his Gods: but being perswaded to be content, and to get him home, lest a worse thing did happen, he then (perceiving he was not able to make his Party good,) returned back again. Read the Story of Dan. Micah, who like our God, or poverty, or the lowliness of the Lord, or the Lord striking. Michael, the Son of Israhia. Michael, who is like the Lord.1 Chron. 7.
Michael,Dan. 10.13. one of the chief Princes that was sent to comfort Daniel. Michael,Judc. the Arch angel which strove against the Devil, and disputed about the Body of Moses. Michael,Rev. 12.7. and his Angels, that fought against the Dragon. Micajah,1 King. 22. the Son of Imlah, was a Prophet in the days of King Ahab, and because he would not flatter the King,This was not that Pro∣phet that wrote the Book of Pro∣phecies, but another of that name. 1 Sam. 18.20, &c. as the four hundred false Prophets had done, but prophesied plainly of the King's death, he was smitten and cast in Prison. Micajah, Poor, or low and base. Michal, was the second Daughter of King Saul, whom he gave to David to be his Wise, that she might be a snare to bring him into the hands of the Philistines. But Michal loved David so well, that he could not have his purpose that way: For when he sent Men to watch his House and to slay him,19.11, &c. Michal told David, saying: Except thou save thy self this Night, to morrow thou wilt be slain. Wherefore to save the life of David, she let him down at a Back-window, and layed an Image in his Bed, with a Pillow under his Head, stuffed with Goats hair, and covered it with a Cloth. And when the Men came into the House (in the Morning) and asked for David, Michal said he was sick. The Messengers then (thinking to have carried him, Bed and all to the King as he had commanded) went into David's Cham∣ber, and when they came there and found nothing else in the Bed but a block, they were ashamed, and so re∣turned to Saul and told him. Then Michal being de∣manded, wherefore she had so derided him, and sent his
enemy away, made her excuse, that if she had not let him go, he would have killed her. After this her Father took her from David, and gave her toLook in the history of Psaltei how he used Mi∣chal David's Wise. Psaltei the Son of Lais to Wife, with whom she remained till the death of Saul, and then was restored again to David by Abner's means. Finally, when David came dan∣cing before the Ark of God in his shirt, to the City of David, it chanced Michal to look out at a Window, and beholding the King how he leaped and danced before the Ark, she began to despise him in her heart, and meeting him after all things were done, she said: O how glo∣rious was the King of Israel this day, which was unco∣vered to day in the eyes of the Maidens of his Servants, as a Fool uncovereth himself! And for thus despising of David the Servant of God, the Lord plagued her with Barrenness that she never had Child. Michal, who is perfect. Mephibosheth,2 Sam. 4.4. the Son of Jonathan was lame in his Feet, by reason his Nurse (by misfortune) in his in∣fancy let him fall to the Ground out of her Arms, and was brought up and nourished (after the death of his Fa∣ther) in the House of Machir,9. cap. 4, &c. till David coming to his Kingdom, took him from thence, and restored him to all the Land of King Saul, making Ziba his Servant chief Overseer and Receiver of the Lands, and to see Mi∣cah his Master's Son well brought up and cherished, for so much as Mephibosheth should remain with him, and eat and drink at his own Board. Now after this, when David was brought into so great affliction & trou∣ble, by reason of Absalom his Son, Mephibosheth remai∣ned still at Jerusalem and never removed.2 Sam. 16.1, 2, &c. But Ziba his Servant went after David with a present, and by false report of Mephibosheth his Master, got his Land from him. And when the King was returned and come to Jerusalem again,19.24, &c. then Mephibosheth (who had nei∣ther
washed his Feet, nor dressed his Beard, nor washed his Cloaths from the time the King departed, until he returned in peace) went out to meet him, and when the King saw him, he said: Wherefore wentest thou not with me Mephibosheth? He answered: My Lord, O King, my Servant deceived me, for thy Servant said: I would have mine Ass sadled to ride thereon for to go with the King, because thy Servant is lame: There∣fore Ziba hath falsly accused thy Servant to my Lord the King, but my Lord the King is as an Angel of God: Do therefore what it pleaseth thee, for all my Fathers House were but dead Men before my Lord the King, and yet didst thou set thy Servant, among them that did eat at thine own Table: What right have I to cry any more unto the King? Then said David, why speakest thou yet in thine own cause, I have said, Thou and Ziba divide the Land between you. Yea, said Mephi∣bosheth, let him take all, seeing my Lord the King is come home in peace. Mephibosheth, shame or confusion from the mouth. Mephibosheth,2 Sam. 21.8. the Son of Rizpah, King Saul's Con∣cubine, was by the Gibeonites (with his Brother Armoni) hanged for their Father's offence. Miriam,Exo. 6.20. was the Daughter of Amram and Jochebed, and Sister to Aaron and Moses. When her Brother Moses had brought the Children of Israel thorow the red Sea,Exo. 15.20. Miriam the Prophetess took a Timbrel in her hand with other Women following in like sort, and began joy∣fully to sing and dance. Their Song was this: Sing ye unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously: The Horse and his Rider hath he overthrown in the Sea. After this she grudged against Moses,Num. 12.1, 10. because he had taken an Ethiopian Woman to his Wife, wherefore the Lord smore her with Leprosie. Then Moses (partly for pity, and
partly at the intercession of Aaron his Brother) besought the Lord to heal her, who made him answer, saying: If her Father (in anger) had spit in her Face, should she not have been ashamed seven days? Let her be shut out of the Host seven days, which being done, she was restored, and received in again. Finally, when Moses and the Children of Israel were come to Kadesh,Num. 20.1. there she died and was buried. Miriam, exalted, or reaching. Meshach, first called Mishael,Dan. 1.7.3. cap. was one of Daniel's Companions, and one of the three which was cast into the hot burning Furnace, and miraculously preserved. Meshach, prolonging, or drawing to him, or compassing the waters, or hedging. Mithridates, was King Cyrus's Treasurer,3 Esd. 2. at whose commandment, he delivered all the holy Vessels of Gold and Silver pertaining to the House of the Lord, to Salmanassar the Deputy in Jewry. The number of which Vessels was five thousand eight hundred and three score. Mithridates, dissolving the law. Mnason, was a certain godly Man,Act. 21.16. and a Cy∣prian born, who had of long time believed the Gospel, in whose House Paul was lodged at Jerusalem. Mna∣son, a searcher out, or promising, or remembring. Moses, the Son of Amram and Jochebed,Exod. 2. cap. was mi∣raculously preserved at his birth. For whereas Pha∣raoh the King of Egypt had straitly commanded the Midwives,Moses signi∣fieth, preser∣ved from the water. that whensoever they saw an Hebrew bring forth a Man-child, they should cast it into the River, yet Moses being born, and a proper Child, was (notwith∣standing the King's Commandment) kept secretly three Months. And when his Parents could hide him no
longer, they closed him in a Basket made of Reed or Bul∣rushes dawbed with slime and pitch, and laid him in the River. And as the Child's sister stood looking, what should become of him, it came to pass that King Pharaoh'sHer name was Termuth. Daughter came a walking by the River side, who see∣ing the Basket floating upon the River, caused one of her Folks to take it up. And when she had opened the Basket and saw the Child, she had pity upon it, and caused the Maid (his sister) to fetch her a Nurse, who went and brought his own Mother. And so the Child being nursed and brought up in Pharaoh's house, was instructed from his Childhood in all manner of cunning and wisdom of the Egyptians, and became mighty in words and deeds, saving in his speech he had an impediment. And when he was full forty years old, it came in his heart, to go and visit his Brethren the Children of Israel, whom Pharaoh vexed without all measure. And as he saw an E∣gyptian smiting an Hebrew,How that Moscs's im∣pedment of speech came. The King (on a time) for his Daughter's sake, took the Child in his arms. and set the Crown upon his Head, which Moses, as it were, chil∣dishly play∣ing, hurled to the ground, and with his Foot spurned it. At the which, the Priest cried out, saying that this was he, of whom it was pro∣phesied, that he should de∣stroy Egypt. Then Ter∣muth excused the Child, al∣ledging his infancy and lack of dis∣cretion. And for proof thereof, cau∣sed burning Coals to be put to his mouth, which the Child with his Tongue licked, where∣by he ever af∣ter had an im∣pediment in his Tongue. Lanquet. he slew the Egyptian, and hid him in the Sand: The next day he went again, and found two Israelites striving together, and demanded of him that had done the wrong, wherefore he smote his Fellow: who made thee a Judge (quoth he) or a Ru∣ler over us? Thinkest thou to kill me, as thou didst the Egyptian yesterday? Then Moses perceiving his fact to be known, refused to be call'd the Son of the Daughter of Pharaoh, and fled into the Land of Midian, where he was received into the House of Jethro, who gave to him in Marriage his Daughter Zipporah, by whom (in process) he had two Sons. And when he had continued with Je∣thro his Father-in-law forty years, and kept his Sheep, the Lord appeared to him in the Wilderness of Sinai, out of a Bush, which seemed to be all on fire, and there gave him Authority to go into Egypt to deliver his Peo∣ple out of the Bondage of Pharaoh. Who at last (after di∣vers Miracles done by him, in the sight of Pharaoh, for the confirmation of his Authority) brought them
thorow the red Sea, and delivered them quite out of Bondage. Thus was Moses, whom they had before re∣fused, both their Deliverer and Ruler. He was a Man full of meekness, he lived one hundred and twenty years, and was buried by Angels in the Land of Moab, whose Sepulchre was never known. Moses, drawn up. N. NAAMAN, Captain of the2 Sam. 5. Host of the King of Syria, was a mighty Man, and honourable in the sight of his Lord, because that by him the Lord had delivered the Syrians. He was also a valiant Man, and expert in Wars, but was a Leper. Wherefore the King of Syria being informed that there was a Pro∣phet in Samaria, that could heal his Servant Naaman of his Leprosie, sent him to Joram King of Israel with his Letter, containing this tenor: Now when this Letter is come unto thee, understand that I have sent thee Naaman my Servant, that thou mayest heal him of his Leprosie. And when the King had read the Let∣ter, he rent his Cloaths, saying: Am I a God to kill and to give life, that he sendeth to me, that I should heal a Man of his Leprosie? Consider I pray you, how he seeketh a quarrel against me. The Prophet hearing of this, sent to the King, to send Naaman unto him. And when he was come to the house of Elisha, and stood at the Door, the Prophet sent him word, and bad him go wash him seven times in Jordan, and he should be whole. Then Naaman departed in displeasure, saying: I thought with my self he will surely come out, and stand, and call on the Name of the Lord his God, and put his hand on the place, and heal the Leprosie. Are not A∣bana and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, better than all the Waters of Israel, may I not as well wash me in them and be cleansed? Then one of his Servants said:
Father, if the Prophet had commanded thee to do a great thing, would'st thou not have done it? how much rather than, when he saith to thee, wash and be clean? And so at his Servant's perswasion, he went to Jordan, and washed him seven times as the Prophet had com∣manded, and being whole, he returned to the Prophet, and gave thanks unto God, saying: Now I know that there is no God in all the World, but in Israel. And so making promise, he would never offer sacrifice nor offering to any other God, save unto the Lord God of Israel: he returned home into his Countrey again. Naaman, Fair, or beautiful. Nabal,1 Sam. 25.2, 3, &c. was a great rich Man, but of churlish na∣ture, and froward condition. As he lay in Carmel in the time of his Sheep-sheering, David sent certain of his Men, desiring Nabal to help him now in his great neces∣sity with some of his Victuals whatsoever he would, and he would requite him, at one time or other. But he not regarding their message, made them this churlish an∣swer again: who is David? or who is the Son of Jesse? There be many Servants now a days that break a∣way from their Masters, shall I then take away my Bread, and my Water, and my Flesh, which I have kil∣led for my Sheerers, and give it unto Men whom I know not whence they be? And so with this answer, the Mes∣sengers departed. Read the story of Abigail, for the rest of his life. Nabal, a Fool. Naboth,1 Kings 21. was a certain rich Man, and a Jezrelite born, whose Vineyard lay joyning hard by the Palace of Ahab King of Israel, which Vineyard, the King would fain have bought, and given him as much for it as the Ground was worth. But Naboth considering it was his Father's Inheritance, and that he had no need to sell it, would in no wise yield thereunto. Where∣fore
the King being heavy and sad, went home to his House, and laid him down upon his Bed, so wayward, that he could neither eat nor drink. Then came Jeze∣bel his Wise, and demanded why he was so sad, who told her it was for Naboth's Vineyard, which he had de∣nied him. What (quoth she) dost thou now govern the Kingdom of Israel? up and eat thy Meat, and set thine heart at rest, and I will give thee the Vineyard. And so she wrote a Letter in Ahab's Name, sealed with the Kings Signet, and sent it to the Elders of the City where Na∣both dwelt, commanding them to Proclaim a Fast, and set Naboth among the chiefest of the People, and to bring two false Witnesses against him, which should say he had blasphemed God and the King, and then to put him to death. And so all things were done according to the tenor of Jezebel's Letter, and Naboth was carried out of the City, and stoned. Naboth, Speech, or prophesying. Nabuchodonosor, was King of Babylon.Dan. 1.1, &c. And by the occasion of his great and wonderful dominion, fell into such pride, that he would have his Image honour∣ed for God. But shortly after he saw the Vision of the Falling-tree, whereby he was warned of his fall,2. cap. and suddenly (by the power of God) transformed and turned into a beastly fury, living in the Woods among Beasts,He reigned 44. years, and was cal∣led the scourge of God. He was be∣fore the in∣carnation of Christ, 633. years. Cooper. eating Herbs and Grass for the space of Seven Years. Finally, God of his mercy restored him again to his pristine form, who afterward lived well, and com∣manded that the very God of Heaven should be honour∣ed of all Men, and whosoever refused so to do, should die. Nabuchodonosor, the Mourning of the Generation. Nadab,1 Kings 15.25, &c. the Son of Jeroboam began to Reign over Israel in the second year of Asa King of Juda, and walked in all the wicked steps of his Father. And in the second year of his reign (as he was laying siege
to a City of the Philistines called Gibbethon) Baasha con∣spired against him and slew him. Taking upon him to reign in his stead. Nadab, a Prince, or liberal. Nahash,1 Sam. 11. Judg 11. cap. was King of the Ammonites. And as his Predecessors afore time had made a claim to the Land of Israel, so he now purposing the same, went and besie∣ged the City of Jabesh in Gilead. And when the Men of Jabesh perceived themselves in great danger of their lives, they desired the King to make a covenant with them, and they would be his Servants. Then said Na∣hash: If ye will suffer me to thrust out all your right eyes, to bring Israel to shame, I shall be content to make peace with you. Then said they: Give us respite seven days, and if none do come to help us in that space, we will come out unto thee. Then Nahash (thinking that none durst come to aid them against him) granted their re∣quest. Upon the which they sent Messengers, into all the Coasts of Israel, which News was so heavy tidings to them, that they fell a weeping. And as they were mour∣ning and lamenting their case, it chanced Saul (by the providence of God) to come out of the Field following the Cattel. And beholding the People what a do they made, he demanded wherefore they mourned. And when they had told him the tidings of the Men of Jabesh, his heart was so moved by the spirit of God, that he took out two of his Oxen, and hewed them in pieces, and sent them thorow all the Coasts of Israel, saying: who∣soever cometh not forth after Saul and Samuel, so shall his Oxen be served. And the People were stricken in such a fear, that they came out to Saul, as they had been but one Man, to the number of three hundred thou∣sand of Israel, beside thirty thousand of the Men of Ju∣dah. And then Saul sent word by the Messengers to the Men of Jabesh, that the next morrow they should have help. They being glad of that, sent word unto Nahash,
saying: To morrow we will come forth unto you, and ye shall do unto us, whatsoever pleaseth you. And so on the morrow, Saul came upon the Ammonites and slew them. Nahash, a Snake, or Serpent, or guessing, or divining. Nahor, when he was nine and twenty years of age,Gen. 11.24, 25. begot Terah. And lived after he had begotten him, an hundred and twenty years. Nahor, Hoarse, or Angry. Naomi, was the Wife of a certain Man called Eli∣melech,Ruth 1. cap. dwelling in the Land of Juda, in a City called Bethlehem. And because of the present Dearth, which was over all the Land of Juda, She went with her Hus∣band and her two Sons into the Countrey of Moab to sojourn. Where (in process) her Husband died. And her two Sons (being married to two of the Moabitish Damosels) died there also. So that Naomi which had dwelt in the Land of Moab ten years, was left desolate both of her Husband and of her Sons. Then Naomi hear∣ing how the Lord had visited her Countrey again with plenty, returned from Moab homewards again, her two Daughters-in-law, bringing her on the way. And when she saw they had gone a good way with her, and co∣veted not to return, she said unto them: Go now my Daughters, and return each of you unto your Mothers House, and the Lord deal as kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead and with me. And the Lord give you, that ye may find rest, either of you, in the House of her Husband, and so kissed them, to have bid them farewel: But when she saw that they would not depart from her, she said unto them again: Return my Daughters I pray you, for what cause will ye go with me? Are there any more children within my womb to be your husbands? Turn again therefore I say, for I am too old to have an Husband. And if I did take one this Night, and had already born Children, would ye
tarry for them till they were grown, and refrain from taking Husbands so long? Not so my Daughters, it grie∣veth me much for your sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me. Then they wept all together, and Orpha kissed her Mother-in-law, and returned into her own Land again, but Ruth abode still. And so when they came to Bethlehem Juda (which was about the be∣ginning of Barley-harvest) the Women which saw Nao∣mi, said: Is not this Naomi? Nay, said she, call me not Naomi (which is as much to say as beautiful) but call me Mara (that is to say, bitter) for the Almighty God hath made me very bitter. I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me again empty, why then call ye me Naomi, seeing the Lord hath humbled me, and the Almighty hath brought me unto adversity? And so Naomi remained in Bethlehem Juda, where (ere it were long) God gave her a Son by the Womb of Ruth her Daughter-in law, who was married to Boaz, a Kinsman of Naomi's, which Child being born, the Women said unto Naomi: Blessed be the Lord, the which hath not left thee without a Kinsman to have a name in Israel, and that shall bring thy life again and cherish thine old age, for thy Daughter-in-law which loveth thee, hath born unto him, and she is better unto thee than seven Sons. And Naomi took the Child and laid it in her Lap, and became Nurse unto it, being glad that a Son was born unto her, in her old days. Naomi, Fair, or comely, or provoking much. Nathan,2 Sam. 7.4, &c. the Prophet, at what time King David was minded to build God an House to dwell in, was sent of the Lord to forbid him to meddle with it, for Solomon his Son should do it. Again, at what time David had committed Adultery with Uriah's Wife, Na∣than came to him and said:12. cap. There were two Men in one City, the one Rich and the other Poor: The rich
man had exceeding many Sheep and Oxen, but the poor had none at all, save one little Sheep which he had bought and nourished up. And it grew up with him and with his Children also, and did eat of his own Meat, and drank of his own Cup, and slept in his bosome, and was unto him as his Daughter. Now there came a stranger unto the rich man, who refused to take of his own Sheep and Oxen to dress for the stranger, but took the poor Man's sheep, and dressed it for the Man that was come to him. Then David was exceeding wroth with the Man, and said: As surely as the Lord liveth, he that hath done this thing, shall surely dye. He shall re∣store the Lamb four-fold, because he did it without pi∣ty. Then said the Prophet, Thou art the Man. Thus saith the Lord God of Israel: I anointed thee King over Israel, and delivered thee out of the hands of Saul, and gave thee thy Lord's house and his Wives into thy bosome, and gave thee the house of Israel and Juda, and would (if that had been too little) have given thee much more: Wherefore then hast thou despised the command∣ment of the Lord to do evil in his sight? Thou hast kill'd Urias the Hittite with the Sword, and hast taken his Wife to be thy Wife, and hast slain him with the Sword of the Children of Ammon. Now therefore the Sword shall never depart from thine house, because thou hast de∣spised me, and taken the Wife of Urias the Hittite, to be thy Wife. Wherefore thus saith the Lord: Behold, I will stir up evil against thee, even out of thine own house, and will take thy Wives before thine eyes, and give them unto thy Neighbour, and he shall lye with thy Wives in the sight of the Sun: For thou didst it se∣cretly, but I will do this thing before all Israel, and in the open Sun-light. Then said David: I have sinned against the Lord. Well (said Nathan) the Lord hath also put away thy sin, thou shalt not dye. Howbeit, because of doing this deed, thou hast given the enemies
of the Lord a cause to blaspheme, the Child that is born unto thee shall surely dye: And so Nathan departed. Fi∣nally, at what time Adonijah had taken upon him to rule the Kingdom, unknown to his Father David, Nathan came to the King and said: My Lord (O King) hast thou said Adonijah shall reign after me, and he shall sit upon my Seat? For he is gone down this day and hath slain many Oxen,David had a Son called Nathan also, 2 Sam. 5.14. and fat Sheep, and hath called all the King's Sons, and the Captain of the Host, and Abiathar the Priest, and behold they eat and drink before him, and say: God save King Adonijah. But me thy Servant, and Sadock the Priest and Benajah, and thy Servant Solomon hath he not called. Is this thing done by my Lord the King, and thou hast not shewed it unto thy Servant, who should sit on the Seat of my Lord the King after him? And when the King had de∣clared his mind and will, Nathan and Sadock the Priest, went and anointed Solomon King. Nathan, Given, or giving. Nathanael,John 1.45, &c. which was a Man wonderful desirous of Messias coming, was brought to Christ by Philip, who finding him under a Figg-Tree, said: O Nathana∣el, I can tell thee tidings, we have found him, of whom Moses in the Law, and the Prophets did write even Jesus, the Son of Joseph of Nazareth. Is that true, quoth he, can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? If thou dost not believe me (quoth Philip) come and see thy self. And as Nathanael was coming with Philip to Jesus, he saith of him thus: Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile. Nathanael perceiving that Jesus knew him, said: How knowest thou me? I knew thee (said Jesus) before that Philip called thee, I saw thee when thou wast under the Figg-Tree. Then said Natha∣nael: Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. Nathanael, the gift of God.
Nehemiah, a Jew born,2 Esd. 1. cap. was Cupbearer to Artax∣erxes King of Persia, a Man of great Learning and Holi∣ness, who being in great favour with the said King, obtained both Licence and Aid to re-edifie the City of Jerusalem. Nehemiah, the comfort, or rest of the Lord, the Lords direction. Nicanor, being a great Prince under Demetrius,1 Mac. 7. cap. and an utter enemy unto the Jews, was sent with a mighty Host against Judas Machabeus, who notwith∣standing the hatred that he had to the Jews, yet unto Judas himself he bare a secret good will and love in his heart,2 Mac. 14. cap. and counselled him (when they met together to talk of Peace) to take a Wife, and to beget Chil∣dren. But for all that, his malice was so great against the rest of the Jews, and his heart so puft up with pride, thorow his invincible power and strength, that he held up his hand against the House of God, making an Oath that-he would destroy it, and break down the Altar, and consecrate the Temple of God to Bacchus. And think∣ing all this but a trifle to bring to pass,8 cap. sold the Jews before he came at them, promising to every one that would buy them, four-score and ten Jews for one Ta∣lent. But this Blasphemer who had brought a thousand Merchants with him to buy the Jews, was (by the help and power of God) for all his stout brags, short∣ly overthrown, and so discomfited, that he himself was fain to change his Apparel, and to flie alone to Anti∣och,1 Mac 7. cap. 2 Mac. 15. cap. with great dishonour and shame. Finally, attemp∣ting to fight again with Judas upon the Sabbath day, he was at last (by the mighty hand of God) slain.Nicanor, which was one of the se∣ven Deacons, Act. 6.5. Whose Head Judas commanded to be set upon the Castle at Jerusalem, and his threatning hand to be hanged against the Temple, and his blasphemous Tongue cut in pieces, and cast to the Birds to be devoured.
Nicanor, a Conqueror: Valiant. Nicodemus,Joh. 3.1, 2, &c. was one of the head Men among the Sect of the Pharisees, but not the best Learned, al∣though his mind were lesser corrupt than the other. This Man favoured Christ, but durst not be known thereof for fear of the Jews, wherefore he came to Je∣sus by Night secretly, saying: Rabbi, we know that thou art a Teacher come from God, for no Man could do such Miracles as thou dost, except God were with him. Jesus answered: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except a Man be born from above, he cannot see the Kingdom of God. Nicodemus: How can a Man be born when he is old? can he enter into his Mother's Womb, and be born again? Jesus: Verily, verily, I say unto thee, ex∣cept a Man be born of the Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: that which is born of the Flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of the Spirit, is spirit. Marvel not thou that I said un∣to thee, ye must be born from above: The Wind blow∣eth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, or whither it go∣eth. So is every one that is born of the spirit. Nicode∣mus: How can these things be? Jesus: Art thou a Master in Israel, and knowest not these things? Veri∣ly, verily, I say unto thee, we speak that we know, and testifie that we have seen, and ye receive not our wit∣ness: If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things? &c. This Man afterward answered for Jesus, and said to the Pharisees,7.50. what time as they had sent Ministers to apprehend him: doth our Law judge any Man before it hear him? Finally, at the Death of Christ (to honour his Burial) he bought of Myrrhe, and Aloes mingled to∣gether, about an hundred pound weight,19.39. and came with Joseph of Arimathea to take down the Body of Je∣sus,
and wound it in Linnen cloaths, with the odours (as the manner of the Jews was to bury) and laid him in his Sepulchre. Nicodemus, Innocent bloud. Nicolas, a Convert of Antioch,Act. . 5. was one of the se∣ven Deacons, ordained in the Congregation to do ser∣vice in necessary things of the Body,His Heresie was this: That every Man might lawfully use e∣very Woman that he lusted after. that the Apostles might wait only upon the Word of God, who notwith∣standing fell into a foul Heresie, which S. John in his Book of the Revelation 2d. Chapter reproveth. Ni∣colas, the victory of the common people. Nimrod, was the Son of Gush,Gen. 10.8. Son of Cham the second Son of Noah. He was the first that took on him to reign over Men, and became a cruel Oppressor and Tyrant. He was called a mighty Hunter, for that he was a Deceiver of Souls, and Oppressor of Men.Gen. 11.4. He at∣tempted to build the great Tower of Babel, intending to have raised it above the Clouds, thinking thereby to have escaped, if any Floud should again have happened. Nimrod, Rebellious. Noah, was the Son of Lamech,Gen. 5.29. not and five hundred years of age, before he begat Shem, Ham, and Japhet. And being a just and perfect Man, he found such favour in the eyes of God,6. cap. that when all flesh had so corrupted his way upon Earth, that God threatned the destruction of the World, yet to save Noah, and to declare it unto him 120. years before it came, he bad him prepare an Ark of Pine-Trees, which should contain in length three hun∣dred Cubits, in breadth fifty Cubits, and in deepness thirty. Now when Noah had made the Ark, and was six hundred years of age, the Lord told him, that af∣ter seven days the Deluge should fall: wherefore Noah (at the Lord's commandment) got him into the Ark,7. cap. with his Wife and three Sons with their Wives, provi∣ding
(in the mean space) all things necessary for them. And when Noah was in the Ark, suddenly (by the power of God, and not of Man's bringing) there came into the Ship two and two together, of every kind of Beast and Foul, the male and the female. And when they were all in, the Lord shut the Door of the Ark, and opened the Windows of Heaven, so that the Rain fell continually forty Days and forty Nights, whereupon the Waters prevailed, and rose above all Mountains fifteen Cubits. So that all living Creatures dyed, except Fish, and such as might endure in the Bowels of the earth. And after the Waters had prevailed a hundred and fifty days. They decreased again,8. cap. and in the seventh day of the seventh Month (which was October) the Ark stuck upon the Mountains of Ararat. Then Noah opened a Window, and sent forth a Crow, which returned not again. After seven Days, he put forth a Dove, which came again at Night bringing a branch of Olive with green Leaves in her mouth. Nevertheless, he remained seven other days, and put forth the Dove again, which never re∣turned. Then Noah after he had continued one Year in the Ark, and sell the Earth drie, he (at the command∣ment of God) issued out of the Ark, and incontinent builded an Altar, whereupon he offered a Sacrifice unto the Lord, of every clean Beast, and of every clean Fowl, which Sacrifice was a sweet smell unto the Lord, and pleased him so well, that he made a promise to Noah, that he would never more destroy the world with water,Gen. 9.8.9, &c. and for the confirmation thereof, gave the Rainbow for a sure token between him and man. Noah was the first in∣venter of Wine, and therewithal was made drunk. He lived after the Flood, 350. years. Noah, Rest. O. OBED,Ruth 4.17. the Son of Boaz and Ruth, begat Jesse the Father of King David.
Obed Edom,1 Chron. 46.37. 2 King. 6.10.11, &c. the Son of Jeduthun had the Ark of God remaining in his house three Months, for the which the Lord blessed him and all his house. And when it was told to David, that the house of Obed Edom was bles∣sed, because of the Ark of God, he removed it thence, and brought it into the City of David with great triumph, and ordained Obed Edom and his Brethren (which were Le∣vites) to keep the Door of the Ark. Obed Edom, the servant of Edom, or a servant Edomite. Obediah,1 King. 18.3, 4, &c. notwithstanding he was Chief Gover∣nour of all King Ahab's house, yet he was a Man that feared God greatly. Insomuch that when Jezebel de∣stroyed the Prophets of the Lord, he took an hundred Prophets, and hid them, fifty in one Cave, and fifty in another, providing all things necessary for them. On a time as Obediah was going about the Land (at Ahab's commandment) to search for Water and Grass for their Cattel, which were almost overcome with drouth, he chanced to meet Elijah the Prophet. And when he saw him, he sell down and said: Art not thou my Lord Elijah? yea, quoth he go tell thy Lord that I am her. O (quoth Obediah) what have I sinned, that thou wouldest deliver thy Servant into the hands of Ahab to be slain? As truly as the Lord thy God liveth, there is no Nation or Kingdom, whither my Lord hath not sent to seek thee: And when they said, he is not here, he took an oath of the Kingdom and Nation, if they had not found thee. And now thou sayst, go, tell thy Lord that Elijah is here. And when I am gone from thee, the spirit of the Lord shall carry thee into some place that I do not know, and so when I come and tell Ahab, and he cannot find thee, then will he kill me: But I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth. Was it not told my Lord what I did when Jezebel slew the Prophets of the Lord, how I hid
an hundred Men of the Lord's Prophets, by fifties in a Cave, and fed them with Bread and Water? And now thou sayst, go and tell thy Lord: behold, Elijah is here (that he may slay me.) Well, said Elijah, as truly as the Lord of Hosts liveth, before whom I stand, I will shew my self unto him this day. Then Obediah (hear∣ing him say so) went to Ahab and told him. Obediah, servant of the Lord. Oded,2 Chron. 28.9. &c. when Pekah King of Israel had taken so ma∣ny Captives of the Children of Juda, and carried them to Samaria, the Lord sent this Prophet unto him, say∣ing: Behold, because the Lord God of your Fathers is wroth with Juda, he hath delivered them into your hands, and ye have slain them in your cruelness that reacheth unto Heaven, and now ye purpose to keep un∣der the Children of Juda and Jerusalem, as Bond-men and Bond-women: And do ye not lade your selves with sin in the sight of the Lord your God? Now therefore hear me, and deliver the Captives again, which ye have taken of your Brethren, or else shall the wrath of God be upon you. Then certain which were the Heads of the Children of Ephraim (being sorry for the great of∣fence they had committed) took the Prisoners, and (with the spoil) clothed all that lacked, shod them, and fed them with Meat and Drink, anointed the wounds of such as were hurt, and the feeble they carried upon Asses, and brought them to Jericho (the City of Palm-Trees) to their Brethren: And leaving them there, returned to Samaria again. Oded, bolding up, or erecting. Og,Num. 21.33. Deu. 3.3.29.7. the King of Bashan was a mighty great Gyant, whose Bed was made of Iron, and in length nine Cu∣bits, that is, thirteen foot and an half. And four Cubits broad, that is, six foot. This Og was next neighbour to Schon King of the Amorites. And having knowledge of
all that Moses had done to Schon his neighbour, made out a great Army against Moses thinking to have over∣come him, in revenging his neighbours quarrel. But when it came to trial, he sped no better than his Neigh∣bour had done before him. Og, a Cake, or bread baked under the ashes. Onan, was the second Son of Juda,Gen. 38.4. who after the death of Er his eldest Brother, was married to Tha∣mar his Brother's Wife to raise up Seed unto his Brother. But when he perceived that the Seed should be none of his, he practised such wickedness that the vengeance of God fell upon him and slew him. Onan, Sorrow, or Ini∣quity. Onesimus, being in service with Philemon,Col. 4.9. like an unfaithful Servant robbed his Master, and ran away from him to Rome. Where, by hearing of Paul (who at that time was in Bonds) he received the Do∣ctrine of the Gospel, and served Paul in Prison: and became so faithful a Souldier of Christ, that Paul sent him with Tychicus to the Colossians with his Epistle, commanding him unto them on this wise: And with Ty∣chicus,Phile. cap. I have sent Onesimus, a faithful and beloved Brother, which is one of you. Finally, he sent him home to his Master again, beseeching Philemon, not to re∣ceive him now as a Servant, but more than a Servant, even as a faithful Brother, and as his own Son, whom he had (in his Bands) begotten to Christ, offering him∣self surety, to make good whatsoever hurt he had done him in time past. Onesimus, Apparel, or a Garment. Onesiphorus, was a faithful godly Man,2 Tim. 1.16. and a great refresher of such as were in Bonds for the Doctrine of Christ, as Saint Paul doth testifie of him, saying: The Lord give mercy unto the Houshold of Onesiphorus,
for he oft refreshed me, and was not ashamed of my chain: But when he was at Rome he sought me out very diligently, and sound me. The Lord grant un∣to him, that he may find mercy with the Lord at that day, and in how many things he ministred unto me at Ephesus, thou knowest very well, O Timothy. Onesiphorus, bringing profit. Onias,2 Mac. 3. the High Priest among the Jews, was a Man of such godliness and holiness of life, that he always sought the honour of the Laws, and wealth of the People of God. By his prayer that wicked man Heliodorus was restored to his health, but notwithstanding all his vertue and goodness,4. cap. yet had he enemies. For Symon (a Man void of all godliness) never ceased with all slanderous and evil reports that he could devise to Seleucus the King, to bring him out of favour, which he could never do, so long as the King lived. But Seleucus. being dead, Onias was soon put out of office, by the false deceit and means of his own Brother Jason, and brought in such fear thorow him and Menelaus with other his enemies, that he was sain to take sanctuary. Where at the last by the counsel of Menelaus, he was (without all regard of righteousness) most traiterously slain by the hands of Andronicus) whose innocent death was so sore lamen∣ted, both of the Jews, and also of Antiochus the King himself, that at his coming home, he rewarded the Malefactor according to his deeds. Onias, the strength of the Lord. Oholiab,Exod. 35.34. the Son of Achisamah of the Tribe of Dan, was a Craftsman, whom the Lord had endued with great cunning, and appointed him to Moses, for one of the chief Workmen, for the finishing of the Temple. Oreb and Zeeb,Judg. 7. ult. were two great Captains among
the Midianites, whom the Men of Mount Ephraim (which had stopped the Waters from Bethbarah to Jor∣dan) took, and smote off their Heads, and sent them to Gideon, on the other side of Jordan. Oreb, a Crow, or sweet, or a surety, or evening time. Ornan, was a certain Jebusite,1 Chron. 21.15, 18, &c. unto whom the Lord commanded David (after he had plagued him with Pestilence) to go and rear up an Altar in his thre∣shing floor. At whose coming,In the se∣cond Book of Sam. chap. 24. he is called Araunah. Ornan fell down be∣fore him and said: Wherefore is my Lord the King come to his servant? I am come (quoth he) to buy thy threshing floor, and to make an Altar unto the Lord, that the Plague may cease from the People. Ornan an∣swered: Let my Lord the King take and offer what seem∣eth him good in his eyes. And moreover, here be Oxen for burnt sacrifice, and sleds with other instruments for wood, take them all to thee as thine own. David said: Nay, not so, but I will buy it for sufficient money, for I will not take that which is thine for the Lord, nor offer burnt-of∣ferings without cost. And so David gave Ornan for that place, six hundred sicles of gold by weight. Ornan, Rejoycing. Orpah, and Ruth,Ruth. 1 cap. were two Damosels of the Coun∣trey of Moab, which were married to the two Sons of Elimelech and Naomi, strangers, come out of the Land of Juda, there to dwell. Read the story of Nao∣mi, for the rest. Orpah, a Neck. Osias, the Son of Micha, of the Tribe of Simeon,Judith 6. was one of the principal Fathers and Rulers among the Israelites, what time as Holofernes besieged the City of Bethulia. This Man comforted Achior, which had so boldly magnified and praised the great power and strength of God, before Holofernes, and took him into
his house, where he made him a great Supper, to the which he called the Elders, who (all together) praised God in him. Also when the People came weeping and cry∣ing out unto him, to give over the City into the hands of the Assyrians, he said unto them: Oh, take good hearts unto you (dear Brethren) and be of good chear, and let us wait yet these five days for mercy of the Lord,7. cap. peradventure he shall put away his indignation, and give glory unto his Name. But if he help us not af∣ter these five days be past, we shall do as ye have said. Which counsel of Osias pleased not Judith, because he had set the mercy of God a time, and appointed him a day at his pleasure. So that after this, Osias remained in prayer, and followed the advice of Judith in all things. Osias, the Lord Saviour, or the health of the Lord. Othoniel,Judg. 1.13. was the Son of Kenaz, unto whom Ca∣leb his elder Brother, gave Acsah his Daughter to Wife, for winning of a certain City called Kiriath-sepher. This Man delivered the Children of Israel from the Cap∣tivity of Chushan-Rishathaim King of Mesopotamia,3.9. which had oppressed them eight years, and judged Israel for∣ty years. Othoniel, the time, or hour of God. P. PAUL,Act. 7.58.8.1, 3. the Apostle of Christ was born in India, in a Town called Giscalis, and was of the Tribe of Benjamin. And the Town being taken of the Ro∣mans, he went with his Parents to Tharsus a City of Cilicia and dwelled. But afterward he was sent by them to Jerusalem to learn the Laws, and was there taught of one Gamaliel, a great Learned man. He being with others at the Martyrdom of S. Steven, recei∣ved Letters of the Bishop,9. cap. willing him to go to Damascus, there to persecute them that believed in Christ. And in the way he was by revelation changed from a cruel Persecu∣tor,
to an earnest Preacher of Christ, whose name he pro∣fessed first at Damascus, confounding the doctrine of the Jews, for the which they lay in wait to kill him, but being let out at a Window in a Basket by night, he escaped and went to Jerusalem, where he disputed with the Greeks, who sought to kill him also, but the Brethren conveighed him to Caesarea, and sent him to Tharsus.11. cap. 25. And during his abode at Tharsus, Barnabas fetcht him from thence to Antioch, where he continued a whole year, and conver∣ted many to the faith of Christ. From thence he went to Cyprus,13. cap. and turned the Ruler of the Country called Sergius Paulus, to Christ, by whom he was called Paul, whereas before he was named Saul. Then he wandred about the Countreys, and came toThe other Antioch be∣fore is in Syria. Antioch Pisidia, where he came into the Synagogue, and (after the Lecture of the Law and Prophets) made a long Ser∣mon, which was so well accepted of the Gentiles, that they were desirous to hear him again on the next Sab∣bath, at which time the unbelieving Jews raised up Persecution against him:14. cap. So that Paul departed to I∣conium, and from thence to Lystra, where he was sto∣ned and left for dead: but being recovered, he ceased not to exhort the People to continue in the faith of Christ. And so passing thorow many dangerous places, he came at the last to Attalia, and there he took shipping, and sailed back again to Antioch, declaring to the Congregation there gathered together, all things which God had done by him and Barnabas in their Journey. After this, Paul again departed from Antioch. And passing tho∣row many Countries,16. cap. he came to Philippi (the Chief City in the parts of Macedonia) where he was beaten and cast into Prison, where he converted the Jayler, and was delivered as a Roman. And from Philippi, he passed the Countries till he came to Thessalonica, where he preached Christ so earnestly, that the unbelieving Jews moved all the City against him, notwithstand∣ing
he escaped and went to Athens, preaching to the Athenians the true and unknown God. From Athens he departed to Corinth, where he remained a Year and a half. From thence he turned again to Syria, and came to Ephesus, where the Silversmiths moved sedi∣tion against him, for Diana their Goddess. And so forth passing many Countries and dangers, he came at last to Jerusalem, where he was taken of the Jews, and had to Prison, to be scourged, but he professing himself to be a Roman, made the Captain afraid, who after he had heard his cause, and had knowledge of the Jews conspiracy against Paul, he sent him privily by Night to Felix Lieutenant of Caesarea, where he continued in Prison two Years, till Festus came into Felix room. And being examined afore Festus, he appealed to the Emperour: wherefore Festus (after a-while) commit∣ted him to a Centurion named Julius, who with much danger,Paul suffe∣red Martyr∣dom by be∣heading un∣der Nero, in the xiv. year of his reign. and after the Passion of Christ, 37. years. Eliote. brought Paul to Rome, and delivered him to the High Captain, with whom Paul found so much fa∣vour, that he was suffered to dwell in an house by him∣self, with a Souldier to keep him, and to receive who∣soever came unto him. And so Paul continued in Rome two years, preaching and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus, with all boldness, no Man forbidding him. Paul, the mouth of the Trumpet, or mar∣vellous, or the least. Pekahia,3 King. 15.23, &c. the Son of Menahem, began his reign over Israel in the fiftieth year of the reign of Azariah King of Juda, and departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, but walked therein as his Father did before him. He had not reigned two years, ere that Pekah his own Cap∣tain rose against him, and slew him in Samaria, and reigned in his stead. Pekahia, the Lords opening. Pekah,2 King. 15.25, &c. the Son of Remaliah began his Reign
over Israel in the 52. year of Azariah King of Juda. This Man slew Pekahia his own Lord, and so usurped the Crown. He kept the ways of Jeroboam as his Prede∣cessors did. He made War against Juda,2 Chron. 28.6, 7, &c. and slew of them in one day, six hundred thousand: and took two hundred thousand of Women, Sons and Daughters Pri∣soners, and carried them away to Samaria, purposing to have kept them in bondage and slavery all their life long. But being admonished by Oded the Prophet, he new arrayed them, and sent them home again. After this, God stirred up Tiglath King of Assyria against him, which came and dispossessed him of all the Land of Nephtalim, and carried away his People. Finally, Hosea the Son of Ela conspired against Pekah and slew him, after he had reigned twenty years, and was King af∣ter him. Peleg,Gen. 10.25.11.17, 18. was the Son of Eber of the Generation of Sem. His Brother's name was Joktan. At the age of thirty years, he begot Reu, and lived after that two hundred and nine years. In this Man's days was the Land divided, by reason of the diversity of Language which happened at the building of Babel. Peleg, a division. Persis, was a Man singularly beloved of S. Paul,Rom. 16.12. for his diligence in setting forth the Gospel, as doth ap∣pear by his words, saying: Salute the well-beloved Persis, which laboured much in the Lord. Peter, otherwise called Simon the Son of Jonas,Matth. 4.18. dwelt in the City of Bethsaida, and from a Fisher-man, was called to be an Apostle, into whose house Christ vouch∣safed to come and heal his Wifes Mother of her Feaver.Luk 4.38, &c. Peter was of that audacity and boldness,Matth. 14.28, 29. that he went upon the Water, which was too great an enterprise for
him to perform, without the help of Christ his Ma∣ster, who seeing him (thorow weakness of faith) in danger of drowning,Matt. 16.21. saved him. Again, when Christ did shew unto his Disciples, how that he must go to Je∣rusalem, and suffer many things of the Elders and of the Priests and Scribes, and be put to death, and the third day rise again (which thing he spake to remove out of their hearts, that false opinion they had of his temporal Kingdom) Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him, saying: Master, look to thy self, this shall not be unto thee. With whose rash zeal, Christ was so offen∣ded that he called him Sathan, laying to his charge that he savoured not the things that were of God but of Men. Also when Peter saw Christ (being transfigured) talk with Moses and Elias,17.1, 2, &c. he was so ravished with that sight, that he said unto him: Lord here is good being for us. If thou wilt, let us make here three Tabernacles: One for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias.Matth. 26.31, &c. Further∣more, when Christ said unto his Disciples (the night he knew he should be apprehended) that all they should be offended because of him, Peter (trusting too much to his own strength) said: Though all Men be offended be∣cause of thee, yet will not I forsake thee: Nay, I will suffer death, rather than I will deny thee. And to per∣form this promise, when Judas came with a multitude of the High-Priests servants with Swords and Staves to take Christ,John 18, 10. Peter drew out his Sword, and smote off the ear of one of the High-Priests servants: For whose foolish hardiness, Christ rebuked him sharply, and bad him put up his Sword. Then Peter seeing his Master led away, and all his Fellows fled and gone, would not seem utterly to forsake his Master, but fol∣lowed afar off, and at length in the dark as unknown, entered into the Court of Caiaphas. And sitting among the Servants warming him by the Fire, a Wench came to him and said, Art not thou one of this Man's Disci∣ples?
No said he. Yes but thou art (quoth another) for I did see thee with him in the Garden: Peter denied a∣gain, saying that he did not know him. Then certain which stood by, knowing Peter, said: Surely thou art one of them, for thy speech doth bewray thee. Then began Peter to curse and swear, denying that ever he knew him: And immediately the Cock did crow. Peter now remembring the words of Christ, which had said unto him, that before the Cock did crow, he should deny Him thrice, was touched with in∣ward repentance, and went out and wept bitterly. And after he had lost the presence of his Master,21. cap. he went to his old occupation of fishing again: And as he (with other his companions) had laboured all the night long in vain, and were coming to Land, Jesus (which stood on the shore) asked if they had any meat: who (not know∣ing what he was) said they had none. Then cast out your Net (quoth he) on the right side of the Ship, and ye shall speed; and so they cast out their Net, and were not able to draw it to Land again, for the multitude of Fishes that were caught in it And as Peter was haling up the Net, and heard John say it was Jesus which stood upon the shore, he left the Net and cast himself into the Sea to Jesus. This is that Peter upon whose confession, Christ (when Peter acknowledged him to be the Son of the living God) did build his Church. Final∣ly,Matth. 16.18. to stablish Peter in the office of an Apostle, Christ commanded him earnestly three times, to feed his sheep. Giving him also forewarning of his death. Pe∣ter, a Stone, or Rock. Phaltiel, the Son of Laish,1 Sam. 25. ult. would not seem to dis∣obey the will of King Saul, when of hatred he had ta∣ken  Daughter Michol from David,Lyra saith that Phaltiel was a learn∣ned man And knowing Michol to be David's law∣ful Wife, he reserved her as his Sister: and wept for joy that she was without dishonesty, re∣stored to Da∣vid again. and gave her to him  thankfully received her and gently entertai∣ned  so long as the King her Father lived, who
being dead, then David required to have his Wife Michol again: And at the day of her deliverance to Abner, to be restored to David, he brought her on the way, and came behind her weeping, till they came to a place called Bahurim. And there, at Abner's commandment, he returned home again. Pharaoh: There be diversGen. 12.14, 15, &c. Kings of this name ex∣pressed in Scripture. What time as Abraham came into Egypt with Sarah his Wife, who was reported to Pha∣raoh to be a Woman of an excellent beauty, he took her home to his house, and gently entertained the Woman without any spot of dishonesty, and also entreated Abra∣ham well for her sake. But when he perceived that God had plagued his house,Pharaoh was a general name given to the Kings of Egypt. for keeping the Woman from her Husband, he called Abraham unto him and said: Why hast thou done this unto me? Wherefore didst thou not tell me, that she was thy Wife? Why saidst thou she is my Sister, that I should take her to be my Wife? Now therefore, behold thy Wife, take her and go thy way; and he gave a commandment that no Man should hurt them either in Person or Goods. Another Pharaoh there was,41. cap. 47. cap. that delivered Joseph out of Prison to expound his Dreams: And for the ex∣cellent wisdom and knowledge that he saw to be in Joseph, he made him Ruler and Governour of all the Land of Egypt, and shewed much kindness to his Father, and to all his Kinred. After this Pharaoh,Exod. 1. cap. rose there up another which knew not Joseph. And he without all measure vexed the Chil∣dren of Israel: And thinking by his humane wisdom to have lett their increase, he commanded the Midwives to destroy the Men Children of the Hebrews, assoon as they were born: Whose policy took no effect, for Mo∣ses (notwithstanding) was preserved and brought up, even in his own house forty years.
And after the death of this Pharaoh, there came ano∣ther,Exod. 5. cap. 7.8.10.14. whose heart God did harden, and plagued him with ten marvellous Plagues, before he would let the Is∣raelites depart out of his Land: And persisting in his ob∣stinacy and froward heart, God at the last drowned him and all his Host in the red Sea. There was yet another mighty Prince of this Name,1 King. 3.1.9.16. whose Kingdom joyned so nigh to Solomon's, that So∣lomon (to make himself the stronger) made affinity with him, and married his Daughter. And this Pharaoh took the City of Gaza from the Canaanites, and gave it (with the Countrey thereabout) to Solomon for his Daughters Dowry. Finally,2 King. 23.33, &c. Pharaoh Nechoh, in the days of Jehoahaz the Son of Josiah King of Juda, came and deposed him, making Eliakim his Brother, King in his stead: and taxed the Land in a hundred Talents of Silver, and one of Gold, and carried Jehoahaz away with him into Egypt. Pharaoh, Vengeance. Phebe, was a certain Woman,Rom. 16.1. which served in the Congregation of Cenchrea, by whom Paul sent his Epistle to the Romans, wherein he saith in her praise and commendation, on this wise: I commend unto you Phebe our Sister (which is a Servant of the Church of Cenchrea) that ye receive her in the Lord, as it be∣cometh Saints. And ye assist her in whatsoever bu∣siness she needeth of your aid, for she hath succoured many, and me also. Phygellus, was one of them in Asia,2 Tim. 1.15. which had clea∣ved to Paul's doctrine, and after ward forsook him. Of whom Paul writeth to Timothy thus: This thou knowest, how that all they which are in Asia be turned from me, of which sort are Phygellus and Hermogenes. Philemon, look Onesimus.
Philetus,2 Tim. 2.17. was a certain Man in S. Paul's time which erred from the truth, saying that the resurrection was past already: of whose errour Paul warneth Ti∣mothy, saying on this wise: Study to shew thy self appro∣ved unto God, a Workman that needeth not to be asha∣med, distributing the word of truth justly: as for pro∣fane and vain bablings, pass thou over them, for they will increase unto ungodliness and their words will fret as doth the disease of a Canker: of whose number is Hymeneus and Philetus, which (as concerning the truth) have erred, saying, the resurrection is past alrea∣dy, and do destroy the faith of many. Philip.1 Mac. 6. To this Man, Antiochus the King (at the day of his death) committed the governance of his young Son Antiochus, with the whole Realm, during his Nonage. Which Philip afterward went into Persia with a great Host, leaving the King's Son under the tuition of Ly∣sias, who in the absence of Philip, made Antiochus King in his Fathers stead, adding to his name Eupater. Then Philip hearing of this (whose intent was to be King him∣self) returned with the King's Army out of Persia, and came to Antioch, where he got the dominion. But Lysias hearing thereof, made haste to Antioch, where he fought with Philip, and (in fine) got the City from him. Philip,John 1.43. a Man born in Bethsaida a City of Galilee, was called to be an Apostle. After whose calling he went to Nathanael, and said, we have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did write, Jesus the Son of Joseph of Nazareth; and so brought him to Jesus.6.5. This is he whom Christ asked (to prove him) where he might buy so much Bread as would serve the Company to eat, that came unto him, who made an∣swer, that two hundred penyworth would not suffice
them, to have but every Man a little: Also,12.21. when there were certain Greeks, which came to Philip, saying: they were desirous to see Jesus, Philip went and told Andrew. And again, Andrew and Philip told Jesus. Furthermore, when Jesus reasoned with his Disciples about his Father, saying that they both knew him, and had seen him: Philip said: Lord shew us the Father,14.8. Act. 8.5, &c. and it sufficeth us. Now after the death of Christ, and per∣secution that was about Stephen, Philip went to the Ci∣ty of Samaria, where he preached Christ, and did not only convert the whole City, but also Simon Magus the Sorcerer, who had of long time seduced the same City with his sorcery and witchcraft. And when he had thus sown the Word of God among the Samaritans, the Angel of the Lord spake unto Philip, saying: Arise, and go toward the South, unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto the City of Gaza, which is in the Desert. And as he was going, he met in the way (by God's providence) a certain Man of Ethiopia, a Chamberlain and of great Authority with Candace Queen of Ethi∣opia, which had been at Jerusalem to worship. And re∣turning homeward sitting in his Chariot, he read the Book of Esay the Prophet. Then Philip, being com∣manded by the Spirit of God, to go and joyn him∣self unto the Chariot, went. And when he came near, and heard him reading of Esay the Prophet, he said unto the Chamberlain: Understandest thou what thou readest? How can I (quoth he) except I had a Guide: wherefore I pray thee come up and sit with me. The Tenor of the Scripture which he read, was this: He was led as a Sheep to be slain, and like a Lamb dumb before his shearer, so opened he not his mouth. Because of his humbleness, he was not esteemed: But who shall declare his generation, and his life is ta∣ken from the Earth. When Philip had repeated this Text unto the Chamberlain, he said unto Philip: I
pray thee of whom speaketh the Prophet this, of him∣self, or of some other man? Then began Philip at the same Scripture, and preached unto him Jesus. And as they went on their way, they came by a certain Wa∣ter. And the Chamberlain said to Philip: See, here is Water, what doth lett me to be baptised? Philip said, If thou believe with all thy heart, thou mayst. And he said: I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God. Then was the Chariot stayed, till they both went down into the Water, where Philip baptised him. And assoon as they were both out of the Water, the spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, so that the Chamberlain saw him no more, who went away rejoycing. But the Angel set Philip down in the next City called Azotus, who walked thorowout the Country preaching in all the Ci∣ties, till he came to Caesarea. Philip,Act. 6.5.21.8. the Evangelist, was one of the seven Dea∣cons. He dwelt in Caesarea, and had four Daughters which did prophesie. Phinehas,Num. 25. cap. the Son of Eleazar, was so jealous over the Laws of God, that when the Children of Israel had committed whoredome with the Daughters of Moab, and saw an Israelite (named Zimri) bring to his Bre∣thren a Midianitish Wife (named Gozbi) even in the sight of Moses and all the multitude of Israel that stood before the Door of the Tabernacle, lamenting their of∣fence, he took his Weapon in his hand and followed the Man into his Tent, and thrust them both thorow the Bellies and killed them. And then the Plague (wherein were dead four and twenty thousand) ceased. For the which deed, the Lord said to Moses: Phinehas the Son of Eleazar, hath turned away mine anger from the Children of Israel while he was jealous for my sake among them, that I had not consumed them all in my
jealousie: Wherefore I give unto him my covenant of peace, to him and to his seed after him, even the Cove∣nant of the Priests office for ever, because he was jea∣lous for his God's sake, and made attonement for the Children of Israel. Pilate, was Lieutenant of Jewry,Matth. 27. Mark 14. Luke 22.23. John 18, 19. when Annas and Caiaphas were the High-Priests, who with the Scribes and Elders of the Jews sat in Council upon Jesus (now betrayed unto them by Judas) how and by what means, they might dispatch him out of the way. But having no Authority to condemn or put him to death, they brought him bound unto Pilate the Temporal Judge, saying, how that they had found him perver∣ting the People and forbidding Tribute to Caesar, and cal∣ling himself a King. Pilate hearing this, demanded of him, whether he were a King or no. Jesus neither deny∣ing nor affirming that he was, made answer that Pi∣late himself had said so. Then Pilate said unto all his Accusers, how that in examining of Jesus, he could not see that he had offended in any such thing, as they had charged him withal. The People then more vehement∣ly affirmed, how that he had with his teaching and prea∣ching (which he first began in Galilee) moved all Jewry to follow his doctrine. When Pilate perceived the Man to be of Galilee, and that his matter pertained to Herod's jurisdiction, he sent him (forthwith) to Herod lying at Jerusalem. Who of a long time had been desirous to see him. But when as Herod had demanded many things of him, and could have no answer again, he despised and mocked him, and so returned him back again to Pilate clothed all inCommonly this was a robe of honor or excellency, but it was given to Christ in mockage. white. And from that day forth, Pilate and Herod were evermore friends, who before were enemies. Then Pilate (for so much as Herod had sent Jesus back again, and done nothing unto him, and that neither he nor Herod could find any
thing in him worthy of death) would have chastened Je∣sus, and so let him go. But the High-Priests laid so many things against him, that Pilate (after he had reasoned a little with Jesus, concerning his Kingdom and other things) went and sat in judgment, knowing right well in his conscience, that the Priests of very envy had delivered Jesus unto him. And being set down upon the Judgment Seat, his Wife sent to him, saying: Have thou nothing to do with that just Man, for I have suffered many things this Day in a Dream, by rea∣son of him. Which counsel of his Wife, nor yet his own knowledge, did any thing the more move him, to defend the innocency of Christ, but asked of the People, which of these two they would have quit, Barabbas or Jesus, and they said Barabbas. What shall I then do (quoth he) with Jesus which is called Christ? They all said, let him be Crucified. What evil or great offence hath he done (quoth Pilate) that deserveth death? The People being much more eager than they were before, cryed out amain to have him Crucified. When Pilate saw this, that he could not prevail against them, he took Water and washed his hands, saying: I am innocent of the bloud of this just person; in the which saying he bare wit∣ness of his innocency,Pilate mur∣thered the Galileans, as they were sa∣crificing: and so their bloud was mingled with the bloud of the Beasts which were sacrificed. Luke 13.1. before he condemned him. And so delivering Jesus to the Souldiers, they scourged him, and arrayed him in Purple, with a Crown of Thorns upon his Head. In which sort Pilate brought him forth a∣gain, and said to the People: Behold, I bring him forth to you, that ye may know that I find no fault in him. And when Jesus appeared before them, Pilate said: Behold the Man; which he spake in mockery, because that Christ had called himself a King. And when the High-Priests and Officers saw him, they cryed out, Cru∣cifige, Crucifige. Then said Pilate, take him to you, and Crucifie him, for I can find no cause of death in the Man. They answered again and said: It is not law∣ful
for us to put any Man to death, but we have a Law, and by our Law he ought to dye, because he made himself the Son of God. When Pilate heard this, he was afraid, and went again into the Judgment-Hall, and demanded of Jesus what he was, but he made him no answer. Then Pilate said: Why speakest thou not? Dost thou not see, that it lyeth in my hands, either to kill or save thee? To that he made answer and said: Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above, therefore he that delive∣red me unto thee, hath the more sin; and from that time forth Pilate sought by all means to deliver him. But the Jews cryed upon him, saying: If thou let him go thou art not Caesar's friend, for whosoever maketh him∣self a King, speaketh against. Caesar. When Pilate heard them say so, he brought Jesus forth, and sat him down in the Judgment-Seat, saying unto the People: Behold your King. They cryed, away with him, away with him, crucifie him. What (quoth Pilate) shall I crucifie your King? To that the High Priests made answer and said: We have no King but Caesar. At that word, Pilate delivered Jesus to be crucified, and being brought to the place of execution, and spread upon the Cross, Pilate caused this Title to be set over his Head: Jesus of Nazareth King of the Jews,This Man Pilate (as Eusebius saith) was at the last, depo∣sed and bani∣shed to Lions in France, where he slew himself. which was written in Hebrew, Greek and Latine, that all Nations might understand it. With the which writing, the High-Priests were offended fore, and would have had Pilate to correct it, and not to write him King of the Jews, but that he said, I am King of the Jews. Well (quoth Pi∣late) what I have written, that have I written. Priscilla, look Aquila. Ptolomy, King of Egypt had a fair Daughter na∣med Gleopatra,1 Mac. 10. the which he gave to Alexander the Son
of noble Antiochus in Marriage, which was solemnly and with great Royalty finished in the City of Ptolemais, But notwithstanding this great Bond of Amity now knit between them, Ptolomy afterward withdrew his favour from Alexander, and sought by all means, how he might defeat him of his Kingdom. And thinking to bring his purpose now better to pass, while Alexander himself lay out of his Realm, he prepared a great Host, and took his Journey into Syria, where into eve∣ry City as he came, he was honourably received accor∣ding to Alexander's commandment. And being his Fa∣ther in-law, was nothing suspected of Treason. But Pto∣lomy meaning nothing else, left in every City wherein∣to he was received, certain Men of War, to fortifie and keep the same. And when he had gotten the Domi∣nion of all the Cities upon the Sea-coast, he joyned him∣self in League with Demetrius, and took his Daughter from Alexander, and gave her to Demetrius: Raising up a slander upon Alexander, how he went about to kill him. And so his malice and unsatiable covetousness being openly known, he got him to Antioch, where he set two Crowns upon his Head, the Crown of Egypt and Asia. Then Alexander (who at that time lay in the Countrey of Cilicia) hearing of all that his Father-in-law had done, returned home, and made War against him. But Ptolomy being the stronger, chased him into the Countrey of Arabia, where the King of that Land smote off his Head, and sent it to Ptolomy, which plea∣sure he did not long enjoy, for within three days after, Ptolomy dyed himself. After whose death, his Men of War which he had left in the Cities were all slain. Ptolomy,1 Mac. 16. the Son of Abobus, married with the Daughter of Symon, Brother to Machabeus. And being made Captain of the Host at Jericho, he began (thorow his great abundance of Gold and Silver) to wax
proud and high-minded, imagining how he might de∣stroy Symon his Father-in-law and his Sons, and so to conquer the Land. And being in this mind, it chan∣ced Symon (as he was going thorow the Cities of Jewry, and caring for them) to come down to Jericho, with Mattathias and Judas his Sons, where this Ptolomy received him under the colour of great friendship, into a strong Castle of his named Douch, and in the same made him a great Banquet, at the which he most traite∣rously slew Symon his Father-in-law with both his Sons. This done, he wrote to Antiochus to send him an Host of Men, and he would deliver the Land of Jewry into his hand. And further, he sent certain Men to Gaza to kill John the third Son of Symon, and wrote to the Captains to come unto him, and he would re∣ward them with Silver and Gold. But John, having knowledge of all the Treason slew the Messengers which came from Ptolomy, and so disappointed him of all his purpose. Ptolomie, sirnamed Macron, being made a Ruler,2 Mac. 10. purposed to do Justice unto the Jews, for the wrongs that had been done unto them, and went about to behave himself peaceably with them, for the which he was ac∣cused of his friends to Eupator, and was called oft-times Traytour, because he had left Cyprus that Philo∣metor had committed unto him, and came to Antiochus Epiphanes: Therefore seeing that he was no more in esti∣mation, he was discouraged, and poisoned himself, and dyed. Publius,Act. 28.7, 8, &c. was a certain Man dwelling in the Isle called Melitus, and the chiefest Man in all the Isle, who re∣ceived Paul with all the rest that had escaped the Seas, very gently: and lodged them three days in his House, whose Father which lay sick of an Ague, and of a bloudy
flux, Paul healed. Publius, a Latine word. Putiphar,Gen. 39.1, &c. was a great Lord in the Land of Egypt, and Steward of King Pharaoh's house. He bought Jo∣seph of the Ishmaelites, and found him a lucky Man. And when he saw that God did prosper all things under his hand, he made him Ruler and Governour of all that he had, and God did bless his house for Joseph's sake. But in the end, thorow the false accusation of his Wife, he cast Joseph in Prison. R. RACHEL,Gen. 30.22, &c. 31.19, &c. the youngest Daughter of Laban the Son of Nahor, was a beautiful young Woman, and Jacob's Wife. She being long barren, at the last brought forth a Son, and called his Name Joseph. And at her departing from Laban her Father with Jacob her Husband into the Land of Canaan, she stole a∣way her FathersNot to worship them, but to with∣draw her Fa∣ther from I∣dolatry. Images from him, for the which he made no little ado with Jacob whom he followed and overtook at Mount Gilead. And when her Father had searched Jacob's Tents, and could not find his Idols, he came into Rachel his Daughters Tent, who had hid them in the Camels litter, and sat upon them: And as her Fa∣ther was rifling about the place where she sat, she said: O my Lord, be not angry that I cannot rise up before thee, for the custome of Women is come upon me, and so the thing was not known. Finally, Rachel in travail∣ling of her second Son, whom she called Ben-Oni, (the Son of my sorrow) dyed, and was buried in the way to Ephrath which is Bethlchem, where Jacob caused a stone to be set upon her Grave, which was called Rachels grave-stone. Rachel, a Sheep. Raguel,Tob. 6, & 7. was a certain Man dwelling at Rages a City of the Medes, whose Sister was Wife to old Toby.
This Raguel had a Daughter called Sarah, which had been married to seven Men one after another, which Men were all slain the first Night of their marriage, by the Devil dsmodius. To this Sarah God had appointed young Toby (which feared God) to be her Husband, and made his holy Angel Raphael, to bring him to Rages, and so to Raguel's house his Mother's Brother, where they were joyfully received. And when Raguel had looked up∣on young Toby, and beheld him well, he said unto his Wife: how like is this young Man to my Sisters Son? And then to know who they were, he said: whence be ye my good Brethren? We be (said they) of the Tribe of Nephtali, and of the captivity of Niniveh. Know ye (said he) Tobias our Kinsman? Yea, said they, we know him well, and this young man (said the Angel) is his Son. With that Raguel bowed himself, and with weeping eyes took him about the Neck and kissed him, and bad his Wife prepare in all hast for Dinner. Nay said Toby, I will neither eat nor drink here this day, except thou grant me my Petition, and pro∣mise to give me thy Daughter Sarah. Then was Raguel fore astonied, and began to fear, lest it should happen unto him, as it did to the other seven. And while he stood in doubt what answer to make, the Angel said: Fear not to give him thy Daughter, for unto this Man that fea∣reth God, belongeth she, and to none other. I doubt not (said Raguel) but God hath accepted my prayers and tears in his sight, and I trust he hath caused you to come unto me for the same intent, that this Daughter of mine might be married in her own Kindred, according to the Law of Moses. And now doubt thou not (my Son) but I will give her unto thee. And with that, he took the right hand of his Daughter, and gave her into the right hand of Toby, saying: the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob be with you, joyn you together, and fulfil his blessing in you.
And when the Marriage & all was ended, Raguel brought his Daughter into her Chamber, and said: Be of good cheer my Daughter, the Lord of Heaven give thee joy for the heaviness that thou hast suffered, and so went to rest. Then in the morning about the Cock-crowing, Raguel (supposing all things to have happened to Toby, as it did to the other seven before) called up his Men, and went and made ready his Grave, which being done, he bad his Wife send one of her Maidens, to look if Toby were dead, that he might bury him before day light. And when it was told him they were both sound, and fast asleep, he praised God, and caused his Men to fill up the Grave a∣gain, and made a great Feast to all his Neighbours and Friends. And gave to Toby the half of all his Goods, and made him a sure writing for the other half that re∣mained, to be his also after his death. And at the day of their departure, delivered the Goods, and taking his leave, said: The holy Angel of the Lord be with you, in your Journey, and bring you forth safe and sound, that ye may find all things in good case with your Elders, and that mine eyes may see your Children before I die, and so kis∣sed them and let them go. Raguel, a Shepherd of God. Rathumus,3 Esd. 2. cap. with other Officers under Artaxerxes King of Persia, writeth unto him against the Jews on this wise: Sir, thy Servants Rathumus the story wri∣ter, Sabellius the Scribe, with other Judges of the Court in Celosyria and Phinehes: Be it known and manifested to our Lord the King, that the Jews which are come up from you to us into the rebellious and wick∣ed City, begin to build it again, and the Walls about it, and to set up the Temple a-new. Now if this City and the Walls thereof be set up again, they will not only refuse to give Tributes and Taxes, but also re∣bel utterly against the King. And for so much as they take this in hand now about the Temple, we thought
it not meet to pass over such a thing, but to shew it unto our Lord the King. And to certifie him thereof: To the intent, that if it might please the King, to cause it to be sought in the Books of old, and thou shalt find such war∣ning written, and shalt understand that this City hath always been rebellious and disobedient, that it hath subdued Kings and Cities, and that the Jews which dwelt therein, have ever been a rebellious, obstinate, un∣faithful, and fighting People, for the which cause this City is wasted. Wherefore now we certifie our Lord the King, that if this City be builded and occupied a∣gain, and the Walls thereof set up a-new, thou canst have no passage into Celosyria and Phenice. And when Rathumus and the other had received the King's an∣swer, they got them to Jerusalem with an Host of Men, and made the Jews cease from their building, which was not begun again until the second year of King Darius. Rebecca,Gen. 24. cap. was the Daughter of Bethuel and Sister to Laban. As she went on a time, with a Pitcher upon her Head, to the common Well without the City to draw Water, it chanced Abraham's servant to stand by the Well, with ten Camels lying thereabout. And when the Maid had filled her Pot, and set it upon her Head, rea∣dy to go away, the Man desired to drink a little of her Water, who forthwith set down her Pot and gave him drink. And when he had drunken, she poured out the rest into the Water trough, and ran again to the Well, and drew Water for his Camels, until they had all drun∣ken their fill. Then the Man (in hope the Lord had made his Journey prosperous) took out a Golden ear-ring and two Bracelets of Gold and gave them to the Maid, de∣manding whose Daughter she was. I am (quoth she) the Daughter of Bethuel the Son of Milcah, which she bare unto Nahor. Then tell me I pray thee, is there room
in thy Father's House for us to lodge in? Yea (quoth she) there is both Room and Lodging, and also Litter and Pro∣vender enough for your Beasts? Blessed be God (quoth he) that hath dealt so mercifully with my Master, and hath brought me the right way to my Master's Brothers House. Then Rebecca (hearing him speak of her Fathers Brother) ran home and told all things what the Man had said. And as Laban beheld his Sister and saw the Ear rings and Bracelets upon her Hands, he ran out to the man, and with gentle entertainment brought him into the House, and saw his Camels drest and provided for, and also set Meat before him to eat: But the Man would not eat, before he had declared the cause, wherefore his Master had sent him; which being done, and his request granted, he ate and made merry and tarried all night. And on the morrow as the Man made haste to go his way, the Damosel was called forth, to know whether she would go with the Man or no: and being content to go with the Man, he would not tarry, but took the Maid and had her to Isaac his Master's Son, whose Wife she became. And being twenty years without a Child, at last she conceived with two: and when she felt them strive with∣in her womb, she made her moan to God, saying: See∣ing it is so, why am I thus with child? God made her an∣swer, saying: There are two manner of People in thy womb & two Nations shall be divided out of thy bowels: And the one Nation shall be mightier than the other: And the elder shall be servant to the younger. And so when her time was come to be delivered, she brought forth two Twins, the one named Esau, and the other Jacob. Which two became mighty Men, but Rebecca loved Jacob better than Esau: and to prefer him before the other, she said: Hear me my Son Jacob, I have heard thy Father say to thy Brother, go and kill some Venison, and make me meat thereof, that I may eat and bless thee, before the Lord, before I dye. Now there∣fore
my Son hear my Voice in that which I com∣mand thee: Get thee to the Flock, and bring me thence two good Kids, that I may make meat of them for thy Father, such as he loveth, and thou shalt bring it him to eat, that he may bless thee before his death. Then said Jacob: My Brother Esau is a rough Man, and if my Fa∣ther shall happen to feel me, I shall seem unto him, as if I went about to deceive him, and so shall I bring a curse upon me, and not a blessing. Well (said Rebecca) upon me be thy curse my Son, only hear my Voice, and go and fetch me them. And when he had brought the Kids, and that she had drest the Meat and made it ready, she fetcht out certain Raiment of Esau's, and put it upon Jacob, and covered his hands and the smooth of his Neck with Goat-skins, and put the Meat in his hand to carry to his Father, by which policy of Rebec∣ca, Jacob had his Brother's blessing. And when she heard how his Brother threatned to kill him for stealing away his blessing, she told it Jacob, saying: Thy Brother Esau threatneth to slay thee, therefore my Son hear my voice: Make thee ready, and get thee to Laban my Bro∣ther at Haran: and tarry with him a while until thy Bro∣ther's fierceness be asswaged, and that his wrath be turned away from thee, and he forget the things which thou hast done unto him, and then will I send and fetch thee a∣way from thence, for why should I be deprived of you both in one day? And when she had given her Son this counsel, she went to Isaac her Husband and said: I am weary of my life, for fear of the Daughters of Heth. If Jacob take a Wife of the Daughters of Heth, such a one as these are, or of the Daughters of the Land, what good shall my life do me? And so by the counsel of Rebecca, Jacob was sent to Laban his Mother's Brother, where in process he got him a Wise, and purchased the love of E∣sau his Brother again. Rebecca, Fed.
Rechab,Jer. 35.6. was the Father of Jonadab. Which Jona∣dab made a Law, that the Rechabites should never drink Wine, their Wives nor their Children, neither yet build House, nor sow Seed, nor plant Vineyards, but should always dwell in Tents. Which command∣ment they kept and obeyed truly. And this their obe∣dience, Jeremy layeth before the Jews to their great reproach, for that they were not so ready to obey the will and commandment of God their heavenly Father, as the Rechabites were to obey their Father Jonadab. Rechab, a Rider. Of Rechab the Son of Rimmon, read the story of Ba∣anah his Brother. Rezin,2 Ring. 16.5, &c. King of Syria, went with Pekah King of Is∣rael, to fight against Ahaz King of Juda, but could not overcome him. At which time Rezin took the City of Elath, and drove out the Jews therein and peopled the City with Syrians. But in fine, the King of Assyria came against him, in the defence of Ahaz King of Juda, and at Damascus, slew him. Rezin, will, or willing to a thing. Rezon,1. King. 11.23. the Son of Eliadah, was a great Captain under Hadadezer King of Zobah, which Hadadezer, David had overcome in Battel. And when Rezon saw his Lord and Master discomfited, he fled from him, and gathered a Band of Men, and went to Damascus where he reigned as King, and became a great adversary to Solomon, for the which purpose the Lord had stirred him up. Re∣zon, a Secretary, or leave. Rizpah,2 Sam. 22.8, &c. the Daughter of Ahia, was Saul's Concu∣bine, and had by him two Sons, the one named Armo∣ni, and the other Mephibosheth: which two, with the Sons of Merob, David delivered to the Gibeonites,
who (for the offence of Saul) hanged them up upon an Hill before the Lord. Then Rizpah perceiving their Car∣kasses to remain upon the Gibbet longer than the Law required, made provision to save their Bodies, that nei∣ther Birds should fall upon them by day, nor Beast by night. And when it was told to David what Rizpah had done, he caused their bones, with the bones of Saul and Jonathan to be carried into the Country of Benjamin, and there buried in the Sepulchre of Kish, Saul's Father's. Rehoboam,1 King. 12. the Son of Solomon, was xli. years old when he began to reign, and his Mothers name was Naa∣mah. In this Man's time began the Kingdom of Israel to be divided. For when the People came to him, and said: Thy Father laid a grievous Yoak upon us, now there∣fore remit thou somewhat of the grievous service of thy Father, and of his heavy Yoak that he put upon us, and we will serve thee. He answered (as his young Counsel∣lers had counselled him) saying: My little Finger shall be heavier than all my Father's Loins. And whereas my Father put an heavy yoak upon you, I will add more un∣to it: And whereas he chastened you with Whips, I will chasten you with Scorpions. The People hearing this, they forsook him, all save the Tribe of Juda andThe Tribe of Benjamin was given to Nathan the Brother of Solomon; who never∣theless, aided the Tribe of Juda as of∣ten as they needed. Benjamin. Then Rehoboam seeing his Kingdom divi∣ded, gathered an Host of Men, out of the house of Juda and Benjamin, to the number of nine score thousand, to fight with Israel, and to bring the Kingdom again unto himself. But while he was thus minded, the Pro∣phet Shemajah came to him, and bad him cease from his purpose, for the thing that was done, was the Lord's do∣ing. Whereupon every Man departed, according to the words of the Lord, which the Prophet had spoken. Then Rehoboam fell to building of Cities,2 Chron. 11.5, &c. and repairing of strong holds, which he furnished both with Men and Victuals.12. cap. So that his Kingdom was mighty and strong
by the space of three years (for so long walked he and his People in the ways of David) but when they had once forsaken the Law of the Lord, in making Hill∣altars, Images, Groves, and were become Sodomites and workers of all abominations, then God forsook them and gave them into the hands of Shishack King of Egypt, who (in the fifth year of Rehoboam's raign) came to Jerusalem, and spoiled both the house of the Lord and the King's house, and carried away the shields of Gold which Solomon had made, in stead whereof Rehoboam made shields of brass. And so for a while, God made the Tribe of Juda and Benjamin, servants to Shishack (al∣though they humbled themselves) to the intent they should know the difference between his service, and the service of the Kingdomes of the World. This King Reho∣boam had eighteen Wives, and three-score Concubines, on whom he begot eight and twenty Sons and three-score Daughters. But among all his Wives and Concubines, he loved Maacha the Daughter of Absalom best. And made Abijah her Son, chief Ruler over all his Brethren, and to have the Kingdom after him. And when by his wisdom and policy he had dispersed his Children a∣broad, and had raigned seventeen Years, he dyed. Rehoboam, inlarging, or spreading abroad the people. Reuben,Gen. 29.32. was the eldest Son of Jacob and Leah. He brought the Mandrakes which he found in the Field to his Mother.Gen. 30.14. He saved Joseph from his Brethren which went about to kill him,Gen. 37.21, 22. giving counsel to cast him into an empty Pit, because he would rid him out of their hands: But when he came afterward unto the Pit and found him not there, he rent his Cloaths, and made great mone for his Brother Joseph. Long after this, (when Jo∣seph was thought to be dead) they went into Egypt for Corn, and when they were taken for Spyes, and hardly intreated and cast in Prison,Gen. 42.22. Reuben said unto them:
Did not I warn you and say, that ye should not sin against the Child, and ye would not hear me, and now ye may see how his bloud is required at our hands. All this notwithstanding, it was his chance to lye with Bilha his Father's Concubine,Gen. 49.4. which deed sore displea∣sed his Father, wherefore before his death, he declared the unstableness of Reuben, saying: That although he were the eldest, yet should he not be the chiefest. His birth right was taken from him,1 Chron. 5.1. and given to the Sons of Joseph. Reuben, seeing his son, or the sight of his son. Rufus, was a vertuous and a Religious man,Rom. 16.13. whom Paul remembred in his Epistle, saying: Salute Rufus, chosen in the Lord, and his Mother and mine. Ruth,Ruth 1. cap. and Orpah, were two fair young Damosels born in the Countrey of Moab, where by chance they married with the Sons of Elimelech and Naomi, who were strangers come out of the Land of Juda, there to inhabit; and when both their Husbands were dead and their Mother-in-law a Widow also, they forsook their own Countrey to go home with their Mother into the Land of Juda. And when they had gone a good way toge∣ther, Orpah (not without great intreaty of her Mother∣in-law) turned home again, but Ruth abode still. Then said Naomi to Ruth: Oh see my Daughter, thy Sister∣in-law is gone back again to her People and Goods? return and go after her. I pray thee (said Ruth) in∣treat me not to leave thee: For whithersoever thou goest, I will go with thee. And where thou dwellest there will I dwell also: Thy People shall be my People: And thy God my God: look where thou dyest, there will I dye also, and there will I be buried: The Lord do so and so unto me, if ought but death only part thee and me asunder. And so went they forth till they came to Bethlehem Juda, which was in the beginning of Bar∣ley
Harvest.Ruth 2. cap. And as Ruth went one day out a leasing a∣mong the Harvest folks, she happened (by the providence of God) upon the Fields pertaining to Boaz, who shew∣ed her such kindness; that she neither lacked Meat nor Drink, neither yet Corn, so long as Harvest lasted. And when all Harvest was done, Naomi said unto Ruth: This Man in whose Field thou hast leased all this while,Ruth. 3. cap. is our nigh Kinsman, therefore do now by my coun∣sel. This Night he winnoweth Barley in the Barn, wash thy self therefore, and anoint thee, and put thy Rai∣ment upon thee, and get thee to the Barn, and keep thy self close, until he have left eating and drinking. And when he goeth to sleep, mark the place where he layeth him down: And when he is a-sleep, go and lift up the Cloaths softly at his Feet and lay thee down, and he shall tell thee what thou shalt do. So when Ruth had done all things according to her Mother-in-laws teaching: Boaz about Midnight waked out of his sleep, and feeling one lye at his Feet was afraid, and groping with his Hand, he asked who it was. I am Ruth (quoth she) thine Handmaid, spread therefore the Wing of thy Garment over thine Handmaiden, for thou art next of my Kin. Now blessed art thou (quoth Boaz) for thou hast shew∣ed more goodness in the latter end, than at the begin∣ning, inasmuch as thou followedst not young Men, were they poor or rich. And now my Daughter fear not, I will do unto thee all that thou requirest: For thou art well known to be a Woman of vertue. Howbeit, there is one nearer of Kin to thee than I, if he will do the Kins∣man's part unto thee, well, let him do it: If he will not, then will I. And so in the Morning, he gave her so much Corn as she could carry home. And shortly after she be∣came his Wife,Ruth 4.13. and in process, brought him forth a Son called Obed, which was the Father of Jesse, the Father of David. Read the story of Boaz and Naomi. Ruth, watered, or filled.
S. SADOK, the Son of Ahitub,2 Sam. 8.17. was Father to Shal∣lum and Ahimaaz, and one of the Priests that governed the Ark of GOD, which he carried out of Jerusalem with David what time as he fled from his Son Absalom.2 Sam. 15.24, &c. And when Zadok had brought the King over the Brook Kidron, he desired him to return again with the Ark into the City, that from him and d∣biathar he might have word of all things that Absalom and Achitophel determined against him. And so he returned with the Ark to Jerusalem, and there remained David's faithful man, in all things that he had commanded him. And when he had knowledge of Absalom's over∣throw,2 Sam. 19.11. he then exhorted all Israel and Juda, to remem∣ber the kindness of David their Soveraign Lord and King: who had so many times delivered them out of the hands of their enemies, that now like true, faithful and obedient subjects, they would fetch him home again, and restore him to his kingdom. By whose godly exhortation, the hearts of all Juda were bowed to David, even as the heart of one man.1 King. 1.8, 38, &c. This Sadok was ever a faith∣ful Priest, and never swerved from David. For in the end when Adonijah took upon him to reign as King (his Father David being old and alive) Zadok consen∣ted not unto him, but according to David's will and com∣mandment, anointed Solomon King, who after∣ward promoted him into the room of Abiathar which had the High Priests office. Sadoch, or Zadok,2.35. Justi∣fied, or just. Shallum, the Son of Jabesh conspired against Za∣chariah,2 King. 15.10, 13. There is a∣nother of this name, the Husband of Hulda the Propheress, 2 King. 22.14. and slew him, and raigned in his stead. In the xxxix. year of Azariah King of Juda began Shallum his raign over Israel, and had not raigned one Month, but Menahem rose up against him, and slew him in Samaria,
and reigned in his stead. Shallum, Peaceable. Salmanasar,2 King. 18.9, &c. King of Assyria, came in the seventh year of Hoshea King of Israel, and besieged Samaria, and in the third year (which was the ninth year of Ho∣shea) he wan it, and took Heshea prisoner, and carried him away into Assyria. Salmanasar, Peace bound. Solomon,2 Sam. 12.24. the Son of Bathsheba was ordained to reign after his Father David, and anointed King o∣ver Israel,1 King. 1.30, 39. by Sadok the Priest, and Nathan the Pro∣phet. Who being stablished in his Kingdom, began to minister Justice:2. cap. 25. first upon Adonijah his Brother, which had aspired to the Kingdom.ver. 34. Secondly, upon Joab, which had slain Abner and Amasa, and conspired with Adonijah.ver. ult. Thirdly, upon Shimei, which had cursed Da∣vid his Father.3. cap. This King was so dearly beloved of God, that in a dream he appeared to him, and bad him ask whatsoever he would, and he should have it. Then Solomon considering in himself that he was but young, and that (being called to the office of a King) how hard a thing it was to govern the whole multitude of the Peo∣ple well, desired of God to give him an understanding heart, to judge the People, and to discern between good and evil. Which thing pleased the Lord so well, that he gave him not only a wise and an understanding heart, but also riches and honour, wherein he excelled all other Kings that ever were before or after him. And that he passed all men in wisdom and understanding,4. cap. doth ma∣nifestly appear by the wise sentence he gave upon the living Child, that the two Harlots strove for before him. And also by his three thousand Parables, and his thou∣sand and fifty Songs, wherein were declared such wise and grave sentences, that all the world (hearing there∣of) came to see his presence, and to hear his wisdome, which did so far exceed the wisdome of Ethan, He∣man,
Chalcal, and Darda (four of the notablest men then living in all the world) that they fell a wondering, and said, that the great fame that was bruted of his wisdome and royalty before they came forth, was no∣thing to be compared with that they had now both heard and seen. And as he did exceed all men in wisdom, so he did all other in riches. For he had xii. Officers which provided Victuals for his houshold every Moneth in a year. And his ordinary expences every day was thirty quarters of Manchet flour, and sixty quarters of Meal, ten stalled Oxen, and twenty out of the Pasture, and an hundred Sheep, beside Harts, Bucks, wild Goats, Capons, and Fowls. He had forty thousand Horses, and xii. thousand Horsemen to keep them.10. cap. The weight of Gold that came every year out of Ophir to Solomon, was six hundred three-score and six talents of Gold, be∣side that which Merchants and other Men brought him. Whereof he had so great abundance, that he made the Furniture of the Lord's Temple all of clean Gold. Yea, there was not so much as a drinking-Pot in all his own House, but it was of Gold: And as for Silver, he made it as plentiful as stones in the street.11.1, &c. But notwithstand∣ing all this his wisdom and riches, which God had gi∣ven him, yet at the last he fell to loving of outlandish Women (contrary to the Law of Moses) whereof he took so many, that he had seven hundred Queens, and three hundred Concubines, which turned his heart to strange gods, and made him of a wise King a stark fool, and great Idolater, for the which his horrible offence, he lost the favour of God. And when he had reigned forty years he dyed, and was buried in the City of David, and his Son Rehoboam succeeded. Solomon, peaceable. Nathan the Prophet, called him Jedidiah, beloved. Shamgar,Judg. 3. ult. the Son of Anath delivered Israel from the Philistines, and flew six hundred of them with an Oxe
goade. Samgar, desolation of the stranger. Samson,Judg. 13.24. the Son of Manoah of the Tribe of Dan, was born in the City of Zorah, and became a mighty strong man.Judg. 14. cap. On a time as he went to the City of Timnath, and saw a Woman of the Philistines which liked him well, he intreated his Parents to have her to his Wife. Who not contented therewith reproved him, say∣ing: Is there never a Wife among the Daughters of thine own People and Brethren, but thou must take a Wife a∣mong the uncircumcised Philistines? Well (said Sam∣son) let me have her, for she pleaseth me well. Then his Parents (not knowing it was the Lord's doing, that he should seek an occasion against the Philistines) went with their Son to Timnath to see the Woman: And by the way going, Samson (unknown to his Parents) slew a Lyon which came ramping upon him, and so went forth with them and talked with the Woman. And a few days after, as he came again to receive his Wife, he turned aside to see the Carkase of the Lyon, and found in the Belly thereof, a swarm of Bees and Hony, where∣of he took in his hand, and went eating to his Father and Mother, and gave them part of the Hony. And when the Feast-day of his marriage was come, he said to thirty young Men of his Guests: I will put forth a Riddle unto you, and if ye can declare it me within the seventh day of the Feast, I will give you thirty sheets, and thirty change of Rayment, and if ye cannot, then shall you give me the like: The Riddle is this: Out of the eater came meat,A Riddle. and out of the strong came sweetness. And when the seventh day was come, and the Men had not yet found out the Riddle, they perswaded Samson's Wife to get it out of her Husband and tell it them, who never rested flattering of Samson and weeping before him till he had told her. Then they (being taught of her) went to Samson before the Sun was down, and said: What
is sweeter than hony? and what is stronger than a Lyon? Then said Samson: If ye had not plowed with my Heifer, ye had not found out my Riddle. And so he went out to the City of Askelon (one of the chiefest Cities of the Philistines) and slew thirty men, and gave the spoil of them to those that had expounded his Riddle, and so got him home to his Father's house half displeased with his Wife. After a while,Judg. 15. cap. he went to visit his Wife with a Kid, but when he came, his Father in law had given her to another, thinking that Samson had hated her, and bad him take the younger (which was fairer) in her stead. Then Samson having good occasion given him against the Philistines, went out and caught three hun∣dred Foxes, and fastened tail to tail, and put a Fire∣brand between the two tails, which he set on fire (and so sent them into the Philistines Corn, and burnt it up, with their Vineyards, Olives and all. The Philistines (knowing that Samson had done it) went and set fire on his Father-in-law's house, and burnt both him and Sam∣son's wife with all that ever they had. And sent three thou∣sand men of Juda (who were then under the Philistines) to Samson, to bind him and to bring him to them. And when (by his sufferance) they had bound him, and brought him to the Philistines, they gave a great shout when they saw him, whereat Samson brake asunder his bands, as though they had been but flax. And took up a rotten Jawbone of an Ass, and laid so about him, that he slew a thousand Philistines ere he rested. And be∣ing sore athirst, God made water come out of a tooth in the Jawbone, and so refreshed him. After this,Judg. 16. cap. he got him to the City of Gaza, and lodged in a Womans house that sold victuals: And when he perceived the Citizens to watch and to go about to kill him, he got him up about midnight, and went to the gates of the City, which he rent off, bars and all, and laid them upon his shoulders, & carried them up to the top of an high hill before Hebron.
Finally, through his inordinate affection to Dalilah his Wife, he lost God's excellent gift, and so was betrayed to the Philistines, who took and put out his eyes and cast him in Prison, where they made him to grinde like a slave. And when the great day of the Philistines came, that they should hold their Feast to their god Dagon, they sent for Samson out of prison, to play before them and to make them laugh. The house was full of Men and Women, so many that in the roof of the same, there was about three thousand to behold Samson while he played before the Lords and great men. And as he stood between the great Pillars which bare up all the house, he called upon God in his mind, saying: O Lord think upon me, and strengthen me at this time only, that I (according to my vocation executing thy judgment) may be aven∣ged on the Philistines for my two eyes. And with that he caught the Pillars in his hands, saying: Let me lose my life with the Philistines; and so shook the Pillars with all his might, and brought down the house upon them, and killed them all. Then his brethren hearing thereof, came and took up the body of Samson and buried him with Manoah his Father, after he had judged Israel twenty years, who had been in subjection under the Philistines forty years. Samson, there the second time, because the Angel appeared the second time, at the prayer of his Father. Samuel,1 Sam. 1.20.28. the Son of Elkanah and Hannah, was the next Judge after Eli, and the last that judged Israel. And because his Mother had asked him of God, therefore she called his name Samuel. And when he was able to do any ministration in the Temple, his Mother brought him to Eli, and gave him unto the Lord, according to her pro∣mise. And so Samuel ministred unto the Lord before Eli:3. cap. And one day as he laid him down to sleep in the Temple, the Lord called him: And Samuel (thinking
it had been his Master) ran to Eli, to know his pleasure, who said he called him not. And at the third time when Samuel came to his Master again, Eli said unto him: Go and lay thee down once more, and if he call thee again, then say thou: Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth. And when the Lord had called him the fourth time, and had opened unto him all that he had determined against the house of Eli (for not correcting his Sons for their great wickedness) Samuel went to his Master Eli, and (at his commandment) told him every whit what the Lord had said. Now Samuel (be∣ing the Lord's Prophet) judged the People, and was both loved and feared of them. And when he began to wax old,8. cap. and was not able to bear the burden, he made his two Sons (Joel and Abiah) Judges over Israel, thinking that they would imitate his steps: But contrariwise, they were so covetous, that (for lucre sake) they per∣verted all true justice: whereupon the Elders of Israel, perceiving Samuel to be old, and his Sons given all to covetousness, went to Samuel, desiring of him that they might have a King to raign over them as other Na∣tions had. Then Samuel (hearing them speak of a King) was sore displeased. But nevertheless, at the Lords commandment, who bad him make them a King, he first declared to them, the office and authority of a King, and then anointed Saul to be their King and Gover∣nour, whom he sent to Gilgal,1 Sam. 10.8. commanding Saul to tarry there seven days, and then he would come and tell him what he should do.13.8, 9, &c. And on the seventh day when Samuel came to Saul, and saw he had offe∣red before he came, he asked him what he had done: Quoth Saul, when I saw the People begin to scatter from me, and that thou tarriedst so long, I offered burnt∣offerings, lest the Philistines should come upon me, be∣fore I had made my supplication unto the Lord. Now (said Samuel) thou hast played the fool. For if thou
haddest kept the Lord's commandment, he would have stablished thy Kingdom for ever: But now it shall not continue. For the Lord hath sought him out a man, after his own heart, which shall rule the People; and so Samuel departed to his house at Gibeah.15. cap. After this, when Saul had broken the Lord's commandment, in sa∣ving Agag King of the Amalekites alive, and had made a sacrifice unto the Lord of their best Sheep and Cattel which he reserved: Samuel came, whereof the King was very glad, and told him that he had fulfilled the Lord's commandment: But what meaneth then (quoth Samuel) the bleating of the Sheep and noise of Oxen that I hear? There are (quoth he) the best Sheep and Oxen that the People hath spared to sacrifice unto the Lord, but the rest have we destroyed. Then said Samuel: Did not the Lord when thou wert little in thine own eyes, make thee King over Israel, and gave thee a charge, utterly to destroy those sinners the Amalekites? And wherefore hast thou obeyed the People and not the Lord? I have (quoth he) done all that the Lord com∣manded me, and saved none but Agag: Hath the Lord (quoth Samuel) as great pleasure in burnt sacri∣fices and offerings, as when the voice of the Lord is obeyed? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken is better than the fat of Rams: for rebel∣lion is as the sin of Witcherast, and stubbornness is as the wickedness of Idolatry: And because thou hast cast away the word of the Lord, therefore hath the Lord cast away thee from being King. Then said Saul: I have sinned and gone further than the saying of the Lord, therefore take away my sin, and turn again with me, that I may worship the Lord. Nay (quoth Samuel) I will not return with thee: for thou hast cast away the Lord, and he hath cast away thee. And as Samuel was turning himself to have gone away, Saul caught him by the lap of his Garment, and it rent: Then said Sa∣muel:
the Lord hath rent the Kingdom of Israel from thee this day, and given it to a neighbour of thine, better than thy self: Nevertheless, through great intreaty of Saul, Samuel went with him. And when they had worshipped the Lord, Agag was brought to Samuel, who took and hewed him in pieces, and so departed to Ramah: where he mourned so long for Saul, till the Lord reproved him for it, and sent him to Bethlehem to anoint David. Which thing done, he went home a∣gain to Ramah, where he remained until he dyed. Samuel, heard of God. Sanballat, the Heronite,2 Esd. 2.6. cap. when he heard of the grant that Achemiah had obtained of Artaxerxes, for the building of the Temple at Jerusalem, he was mar∣vellously grieved therewith, and sought by all means how to lett the Jews of their purpose. Sanballat, A Bush in a secret place, or in a privy corner. Sapphira,Act. 5.1, 8, &c. the Wife of Ananias, being of his Coun∣sel in keeping away part of the price of a possession which they had sold, came unto Peter about three hours after her Husband, (ignorant of that which was done) unto whom Peter said: Tell me Sapphira, sold ye the Land for so much? yea, (quoth she) for so much. Why have ye (quoth Peter) agreed together to tempt the spirit of the Lord? Behold, the feet of them which have buried thy Husband, are at the door, and shall carry thee out. And with that she fell down and gave up the ghost. And the Officers came and carried her out and buried her beside her husband. Sapphira, telling, or numbring. Saul, the Son of Kish of the Tribe of Benja∣min,1 Sam. 9. cap. was a goodly tall young man: who on a time as he was seeking his Fathers Asses, and could not find them, happened (by the provision of God) to go and seek
out Samuel, to know of him some tidings of his Asses. And as he was going toward the City, it was told him of a great offering that should be there, and how the People waited for Samuel's coming to bless the same. And when Saul was come into the midst of the City, he met Samuel coming toward him, going up to the Hill. And as Samuel beheld Saul, the Lord said unto him: this is the Man which I told thee yesterday, I would send this day unto thee, to be King of Israel. Then Samuel took him up with him to the Hill, and set him in the chiefest Seat among his Guests, and made him eat with them. And the Feast being done, he went and anointed Saul King,1 Sam. 10. and told him what he should do after his departure from him. And going from Sa∣muel, the Lord gave him another manner of heart than he had before. So that he prophesied among the Pro∣phets, and was so greatly honoured of all men, that af∣ter he had delivered the City of Jabesh out of the hands of Nahash King of the Ammonites, the People renewed his Kingdom,11. cap. which God would have stablished for ever, if he had not disobeyed his commandment, in taking upon him to offer burnt-sacrifice before Samuel came,15. cap. and also to save Agag whom he was commanded to de∣stroy. And for this his disobedience, the Lord took his spirit from Saul, and gave it to David, and gave un∣to Saul an evil spirit to vex him withal.16.14. Then Saul seeing the spirit of the Lord departed from him, and gone to David, he sought by all means to destroy him, but never could come to his purpose. Finally, Saul being sore cumbred with the Philistines,28. cap. he went to an En∣chanter (notwithstanding he had expelled all of that Art before) to raise him up Samuel, who being raised up, told him, that for as much as he had disobeyed the Lord, and not executed his fierce wrath upon the Amalekites, therefore had God forsaken him, and rent his Kingdom out of his hand, and given it to Da∣vid,
And moreover (saith he to Saul) the Lord will deliver the Israelites into the hands of the Philistines, and to morrow shalt thou and thy Sons be with me.31. cap. And on the next day, Saul (being overcome of the Phi∣listines, and his three Sons slain) for anguish of heart, fell upon his own Sword, and killed himself, after he had reigned forty years. Saul, Required, or commended. Sarai, the Daughter of Aram, was Abraham's Wife.Gen. 11.29. And perceiving that the Lord had restrained her from bearing of children. she gave Abraham leave to take Ha∣gar her Maiden to Wife.16. cap. But when she saw her self despi∣sed of her Maid (which had conceived) she began to be so sharp and quick with Hagar, that she made her run a∣way. Nevertheless, at the humble submission of Hagar, Sarai received her again. Then Sarai passing forth, till she came to the age of four-score and ten years, it chan∣ced she heard the Angel of the Lord (as she stood in her Tent) say unto Abraham,18.10. that Sarai his Wife should have a child, which words seemed so impossible unto her, that she laughed within her self and said: Is it of a surety that I shall bear a Son? Shall I now have plea∣sure being old, and my Lord old also? And when she had talked thus to her self, the Angel of the Lord demanded of Abraham, wherefore his Wife did laugh, as though it were (quoth he) too hard a thing for God to perform his promise. Then she being asked the question, denyed it (for she was afraid) saying, that she laughed not. And so Sarai judging him faithful which had pro∣mised,21.1, 2, 3, &c. brought forth a Son at the time appointed of God, and called his name Isaac. And when the Child was born she said: GOD hath made me to laugh, and all that hear will laugh with me: Who would have said to Abraham, that Sarai should have given Chil∣dren suck? for I have born him a Son in his old age.
After this, when Sarai perceived Ishmael the Son of Ha∣gar (as he played with Isaac) to be a mocker, she said unto Abraham, put away this Bond-maid and her Son, for the Son of this Bond-woman shall not be Heir with my Son Isaac.23. cap. Finally, when Sarai had lived one hun∣dred and seven and twenty years, she died, in Kiriath-Ar∣ba. Which is also called Hebron. And was buried in the double Cave, which Abraham had bought of the Sons of Heth. Sarah,Tob. 3. the Daughter of Raguel had seven husbands one after another, which men, before they had lain with her, were all slain of the Devil Asmodius, to the great discomfort and heaviness of the young Woman. And yet the more to aggravate her sorrow, her Father's Maidens (when she did correct them for their faults) would slan∣der her on this wise, saying: God let us never see Son nor Daughter of thee more upon earth, thou killer of thy Husbands, wilt thou kill us also as thou hast done them? Which words were so grievous to Sarah, that she got her up to an high Chamber of her House, where she conti∣nued three Days and three Nights in prayer, beseeching God that he would vouchsafe to loose her out of that re∣buke or else to take her out of the earth. For thou knowest (O Lord) that I never had desire unto man, and that I have kept my soul clean from all uncleanly lust: I have not kept company with those that pass their time in sport, neither have I made my self partaker with them that walk in light behaviour: nevertheless, an Husband have I consented to take, not for my pleasure, but in thy fear. Now peradventure, either I have been unworthy of them, or else were they unmeet for me: for thou happily hast kept me for another Husband. And thus making her prayers to God, he heard her and sent young Toby to be her husband, who being joyned together in Matrimony, lived all their days an holy life, in the
fear and laws of God. Sheba,2 Sam. 20. the Son of Bichri (assoon as David was restored to his Kingdom again) begun a new insurre∣ction, and got all Israel to follow him, save only the men of Juda which stuck fast by David: and as he came into the City of Abel (to the which Joab followed him) the Governess of the City (being a Woman of wisdom) smote off the head of Sheba, and threw it over the Wall to Joab, and so the commotion ceased. Sheba, vanity, or little accounted of, or uproar. Sceva,Act. 19.14. was a Jew born, and the chief Priest a∣mong the Jews. This Man had seven Sons, who for lucre sake, and to purchase unto themselves a great name thereby, attempted to cast out evil spirits by invocation of the name of the Lord Jesus, as Paul did, saying unto the Man possessed. We conjure you in the name of Jesus whom Paul preacheth, that ye depart out of the man: To whom the spirit answered and said: Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? And as soon as he had spoken these words, the man in whom the evil spirit was, ran upon them, and got the upper hand on them. In so much that they had much ado to escape with their lives, and scarce got at the last naked and wounded out of the house. And this example of the Sons of Sceva being bruted abroad among the Jews and Gentiles, many (which believed) came to Paul and confessed their offences. And beside that, divers other which had used such curious crafts of Conjurations, brought their books and burned them before all men, the price whereof were counted at fifty thousandA silver∣ling was in value about a groat ster∣ling, or more. Silver∣lings. Shelah, the youngest Son of Judah,Gen. 38.5, 11. being grown to perfect age, and not given to Thamar in marriage accor∣ding
to his Father's promise, was the occasion of Tha∣mar's playing the Harlot with Judah her Father-in-law. Shelah, dissolving. Selah,Gen. 11.12, &c. the Son of Arphaxad (of the generation of Shem) was the Father of Eber, whom he begot when he was thirty years of age, and lived after the birth of Eber four hundred and three years. Which make in the whole four hundred and xxxiii. years. Shem,Gen. 9.18, 23.11.10. He is called also Melchi∣sedeck. And did first build the City of Salem, which after was called Jeru∣salem. the eldest Son of Noah, received praise of his Father because he covered his nakedness as he lay uncovered in his Tent. Shem, at the age of an hundred years, begot Arphaxad (two years after the Flood) and lived after, five hundred years. Shimei, the Son of2 Sam. 16.5, &c. Gera (of the kindred and house of Saul) dwelt in a City called Bahurim. And as it chanced David to flee thither for fear of his Son Ab∣salom, this man came out against him cursing and rail∣ing out of measure, with such spiteful words as these: Come forth, come forth, thou bloud shedder, and man of Belial: The Lord hath brought upon thee now all the bloud of the house of Saul, in whose stead thou hast raigned. The Lord hath delivered the Kingdom in∣to the hand of Absalom thy Son. And behold thou art come to thy mischief, because thou art a murtherer. And for all this, would David suffer no man to do him harm. So that Shimei went on still, cursing and railing, and hurling of stones and dirt at David like a mad∣man. But when the time came that David should be re∣stored to his Kingdom again, then Shimei (that in his adversity was his most cruel enemy) was now in his prosperity one of the first that met him to bring him home again: And being passed over Jordan, he fell down flat before David, saying: Oh let not my Lord
impute wickedness unto me, nor remember the thing that thy servant did wickedly, when my Lord the King departed out of Jerusalem, that the King should take it to heart, for thy servant doth know, how that I have done amiss: And therefore, behold, I am the first this day of all the house of Joseph, that am come to go down to meet my Lord the King: So David forgave him.Here he saith, he was of the house of Jo∣seph, and be∣fore he saith, he was of the house of Saul. Of the Fathers side (saith Lyra) he was of the house of Joseph, that is to say, of the tribe of Ephraim: but of the mothers side he was of the house of Saul. But when the time of Davids departure out of this world drew nigh, among all things which he spake to Solomon his Son, he remembred Shimei, saying: Behold, thou hast here with thee Shimei, the Son of Gera, the Son of Ge∣mini of Bahurim, which cursed me with an horrible curse, in the day when I went to Mahanaim, but he came to me at Jordan, and I swre unto him by the Lord that he should not dye. But thou shalt not count him as unguilty, for thou art a Man of wisdom and knowest what thou oughtest to do unto him. His hoar head shalt thou bring to the grave with bloud. And so Solomon being set in his Kingdom called Shimei and said: Build thee an house in Jerusalem and dwell there. And see thou pass not from thence any whither, for be thou sure, that the day thou goest out, and passest over the River of Kidron, thou shalt dye, and thy bloud shall be upon thine own head. Shimei thanked the King, and dwelt in Jerusalem the space of three years, and then it chan∣ced two of his servants to run from him to Achish King of Gath, whereupon Shimei sadled his Ass, and went for his servants, and brought them home again. Then So∣lomon hearing of his doings commanded Benajah, to put him to death, for the wickedness he had done to his Father David. Shimei, bearing, or obedient. Sennacherib, King of Assyria was a mighty Prince,2 King. 18.13. which seeing that Salmanasar his Predecessor had con∣quered the King of Israel and made them Tributaries, thought it good to set upon the King of Juda, who at that
time was the godly and most noble Ezechias. And when Sennacherib had gotten into his hands all the chief Cities of Juda and Benjamin, save only Jerusalem, he besieged that also, with such might and power, that Ezechias was fain to submit himself to the mercy of Sennacherib, offering him tribute, so much as he would demand. Upon which offer, Sennacherib promised Ezechias, that if he would pay him three hundred ta∣lents of silver, and one of gold, his land should be safe and in quiet, which promise he kept truly till the mony were payed. But as soon as he had received the money, he sent back again three of the greatest Captains he had, to make fresh War against Ezechias. And when they had pitched their Tents about Jerusalem, they sent for Eze∣chias to come and speak with them, who fearing his own life, sent three of his Noble-men unto them to know the matter. And when they had heard all the blasphemous words of Rabshekah,2 King. 19. they returned and told them to Ezechias. Who hearing those evil news, rent his cloaths, and put on sackcloth, and fell prostrate upon his face, and prayed unto the Lord to help him, and to have mercy upon his people, and beside that, he sent to E∣say the Prophet, desiring him to pray unto the Lord for them: whose Prayer the Lord heard, and bad him go tell Ezechias, that the blasphemous railing of Rabshekah should turn to his great shame, for he should go home again without victory, and never a stroke stricken. And so Almighty God sent his Angel which plagued the whole Army of the Assyrians with such a Pestilence, that in one Night there dyed 185. thousand. At the which suddain death, Rabshekah and all his Host that were left, ran away. And then, Sennacherib got him to Niniveh, where at the last, being in the Temple, worshipping his God Nisroch, his own Sons slew him. Sennacherib, the bush of destruction.
Sehon, was King of the Amorites,Numb. 21.21, 22, &c. whose Land bordered so upon the Land of Canaan, that Moses could not pass from the Desart of Cadesh to Canaan, but he must needs go thorow it; wherefore Moses sent Messen∣gers to King Sehon, beseeching him of licence to pass tho∣row his land by the Kings highway, and he would neither hurt his Fields nor Vineyards, neither yet take so much as one drop of water for him and his Cattel to drink, but he would pay for it. Which reasonable request, Sehon refused. And thinking to have overcome Moses and all his People (because they were strangers sore laboured and wearied and knew not the Coast of his Countrey, neither the shifts of the Realm) he made out two great Armies a∣gainst Moses: Who hearing thereof was so afraid that he asked counsel of God what he should do: And God bad him not fear, but fight manfully and boldly with them, for the victory should be his. And so was Sehon with all his power and policy overthrown. Sehon, a rooting out, or treading under foot. Sephora, and Phua,Exod. 1.1. were two of the Chiefest Midwives in all Egypt, unto whom King Pharaoh gave a commandment, that whensoever they did execute their office among the Women of the Hebrews, and saw in the birth a Man-child, they should kill it. But they, (fearing God more than man) brake his commandment, and saved all the Men-children, laying for their excuse unto the King, that the Women of the Hebrews were not as the Women of Egypt, but so strong and lively Women that they were delivered before the Midwives came. And for this deed, God dealt mercifully with the Mid∣wives, because they feared him, and made them to prosper. Sephora, Fair. Look, Zephora. Sergius Paulus,Act. 13.7. the Lieutenant or Lord De∣puty
of Cyprus, was a prudent man, who nevertheless had been sore seduced by one Barjesus the great Sorcerer. And now, hearing the Gospel to be sowen thoroughout all the Country by Paul and Barnabas, was desi∣rous to hear it, whereupon he sent for them: By whose preaching and great miracles that they did before him, he was at the last turned to the faith of Christ. Seth,Gen. 4.25.5.3. was the third Son of Adam, and gave him∣self all to vertue and godliness. His Father was at the age of an hundred and thirty years before he begot Seth. Seth was an hundred and five years old, before he begot Enos. He lived after the birth of Enos eight hundred and seven years. So that all the days of Seth, were nine hundred and twelve years. Seth, set, or put. Sichem,Gen. 34. cap. the Son of Hemor the Hivite, ravished Dinah the Daughter of Jacob. For the which deed, Si∣meon and Levi (the Brothers of Dinah) slew both Sichem, and his Father Hemor with many more. Sidrach,Dan. 3. cap. Meshach and Abednego, were three of Da∣nicl's companions, and of the Children Juda. Which three young men Nabuchodonosor (at Daniel's interces∣sion) made Rulers over all the Officers in the Land of Babylon. And because they would not fall down to the King's golden Image which he had made and set up to be worshipped, they were accused to the King, as trans∣gressors of his commandment. And being brought before the King, he straitly charged them, to be ready the next day when they heard the noise of Trumpets and other Instruments of Musick, to fall down and wor∣ship his Image as others did, or else they should be cast into the hot burning Furnace, and then let see (quoth he)
what god is able to deliver you out of my hands. They answered and said: Oh Nabuchodonosor, we ought not to consent to thee in this matter: For why: our God whom we serve is able to keep us from the hot burning Furnace, (O King) and can right well deliver us out of thy hands: And though he will not, yet shalt thou know (O King) that we will not serve thy gods, nor do reve∣rence to that Image which thou hast set up. The King hearing this, was so full of indignation, that he caused the strongest men that were in all his Host, to bind them hand and foot, and cast them into the Furnace, which Furnace was made so exceeding hot, that the flame of the fire de∣stroyed those men that cast them in. And as the King look∣ed into the Furnace after the men, he saw four walking at liberty in the midst of the Furnace, & the fourth man was like unto the Son of God to look upon. And being sore a∣stonied thereat, he went to the Furnace mouth and said: O ye servants of God, come out of the Furnace. And when they were come forth, it could not be perceived, neither by the hair of their Heads, nor by the smell of their Garments, that ever any fire had touched them. And so the King praised the God of Sidrach, Meshach and Abednego: and promoted them to honour. Silas,Act. 15.27, 32, 40. was a certain Disciple sent with Paul and Barnabas and other chosen brethren, to Antioch to pacifie the variance, which was there happened about circumcision. And after the salling out of Paul and Bar∣nabas about John Mark, Silas became Paul's com∣panion, and fellow-labourer in the Gospel a great while,16.19, 25, 38. and was in bonds with him at Philippi, where they converted the Jayler and all Prisoners, and were de∣livered as Romans. From thence they departed to Thessalonica,17.1, 14. where the Jewes set the City in such an uproar against them, that Paul was fain to flye to A∣thens, leaving Silas behind him, with a precept, to make
speed after him,Act. 18.5. who came to Paul at Corinth. Silpah,Gen. 30.9, &c. was Hand maid or Servant to Leah, who being given (by her Mistress consent) to Jacob to Wife, brought him forth two Sons, Gad and Asher. Silpah, a Rheum or distillation at the mouth, or vileness. Silvanus,2 Cor. 1.19. was a great setter forth of the Gospel with Paul and Timotheus, as is mentioned in the first and second Epistle to the Thessalonians first Chapters. Simeon,Luk. 2.25, &c. was a blessed old man dwelling in Jeru∣salem, which longed sore for the coming of the Messias. And whereas he had prayed unto God, to give him the gift, that he might but once see him with his bodily eyes before he departed out of this world, he received an an∣swer of the Holy Ghost, that he should not see death un∣til he had seen Christ with his fleshly eyes (which he had seen many a day before with the eyes of his faith.) And when the time came that the Child Jesus should be brought into the Temple by his Parents, Simeon by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, came into the Temple a little before them, and when he had seen all things done by the Priest according to the law, he (of a godly zeal) took the Babe in his arms also, and said: Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy promise: For mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel. And when he had blessed the Babe, he said to Mary the Child's Mother: Behold this Child is set to be the fall and uprising again of many in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken against. And moreover, the sword shall pierce thy soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. Simeon, hearing, or a perfect hearing.
Simon, the second Son of Mattathias,1 Mac. 2. was a Man of great wisdom, and the High Priest among the Jews. He helped much his Brother Judas and Jonathas in the Wars, and after the death of Judas, he discomfit∣ed Bachides, and was made Captain over the Jews after the apprehension of Jonathas, and overcame An∣tiochus. But in the end, he was of Ptolomy his Son-in-law most traiterously murthered. Simon, of the Tribe of Benjamin,2 Mac. 3. being a Ruler of the Temple what time as Onias was the High Priest, went about to work much mischief in the City of Je∣rusalem. And when he saw that he could not overcome Onias and the other Priests that resisted him, he got him to Apollonius, which then was Governour of Celo∣syria and Phenice, and told him that the Treasury in Jerusalem was full of innumerable money, which did not belong to the provision of the sacrifice, and that it were possible that these things might come to the King's hands: But when this betrayer of the money and of his own natural Countrey, saw the great Plague that fell on Heliodorus, (which was sent for the money) and that his cursed device could take no place, then he fell to rail∣ing and slandering of Onias, reporting of him, that he had moved Heliodorus to that malicious enterprise, yea, so much increased his malice against the godly man Onias, that malice of Simon compelling him thereunto) complained on Simon to Seleucus the King, to have him reformed. Simon,Matth. 27.32: of Cyrene, the Father of Alexander and Rufus, was compelled to bear Christ's Cross when he went to his passion. It was the custome to make him that was condemned, to carry his Cross: And foras∣much
as Jesus was not able to do it for weakness, they took Simon as he came out of the field, and made him to bear it after Jesus. Simon,Luk. 7.36, 40. a certain Pharisee, invited Jesus to his Table. And Jesus sitting at meat with him, there came in a certain Woman with an Alabaster Box of Oint∣ment, who stood behind him weeping, and began to wash his Feet with tears, and to wipe them with the hairs of her Head. That done, she kissed them, and a∣nointed them with her sweet Ointment. Then Simon which had well marked all her doings, spake within him∣self, saying: If this man were a Prophet, he would surely have known, who and what manner of Woman this is which toucheth him, for she is a sinner: To whose thought Jesus answered, and said: Simon I have somewhat to say unto thee: say on Master (quoth he.) There was a certain Creditor which had two debtors, the one ought five hundred pence, and the other fifty: And when they had nothing to pay, he forgave them both, which of them therefore, tell me, will love him most? Simon said: I suppose that he will love him best, to whom he forgave most: Thou hast truly said (quoth he.) Then Jesus turning unto the Woman, said to Si∣mon: Seest thou this Woman, I entred into thine house, and thou gavest me no Water to my Feet, but she hath washed my Feet with tears, and wiped them with the hair of her Head: Thou gave me no kiss; but she since the time she came in, hath not ceased to kiss my Feet. Mine Head with Oil thou didst not anoint, but she hath anointed mine Head with Ointment. Wherefore I say unto thee, that many sins are forgiven her, for sheLove can∣seth not re∣mission of sins: but remission of sins causeth love. loved much; to whom a little is forgiven, will love a little. Simon Magus,Act. 8.9, &c. which had of a long time seduced the People of Samaria with his sorcery and witchcraft,
was had in so great estimation among the multitude, even from the highest to the lowest,This Simon Magus was of so great e∣stimation in Rome, that Images were erected to him as a God. that they counted him God's fellow, and to work all things by his power: so much were they given to follow the illusions of Satan, more than the truth of God. But when Simon had heard the preaching of Philip, and seen his miracles, and the number of People converted to the Faith of Christ, he was forced himself also (by the majesty of God's word) to confess the truth. And so (to cover his hypocrisie) dis∣sembled to believe, and was baptised, and continued with Philip. But after this, when Peter and John were come from Jerusalem, and had laid their hands on the Peo∣ple, by the which the Holy Ghost was given: Simon (co∣veting to have that gift as well as they) offered the Apo∣stles money, to give him the power to do the same: To whom Peter said: Thy money perish with thee, be∣cause thou thinkest that the gift of God may be obtained with money: thou hast neither part nor fellowship in this business, for thy heart is not right in the sight of God: Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God that the thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee, for I perceive that thou art full of bitter gall, and wrapped in iniquity: Then said simon, pray ye unto the Lord for me, that none of these things which ye have spoken, fall on me. And so they left him full of malice and devilish poyson, tyed in the bonds of Satan. Of Simon the Son of Onias, whose praise is set out, Ecclus. 50. Simon, one of Christ's kinsmen. Matth. 13. Simon the Tanner, with whom Saint Peter hosted many a day. Act. 9.43.10.6. Simeon, surnamed Niger, which was one of the Pro∣phets and Teachers, in the Congregation of Antiochia. Act. 13.1. Simon the Cananite, surnamed Zeletes, and one of the twelve. Matth. 10.4. Luke 6.15.
Syntyche,Philip. 4.2. was a certain Christian Brother, to whom Paul sent salutations from Rome, exhorting him and Euodias to be of one accord in the Lord. Sisinnes,1 Esd. 6. cap. the under Sheriff in Syria and Phenice, with other Chief Rulers there, went to Zorobabel and his Companions the Jews (which were come by Darius licence, to build the house of the Lord at Jeru∣salem again) and demanded who had given them such commandment. And when they saw the Jews would not cease, then he (with others) sent their letters of com∣plaint to Dartus the King to know his pleasure.7.1, 2, 3. And when they had received the King's answer, Sisinnes with all the rest of the Rulers, obeyed the King's com∣mandment, and helped the Jews with all diligence to build the sanctuary again, and so the work went forth and prospered. Shisak,1 Kirgs 14.35 King of Egypt came to Jerusalem in the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam, with twelve hundred Cha∣riots, and threescore thousand Horsemen, and People in∣numerable, and spoiled the Temple of the Lord, and the King's house, and took away all the Treasure in both, with the shields of gold, which Solomon had made, and so departed. Shisak, an empty, or a void sack, or bag. Sisera,Judges 4. cap. was the general Captain of King Jabin's Host. And trusting in the great strength of his Chariots of Iron (which were nine hundred) and power of his men, he went against the Children of Israel, thinking to have over-run them all. But God so wrought with the holy Prophetess Deborah, and with Barak her Captain, that they destroyed his Chariots with all his Host. So that Sisera himself was fain to flie on foot. And com∣ing by the Tent of Heber (for there was peace between
King Jabin and the house of Heber) he turned in. And being sore athirst, he desired Jael the Wife of Heber to give him some drink: and she brought a Bottle of Milk, and gave it him to drink, and when he had drunk, and was laid down to take his rest, he said to Jael: Go (I pray thee) and stand in the Tent-door: And when any doth come to enquire of thee, if there be any man here, say nay. And so thinking he had been safe enough, took his rest, and fell asleep. Then Jael with a Nail which she drove into his Head, slew him. Sisera, he that seeth a Swallow. Shoby,2 San. 17.27, 28, 29. the Son of Nahash out of Rabbah the City of the Children of Ammon, and Machir the Son of Ammi∣el out of Lo-debar, and Barzillai the Gileadite out of Ro∣gel, what time as David lay with his People in the Wil∣derness of Mahanaim, hungry, weary, and thirsty, brought unto him Bedding, Wheat, Barley, with all other necessaries, to ease and refresh David and his Men, in that time of adversity. Sosthenes,Act. 18.17. of whom Saint Paul maketh mention in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, first Chapter, was the chief Ruler of the Synagogue in the City of Achaia, against whom the Greeks had such indignation, for ta∣king Paul's part against the Jews, that they fell upon him, before the Judges feet (where Gallio the Lord Deputy sat) and smote him: And Gallio not caring for those things, let them alone, and would not meddle with the matter. Stachys,Rom. 16.9. to whom Paul (in his letter of commen∣dations) sendeth greeting, saying: Salute Urban our fel∣low-helper in Christ, and Stachys my beloved. Stephanas was a faithful lover of Christ and his1 Cor. 16.15, 16, 17.
doctrine, in whose commendation, Paul to the Corin∣thians writeth thus: Brethren ye know the house of Stephanas, and of Fortunatus and Achaicus: how that they are the first-fruits of Achaia: And that they have appointed themselves to minister unto the Saints: I beseech you that ye be obedient unto such, and to all that help and labour. I am glad of the coming of Stephanas and Fortunatus, and Achaicus: for that which was lack∣ing unto me on your part, they have supplied. For they have comforted my spirit and yours: Look therefore that ye know them that are such. Steven,Act. 6. a Man full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost, was one of the seven Deacons chosen in the Congrega∣tion, to make provision for the poor, which did great Wonders and Miracles among the People. Against whom arose certain of the Synagogue, which were called Libertines, Cyrenians, and of Alexandria, Cilicia, and Asia, which disputed with him. And when they could not resist his wisdom, and the spirit of God wherewith he spake, they accused him of blasphemy against God and Moses, and brought him before the Council with their false witnesses ready, which said: We heard this fellow speak blasphemous words against this holy place and Law, saying that Jesus of Nazareth should destroy this place, and change the Ordinances which Meses gave us. And all the Council looked stedfastly up∣on him, and saw his face, as it had been the face of an Angel.7. cap. Then Steven (for as much as he was accused to be a denyer of God) made an earnest answer unto his accusation, in the end whereof, the Council waxed so angry against him, that their hearts clave asunder, and gnashed on him with their teeth. But he (being full of the Holy Ghost) looked stedfastly up with his eyes into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, and said: Behold, I see Heaven
open, and the Son of Man standing on the right hand of God, with the which, the People gave a great shout, and stopped their ears, and ran upon him all at once, and carried him out of the City to put him to death. And as they stoned him, he said: Lord Jesu receive my spi∣rit. And kneeling down, cryed with a loud voice: Lord lay not this sin unto their charge: And so fell a∣sleep in the Lord. Susanna, the Daughter of Helchias,Susanna 1. was a very fair Woman, given to all vertue and godliness. Her hus∣band's name was Joachim, a Man of great reputation among the Jews. In the first year that Susanna was married, there were two Judges made which resorted much to Joachim's house, and all such as had any thing to do in the Law, came thither unto them. These two Judges (being wicked men) were so wounded with the love of Susanna, and burned so in lust after her, that they could not tell what to do: But neither durst tell the o∣ther his grief, nor yet (for shame) utter their inordinate lust unto her. And so on a day, when they had sat long in Joachim's house about matters of the Law, and waited for to have their purpose on Susanna, and could not, they brake up and went home to dinner. And at their re∣turn again together, the one brake to the other their whole minds, and appointed a time, when they might take her alone. And when they had spyed out a conve∣nient time, that Susanna went into the Garden (as her manner was) with two of her Maidens only, to wash her self, these two hid themselves in the Garden against her coming. And assoon as the Maidens had shut the Orchard-doors, and were gone for Oyl and Sope for their Mistress, the two Elders came upon Susanna, and said: The Garden doors be now shut that no man can see us, and we burn in lust towards thee, therefore consent, and lye with us; if thou wilt not, we will bear
witness against thee that a young Man was in the Or∣chard with thee, and therefore thou sentest away thy Mai∣dens. Then Susanna sighed and said: If I do follow your minds, it will be my death: and if I consent not un∣to you I cannot escape your hands. It is better for me to fall into your hands without the deed doing, than to sin in the sight of the Lord. And with that cryed out with a loud voice, and the Elders cryed out against her; which clamour on both parties was so great, that it was heard among the Servants without, which ran to the Orchard door and burst it open, to see what the matter was: And when the Servants had heard the Elders report of Susanna, they were greatly ashamed, for there was never such a report made of Susanna be∣fore. And so on the next morrow, the two Elders (full of mischievous imaginations) declared the matter to Joachim her husband to bring her to death. And when she was come with her Father and Mother, her Children and all her kinred, to be judged according to the law, she stood before the two wicked Judges with her Face covered, who commanded to take the Cloth from her face, that at the least they might be satisfied with her beauty: which thing being done, the Judges stood up and laid their hands upon the head of Susanna, saying: As we were walking in the Orchard alone, this Woman came in with her two Maidens, whom she sent away from her, making fast the Orchard door after them. Then started there up a young Fellow which lay hid in the Garden, and went unto her, & lay with her. Then we which stood in a corner seeing this wickedness, ran unto them, and saw them as they were together, but we could not hold the fellow, for he was stronger than we, and got open the door and leaped out: And when we demanded of her what fellow it was, she would not tell us: This is the matter, and we be witnesses of the same. Then Susanna cryed out and said: O everlasting God, thou searcher
of hearts, thou that knowest all things before they come to pass, thou wotest that they have born false witness against me: And behold, I must dye, whereas I ne∣ver intended any such thing, as these Men have mali∣ciously imagined against me. And as she was led to∣ward the place of execution, the Lord of Heaven which heard her prayer, raised up the spirit of a little Child called Daniel, who cryed with a loud voice, saying: I am clean from the blood of this Woman. And when the People heard that, they stayed to know of the Child what he meant by his words. O ye Children of Israel (said he) are ye such fools, that without examination and knowledge of the truth, ye have condemned a Daugh∣ter of Israel? return again to Judgment, for they have born false witness against her. Then the People went back again, and the Elders took Daniel, and set him among them in Judgment. Who, when he had com∣manded the two false witnesses to be severed that he might examine them, he called the one before him and said: O thou that art old in a wicked life, now thy sins which thou hast committed afore time, are come to light: Tell me under what Tree thou sawest this Woman and the young fellow together? he said, under a Mulberry Tree. Now verily (quoth Daniel) thou hast lied, and art worthy of death, in that thou hast oppres∣sed the innocent, and hast let the guilty go free, contrary to the words of the Lord, which saith: The innocent and righteous, see thou slay not. Then he called the other and said: O thou seed of Canaan, but not of Juda, Beauty hath deceived thee, and lust hath subverted thine heart: Thus have ye dealt with the Daughters of Israel, and they (for fear) consented unto you, but the Daugh∣ters of Juda would not abide your wickedness: Now tell me, under what Tree didst thou take them com∣panying together? He answered, under a Pine Tree. Now verily said Daniel, thou hast lied also against
thine head. The Messenger of the Lord standeth waiting with the Sword to cut thee in two, and so to destroy ye both. And with that the whole Assembly cryed with a loud voice, and praised God, which so miraculously had preserved Susanna that day. And so fell upon the two wicked Judges, and according to the law of Moses, put them both to death. Susanna, one of those godly Women which followed Christ and his Apostles, relieving them with her sub∣stance, as much as lay in her power. T. THADDAEUS,Matth. 10.3. was one of the twelve Apostles. Thaddaeus, praising, or confessing. Tertullus,Act. 14.1, 2, &c. was a certain Oratour, which Ana∣nias the High-Priest had brought with him, to inform Felix the Ruler against Paul. And when Paul was brought forth, Tertullus began to accuse him, saying: Seeing that we live in great quietness by the means of thee, and that many good things are done unto this Na∣tion, through thy providence, we acknowledge it wholly and in all places most mighty Felix with all thanks. Not∣withstanding, that I be-not tedious unto thee, I pray thee that thou wouldest hear us of thy courtesie, a few words: For we have found this man, a Pestilent fellow, and a mover of debate unto all the Jewes throughout the World, and a maintainer of the Sect of the Nazarites: And hath alsogone about to pollute the Temple, whom we took and would have judged according to our law: But the chief Captain Lysias came upon us, and with great violence took him away out of our hands, comman∣ding his Accusers to come unto thee. Of whom thou mayst (if thou wilt inquire) know the certainty of all these things, whereof we accuse him. Tertullus, a false reporter, or a teller of tails, a lyar.
Terah, was the Son of Nahor, the Son of Serug.Gen. 11.24, 25, 26, &c. He, at the age of seventy years, begot Abraham, but he had before by another Wife, Nahor and Haran. All the days that Terah lived were two hundred and five years. Terah, Smelling. Look in the story of Abraham. Tertius, was the name of him that wrote the Epi∣stle of S. Paul to the Romans, while Paul indited it,Rom. 16.22. saying on this wise: I Tertius salute you, which wrote this Epistle, in the Lord. Tertius, a Latine word. Thamar,2 Sam. 13.1, 2, &c. the Daughter of David was so beautiful a young Woman that Amnon her Brother fell sick for her love. And when she had visited Amnon (at her Fa∣thers commandment) and drest him certain meat, and brought it into his Chamber, he began to force her to lye with him. Then she seeing that, said: Nay, my Bro∣ther do not force me, for no such thing ought to be done in Israel, commit not this folly. For whither shall I be able to go with my shame? And thou shalt be as one of the fools in Israel: Now therefore I pray thee speak unto the King, and he will not deny me unto thee. How∣beit, Amnon would not hearken unto her voice, but be∣ing stronger than she, forced Thamar and lay with her. And then was his hatred so great against her, that he thrust her from him, and bad her get her out of his sight: Well (said Thamar) Thou hast no cause thus to in∣treat me, for this evil, that thou puttest me away, is greater than that thou didst unto me. Nevertheless, there was no remedy, but out of his house she must go. And when his servant had put her sorth, and made fast the doors after her, she put ashes upon her head, and rent her garment (which was of divers colours and the manner of apparel that Kings Daughters, such as were Virgins, did use to wear) and so went crying home to her Brother
Absalom's house, where she remained desolate. Tha∣mar, a Palm-tree. Thamar, which was Daughter-in-law to Judah, the Son of Jacob, Read her story, in the story of Judah. Thamar, the Daughter of Absalom, 2 Sam. 14.27. Theudas,Act. 5.36. was an Inchanter, and false deceiver, who by boasting himself to the People, and promising of prodigious things, drew unto him a great company of Men, to the number of four hundred. Whose wicked enterprise (for as much as it proceeded of malicious spite) came to an untimely end. For both he him∣self suffered death and his partakers, some slain and some taken Prisoners. And so the rest being scattered abroad, the sect came to nought. Thiglath Pileser,2 King. 16.7, &c. King of Assyria, who had recei∣ved of Ahaz King of Juda a great Summ of Treasure to come and help him against Rezin King of Syrta, came to Damascus, and took the City, and slew Rezin the King there: And carried the People away to Kyr. Thot,2 Sam. 8.9, &c. King of Hamath had a great enemy of Hada∣rezar King of Zoba. And when he heard how David had overcome and beaten him, he sent his Son Joram to David, with Vessels of Gold, silver and brass, for a pre∣sent, and to salute him with peace, and to give him thanks, for that he had fought with his ancient Enemy, and so valiantly overcome him. Thola,Judg. 10.1, &c. the Son of Puah of the generation of Isa∣char dwelling in Shamir in Mount Ephraim, succeeded his Uncle Abimelech, and judged Israel three and twenty years, and was buried in Shamir. And after him rose Jair. Thola, a Worm.
Thomas,Matth. 10.3. otherwise called Didymus (which signi∣fieth in English doubtful) was one of the twelve Apo∣stles of Christ. Who (what time as the Disciples disswa∣ded Jesus from going into Jewry again, forasmuch as the Jews had lately sought to stone him) said:John 11.16. Let us also go, that we may dye with him.20.24, &c. This Thomas doubting of the Resurrection of Christ, said unto his fel∣lows which told him, that they had seen the Lord: Ex∣cept I see in his hands the print of the Nails, and put my finger into the print (or place) of the Nails, and put my hand into his side, I will not believe. After eight days (Thomas being with the Disciples) came Jesus again, and stood in the midst, saying: peace be with you: and said to Thomas, put thy finger here and see my hands, and thrust forth thy hand and put it into my side, and be not faithless but faithful. Then Thomas conceiving a full faith that it was the Lord, said: Thou art my Lord and my God. Which confession Jesus did well ac∣cept and embrace, but yet withal to reprove the hardness of his belief, he said unto him: Thomas, because thou hast seen me thou believest: Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. Thomas, A twin. Tiberius, was an Emperour, of whom Saint Luke maketh mention in his Gospel, saying:Luk. 3.1. That in the fif∣teenth Year of his Reign, the Word of God came to John Baptist in the Wilderness. Tiberius, A good sight or vision. Tychicus, was one of the Disciples,Act. 20.4. which went out of Asia, to Troas, where he abode Paul's coming, who sent him afterward to the Ephesians,Eph. 6.21. and also to the Collossians with his Epistles, to inform them in what case he stood, and what he did in all things.Coll. 4.7. Tychi∣cus, casual, or coming by chance.
Timothy,1 Mac. 5.6, &c. 8. ch. 10. was a certain Captain of the Ammo∣nites, which was twice overcome and put to flight of Maccabeus, and at the third time so sore discomfited (through help of the five Men which God made to ap∣pear on Horseback, with Bridles of Gold leading the Jews, and two of them having Maccabeus between them) that Timothy's Host were so confounded with blindness and so sore afraid, that they fell down and were slain of them, twenty thousand and five hundred Foot-men, with six hundred Horsemen, and he himself fain to take the strong hold of Gazar, to the which Maccabeus laid siege four days, and could not win it. Wherefore they within (trusting to the strength of the hold) fell to cursing and railing on the Jews with most spiteful words, and made so great cracks and boast of their strength, that on the fifth day, the Jews were so chafed in their minds, that with bold courage they scaled the Walls, and set the Ports on fire, and burnt those crackers and blasphemers, and got the Castle which was two days in destroying, where (at the last) they found Timothy (which was crept into a corner) and flew him, with Cereas his Brother, Captain of the Castle. Read the story of Dositheus. Timothy, the honour of God, or he that honoureth God. Timothy,Act. 16.1. was a certain godly Disciple, whose Mother was a Jew, and his Father a Graecian. Of this Man there went so good a report of his vertuous living among the brethren of Lystra and Iconium, that Paul was much desirous to have him go forth with him in his Journey, wherefore he took and circumcised him, because of the Jews in those Quarters, which knew his Fa∣ther to be a Greek.Pkil. 2.9. And so went Timothy forth with Paul, and (as he reporteth) even as a Son with the Father, bestowed he his labour with him upon the Gospel. He was a Man of great study and abstinence,
through the which he fell oftentimes sick. And there∣fore Paul, to measure his abstinence,1 Tim. 5.23. exhorteth him to drink no longer water, but to use a little Wine. Tyrannus, was a certain School master in Asia,Act. 19.9. in whose School Paul disputed daily by the space of two years. Tyrannus, Commanding, or a Prince, a Tyrant. Titus,2 Cor. 2.13.7.6.8.6, 16. Tit. 1.5, &c. was S. Paul's Disciple, whom (for the ex∣cellent gifts that were in him) Paul loved as if he had been his own natural Son. And made him the chief Overseer (or as ye would say Archbishop) of the Christi∣an Congregation in the noble Isle of Crete. And in every City within the Isle, Titus ordained an Overseer (which we call a Bishop) for the which cause, Paul prescribed unto him, the true form of a Bishop or Shepherd of Christ's Flock. Titus, Honourable. Toby, was a godly Man of the Tribe and City of Nephtali: And being brought into great captivity,Tob. 1. in the days of Salmanasar King of Assyria, yet would he not forsake the way of truth, nor worship the golden Calves (as others did) neither yet defile himself with the Heathens meat, but always kept his heart pure unto God. For the which, the Lord gave him such favour in the sight of Salmanasar the King, that Toby had power to go where he would, and to do whatsoever he listed. Then Toby having this liberty, went about comforting all those that were in Prison, both with his goods and godly exhortations. Such was his daily exercise to feed the hungry, to cloath the naked, and to bury the dead, with such like deeds of Charity. And when the time came that Sennacherib (which hated the Children of Is∣rael) raigned in his Father's stead, and in his wrath slew many of them: Toby buried their bodies, for the which the King commanded to slay him, and to take away his
goods, who nevertheless (through friendship) escaped and fled. And after the Kings death, being slain of his own Sons within xlv. days after,Tob. 2. Toby returned and was restored to his goods again, and called his kindred and friends together, and made a great feast. And sitting at the Table with his Guests, one told him there lay an Israelite slain in the street, who then immediately leapt from the Board, and went fasting to the dead Corpse, and brought him home to his house, where he hid him pri∣vily until the Sun was down, and then buried him. For the which deed his friends reproved him, because he had been in danger but a little before, even for the like matter. But nevertheless, Toby (fearing GOD more than the King) would take the slain, and hide them in his house, and bury them at Midnight. Inso∣much that one time he was so weary with burying the dead, that he got him home, and laid him down be∣side a Wall for weariness, where he fell asleep: And so lying, there fell down upon his eyes, warm dung out of a Swallows Nest, which took away his sight, that he could not see, against the which plague of blindness he never grudged, but remained stedfast in the fear of God, giving him thanks as well for that, as other gifts of health. And this temptation God suffered to fall on Toby, for an example of patience to all that should come after. Finally, of his great patience, deeds of charity, and other godly exhortations,Tob. 14.2, 3. his book is full. He lost his sight at the age of six and fifty years. And was resto∣red at three-score, so that he remained blind about four years. And lived after he had received his sight two and forty years, and so he dyed at the age of an hundred and two years, and was honourably buried in the City of Ninive. Toby, the Lord is good. Toby,Tob. 5. the Son of Toby, being brought up in the fear of God, followed the vertuous steps of his Father
in all things. He was sent to the City of Rages to one Gabael for certain Money which his Father had lent him. And (after many dangers by the way) was,6. cap. by God's providence, whose Angel was his guide,7. cap. married there, to the Daughter of Raguel, whose name was Sara. And when he had tarried with his Father and Mother-in-law, about fourteen days,8. cap. he returned home with much substance, to the great consolation and comfort of old Toby his Father, and Anna his Mother.11. cap. After whose death (when he had remained at Ninive the space of two, and forty years) he departed with his Wife and seven Sons to the City of Rages,14. cap. where he found his Fa∣ther and Mother-in law, both living in great age, on whom he took the care until they died, and was Heir to all their Goods. And when this Toby had lived xcix. years, he dyed and was buried. After whose death, his Posterity continued in such an holy conversation of life, that they were beloved and accepted both of God and Man. Toby, the Ammonite and Son-in-law to Sheca∣niah,2 Esd. 2; was one that conspired with Sanballat to hinder the building of Jerusalem. For when Sanballat said in derision of the Jewes: What do these weak Jewes? will they fortifie themselves? Will they sacrifice? Will they finish it in a day? Will they make the stones whole again out of the heaps of dust, feeing they are burnt? Then Toby which stood beside him said:6. cap. Although they build, yet if a Fox go up, he shall even break down their stone Wall. This Toby wrought all the ways he could, both by Letters and false Prophets hired for Money, to fright Esdras from the work, but could not prevail. Tryphena, and Tryphosa,Rom. 16.12. were certain godly Wo∣men, to whom Saint Paul (for their diligent labour in
the Gospel) sendeth greetings, saying: Salute Try∣phena and Tryphosa, which Women laboured in the Lord. Tryphena, a fine, nice, or delicate Woman. Tryphon,1 Mac. 11. was a certain great Man which took part with King Alexander against King Ptolemy. And when Alexander was dead, Tryphon found the means to get his young Son Antiochus out of the hands of E∣mascuel the Arabian (who had brought him up) to reign in his Fathers stead. And when he had got the govern∣ment of the young King, he conceived treason against him, which he thought could never be well brought to pass, so long as Jonathan (whom the King had made High Priest) was his friend, wherefore he sought to kill Jonathan, that he might come the easier by his wick∣ed purpose.12.39.40, &c. So Tryphon went to a place called Bethsan, at the which place Jonathan met him with forty thou∣sand Men. Then Tryphon perceiving the great Host that Jonathan brought, was afraid, and thought it not best to meddle with him at that time, but to use some po∣licy how to betray him. And so commanding all his Souldiers to be as obedient to Jonathan in all things, even as they would be unto himself, he received him honourably with great rewards. And being met toge∣ther, Tryphon said to Jonathan: Why hast thou cau∣sed this People to take such travail, seeing there is no War between us? Therefore send them home again, and chose certain Men to wait upon thee, and come thou with me to Ptolemais, for I will give it thee, with other strong Holds, for that is the only cause of my coming, and so I must depart. Then Jonathan (believ∣ing Tryphon) sent away his Host, all save a thousand, and so went with Tryphon to Ptolemais. And assoon as Jonathan and his Men were entred the City, the Gates were shut and Jonathan put in ward, and all his Men were slain.1 Mac. 13. After this, Tryphon went into the Land of Judah
with a great Host, having Jonathan with him in ward. And when he had knowledge that Simon stood up in the stead of his Brother Jonathan, and that he would come against him, he sent word to Simon, that whereas he kept Jonathan his Brother in ward, it was but for mony he ought in the King's account, and other business he had in hand. Therefore if he would send him an hundred Talents of Silver, and the two Sons of Jonathan to be their Father's surety, he would send him home again: But Simon knew his dissembling heart well enough. Yet nevertheless (lest he should be a greater enemy to the People of Israel, and say another day, that because he sent him not the Money and the Children, therefore is Jonathan dead) he sent him both the Money and the Chil∣dren. Then Tryphon, having the Money and Children, kept Jonathan still, and shortly after put both the Fa∣ther and his Children to death. Now Tryphon to bring his long intended purpose about, on a time as he walked a∣broad with the young King, he most traiterously slew him, and possessed the Realm, and crowned himself King of Asia, and did much hurt in the Land. Finally,15. cap. Tryphon was so hated of all men, that when Antiochus the Son of Demetrius came upon him, the most part of his own Host forsook him and went to Antiochus, who never left persecuting of Tryphon, till he made him flee by Ship, where he was never seen more. Tryphon, a delicate and fine man. Trophimus, was an Ephesian born,Act. 20.4. who went with Tychicus out of Asia to Troas to make all things ready against Paul's coming, and abode there till Paul came, from thence they went with Paul to Jeru∣salem, where certain Jews which were of Asia, moved the People against Paul, complaining of him,21.28, &c. that he had brought Greeks with him to pollute the Temple, be∣cause they saw Trophimus with him in the City, whom
they supposed Paul had brought into the Temple. Tubal,Gen. 4. was the Son of Lamech by his Wife Adah. And was the first that invented the Science of Musick, by the strokes and noise of the hammers of his brother Tu∣balcain which was a Smith, and the first finder out of Mettal, and the working thereof. Jubal was his brother by Father and Mother, and Tubalcain only by the Father, for Zillah was his Mother. Tubal, born, or brought, or worldly. Tubalcain, Worldly possession. V. VASHTI,Estter 1. was a very fair Woman, and Wife to Ahashuerus (otherwise called Artaxerxes) King of Persia. And because she would not come to the King when he sent for her, a Law was devised and made by the seven Princes of Persia and Media. That forasmuch as it could not be chosen, but that this deed of Queen Vashti must needs come abroad into the ears of all Women, both Princes and others, and so despise their Husbands, and say: Thus and thus did Vashti to Ahashuerus, by which occasion much despitefulness and wrath should arise: The King should therefore put her away and take another, to the end that all other Women (great and small) should hold their Husbands in more honour. And so she was divorced from the King, and Esther received in her place. Vashti, Drinking. Vrban,Rom. 16.9. was a certain faithful Christian Brother, to whom Paul sent greetings, saying: Salute Urban our helper in Christ. Vriah,2 Sam. 11. the Hittite, was a Man always (for the most part) imployed in the Kings Wars with Joab the King's Captain-General. This Uriah had a fair Wo∣man to his Wife called Bathsheba, whom King David
(in his absence) had got with Child. And when the King had knowledge that the Woman was conceived, he sent for Urias to come home. Who being come to the King, and had told him of all things concerning Joab and his Men of War: The King bad him go home to his house, and repose himself there a while with his Wife. And so Urias being departed from the King, went not home to his Wife, but lay without the King's Gate, he and all his Men that night. And when on the morrow, the King had knowledge thereof, he sent for Urias, and demanded why he went not home. To whom he said: The Ark of Is∣rael and Juda dwell in Tents, and my Lord Joab and the servants of my Lord, abide in the open Fields: shall I then go into mine house to eat and drink, and lye with my Wife? By thy life, and by the life of thy soul, I will not do this thing. Then he was commanded to tarry a day or two more, and the King wrote a Letter to Joab, the Tenour whereof was this: That he should set Urias in the fore front of the Battel, where it was sharpest, to the intent he might be slain. And so Urias depar∣ted from the King, carrying his own death with him, and was soon dispatched out of his life. Urias, the light of the Lord. Vriah,2 King. 16.10, 11, &c. was the High-Priest in the time of Abaz King of Juda. And having the pattern of an Altar sent unto him by the King from Damascus, to make him the like against his coming home, Uriah consented to the King's wicked mind, and made the Altar, and did what∣soever the King would have him to do, without any re∣gard to the Laws of God. Vzzah, and Ahio, were the Sons of Abinadab, which waited upon the new Cart, whereon the Ark of God,2 Sam. 6.3, 4, &c.(which was taken out of their Fathers house to be carried to the house of Obed) was laid. And forasmuch as Uzzah
(of a good intent) put forth his hand to stay the Ark when the Oxen stumbled, the Lord smote him for his fault, that he dyed, even before the Ark. Z. ZABULON,Gen. 30.19.49.13. was the sixth Son of Jacob and Le∣ab. Of whom his Father prophelied before his death, saying: Zabulon shall dwell by the Sea side, and he shall be an haven for ships, his border shall be unto Zidon. Zabulon, a dwelling. Zachary,Luke 1. cap. was a certain godly Priest in the days of Herod King of Jewry, which came of the course or Family of Abiah. And walked so perfectly in the Ordi∣nances and Laws of the Lord, that no Man could justly complain of him. But he had no Child by his Wife Eli∣zabeth, for she was barren. And when his course came to burn incense (evening and morning according to the law) he went into the Temple. And as he was in prayer, an Angel appeared unto him, saying: Fear not Zachary, for thy Prayer is heard: And thy Wife Elizabech shall bear thee a Son, and thou shalt call his name John, &c. Whereby, said Zachary, shall I know this, for I am old and my Wife old also. I am Gabriel (quoth the Angel) which am sent unto thee, to shew thee these glad tidings: And behold, thou shalt be dumb and not able to speak, until the day that these things be per∣formed. And so Zachary remained speechless until the time came that his Wife brought him forth a Son. And when the Child should be circumcised, great con∣troversie was there about his name. Some would have him called Zachary, some by one name, some by ano∣ther, and his Mother would have him called John, but to that would none agree, because there was none of the kindred so named. Then they made signs to Zachary, how he would have his Son called: And he calling (by
signs) for writing tables, wrote therein: His name is John. Whereat they all marvelled. And immediately the mouth of Zachary was opened, so that he spake and said: Praised be the Lord God of Israel, for he hath visited and redeemed his People, &c. Zachariah, the Son of Jeroboam King of Israel,2 King. 15.8. be∣gan his Raign in the eight and thirtieth year of Azariah King of Juda, and walked in the sins of Jeroboam the Son of Nebat, as did others before him. He had not raigned six Months, ere that Shallum conspired against him and slew him even in the face of the people, & raigned in his stead. This Zachariah was the fourth and the last King of the generation of Jehu, which the Lord had pro∣mised should sit on his seat after him, when he said: Thy Children unto the fourth generation after thee,10. cap. 30. shall sit on the seat of Israel. Zarah,Gen. 38.29.30. was one of the two Twins which Thamar bare unto Juda at one birth, who proffering to come forth before his Brother, put forth his hand, and when the Mid∣wife had tyed a red thread about it, he pluckt in his hand again, and then his Brother came out first, whom they called Pharez, and then he with the red thread a∣bout his hand, whom they called Zarah. Zachariah, the Son of Jehojada,2 Chron. 24.20. was an holy Pro∣phet.This Pro∣phet is also called the Son of Barachias, Matth. 23.35. because his Progenitors were Iddo, Barachiah, and Jehosala. And when he saw Joash King of Juda (whom his Father had trained from his youth up in the fear of God) with all his People declined from the Lord to the wor∣shipping of Idols, and would not hear the Lord's ad∣monition sent by his Prophets to call them home again, he stood up before the People and said: Why transgress ye the Commandments of the Lord? Surely it shall not prosper: because ye have forsaken the Lord, he also hath forsaken you. For the which, the King (not regar∣ding
the kindness of Jehojada his Father) commanded the People to stone him to death, in the court of the house of the Lord. And as he suffered his Martyrdom, he de∣sired the Lord to revenge his death, and to require his bloud at their hands. Zaccheus,Luke 19.2, 3, &c. was a Publican, and chief receiver of the King's Tribute among them. He was a very low man of stature. And being much desirous to see Jesus what manner a Man he should be, made great means to see him. And when he saw the prease so great that he could not, he ran before (knowing which way he would come) and climbed up into a wilde Figg-Tree. And when Jesus saw him in the Tree, he said: Zaccheus, come down quickly, for to day I must abide at thy house. And Zaccheus came down & received him joyfully. And shew∣ing forth the true fruits of repentance, said: Behold Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have done any man wrong, I restore him four-fold. To whom Jesus said again: This day is salvation come to this house, forasmuch as thou art also become the Son of Abraham. Zaccheus, pure, neat, or clean. Zerbiah,1 Chron. 2.16. was David's Sister. Her three Sons were Joab, Abishai and Asahel. Zedekiah,2 King. 24 17. cap. 25. the fourth Son of Josiah was one and twen∣ty years old when Nabuchodonosor made him King of Ju∣da in the stead of Jehojachin his Brother's Son. And made him take an oath of the Lord, faithfully and truly to serve the Chaldeans, in token whereof he changed his name, from Mataniah to Zedekiah. This King suffered sin and wickedness so much to raign in his Land (as well among the Head-Rulers and Priests, as among the common sort) that God was forgotten, his Word despi∣sed, and his Prophets misused.Jer. 37. cap. Wherefore the Lord stir∣red
up the Chaldeans (with whom he had broke his League) which came and destroyed the City of Jerusalem, and the holy Temple of God with fire (as the Prophet Jeremy had said) and took Zedekiah the King (his Army being dispersed) in the plain of Jericho, and brought him to the King of Babylon, who first destroyed both his Sons before his face, and then pulled out the eyes of Zedekiah, and so carried him to Babylon bound with two Chains, where he dyed, his People remaining in bondage until the days of Cyrus, which was about three-score and ten years. Zedekiah, the Justice of the Lord, or the Lord's judgment. Zedekiah,1 King. 22.24. the Son of Chenaanah was one of the false Prophets which deceived Ahab. And when Michajah the true Prophet of God spake against them, this Zedekiah smote him on the Cheek, saying: When went the spirit of the Lord from me, to speak unto thee: Well, said Michajah: Thou shalt see in that day, when thou shalt go from Chamber to Chamber to hide thee. Zelophehad, the Son of Hepher, the Son of Gi∣lead,Numb. 26.33. the Son of Machir, the Son of Manasses, the Son of Joseph, had five Daughters, who forasmuch as their Father dyed in the Wilderness without Male-issue, and was none of those that rebelled against the Lord in the Congregation of Chore,27. cap. they required of Moses to have a possession among their Fathers brethren, lest the name of their Father should be utterly taken away from among his kindred. Whose request God allowed, and bad Moses give them a possession among their brethren, and to make a law, that whosoever dyed without a Son, his Inheritance should turn to his Daughter. If he have no daughter, to his brethren. If he have no brethren, to his Fathers brethren. If his Father have no brethren, then it should turn to the next of the kin.Two of sun∣dry Tribes; And also to stablish
their inheritance, that it should not be removed through marriage into another Tribe,should not marry toge∣ther. an order was taken, that no Tribe should marry with another Tribe, but every Tribe should marry with whom he list, among his own Tribe and Kindred. And so the Daughters of Zelophehad were married to their Father's Brothers Sons, which were of the kindred of Manasses the Son of Joseph, by which means their inheritance remained still in the Tribe and kindred of their Father. Zenas was first an Interpreter of Moses Law,Tit. 3.13. and afterward became an earnest Preacher of the Gospel of Christ. Of whom Paul writeth to Titus (Bishop of Crete) that whensoever Zenas departed from him, he should bring him on his Journey with all diligence, and that nothing should be lacking unto him. His words to Titus were these: Bring Zenas the Lawyer and Apollos on their Journey diligently, that nothing be lacking to them. Zenas, Living. Zipporah,Exod. 2.21, &c. was the Daughter of Raguel, Priest of Ma∣dian and Wife to Moses, by whom she conceived and bare him two Sons:Eleazer was not circumci∣sed, & therefore GOD was angry with Moses, saith Lyra. The one Gerson and the other Elea∣zer. And as she went with Moses her Husband toward the Land of Egypt, by the way in her Inne, she took a sharp Knife and cut away the foreskin of her Son, and cast it at his feet, saying: Thou art indeed a blou∣dy husband unto me; she said a bloudy husband because of the circumcision. Zipporah, A mourning. Zibah,2 Sam. 9. was one of King Saul's old Servants, after whose death he belonged to Mephibosheth the Son of Jo∣nathan, and had the oversight of all his Master's Lands, which David had restored unto him, and the gover∣nance also of Micha his Master's Son.16.1, 2, &c. This Ziba (in∣tending to deceive his Master) what time as David
fled from Absalom his Son, and was a little past the top of Mount Olivet, met him with a couple of Asses sad∣led, and upon them two hundred loaves, and one hun∣dred bunches of Raisins and an hundred of dryed Figgs and a bottel of Wine. And when the King saw him, he said: What meaneth thou with these Ziba? They be (quoth he) Asses for the King's Houshold to ride on, and Bread and Fruit for the young Men to eat, and Wine that such as be faint in the Wilderness may drink. Then said the King, where is thy Master Mephibosheth? Zaba said, behold, he tarrieth still at Jerusalem, for he said: This day shall the house of Israel restore me the Kingdom of my Father. Then said David to Zi∣ba: Behold, all are thine that pertained to Mephibo∣sheth. Then said Ziba: I do homage unto thee, I be∣seech thee I may find grace in thy sight, my Lord, O King. Thus Ziba deceived his Master, and got his Land from him: But when the King was returned again to Jerusalem and perceived by Mephibosheth that Ziba had wrongfully accused him, he commanded the Land to be divided between them. Ziba, Fulness, or an Oath. Zimri was the servant of Ela the Son of Baasha King of Israel, and Captain of half his Chariots, who,1 King. 16.9.10, &c. or his Master had reigned full two years, conspired against him and slew him, as he was in Tirzah drink∣ing till he was drunken in the house of Arza Steward of his House in Tirzah. And raigned in his stead in the time of whose reign (which was but seven days) he slew all the house of Baasha, leaving neither Kinsman nor friend of his alive. At this time had Ela the King an Host of Men lying at the siege of Gibbethon a City of the Philistines. And when they heard of the Treason of Zimri, and that he raigned in the stead of Ela, they (with one consent) made Amri their Captain, King, who then went and besieged Zimri where he lay in the
City of Tirzah: And when Zimri saw that the City must needs be won, then he (lest they should take him a∣live and put him to a shameful death) burnt himself and the King's house with fire, and so dyed. Zimri, a singing, or making melody. Zorobabel,Esdras 3. & 4. cap. the Son of Salathiel, with all the Jewes which were delivered from Babylon by Cyprus, returned to Jerusalem, where they repaired again the City and Temple of God, and renewed their Laws, though they were sometime hindred and lett by their ene∣mies about them. Zorobabel, Free from confusion, or strange. FINIS.
