P2589 99832822 37297
Quaer's to be propounded to the most ingenious of each County in my Travels through England. IS there any eminent Mathematitian in this County? ha's He found out any thing new, in his celestiall, or other ob∣servations? Know you of any thing unusuall in the Aire hereabout? in the Winds? or in any Tempest that ha's happend here? Is there any place where the Winde breathes continually forth of the Earth? or know you of any considerable Eccho in this County? Enquire of Seamen. Concerning Navigation, of the most considerable Currents a∣bout England, of Tides, Eddy's of water, of the Saltness of the Sea, why not alike every where? of the Gulf between England and Normandy; of Lands, Citys and Castles drowned by the Sea: of any strange shells, fishes, Herbs; Stones, Sands, or any other unusuall thing that they have observed on the cost of Eng∣land. Enquire of them for the stone Sagda. Know you of any strange fountaines in this County, such as break forth but now and then, as against a dearth of Corne, Warr, Plague &c? Such as Ebb and flow with the Sea? Have you any petrifying Waters? ancient Aqueducts? or Water∣works? Rivers that have any thing unusuall in them, such as run underground? have they any fish peculiar to them? Is there any Medicinall waters, of an unusuall colour, smell, or tast? or any other thing strange attending Water? Have you any Sands, or Earth of use in this County, such as sands for the Glass houses, Marles, fullers Earth, Boles, Peats, Ochres, Tobaccopipe clay's, Clay's famous for brick or Tile or other Earths remarqueable for their colour, weight, smell, tast? Is there any Coles found here? Is there any Mountaines in this County noted for any thing or Caves in the Earth? Barrwes, or any thing unusuall attending the Land? Have you any Minerals digged in this County, as stone coale jet, Amber, or doth any Naphta or Petroleum, swim on the water or distill from any rock hereabout? Is there any Quicksilver, Sulphur, Arsenick, Orpiment, Calamy Stone, Salt, Allum, vitriol, or Niter, dugg or made in this County? Know you of any Stones not common in this County, such as Hya∣cinths, Emraulds, Agats, Jaspers, Chrystalls, Sparrs, Marble, Man∣ganese,
Magnets, Goldstones, Is there any stones to be found here ruriously work't by nature? either like any living creature, viz. Oisters, Cockles, Escallops, Serpents &c? or like inanimate things, as starrs drops of water, Suger Plumms, figs, a wheele, a Cheese, Letters of the Alphabet, or Geomatricall figures? Do you know of any place here about where wood is turned into stone? or of any Quarrys of free stone, Millstones, Gravestones. Have you any gold or Silver found in this County, any Copper Iron, Tin or Led ores, any Bismuth, Antimony Bell-metall, Zink, Chrysocolla or native green, native blue, Cinnaber, Lignum fos∣ssile, Amianthus, or fossile teeth? or any kind of ore unknowne to you? Know you of any strange or prodigious trees, either in their, growth, fruits, leaves, or time of blossoming? Is there any Tobacco, Saf∣forn, Carrawayes, Samphire, Calamus Aromaticus or any other unusuall plant plentifully growing here? Have you any vineyards, Curious Gardens for rare plants, fruits, flowers &c? Ha's there any body here about found out any new improvement of Land, or other curiosity in husbandry? Know you of any body in this County that is studious in infects an observer of the works of Bees, Silkwormes? Know you of any strange Birds or fishes that are peculiar to this County, or of others that are never found in it? Know you of any strange beast, Sheep, Dog, Hog, Horse &c, of any unusual quality, or mixt generation? of a great Age or Wonderfull bigness? Know you of any strange qualified Man, of any body that has been the Inventor of any profitable or curious Art? Know you of any prodigious births, numerous ofsprings, Hermaphrodites, Men extreamly alike; Men of prodigious Memorys, of extraordina∣ry stature, either in excesse or defect? of unusuall fasting, sleep, or Dreames that have strangely come to passe? of men of ex∣treame Age, of sudden deaths? of any that have been dead and raised to life againe? Know you of any thing remarqueable that attends a family in their lives or death? Is there any ancient se∣pulchers of men of Gigantick stature, Roman Generalls or o∣thers that are notable? Ha's there been any certain apparition? or Know you of any Monstruous creatures to be seen in this Countrey? any strange Customs now in use in this place? or any strange confusion in Consanguinity or affinity?
Doe you know of any Extraordinary Engines, Stupendous or curi∣ous building either in the whole or parts? Is there any body here that ha's any thing peculiar to Himself in Clockwork pain∣ting, Graveing, Etching, dying, Weaving, or any other handi∣craft? Finde you hereabout any ancient Mony, Urnes, lamps, Lachryma∣torys, or other ancient Brittish, Roman or Saxon antiquitys? and whether any Gentleman hereabout have any such in his pos∣ssion? What words do you know peculiar to this County? Is there any person hereabout that has any ancient Manuscript bookes? or any other rarity's of Antiquity? Finally you are desired that whatever you meet with (worthy no∣tice) in your reading, or converse in the World, upon any of these subjects, to take notice of it, and transmitt it to the un∣dertaker of this define accordingly as you shall be directed; for which all persons shall receive due acknowledgment according to the merrits of the information, by Their faithful Servant R. P.
