p546 12356749 60152
CHRISTS GRACIOUS INTENTIONS OF Peace and Mercy towards sinners, freely tendred. TOGETHER With the necessity of observing the season, and accepting the offer of Peace and Reconciliation, while it may be attained. Evidenced in a Sermon at St.Pauls, London. Martii 3. 1661. From Luke 19. verse 41, 42. By Rich. Parr. D. D. Pastor of Camerwell. Heb. 2, 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great Salvation! 2 Cor. 6.2 Behold, now is the accepted time, Behold; now is the day of Salvation.. Qui voluntatem Dei spreverunt invitantem, Voluntatem Dei sentient vindicantem. Aug. London, Printed for Nathanael Brook, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the Sign of the Angel in Corn-Hill, 1661.
TO THE READER. I Have no Design in publishing this Ser∣mon, but Thy good that readest it. When I preached at Saint Pauls, the Text put me in mind
of Jerusalem; and the sad aspect it had on Lon∣don, made me the more earnest and particular in the application. It had hen the Lot (as all pub∣lique Discourses have) to be censured as mens hu∣mours and apprehensions are, which are various; and they judge of things for the most part as they af∣fect: But with some among those many present then, this Sermon had successe and acceptance. To the Truths in the Doctrines;
some bore Testimony, and others were convinced; And I am sure it concern∣ed every one, as well as any one. And now, Reader, you see I make the Dedication to none but thee, because none but he that will vouchsafe the serious per∣usall, is capable of it. I beg not Patronage from any body; but if the Truths therein, and the Cause in hand, and ho∣nest Intentions cannot se∣cure it, and justifie its
walk abroad, let it fall; and if it fall into thy hand, heart, and practice, it can∣not be lost. The Designe of this Sermon was, at preaching, and now is in publishing, To let every one know as well as London, 1. How gracious the Lord Jesus is toward poor sinners, And how ill he takes it, to be slighted in his offers of grace, and Termes of peace and re∣conciliation, when sinners most need it —. And
2. To give warning from the Lord, That you let not slip your sea∣son and day of grace, and saving mercy, while you may have it; Alas, how ill must it go with that soul, when the day is lost as to it, and the merci∣full offer withdrawn! And truly, were it not a mat∣ter of the highest concern∣ment in the whole world, that herein is treated of; I would not have let it gone beyond that Numerous Congregation,
where 'twas preached. But considering that deliberate Reading, and serious Consideration may much improve the use more then hasty Preach∣ing; I am at length pre∣vailed withall by some devout soules importuni∣ty, to let it come forth without any more or lesse than what was deliver∣ed, except what it got or lost in the presse, which I must not own. And now if the open∣ing and applying these two
dostrines may he accep∣table to the Reader: The first manifesting Christs reall, free, and most gracious intentions toward sinners, in design∣ing their conversion and eternall salvation, most heartily, most passio∣nately, most powerful∣ly, and fully, on his part. This is clearely pro∣ved: And then the se∣cond which evidenceth the necessity of improving the mercy in due time, by
accepting the offer, and complying with Christs de∣mands on his own terms, in the day of grace, as it is the greatest concern∣ment in the world to eve∣ry one that makes any reckoning, whether he be saved or damned eter∣nally. If those Two Points which are here discussed, will draw the Reader on to the perusall with an honest heart, and that he thinks them of any moment, let him read
on, and consider; If not, then lay the Sermon by, and despise thy mer∣cies, lose thy day, cast away thy soul, lye down in sorrow, and lament thy ir∣reparable and unrecovera∣ble losse. But if Thou hast a mind to be happy indeed, and saved eter∣nally; Then, whether thou read any more of this or not, let me prevaile with thee, as thou valuest thy eternall State, delay no long∣er; put not off again
any more the intreaties of Christ, and the offers made thee in the Gospel, and brought to thee in the name of the Lord Jesus, by them who are intrusted with the conditions of Re∣conciliation, and are treat∣ing with you in the Mi∣nistery to this end, and calling upon you to accept in time, what may do you good for ever; And doe not (ah, doe not) put Christ and his Mini∣sters to say of thee, and mourn over thee, with
an O that thou hadst known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong to thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes. Know therefore thy day, embrace Grace while ten∣dred, make up thy peace with God while it may be made, lay in for thy inte∣rest by Christ, lay up treasure in Heaven; Let not Christ go, force him not away from thy Soul, as the Jewes did from their
City, but close with him, cleave to him stedfastly; take him for thy Saviour, and for thy Lord, leave him not, and he will never leave thee comfortlesse; let thy sinnes go, cast them all away this day, let not one day passe away again without thy hearty closing with Christ; let him rule in thee, and over thee; im∣prove the day of visitati∣on, and be happy; re∣solve upon a godly life, make Religion thy chiefest care, and the glory of
God and his free grace, in the salvation of thy preci∣ous soul, thy aime and ultimate end; and lay to heart the things belonging to thy peace: Read the rest, and consider all, and God blesse it to thee. Thy friend and Servant, in the faith of Jesus. R. P.
Luk. 19.41, 42. And when he was come neer, he beheld the City, and wept o∣ver it. Sayings, If thou had'st known, e∣ven thou, at least in this thy. day, the things that belong unto thy peace! But now, they are hid from thine eyes. THis Scripture readd is a nar∣rative, about our blessed Lord Christ: both of what Hee did, and what Hee said, in the day of his flesh, a little before his departure hence to his Glory a∣gain. And I hope the reading of the Text hath already prepared your attention; and, may the opening of it, and Application, affect your hearts!
The story is Sad in the Letter, weeping and lamentation; but more Dolefull in the Event. It ends with a deplorable reflexion of misery upon the Jews, for refusing their mercy, together with their King and Saviour. Christ meant them all good, but they would not have it; they would have none of his good things. Christ wept over them, and sought them, with tears: they cared not, they regarded not. He intrea∣ted them, again and again; but no Importunity, nor love, nor mercy, could win them, all is cast away upon them. They refused and by refusing, grieved the heart of Christ, and undid themselves for ever; they lost their day, and lost their peace, and lost their souls. God had sent unto them, his Servants the Prophets, formerly to treat with them about the things of their Peace and Eternall happiness, things of the greatest concernment imaginable; but all is one to them, they were taken up with other im∣ployments:
And because the ser∣vants of the high God, were so Im∣portunate, these were violent; they did not only slight the message, but they beat the Prophets, and abused them, and killed them. 'Tis often the lot of those who come in the name of the Lord, on Heavenly Errands; to be most slighted, and most abused: so then; so now. Now Christ himself appears, the Saviour of the World, in Person, from the bosome of Glory; and Hee comes with tenders of the riche'st mercies, and dearest love that ever was heard of; draws neer, bespeaks their acceptance: but alas, the sad∣dest story that ever was told, Hee, the King of Glory, is rejected too; His offers slighted, as wel as his ser∣vants: The Jews will be Jews still, they'l have none of Christ nei∣ther; no peace from him, no re∣demption nor reconciliation by him; We will not (say they) have this man to reign over us, Vers. 14. Poor wretches! Did you know whom, did you know what yee re∣fused?
You will not have Christ, and with him Grace and Salvati∣on: Why, you shall not then. Hea∣ven shall not be forced upon you against your wills; remember that I would, but you would not: Here is the price of your Redemption, and Salvation brought home, and laid at your doors freely and fully; but if you will not open, and stretch forth your hand to lay hold on it, while 'tis here at hand, some o∣thers will hereafter be glad of what you refuse; you shall go without it: and when I am gone, and the door of mercy and grace is shut against you, you may knock but in vain. You will then wish (Oh) that we could but see one of the daies of the Son of man,Luk. 17.22. and ye shall not see it: For, now they are hid from thine eyes. This is the cutting Sentence, this is the saddest part of the story: for the hardness of their hearts Christ was grieved, knowing well enough, what would come of it. And when he saw them so indeed, Hee wept
and said: If thou had'st known, e∣ven thou, in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace; but now they are hid. Now, though there be a win∣ning oratory in every accent of this Text, in every motion, and in eve∣ry expression, and Oh, how power∣full was it, and lively when Christ himself acted, and said it; who did, as never man did; and spake, as ne∣ver man spake; Yet because these things were done, and spoken at a distance from us, a good while a∣goe in the Letter of the Text:Dum nar∣rat Scrip∣tura gestum prodit My∣steriū, &c. I shall let that alone, and consider it in the mystery of this Text, and so much as belongs to us, I shall ap∣ply. These outward actions of Christs Body, and words of his mouth, are but so many expressions, and no∣tices, by which men might perceive the heart of Christ towards sinners; all, as well as those; us, as well as them: for Christ hath the same heart still in Heaven, that he had on Earth; He is brim-full of love,
pitty, and compassion; and men on earth, have the same disposition still as they had, alwaies sinning, alwaies resisting; and except the Lord prevail with us by his Word and Spirit, in the day of his mercy, we shall miss our happiness as they did theirs. Do not say or think, that then was then, and now is now; as though there were, and are, severall Dispen∣sations and severall Administrati∣ons, touching the means and man∣ner of Conversion. No, Christ was then, and Christ is now; then in in the flesh, now in the Spirit, and Ministery; Christ spake to them himself: He speaks to you, by us: See 2 Cor. 5.20. Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ: as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christs stead, be yereconciled unto God: Which is the very same thing the Text imports; that, as Christ did treat with them about their Reconciliation and Salvation: So we with you, in his Name, be∣seech and intreat you, in this your
day, to lay to heart, to know the things of your peace; And if you do not hear us and yeild, but do as they did, Slight, Resist, and Diso∣bey: it will be your sad case as it was theirs; Mercy will be hid from your eyes, and Salvation from your souls, as much as if Christ himself were now speaking to you, and weeping over you, and bleeding before your eyes, Luk. 10.16. He that heareth you heareth me, he that despiseth you despiseth me. By this time (Sirs) you easily perceive what the design of your Monitor is this day with you, from this deportment, and this saying of our Saviour recorded in the Text. 'Tis to let you know (that you may in time consider) how graci∣ous the Lord Jesus is toward sin∣ners; and how ill he takes it, if this mercy be despised when offered. And to give you warning from the Lord, that you let not slip the opportunity, for then it must go ill with your souls, you will be the
loosers: Christ may loose the Ho∣nor of your Conversion, but you will loose the happiness of Recon∣ciliation and Salvation. The business we have in hand is of highest concernment; life and death are laid before us this day; Oh that you would in this your day consider the things which be∣long unto your peace, before they be hid from your eyes. I have two Doctrines ready from this Text, to serve up this design unto you. The first, to evidence Christs re∣all, and gracious intentions towards sinners. The second, to evidence the Ne∣cessity of Improving the mercy in due time, by accepting the offer, and complying with Christs de∣mands, on the day of grace, as it is the greatest concernment in the world to us. Then next, and what we have else to do, is, to comply with grace and mercy, and reduce all to pra∣ctice this very day, without any
more delay or Procrastination, and this wil be urged in the Application. And that we may with lesse dif∣ficulty believe th truths propoun∣ded, and without haesitation con∣sent, and imbrace the mercy offer∣ed, Let us together review the expressions in the text, and then we may perceive the mind and meaning of our blessed Lord, by what he hath done, and by what he hath said; to evidence to us what desire he hath that poor sinners should partake of that he graci∣ously offereth, and so make peace, and so make happy. And while we descant upon the words, think with your selves they are as much to you, as any others; Jerusalem the City then, London now, as great, as rich, as sinfull, as wicked; Christ in person there, in Spirit here; Christ was near to them, as near to us; he beheld that City, and beholds this; he sought them, and intreated them; and he seeks us, and beseecheth us; They had an opportunity to be
happy, so have we. And surely if there can be any thing, or way to expresse an infinite love, a tender care, a most hearty longing desire of the salvation of sinners, it is here implyed. He drew near, and beheld and wept. He] the Lord of life, full of grace, and full of pity, and full of power, to help poor sinners to par∣don, to redeem, to sanctifie to save. Near] he was ready for it, they come not out to him, he comes up to them, brings salvation to their door; 'twas Christs love, and sinners misery that brought him so near. Beheld] looked wistly on the City, he saw the stately structures, the rich ornaments, the soft ray∣ments, the numerous multitudes, their outward flourish and gaiety of Religious professions; and with∣all, he saw their manners too, and theirinside  as in a mirrour; what they had been, what they were then for frame of Spirit, and what would come to passe, if
not prevented in time? Wept] , he was broken with grief; he shed tears, he wept: Quest. But why did Christ sor∣row, and grieve, and weep. Answ. Not that the City was so richly laden with outward bles∣sings, Christ grudged not their plenty, nor their peace; if they would have been good, they might have been great, and rich, with∣out offence: but he was grieved for them, that they were so poor, so blind, so naked in spirituall things; they had prosperous bo∣dies, but starved soules: very poli∣tique, and very proud; but very fools and unwise about the unum necessarium. He shed his teares over them, because they shed none for themselves; they remembred not their past sins, nor heeded their present opportunity, nor fore∣saw, nor believed their future mi∣series; they laid none of these things to heart, but wilfully refu∣sed their recovery, they cared not for all these things, nor for Recon∣ciliation,
nor pardon, nor delive∣rance, nor Christ, nor grace; they trusted in their own strength, riches, wisdom, priviledges, with the form of godlinesse; but as for reconciliation by Christ, inward holinesse, conversion, and the power of christianity, these things they looked not after. Hence it was that Christ wept, for the hardnesse of their hearts, and inconsideratenesse: Alas! how too too like those, are the men of this present world after all the care and paines with them: so they may be, and so they may have what they would for outwards, what care they? How little are they concerned, for soul-saving things? and is not this for a lamentation and weeping? Again, Christ beheld the City and wept over it. Christ had them in present view, together with their present pro∣sperity, their intolerable blindness, hardnesse, unbelief, and stupendious supine neglect of the means of their
recovery, on this very day which was their last day of grace: And this was matter of sadnesse. Secondly, And he had in pro∣spect their future ruine and destru∣ction, and this drew tears from the Lord of life; he would, but they would not; he would have given them grace and pardon, and pre∣vented their ruine, but they would not; he would have healed and sa∣ved them from that day, but they would not. Hence it is that Christ wept, both for their present hard∣nesse, and future destruction. Alas! Christ wept not so much for the destruction and down∣fall of those stately Buildings; he could have raised such ones and better, God could quickly have made them as rich again, though they had lost all by fire, and pillage: but alas, alas they re∣fused and rejected such a Lord and Saviour, such grace and rich salvation, which God had not the like to give them again; they might have lived as happily any
where else, where Christ and sal∣vation were to be had; but where could they find another Saviour, and another such day, when these were finally lost? Wept over it, saying] His love to them would not let him depart so, but pleads again with them; he'le try again whether his lan∣guage can yet prevaile, seeing his tears cannot: for this once he be∣speaks them pathetically; why poor soules, you are now upon the point of making or marring, you may be happy this day, and for ever after; oh how happy may you be, and blessed! And, if you mark it, his speech is like that of a most tender parent, beholding a beloved child wound∣ed to death by his own hand, and wallowing in his blood, and would not be helped, but rejects the means of recovery; grief gives not pas∣sage to words; oh how doth Christ grieve over these wilfull misera∣ble sinners, and weeping saith, scarce can he speak for sorrow,
bemoanes them perishing, with broken words, interrupted with sighs and groans. Hadst thou but known, even thou] So bad as thou hast been, yet (even thou) after all thy unkindnesse to me, thy contempt, thy stubborn∣nesse, thy sin, and thy folly, thy insolent carriage toward my Mi∣nisters and messengers; yet after all this thy wickedesse, and abuse of my patience, and long-suffe∣rance. O yet, yet, after all, if thou hast in this thy day laid all these things to heart, and considered who it is that now weeps over thee, that now speaks to thee; who it is, and what, this day, is freely offered thee; if thou wouldst lay to heart and imbrace yet the things belonging to thy peace, while I am now speaking in this last hour of this thy day; this is thy day (Hic dies est tuus) where∣in yet thou mayest lay the founda∣tion of happinesse, and partake of those things which are matters of the highest concernment, ten thou∣sand
times more worth then all the pleasures, the honours, the riches of this world, put all toge∣ther. And if thou come in before this day be closed up with night, ere this Sun be set upon thee, and this light withdrawn from thine eyes; O happy mayst thou be: But if thou wilt not,Acts 17.31 in this thy day ac∣cept of thy recovery, but put it off and refuse it still as thou hast done, O then, another day will come (non tuus) not thine for mercy, but a day of vengeance, Gods day of punishment, wherein thou shalt pay most dearly for all thy folly; a long day of Eternity, of La∣mentation, of mourning, of an∣guish and torment, without reme∣dy, for that thou hast lost thy day, and that mercy intended, and most seriously offered to thee. So much for explanation of so much of this text, which we are sure belongs unto us. Pray God, the latter clause, that killing part∣ing blow, which doom'd that peo∣ple
to their deserved losse, — But now are they hid from thine eyes, may never passe on any soul here present. Whose ears can hear that sentence without Tingling; whose heart can consider this and not tremble? But now are they hid from thine eyes. This was long a coming on them, but it came sure∣ly at last; mercy removed from them, misery came upon them. From this carriage of our bles∣sed Lord Jesus toward those sinful people, wherein he expressed so much care, so much love toward them while recoverable, and so much pity and commiseration, when lost and undone; This first OBSERVATION is most evident, and shall be resol∣ved into this infallible doctrine of saving truth, most certain and most acceptable, That God, who is the lover of soules, and the giver of grace, doth really, in and by Christ, wish the con∣version and salvation of sinful men; and doth not design, nor delight in
their sinning nor destruction. This truth is a genuine deducti∣on from the text, and needs no fur∣ther proof, then its own Evidence, 'tis as certain as good, and as true as the goodnesse, faithfulnesse, and gracious nature of God can make it; and that is, Eternally true; no man need doubt of this, who will believe any thing worthy of God. Yet for further Evidence, that no poor soul among you, may re∣tain any hard or unkind thoughts of God, or reserve your sins, and neglect your endeavours upon any suspition of an Invincible necessity, of continuing in a state of sinning by a secret decree, Inferring an in∣evitable obligation to Sinne and Damnation, but rather conclude, not against the holy and gracious God, but your selves; that if you continue in your Rebellion, and Sin, and be at last cast into hell; that 'tis long of your selves, your own wilfulnesse doth procure it. Be∣cause you refuse the grace offer∣ed,
and to obey when called, and denied subjection unto the Lord Jesus, and resisted the motions of Gods Spirit, and despised admoni∣tion, and slighted the means God hath appointed for thy Instruction, Conviction, and Conversion: Hence conclude, a sinners destruction is from Himself, God disclaimes it; he is full of mercy, and he is ready to shew his good will, to pardon poor sinners when penitent; and to receive them when they come; and to go forth to meet the vilest pro∣digal at the first step homeward. See how God hath declared himself this way, so plainly, and so freely, and so fully to guard this truth in the doctrine from the least Imputation; and to open a Door of hope for poor sinking despondent penitents, to relieve them, and in∣courage them, in their returning to him homeward, Ezek. 33.11. say unto them, As I live saith the Lord, I have, no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his way and live;
turn ye, turn ye from your evill wayes, why will ye dye? and if God doth not mean in good ear∣nest, and design the conversion and salvation of poor sinners. What mean those so often and se∣rious invitations, Matth. 11.28. why doth Christ say, he that com∣eth to me I will in no wise cast out, John 6.37. and why doth he up∣braid them, Ye will not come to me that ye might have life; Joh. 5.40. and Jerusalem,Matth. 23.37. How often would I have gathered you, and Isai 1.2, 3. why doth he wish sinners had harkned to his voyce, Psal. 81.13, 14. If God did not desire it, why doth he lay such strict commands upon pain of his high displeasure; To believe and Repent, and turn that they may live? What means Gods pleading and arguing with sinners, but to con∣vince them? What was the end of hrists undertaking for the world, but that by him men might be sa∣ved? he tasted death for every man,Jo. 3.16, 17. Heb. 2.9. and to convince all men
throughly of Gods good will and pleasure, and that there is no dis∣simulation in the Lord as touch∣ing this matter. He hath converted and saved some of every nation, of every sort, of every degree; as great sinners, as was; to shew that he excludes none from mercy, that come unto Christ and believe, and turn from sinning to holy living. And consider how the Lord fits all means and useth all expressi∣ons to effect what he really in∣tends, trying with their hearts, informing their mindes, incline¦ing their wills, stirring up their affections, to reform their lives, that they may be saved. And if God did not in good earnest in∣tend that men should be left with∣out excuse, why did he send his Son into the world, but to save sinners, to call them to repentance, and to save them that were lost? and his Spirit to raise those fallen? and his word to guide unto Salva∣tion? why doth he continue the Means? why doth he send forth his
Ministers, and servants, to Invite to the supper of the Lamb? why doth he furnish them with severall gifts, and put such arguments into their mouthes, to convince and perswarde; and such zeal and fer∣vency into their Prayers, and pow∣er and life into their Sermons and Indefatigablenesse into their stu∣dies, and Labours, and such Cou∣rage into their Spirits; that no re∣proaches, nor menaces, nor denials, makes them give out? Line upon Line, Sermon on Sermon; and though they often times see little successe in all their labours and pains with sinners, yet again and again cast their net, and sow their good seed; doth not all this shew that God would lose none of your precious souls, but that you should all come to the knowledge, of the truth, that you might be saved. Why doth he in his gracious providence open the doores of the Sanctuary, for all comers, and send labourers into his harvest, and gives us dayes of meeting, to con∣sult
with God, and treat about the great affairs of our soules, and here to woo us with the cords of a man, the bands of love, if he did not love us? what need all this adoe to prevaile with men, even by dis∣pensations so suitable to Rationall soules, were it not that God doth delight in, and desire the conver∣sion of poor sinners, and would not have us misse our Day of accepta∣tion with the Lord? Again, can you tell what is the meaning of all those secret convi∣ctions and touches of conscience, all those crosses and afflictions, and a thousand divine Arts God useth, but that God doth leave no way untryed, to weane and to tame worldlings, and refractory sinners, to bring them home? what could I have done for my vine-yard, Isai. 5. So that 'tis beyond all dispute, that God is serious and willing. and that he is not the cause of any mans sin or perdition? or doth he desire it, either through want of love, pity, or supply of grace,
or that any secret Decree doth put any barre to mans Conversion pri∣marily, and of absolute Determi∣nation, untill all means and mercies be contemned, and all motions and touches of heart be stifled and resisted: surely if God meant to damn men within the call and line of the Gospel, upon the ac∣count meerly of absolute Domini∣on, he need not, he would not, deal as he doth in this gracious manner; no, God hath determined in his word, that if sinners will stand out, and go on in a way of contradicti∣on to his Lawes and will; they shall fall upon the edge, and be cut asunder with their own weapon, and perish by their own iniquity: and after all, God will be justified in their destruction: and sinners that will not lay to heart the things of their peace, in the day wherein God is stretching out his hands in mercy, then the in day of Retribu∣tion, and account, they shall not have one word to say, either by way of excuse for themselves,
or blame on God; they shall not be able to say they would, but God would not; but this they shall be forc't to confesse; God would, Christ would, his Ministers would, but alas, I would not. Quest. And hence you have an answer ready to that question,Quest. How comes it to passe (if God be so de∣sirous of mans conversion, and sal∣vation) that so many are damned? 'Tis easily resolved, that is,Answ. 'tis long of themselves they do not come unto Christ, they will not come to me, Jo. 5.40. they did not, they do not, they will not believe, repent, and obey the Gospel in time, they either refuse the offer, lose their day, or perform not the conditions in the Covenant of mercy and grace, indispenfibly required to salvation; the means are compre∣hended, and conditions on mans part established by Gods will, as the end is. If sinners will decline the way, or go contrary to the rule, they may not in reason expect the end.
Men would be saved by grace, but men will not be ruled by graces, Tit. 2.11, 12. there is the summe of all. Gods free grace, and mans whole duty must go together. 'Tis true; works perfect, in defective, and intire (as under the first demands of God) are not now our conditions, here is our cannot Indeed: but what the Gospel requires and grace effects, this is your Condition. And if we believe not, repent not effectually, and live not a sanctified life, holy, just, sober, chast, charitable, we act against Gods will; and forfeit our interest in Christ purchase and redemption: and wilfully and foolishly throw away our souls, and so perish eternally; for God hath said, Ezek. 18.21.Ezek. 18.21.30.32. But if the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all my statutes, he shall surely live; he shall not dye; he shall save his soul alive: because he considereth, ver. 30. Repent, and turn your selves, so iniquity shall not be your
ruine, for ver. 32. I have no pleasure in the death of him that Dieth, that is damned, saith the Lord God, wherefore turn ye and live. There is a quaint distinction found out by some body, I cannot well tell any use there is of it, unless it be to reconcile some mens Doctrines and their Applications, while they tell them in Thesi one thing, and in Hypothesi another: and if the di∣stinction had never been, it had never been wanted. ('tis this) That according to Gods declared will, God would have sinners come to repentance, and faith, and holi∣nesse, and be saved: but he hath a secret will, by which he would not have them either do so, or be saved. Though he speaks sinners fairly, and presseth them earnestly, yet he wills no such matter, but their damnation; and decreed this without respect to sin, ere the men had sinned. Alas, what a fine representation doth this make of the tue God? How much is God and man behold∣ing
to this distinction; Why? what is it lesse then to render the glori∣ous God so to be, as no honest fair dealing man would be accounted (i. e.) to speak one thing and mean another, to shew much love, yet intend much hatred. No cer∣tainly, God means what he speaks, and if any man perish, (as thou∣sands do) is not because they were forc't to damnation, but be∣cause they chose it; that is, they will not be saved in Gods own way; and God hath decreed, (for he hath declared) that no man shall be saved, but he that believeth in his Son, and obeyeth him in his heart and life,1 Jo. 5.11. Mark 16.16. Jo. 3. ult. Mark 16.16. And methinks this plain dealing with men, answers best the glory of Gods power and justice, grace and mercy; And if any will say that the glory of Gods justice is seen in the damnation of sinners, I say so too, and of that glory God will have a great deal: for there are but a few will be saved, and what will become of the rest then?
Well let alone, let secret things belong to God, 'tis his Prero∣gative to reserve that to Himself,Deut. 29. which we are not fit to know: but those things that are revealed belong to us, and this that we speak of is such; and then we may safely conclude what we have in the doctrine delivered. But would you know the REA∣SONS why God is so abundantly gracious to poor sinners, that de∣serve no such things from him? The Reason of this a founded in Gods own nature and will,Reason. the foundation is in Himself, the mo∣tive from himself, his free and li∣beral grace; we are only the sub∣jects of misery, and objects of pity, no worth or comelinesse in us, that wallow in our blood and filth:Ezek: 16. Ps. 145.8, 9 he will shew himself first ths way in mercy, because he will shew mercy; he is good to all, his mercy is over all his works; and you may spell the reason from the Text-Let∣ters of his name, Exod 34.6. The Lord, the Lord God, mercifull and
gracious, long-suffering, and abun∣dant in goodnesse and truth, keep∣ing mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. And now, who shall ask again, why doth God do thus? seeing God is not bound to give a reason of his doings? is it not enough for us poor worthlesse dust, that God hath revealed himself to be thus? Yet secondly,2. Reas. you shall find the fountain of this stream of love pity, and mercy in Christ Jesus,Eph. 3.11, 12. 2 Tit. 1.15 Heb. 2.9. Jo. 3.16. Eph. 3.11, 12. according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord, and 2 Tim. 1.9, 10. accord∣ing to his own purpose, and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began; and his coming into the world was to ex∣ecute this purpose, 1 Tim. 2.15. he tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. God so loved the world, that he sent his own Son into the world, that whosoever believeth on him, should not perish but have everlasting life, Jo. 3.10.
Christ the foundation of this love and grace, and the executio∣ner of this purpose and decree; For the Sonne of man is come to save that which was lost, that is, Mankinde: Matth. 18.11.Matth. 18.11. And he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance, 2 Pet. 3.9.2 Pet. 3.9. this is reason enough, aske no far∣ther. So that now, Sirs, you have the first point proved, make no que∣stion of it, but believe it assuredly, and give God the praise of his free grace, and admire the great∣nesse of his goodnesse toward the children of men. And consider withall, the great patience, and long-sufferance, and forbearance of our gracious God, flowing from this, his rich goodesse to thee poor sinner in Christ, as the Emanations from that fountain:Rom: 2.4. which on pur∣pose is lengthened out unto thee, to lead to Repentance, and Refor∣mation, as a testimony of that rea∣lity in Gods heart, that he willeth
our salvation, and not our destru∣ction. Therefore, sinners, oh, let not this grace and favour be abused, despise it not, accept it with all readinesse, put not off the intrea∣ties of the Lord, do not say of grace, reconciliation, reformation; go for this time and come again, lest you never hear more of it; but it be hid quite from your eyes: but while a prize is put into your hand, but your heart to it, why should you be fools? And this brings us to a second OBSERVATION. Now in the next place, as this doctrin from the Text hath open∣ed a door of hope to poor sinners, upon their thoughts of returning to God, so as the Smoaking flax may not be quenched, nor the bruised reed be quite broken; but may receive flame and strength from the breath of mercy, and power of God: So I must shut the door of presumption upon loose and care∣lesse
livers, for such there are, that make no other use of Gods grace and favour, but to abuse it, by making it serve their continuance in sin, (i. e.) No man may rest in Gods mercy in a way of sinning, no more then despaire in a way of re∣penting. That men may neither depend on their free-will to be saved when they please, as though they would command grace at pleasure, or be saved on their own account: and that men may not dare to put off or delay their opportunities, but take their day, and in it lay to heart the things which belong unto their peace, before it be hid from their eyes, for when once he day is gone, and that grace tendred to thee, is retired to be bosome of Christ; it will be too late, too late. Therefore this Text gives us a doctrine of Caution, and Premu∣nition, thus. That if sinners would be parta∣kers of the mercy so really intended,2. Doct. and things which belong unto their
peace mercifully offered, they must in due time lay to heart in the day of visitation, imbrace the offers, close with Christ, Repent and turn from their sins, and serve and love the Lord Jesus heartily, or else they shall have none uf it; you lose your day, you lose your mercy, you lose your soules. Hadst thou known in this thy day, &c. but now— They are hid from thine eyes.— This Item and Caution in the Text, is as clear and evident as the other; Christ wept for the hard∣nesse of their hearts, while reco∣verable, and our Lord bemoaned them for their misery, when past recovery; they had their day once, and lost that day, and 'twas hid from their eyes for ever after. God hath, and doth really in∣tend mercy, and as seriously doth he tender it some time or other, and to all without exception; if sinners had eyes to see it, and hearts to consider it when offered: but God hath set boundaries and limits
to the time, so long will I wait to be gracious; All the day long have I stretched out my hands to a gain-saying people: God will visit thy soul; man must wait and observe; our times are in Gods hand, we have not the command of our time nor grace; God dispo∣ses of both: when therefore it is called, Thy day, it is meant of a cer∣tain time, which God hath ap∣pointed thee, to come in and re∣ceive the mercy, and to improve the talent; but no man must hence peremptorily conclude, that he may chuse his time when he plea∣seth, and set his day, and limit God to such periods of his life. though he were sure to live so long; alas, if men could command grace and salvation when they please, what fine doings would there be in the world? how would sinners make God serve with their sins, and wait on them even to their death-bed, and then to serve their turn at last with salvation, per saltum? Therefore God hath
given us a day to manifest his goodnesse and love, and hath limi∣ted this to Hic and Nunc, to shew his wisdom and prerogative. God limits us, we must not limit him; if while God gives us a day, we come in, then 'tis ours; but if we come not to the dole that day, and close with the offer, then 'tis lost to us: yesterday was, but is not now ours; and to morrow may be again, but not certain. Before we were born, we were not; a day we had not: And when we are dead, and the talent of lead seals up our grave, we have no more day for this work,Eccles. 9.10. see Eccles. 9.10. So, Joh. walk while you have the light, that is, as the holy Ghost saith, to day while it is day, if you will hear his voyce, harden not your hearts.Heb. 3. And Saint Paul preaching to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 6.1, 2. beseecheth them,2 Cor. 6.1, 2. that they receive not the grace of God in vain, that is, that they put not off the offer, or delay the re∣ceiving, but presseth them to close with the mercy; now, for
now is the accepted time, behold now is the day of salvation. And to this doth well agree that passage in Rom. 12.11. and with the first and second verses of the same Chapter, Be not slothfull, but fervent in spirit, , serving the Lord (as our Translation renders it); but Origen saith, that some copies have it, , serving the time, that is, taking the opportu∣nity; misse not your day: there is a time when God may be found by sinners, and there is a day when God will not be found, Isai 55.6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call upon him while he is near. Though God in mercy strives with men in this Iife, yet he saith, My Spirit shall not al∣wayes strive with man, Gen. 6.3. no, not alwayes in this life; the day of grace may be lost, before thy life be lost; yea long before a man comes on his deathbed. There are some sort of sinners with whom the Lord will have no more to do in a
way of mercy; will move them no more; the meanes, nor any Sermon shall work upon them: it may be they have slighted and resisted so long, that now in judgement they are hardened, and given up as the Israelites, after forty yeares, so long was their day; and when they had provoked so long, 'tis said,Psal. 81.11, 12. My people would not harken, my people would none of me, so I gave them up unto their hearts lusts; and leaves them it with an (oh) Oh that my people had harkned to me, and the next we hear of, was, that God sware they should not en∣ter into his rest, Psal. 95.11. You have heard of Esau,Heb. 12.16, 17. whose sir name (to this day) is, The prophane, he had a fair opportunity for his fa∣thers blessing, but either his little e∣steem of it, & neglect while it might have been gotten, or his presump∣tion, that any time he might have had it, the blessing was lost to him, and totally lost; for after∣ward, when he would have inheri∣ted the blessing; he was rejected;
though he sought it (when too late) with tears. There is a sad Instance of the case, though no person named, in Prov. 1.13. Turn you at my Reproof. behold, I will pour out my Spirit upon you, and this be it known unto you, Because I have called and ye have refused, I have stretched out my hands, and no man regarded; but ye have set at nought all my coun∣sell: I will also mock at your cala∣mity, for then shall they call upon me, and I will not answer; they shall seek me, but shall not find me: and so they are served in their own kind. The like to this for event, you have in the instance of the five foo∣lish virgins; Carelesse they were, and waited not their opportunity, they lost their happinesse, they came too late, the dore was shut, they cryed for entrance, but none granted; Watch therefore,Ma. 23.1 for the know neither the day nor hour wherein the Son of man cometh; And so here in the Text, Jerusalem
had a day, as fair an opportunity for their peace and mercy, as could be desired; but lost it, and with it their mercy, and their souls. And the amount is this,Note. that if men will consume their dayes in sinning, they shall lose their day of saving. It may be now at a Ser∣mon, God is treating with thy soul, and he hath been formerly speaking to thee, this is not the first time, but who knoweth but this may be the last time; after so many past, God may hold his peace, and stay his hand, and with∣hold his grace, and you may hear an hundred Sermons more, yet ne∣ver feel one touch of the Spirit more. Preachers may not be hid from your eyes, yet grace may be hid from thine heart. And to be sure, if not till then, yet when this life is at an end,Note. thou shalt live no more to hear, nor see this day; and alas, how many men are dead while they live, dead in sins▪ and dead, and stiffe, and cold to grace, and the intreaties of Christ.
Therefore let every soul that prizeth his peace and salvation, take heed and lay to heart the of∣fers of mercy in the day of Gods gracious visitation; look to it, Sirs, and trifle no longer: to day if you will hear his voice, harden not your hearts. Now as all those hints and in∣stances do bespeak your care and watchfulnesse, lest you should misse your opportunities; So in the next, you shall do well seriously to consider, for your imitation, while we instance in some record∣ed in Scripture, which took the season, obeyed in due time, and were▪ successefull, and became happy in this, that in that their day they knew, and accepted the things that belonged to their peace. And mark as you hear, How they took the first opportunity was offered them, though some came in later than others. In the Parable of the labourers hired, Matth. 20.1. to 8. Some
were called in the morning early, obeyed presently, and were enter∣tained, they put not off, nor made excuse. (2.) Others, the third hour, and they likewise went and did what they were called unto, and delayed not. (3.) Others, the sixth hour and ninth, and they yielded as▪ soon as called, and did not make excuse, nor demanded longer time. (4.) And some others that had loytered to the eleventh hour of the day, yet they refused not, but presently set themselves to their businesse; they said not, We will stay till to morrow, or some other time; and they were accep∣ted also: but all this while you must note, that each of these took their first opportunity. You have likewise to remem∣ber the good successe the five wise Virgins had,Mar. 25. They were ready at the first approach of Christ, and went in with him to the mar∣riage. So the Prodigal; so farre as he went, and so idle as he had been;
yet as soon as he was touched, and had his eyes open, and came un∣to himself, to his wits again; he no sooner thinks of his Father's house and love, but leaves his swine and husks, and makes homeward, and he was met with joy, imbraces, pardon, and mercy. And one instance more in this Chapter where the Text is,Luke 19.5, 6. Za∣cheus, Oh how happy 'twas for him that Christ called him on a day, and that same day he answered, and accepted and was converted; for he made haste and received Christ joyfully into his heart as well as his house, and that was the happiest day he ever had seen; and Jesus said unto him,Verse 9. This day is salvation come to this house. Thus you have this point de∣monstrated by Scripture, proof, and example: and by this you may per∣ceive, that though God in mercy hath appointed poor sinners a cer∣tain time, as well as means for their conversion, and reconciliation, and some have been so happy and
blessed, as to take their opportu∣nity, yet 'tis possible, and 'tis pro∣ved, that many have had their day for the like mercies, but have lost it; for they did not lay to heart the things belonging to their peace in that their day, and afterward were hid from their eyes. This hath been the case of verie many, and still is; Pray God no man here pre∣sent, put off this day's intreaties again as formerly, lest he haz∣zard his peace and reconciliation again, and so lose this day, and never live to see another, for the purpose of salvation for himself. Quest. If any man ask me when is this day?Quest. How shall I know it? which is mine, and which is thine, when is it gone and lost? Answ. When and wheresoever Christ is preached,Answ. and the Gospel is published, then and there to that people Christ is near, and grace is offered, and this hath been many yeares in England, and in London, and all this while, have been continued these glad tidings
of peace and reconciliation to soules: but when this shall be re∣moved out of this place, then it will be hid from your eyes; Christ is gone, grace is gone, light is gone, darknesse comes, and the day is lost, and God only knowes, how long it will continue, or how quicklie it will be removed out of our sight. Would to God men would not deal unkindly with it and drive it away, but repent and believe,Note. yield and obey, accept and love it, that Christ and his Gospel of grace, might stay with us. Quest. But secondly,2. Quest. If you would know what time God hath set for thy coming in, beyond which he will not wait to be gracious any longer; in which, if thou despisest the Call, or refusest the Offer, God will put a bolt, and grace shall strive no more with thee: Answ. This no man knoweth,Answ. whether this or the next be the time, but surelie it must be before the day of death; everie man must
be reconciled to God, ere he die, by faith in Christ, Repentance from dead works,Eccles. 9.10. and holy living, or else he shall never: now or never, while grace and the man live to∣gether in this present world, so long there is hope; but when grace is gone, and thou art driven hence to thy long home, thy day is lost, and the poor sinner irrecove∣rable. You had best consider in time what hour of the day 'tis with you,Note. what is the date of thy life, how many daies and years can each of you reckon; you can tell how long you have lived, and enjoied the means of grace; but can you tell how long you shall live in this world, or under the discipline of grace with a win-able heart? You can neither command time or grace, but you may in time accept the grace offered. It may be, some that are here present this day before the Lord, can say with joy and thankfulness, They had their day, and knew it,
the Angel moved and they stept in, their hearts were touched, and they yielded; the offer was made and they accepted, Christ was near and they embraced him, they stood not out, but closed with him; in the day of his power they were made willing, and now Christ is theirs,Psal. 110.3 and they are Christs; they love him heartilie, and hate sin per∣fectlie, and live holilie: lift up your heads, pretious soules, and be thankful; you have not lost your day, you are happie now, and in a fair way to heaven, and if you continue in faith and love of Jesus, and grow in grace, you shall be for ever happie in glorie, when you have finished your course: It may be, some others are here standing, some young, some aged, with whom Gods Ministers have been treating, and Gods Spirit stri∣ving formerlie, and they have stood out untill now; Who knows but that they have bin reserved for such a time as this; now another prize is put into your hand, this may
be to them the acceptable time, a day of reconciliation and peace: a day you have now, which thou∣sands who now lay under wrath and final despaire, would prize above Mountains of gold, and Rocks of Rubies, if they had once again such an opportunitie as this; it may be God hath determined, that hitherto to this day thou shalt come, and grace and mercie shall wait on thee now; but no farther. Christ may be passing on by thee now,Note. and looks on thee, and gives a secret touch, and bids thee, Come away after him, and leave thy sins and follow him, and saith as to Zacheus, I will come to thy house and bring salvation this day. Oh if there be any such among you, who is touched at heart this minute, let him not quench the spirit, nor reject the motion; let him take this opportunitie, and make up the match (now, even now) in this place, ere he stirre hence, and then he may conclude, he hath not lost his day, but what∣ever
he hath been before, yet now he may be be a converted man, a pardoned man, an happie man, in this his day of visitation, if he lay it now to heart, and consider it. It may be, there are others here, with whom there is no prevailing, no mercie moves them, no teares melts them, no intreaties winne them, no promises allure them; in whom the custome of sin hath worne off the sense of sinne and miserie, to whom nothing but the world, and pleasures, and sin, is of any account; to whom the Riches and treasures of grace. and glories of heaven are accoun∣ted poor and mean, and foolish things. Such there may be here now, who have had some impressions on them of good, but now worn out again; those, who, it may be, were once almost perswaded, but now again altogether as obstinate as ever; who can make a mock of sin, and scoffe of Religion: who
can laugh or sleep at a Sermon of life and death, and scorn re∣proof, and defie God to his face, and are growing worse and worse, filthie, and more filthie; and what may be thought of such? Have they lost their day. Alas,Answ. for such, we know not what God will do with them yet, but those are sad notices of men given over: & this we say, Many dais they have lost, many mercies have they abused, many offers have they re∣jected, many motions have they quenched, much patience have they wronged: and trulie, if there be any day yet for them left (but the day which they cannot avoid, the day wherein God will judge the world, all obstinate impenitent sinners to eternal flames) they had best look to it, that they may take it when it comes: lest if that passe away too, and be hid from their eyes also, and they not converted in that day neither; then must they lie down in sor∣row, saying, Oh that I had but
known! but now it is hid from mine eyes: I shall never see the day of salvation, for I would not know, nor lay to heart the day of visitation: oh sinners, think on this,Note. and trie your tempers, and consi∣der how long alreadie you have refused, will you not henceforth from this time crie unto the Lord, if peradventure he may yet be gra∣cious to thee, if thou return af∣ter thou hast done all these things, even then turn, turn unto the Lord;Jer. 3.4. even now, and put all out of doubt, close now with Christ, cast away your sins, and the question will be best resolved by your practice. So much toward resolving the quaerie, as far as God hath given us any hints about particular times or seasons, of getting or losing a mans interest in peace and reconci∣liation by Christ offered in a day, During a mans life. Now, I know, there are some would make a quick answer to to this demand, and enough to gratifie the humours of many loose
and vain persons, but not at all to satisfie a sober soul that thinks of another world. Tush, say they, What trouble you your self about these niceties, take your pleasure now while you may, and take your time of repentance at leisure; a little time will do that work: do you not remember? that, At what time soever; And, the Thief on the Crosse? Answ. Indeed here is a rare Example,Answ. and a short halfe-sen∣tence, which men abuse to their undoing. I could answer this at large, but this I onlie say now to you, that have not debauch'd your Reason, and lost Consideration. When any of you can dispatch the whole dutie of man, the All of Faith and Repentance, and new Obedience, in a trice, and on your death-bed, and can be assured withall, that you shall have then time enough, and grace enough, and will enough, and strength enough to perform all; then you
may deferre untill your dying day: but untill this be made sure to you, be not so foolish as to cast away your soules, upon such de∣sperate attempts and impossibi∣lities. And for the Thief] when any of you, or any bodie else you know, can have the like opportunitie to die with such circumstances, to be put to death in the same place on the same day, with the Saviour of the world, our blessed Jesus, and to be the happie instance of a great miracle; then, and not untill all these things be hoped for, let no man think, that (though it may be many a mans case to die as great a Malefactor as he was) yet that any bodie in the world should imagine, that one single instance should justify his presump∣tion, when 'twas never intended, for to give any hopes to any rebel∣lious sinner; seeing he was the first and the last of that kind: And surelie it is a desperate game∣ster that doth venture all he is
worth, in this and another world; at one cast of dice; and that, lesse then Ams-ace: Shew me another like this, or else hold thy peace, and leave off arguing the case, lest you make it desperate. How much more safe is it, as well as Rational, to do that while we may, and have opportunitie, than to put it off, (to) while we cannot perform what of absolute neces∣sitie is to be done, or the poor soul is lost for ever. Having bin so large in the do∣ctrines, I need be the shorter in the Application, which comes now in the close: to perswade the pra∣ctice of laying to heart the things of our peace, while it is to day; that in this our day we may know the things belonging to our peace, while we may, shortly: Else they will be hid from our eyes and then we may no. Application. I shall reduce all I have to say now to you, about these two
points (you have heard raised from the Text) to these two Heads, to trie what may be done with you, in behalf of your own precious soules this day; which I would dispatch in an an Essay of 1. Conviction, & Admonition. 2. Counsell, & Perswasion. And first of all, I would (if I could) shame the Follie, and re∣prove the Madnesse of men, such as neglect their salvation, by not timelie laying to heart, and slight∣ing the Offer: and such as throw away their souls by resisting grace, and continuance in their sinne; would I could this day convince them of the greatnesse of their sin and néarnesse of their danger, and dreadfulnesse of their destruction, who have to this day stood out wilfullie against the intreaties of Christ, and still resolve to do as they have done. Why sinners! be it known unto you, that this is the Great condem∣nation, this is greater then all your
sins (Jo. 3.19.) that light is come into the world, and men love dark∣nesse rather then light, (that is) men refuse and reject Christ and Grace, and love their sins better; they may be saved, but they care not; they chuse those wayes which wil bring them to destruction. Who are to be blamed, if such as they are not to be blamed? and are there none such here? what! throw away your remedie. Alas! that Christ who should be the Desire of all nations, should come with tears in his eyes, and love in his heart, and salvation in his hand, to sinners who are the shame of all nations? and yet be put off and rejected? He who is everie way lovely, doth sue to thee sinner, who art everie way uglie and loathsome. Would he wedd thy soul; and wilt not thou be married to him? alas for thee! how wilt thou escape the forest damnation; if thou neglect so great salvation.Heb 2.3. Wilt thou not lay down a lust, a sin for his sake, who
laid down his life for thy sake? alas! alas! Why sinner, what hell doth that soul deserve, that doth despise heaven? and what miserie doth he choose, that wilfully refu∣seth mercie; wo unto thee Beth∣saida, wo unto thee Corazin, wo unto thee London, for mightie works have been done in you, and powerfull preaching hath been among you; and if after all, you will still remain impregnable, impenitent and unbelieving: it shall be easier for Sodom, then for this City. Mark that, Luk. 10.12, 13. With what face can sinners cry out upon the cursed Jewes, that rejected their Saviour, and put him to death, and yet do the same things themselves? they chose a Barrabbas, and refused Christ: but what better art thou, that choosest a lust to keep it alive, and refusest Christ, that would save thy live: 'Tis possible at a distance, men will be Christians, that they will; and hear and speak of grace and hea∣ven
very complyingly; but alas, when it comes to it, the time and the offer, then no such matter: How doe sinners draw back? then what excuses do they make, and what delayes do they use, The time is not yet come, or a Farm, or Merchandise, a trifle, or a folly comes in between the Heart and Christ, that they cannot close; and very often it is in down-right terms, we will not have Him to Reign over us. Is this the way to peace and reconciliation? will this end well at last, friends? Alas, (Sirs) what cares Christ for your fair words, if your actions be foul? How little doth he esteem a complement, a cringe, and a nod, if your hearts bow not to his Scepter? will it serve our turn that we cry Hosanna to day in our professions, and crucifie him to morrow in our practises? what is it the nearer, if we say we will from day to day, give up our hearts and lives to Christ, and yet do not what we promise, but keep our hearts
upon the world, and sin every day; well Sirs, there is no dally∣ing with Christ and grace, God is serious, and ye must be serious too, or else you do but mock God, and destroy your own souls: what do you do with the naming of Christ, if you depart not from iniquity? what do you do with the outside, and form of godlinesse, if you de∣ny the power of godlinesse? Is it not enough, that you have re∣fused so long, will you still refuse; when will you return, if you will not now return, when will you be reconciled to God; if this day you refuse, when will you in good ear nest close with Christ and make an end of sinning, by Repentance and new obedience; if not now? Is it not enough yet, you have pro∣voked God, and abused his long-sufferance: when will it be enough then? hath not Christ waited long enough for thee Sinner, but thou wilt put him to wait longer: why? Christ can be without thee, but how canst thou be without
Him: if thou be lost, Christ will be Christ still; but if Christ be lost to thee, thou art lost and un∣done for ever. Hath not Christ done his part, and the Gospel its part, and Prea∣chers their part, by intreaties, re∣proofes, instructions, counsels, prayers, and tears, but when will you do your parts; namely to yield and obey, to come in and submit to the Lord Jesus, for grace and salvation; O when will it once be? when will it once be? Oh sinners will you runne on, and not look back, how farre have you gone from your God? and will you not yet consider how near you are to the last day? will you quite forsake him, and never return? to whom will you goe then for eternal life? Go thy way then proud Prodigal to the Swine, and to the husks, wallow there and die; if that be better then thy fathers house. Ah sinner! stay, and consider what thou leavest; look upon
Christ, see how he wooes thee: see how near he drawes to thee, see how he bemoanes thee, see how grace, reconciliation, and salvati∣on courts thee; canst thou find in thy heart to let him go away from thy soul, and canst thou not find in thy heart to close with him this day, and that he may leave a blessing behind him: will no∣thing prevaile with thee? shall Christ intreat? and shall We in∣treat? and shall the sinner remain still as he was? oh! can any Heart stand out against Christ, but an heart of Adamant? can any Bow∣els not yearn, when Christ's bowels yearn, but bowels of brasse? O would to God it might be, that some poor wearied sinner among you, would come and lay down his burden at Christs feet, and change Masters; the worst for the best, sin and Satan for Christ and grace; oh that some one of you (among so many) that have gone so farre, and stood out so long, would stop here, and stand out no longer;
what an happy day would this day prove to thee poor soul, if it may prove a day of thy peace, and reconciliation, a day of thy tran∣slation from the regions of sin and death, and Consecration to the service of Christ; A day of thy new birth: O how much better would this day be then the day of thy first birth, or if were a day of advancement to all earthly ho∣nours and dignity? oh sinner wilt thou not yet yield? —Oh that in this thy day thou wouldst lay this to heart. Use II. of Counsell and Perswasion. Exhortation. Must I part with you so without an earnest exhortation? I cannot, I may not; why may I not hope to prevaile with some one or other in this Numerous Congregation this day: it may be I shall never see your faces more in this place; and 'tis oddes to lay, all you that now
are here, may not live to see ano∣ther such day all together again; the thred may be cut; the life spilt as water on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again; ma∣ny of us may be ere to morrow in another world. How doth it concern us all, this day to lay some foundation, on which we may build our hopes of happinesse in the other world? Give me leave to try in the name of Christ, what I can do to per∣swade you that I may leave some∣thing with you, that you may re∣member hereafter, that a poor Mi∣nister of Christ did beseech you in his name, that you would know, and lay to heart, the things, be∣longing to your peace, in this your day. O would to God I might prevail with you for your own good. I exhort you, I beseech you, I conjure you in the name of God, and if I had tears at command, I would intreat you weeping; this. That you, every one of you, this
day, would let all your sins goe, but let not Christ go, let not grace go, let not this day passe away with∣out your hearty and reall closing with Christ, as ever you look for any good in and by Christ; give him leave to banish your sins, and to bear rule in your hearts and lives:Note. He must be thy Lord, or else he will never be thy Saviour. Improve this hour of visitation and be happy, throw away that with loathing and indignation, which hath kept thee so long from being fully perswaded to be altoge∣ther a Christian, and be happy; and if any of you feel the door of your hearts now opening to Christ,Psal. 24, 7, 8. lift them open wide, that the King of Glory may come in, that he may have full possession; let him rule and raign there, and thou wilt be an happy man. These three things I would counsel you to performe within your hearts, and resolutions ere you stirre hence. To make an end of all your sins
this day ere you sleep, in an un∣feigned repentance, and God will speak peace to thee. 2. To make up that happy match between Christ and thy soul, by receiving Christ by Faith, and re∣signing up thy self to Christ by hear-consent, love, and obedience: Christ is ready now, if thou be ready now; oh do not give him the denial now he is so near thee; and canst thou do any thing better than this? than to match with Christ; will any thing in the world be of such concernment to thee as this? 3. To Resolve this day upon a godly life, to make Religion thy chiefest care and businesse; and if you find it now in your hearts to perform these three acts, you may be sure your day is not lost. Oh Sirs, do this now, as you tender your life and eternal happinesse; do not put Christ off again with any excuse or denial, but take your opportunity this hour of vi∣sitation,
and blesse God that you have it. Is there never a poor lost sheep here will be fetcht home to the Lord this day? shall not this days light bring home one Prodi∣gal? will you all go away, and not any bodies soul be brought nearer to Christ, nor one jot the more resolved then before? Why then the Sermon is lost, and the day is lost, and God knowes whether we shall see another Sabbath, or hear another Sermon with any profit, to any purpose of good to our souls. Oh that you, who have not hitherto been at all perswaded, would now you were almost re∣solved; and you, who are almost resolved, would to God you were altogether perswaded, to be∣come the Lords. 1. You young ones, May one prevaile with you; you are ten∣der yet, will you remember your Creatour? Eccles. 12.1.
2. You men of age and strength, have you yet considered your greater Concernment? may you not be perswaded? You are or should be wise, and hearken to counsel; you have reason: Will you go away without yielding to be happy, by embracing of Christ, and devoting your selves to be truly Religious. 3. You old men, What say you to Christ now? is it time for you to lay to heart the things of your peace, and to look to your interest in Christ? you have but little time before you, surely you had best to make all sure and fast this day; look to your Evidence, for you have but a very little time to live ere your Sun be set; oh that among these hundreds here this day, some-one or other at least would be wonne to Christ; that it might not be said, Not one would yield to Christ, nor close with him this day, of so many: that it may never be said, those marbles and
your hearts are of one make and temper. How gladly would a servant that invites for Christ, hear of (though but) one whose heart is opening, and yielding to Christ, that were but about to repent and believe, how would he fol∣low him with intreaties, untill the match were fully made and concluded, 'twixt Christ and his soul. But I shall leave all with you, that I have to perswade withall, in these six Considerations: for Conclusion. 1. Consider, What if you saw our blessed Lord Jesus drawing near you in mercy, beholding, and weeping over you? would you leave him? would you slight him? no, you would not? Why then, do not now. 2. Consider, Can you do bet∣ter then close with Christ this day, or if you will not now,
when do you intend? Oh surely you will do worse, if you do not this; and if you do this now, you cannot do better. 3. Consider, Is it fit you should wait and begge, and cry hence∣forth after Christ, or that He should after you? Who will be the losers? who will have the worst of it. If you lose grace and salvation, how will you get this again, or such another? 4. Consider, Are the things be∣longing to your peace worth the looking after, or not? Alas, what will you do when you are undone? 5. Consider; what if you were certainly perswaded, that the next time you slighted grace in∣treating, and closed with sinne tempting, that God would with∣draw his mercy, and clap dam∣nation on thee? and never look on thee more for good? would
you then slight, what now is offered? 6. Consider, if this were the last day you had to live, the last Sermon you had to heare, and shortly to go to the other world? would you put off the mercies of this day? How can you tell, but that to morrow, or very shortly you must be sent for to the other world, arrested by death, that spares no body? Why then, pretious soules, be perswaded now once for all, to lay to heart this day the things that belong to your peace, be∣fore they be hid from your eyes; The Lord set it home, that you may be wise and happie. Oh what will it profit you, to gain the whole world, and lose your own souls? FINIS.
