R650A 99832080 36549
THE JUDGMENT OF Vrines. By Robert Record Doctor of Physick. Whereunto is added an ingenious Treatise concerning Physicians, Apothecaries, and Chirurgeons, Set forth by an Eminent Physitian in Queen Elizabeths dayes. With a Translation of Papius Ahal∣sossa concerning Apothecaries Con∣fecting their Medicines; Worthy per∣using, and imitating. LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Peter Parker at the Leg and Star in Cornhil, against the Royal Exchange, 1679.
To the Reader. IF either the corruption, or abuse of things, might deprive us of this lawfull and necessary use of them, even the sacred Scriptures, our laws, our provisions of life and clothing, might fall under declension, if not abolition: It is true from the inspe∣ction of Urine, some have presumed to pretend a larger judgement, and indication, then may justly be drawn or conjectured out of it; yet it is generally concluded by Physitians,
both ancient and moderne, that both Urine and Pulse are so necessa∣ry, that without them all knowledge of Physick, besides, is doubtfull, obscure, and uncertaine: whereof the first sheweth the estate of the liver and veines, the second of the heart and arteries: The Urine be∣cause with the blood it is conveed into all parts of the body, and from thence returneth back again in the veines, to the liver and urinall vessels, bringeth with it some indicature of the state and disposition of all those parts from whence it commeth: and who shall please to peruse that exact peice of Daniel Becherus, shall finde observable peices, both concerning the urine, and divers experimented medicines made with it. Concer∣ning the judgement of the Pulse, who shall please to peruse Doctor
May upon Pennant, shall finde the Pulses motion not so certain an in∣dicature, because in some diseases there is cessation, or none, or small appearance to conjecture by. Con∣cerning the Author, he was one of the first who labour'd to reduce the tractate thereof, unto order and me∣thod, and hath been seconded by la∣borious Fletcher, to whom our En∣glish Nation oweth much for their labours: The antiquity and paines of the Author hath caused it to be presented again to the Presse, ho∣ping, with judicious men, it shall receive the acceptance is desired and studied By the well-wisher of your health, R. R.
The PREFACE. The good use of a co∣vetous ex∣ample.THough the unsatiable greedines of covetous men doe many and sundrie waies hurt, yet some wayes it may do no lesse good, if men will not disdain (as they ought not) to use it in such sort as I shall shew you. But because that unsaciableness is never satisfied, but beside thousand of means in∣vented already to quench the unquenchable greedines, it seeketh and findeth daily new and new means innumerable, so that it were an infinite labour to declare them all. I will wittingly, and purposedly passe them over, only taking one general sentence, which shall be in stead of all the rest. Vespasian, one of the great schoolmasters of avarice, which could pick out profit of every thing (yea, even of mens urine) taught his Scholers (I meane the whole court of covetous persons) this lesson ensuing: Lucri bonus odor  qualibet.
Lucre is sweet, and hath a good savour; Though it come of Ʋrine, dirt or Ordure. This sentence, if it be withdrawn from the filthy lucre of unsatiable covetousnesse, wherein it is detestable, and imployed ra∣ther to the due lucre of mans sustenance, then it becomes tolerable: But if it bee referred to the necessarie lucre of mans health, then is it greatly commendable. If there can be then any commodity for mans health gathered out of urine, (as there may be much) men should not be negligent in seeking of that thing which should do good both to them∣selves and others? seeing the covetous are so diligent in seeking for that thing which shall profit neither themselves nor others? And the negligence is so much the greater, if men be more remisse in seeking after so necessary a thing in a matter so commenda∣ble, then the covetous in a bad thing. But in as much as this thing (by reason it is not plainly set forth) is with no lesse diffi∣culty to be studied on, then it is necessary to be used, the ignorant may have some ex∣cuse: I therefore in the name of many other, have taken this pains on me, to set forth this thing so plainly,Ignorance set aside. that ignorance can have no excuse. But that no man should doubt of the truth
of this Treatise, or of mine intent,Why this Book is written. in putting forth the same rather in this our English tongue then any other: I shall briefly shew reasons of both; First, for the truth of it,The first reason. I will boldly speak, knowing for certain that no man that can judge it, will say or thinke otherwise, but that it is as true as mans knowledge can devise it. And it is the opi∣nion of the most excellent writers of Phy∣sick both Greeks and Latine; namely, Hip∣pocrates, Galen, Aetius, Aeginta, Philo∣theus, Theophilus, Actuarius: also Corne∣lius Celsus Plinius, Constantinus, Africa∣nus, and Clementius Clementinus, with o∣thers more, conferring also with these Avi∣cenna, Egidius, Polidamus, and such like: But with what temperance and moderation they that are learned may perceive. These have I followed chiefly in this judgement of Urines. And in the use of medicine and diseases touching urine, I have joyned with them Dioscorides, Quintus Serenus, Columela, Sextus Platonicus, and divers others. Now if there be any man that doubteth of the truth of those writers in this thing, I am not here to force beleef upon them. The inter of the Au∣thor.But now as touching mine intent in wri∣ting this Treatise in English; though this
cause might seem sufficient to satisfie many men, that I am an English man, and therefore may most easily and plainly write in my na∣tive tongue, rather then in any other: yet un∣to them that know the hardness of the mat∣ter, this answer should seem unlikely: consi∣dering that it is harder to translate into such a tongue, wherein the Art hath not been writ∣ten before, then to write in those tongues in which the terms of the Art are better ex∣pressed. Now to shew briefly the causes moving me thereunto. I am sure, there are but few that ever sought counsell for their health, but they know that the common trade to attain to the knowledge of the disease, is by the judgement of the urine, though not a∣lone, yet as the principall. Likewise, as there is not any thing so good, but the abuse of it may cause harm to ensue therupon. So this judgment of urines, though it be a thing highly to be regarded, yet if it be used rashly without foregoing signs it may cause (as it doth often) some error in the judg∣ment of the Physitian, though he were right excellently learned: not so much by the ig∣norance of the Physitian, as by want of knowledge in the patient, which should in∣struct the Physitian, in such questions as hee
needed to demand of him: and not to look that the Physitian should tell him all things at the first sight, more like a God then man. So that if there be any Physitian so arro∣gant, that he will take upon him to tell all things alone, and will not hear the Patient speak, specially not knowing the party be∣fore, neither seeing other signes but only the urine, as I dare boldly pronounce, That such a man is unworthy to be called a Physitian. So it shall be good for all men, not to trust to the judgement of such a one: for by such mis-use in this thing not only much harme befalls the patients, so that it hath been the occasion of many mens death, but also very much reproach hath ensued to the whole e∣state and order of Physitians, and hath caused that excellent and most necessary art to bee contemned, derided, and little set by. To avoid the more this inconvenience, I have written this little Treatise to all men in common,The use o this Book. that they may learn to have some knowledge in their own urines, and thereby may be the better able to instruct the Physitian, at the least, what sort of urine they have made from time to time from the beginning of their sicknes, and somewhat be∣fore. And also what sort of water they were
wont to make in their health? so that if men will be diligent to mark their water in time of health, they shall not only be able to in∣struct the Physitian (as I have said) but should bee also able to perceive the cause of the dis∣ease sometimes before the grief come, and so by the counsell of some discreet Physitian avoid the sicknes before it bee fully entred: yea, and by due marking of their urine, they shall perceive from time to time, how they shall governe themselves in meats and drinks, in exercise and rest, and the like things, so that thereby they may eschew both the diseases, and also the causes of the same. Now what a commodity this may bee to all men, and what thanks he hath deserved that hath taught this so great a commodity to all men in generall, I leave it to every mans own judgement. And thus (as you may perceive) I have declared the causes of this my pains, taking them to be for the profit of the whole Com∣mons indifferently. Howbeit, if any mean learned Physitian shall be thereby furthered in his judgement, I will not envie him, but will be the gladder, the more number of men I perceive to take benefit by it. I am sure that the true judgement of u∣rines,
according to the mind of Hippocrates,The diffi∣cultie of Judgemen in Urine. Galen, and such like, is very hard, though not to excellent Clerks, yet to the meaner sort; partly by reason that it is written so disper∣sedly in their works, and not in any one Book peculiarly and sufficiently: and partly because that sundry words used in the same (as in the rest of Physick) are obscure to them that have not been exercised in all kinds of learning, and that with the knowledge of both the Greek and Latine tongues. There∣fore I trust, that this my pains shall be some help also, to them that lack the exercise of such studie and knowledge. But because there is a common saying in the mouths of many men now a dayes, that it is a profaining of learning, and a meanes to bring it into contempt, so to set it forth in the vulgar tongue, that every man in∣differently may read it, and study it:The answer unto it. To this I will briefly answer, that this say∣ing is not onely against many great learned mens acts and examples, but also against manifest reasons: besides, that it encludeth a pernitious kinde of counsell. For if every thing should be put away, or left undone, that evill men may pervert and use to an evill purpose, so should we have no good thing remain: meats and drinks must be
taken away, because many abuse of it. And because evill men doe abuse of both eyes, and tongues, shall all men therefore pluck out their eyes and their tongues? Because many men doe abuse lawes and authority, shall men expell lawes and high powers? Many evill men and hereticks have misin∣terpreted Gods word, yet ought Gods word neverthelesse to be taught vulgarly to all men. Though the Pope, Cardinals, and Monkes, have practised to poyson men, even with the very Sacrament of the sup∣per of the Lord, yet no man will be so mad, therefore to eschue the use of that blessed Sacrament: And yet all this followeth, if men allow that common saying, above writ∣ten. Better meanes it were to set forth pub∣lickly all that might doe good to the pub∣lique wealth, and streightly to punish the a∣buses of them, then to punish good men and good things, because that evill men offend. It is a like error to that sort of doctrine, which contemned wine as an evill thing, be∣cause that many were made drunken with it. But to leave this, and to come more particu∣larly to the matter. What is learning unlearned, or know∣ledge unknown, any thing else but a vaine name? Learning then encreaseth most, when
it is studied of most: And learning then triumpheth most, when it hath most favou∣rers and followers. And then doth igno∣rance (learnings enemy) rejoyce most, when learning reigneth in fewest, and blind∣nesse ruleth most: so that then is learning most profained, contemned, and hated, when it hath most enemies: that is to say, when most men are ignorant. For that old saying shall alwayes be true: Learning hath no enemy, but the ignorant. Plutarch his sentence.Aske that great Cleark Plutarch what his minde is in this: Whether the judge∣ment of health be a meet thing for every man to study: and thou shalt heare him an∣swer: that shame it is for men to observe the crying of Crowes, and such like things in beasts and birds, whereby men judge of the change of weathers, and to be negligent in marking motions within themselves, and alterations preparing unto sicknes. Yea he requireth so exact knowledge in every man appertaining unto health, that he noteth it for a great shame, and calleth it unsensible∣ness in a man if he be so ignorant, that he shal need to ask of the Physitians, what meats are best for him. And to ask what meates shall best digest in him, is as absurd a question (saith he) as to ask what meats are sweet,
soure, or bitter, and such like. Yea beyon all this, he requireth in every man the know∣ledge of his own pulse, which is a thing har∣der then the judgement of urines. Examples of Writers in the Vul∣gar tongue.Now if you require Examples, the whole world is full of them. They that wrote i Greek, wrote in their own vulgar tongue  and so did they that wrote in Latine, write in their own common speech. Besides that, have we not infinite exam∣ples of Learned men in Germany, France, and Spain, which wrote of Physick in their own tongue? Yea, Is not our own England full of Examples? How many Books of Practises? how many Herbals? and other like Books of Physick, hath there been put forth many yeers past? And yet unto this day doe not learned wits sleepe. How much is all England bound to that Worthy and Learned Knight Sir Thomas Eliot,Sir Thomas Eliots Ca∣stle of Health. which took the pains to build a Ca∣stle of Health for all English men (besides many other learned Books that he hath pu forth in the Vulgar tongue) whereby a man may learn both to govern himself so, that though he escape not all sicknesses quite yet he shall eschew the great dangers of them? England may rejoyce of such a Knight: yea, England hath too few that
followeth such example. But if England had as many well willing doers as she hath cruell and spitefull disdainers, then were England the Flower of all Realmes in the world. Now will I leave this and draw nearer to my purpose, and will desire all men that shall read this Book, patiently to bear with my boldness, and thankfully to receive my good minde. And if there shall bee found in this Book, or in any other that I shall put forth, a small error or oversight (for greater errors, I dare say there shall be none) I shall desire all them that shall find any, to advertise me thereof by word or writing, and I shall be ready not onely to render condign thanks, but also to amend duely that shall be thought amisse, or else to yeeld a reason for the proof of the same, An exhor∣tation to the Reader.And now to make an end: I will de∣sire every man soberly and discreetly to use this my Book, not using it to the taunting or checking of other men: nor to trust in heir own knowledge further then they ought. And likewise I shall exhort all men, not to mock and jest with any Physitian (as some light wits do) tempting them with
Beasts stale, in stead of mens urine: others bringing to them mens water for womens, and such other like things. For in this do∣ing they deceive not the Physitian, but them∣selves. For a mans water to be like a wo∣mans, it need seem no strange thing. How∣beit, again there is a notable difference, in∣somuch that that water which in a man de∣clareth health, if it were a womans, might declare some disease; and likewise that which in a woman signifieth health, if it were a mans water, it might betoken sick∣nesse. And if a mans water and womans be like, and betoken both diseases, those diseases may be divers and not one. Yea two mens waters being both alike, shall not declare alwaies one grief, except they agree also in age, diet, exercise, and other like things Also, that a Beasts Water may be like a Mans (the Mans sicknesse being thereaf∣ter) Hypocrates witnesseth, and experi∣ence teacheth, as I shall declare hereafter. Therefore if you seek the Patients health, look that you receive the urine diligent∣ly: and as soon as you can, present it to the Physitian, and be diligent to instruct him in all things that you can, and that
he shall not have need to aske. And so no doubt, you shall receive great commodity of that Art, to the health of man, and the glory of God, which hath given such know∣ledge unto man.
THE URINALL OF PHYSICK. CHAP. I. Of the Division and Order of this Book. BEcause that nothing done confu∣sedly can be well understood of the Readers, for every thing the better order it hath, the better it may be understood, and is much more ea∣sily remembred, when the order of it is well and certainly known:The sum of this Book. I have therefore di∣gested this Book orderly, as I shall here set forth, to the intent that you may read, as it were in grosse the whole Book, and there∣by keep it the better in remembrance.
First, therefore I will declare the nature of urine, what it is, and how it is ingendred within man, and how it passeth forth from man. Secondly, of the order of receiving it in a convenient vessell. And of the time and place meet to consider it. Thirdly, how many things are to bee considered in urine: and how many wayes they may be altered in a healthfull man. Fourthly, what significations and tokens may be gathered of urine, concerning any alteration in man, past, present, or to come, Fiftly, to what use in medicine urine may serve: and of other good uses of it to mans commodity. And last of all, I wil declare certain diseases touching urine, which either let it, or cause it to void unwillingly: with the Medicines and remedies meet for the same. CHAP. II. How Ʋrine is ingendred in Man and how it passeth forth. AS unto them that are learned and know by the Art of Anatomy the scituation of the parts of man, and the naturall office
of every part, it is easie enough to perceive the originall generation and cause of urine, without any example: so unto them that neither know the scituation, nor offices, no, neither yet the names of the parts of mans body, it is scarce possible to make them to perceive the generation of urine, without some sensible example But because it is ve∣ry hard to find an artificiall example, which can alone duely expresse this work of nature, I will use therefore an example of a natural work, which shall expresse in many points this thing, though not in all; for such can there none be, but the thing it self. And in as much as this example is not easie to be understood of all men, though the most part do now a daies partly know it by experience of finding springs of waters, I will first propose an artificiall example, to make both the other to be the better per∣ceived. An exam∣ple of Stil∣ling.It is daily seen in distilling of Waters, that the temperate heat of the fire doth sepa∣rate the purest part of the juice from the herbs, and also from the grosser juice. This by naturall lightness is drawn into the head of the Stillatorie, where by the coldness of the helmet, it is made somewhat grosser, and so through naturall heat descendeth and
passeth forth by the Pipe of the Stillato∣rie. The Origi∣nall.And as the Art of man useth to make this water, so doth nature use to make the water of springs, whereof come all rivers, streams and floods, except the sea. For seeing the earth is not perfectly sound and thick of substance,Cause of springs. as stones and some woods appea∣reth to be, but it is hollow and full of holes, as you see that cork is: so that the air which by his subtleness pierceth into never so little a hole, entreth and filleth this hollow∣ness, nature so leading to it, because no place should be emptie: In which place by the coldness of the earth, the air is turned into water, as you may see in walls and pillars of stone, namely, of marble, how the cold∣ness of the stone turneth the air into wa∣ter, and hangeth full of drops, which some∣times trickle down apace, as if they did sweat. So when the earth hath turned the air thus into water, then doth it drop down and gathereth together, and so run∣neth out as it can finde or prepare way▪ As long therefore as there is hollownes in that place, with such sort of coldnesse, and none other let, the Spring of water shal never cease. But if the way by any mean be stopped, then the water turmoileth and
laboureth, either to expell that let, or to make a new way. The causes of diversity in tast of Water.Now this water being thus ingendred of the air which hath no taste, is also naturally without all taste: but the tast that it hath is the taste of the vaines of earth or mettall, by which it doth run. And that is the cause that some waters are sweet, and some soure; some fresh, and some salt, and otherwise diversly tasted; some also are hot, and some cold, and with other like qualities endued, according to the ground whereby it passeth. But of this I will not now speak, because I have appointed for it a peculiar Treatise, if God grant me time: Only this I say now, that a man that is expert, can by the colour, tast, and other qualities of the water which he seeth, tell what vains of earth or mettals is in that place whence that water cometh, though he see it not. And this water is expelled out of his first place, as unprofitable there to remain; and yet when it is come forth thence, it is good for divers and sundry uses. The gene∣ration of urine.Thus may we thinke of the generation and use of urine or mans water. Three Con∣coctions.It shall not need that I here reckon exact∣ly the places, causes, and the order of the three concoctions which go before the ge∣neration
of urine, but it shall suffice to te briefly, that of the meat and drink togethe concocted in the stomack is made rud blood: (if I may so call it) which rude bloo is wrought again, and made more perfect in the liver: and thirdly yet more purifi¦ed in the hollow vein, where the urine i separate from it, as whey from milk, but ye may not exactly be called urine, till it com into the reins or kidnies, which draw it ou of the hollow vein, by a certain natural power resting in them. And then doth the reins or kidnies alter it perfectly into urine us the coldnes of the ground turneth air into water. But you must take this comparison o similitude to be spoken of the alteration it self, and not of the cause. Now when Urine is thus made like to that fashion of water (as I said) then as the water passeth forth from his first place, by issues outward, so doth the urine descend from the reins by certain veins (as it were) called Water pipes, and runneth into the bladder, from whence at due times it is expelled forth, if the way be not let. So that you may compare the reins to the head of a con∣duit, the water pipes, to the conduit pipes, the bladder to the conduit, and the shaft to the rock of the conduit.
And further as the water doth declare by aste and colour the qualities of the earth, or eins of mettall, whereby it runneth, and rom whence it commeth, so the urine by olour, and other wayes, declareth of what ort the places that it cometh thorow, and humors that it commeth from are affected. And yet not only serveth for this, but also s the water, though it depart from the earth as superfluous in that place, yet in o∣ther places and to other purposes it is great∣ly profitable. So the urine, though it be ex∣pelled as a superfluous excrement, yet beside the commodity of judgement, which it gi∣veth of the parts that it cometh from, it doth also serve for divers uses in medicine, and o∣ther good commodities: Of both which, I will anon orderly write, after I have decla∣red certain things appertaining to the due judgement of it.
Of the Instrument and parts by which Ʋrine is engendred and passeth, mark this Figure following. excretory system A. Is the li∣ver. B. The hol∣low vein C. Veins by which the reins do draw the urine, and therefore be called suck∣ing veins. D. The reins. E. The wa∣ter Pipes. F. Is the Bladder. G. The spout of the yard. All the other parts beside, ap∣pertain to Gene∣ration and seed.
CHAP. III. What Ʋrine is, and what tokens it giveth in generall. YOu have heard now how urine is in∣gendred, from whence it cometh, and y what places it passeth, which things all, o the intent that you may the better keep n minde, you shall note this short definiti∣n. The defini∣tion of u∣rine.Urine is the superfluity or wheyie substance f the bloud into a hollow vein, conveyed by he reins and water pipes, into the bladder. o that hereby you may plainly perceive, hat if the bloud be pure and clean, and none  grief in the reins, Water-pipes, Blad∣er, nor Shaft, then shall the urine so declare t, being also perfect and pure in substance nd colour, and all other tokens according o the same. But if there bee any grief in ny of those parts, or the blood corrupt by ny means, then shall the urine declare cer∣ain tokens of the same, as I shall anon parti∣ularly expresse. But first it shall be necessary to instruct ou of the vessel place, and time, meet to udge urine, and of the manner of receiving
CHAP. IIII. Of the form of the Ʋrinall, and of the p and time meet to judge urine, and how it should be received. THat urine should be kept to see, wh is first made after midnight common or namely when the patient hath slept lo but you must take heed whether the pati be man or woman,The order to receive urine. that they make not th urine in another vessel first (as many use do) and then pour it into the urinall wh it is setled, for that causeth much de and error in the judgement of it. And that the Patient cannot well make it in  urinall, either by weaknesse, or any ot cause, then let them make it in another v¦sel; but see that it be clean and dry; and soon as the water is made, pour it forth p¦sently into the Urinall altogether, and lea no part of it out, as some curious folk use to put the clear part only into the urin and cast away the dregs, as though it sto not with their modesty to bring such fo gear to the Physitian, others of such like fo¦lish mind. Pour it therefore in wholly, an let not the urinall stand open, namely in¦dusty place, but stop it close with a glove
other leather, and not with cloth, paper, nor ay, and let it be brought to the Physitian within six hours at the furthest, for after that ime it cannot well be judged. The Urinal.Now as touching the Urinall, it should be of pure cleer glasse, not thick, nor green in colour, without blots or spots in it, not at in the bottome, nor too wide in the neck, out widest in the midle, and narrow still to∣ward both the ends, like the fashion com∣monly of an egg, or of a very bladder being measurably blown (for the Vrinall should represent the bladder of a man) and so shall every thing be seen in his due place and co∣our. If neither the grossenes of the Vrinall neither the colour, nor spots shall let the true sight of the colour and substance of the urine, and the contents of it: neither the deform fashion of the urinall shall alter the regions or rooms of the urine. The placeLikewise concerning the place meet to behold urines, you must look that it be nei∣ther too dark, so that your fight should not discern perfectly, either the colour, sub∣stance or contents, for lack of light: neither yet that your sight be likewise deceived, if the place be too light, as in open light or beams of the sun. The time.Besides this also you must mark the time
due to behold urines, but because there o no one time be assigned certain and exact judge all parts of it, I will briefly shew t order of the things to be considered in the time. First, when the urine is made, while it yet somewhat hot, you shall consider the c¦lour of it: for that may best bee discerne then; and likewise the thickness of the sub¦stance of it, which if it be mean, shall the be best seen. All other things, as the bubbl and the contents shall be best judged som¦what after, when the urine is somewhat co∣led, and they be duly setled in their prope places. CHAP. V. How many things are to be considered in Ʋrine. NOw leaving this as a brief instructio of the generation of the Water or U¦rine,Four things to be con∣sidered in Urine, viz. Substance, Colour, Quantitie, Contents. and of the manner of receiving it i vessels due, with time and place meet to con∣sider it. I will particually declare how many things are to be considered in it, which ar commonly named four, that is the Substance, the Colour, the Quantity, and the Contents
and the Savour thereto may be added as the fift; to the which fift, if you shall joyn sta∣bleness and order, as two accidents common to the first four things, (but yet no lesse to be considered then they) then shall you judge the more certainly. Stableness.Stablenes is called, when the urine conti∣nueth certain daies together of one sort. And if it alter every day,Unstable∣ness. Order. then is that called un∣stableness or changeableness, to which thing order doth appertain: For order is the following of one thing after another, as black coloured urine after white, green or pale. I mean not, because that so it ought to fol∣low, but only that you must observe how it doth follow. For black Urine doth not signifie the same if it follow after green urine, as it doth if it follow after white u∣rine: so that the order ought also to be mar∣ked. Substance.But now to return to the four first things. Three sorts of substance in urine. Thin.Substance is called in urine, the urine it self, in respect of the thickness or thinness of it: So that there are 3. sorts of substance in urine: thick, thin, and mean. Thick.Thin substance is called, when you may perceive well the joynts of your fingers through the urine. And contrariwise it is called thick, when you cannot well see your
fingers through it: and that is in the mid¦dle between extream thick and extream thin,Mean . is called, mean. Colours are divers, but the principall are these six, white, pale, flaxen, yellow, red and black. And all the other colours are con∣tained under these six. Light white as Chrystal∣lie, snowie.As under white, are contained clear as chrystal, white as snow, and pure as water which three are light whites. Dark white as milke-white, horny ray, pale, flaxen, yel∣low.Then are there other three more darker as milk white, cleer like horn, and grey. After white, followeth pale colour, an then flaxen, , an then yellow, which may be called golden, fo it is the colour of pure gold. Light saf∣fron, saffron colour. Claret. Red. Crimson. Purple. Blew. Green.After it followeth light saffron, and the saffron, then claret colour, and then red, af¦ter it crimson, and then purple, and the blue. Then is there green of divers kinds, as ligh green, green as grasse, stark green, and dar green. Oylie.There are also oil colours (that is, popi gay green) of three sorts: as of green, ligh oily, stark oily, and dark oily. Ash colour.After these is there Ash colour like un lead;Black. and after it, as last of all cometh blac And these be the chief colours.
Now as touching quantity, it is also in three sorts; much, little, and mean. Quantity Much.Then it is called much quantity, when it exceedeth the measure of a mans drinking. Little.And then is it called little, when a man pisseth lesse then he drinketh. Mean.And that is mean, when a mans pissing and his drinking is of like quantity. All this must be considered by due proportion. Contents.The contents are all things in the water, that be of another matter and substance par∣ticularly, then is the urine:Sediment. Sublation. Cloud. as the sediment or ground, the sublation or swim, and the cloud, To these are added other dis-form contents, like hairs, like huskes, like bran,Crown. and such other. And also the crown of the urine, with the bubles, and other things swimming on the top of it. For the better understanding of these con∣tents, you must note that the whole urine from the top to the bottome, is divided com∣monly into three rooms or regions. rooms or Regions. Ground or Sediment.The lowermost is the region of the ground or sediment: so that the grounds or sedi∣ments are the contents that occupie the lowermost region. Or yet more properly, the sediment is called a certain substance of grosser matter then is the urine, like to a quantity of very watery flegm, which sleeteth
a little above the bottome of the urine: But if it be so light, that it swim in the middle region of the urine, then is it called the sub∣limation or swim. Sublimati∣on or Swim.And if it bee yet more lighter, so that it doth fleet in the highest part of the urine then it is called a cloud: whereby you may perceive that the ground,Cloud. the swim, and th cloud are but one thing in substance, and differ onely by lightness and height, and ta∣keth his name according to the region that i occupieth.Another division of the three Regions. But yet again note, that ever one of the 3. regions, is farther devided int other parts also; whereby you may know exactly, how far all contents differ from th just room of their region; so that the whol urine must be divided into eleven just parts of which the nether region occupieth fou the fift is the void room between that an the middle region, which containeth 3. more that is to say, the sixt, seventh, and eigh And then the ninth is a void room between the middle region and the highest, whic highest region, containeth the other tw parts that remain, that is the tenth an the eleventh, as this Figure sheweth whic hereafter followeth.
urinal divided into sections for measuring urine ABove these 3. regions, about the very brink of the u∣rine, you may see a certain ring as it were, going a∣bout, and that is cal'd the crown.Crown. Bubbles.Highest of all things in the u∣rine are the bub∣bles which ei∣ther go about with the ring only, or else fleet in the middle of the urine onely, or else both. Yea sometime they cover all the whole top of the urine. Fattiness.Beside these, there is oftentimes as it were flotes or fattiness on the top, and some∣time certain spots only, which are like to drops of oil. And these commonly are the whole contents. For as for gravell or stone, or any like thing is contained under the name of dis-form contents. You shall also understand, that in the con∣tents must the substance, the quantity, and colour, bee observed.
Substance.The Substance is either equall or une∣quall. Equall.Equal Substance is called, when the ground swim, or cloud, (for to them appertaineth this consideration) is not tattered and disper∣sed, but justly knit together. Unequall.Unequall is contrary, when it is thinner in one part then in another, or flittered out, and not joyntly and uniformly joyned toge∣ther. Quantitie.The quantity must be considered in res∣pect to a mean, which if you know well, then may you soon judge that to bee over∣much, that is more then it: and that to be too little, that is lesse then it: But this mean quan∣tity must you learn of a perfect whole wa∣ter, and best by the teaching of some good Physitian. Of colours I have spoken before suffici∣ently for their varietie. CHAP. VI. What a perfect Ʋrine is, and also how ma∣ny wayes all parts of the Ʋrine may be altered in a healthful man. NOw that you know the difference o such things that ought to be conside∣red
in urine, before you shal learn by conside∣ration of them, to judge of the person that made it, how he is disposed in his body: you must first know how many waies the parts of the urine may bee changed in a healthfull man. For the better understanding of which thing, and of all that shall be said hereafter, I will first define what a perfect whole urine is, which as it betokeneth no grief in it self, so it is a true rule to examine all other urines by that, which are not whole, but declare in them some grief. A perfect whole urine Galen c. 12. Crisib.A perfect whole urine is mean in sub∣stance and in quantity, and in colour pale, or party saffron, with a white ground, duely knit and stable, without bubbles and other evill contents. So that this perfect whole urine declareth the difference of all other urines; For eve∣ry urine the more it agreeth with this, the better it is: and the more it differeth from this, the worse it is, as I shall anon particu∣larly declare. And here you must mark, that this perfect whole urine is not only taken of a perfect whole man, but also of the lustiest time of mans age, that is at thirty yeers: or more largely, between twenty five and thirty five. For in every age doth the urine alter, as you shal hear by and by.
The difference of Ʋrine by age in men. Children.THe Urine of children differeth but little in colour from pale, or light saffron and in substance it somewhat exceedeth i thicknesse the substance of yong mens urine and hath much ground in it.Galen 2. presag. Hip∣poc. 13. And the more they do grow in age, the higher waxeth th colour,Young men. the substance the thinner, and the les is the ground. And therefore when age i most freshest,Men. the colour is pale (so that th urine of flourishing youth or perfect man¦hood, is pale or light saffron) and the resteth, and goeth no higher, and the groun of it is mean. But now after that time th more age increaseth and youth decayeth, th more the colour changeth from pale tow¦ard white,Age. and the ground waxeth lesser an darker: so that the urine of old men is thi and white, with little ground, inclining un¦to cruditie. Of the Ʋrine of Women by age. Women.THe Urine of women which are temp¦rate in health and in their flourishin youth, doth decline somewhat from pa and light saffron toward white, and the sub¦stance
is in manner thin,Young wo∣men. but it hath more ground then mens urine; now all they that be under this flourishing age, the younger they be, the whiter coloured is their urine, and the more ground it hath; and if they be elder, the more aged they are,Aged wo∣men. the whiter also is their urine, but the ground is everless and lesse. And this you may see how both diversity of age, and diversitie also of kind or sexe, causeth alteration in urine, without change of health; for you must understand all these ages with perfect health. The diversity of Ʋrines, according to the times of the yeer. EVen as the diversity of ages alters urine, so doth the times of the yeer. Spring.For the more that the spring time draws toward heat the more the urine gathereth high colour, departing from pale and flaxen, toward pale and light saffron: and the inequality of sub∣stance changeth into a due equality according to nature, and the ground doth waxe thin∣ner, and the quantity is more in respect to that is drunk: so that about the midst of the spring they return to a mean. Summer.In the beginning of Summer, the colour appeareth pale and light saffron, and the sub∣stance
mean, the ground white, duly kn and stable, but yet thinner then a mea ground. And the more that the Summ proceedeth and draweth to the highest, th lesser is the quantity of urine, in compariso to the drink and the ground, changeth fro his naturall whiteness to a palish colour an is much lesser and thinner. And this thin¦nesse glystereth withall, and inclineth to¦ward golden and saffron colour. Harvest.When Harvest commeth, then the co∣lours do return to a mean again: but th thinness and brightness remaineth still; th ground also is still obscure and little, but y it is white, duely knit and stable. And a Harvest goeth forward, so the urine retu¦neth to a mean in all things. In the middle of winter and thereabou the urine keepeth due quantitie, but the co¦lour inclineth toward white, and the groun is over great, but in all other points it mean. Winter.And as Winter goeth on, the substance urine appeareth divers, and the colour whit the quantity greater in respect to the drin and the contents greater and unconcoct but toward the spring time they return to¦wards a mean as I have before said. Yet beside these, also diversity of coun¦tries
causeth diversity of urine,Countries alter urine. even by the ame reasons as doth the times of the yeer. For countries that be temperate exactly, make urine like unto the spring time. And those countries that be hot and dry make urine like unto summer. And contrariwise, cold and moist alter water, as doth winter. But countries that are drie and distempered between heat and cold, make urine like har∣vest. Meats drinks and medicines.Also meats and drinks, and order of diet, causeth urine to alter, and medicines also, as not only experience reacheth, but also Hippocrates witnesseth in the sixt Book of his Epidemies, (or raining sicknesses) in the fift part and the fifteenth sentence, as for example:Meats of light con∣coction▪ Those meats that are light of con∣coction and good in substance, cause good and temperate urine with pure contents: but contrary meats cause discoloured urine, and thin, with strange contents. Meats of hard con∣coction.Meats that will not concoct, make lesser contents, and divers in substance. Evill meats cause greater contents, and in nothing duely formed. And as the quality of meats doth alter urine, so doth the quantity also. For if a man have eaten much, and not con∣cocted it, his urine shall be thin and white, and sometime without ground. But if this
crudity (or rawness in stomack) contin long, the urine will become divers in su¦stance,Drinking of wine. and in contents. Also wine drunk abundantly causeth ¦teration in urine. Fasting long.But now contrariwise, if a man doe s long, his urine will appear fiery and saffr coloured, and thin with lesser ground Suffering of famine.But if a man suffer famine, and do n nourish, his water shall be thin and whi with a certain glistering, and witho ground. Labour.Moreover, exercise and rest changeth ¦rine: for through excessive labour, the uri changeth from light saffron, and at leng becommeth saffron coloured, with lit ground, thin, and higher coloured then should be. And some time there fleete on the top a certain fastness, specially aft overmuch wearinesse. Rest.But idleness and rest doth contrariwi cause white urine, with greater and gros ground. Sleep. Watching.Furthermore sleep, and watching, if th exceed measure, they alter urine; but the is a difference between both sleepe a watching comming of sickness, and the both when they be taken willingly in heal For if that sickness cause overmuch slee
hen is the urine whitish, with substance ei∣her fully thick, or but partly thin, and the contents many and undigest. Naturall sleep.But if that such sleep come naturally the urine is not so white, but rather flaxen, and the substance mean, with greater and well concoct contents. Voluntary sleep.And likewise they that have watched purposedly, and not by reason of sickness, their urine is but little changed.Watch in sickness. But if they watch for any sickly cause, their urine will change but little at the beginning: but with continuance the contents will be dispersed, and at the last clean wasted, and the sub∣stance of the urine waxeth thinner and thin∣ner, by little and little, and the colour in∣clineth either to white and watery, or unto golden saffron, oylie, or black, according as the cause is that maketh it so to change. Of alteration by complexion, I will write in the next Chapter. Now have you heard as touching altera∣tion of urine in health, according to diversity of ages, both in men and women, times of the yeer, countries, meats and drinks, labour, rest, sleep, and watch: so that you must have regard to these in all judge∣ments both in health and in sicknesse. For if these be not diligently marked, they may
cause great error, as you may well co¦der. What is to be conside∣red in urineFirst therefore, in every urine you  consider, whether it be a mans or a wom and what age he or shee is of, then w time of the yeer it is, and what count what meats and drinks the person us and likewise of labour and rest, sleep  watch: And then must you consider  every one of these doth alter urine: so  if the altering of them from that health urine (whereof I spake in the beginning this Chapter) be but such as one of th foresaid things would cause, then may it be judged to come of any disease, as for ¦ample. High coloured water in sum (so that it pass not saffron colour) or w coloured water in winter, should rather reckoned to come of the time of the y then of any sickness: and likewise of o things. CHAP. VII. What be the generall qualities that alte the parts of Ʋrine. BEfore I treat of the signification of  parts of Urine, I think it good to instr
you of the generall qualities which cause all alterations in urine: whereby you shall per∣ceive not only what every urine doth beto∣ken (as I shall anon set forth) but also if you mark well this Chapter, you shall see he cause why every urine doth so signi∣fie. You shall understand therefore, that there be four chief and only qualities, whereof all things that are both in the Sea and Earth are made: as man and beast, fish and fowl, trees, herbs, stones, and mettals. These four qua∣lities are heat, cold, moistness and driness: and these four continuing duly tempered (as nature ordered them first in every per∣fect body) be the cause of continuall health. But if they bee altered wrongly, then doe they cause diseases diversly, according to the diversitie of the alterations: And as they doe cause diseases, so they change the colour, substance, and other parts of the urine, whereby wee may conjecture the cause of the disease; and so consequently the disease it self, though sometime it declareth the dis∣ease it self, and not the cause thereof. Passive and active qua∣lities.But now to come to the matter meetest for this time, you shall mark that two of these four qualities are named Passive, and they cause but small alteration in compari∣son.
The other two are called Active, an they cause great alteration. The Active qualities are heat and col and the Passive qualities are driness an moistness. Moistness.When Moistness therefore exceedeth a¦lone, it dulleth the naturall colour of urin thicketh and ingrosseth the substance, an increaseth the quantitie. And as the ove part of it above waxeth rough and trouble so the ground increaseth and continue raw and unconcoct. Dryness.But dryness doth diminish the quantit of urine, and also the contents: It maket it thin in substance, cleer and bright, an causeth mean colour, and the ground appea¦reth grosser. Heat.Likewise heat, if it exceed measure bu little, it maketh pale and light saffron co¦lour in the urine. But if heat exceed great¦ly it causeth golden and saffron colour with mean substance, and a little brightness the ground is mean, in respect to the quan∣tity of urine, but it declineth from the du whiteness toward saffron colour. Cold.But cold on the other side maketh urin turn to white colour, and changeth the sub∣stance from a mean. And if the cold in∣crease, the urine will alter from mean sub∣stance,
and therefore consequently will bee either thin or grosse. If it be thin or un∣pure, the ground shall be either obscure and little, or much, and that divers and uncon∣coct. And this is the working of these four qua∣lities when they exceed alone. But and if two of them exceed together, there may result of that sort four other di∣stemperances; as hot and dry, hot and moist, cold and dry, and cold and moist.Compound distempera∣tures of qualities. Now what alterations these and every one of them doth cause the urine, you may easily conjecture, if you keep in mind that which I said of the four simple qualities, and so adde togethet the alterations. And this must you remember therewith, that where they both agree in any altera∣tion, they cause that alteration to bee the greater: and where they be contrary, they cause the alteration to be nearer to a mean: howbeit somewhat to help you, take this brief declaration. A tempe∣rate man.As a temperate man doth make that per∣fect urine, written of before, (in Chap. 6.) so the urine of a sanguine man (which is hot and moist) shall be yellow, or light saffron coloured, by the reason of the heat, and somewhat gross, by reason of the moisture.
A cholerick man.In a cholerick man (being hot and dry  the urine shall be in colour as in a sanguin man, but in substance thin, by reason of th dryness. A melan∣colike man.The urine of a melancholy man (whose na¦ture is cold and dry) shall be white throug the cold, and cleer for the dryness. A flegma∣tick man.The flegmatick man (which is cold an moist) maketh urine white through cold, an thick by the moisture, for as heat and col altereth the colours, so dryness and moistur changeth the substance. Now if you hav remembred all that I have written before then shall you be the meeter and better a¦ble a great deal to perceive the reasons  the tokens which vrine doth give. And  shall your knowledge be the more certai if you know not only the thing, but also th cause of it. Now therefore will I wri of the signification of the parts of urin particularly, that you may perceive th first, and chief commoditie of urine which  worketh for mans health.
CHAP. VIII. The significations of the parts of Ʋrine particularly. I Told you in the sixt Chapter of this Book what urine was most perfect, sound, and healthfull of all other. And I said, that it was the rule and tryall to examine all other urines by, so that the neerer that any urine was to it, the better it was; and the further that it declineth from it, the worse it is. This I said, should be as a generall rule, which thing to be true in healthful men, you may perceive by that I have written already. And that it is also true in sick men. Hypocra∣tes, witnesseth, saying, That Ʋrine is best, whose ground is white, duly knit and stable, all the time that the sickness prevaileth. But Galen to supply that that is understood in this saying, and so to make it perfect, ad∣deth thereto, That it must be of colour par∣tie golden or pale, and of a mean substance between thick and thin. And also in these things is required stableness, to make it a perfect Urine; for that which is unstable in any part, in that it is not perfect. Here were a place to speake of the diffe∣rence of this changeableness or unstableness;
for there is one sort called ordinary, and an∣other called unordinarie, and of both these are there divers differences. But because they depend of an exacter judgement the unlearned men can well attain unto, I over∣pass them for this time, and will declare the other differences of urine, whereby it alte∣reth from this mean urine, in all parts parti∣cularly. Substance or urine.And first I will begin with the substanc of urine, the which (as I said before) is o three kindes, thick, thin, and mean. Mean.A mean urine is that, that is in the mid¦dle between extream thick, and extrea thin. And as it is mean between them i substance, so is it mean in signification, so it doth betoken (of it self) only good tem¦perance and health. But the other two beto¦ken distemperance and default of concoct¦on, and that diversly, according to the diver¦sity of the causes of them, as you shall no consequently hear. Thin urine.First to speak of thin urine, either it doth still  continue thin, as it was first made, or else it doth she¦ly waxe thick and troubled. That that doth contin still thin doth betoken lack of concoction, and so do the other also; but yet this that continueth thin be¦keneth more lack of conoction, for it betokene that nature hath not yet begun to concoct. A therefore is that water, a sign of extream crud or rawness in nature. But that that waxeth thick,
it beginneth to cool, though it betoken lack of con∣coction, yet doth it declare that nature hath begun to concoct alreadie, notwithstanding it is an evill urine, for it signifieth that nature hath need not only of great strength to perform that concoction which she hath begun; but also that there is required long time to the performance of the same. For the which cause, Galen calleth this, Of all Ʋrines the worst. Thus have you heard touching crudity and concoction, what thin urine doth signi∣fie, so that all thin urine betokeneth crudity. And beside that doth further betoken (as witnesseth Hypocrates) gatherings or apo∣stumations in the nether parts of the bodie, namely, if it continue so very long, and the patient escape death. Thin and white.Furthermore, if such thin urine have with it a light whiteness, it is a very evill sign. For if it be in a burning ague, it is a token of frensines. But if the patient be fransick alreadie, and the urine doth so continue, it doth most commonly betoken death. And if he escape death (the which is seldome seen) then shall he be long sick, and escape hardly. Thin urine also betokeneth divers other things: as the stopping of the reins, and of the water veins. And likewise, if a man have had much bleeding, or laxe, or pissing, his urine will be white and thin, and al∣most without ground: Like manner in old
age, and long weakness of sickness. Also in young children if it continue long, it is a deadly sign. Yet thin urine doth sometime betoken the end of sickness and recovery of health: as in Agues (namely quotidians) if at the be∣ginning of them and so after, the urine did appear thick and troubled, and especially if the colour amend therewith. Thin and axen.And if it be thin in substance, and of flaxen colour, then is it better then thin and white: for because the colour is better though the substance bee all one; so that though it betoken some weakness and lack of con∣coction, yet not so much as doth the other, for the colour is meanly concoct: that is to say, naturall heat is meanly increased. Thin and golden.But if it be thin and golden, it is ye more better then thin and flaxen: for the colour is more exact and this betokeneth concoction half compleat, for that which it lacketh in substance, it hath in colour. Thin and saffron.After this is there thin and saffron colou∣red, which betokeneth first lack of concocti∣on, and beside that default of nourishment as in a young man that fasteth long: And sometime it betokeneth that excess of her in the inner parts of the body, doth caus cholerick humours to abound, as in the feve
tertian. Beside all this, it betokeneth thought, carefulness, and watching, and also over∣much labour, and taking of heat in the Sun. And thus have you heard the significati∣ons of thin urine, both alone, and also with such colours as it can be coupled. Now shall you hear what thick urine doth betoken, both alone, and also with such divers colours, as it may be coupled. Thick.Thick urine (which is, so I mean, when it is first made) either it doth continue still thick, or else it doth settle, and waxe clear. If it continue still thick, it betokeneth that that disturbance which was in the bloud, that is to say, the rage of sicknesse doth still continue strongly: and that naturall strength is but weak. This urine is not so good as that which doth settle and waxe cleer. For that doth betoken that the disease shal short∣ly be overcome: howbeit there remaineth yet somewhat of that distemperate trouble in the blood: yet nature hath the over-hand and expelleth the matter of the grief, and therefore is such a urine called good, but yet it betokeneth some lack of concoction, though not so much as that which continueth troubled and thick still. Also thick urine (if it be exceeding thick) doth betoken death, as Hypocrates saith,
And the urine that is thick and troubled, lik beasts urine, doth betoken head ach, eithe present already, or shortly after to com If thick urine appeare in an ague, whe thin urine went before, it betokeneth tha the sickness will abate straightwaies, for  declareth that nature hath overcome the mat¦ter of the sickness: but if it appear thick  the beginning of the ague, and do not wa thin in process of time, it betokeneth plent of matter, and weakness of nature; so th there is fear lest nature should be overcom except the colour do amend. Thick and white.Thick urine also betokeneth openne of the water pipes and reins. And if it b thick and white, it betokeneth great plen of raw humours, and sundry kinds of fleg to be gathered in the bodie: and betokene also (namely if it be much) that those gath¦rings, which might be looked for in so agues shall not ensue, for the matter whic should cause them departeth out by urine but the whiteness of this urine is bright snow. For if it be somewhat darker li the whiteness of milk, it is a token of th stone, either in the bladder or reins, namely if such urine chance in the end and amendin of sickness. Grey.But if the colour of it be grey, it betokene
not only plenty of matter in the body, but also that the whole body is possessed with a dangerous sickness, whereof oftentimes it chanceth the patient to break out with bli∣sters and heat in his skin. Thick and claret.Next after this followeth thick claret co∣lour (for flaxen, yellow, nor saffron colour doth not agree with thick urine) and it doth signifie that the disease shall continue long, specially if the ground of it be also of claret colour. But yet this disease without perill of death. Thick and red.Thick urine, if it be red coloured, doth be∣token abundance of blood, as is seen in con∣tinuall Agues, and in all perillous Agues, as witnesseth Theophylus. If this water come by little and little, it is an evill token, for it doth alwaies declare danger. And if that sort of urine (in such Agues) do waxe troubled, so that there come with it deafness of hearing, and ach of the head, with pain in the neck and in the sides of the belly, it betokeneth that the Patient shall have the falling evill within a seven night. Thick and crimson.And if a thick urine have a crimson colour, If it bee burning Agues, and the Patient then have the headach, it betokeneth that a chief criticall sign either is then present, or else nigh at hand.
Thick and blew.But if the urine be thick and blew colo¦red, it signifieth diversly, as the persons a that made it. For in them that are in wa of recovery, it betokeneth that they sha escape their grief. It signifieth also pa in the water-pipes, or else that the par hath runn much. And if it appear such in old men, and th continue long, it declareth not only that th bladder is infected with evill humours, b commonly also that he shall be rid of them But if it come after the grief of the stone,  declareth that the grief shall be turned int the strangurie. Thick and green.Thick urine and green, namely in Ague is a token of the yellow Jawnders, eithe present, or ready to come. Thick and ash colou∣red.Thick urine and ash coloured, if it appea in Agues and do not settle, it is a sign of mad∣nesse, But in the burning Ague, it betoken∣eth that the strangurie will come shortly. Thick and black.But if a black colour appear in thick urine it betokeneth sometime well, as in the end of the Fever Quarten, and of melancholike madness, for it betokeneth that the melan∣cholike matter, which caused the diseases, doth avoid out. But sometimes it is an evill token, for it signifieth that either the blood is burned
through exceeding heat, or else that natu∣ll heat is clean quenched through deadly ld, and therefore is commonly called a adly sign, namely in sharp Agues, if it ve an evill savour. And so meaneth Galen, hen he saith, that he marked, The thicker at a black water is, the worse it is, and oreover, That he never saw any escape, hich made such Ʋrine. And thus have you heard of the significa∣ons of thin and thick urine, with such co∣ours as may be coupled therewith. Now will I write a little of the colours a∣one, and of such tokens as come chiefly of hem, rather then of the substance or any other part of the urine. Colours of urine.The colours of urine declare commonly, how heat and cold do reign in the body, so that the whiter the urine is, the greater is the cold, and natural heat lesse; and the higher coloured that the urine is, the greater is the heat. White.But to speak particularly, that you may perceive it the better. If the urine be white, it is a sign that concoction faileth quite, and the lighter coloured, the worse. Pale.Pale colour is better somewhat, though it also declare lack of naturall heat and strength. Flaxen.And flaxen colour, though it betokeneth
beginning of concoction, yet it is not pe¦fect: howbeit it may be well taken, if all ¦ther signs be good. Pale, light saffron.Pale and light saffron (as you have hea before) are the best colours and most temp¦rate, which betoken exact concoction. Golden saffron.But golden and saffron colour declare e¦cess of heat. Claret red. Crimson Purple. Green oily.Claret is next, and then red, after it crim¦son, and then purple, then green, and l of them is oily urine, which as they goe in o¦der, so they declare greater and greater he with increase, not only of the qualitie, b also of the matter containing the same. Blew ash-colour.But now of the other side, blew urine, an ash colour, are tokens of excessive cold sometime with matter, and sometime with out; and so likewise of black urine, howbe¦it it cometh sometime of excess of heat. But how you may know the difference both of it and all the other, now will I shew in order, with the rest of their significations White.White urine, if it come in great quantity in a whole man, it betokeneth much drink¦ing of thin wine. But if it be mean in quantity, with a due ground, it declareth cold distemperance of the liver. The urine doth appear white, with a dis-form and unconcocted ground, in them
that have the dropsie. But in old men, white rine is no great evill sign, as you may per∣eive by that I said before of Ages, how hey alter urine. But in yong men, and such s are of freshest age, it is a worse sign, and pecially if it have either no contents, or else evill contents. And if urine continue ong time white without changing, it beto∣keneth painfull beating of the head, daselling of the eies, and giddiness, and also the fal∣ing evill, lothsomness of good meats, and usting sometime after evill meats, greedie hunger, pain in limbs, and painfull moving of the sinewes, and divers griefes of the head and reines, and also pain in the fun∣dament, and great weakness by sickness, for all these doe follow continually lack of concoction, either cold, or stopping of the urines and conduct, or transposing of the humours. But the differences of these cannot easily bee known of every man, yet such as are learned may gather certain distinctions of them by the accidents which follow dis∣eases. Milk white, hornwhite, gray.Dark white colours, as milk white, white, white like horn, and grey, If they appear in the beginning of Agues, and in the increase of them, they doe betoken much pain. But
in the decrease of Agues, they declare he especially if it come plentifully. Pale, flaxenPale urine and flaxen, do not lightly pear in Agues, except they be easie Ag and short, as those which continue but day, but if that it do follow after bu Agues, it declareth that they be fully d¦ved. Pale, saf∣fron.As for pale and light saffron, they are  I said before) the best and most perfect ¦lours, namely, in young men and f youth. But in old men, women and child (whose urine, as I have said, declineth ¦ward white and pale) it doth betoken t their bodie is too hot, either by reason their diet, or else of their exercise. Bu as much as it is but mean excesse, it declare but small grief. Golden saffron co∣lour.Golden and saffron coloured urine, if be either somewhat thin, or very thick, ¦ther it hath no ground, or else very few, a dark contents. But in this they differ, th golden urine declareth excess of heat, a matter also, by reason of meats, sharp med¦cines, chafing of the bloud through ange heat of the bowels, or else heat of the tim of the yeer. But saffron colour appeareth rather wit default of matter, through some affection o
the mind, watching, heat of the sun, labour, and such like things, which increase thin and yellow choller, and diminish naturall heat, o that the cause of this colour is choler it self, increased either in quantity, or else in qualitie. But in old men and women, and uch other, there is some greater cause that occasioneth it, for it signifieth an Ague com∣eth of saffronly choler dispersed through the whole body; after which there followeth commonly giddiness, headach, bitterness of he mouth, lothsomeness of meat, thirstiness, Also in yong men, such urine is caused through much exercise, and use of hot meats. Of Claret and red Ʋrine. Claret urine.CLaret and red urine is coloured either of the mixture of red choler, or else of the corruption of bloud; such urine oftentimes goeth before Agues. For when the blood doth so abound, that it cannot be duly la∣boured, nor can take no ayre, there is en∣gendred a certain corruption, which as it is red of colour it self, so it causeth the urine to be red in colour if it be much, else it ma∣keth only claret colour. But if it be exact red lik grain, it betokeneth that bloud issueth into it, out of some veins nigh to the reins,
which either are broken, or other waies ¦pened. But how it may be known fr whence it commeth, and how, there are ¦ny means to search, but because they are light to perceive, I will reserve them for P¦sicians that are learned. This colour o self is no great evill sign, namely in yo men, for it betokeneth excess of bloud, wh may well bee born of them. But in old m it is a very evill sign, for it betokeneth ¦ther long sickness, or else death, sith na is so weak that it cannot keep in her natu humour. And if that red colour, come red choler, as it doth in young men, for  most part and not of blood (which thing learned Physician may conjecture partly  the former diet, and other signs more) t accidents shal be the more troublous; ho¦beit yet not so evill, as when it commeth  saffron or golden choler, for this cause greater thirst, and more troublous sleep th the other. Of Crimson colour. Crimson colour.CRimson colour is a token that the goo humours of the bodie are burned, an turned into red or black choler, which cau worse griefs then the other; howbeit if
have a good ground, the grief is the more moderate: But if it have either no contents for a space, or else evill contents, and the urine appear like a thick myste, but some∣what glistering light, it is a sign that nature needeth such strength to recover her selfe to her own state. Notwithstanding such u∣rine is caused sometime in whole folk, by reason of much labour, and long journying, and then it hath some good signs therewith. But in them that have a sharp Ague, such crimson colour of urine doth betoken that corrupt blood doth abound, and that it doth putrifie, and turn into choler. And commonly they that make such urine, doe thirst much, and are dry in their mouth, and are troubled in their sleep, and feel sharp Agues, and are half distract, and feel pain of the liver with coughing. Howbeit, yet these signs may be some∣times as well good as bad, according as the colours do change to better or worse. Of Purple Colour. Purple co∣lour.PUrple colour declareth need of much strength before it can be altered to a good urine. This urine is a sign of burning choler. And if it do continue very long, it is a token
of the yellow Jaunders, with abundance gross and corrupt choller, gathered in the ¦ver. And at the beginning there goeth w it some spices and grudgings of the Ag with a little thirstiness; but unless there b discretion used in the diet of such a Patie it may turn to a much worse disease. Of Green Ʋrines. Green co∣lour.GReen colour is an evill and a dangero token, for it needeth not only long tim but also cotinual strength to bring it ag to a good trade. The higher that this cold is, the more it declareth that choller exce¦eth the other humours: which if it be a more burned, will cause black urine, which I will anon speak. But if green o¦lour come of wasting of the fat, then is somewhat like to oylie colour, or popin green: but if it come of abundance of purp¦lish colour, and through increase of his qu¦litie, then doth the colour incline more ¦ward black, and glistereth with shadow green, drawing very nigh unto black. Af green choler followeth madness, parbrea¦ing, and avoiding of choler, sometimes wi matter, or else burned: and also continu thirstiness, and burning heat of the tongue
straightness about the stomack. And like o∣ther things. But if the patient continue strong, and the colour of the urine do waxe lighter, there is good hope, else there is great fear, least of the dryness and burning, there do follow contraction of the sinews, which will kill the patient. Of Oilie Ʋrine, or Popinjay Green. Oilie urine, or popinjay green.OYlie Urine is of three sorts, as I said in the fift Chapter, that is, light oylie, stark oylie, and dark oylie. Oylie urines are a token of unnatural heat, and the higher that the colour is, the greater is the heat. And also they betoken melting of the fat within a man, for of it are they so coloured. But at the beginning, when there is a little fat melted, the urine is light oylie. For if it look stark oylie, then it signifieth that the disease increaseth. But if it come once to dark oylie, then is the disease sore in∣creased, Hippocrates in the seventh Book of his Aphorisms speaking of fatness in urine, saith thus: Who so maketh urine with fatty flotes comming much and fast, they have sharp pains in the reins. Which sentence though it seem more to appertain to the contents then to the colour,
yet doth not onely Galen, but also Aetin Actuarius, and also another Grecian, (who name I know not) expound it amongst co¦lours: and by it declare the difference  know whether that wast or melting  fat be in the reins it self, or in other parts o the body. For if it come fast together, ( Hippocrates saith) then commeth it from th reins it self, and betokneth the wasting  be in them. But if it come softly and increa by little and little, then doth it declare th the whole body is overcome with unna¦turall heat, and that the fat of it doth wast it doth betoken (as Act. witnesseth) a wast¦ing Ague; consuming the body. Of blew Ʋrine, Ash-colour, and Black. BLew colour, Ash-colour, and Black do differ only in lightness and darkness For ash-colour is darker then blew: an black is darker then any of them both. Blew co∣lour.Blew colour sometime cometh of mode¦rate melancholy, and then is the urine some¦what thin in substance. And sometime i commeth of great cold, and then it is thick in substance. And sometime it is a token o mortifying of some part. Yea, and sometime even of whole nature: namely, if the colour change to worse and worse, and there went
before no token of concoction. Ash-colour.Ash coloured urine commeth of like causes, and betokeneth like things. How∣beit it is so coloured many times, when the party that made it, hath been sore beaten and bruised. But in this you need not the help of urine, for you may see the walts and tokens of the stripes in his body. Black urine.Urine which is extream black, some∣time betokeneth extream heat, and some∣time extream cold, the which both you may distinctly discerne, if you doe observe or∣der of alteration in the colours of the urine that the patient made last before. For if his urine before were green, or like thereto, then doth the black urine which follows it, betoken extream heat. But if it were last be∣fore blew or ash-coloured, then doth it signi∣fie extream cold. This black colour though it be commonly an evill and deadly sign, as I said before, (speaking of thick urine and black) yet sometime it is a good token. For in all diseases lightly that come of me∣lancholy matter, it betokeneth that the mat∣ter doth avoid, and so the sicknes to end. And such urine doth appear many times after pur∣gations or other meats and drinks which purge the splene; namely, if a man do labour upon them, that was before diseased of the spleen.
Howbeit, sometime meats and drinks of li colour cause black urine, as Galen witnesseth namely, after dark red wine, and Allegant. But in moderate Agues, if such black ¦rine doe appear, it is a token of death, excep it be on some Criticall dayes. And likewi in sharp agues, especially if the savour b strong and stinking: unless it come of som grief of the bladder Quantitie of urine.Let this suffice for this time, as touchin colours. Now for the quantitie of urine,  when it is mean, it is a good token: so whe it is either too much, or too little, it is an e¦vill sign, except it come of such cause, (as shewed before) that altereth urine in healthfull man. Much in a whole body.As first excessive quantitie of urine, com¦meth of much drinking of thin wine, as Re¦nish wine, and such like. But that shall yo thus know: for the colour will be white¦ly, and the substance thinner then a mean the contents also will be divers, and not d¦ly knit. Likewise if there be aboundanc of raw humours in a man unconcocted, an yet nature persevering strong, then is ther great quantity of urine, and somewhat thi of substance, but not so white as the othe and the contents of this are better. Als (as Hippocrates saith) much Ʋrine made i
the night,4. Aph. 3. is a token of small sege; so that if any impediment let naturall sege, then will the quantity of urine be the greater. But in this as the colour is mean, so is the ground both greater and grosser, yet in healthfull folk may the urine, by another means also be greater then a mean, and that may be by medicines which provoke urine, but then is the colour more naturall then the last that I spake of, and the ground is thinner of sub∣stance, so that it is dark and scarcely seene, and then is there a certain glistering in the u∣rine it self. Little urine in a whole body.Now contrarie waies, and of contrary cau∣ses cometh small quantitie of urine. For it cometh sometime of lack of drinke, or dry meats, and then is the colour light saffron, with a smal ground, but yet somewhat gross. Also both meats and medicines that are clammie, and apt to stop the water-pipes, do cause little urine, but then is the ground also little and thin. Besides these, much sege causeth urine to be lesser, for if the one excrement be greater then nature would, the other must needs be lesse, if the body be healthful. In this urine, as you may partly know the cause of it by the knowledge of the excessive sege, so will the urine it self be thinner, and the ground very
dark, thin, and not duely knit. And th many waies may this alteration appear in healthfull body. Much urine in a sick bo∣dy.Now in a sick person, much urine eithe betokeneth the dropsie, and then is it lik water, with a raw and diverse ground or else if it be white, thin, and witho ground, then doth it betoken the pissing ¦vill. And this urine (as witnesseth Galen  in his first Book of Judicials) is the worst  any other of like sort,Diabete. I mean which decla lack of concoction, for it declareth the decay yea I may say, the utter extinction of tw naturall powers, that is, the retentive power and the alterative power also. Much urine, in colour fierie, and light saf¦fron, or of any like colour, is to be feared namely, if it be coupled with evill contents But if it be of crimson or purple colour and so proceed, especially if no concoctio went before it, then doth it encline to evill and betokeneth a certain mortifying and wa¦sting of the whole composition of the body▪ But if much urine come in an Ague, name∣ly toward the end, and that there went be∣fore it little urine, thick and ruddie, then is that a good token,4. Aph 69. as witnesseth Hypocrates for it betokeneth the Ague to be at an end. And this Urine will bee white and thin
moderately, and will have a mean ground. Little urine in a sick bo∣dy.Now little quantity of urine, with a grosse ground, unduly knit and unconcoct, is an e∣vill token; for it betokeneth the weakness of the alterative power, which is not able to extenuate, concoct, neither alter the mat∣ter, and therefore doth it with much diffi∣culty pass forth in such grossnes. Howbeit, if there follow after it a more thinner urine, with the ground well and duly knit, and sta∣ble, then is it without fear. For this latter u∣rine (as you heard before) is a token that the cause of the other is overcome and vanqui∣shed. This little quantitie of urine cometh some∣time in vehement Agues, and then is the vio∣lent heat, cause thereof. Sometime also it cometh of the stopping of the water-pipes, not only through clammy meats and drinks, but also of some disease or grief in them. And this now shall suffice for an Intro∣duction, as touching the substance, colours, and quantitie of urine. Contents.It followeth next, to speak of the con∣tents which so greatly help to the right judgement of urine, that Hippocrates (in his second book of Prognostications) doth by them only; yea, and that by one of them (I mean the ground (pronounce the judgement
of a perfect urine; saying, That that is the best Ʋrine,Sediment. which hath his sediment or ground, white, duly knit and stable, and that continually all the time of the sickness. Now seeing this great Clerk and Father of Physick, doth thus esteem the ground, it shall not seem unmeet, that I orderly doe write briefly of those principall things that are to be considered, as touching the con∣tents; and first of all of the ground, which hath alteration (as you have heard) both in substance, colour, and quantitie. But now as touching the substance? then is it only mean, when the third concoction in the veins is perfect. For the ground is the excrement (as you might say) of that third concoction, and is like in forme to matter, save that it is more duly knit together then is matter, and doth not smell so evill as it; or else you may liken it to thin steam. Grosse ground.This Ground is then gross, when the veins are replenished with raw humors. How∣beit this grosseness or thickness is not al∣wayes an evill token; for sometime it is a sign that nature hath prevailed against the crude humours which caused diseases, and doth expell such superfluous excrements. And that shall you discerne by the goodness, of the colour, and also if it come in the de∣clining
of the sickness: for if it come at the beginning, either in the increase of the sick∣ness, then are they to be suspected as evill; especially if they bring with them evill co∣lours. Thin ground.A thin ground, being also pure, and so cleaving to the bottom of the Urinal, that it will not lightly rise, though the urinall be shaked, it is a token of great weakness of nature in the third concoction, and such a ground appeareth most in white and watrie urine. Howbeit sometime a thin ground cometh by the reason that the raw humors are extenuate through naturall heat, which getting new strength, doth extenuate and disperse all grossness of raw humors within the veins. For the propertie of heat, is to knit and bind together thin things, and to extenuate and disperse grosse and raw things. Colour of the grounNow as touching the colours of the ground, the perfect ground is neither ex∣ceeding white, neither yet pale, but mean between both, for if there appear any such excessive white, then is it some rag of phleg∣matick matter, or else matter extreamly concocted, which commeth from some in∣ward member being sore; and that you may discern (as I said before) by the toughnes, and by the savour.
And if any man be desirous to know the cause why the ground is white of colour, let him remember, that the ground is the superfluous excrement of the bloud being perfectly concocted in the veins. Now that the bloud it self, when it is exactly con∣cocted, is turned into a white, or at least, a party white colour, you may conjecture by the generation of milke, and also the seed of man, yea, and of matter, which all three are nothing else but bloud, exactly concocted, save that matter cometh of evill bloud. Pale. Flaxen.And therefore whensoever the ground hath in it any other colour then white, it is no good token: As first, if it be pale and flaxen coloured, then it is swarved from his right and commendable colour. Howbeit, yet it may be born as but meanly evill, be∣cause that that colour commeth of small ex∣cess of choler. Saffron. Actuarius.But if it be more higher coloured by cho∣ler, so that it be saffron coloured, then is it an evill token (as Actuarius saith) for it declareth that choler is excessively increased, either by the order of diet, or else by the corruption of bloud, or some other wayes.7. Aph. 32. Howbeit Hippocrates in his A∣phorisms, seemeth to say the contrary, for he saith, That when the ground is so colou∣red
of choler, especially if at the beginning of the sicknesse it were waterie to sight, then doth it betoken a quicke sickness; that is to say, as Philotheus expoundeth it,Philotheus. a sicknesse, that will shortly be ended, and so it may justly be called a good sign. Not∣withstanding as in this point it is a good token, in that it signifieth that the disease is nigh the end, so it may be called (as Actua∣rius calleth it) an evill sign, because it doth betoken a cholerick sickness, and that cho∣ler doth unnaturally abound. Antonius Musa.And if this answer do not content you, (though it content Antonius Musa) then may you say more better (as I thinke) thus: That if the ground be at the beginning of the sickness coloured with choller, and so increase (as Actuarius seemeth to mean) then is it an evil token indeed, for it declareth both the abundance, and also the encrease of choler. But if the ground, at the beginning of a cholerick disease were warry, that is, white and thin, and afterward turn to saffron co∣lour, which is the exact colour of choler: or else to a yellow colour (which is some∣what lesse cholerick) then is it a token that the cholerick matter, which before lay lurking in the body, doth now begin to avoid; and so the cause of sicknesse,
thus by nature expelled, health must nee follow. As contrariwise, if after yellow or sa¦fron colour it change unto whiter, and the be no certain token of concoction, then it an evill sign, and a token of phrensie. How¦beit, if there be any token of certain con¦coction, then is the same a good sign, that if you take heed, you may perceiv here what a necessary thing it is to observ order in the alteration of urine, of whic I have partly spoken before. Claret co∣lour. Red. Bloudie.Now therefore to goe on If th ground bee of claret colour, either red o blew, the token is not good. For these bloo¦dy colours come either of too much abun¦dance of bloud, or else by reason that the retentive power is so feeble, that it canno keep in the good humors, but suffreth them to run out. Claret red.Claret colour and red, doe betoken a cer∣tain default of concoction in the veins, and that through the excess of red choler. Bu yet this default is but mean and without danger, seeing that the hurt is only by quan∣tity, whereas some other do hurt both by quantitie and qualitie also. Bloudie.Bloodie grounds are altogether worse then red (though they be better then ash-coloured,
and black) for they betoken that the bloud is nothing duely wrought, especially if their quantitie be much, with∣all, for then the quantity of matter doth let the powers to work, which thing yet as it may be born, so it declareth need of long time to recover health. But if this doe come through weakness of the powers in themselves, then is it an extream evill sign: for it betokeneth that the powers are overcome with weariness in working, and be not able to keep in the good and profitable humors. Which thing to discern more exactly, you shall take arti∣ficiall conjectures by other circumstances, which give also tokens of judgement; name∣ly, as by the age of the person, by his order of dyet, and such like. Blew. Ash-colour Black.Now to make an end with the other co∣lours which are of a dark hew, as blew-ash-colour and black: These of all other are the worst, and most envious to nature, and the nearer they cleave to the bottome of the urinall, the worse they are. These colours come of a black melancho∣ly humour, being ingendred within the veins, or else coming from some other part into them: or else it betokeneth deadly mortifying. But sometimes it cometh of
sore bruising and stripes, and generally cometh (namely the black) either of exce¦sive cold or excessive heat. And now for a conclusion, whatsoever have said of the ground, you shall unde¦stand the same to bee spoken of the swi and the cloud; for they are in kinde but o thing, save that they differ in lightness an¦heft, and therefore also in places: But th judgement of their substance and colour,  much after one rate, though some diffe¦rence there be, as you shall hear hereafter. QuantitieAnd likewise of their quantity, whic as it is then only commendable when it i mean, so if it be greater then a mean, it dot declare some alteration in man, though no alwayes extreamly evill, for sometime it i a token of fatting, or growing to a corpo¦rateness,Great. and that it doth signifie, if non other evill sign be coupled with it. Fo though the person feed much on nourishing meats, and that with rest and an idle life, ye naturall heat appeareth so strong, that she can easily concoct such meats. According to this saith Galen in his Judicials, that the plenty of the ground in urine betokeneth certain and exact with concoction: And that as the body is repleat with crude humours, so it declareth that those same be
in expelling out at that present time. And for this cause (saith he) in all children com∣monly, and in men also which feed much, or bee of some other cause replete with humors, their urine hath a great ground. Also oftentimes it chanceth the pores of the skin to be stopped, so that such excre∣ments as were wont to pass out by them, are inforced to seek a new passage, which they find most readiest by the urine, and thereof are the contents, and namely the ground, oftentimes encreased. And all these waies chance in health. But in sickness, it chanceth many and grosse superfluities do appear in the urine, as often as the natu∣rall powers, namely, the alterative or con∣coctive power being weakned, such crude humours pass out undefied. So doth it chance (as witnesseth Alexan∣der Trallianus) That the urine of them which have the Collick,Tral. 2. cap. 33. is flegmatick and hath a great ground. But if the contents be either great, or gross in the beginning, or in the augmenting of sickness, (name∣ly if the Patient have any notable Ague) it argueth abundance of humours, to the concoction of the which there needeth both strength of naturall powers, with time and good speed.
Little Con∣tents.And now contrary wayes must you judg of the smalness of the contents, for they be¦caused either of great labour, long fasting stopping, or obstruction of the veins, and such like parts, or else of slacknesse of concoction.Gal. 2. pres. Hip. 26. And (as Galen saith) when the body is replete with crude and raw hu∣mours, then is the ground great, but if the body be replenished with cholerick humors, then is there in the urine either little ground or none at all; but in such case it is well, if there be any sublimation or swim. Urine with∣out ground.Now seemeth the place most meet to speak of such urines as have no ground at all, nor other orderly content, and that will I doe by the order of the colours of the u∣rine, according as Actuarius proceedeth. The urine that is very white, and exceed∣ing thin, and so lacketh the ground, doth betoken either some notable obstruction, either immoderate cold, or else cruditie and lack of concoction. And as these tokens may be greater or lesser, so shall the things which they betoken bee judged in like rate, either more, or lesser. But if the urine bee pale coloured, or flax∣en, and then lacketh contents, as it doth de∣clare lesser obstruction, so it doth signifie as great cruditie, as the other before.
And so shall you judge of urine that is yel∣low or flaxen coloured. For in them it ap∣peareth, that naturall heat doth prevail. Not∣withstanding such things (I mean the de∣fault of the ground with those colours) may chance (as often they doe) through vehement pain, immoderate labour, long watching, and also default of matter. But such urines as be higher coloured then these that I have named, by their co∣lours they declare the qualities of the hu∣mours which doe prevail: and also betoken a certain putrefaction, and cruditie in the veins. It chanceth also sometimes, that some ga∣thering sore being in some of the principall members, by his unnaturall heat withdraw thither the matter (even as it were by cup∣ping) and so doth cause the urine to have no ground. And though, indeed, it is never a good token to lack the ground in a urine, yet it is lesse to be complained of, if the colour and substance draw nigh to a mean; for in such a case it betokeneth, that though nature be somewhat slack, yet will shee shortly gather strength, so that there shall appear a ground in the urine. Now to shew you the reason, why it chan∣ceth no ground to appear in the urine: First,
in case of cruditie, when there wanteth per∣fect concoction, there must needs want al∣so the contents in the urine; for they are the excrements (as you might say) and the su∣perfluities of the third concoction. Like∣wise though concoction be perfect enough, yet may there want the contents, if there be any notable obstruction or stopping of the veins, namely, seeing the contents are somewhat gross of substance, and therefore unable to pass, if the way be any thing stop. After the same sort shall you judge of long fasting and default of meat, and moreover of such meats as are unapt to concoct. For in all such cases, there can be ingendred few or no contents. And contrariwise, though nature doe work many superfluities, yet if the wombe be so loose that it yeeldeth many seges, then as the urine shall be the lesser, so shall the contents be few or none: for nature then doth expel by sege, those superfluities, which should cause the contents. And likewise, when there is in any part of the bodie an inflammation or excessive heat, which doth draw matter to it, either that any of those parts are weak, unto which nature is wont to expell such superfluities; for in all such cases there may want the
ground, and the other contents in the u∣rine. And as for some of them (I mean crudi∣tie and opilation) they may be well enough born withal, unles their continuance be long. But now again, there is great difference touching the time of the sickness in which it chanceth, for in the beginning and increase of sharp Agues, if the ground be lacking, it betokeneth great weaknesse of naturall strength, which if not prevented, may conti∣nue unto the chief strength of the sicknesse. And after such an urine, there doth follow much waking and disquietness, halfe mad∣ness and trouble of mind, and all those shall bee according to the greatness of the Ague, either extream or mild. And sometime it is a token that there shall bee a gathering sore in some part of the body, namely, if o∣ther agreeable causes come therewith, as a winterly disposition of the aire, with an uncertain state of sickness, and uncon∣stant alteration, and mean weakness of the Patients power. But in the declina∣tion of the sickness, such urine ought not greatly to be blamed, for then hath nature escaped the brunt of sickness, though she be yet weak. Yea, and in the chief strength of sicknes (as well as in the declination) it may seem no strange thing, if nature (as though al∣ready
she had the over-hand) do gather her power together, and draw a little nourish∣ment to her self, and thereby causeth little or no ground to appear. But afterward when shee is somewhat refreshed, and doth more liberally nourish the body, then doth shee shew forth contents in the urine. And light∣ly the order of the contents is such, that first there appeareth a cloud, which afterward doth gather more strong and weightie sub∣stance, and doth become a swim or sublima∣tion: And last of all, when it hath gathe∣red a right naturall whitness, and due sub∣stance, then will it grow to a ground. CHAP. IX. Of difform Contents. OTher things should I here speak of, as touching the Judiciall of the contents, both of their stableness, that is, their conti∣nuance in good form, and of their due knit∣ting, being neither tattered, nor dispersed, nor yet overmuch clodded together. But because the exact judgement thereof exceed∣eth the capacitie of mean wits (for whose sake I have written this Book) and cannot lightly be perceived of them, but by the In∣struction
of a lively voice, I wil for this time overpass the exact and perfect declaration of them reserving it to a place more due: And now will I briefly over-run the other things which remain to bee considered in u∣rine, but yet not without some mention of those other, as occasion commeth: and first those difform Contents which occupie the place of the ground,Difform contents. and therefore take his name also. Of this sort there are four principall: the first is in bigness of a small fatch, and red coloured, which you may call therefore red fatches, because of their likeness. These (as witnesseth Galen) are ingendred of the con∣sumption and wasting of the flesh,6. Epid. when the fatness is already melted away. But in this there is great difference, for sometime it is only the wasting of the reins, and sometime of the whole body: as if there appear in the urine tokens of due concoction, then is that wast in the reins onely. But if there appear in the urine default of concoction, (namely being great) or if the patient have an Ague, then is it the wast of the whole body, and that standeth well with reason, that when it betokeneth the wast of the whole body, there must needs appear de∣fault of concoction; for in such case those
parts which are the Instruments of con∣coction are so weakned, that they cannot do their office. These contents, by reason that they are gross and heavie, therefore they ap∣pear alwaies in the bottom of the urinall. Brannie contents.Other difform contents there be also, of which some are like bran, and some like scales. And of those that are like bran, there is one sort smaller, and another grosser; the smaller sort is like the bran of Wheat that is finely ground, and those may I call fine bran. The grosser is like bran of Barley, or of evill ground wheat, and may therefore be called gross bran,Fine bran. Gross bran. for it is thrice as big as the other. Scales.The third sort which is like Scales, hath no notable thicknesse, but onely breadth and length. These three doe betoken waste of the strongest parts of the bodie; but yet not all alike, as Hippocrates doth declare in the second Book of his Prognosticks. Howbeit, because that place of Hippocrates is so difficult, that scarcely the great lear∣ned men can agree thereon, I will not now meddle therewith, but will write Actuari∣us mind of those three. Fine bran.When the Ague (saith he) is grounded in the bottome of the veins, then there appea∣reth such fine bran. Howbeit, sometimes
it is a token of the onely grief of the bladder being scabbed, as witnesseth Hypocrates, 4. Aphor. 77. But then hath the Patient no A∣gue, and again, there doth appear tokens of concoction in the urine. But when it com∣eth of the whole body, this is the cause thereof; The Ague getting power and pre∣vailing unto the hard parts of the body (as in those Agues which are called Fevers hec∣tike) then in the striving between those parts and the Ague, the Ague having the masterie, doth by his violence raise of such brannie scurffe. For the nature of fire (whose operation the Ague hath) is to work accord∣ing as the matter is that it findeth, either to melt it, if it be a liquid and unctuous thing, either else to scale it and fret it, if it be hard and unpliant: and the harder that the matter is, the greater scales it fretteth off; which thing you may see by daily experience, how fire melteth wax and tallow, and such like, turning them into liquids: whereas of iron and of other metals,Scales. it maketh scales and not liquor. But when the Ague hath attained and o∣verset, not onely the substance of the veins, but also the strong parts of the body, and doth melt and waste them, then doth there appear in the urine, scales, broad
and thin, which you shall know to come  the whole body (as I said of the other be∣fore) if the Pacient have an Ague, or the appear default of concoction in the urine  else if these two be absent, it may come o the blistering of the bladder, as Hippocrate writeth 4. Aphor. 81. and namely, if ther be in the urine an evill savour withall. Gross bran.Now to speak of the great and grosse bran, which as it is much greater then the other, so doth it declare a greater strength of the Ague, and that in the whole body, and all the parts of it, enflaming and burning the whole substance thereof, and therefore is it not only the worst of them all, but is nigh unto a deadly sign,Note. and that either by the waste and consuming of the great and strongest parts of the body, or else by the burning or drying up of the bloud. Which two things you may discern asunder by the colour of them. For if they be red, then come they of the burning of the bloud; but if they be white, then come they of the wast of the strongest parts of the body. Hippoc. 7. Aphor. 31.Of this kind of contents speaketh Hippo∣crates saying: In whatsoever Agues there doth appear grounds like unto grosse bran, it is a token that the sickness shall continue long. Which saying, Galen doth under∣stand
so to be true, If the Patient have sufficient strength to continue with such sick∣ness, else it may be a sign rather of short life, then of long sickness. For as that token is commonly deadly, so those few that doe escape, do recover hardly, and not without the long sufferance of the violence of that cruell Ague. Now as touching the foreknowledge of it, whether the patient may endure with it or no, that shall you gather of the multi∣tude, order, and stableness or unstableness of it. For if they be many in number, and pro∣ceed to worse and worse, then it is an evill and mortall sign, and doth declare that na∣ture is wearied and doth quite faint thorow the waste and decay of the whole constitu∣tion of the body: But contrariwise, if they appear few, and do alter continually unto lesse evill tokens, then is there good hope of health. And this shall suffice as touching these. Ragged scraps.Now to speak of the rest, of the ragged scraps, hairs, and other like: First you shall understand, that sometime a good ground is coupled with certain evill and unconcted fragments of all sorts of humours, for sometime there appeareth with the contents certain ragged scraps, enclining
in colour toward a yellow, or a white,  else some such like, if those appear in gre quantitie, they declare the matter to be ha unconcoct, and that the humour (who scraps they are) doth abound in the depth  the body, and is as dust or burned, but if the bee few, then declare they the malice  the humour to be milder, and that the  of evill meats doth cause them, the great that such ragged scraps are, the lesser adu¦on of humours they declare to be in t veins, and the lesser they be, the greater he they do betoken. For the cause of suc ragged scraps is excessive heat, which do turn those humors into a thickness, and as  were a bony nature, by reason that they ha remained long in certain veins, and we neither dissolved, nor extenuated, nor ye quickly expelled by urine. Hairs.Besides these there are hairs of sundr lengths, some an inch, and some an handfu long, some longer, and some shorter; an these are in colour whitely, and do betoke grief of the reins. These are ingendred in th water-pipes, which go from the reins t the bladder, so that as long as those water-pipes are in length, so long may those hair also be, which are a gross and baked humor wrought in form of a hair.
Of those speaketh Hippocrates, saying;4. Aph. 76. In whose Ʋrine soever there doth appear little peeces of flesh, either as it were hairs, those same come from the reins, namely, if the urine be thick. Howbeit these are some∣times seen in such mens urines as feel no grief in the reines, but only have fed some continuing space on flegmatick meats, which will prepare matter to such diseases, as they do also to many other griefs, of which to speak in this place it is meet. But to go on with this thing that wee have in hand, beside such ragged scraps and hairs (as I have spoken of) there appear sometimes in the ground of the urine, and also dis-parkled abroad in the urine it self, sundry and divers kinds of motes (as it were) which do declare that there is grief disper∣sed in sundry parts of the body.Motes. The places of the con∣tents. The lowest region.And this now may suffice, as touching contents of every kind: Therefore now will I a little repeat out of Actuarius of the diversitie of judgement, by the places or regi∣ons of the contents. That ground which fleeteth nigh to the bottom of the urinall, being in other points also good and mild, doth betoken no strange thing. But if it be unconcoct and deformed it betokeneth default in nature. And if his,
parts be disparkled asunder, it betokene a dimness in nature, which doth not rest the rebellion of noysome humors, so tha in such case there appeareth need both  long time, and also more strength to over¦come that evill. But as it is commendable that the ground fleet nigh the bottome o the urinall, so is it discommendable if it lye flat on the bottome of the same. The middle region.Now as touching the swim or sublima∣tion, if it be good in colour and other waies, then doth it differ only in place from a right ground: and that cometh of an unnaturall iness, which maketh it to be so light, o fleet above his due place, but if his r and other like points bee evill, yet oth it betoken lesse evill, then if it in the right place of the ground. The regio now as touching the third and high∣ gion, which is the place of the clouds. e appear a light and thin cloud, it be∣th no small grief of the head. But fference is there in the clouds, the that they be in colour and substance, ther they differ from a right good urall Content. And therefore need ng time to return thereunto. And y wayes, the worse that they are in nd substance, the less they are to be
blamed, by reason of their place, which is so much distant from the naturall place of Contents. For this is a generall rule: The lower that good contents fleet in the urine, (excepting alwaies such as cleave to the hard bottom) the better they are. And con∣trary wayes of evill contents and such like, the higher they fleet, the lesse evill they be∣token. The pro∣portion of the regions, to the parts of man.Now to make an end of this. You shall ob∣serve a certain proportion that is between the parts of the urine, and the parts of mans body. The highest part of the urine doth betoken, the highest part of the body, name∣ly the head, and such other neer unto it. The middle region of the urine doth repre∣sent the middle parts of man, as the breast, the bowels, and the parts about them. The hether region of the urine doth purport the lowest parts of man, from the bowels downward. And if you mark well this pro∣portion, you may the easier judge the griefs of the parts of man. For when the contents which in colour and substance are naturall, and yet by the abundance of windiness be lift up to the higher part of the urine, it declareth some great pain to be in the head. And in like manner, when the swim or sublimation
doth declare grief, that grief must be lo¦ed to be in the middlemost parts of man ( I said before) and so of the other. Again, as this proportion between th regions of urine, and the parts of mans bo¦dy doth declare that place in certain heigh so doth it in breadth also by like proportion if you doe duly mark the side, unto whic the contents do decline. And if you mark wel what I have sai you may perceive the only cause of me such griefs, when the contents is only di¦ordered in place, cometh of an unnatura windines, but yet commonly annexed wit phlegmatick and unconcocted matter. And as the windiness doth cause disord in the contents, so it causeth also anothe kind of things not to be neglected in urine and that is bubbles:Bubbles. which sometimes flo in the ring or garland onely, and sometime in the middest of the urine onely, and othe times doe cover the whole face of the urin The Bubbles which stand round abo over the garland only, and continue withou parting, if they he of the same colour th the urine is, they declare great pain to be it the head, and that in all parts of the head if the Bubbles joyn together without part∣ing. But and if they occupie only the one
half of the garland, then is that pain in the one half of the head. And so forth may you judge by like proportion. But if they doe part in sundry places, and joyn not all together, it is a token that the pain is the lesser, and cometh of a weaker cause. The more yellower that their co∣lour is, the greater they declare the pain in the head to be. If they be white, or rather whitish, and stand about in the compasse of the garland, they betoken little pain or none. And if the urine bee thin withall, they betoken weakness of naturall heat, or else the opilation and stopping of the reins, namely, if there appear no ground in the urine. This doth Hippocrates witness,7. Aph. 14. saying; When in the urine there swim∣meth bubbles, they betoken grief in the reins: And also that it shall long continue. The reason of the long continuance (as Galen and Philotheus doe both declare) is, because that the grief commeth of cold and tough phlegmatick matter, which always is long before it may overcome.Lib. 28. c. 6. Pliny also saith, that that urine is evil, which is ful of bubbles and thick, in which if the ground be white, it is a token that there shal be grief either about the joynts, or else about the bowels. How∣beit, yet sometimes the bubbles are not
an evill token, but contrariwise, a good to∣ken of concoction, and declare that nature doth now apply her self wholy unto con∣coction. And this do the Bubbles signifie, when they appear in the water, in which they were not seen long before. And there∣fore in an Ague, we may conjecture the de∣clination of it, when we see bubbles to ap∣pear after that sort; except it be so that they appeared in the urine at the beginning of the sickness, and hath so continued still: For then they declare grievous pain to be in the head, yea and that dangerous, if the urine also be thin in substance. But if the substance of the urine be thick, then the bubbles are not so evill a sign, neither declare so greivou danger. Sometimes in stead of Bubbles which doe not appear when they should, it sufficet that there appear a gross some (as it is some∣times seen to rise upon wine) and it doth be∣token even the same thing that the Bubble do,Fome. especially in the declination of the Ague of which I spake a little before. These Bubbles do appear very thick aboue the garland, in the urine of him that hath the issue of seed, or wast of nature. Sometime also there are seen in the Bubbles certain small scrapps (as you would say) much like
hairs in grossness, and of such length some∣time that they reach from the one side of the bubble unto the other, and sometimes lon∣ger, and sometimes shorter, which things may come either of the wasting of the reins, or else of the shedding of nature. The cause of the generation of bubbles, and also of the dispersing and elevation of the contents, is an unnaturall windiness. Of which, as there are divers kindes much dif∣fering asunder, partly in multitude, partly in substance, and partly also in quality, so doth the bubbles engendred of them diversly varie, according unto those differences, whether they be sole and severall, or joynt∣ly many knit together. But windiness if it be grosse, then doth it puffe up such Bub∣bles; and if it be subtile, then doth it ra∣ther work a dispersion in the contents, and is not able nor meet to cause Bubbles. And hereby may you know the qualitie of the windiness, and likewise also the quantitie. For there appeareth lesse quantitie of windi∣nesse to bee where the contents onely are dispersed, then where such Bubbles be in∣gendred. Now as touching the other qualities of it, as heat and cold (which are the chief quali∣ties indeed, and most active) you may judge
them by the colour of the bubbles. For as pale colour, and other low colours declare coldnes of that windiness, so high colours enclining toward yellow or higher, be cer∣tain tokens of heat. Bubbles that are small, and thick knit to∣gether in the garland of the urine, doth be∣token a grosse windiness, whose cause can∣not easily be vanquished; for the grossness and toughnesse that is in them, will not suf∣fer them to swell great, and that causeth them to be so small. And contrariwise, the greater that the bubbles be, and the more bouled, the more they declare that windines that causeth them to be severed from tough matter. Moreover, the colder that such windiness is, the lesser grief is felt of them. Bubbles in the urine of old men, namely being great and large, doe betoken cold wi¦dinesse, but sometime such bubbles are  sign of rheum distilling from the head int the lights, especially if the Patient at th entring of Summer were very hot, and  did drink much, which matter, the head be¦ing dryed, did draw unto him, and did di∣still again part of it down into the lights whereof commeth a cough, and part of it in∣to the womb, which thereby is moved to laxe.
CHAP. X. Of the Garland and other like things. AS I have compendiously, and yet not very slightly spoken of those former parts, to bee considered in urine, so will I briefly speak of a few more, which may not well be omitted, and so make an end of the Judiciall. The Gar∣land.First, therefore in the over-part of the u∣rine, round about the edge of the urine there appeareth a garland, circle, or ring, which doth there appear, by reason that the higher part of the urine being thinner than the rest, and more subtiller, and therefore doth not only more sooner alter, but doth more readi∣er declare the alteration. Howbeit sometime there doth appear no ring at all; and that is when the colour of the urine, and of it is all one, by reason of the great force of the cause which altereth the urine, but yet so that na∣ture doth match that humour, and is neither overcome by it, neither yet hath overcome it. For if nature have plainly either got the victorie, or lost it, then is there another co∣lour in the garland, then is in the rest of the urine.
Now if the colour of the urine be evill, and the colour of the garland better, it is a token of health. As if the colour of the urine bee yellow, red, or crimson, or any such like, and the colour of the garland be white, or whitely, it is a token full of good hope; but when the colour of the whole u∣rine is evill, and the colour of the garland worser yet, then is it an evill sign. As when the colour of the urine is green or purple, and the garland worse coloured, then is it a plain token that nature is overcome, and that the evill humours have gotten the upper∣hand. Of these more particularly doth Egidius treat, but yet not more truly nor more suf∣ficiently, his words are these: If the circle of the urine be thick and waterie, it is a to∣ken that the hinder part of the head is op∣pressed with phlegmatick matter; but if it be purple-coloured and thick, then is the forepart of the head overcharged with blood. A pale and a thin circle declareth the left side of the head to be troubled with me∣lancholy matter; but if it be red and thin, it betokeneth choler to abound in the right part of the head. Leddy or ash-colour.A Leadie or Ash coloured circle, doth signifie the falling Evill, through the great grief of the brain.
And further declareth that such grief shall proceed by the sinnews into the other parts of the body. But if after such a leadie colour there follow a reddsh colour, that is a good token; for then doth nature gather strength again, and the powers of the brain reviveth. Green.If the colour of the garland be green, and the Patient have a burning Ague, it is to be feared, least that the abundance of choler shall cause a Phrensie. Black.Black colour in the circle doth sometime betoken mortification, and sometime only extream heat. But these shall you distinct (as I said before of the urine it self) by the or∣der of the colours. For if green colour went before, then doth the black betoken adusti∣on through heat, but if his colour last be∣fore was ash-colour, then is it a token of death, comming through the dominion of cold. And thus much as touching the colours may suffice for this time.Quivering in the gar∣land. Sometimes also you shall perceive a qui∣vering and trembling in the garland, and that declareth grief in the back bone. And thus many tokens be taken of the circle or garland. Fattiness.Sometimes there will appear fleeting on the urine, certaine scum or fattiness, sometimes like drops of oyle, and sometime
like a thin spiders web, and these both doe betoken the melting of the fat within the body, as Hippocrates witnesseth in his Prog∣nosticks,7 Aph. 30. howbeit in his Aphorisms he doth assign it as a token of the grief of the reins peculiarly, saying; In whole urine there fleeteth fattiness, and that much at once, they have pain in the reins, but shall not long endure. This Aphorism doth Galen understand so to be true, if that fattiness appear quickly and much at once; else if it come by little and little with longer continuance, so doth it not betoken wast only of the fat about the reins, but rather throughout the whole body, which sign yet is not alway evil, except it continue long; for if it continue but a little while, it declareth no great evill. Stinking sa∣our in u∣ne.Now to goe forth with other signs; If the urine have a stinking savour, it is ever an evill sign, for it doth betoken some putrefa∣ction more or lesse; as of the bladder one∣ly, by some blister or sore in it: and that most certainly, when the stinch is very great, and there appeareth also scales in the urine, and matter. But if there be matter in the urine, and the stinking savour but mean, then doth it declare the sore to be in some other part of the body. But this ever is
true, that matter in urine is a token of a sore. And if in continuance of time the matter and stinch doe abate, it is a good to∣ken, but if the other continue or increase, it is an evill sign. If the urine doe stinke, and there appear no matter in it, then is it a token of some mortifying. For if there be in the urine mean tokens of concoction, then is the mortification in some one part of the body; but if the other signs in the urine be evill, then is that mortification rather of the whole body, then of any one part of it. And thus have I over-run briefly the chief things to be considered in urine, which (I say) are appertaining or annexed to the urine it self. Howbeit two other things there are, which though they be more plain∣er then these other, yet may they be over∣passed no more then the other: that is to say, blood coming forth with the urine, and gravell expelled therewith also. Blood.Blood coming forth with urine, doth de∣clare some sore to be in the reins or blad∣der (as Hippocrates writeth in his Apho∣risms) or else some vein to be broken a∣bout the reins, namely if it come suddenly, and without manifest cause. Howbeit, as Ga∣len, Oribasius, and divers others do declare, and reason also with experience doth consent,
there may appear blood in the urine also, i that there be such a sore in the liver, or in t shaft. But in any of these cases, the pain fe in the place and part, will utter from whence the blood commeth. Gravell.Now to speak of gravell: Hypocrates saith, In whose urine there appeareth grave in the bottome, they have the stone in the bladder, or else in the reins, as Galen ad∣deth; but commonly if the stone be in the reins, the gravell will be red, as Hypocrate declareth in his sixt Book of his Epidemies, And thus now will I make an end of the ju∣dicial of urine. CHAP. XI. Of the Commodities and Medicines of Ʋrine. THe greatest commodity of urine is al∣ready declared: that is, That it doth declare unto man, the manifold diseases which happen unto him; and thereby doth not only give him knowledge of the cause, and so consequently of the cure of the same, but also warneth him before of the grief to come, whereby he may take an occasion to eschew it, if he will be diligent.
Now as this is the greatest commoditie of urin, so it hath many other as well in use of medicine as other waies, of which I will write some, though not all. And first out of Plinie,Plinie. which reciteth strange operations of the urine of a Hedge-hog, and of a Beast that the Greeks call Leontophon, and more∣over of the Beast Lynx, which I omit now with many other: but this will I not omit,Urine of man. that Hosthanes saith: That if a man let his own urine drop upon his feet in the morning, it is good against all evill. And that it is good for the gout, we may perceive by Ful∣lers, which never have the gout, by reason that their feet are so often washed with it. Ostrich u∣rine.The same Plinie writeth, That the Ʋrine of an Ostrich, will do away blots and moles of Inke. Also that if Urine be tempered with wa∣ter of like quantitie, and so powred at the roots of the trees, it will both nourish them (as many men say) and also drive all noyance from them. Bees.The urine also of men or oxen, tempered with hony, and given to Bees, will cure them that are poysoned with the flower of the Cormier or Cornoiller tree. Beans.And likewise if Beans be steeped in u∣rine
and water three daies before they bee sowed,Dioscorides Stinging of Adders, &c. some judge that they will increase exceedingly. Dioscorides saith, That a mans own urine is good to be drunk for stinging of Adders, and against poison, and also against the dropsie when it doth begin: And for the stinging of the sea-Adders, of scorpions, and dragons; it is good to soke the stinged part withall. Dogs u∣rine.The urine of Dogs is good to soke the place that is bitten with a Dog, and to cleanse manginess, and itchinesse, if salt pe∣ter be added thereto. And that that is old will more strongly cleanse scales, scurff, scabs and hot pushes. Also it stayeth fretting sores, namely, on the privie members. Further∣more it stincheth mattering eares, if it be dropped thereinto, and if it be sod in the rind of a Pomegranate, it expelleth worms out of the ears. Childes urine.The urine of a child under 14. yeers of age doth cure the toughness of breath, if it bee drunken. If it be sod in a brazen vessell with honey, it healeth creythes, and also the web and the tey in the eie. There is made of it and copper, good soulder for gold. Dregs of urine.The dregs of urine is good for Saint An∣thonies evill, if it be nointed thereon, so that (as Galen doth wisely add) the sore be coo∣led
first with some other thing, and bee not burning. If it be heated with oyle of privet, and laid to the womb of a woman, it will asswage the grief of the mother, and cureth also the rising of the same. It cleanseth the eie-lids, and the creythes in the eyes. Oxe stale.Oxe stale being tempered with myrrh, and dropped into sore eares, healeth the pain of them. The urine of a wild Bore,Wild bore. is of the same vertue if it be kept (as Sextus Pla∣tonicus writeth) in a glasse, and dropped warm into them, but it hath a more peculiar property in breaking of the stone, and to expell the same, if it be drunke. Goats urineGoats urine drunke every day, with Spikenard, and three ounces of water, is good for the dropsie, for it expelleth urine by the sege, and it cureth pain of the ears, if it be dropped into them. Asse pisse.Asse pisse (as it is written) is good for the grief of the reins, if it be drunke. Mules stale.Mules stale (as Paulus Aegineta saith) is good to heal pain in the joynts. Camels and goats stale.The stale of Camels and Goats also doth provoke sege, and therefore is good for them that have the dropsie. Sextus Pla∣tonicus.Sextus Platonicus saith, That Goats u∣rine (if it be drunke) doth provoke womans terms, and cureth pain in the eares being
droped into them,Paulus Ae∣gineta. and being mixed with mulset wine, and so dropped into the ear it draweth out matter, if there be any. Wild Bore.The urine of the wild Bore with mulse vineger, is good for the falling evill, if it be drunke. Dogs pisse.A Dogs piss tempered with dust, and l in wool, will heal corns marveilously, an destroy warts. Childes urine.A childs urine will heal the stinging of Bee, Waspe and Hornet, if the place be washed therewith. Mans urine.A mans urine will cleanse the freckle and spots in the face. And if a woman ca¦not be delivered of the after burden, let he drinke mans urine, and she shall be delive¦red straight. Collumella.Collumella saith, that the best dunging f yong shots of trees, is mans urine, namely which hath stood half a yeer. For if yo water vines or apple-trees with it, there no dung that will cause so much fruit as  will doe:Sheeps urin and not only that, but it cause also the savour and the taste both of the ap∣ples, and of the wine, to be much the bet∣ter. Constantinus Affricanus.Constantinus Affricanus saith, That the u∣rine of a Sheep, or an Oxe, with some hot oil is good for the grief in the ears that cometh
of cold.Vitalis. Urine (as Vitalis de Furno saith) fretteth, dryeth, and burneth, and is good for the grief of the spleen, if it be drunk, as Gentilis writeth. Asse stale.The Urine of a male Asse, as the same Vi∣talis saith) tempered with Nardus doth in∣crease and preserve hair. M. VirgiliusAnd as some say (by the writing of Mar∣cellus Virgilius) Ʋrine is of no smal nourish∣ment, for divers folk in the time of dearth, have been preserved by the onely use, and drinking of it. Marcellus.Also Marcellus the Practitioner, in the 27. Chapter doth witnesse; That the Ʋrine of a man is good for divers diseases of the wombe and bowels, and namely for the Col∣lick, because that partly with provoking of vomit, and partly by occasion of seges, it ex∣pelleth strongly all noysome humours, and for the same cause doth common Practitio∣ners keep it still in daily use. Ʋldericus Huttenus.Ʋlderick Hutten also witnesseth, That he did drive away the Ague above 8. times with the only drinking of his own Ʋrine, at the beginning of his sickness. And many still doe use the same practise, and it proveth well. Likewise Marsilius Ficinus writeth that Many men doe use to drink urine for the Pe∣stilence;Marsilius Ficinus.
which thing did Galen write long before him, and also Paulus Aegineta; and doe testifie also, that it preserved them tha dranke it: at the least way as they thought Galen.All urine (as Galen writeth) is hot i vertue, and sharp (as saith Aegineta) how∣beit, it differeth according to them that mak it. For the hotter they are that make it, the hotter is it also, and likewise the colder u∣rine cometh of a colder body. Mens urine is the weakest of all othe except tame barrow hoggs; for they in ver many points agree with man, but the urin of wild Bores is stronger. Mans urineMens urine is of as strong cleansing vertu as any thing else, and therefore doe Fulle use it to scoure and cleanse their cloth. An in cure of griefs also for the same reason it is used to soke, and wash maunginess, an scabbedness, and running sores that are ful of corruption and filth, and specially if they have in them putrified matter, and for suc sores on the privie members it is good, an for mattering eares, and for scales and scurf if the head be washed in it. I have healed with it many times sores on the toes, namely, which came of bruises, and were without inflammation, and that in servants and husbandmen, which had a
journey to goe, and no Physitian with them, bidding them to wet a small clout with it, and to put into the sores, and then to bind a cloth about it, and as often as they listed to make water, to let it fall on their sore toes, and not to take the cloth away till it were quite whole. ChrisocolaThat medicine which is made of childes u∣rine, called of some men in Greek, Chryso∣cola (that is to say, gold soulder) because men use to soulder gold. This (I say) is exceed∣ing good for sores that are hard to heal. For this medicine doe I use for the chiefest, mixing it with such other things, as are good for such like sores: In the time of Pestilence in Syria, many did drinke Childrens urine and mens also, and thought that they were preserved by it. Alchumists.Of urine also, do Alchumysts make divers things, as salt, and other things moe. And many other commodities there bee of urine, as for washing and scouring, and other like, which for briefness I over-passe, and the rather, because they are commonly known of all folk.
Of the Diseases touching Ʋrines, and the Remedies for the same. NOw to come to that I promised, as tou∣ching the griefs which hinder urine, or expell it disorderly, either in time oft∣ner then is meet, or in qualitie, with other fashions then is agreeable to it, or like o∣ther sorts, I will briefly write, not intending to teach the art of curing them, (which would require a longer Treatise, and a meet∣er place) but onely to name certain of the most common diseases, and to set after them such simple and uncompound medicines on∣ly which cure those griefs. Stopping of urine. The stone.First therefore, touching the hinderance or stopping of urine, it is not unknown, that one common cause is the stone, which sometimes is in the reins, and sometime in the bladder. I shewed you before, that commonly you may discern those two asunder, by the colour of the gravel, but the more sure token is the grief in the sick part. Now for the cure of the same, doth these medicines serve, which follow. But as I have alwaies said, you shal use them with the coun∣sell of some learned Physitian; for there is great difference both of the grief, and of the medicines.
Medicines for the stone, both in the Reins and Bladder. Astra Bacca. Ameos. Angle toches sod. Betony. Bryony root. Bylgrum. Chamamel. Capers Bark, namely of the root. Claret seed. Clot seed. Dock root. Fenel seed, and root. Goats blood. Gladian. Gromell. Gum of Plumtree, and Cherry tree. A hedge Sparrow. Harebell. Kneholm root and Berries. Madder root. High Mallows seed and Root. Mugwort. Parseley. Pelliter of Spain. Pyony Berries which are black. Radish. Sampere. S. Johns Wort. Sperage. Scholm. Swines Fenell. Sothern Wood∣seed. Sour Almonds. Tent-wort. Tutsan Berries. Water Plantine. Winter Gilli-flower And beside these there are divers others. Also the Stone it selfe that came from a
man, being braid and drunken, will breake and expell that other within him. Beside the stone, also it causeth the u∣rine to be clean stopped, by reason of weak∣ness of the expulsive vertue, and sometimes through clodds of blood, which rest in the shaft. Sometimes also through tough and clammie humours, and sometime through some swelling within the yard, and divers o∣ther wayes also, of which the declaration is too long for this place and time: but ano∣ther time I intend to write of them at large, and of all other griefs of mans bodie. But to return to this matter that is in hand. One other stop of urine there is, which doth not clean let it, but causeth it to avoid lesser then it should; and this commeth of like causes as that other last did, save that the cause is less, according as the stay of urine is, and therefore the cure in both is much like. For if it come of weakness of the expulsive vertue, then with the use of other hot meats and drinks, those medicines are good which doe provoke urine, as these be that follow. Medicines which doe provoke urine. Annise-seed. Ally-saunders. Alkakengi. Basyle. Bylgrum. Cammock.
Charlock. Chervell. Carawayes. Calamus Aromati∣cus. Cubebes. Dictany of Candie. Dragance. Fumitorie. Fatchys. Flower delyce. Garlike. Ground pine. Ginger. Helecompane. Honey. Juniper and the Ber∣ries. Lase saverie. Leeks. Mints. Margerom. Maiden hair. Navew. Nepte. Negella Romana. Nettle. Pepper. Pye Ryall. Quinces. Rue. Rosemary. Rocquet. Savine. Sage. Saverie. Time. Valerion. Wild Marjoram. Wild Parseley. Wild Time. Water Cresses. Woodbinde. with many other, and namely those for the most part, which I named before to be good for the stone. But there must be discretion in the use of them. Besides those, is there a disease named the Strangurie (which some corruptly call the Strangurion) in which Disease the urine doth continually drop forth,Excess of urine. as fast as it cometh into the bladder. And therefore may it well be noted the first kinde of such
griefs as provoke forth, and further urine ex∣cessively. For that strangurie these Medi∣cines following are noted good. Medicines for the Strangurie. Alisander. Astra Bacca. Brokelime. Ceder berries. Ceterake. Calamus Aromati∣cus. Gladiane. Knot grasse. Kneholm. Sperage. Seholm. Spatula Fetida. Turpentine washed. Wilde Fennell. Water mints. But you must consider (as I have often said) that as the disease may come of sundry causes, so it must have sundry cures. For most commonly these are good that I have written, yet such may bee the cause of the sickness, that they may do harme, therefore take alwayes counsell of some learned Phy∣sitian. Another kinde of excessive making of u∣rine cometh of the weakness of the reten∣tive vertue in the reins, whereby the Pati∣ent pisseth as fast as he drinketh,Flux of u∣rine. Pissing e∣uill. The piss gout. and that in like quantitie. This I may call the flux of urine, or pissing evill: or after the imi∣tation of the Greeks, the pisse gout. For which disease it is not greatly commendable
to set forth medicines with the onely bare names. Howbeit, if I doe it, I trust no man will the rather misuse them, namely being warned so often to take no medicines with∣out counsell, and specially in this thing, For some of the Medicines must be received inwardly, and some of them emplaistred outwardly. Medicines for the pissing evill. Apples. Dates. Elecompane. Perys. Myrtle Berries. Night shade. Cycory. Comferie. Endive. Paritarie. Penny wort. Lettis, Lintels. Pomegranat. Purselane. Vine leaves. Other defaults there be of excess of urine, as of them which cannot keep their urine, and namely of children, which pisse their beds. This disease cometh oftentimes of the dissolution of the muscle which should keep the urine, and therefore requireth cure meet for it, and unmeet for this place, and such shortnesse. Wherefore for this time here I will make an end, trusting that all men will with as gentle heart receive this my writing, as I of gentleness have taken the pains to set it forth.
Additions. Of the diversities of Colours, and of the making of them. BEcause that it is not very easie for every man to distinguish colours duly asunder, I thought it good at the end of this Book, a little to touch the distinction and making of them, namely of such as are mentioned be∣fore in this Book. Milk white.Milk white, by the name of it self doth sufficiently declare what it is; for it is the very colour of milk, though the substance need not to be so thick in the urine, as in the milk, for the colour must be understood several from the substance, both in this and all other colours, which thing would be re∣membred, for it might else (as it hath often done) deceive the simple folk. Horn white.Horn white in like manner hath his name of the thing that it assimuleth most, for it is like the white and cleer part of a horn of a lanthorn, or such like. Grey.Grey is like the white part of a mans nail next unto the joynt, or like hoar hair that is not very white, for gray is so much darker then horn white, as horn white is darker then milk white.
Pale.Pale colour hath a certain appearance of yellow in it, but is exceeding little. If you seeth a peece of the rind of Pomegranate, and then put to it thrice as much clean wa∣ter, it will be a pale colour. Flaxen.But if you put thereto little or no clean water, it will be flaxen coloured, that is somewhat more yellower then pale. Pale.After it followeth pale, which is a kind of light yellow, something lighter in colour then crown gold. Yellow.For the colour of pure gold (as an angell or royall) is a right yellow colour. Light saf∣fron.A light saffron colour is, that colour that saffron doth make when it is steeped in wa∣ter, and laid light on any white. For if it be laid on deep, then doth it make a full saffron colour.Saffron. For that is called a saffron co∣lour, which saffron doth die, and not that that is in the saffron it self.Red. Claret. For that is very red, and is higher then claret, which is a mean colour between saffron and red, as if it were made of them both mixed together. Crimson.Crimson is a dark bloody colour, well known by his own name, but is not in urine so light as it sheweth in cloth. Purple,Purple. needeth not to be much described, being so commonly known, howbeit if you will see the making of it, mixe a dark crimson, with
an orient blew, and it will be purple. And because that many men be deceived in the latin name of this colour, you shall observe that it is not that which in Latin is called Purpureus color, (as most men think) for that is rather a crimson, but it is called more peculiarly Purpura violacea, or Pas∣seus color. Blew.Blew colour is the colour of the cleer Skie, or of Azure. Howbeit, in urine it is not so orient, but if you will mix pure white (as white lead, or pure lime) with due por∣tion of right black (as cole dust, or other like) then there will of these amount that blew, which is ascribed to urine. Green.Green is a compound colour of blew and yellow duly tempred together. And the right green have I in this Book called a stark green.Stark green. But if the yellow do exceed in it, then is it a light green; and contrariwise, if the blue do exceed,Light green. then is it a dark green: Of this green doth Dioscorides mean, when hee doth say of divers herbs, that their leaves be black; and sometime when he noteth white-lines to be in herbs, he meaneth a light green, though he other times understandeth there∣by a certain horiness; of which thing in mine Herball you shall read more exactly. Oylie.Oylie colours differ from green oylie in
their lightness of hue, and thinness of sub∣stance in the urine where they appear. The light oyly is somewhat lighter,Light. (or rather) brighter and more glittering then light green,Stark. So is the stark oylie brighter then the stark green,Dark. and the dark oylie then the dark green, which all cometh through the thin∣ness of substance in the urine. Ash-colour.Ash-colour is darker then blew, and is made of the same sort that blew is, save that it requireth more of the black by twofold. This is the colour of lead, which is much darker then the inner part, though indeed both are one colour, and differ onely in brightness and darkness, which ought rather to be called the hue of colours, then colour. Black.Now as for black, I need not to speak any whit, for as all men do know it, so these ve∣ry letters do shew it, which though of all other it be most deadly, yet is it surely of all the most mightie, for it overcommeth all colours, and none can change it, so that well it may be called the colour of death. For as death overcometh all bodies, so black doth damp all colours; beside, that it is the mes∣senger and token of death, which is the end of all things, and black the end of colours.
The Exposition of certain VVords. NOw for because I was inforced to use some (though but few) terms in this Book, which be not wel known of the most sort of men, though a great number know them well enough, by often talking with Physitians, I thought it good here to declare some certain of them, for the aid of the most simple sort. Ages. Because that in the judgement of urines, the differences of ages ought to be conside∣red, you shall understand that the chief dif∣ferences of them are four, that is to say, Childhood,Childhood. Youth, Manhood, and Old-age, for though there be commonly 7. Ages rec∣koned, yet these be four principall, and the other three be comprehended under these four, childhood endureth from the hour of birth till the end of 14. yeers of age, and is of complexion hot and moist. At the end of 14. yeers beginneth youth,Youth. and lasteth till the 25. yeer, and this age of all other is in com∣plexion the most temperate. From 25. untill 35. yeers,Manhood. is the flourishing of manhood, but yet that manhood lasteth (though not in full freshness) until 50. yeers of age, and this age is of complexion hot and dry. From 50. yeers
forward, is the time of age peculiarly called,Age. in which time mans nature is cold and dry, and not moist, as many doe falsely thinke. Alterative Active q. Brightness.Active qualities, see the title of qualities. Alterative vertue, see in the title of vertues. Brightness in urine must be marked for a several thing from cleerness. For the bright∣nesse betokeneth the orientness and the beauty of the colour, with a certain glistring. And cleerness is referred to the substance of urine,Clearness. and is ever annexed with thinness of it. Yet is it a divers qualitie from thinness. So may an urine be cleer in substance, by the reason of his thinness, and yet not bright in colour, and not cleer in substance, but this would be well pondered, lest this necessarie distinction, cause a negligent confusion. Criticall dayes.Criticall dayes be such dayes, on which there is (or may be) perceived some certain token and great alteration in the sick body, either to health or death, or continuance of sickness. What these be, more at large I will hereafter (God willing) declare in a Book peculiarly, because it requireth more large∣ness of words, then is meet for this place. But one thing I must tell you, that the same dayes also be called Judiciall,Judiciall dayes. but not Indi∣ciall, for the Indiciall daies are of another kind: but yet associate to these other.
Cruditie.Cruditie is the rawness of the meat in the stomack, when the naturall operation of it cannot duely digest the meat which it hath received; and therefore the urine which de∣clareth default of such digestion, is called a crude, raw, and unconcoct urine. Cupping.Cupping is commonly known, that  needeth no declaration. Cloddie u∣rine.A cloddie urine is that which hath in it clods of bloud, or other crude matter, or any clusterings of difform contents. Dark ground is not meant of the dark∣ness of colour, but rather of the slenderness of substance, so that it can scarcely bee dis∣cerned to be any ground, by reason that it is so neer in shape and substance to the rest of the urine.Dulness. Dulness of colour is contrary to brightness, so that when the colour lack∣eth all brightness, then is it clean dulled, and whatsoever thing causeth decay of such brightnesse, that thing dulleth urine. Divers.Those contents be called divers, which have neither their own right form, nor any other certain, but are altogether disordered and out of form, rather seeming to be many, then to be one. Duly knit.Duly knit, is a property of due contents, when they are not tattered, ragged, nor jag∣ged, nor flittering asunder, nor yet are not
so clammed together, as tough fleam, or any such thing, but are in a moderate mean be∣tween both these. A gatheringA gathering sore, is that sore that is caused of the excessive recourse of humours into any part of the body, as a bile, or any other like. Harvest.Harvest, seek times of the yeer. Judiciall dayes.Judiciall daies, seek Criticall dayes. Inequalitie.Inequalitie of substance in urine doth ap∣pear to be the difforments and disagreeing of the parts of it together; as when it is thin in one part, and thick in another. Howbeit, it is as well used for the alteration from a mean substance to thicknesse or thinnesse, or other wayes unnaturall. Obstruction,Obstructi∣on. is a stopping commonly of the veins, and such great conduits (which convey blood or any other humour) so that the thing which they should convey cannot freely pass as it ought. But if the like stopping happen in the pores of the skin, (I mean those unsensible holes, by which sweat pas∣seth out) so that neither sweat, nor any like excrement may pass that wayes, then is it most named Oppilation. Howbeit,Oppilation. as these words be sometimes used the one for the o∣ther, so they be applied also to other sundry parts of the body; but evermore they beto∣ken
such stopping in that part, that natures work is hindered thereby. Principall members.Principall members (as to our purpose now) are these 3. the brain, the heart, and the liver. Passive. Putrefacti∣on.Passive: seek Qualities. Putrefaction is commonly known to sig∣nifie, rotting. Qualities.Qualities active, are named heat and cold, because they are more apt and able to work, then to be wrought. And contrarie waies, driness and moisture are named passive, or suffering qualities, because they are more ready to be altered by the working of hea and cold, then to work themselves; howbei yet they doe work also. The four times of sicknesse.There be in sickness four principall parts of time, to be observed of Physitians: The beginning of sickness, the increase or aug∣menting, the standing or chief force of it, and the declination or asswaging of it. The begin∣ning.The beginning is, from the time that sick∣nesse hath overcome mans strength, and brought him to lie down, till there doe appear manifest signes of concoction of the matter,The in∣crease. whereof the disease cometh, at which time, the sickness waxeth fiercer and fiercer: and while it so continueth, that time is called the Increase and augmenting
of sickness, but when the violence of the sick∣nesse is at the most,The state. so that the rage of it is at one stay, and neither increases nor decreases, that time is called the standing, stay, state, or chief strength of the sickness. And after that the furious rage of sickness doth abate, and calm his cruell stormes, then is the de∣clination of the sickness:Declinati∣on. after which (if the Patient escape as very few die in the declina∣tion) then followeth recovery to health a∣gain. And these be the four generall or uni∣versall times of sickness. Beside these there be other times more particular,Times of the yeer. wherof how to speak I need not. The diversity of times in the yeer are duly to be observed, for they do much alter mans body. The Spring.The Spring time increaseth blood and bringeth all the parts of the body to a tem∣perance, as nigh as it can. For it of all other times is the most temperate, neither exces∣sively hot, nor cold; neither moist, nor dry; but of a just temperature, as Galen proveth abundantly in his first Book of Tempera∣ments, where he doth much blame them that name it to be hot and moist, which he saith, is of all other the most pestilent state of air. This Spring, after Galens minde, doth begin about the tenth day of March, and endeth about the 14. day of April, so
that it lasteth but 6. weeks, and 2. dayes. For at the rising of the Pleiades (which is now in our time about the 24. day of Aprill) he saith that Summer doth begin.Summer. Which Summer is in complexion hot and dry, and therefore meet to increase choler, which in that time doth abound. The Summer lasteth 21. weeks.Harvest. Harvest doth begin after Galens minde, about the 17. day of September, and lasteth 7. weekes. The Harvest, is dry of complexion, but neither only hot, nor only cold, but is distemperate in heat and cold. For in the morning and evening it is cold, and at noon it is hot. So may it not be cal∣led justly (as men do name it) cold and dry. In this time doth melancholy increase. At the end of Harvest, about the seventh day of November,Winter. doth Winter begin, which time is cold and moist; and therefore increaseth flegm, which is like in complexi∣on unto it. And the Winter lasteth till the 10. day of March; so is it in length about 17. weeks and a half, and then beginneth the Spring time again. And this is the course of the year, after Physick. Other men which in∣treat of Husbandry,Another sort of these times. do part the yeer into 4. equall parts, giving 3. months to every time. Unto the Spring they give February, March, and April. To the Summer, May,
June, and July. Unto Harvest, August, September, October. And unto winter they appoint November, December, and January. Why the Physitians part the yeer one way, and writers of husbandry another way, at more convenient time I will declare. Vertues. Attractive.Vertues naturall are four. The first is, That which draweth nourishment into due pla∣ces, and that is called the attractive vertue. The second,Alterative. is it that altereth the nourish∣ment into a due form to nourish the body, and is called the alterative vertue. The third is that vertue,Retentive. which keepeth in the good nourishment, till the alterative vertue hath duly altered it, and therefore is called the re∣tentive vertue. The fourth, is called the ver∣tue expulsive,Expulsive. because his office is to expel those superfluous excrements which are left, when the other vertues have done their office duly. FINIS.
