S3074 16240357 105147
Tachy graphy The Most exact and compendious methode of short and swift writing that hath euer yet beene published by any Composed by. THOMAS SHELTON Author and professor of the said Art. Approoued by both vnyuersities Ps 45.1 My tongue is as the pen of A swift writer LONDON Printed for Samuel Cartwright and are to be soulde at the hand and Bible in duck-Lane Ralph Hall sculptor 1641
TO THE WORSHIPFVLL his very Worthy Friend, RICHARD KNIGHTLEY ESQUIRE. Worthy Sir, MY purpose was, that (with∣out any addition or altera∣tion) this small Treatise should have passed, as I had formerly composed it: but finding somewhat that I judged useful, to the easier attaining of the Art, which before was omitted; at the request of diverse of good judgement, I was per∣swaded rather to adventure the breach of that promise, than to conceale that which might be usefull to many. The manifold ingagements I stand in to your Worship, require a better re∣tribution; but your favorable aspect to one as little deserving, hath enboldned me to crave of your Worship to coun∣tenance this, and the rather because
your experience in the Art, hath alrea∣dy encouraged many to the study of it. I dare not so much injure your Wor∣ships vertuous inclination, as to feare the acceptance of this poore expression of my thankefullnesse, seeing it is not unknown to your Worship, nor to ma∣ny thousands beside, that it hath beene instrumentall for the good of the Church, and the perpetuating the me∣mories (as the smell of Lebanon) of many worthy men, who, though they now rest from their labours, and their works have followed them: yet by this meanes the fruit of their labours is continued with us. I desire your Worship to par∣don my boldnesse; and to pray for the increase of all blessings on your Wor∣ship, shall be the imployment of Your Worships to be commanded, THO. SHELTON.
To the Reader. I Am prevented for speaking much of the utility of this Art, by the experi∣ence of many hundreds that have al∣ready learned it, that by this meanes are able (like that heavenly Scribe, Mat. 13.52.) To bring forth of their Treasuries, things both new and old: As also by the benefit that ma∣ny thousands enjoy by the workes of many wor∣thy Divines, which had perished with the breath that uttered them, had not God, as out of Zebulun, Iudg. 5.14. instructed some to handle the pen of the writer; who may say of them as Baruch of Jeremiahs roll, Ier. 36.18. He pronounced all these words to me; and I wrote them with inke in the booke: Besides the priviledge that diverse injoy in foraine parts, by using Bibles and other bookes in this writing, without danger of bloo∣dy Inquisitours.
These and the like considerations move me to say the lesse: only let the intelligent Reader judge how usefull such a skill may be, by the learning whereof so much time and labour is saved; whereby as much may be writen in one page as otherwise in sixe, and as much in the margent as the page: a skill whereby those that have weake memories, may both easily preserve their owne conceits, that else would soone va∣nish, and be furnished with notions from o∣thers. For the plainenesse of the rules, the easinesse in learning, the speed in writing, the facility in reading, let the discreet reader per∣use, practise, and judge THO. SHELTON.
TO THE AUTHOUR HIS Friend, upon his Art of SHORT-WRITING. FOrtunate Art, by which the hand so speeds, That words are now of slower birth than deeds! Dissembling age, that faith so often breakes, Learne hence to doe more than the proudest speakes, Speake not the Authors praise; his Art commands Our tongues should be more cripled than our hands: Nor can we scape (this spight his speed affords) From being over-taken in our words. What shall become of their Divinity, Which scatter'd through two houres Tautologie, Gather'd by these quicke Characters, must hene T'indure the doome of such as can speake sense? But that thine Art's a friend to repetition, Their bourely breath, they'd damned the next edition. Print then that praise, which volumes cannot bold But in thine owne compendious figures told; Figures, which makes us duller-handed thinke Words from the speakers mouth dissolve to inke, And fall upon thy papers; or thy quill, Made of some nimble tongue, give thee this skill, Still may that full-fledg'd pen with moisture spring. Snatcht from the Eagles, not the Gooses wing. E. R. Mag. Art. Magd. Coll.
TO HIS INGENIOUS FRIEND Master Thomas Shelton, on his Art of SHORT-WRITING. SVch is thy Art, that either thou alone Compris'd the Illiads in a nut, or none: I've read this oft, yet scarsely did give credit, (Except they selfe) that ever one man did it: Yet now it is no wonder, when I see Thou writ'st whole volumes in Epitome; And with such speed, that with thy nimbler pen Thou dost anticipate the tongues of men: So that if Plutarch liv'd, he scarce could tell To finde thee in thy Art, a Paralell, Tho. Fancourt. Cantab. Col. Pet.
TO THE AUTHOUR. WHy should I praise thy Art in writing, when Thy Art and praise surmounts the praise of men? For if thy way of writing had beene showne To ages past, Printing had ne're beene knowne, Nor the Invention sought or valued▪ when The Presse can scarcely over-runne thy Pen: So that what honour's due unto the Quill, Or glory unto those that have the skill In faire Orthographie, their titles stand As pages to attend upon thy hand. Nath. Mason, G.C. Coll.
TO THE AUTHOUR ON HIS EXQUISITE ART OF SHORT-WRITING. WHat! write as fast as speake? what man can doe it? What! hand as swift as tongue? perswade me to it. Unlikely tale! Tush, tush, it cannot be, May some man say, that hath not heard of thee. This thu canst doe, this (SHELTON) thou hast done: Thy nimbler pen hath many tongues out-run. Therefore if any one of me demand What hand's the best, I say, thy running hand. Here in the proverbe holds not, for thy haste Is advantagious, it doth make no waste: Nor dost thou envy others this thy Art, But willingly dost it to all impart: And 'tis not sit that such a gemme should rest Within the cabinet of a private brest. On praise of thy Short-writing I could long Insist; but I therein should doe thee wrong. This onely I will adde, whil'st some desire To praise thy skill, I rather will admire. Steph. Iones, Coll. D. Ioan.
THE ART OF Short-writing. CHAP. I. Generall rules of abbreviation, observable in the use of this Art. THe principal end of the Art of Short-writing being to write much in a litle time & room, it is not needefull in every word to expresse every letter, but onely so many as may serve to sound the word, the rest may be left out as super∣fluous: as for example, a may be left out in feare, deae, heaven b may be left out in debt, lamb, tombe c may be left out in science, Scipio, acquite d may be left out in judge, badge, wedge e may be left out in enter, end, else g may be left out in strength, length h may be left out in ghost, inherit, Christ i may be left out in fuit, guide, plaine k may be left out in acknowledge, black l may be left out in palme, half, Psalme. n may be left out in condemne, solemne o may be left out in double, deacon, beacon, p may be left out in psaltery, psalme, empty s may be left out in isle, paganisme, baptisme t may be left out in elect, reject, act u may be left out in plague, league, tongue w may be left out in write, sorrow, know y may be left out in obey, say, nay.
2 Sometimes two letters or more may be left out, and yet the word sufficient∣ly sounded; as for example, ch may be left out in schisme, & the like. gh may be left out in might, naught, & the like. ugh may be left out in through, borough, & the like. ou may be left out in labour, neighbour, & the like. 3 Sometimes a whole syllable may be spared in a word: as for example, For vehement write vement &c. For Abraham write Abram &c. For victuall write vittell &c. 4 In the end of some long words, two or three syllables may be omited with∣out hinderance to the reading of them as for example, For incomprehensible write incompr. For abominable write abomin. For transubstantiation write transubst. 5 Sometimes the letters that are ordi∣narily used in the writing of words, may bee changed for others of like sound, that are written shorter;
As for example. F is sounded like ph, and may be writ∣ten instead of them, as in these words, For physick write fisick &c. For Pharisee, write farisee &c. For philosophie write filosofie &c. F is likewise sounded in the end of words like ugh, and may be written for them: as, For enough write enuf &c. For cough write cof &c. For rough write ruf &c. K may be written for ch, when they have a like sound: as, For Patriarch write patriark For melancholy write melankoly, For choler, write koler, &c. X hath the sound of diverse of the dou∣ble consonants, & may be used in their stead: as for example, it is sounded like cc in accept, accident cts in acts, effects cks in flocks, stocks; for which write axept, axident, &c. for which write ax, effex, &c. for which write siox, stox, &c.
and generally when s commeth after k, they together have the sound of x, and x is to be written for them. 6 The letter e may be left out in many words: sometimes in the beginning, sometime in the middle, sometimes in the end of words. In the beginning it may bee spared, when the sound of it is drowned in the sound of the next letter following, as it is alway before x: as, For externall, write xternall, &c. For extent, write xtent, &c. For extract, write xtract, &c. Also as when it commeth before m: as, For emphasis, write mphasis, &c. For emptie, write mptie, &c. For embrio, write mbrio, &c. Or before n: as, For ensigne, write nsigne, &c. For enter, write nter, &c. For end, write nd, &c. And in many words before s: as, For escape, write scape, &c. For establish, write stablish, &c. For estate, write state, &c. Sometime in the middle of a word
e may be left out, when the sound of it is in the next letter, as, For alteration, write altration, &c. For liberall, write librall, &c. For contemne, write contm, &c. For flatter, write flatr, &c. E in the end of a word may be left out, when it commeth after l: as, For eagle, write eagl, &c. For title, write titl, &c. For double, write doubl, &c. And alwayes, when it serveth onely to produce the former vowell in the same syllable, it may be left out: as, For were, write wer, &c. For name, write nam, &c. For those, write thos, &c. For die, write di, &c. 7 When a consonant is doubled in a word, one of them may be spared: as for bb, ff, ll, write b, f, l: as, For rabble, write rable, &c. For affirme, write afirme, &c. For collect, write colect, &c. 8 Sometimes in this Art, three or
foure words may bee joyned together as one word; of which afterwards. 9. Lastly, in writing some sentences, whole words may be omitted, which yet in the reading must be implyd, es∣pecially in common knowne sentences as, for The feare of the Lord is the beginning of wisedome. may be written. The feare of Lord beginning wisedome. For, In the fulnesse of time God sent his Sonne, &c. may be written. In fulnesse time God sent Sonne, &c, They are not a few that have found benefit by this direction. Those that wil make use of it, must have discretion to know what words may bee spared in writing, and yet must be implyed in the reading; for if any principall word be left out, whereby the sense is maimed, instead of a helpe it will prove an hin∣derance. Again, it is onely to be used when one is not able otherwise to write word for word after the speaker.
The letters of the Alphabet. a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p qu r s t v w x y z
CHAP. II. Of the letters of the Alphabet. HAving in the former Chapter gi∣ven some generall directions, (which are of use through out the whol Art) I com now to the particular rules; the first whereof is the Alphabet of let∣ters, which are to be learned perfectly, according to the forme expressed in the copy, In the making of those letters,Place here the Al∣phabet. each of them but x and y (which are not of∣ten used) are to be made at once, with∣out removing the pen from the paper. I make one character for q and u, be∣cause they come alwayes together: whensoever q is written, u immediately following it; as in queen, quiet, quarter, quantity, &c. These letters being so perfectly lear∣ned, that you can make and know any of them without looking on the copy, proceed to the next.
CHAP. III. Of the double consonants. THe double consonants are the very letters of the Alphabet, joyned to∣gether (except the foure last) and there∣fore the learning of them is no charge to memory, the letters being once lear∣ned. In the making of these double con∣sonants you may observe, that still the second letter is joyned where you end the former:Place here the double consonants as for example, to write bl, your b alone is thus [], l alone thus [] when they are to be joyned, draw l from the foote of b thus []. To write br, write b as before, and then draw r out of the foote of b thus []. To write cl, c alone is thus [],l thus []: when you joyne them, draw l out of the foote of c thus []: or thus [] and so of the rest, as you may see in the copy of the double consonants.
Double consonants To begin words. To end words. bl br cl cr dr dw fl fr gl gr kn pl pr sc sk sl sm sn sp st str tr tw ld lk lm ln lp ls lsi lt mp nd ng nk ns ns n rd rk rl rm rn rv rs rst rt ch sh th wh
CHAP. IV. Of Vowels. THE single Vowels are a, e, i, o, u, which in this Art are never expres∣sed by their proper characters, (unlesse when a Vowell beginneth a word, or else when two vowels come together, of which see Chap. 5.) but are under∣stood by certaine places, assigned them about the other letters: as for example. The places of the Vowels. The Vowels are placed about any let∣ter, as you see them stand about these, The place of a is just over the head of the letter; thus, . The place of e at the upper corner on the right hand; thus, le. The place of i against the middle of the letter on the right hand▪ thus, . The place of o at the foote of the let∣ter on the right hand; thus, lo. The place of u just underneath the let∣ter; thus .
About the characters that are flat, or lye even with the line, as p and n, they are thus disposed; The place of a is just over the middle of the letter: the place of u just against it under the letter; the other three e, i, and o, on the right side one under ano∣ther. About slope characters, as m, and t, they are placed thus The places about any of the rest are easily observed. CHAP. V. Of the use of the Vowels, and their places. WHen a word beginneth with a vowell, the character of the vowell must be expressed: as for exam∣ple, to write art, the character of a must be written thus []: the next letter r, being a consonant, must bee
joyned to a thus [] and then t joyn∣ed to r thus []. To write on, write o thus [], and at the foot of it joyne n thus []. To write eke, write e thus [], and joyn k thus [], as in these. in are arke us ebb odd and the like. If two vowels come together in the beginning of a word, and must both of necessity be founded, write downe the character of the former vowell, and set the following consonant in the place of the latter vowell: as for example, To write aid write the character of a thus [], the next vowell being i, set d in the roome of it thus [], to write eat, write e thus [], the next vowell be∣ing a, set t in the place of it thus [] as in these, aime aire eare oare out ease and the like. When a word beginneth with a con∣sonant, the vowell or vowells follow∣ing
are not expressed by their cha∣racters, but implyed by the places as∣signed them about the consonant, and the next letter or letters following are set in the place of the foregoing vowel. As for instance, to write ball, write b thus [], in the place of a write l dis∣joyned thus []. To write bell, write b as before; and l dis-joyned in the place of e thus []. To write bill, write b as before, and set l dis-joyned in the room of i thus [], boll, thus [], bull, thus []: as in these, bad bed bid bod bud nat net nit not nut and the like. If two consonants or more come to∣gether, and no vowell betweene them, they must be joyned together without taking off the pen: as for example, to write blame, bl must bee joyned thus [], then in the place of a write m thus [], To write breake, write br thus [], and in the place of e write k thus [].
As in these, bredth length short speech whence France and the like. Note that alway when there cometh any vowell, the pen is to be taken off, and the letter after dis-joyned; but till you come at a vowel, all the consonants that come together must be joyned to∣gether. When a word endeth with a vowell, that vowell is understood by a tittle made in the place of it: as to write me, write m thus [], and a tittle in the place of e thus []. To write die, write d thus [], and a tittle in the place of i thus []: as in these, say we crie go due and the like. If a word end with y, the character of y is not expressed, but a tittle set in the place of i: as in these, my why by
CHAP. VI. Of diphthongs. FOr diphthongs, some assigne more places about characters, then for single vowels; which hath proved in∣convenient in the writing, and bred much confusion in the reading of what hath been so written, as they from their owne experience have testified; it be∣ing indeed impossible exactly to ob∣serve 12. or foureteene severall places about a small character; for the avoi∣ding of which inconvenience, I observe onely the places for the single vowels, and no more. If it be demanded, how words shall be expressed wherein more vowels then one come together; I answer, if two vowels come toge∣ther in the beginning of a word, observe that rule, Chap. 5. If in the middle of a word, that is, after some other letters, observe these rules. First, Though two vowels come to∣gether, yet oft times, one of them doth principally sound the word, and then the other may be spared: as in these words.
In deare leave out a and write dere, In heart leave out e and write hart, In neither leave out i and write nether, In people leave out o and write peple, In guide leave out u and write gide. Secondly, if two vowels come toge∣ther, & must of necessity be both sound∣ed (as especially when the first vowell belongs to one syllable, and the latter to another) then write the character of the latter vowel in the place of the for∣mer; as to write lion, write l thus [], in the place of the first vowell which is i, write the character of o thus [], and then joyne n at the foot of o thus []. To write poet, write p thus [], in the place of o write e thus [], and joyne t thus []: as in these, quiet sion caos and the like Or else make a tittle in the place of the former vowell, and write the con∣sonant or consonants following in the latter vowels place; as to write riot, write r thus [], make a tittle in the first vowels place, which is i thus [],
and then in the place of the latter vow∣ell o, write t thus []. To write Ioel, write j consonant thus [], a tittle in the place of o thus [], and l in the place of e thus [] as in these, diall giant duell and the like. CHAP. VII. Of I and V consonants. THE letters j and v are sometimes vowels, sometimes consonants; the knowledge whereof will not bee un∣usefull in this Art of writing; there∣fore those that know it not, may take these directions. I is a consonant alway in the begin∣ning of a word, when another vowell followeth next after it, and it is soun∣ded like g soft: as in these, jarre judge jewell Iob and the like.
Also in the middle of a word, if a vowell follow it in the same syllable: As in these, prejudice reject rejoyce and the like. V is a consonant when it commeth before another vowel, in the same syl∣lable, and is sounded like f, but some∣what softer: as in these, vertue viall vesture deliver and the like. When they be Consonants, and are thus sounded, they must be expressed by their proper characters, as the rest of the consonants, whether it be in the be∣ginning, middle, or ending of words. CHAP. VIII. Of the markes for the beginning and ending of long words. ALthough by the former rules any word may be written in this Art,
and there is no necessity of learning more (the rest that follow, onely ser∣ving to shorten the former) yet to those that desire to be exact in this Art, the benefit of the rules that follow will countevail the pains of learning them therefore (in the next place) for the ab∣breviating of longer words, I have ad∣ded characters for the beginnings and endings of such as are most usuall.Place here the table of begin∣ning and ending long words These markes having little depen∣dance upon the letters, are therefore to be learned perfectly, being of much use in writing. In the using of them the same rules are to bee observed as before in words of one syllable. If a word beginne with one of these markes, the character for it must be set down; if a consonant come next, it must be joyned to the mark, without taking off the pen, and then write the letter or letters following in the roome of the vowell. As for example, to write con∣demne, first write your marke for con, which is thus []; the next letter d be∣ing a consonant must be joyned to con thus [] & then in the vowels place, which is e, write m disjoyned thus []
Prepositions for longe words. Ab ob ac ad af all am an ap op as at circum com Con cor col de di dis fall full for im liber mess miss per par Pre pro re sub suff sup ser sur sal sol temp trans vn vp vt Terminations for longe words. Able ible ation ceiue dure fect ference fication fulness iect itude ing ler lent litie mer mar ment ness ous cent sent serue sion tion soeuer ternall ther tent ture ver
To write prefer, your marke for pre is thus [] joyn f thus [], and in the place of e write r dis-joyned thus []. To write submit, your marke for sub write thus [], joyn m to it thus [] and in the place of i write t dis-joyned thus []: as in these, fortune rebell contain remit proceed translate and the like. If two of the marks make up a whole word, and no vowell come betweene them, they are both to be joyned toge∣ther; as to write reference, write your mark for re which is thus [], & then joyne ference thus []. To write project set downe pro thus [], and joyne the marke for ject thus []: as in these. former perceive circumference and the like. If you have a mark for the ending of a word, and not to begin it, you must begin it with the letters of the Alpha∣bet; as for example, to write nature,
write n thus [], and then ture being a mark to end it, must be set in the place of a thus []. To write brother, joyne br thus [], and set the marke for ther in the place of o thus []: as in these; nation never pliable difference and the like. If you have a marke to begin a word and no mark to end it, it must be ended with the letters of the Alphabet: as to write permit, write the marke for per thus [], joyne m to it thus [], and write t dis-joyned in the place of i thus []. To write suffer, write your marke for suff thus [], and then set r in the place of e dis-joyned thus []. If a vowell come next after a mark or consonant to begin a word, the letter or mark following the vowell must be set dis-joyned in the room of the vowell: as in these, courage support potent lament and the like
CHAP. IX. Directions for making the foresaid marks, and placing the vowels in long words. IN making your Characters, begin them so that you take not off the pen unlesse it be in those that cannot other∣wise be made. Secondly, the most of them are so framed, that you may end them toward the right hand, that so with more con∣venience the next letter may be joyned if it be to be joyned. Thirdly, the next consonant or mark is to be joyned where you last took off the pen from the former. The vowels in long words are to be placed about the last letter, if it bee a word that goeth forward in the line; as to write contemn, write con thus [], joyne t thus [], and then set m dis∣joyned in the place of e against t thus [], not against con thus []. To write disdain, write dis thus [], joyne d thus [], and then set n in the vowels place against d thus [], not against dis thus [], &c. Those markes for ending of words
that begin with a vowell, are common∣ly to be joyned to the former mark or letter: as in these, durable nation bring and such like. Unlesse there come another Vowell before them, and then the marke is to be set dis-joyned in the place of the for∣mer vowell: as in these, doing pliable pious and such like. The character for s after some letters in the end of words cannot convenient∣ly bee joyned; therefore in stead of it write a tittle behind the whole word: as in these, sayings servants conserves pirates
CHAP. X. Of characters that resemble others. THe same character sometimes stan∣deth for two things: as for exam∣ple, there is the same for ture and Christ ternll and which mess and what &c. which is no hinderance (but a help) in the learning this Art, considering how easily they may be differenced. When any of these marks stand alone by them∣selves, they are for whole words: when they are joyned with other markes or letters, they are but a part; as for exam∣ple, this marke [] when it is written alone, standeth for which; when it is joyned with other letters, it is ternall, a part of a word; and so of the rest: and by remembring the one, the other is ea∣sily called to minde.
CHAP. XI. Whether marks for beginnings may be used to end words, and contrary. THe marks for beginning of words may be used for endings, and then endings for beginnings (when they be shorter than the letters of the Alphabet) without inconvenience: as in these, mercie former assume Messias sentence consent durable indure where you may observe, the marke for the beginning of the former word, is the ending of the next. CHAP. XII. Examples of words writen with the marks, with markes for the names of the books of the Bible. THe greatest difficulty that some (who have onely the helpe of the book) have found in attaining this Art, is about the using the foresaid marks in the writing of words; to helpe such,
Examples of words written with each of the former markes Abstaine Abolish Obligation Obedient Acclamation Accuse Admitt Addition Affirme Affright Almightie Allow Amber Amiable Anger Annotation Approach Appoint Oppress Opposition Aspiration Assume Atlas Atturney Circumuent Composition Comendation Condemne Connex Cormorant Courage Colchester Colledge Demerit Deifie Diuert Dialogue Distance Dissemble Fulgentius Fuller Forbeare Forraine Imputation Imoderate Libertine Liberall Messenger Mistake Misserie Pardon Paradice Pretend Preexistent Prophesie Proud Rebell Reallitie Sublime Subborne Suffrage Sufficient Supplie Support Surmise Surrender
Examples of words written with each of the former markes Permission Peregrine Sermon Seraphin Salmon Salute Temptatio Temporall Translate Transact Vpright Vppon Vntill Vniforme Vttmost Vtterance Dureable Pliable Horrible Vocation Scituation Conceiue Felicitie Aduersitie Indure Defect Circumferen Mortification Willfulnes Ioyfulnes Subiect Istitute Calling Doing Templer Quarreller Relent Exelent Informer Grammer Installment Parliament Aptness Proneness Merualous Pious Consent Innocent Reserue Mantion Comision Whensoeuer Whosoeuer Father Murther Content Impotent Departure Future Moreouer Euer
Markes for the Names of the bookes of the old and New Testament. Genesis Exodus Leuiticus Numbers Deuteron: Ioshua Iudges Ruth Samuel Kings Chroniles Ezra Nehemiah Ester Iob Psalmes Prouerbes Ecclesiastes Canticles Isaiah Ieremiah Lamentatī: Ezekiel Daniel Hosea Ioel Amos Obadiah Ionah Micah Nahum Habak: Zephaniah Haggai Zechariah Malachi, Matthew Marke Luke Iohn Actes Romanes Corinthians Galatians Ephesians Philippians Colossians Thessaloniā: Timotheus Titus Philemon Hebrewes Iames Peter Iude Reuelation
I have in this Edition added this Table of words,Place here the exam∣ples of long words. composed of those markes, wherein for the most part there are two words with each mark; the former ha∣ving a consonant following the prepo∣sition, the latter a vowell. These words are not to be learned without booke, (many of them being after shorter expressed in the table) but are onely examples to direct the lear∣ner how to write otherwords by them. I have also added in this Book, marks for the names of the books of the Old and New Testament: the most of them are drawn from the letters, and there∣fore the learning of them is litle charge to the memory. CHAP. XIII. Of writing 3. or 4. words in one. AS I said Chap. 1. before, sometimes three or foure words or more, may be joyned together as one word, especial∣ly if the following word begin with a vowell: as in these.
as it is in use this is of all other which is as if it Or else when the former word endeth with a vowell: as in these, do so too do no more so so he may die and the like. To make many marks for whole sen∣tences is needlesse; because by the rules of this Art, any thing may be written word for word, as fast as it shall be trea∣tably spoken. And it is indeed impossible to use them exactly, because sometimes the speaker varying a word or two in the sentence, the mark is either of no use, or else the sentence must be rendered in o∣ther words then it was spoken, which is a wrong to the speaker: therefore I have onely abbreviated a few, which com∣monly are spoken in the very words as I have set them down: as for example. The Church of God The people of God
The kingdome of God The kingdome of Christ The kingdome of heaven The kingdome of Satan The joyes of heaven The torments of hell That is to say As if he should say As if it were The power of God The truth of God The mercy of God The wisdome of God The glory of God The honour of God The justice of God The word of God The workes of God The love of God The feare of God Many other like might be added, but these I think sufficient to direct the dis∣creete learner, who may adde more if he see them efull.
CHAP. XIV. Of the Table. THough any word in any language may be writen by the former rules, yet to omit nothing that may tend to the speedy attaining of this Art, I have added a short Table of words, so fre∣quent in use, that almost in any ordina∣ry sentence the greater part of the words are written by this table, with∣out removing the pen from the paper in any one word. The most part of these words are lit∣tle charge to memory, being made out of the letters of the Alphabet. Those that thinke the abbreviatng long strange words by markes, to be an helpe to this Art, are of another mind. I thinke it needlesse, for First, any long word may be expres∣sed by the former rules. Secondly, markes for words so sel∣dome in use are oft times forgotten, be∣fore there bee occasion to make use of them, whereas many of these are writ∣ten in every sentence. Thirdly, as such words are longer in writing, so are they also in speaking.
Lastly, in many long words, some part may be omitted, and yet no hinderance to the reading of it, as in Chap. 1. In this booke at the request of some (who have found it usefull) I have drawne the table into sense as neare as I could, keeping to the Alphabeticall way, that it might take the better im∣pression in the memory of the learner. The words that follow orderly in the table, are those that have the marks set against them; the other words that stand forward in a smaller Character, are added onely to make sense of the o∣ther, and have markes also in their place. Of the use of points in this Art. ALthough to those that have attai∣ned any perfection in this Art, there is no great use of pointing; yet for the helpe of new beginners, I have added this direction: At the end of a perfect sentence, the ordinary period may be used which is this . But because it hath some resem∣blance with another word, leave the
space of a word before and after it, thus . or else set it a letter lower than the line, thus ․ The Interrogative point may be used in the common forme, thus ? Parenthe∣sis likewise as it is usually expressed with two semicircles, thus ( ) For other points of lesse use, as Comma, Colon: and the like, they may wholly be spa∣red. Those that desire to write the New Testament, or Bible, for the distinction of Verses, at each Verse end they may set this marke ∴ Printed at London by R. C. for Samuel Cartwright, and are to be sold at the hand and Bible in Duck-lane. 1644.
THE TABLE. Acknowledg Aduantage Aflictions by Away Anger with And Adulterie Admonish Arguments by Against Account the After Abundance for Actions of As when Appeare we shall Amonge Apostle Angells. and B Behold By Baptisme Blest menare Because Begin they Beleiue to Be Behind not Bruit-beasts But Bountie let Benefitts and Betweene be Brethren C Cause Children Come to Christs to Church Congregation and Care with Conscience and Christians Consider Couenant their Concerning and Conuersation Charitie they vse Call and Crosse the Chastisment and Comfortable Confesse and Certaine Customes Cittie of the Corrupt. to be D Doc Dilligence thy Delight with Destroy to Doctrine Diuells of Deliuered Downe Darknes in Dwell. where they E Edefie Elect the Epistle by
Example and Enemies for Enter Effect and Euill Euen Egept to End and the Earth. of the F Follow Faith From Foundation the Forgiue Forbeare and Fulfilled be Feare with Feast and Flesh not ye Fast. but G Giue God Great Glorie Grace for Gospell and ye Good to the Godly and Generation Generall. in H He Hath that Holie A Humble Heart His Hope Helpe and Heauen is in Holighost and the How yet Hands doe the Hipocrites of Heretickes and Hurt Him House and his Hold Heare. I If Instruments men be Instruct to Ignorant the Iniguitie from It Increase will Inward Ioy Iesus for Iudg. is K Keepe Kingdom in the Know King. thy L Let Loue men
Law the Lord of the Life and their Like is Longe to be Land. in the M Meditate Mind in Man Made thou art Mortall Magestrates Ministers and Must More haue Mercie Multitude. on the N Neuertheless Neighbours Neglect Necessitie the Number of a Nothing that lim•• Notwithstanding Name I Not them Now. O Oh Order the Of Our Omnipotent Obseruable is Ouer Outward things Or Other. P People Passe Praie to Principall in a Publigue Perticuler Place Protection for Prouision and Proue and Patience their Purpose. to Q Qualifie Question the Qnantitie with the Quarter. of a R Remember Readie be Repent to Righteous the Regard that Religion Reioyce Reward and haue Reprobates but Reproofe.
S Stand Saluation for Soule of Spirit and See Selfe to thy Small for Secret Sinnes Self-loue of Shall Seeme So Strong Send they Seuerall for Sacrifice. Scripture T Those That Thinke To not Turne Truth to the Tyme in Torment Themselues Though Thou Thought This Thus and Then There and Tell yet These Them and They Tast shall Thy of Trouble. V Vp Voice with thy Vouchsafe and Vs Vnderstand to Verse. the W We Were Wise With Whom What in Where Why and When Wicked the World Would Walk Wordes with Which Worke Was Will Worship. Y yet You Your. want Z Zeale.
The Lords praier The Articles of the Creed The ten Commandements London Printed for Samuel Cartwright and are to be Soulde at the hand and Bible in duck-Lane, 1641
