S3167 12719077 66275
The Loves OF AMANDUS AND SOPHRONIA, Historically Narrated. A Piece of rare Contexture, Inriched with many pleasing Odes and Sonnets, occasioned by the Jo∣cular, or Tragicall occurrences, hap∣ning in the progresse of the HISTORIE. Disposed into three Books, or Tracts By Samuel Sheppard. Horace, —Quod fi meliora novisti, Candidus Imparti, si non, his utere mecum. LONDON, Printed by G. D. for Iohn Hardestie, to be sold at the Black Spred-Eagle in Ducklane, 1650.
LEt the Reader be pleased to Censure mild∣ly of the Printer, by whose oversight, are these Erratas. Pag. 2. for Permitias read Premitias. Pag. 9. for Lunary read Luminary. Pag. 25. for Uronea read Pronea. Pag. 73. for desert read Dissect. for Rapide r. Rabbide.
CANDIDO ET CORDATO Amico foelici Genio, perspicaci, Ingenio, Iohan. Mane De(—) Baronetto Eoque titulo, vere digno SAMUEL SHEPPARD, hosce extre∣mos Amatorum Amplexus Animi per∣mitias, Solenni{que} officio perfunctas hu∣mill ime. Dedit, Dicavit, Dedicavit. Cloth-Faire, August 20. 1650.
To the Author on his Excellent Romantick Piece. THe Priviledge that pens doe find 'Mongst men, comes short unto the mind, For mentall Cabinets doe yeild No jot unto the Criticks shield: If thoughts might crown deserts, I dare Give to my Pen the largest share. But when our Vultures 'gin to gnaw, I'le cease for feare, and say tis Law; Its better faile of debt, then be Honest, in tearms, of flattery; I hate the thought, I'le freely give My Verdict, which perhaps may live 'Gainst Calumnie. If Learning may With Wit, win Fame, thou hast the day. Crown'd be thy brows with lasting Bayes, Who giv'st a Form to future dayes: If witness may be lawfull, then I'le sweare 't shall fear no Vote of men; But to thy ever-shining Glory, The times to come shall hug thy Story. J. BOURNE.
To my much honoured Friend, the Au∣thor, on his History of Amandus and Sophronia. In a Dialogue, between Menander and Museus. Menan. MUseus, how dost brook to be Thus rival'd? Mus. Fate doth find I see 'Tis fit, all Glory should not die Entail'd unto our memorie, Where's thy Aglaia? Men. Where is laid Thy much renowned Sestian Maid? Mus. Beneath a myrtle. Men. So is mine Pratling, with Queen Proserpine. Mine laughs. Mus. Mine weeps. Men. Mine joyes to find Another of as rich a mind. Mus. But Venus Priestesse is in grief, She now no longer shall be Chief, But with Leander must give way T' Amandus, and Sophronia. JOHN HALL Collegij Regnalis Canta. in Artibus Magistro.
In Authorem Amicissimum suum, Encomiasticon. LAdies, you that hug the Quill Of Renowned Astrophil Here, behold a second Birth, Tasting of Sydnean worth. For Pyrocles, here, you may Find an Amandus, every way His Rivall; in Clodomer view Basilius, and his humour too: This is so like in every lim To Sydney, that 'twas got by him I' de sweare, but I should injure then One of our noblest Shepherds Pen. See how the Learned shades do meet, And like Aeriall shadowes fleet, More in number then were spide To flock 'bout the Dulichian Guide. The first, Museus, then Catullus, Then Naso, Flaccus, and Tibullus;
Then Petrach, Sydney, none can move Shakespeare out of Adonis Grove, There sullenly he sits; but these Admire thy novell Rhapsodies. Dear Friend, which ever shall subsist, Spight of Oblivion's hiding-mist. ANTHONY DAVENPORT.
THE LOVES OF AMANDVS AND SOPHRONIA. The First Book. CHAP. I. Embassadours (from divers parts of Eu∣rope) arrive at Verona, the occasion thereof. Rhoxenor courts Sophronia. Her Reply. He resolves her Ruine. ANciently there Reigned a ve∣ry Potent King over the Kingdom of Lombardie, na∣med Clodomer, who, by his
Queen (Lucinda) had one only Son, cal∣led Rhoxenor, a Prince of Exquisite Fea∣ture, who, as he attained yeares, became Splendidly Eminent, for his Inclination to, and his unparralleld Industry in, the Study of the Sciences; to which, (that no∣thing might be wanting, to make him more then a meere mortal) his Deport∣ment commanded an expectation of Ma∣jestick Magnanimitie, and Magnanimous Majestie, to the envy of neighbouring Kings, and to the ineffable joy of his Princely Parents. Comming unto yeares of maturitie (so that now without prejudice to Truth he might write himselfe, Man) he seemed, some golden Casket repleat with Dia∣monds: the eyes of all men were fixed on him, as ordained by Heaven, for a Super-excellent Mirrour, whose very re∣flection should dim the Splendor of all Former, and Future Kings: Their expe∣ctations, labouring with an ardent desire, to see their young Prince fettered, in the pleasing Bands of Matrimony, the main Remora (in their apprehensions) being his
high Descent, and innate Worth, which seated him on so proud a Pinacle, that nothing, save a continuance in his single Capacitie, could preserve his Splendor unsullied, and his Glory un-eclipsed, they could have been content, that their Phoenix should have made himselfe his owne Mate, and his owne Heire, save that they were sensible, another Rhoxenor would not spring out of his ashes. But what Mortalitie had ever yet a durable existence of it selfe? What more vertuous Prince then Nero, the first five yeares? The Father of us all, retained his pristine purity for some houres in the Garden. The Effigie of Byancha, Daughter to the King of Hungarie: The Resemblance of Leonora, Heire apparant to the King of Poland; and the lively Portraicture of Dulciana, (whose living substance was courted by the most famous Princes of Europe) Daughter to the Em∣perour of Almaine, brought by severall Embassadours, sent from the aforesaid Kings, all using their utmost Oratory to winne Rhoxenors assent, in the behalfe of
their severall Masters, bringing with them (as Advocates) many rich presents, were frustrated of their hopes, by his pe∣remptory negation, to their exceeding grief and astonishment, Now, if you demand the reason of this strange aversenesse in Rhoxenor, I shall tell you, that Lust, outragious, injurious, destructive Lust, was the impediment that hindered his compliance, which had ta∣ken such sure hold on his heart, that it was impossible for the hand of Tempe∣rance to dislocate the Usurper, without pulling the panting lump from its strings; nor was Rhoxenor able (though he inde∣fagitably endeavoured it) to conjure down this Fiend, that his owne indiscreet passi∣ons had raised, so that he was every way surrounded with inevitable dangers, Scylla on the right hand, and Charibdis on the left; Aetna on the left hand, and Aver∣nus on the right; (with Maedea) he saw, and knew the horrour of his Crime, and yet (thrust forward by unavoydable de∣stiny) he could not but proceed in the per∣petration thereof.
And that, though he knew this would occasion his owne losse of former Ho∣nour; his Royal Parents Rage and Grief; Amandus (once his alter idem, having been bred up with him from his Cradle, now upon his returne from castigating the Girpides, the Souldiers unanimously and cordially affecting him) his assured hate and vengeance, besides the uglinesse of the Act, in wronging so noble a friend, together with the hazard of the Nobili∣ties, Gentries, and Peoples revolt; yet to enjoy (indeed force) Sophronia (alrea∣dy affianced to Amandus) he is content to lose all, and to make himselfe wretch∣ed, for the fruition of that (which if for∣ced) is (in truth) the worst of miserie. Long (during Amandus absence) hee conversed with the chast Sophronia (whom the King for Amandus sake had appoint∣ed a residence neare his owne lodgings) rather like a Brother then a Lover. [So the Wolfe, and the Lamb, converse in amity, till maturitie divulge how diffe∣rently Nature hath allotted them] Love, (if I may call it Love) by degrees (like
supplanting Ivie) wound about his heart, till at last it mastered his Senses, over∣topping and triumphing over all his Pow∣ers; so that [after many apparant signes of his inward Ardour, more then ever Naso prescribed in his Art of Love, which Sophronia did, but would not seeme to apprehend] he burst out into a plaine lan∣guage, thus uttering his desires. Madam, I Have endeavoured (with a more then masculine resolve) to suppresse those pas∣sions, and to extinguish those flames, which have a long time hover'd about my heart, but find it beyond my force, not to write, when Nature her selfe dictates. (Lady) I love you, love you above Heaven, or Ho∣nour (both which [in all probabilities] I am like to forfeit for your sake) I am not ignorant of your affiancing to Amandus, but (deare Mistresse) consider my Birth with his Fortunes, and my Estate with his Wealth, and you cannot (sure) relinquish the gold, and desire the brasse; this heavenly beauty was not ordained for lesse then a Throne,
and it were an injury to Divinity it selfe, to have these Temples adorned, with ought save a Diadem; it is in you (excellent Mi∣stresse) to make Rhoxenor, more than man, or to uncreate him, (which alone your deni∣all can doe) and to precipitate him, from an Heaven of content and happinesse, to an Hell of distraction and misery. You may imagine, how this unlook'd for narration, amazed poore Sophronia, (a Lady excellently vertuous) and whose heart was as immoveably fixed on A∣mandus, as ever the Sestian Heros on her adventurous Leander, or the unfortunate Thysbes, on her haplesse Pyramus, whose blood gave the first tincture to the Mul∣bery, her cheeks dyed in more perfect Purple, then Monarchs put on when they mourne, she returned him this answer: Sir, Your language (which I wish I had been deafe to) gives me cause to suspect, that some saucy Devil (to be thought an Angel of light) hath cheated Rhoxenor, of his form; for sure, Prince Rhoxenor (I mean King Clodomers Son) whom Fame canonizeth,
for the store-house of Vertue, and the Mi∣rour of mankinde, cannot be such a Traytor to his own fame, and his friends honour, or imagine Sophronia, so light of soule, as to prove false to her faith, to be the greatest Princesse in the world. Having thus said, (the vehemency of her expression, well denoting the per∣plexity of her mind) she flung from him, in a (sober) rage, and the Garden doore being open (for Rhoxenor the more op∣portunely to discover himselfe, had in∣vited her into the privy Garden, adjo∣ning to the Pallace) she forsook the Prince, and retired to her Chamber. He, as much astonished at her sterne reply, as she greived, for his dangerous solicitation, stood a while, like one Pla∣net struck; you would have taken him (had your eyes visited him in that agony) for some shap'd Statue, carved by some cunning Dedalus: but at length, his lost senses (like trewant Servants) returning to their obliged exercises, smiting his hand on his breast (quoth he) I perceive, I may sooner catch a falling Star, or make
a bonefire in the Seas bottome, then win the favour of this icie peice; and there∣fore (for the future) I shall (with Aesops Fox) despise the fruition of that, which in affecting, I cannot attain; yet shall she know, that Princes must of necessity, ei∣ther love affectionately, or hate deadly; and since my selfe must not enjoy her, I will so contrive, that Amandus shall not: having uttered this, in a great rage, he left the Garden, and departed towards the Pallace, in so moody a manner, that none of his Attendance, durst speake to him; and to those Lords that saluted him, he returned no answer, to the exceeding a∣mazement of the Court, who wonder at (but cannot guesse) the cause of his change of cheare; the people whispering vari∣ously, but nothing truly, according to the wildnesse of their fancies. Thus he, who not many months since, seemed to rivall that Prince of Planets, the Sunne, for translucency, and clearnesse, will now scarce serve for a Lunary in Ar∣chimedes Spheare, So great is the folly, that commeth of Wisdome, and so dreadfull is the
wickednesse, that ariseth out of the ashes of a dead vertue. CHAP. II Rhoxenor exceedingly perplexed, Cheri∣brert discovers the cause of his dolour; his wicked counsell, he undertakes the bu∣sinesse about Sophronia. SO great was Rhoxenors anguish, conceived, for the late repulse offered him by Sophronia, a∣gravated by his innate assu∣rance, that his hopes were for ever buried in the Lathe of her chaste Love to Aman∣dus, that he scarce refrained to offer vio∣lence to his own Person; and though Cheribrert his creature (though his Fathers Counsellour) and to whom he had hither∣to unbowelled himselfe upon all occasi∣ons, was importunately solicitous, to gain from him the least part of that which oc∣casioned his sorrow; yet it seemed he had exchanged tongues with some Fish,
no answer was returned to any of his de∣mands: so that it was all one, as if he had entred into dialogue with a Statue, or ex∣pected a responsion, from the painted mouth of a Picture on the wall, to the great griefe of Clodimer, and Lucinda, who mourned for their Sonne as he were now to be inhumed, or were already sleeping in a sheet of Lead. In this dolourous distracted condition, he abode the space of eight dayes, eating little, and sleeping lesse, till one day (as he was tossing himselfe on his Couch) Che∣ribrert, unawares entring in, and standing a while at the door, to listen if he could heare the Prince pronounce the least par∣ticle, that might give him an hint of that which afflicted him, he heard him use these words to himselfe; Ah Sophronia, thus thy unkindnesse, will procure the certaine ruine of thy selfe, and me, and endanger the devastation of a flourishing Kingdome. Cheribrert, glad of this Intelligence, as if he had heard nothing, enters in, after his wonted manner, and (as his usuall custome
was) besought him, now at last to discover his greife; for (quoth he) be confident (Sir) of cure, if it be in the power of Hea∣ven, Earth, or Hell to afford it: But find∣ing him still wedded to his wonted taci∣turnity; (quoth he) my Lord, you are conscious (I am sure) of the knowledge I am famous for in Astrology; and ha∣ving calculated your Nativity, and other∣wise used my Art to the utmost, I finde that you are in Love; Rhoxenor, starting from his Couch, at that word, stood up∣on his feet, (quoth he) but though (per∣haps) by thy Art, thou hast found out the cause, it is not in the power of gods, or men to prescribe the cure: My Lord (quoth Cheribrert) (having ever born a deadly hate to Amandus.) Trees, that will not bend, are as easily broken; tis at your discretion, though you cannot take in the Towne by Seige, to shake it to dust, with your battery; by all that's sacred, and the bright Genius of this place, I vow to sacrifice soule and body to purchase your content, though your commands extended to the killing of my Father.
Quoth Rhoxenor) and therewith fetch∣ed a deep sigh, grating his teeth) Take then the dreadful secret into thy bosome, I love Sophronia (Amandu's betrothed wife) but her Person I must never expect to en∣joy, which though I am content to be∣leeve; yet such is the rigour of my tem∣per, that the damned endure not more unexpressable torments in hell, then I, when I but entertain a thought, that A∣mandus, or any else, shall have the fruition of that Paradice, from entring into which, a Cherubin (with a flaming Sword) is my Remora; I would fain work the coy So∣phronia, some deep disgrace, and so con∣trive, that Amandus may be made incapa∣ble of her imbraces. To this Cheribrert (laughing aloud) an∣swer'd; And hath this sleight businesse (my Lord) occasione all this adoe, to the dishonour of your selfe, the griefe of Clodomer, and Lucinda, and the generall discourse, and destraction of the whole Realme? by the Soule of the world (my Lord) you have most indiscreetly fool'd your selfe.
Why (quoth Rhoxenor) dost thou make so slight of it? Yes, (quoth Cheribrert) for is it not in you, to dispose of Sophronia, and Aman∣dus, as you shall thinke fit? are they not your Subjects, and Servants, are not (or ought not) their lives and estates, to be at your appointment, as other your Fa∣thers Subjects, whose Heire aparent you are? Depute me (my Lord) for the ma∣naging of this businesse, and if I act not like another Mercury, wittily, yet like ano∣ther Saturne, malevolently, decapitate me, and fix this head on the cheife Gate of the City. I ever (quoth Rhoxenor) have found thee cordially fidelious, doe but doe as thou hast indented, and expect what wealth, or honour thou canst covet, while Clodomer lives, and when his death, puts the Diadem upon my head, to be my on∣ly favourite. I (quoth Cheribrert) shall esteem the fulfilling of your commands, rewards sufficient. I joy that Fate hath found out away for me, to expresse the loyall duty
I owe to your Highnesse. And so for that time they departed one from another, the Prince to the Court, and Cheribrert to his own mansion. CHAP. III. Cheribrert (by the aide of Flavia, Sophro∣nias Woman) betrayes Sophronia to the censure of the Law, the manner there∣of. WOnderfull it is to consider, how great an influence the interior parts of man, have on his ex∣terior; Rhoxenor had almost vext himselfe to a Skelleton, but now [re∣lying on Cheribrerts abillity, for the ac∣complishment of his wicked designes] his minde being calmed, his whole Micro∣cosme resumed its wonted vigour. [So the vegitables of the earth, when the frosty hand of Hyems hath dispoyled them of their verdant garments, remaine (for a time) as it were, saplesse; but when Hyperion brings on the spring, they are
againe adorned in their summer glory] Rhoxenor hath the same health (though not the same purity) he formerly enjoyed, to the generall rejoycing of all men. But now was Cheribrert devizing how to expresse himselfe a faithfull Servant, to his ignoble Master, sometime he re∣solves on this, but then another conside∣ration proves it abortive: now he pro∣poseth that, as the surest, and most facile way; but cogitating how it may prove in the Catastrophe, he waveth it, as suggested by the Feinds to his owne ruine; at length he concluded on a way, most probable, for the effecting of his de∣signes, which was this: The vertuous Sophronio had an Hand∣maid, whom she peculiarly reflected on, named Flavia; her he had a long time endeavoured to winne to his lascivious embraces, with all manner of rich gifts, and faire promises, but had still failed in his hopes; the Virgins breast being Ar∣mour of proofe, against all the fiery as∣saults of this Fiend; yet in case he could affect her honourably, in the way of mar∣riage,
she denyed not, to meet his love with equall Fervour: By this Virgins means, he doubted not (though one would think he had cause enough to be diffident) to fulfill his engagement to Rhoxenor, and attaine his proposed ends. With all speed therefore he resorts to Flavia, (who was hardly drawne to ac∣company him, imagining he yet came to demand that which she never meant to give) and having declared unto her his (seeming) noble intents (to make her his Wife, and sharer with him, in all he could call his) she look'd upon him with a more pleasing aspect then hitherto she had done; her gesture proclaiming, she ap∣plauded his intents, and with him would cheerfully accord to sing Paeans to Hy∣men. Having assured her his reality, with ma∣ny oaths and imprecations, calling the im∣mortall Gods to witnesse the Integrity of his heart (quoth he) My deare, since now nothing wants, save some few ceremonious Formes, to make us one flesh, Heaven forbid wee
should deny to accomplish any thing one for another, not beyond our ability to performe. So it is, that the Prince Rhoxenor (upon thy life, weare the secret next thy heart) is deeply enamoured on thy Mistresse, who he hath solicited in as quaint Oratory, as ever Demosthenes, Quintilian, or Tully were masters of, yet neither his words, presents, or pro∣mises, have proved of force enough to thaw her frosty chastitie: Now, it is in thee, to gaine him the fruition of his de∣sires, and to make me (thy Husband) great in Riches and Honours; I know, she permits none to have natures best be∣nefit by her save thee; too morrow night therefore, the Prince Rhoxenor, adorned with these very garments thou hast on, shall slip into thy Mistresse bed, which happinesse, when he hath once attained, if he lose the fruition of his blisse by Cowardice, let Cupid break his head with his Bow, or Venus strangle him with her Ceston. Flavia, stood a while in a Dilemma, not knowing what answer to returne,
yet at length (Oh the frailty of woman kind, who, if they resist the assault the one way, are easily surprised by the other) she consented to act according to his pres∣cription. Thus she whose chastity could not be undermined by lust, or gaine, had her fidelity blowne up by the hope of con∣jugall Wealth, and matrimoniall Ho∣nour. Night now drew her Curtaine o're the World, and the chaste Sophronia preparing for Bed, was enforced to use the ayde of some other Handmaid, Fla∣via (by Cheribrerts advice) keeping out of the way on purpose. Sophronia entring her Bed, seemed like Bow-arm'd Diana, stripping her selfe of her ornaments, in∣tending to bath her Deifide body in some Christall Fountaine, she was (indeed) an Adornment to that which Adorned her; the Arts, which other Ladies use to adde to the Lustre of their Beauties, would have dimmed her natural exquisite Splen∣dor: So great were her outward Perfecti∣ons, that, not Paetrarch, or Sydney, (were
they alive) could find pertinent Elocu∣tion, sutable to her Eulogie: So glorious were her inward endowments, that none save Apollo himself, or rather the tongue of some Cherub, can speak them. By this time pernicious Cheribrert had so dealt with a servant of his (no worse Officer then the Groome of his Stable) whom he had decked (with the Jay re∣corded by Aesop) in Flavia's Plumes, and with faire words, and rich promises, had so fortified his courage, that he resolutely entred Sophronia's Chamber, (having re∣ceived the key of the door from Flavia, in whom Sophronia reposed so great con∣fidence, that she made her [as it were] the Guardianesse of her person) the fel∣low being entred, found the Excellent La∣dy fast asleep (so fatall was her chance, and so direfull her destiny) rejoycing thereat, he beckned to Rhoxenor and Che∣ribret (who stood at the staire-foot) to come up, who did so, and with easie mo∣tion planted themselves in a corner of the roome, behind the Arras, while the fellow went to bed; no sooner in, but
Cheribrert and the Prince left their station, and with loud cries, awaked the Chast Lady, who, amazed at the suddennesse of the thing, and wondring to behold Che∣ribrert, and Rhoxenor, by her beds side, also perceiving the doore of her Cham∣ber wide open, but looking upon the slave that had adventured into her bed, and finding him not to be Flavia, with a lowd shreitch she leaped out of the bed, and was entertained by the Prince, into his Armes, though not with a Lovers embraces O horrour (quoth Cheribrert) calling his man by his name) what sawcie Fiend prompted thee to this villanie, to the never to be obliterated infamy of our Noble Ge∣nerall, Amandus, the deep disgrace of all Ladies in this Kingdome; Heaven knowes how often she hath sated her salt lust with this stallion, and therewithall, he thrust a poniard to the fellowes heart. Thou mayst report it in the other World (quoth he) but never in this, that thou hast had to doe with so beauteous a Lady▪
O Heaven (quoth Rhoxener) is this your love to Amandus (Lady) what woman may be trusted? We give our Soules to the Devil for a little Letchery, and a wo∣man makes the Contract. Was this the occasion I appeared so despicable in your eies, an horse-heel-rubber your Paramour; by all the Gods, I tremble to thinke of your de∣generate dotage, and had not mine eyes been witnesses of this horrour, I should not have credited the Narration, had Apollo pro∣nounced it: But be your sinne to your self, your Letcher hath paid for his wharfage al∣ready, and is now entring into Charons boat: For your part (though your life bee forfeit by the Law) both triall, and exe∣cution shall be adjourned, till Amandus have resigned his Wreath at the feet of Fame, and shall have opportune leasure to hear the History of his own shame. The betrayed Sophronia, was so vassa∣lized to terrour, that she could not speak one word, but swouned away, so that they were forced to shew her some small curtesie against their wils, (such as the
Spanish Inquisitors extend to those they put to the Rack, give them some respite to recover their limbs anew, and more fiercely to torment them) and to put her into her bed, for her recovery. Cheribrert, uncasing his dead Hireling, left him on the floore, throwing his own habit (which he ware under his womans weed) over him, and putting Flavia's gowne under his cloake, departed, with Rhoxenor to the Pallace, of whom, read more in the next Chapter. CHAP. IV. Sophronia (by the Kings command) carri∣ed Prisoner to Castle Angellina: Her Deportment there. THe Prince, having finished this unprincely work (by the help of his wretched Instrument, Cheribrert, to whom he promi∣sed great rewards for this service) resorts
to the King his Father, to whom he de∣clares the debauchery of Sophronia, Che∣ribrert seconding the same, and adding, that he was so exasperated, and vassaliz'd to passion at the knowledge thereof, that he had justly (though unadvisedly) slain his own Servant (her Paramour) with his poniard. Clodomer (who little sus∣pected the treacherie of Rhoxenor, and Cheribrert) after some dispute with those about him, concluded to commit her priso∣ner to Castle Angellina, there to remain, till time should further their intents for her triall, and punishment. Unfortunate Sophronia was hardly re∣conciled to her gadding Senses, when the Captain of the Guard (furnished with plenary power to apprehend, and seclude her person) came to convey her to the place appointed; to whose power, shee willingly submitted, like some innocent Lamb, invironed by a crew of ravenous Wolves, her Innocence, was her Shield; her Puritie, her Defence; her Chastity, her Solace; and her Sanctity, her San∣ctuary.
Being come to the Castle, (or rather Casket, appointed to retaine so inestima∣ble a Jewell) she was received by the Keeper thereof, whose wife, an old Crone, more deformed of mind, then body, took upon her to provide for her, lodg∣ing her in a chamber on the North-side of the Castle, so near the Sea, that sometimes Neptune watered the very windows there∣of, where, taking a coale from the hearth, she wrote these verses on the wall. Ye faire Nereides, who love to sweep (In sedgy Chariots drawn) the foaming deep; Thou chast Actea, and Uronea sage, Cymodoce, that Neptune canst asswage, Themiste, Nemertea, Spio, all Yee seed of Doris, hearken to my call. I am Sophronia, by base lust betraid By Prince Rhoxenor, in a dungeon laid: Chant you my name aloud in Thetis Court, And wealthy Rhea, she wil thank you for't; Or else convey the Story of my woe To my Amandus (oh) did he but know My Innocence occasions me this ill, Clodomer, and Rhoxenor both, hee'd kill;
But do not as I wish, I speak in passion, Clodomer is the Father of my Nation, His Son our Hope and Prop, here let me die; Yet if I hap to have an Obsequie, This Epitaph insculpe upon my Tomb. Here by the destinies injurious doome Hapless Sophronia lies, kild in her prime For to be truly chaste was all her crime. After she had finished these Verses, she sate her down, resolved to beare patiently whatsoever the will of Heaven should ap∣point, with as little repining, as her cause∣less sufferance, and womanish frailty would permit; where for a while I must leave her, for it is high time we visited Amandus, and accompanied him into his own Countrey.
CHAP. V. Amandus (having conquered the Girpids) returnes Victorious to Verona. His So∣lemn Entertainment. WHile Rhoxenor and Cheri∣brert were applauding their fortunate successe in the late businesse, mana∣ged against Sophronia; Rhoxenor pleasing himselfe with the thought of Sophronia's dolour, and Che∣ribrert promising himselfe that this would prove the praeludium to Amandus down∣fall, knowing how strongly he was per∣swaded of his Mistresse Chastity. A∣mandus (having approved himselfe the Master of Mavors, and taught the Gir∣pids, who, being tributary to the Lom∣bards, had rebelled, that the Lombards merited the Supremacie, excelling them both in Wisedome, and Valour) with his chief Captaines, Venantius, Palladius, Pal∣lante,
and others (after 11 months absence) returned towards his owne Countrey, with many Prisoners, and rich Spoile, the people strowing Flowers, and pre∣senting him with Gifts all the way, cal∣ling him their PRESERVER, his COUNTRIES CHAMPION, and the WARS GLORY; all which, he accepted with such a Deportment, as neither manifested he was proud of their Applause, or scorned their Kindnesse. In this manner, he march'd towards Verona, not far from whence, the King Clodomer, Queen Lucinda, Prince Rhoxe∣nor, Cheribrert, and all of the Councell, with infinite numbers of the Gentry on Horse-back, and an innumerable number of the Vulgar on foot, came out to meet him, in this manner. First came the King Clodomer, wrapt in Ermins skins, on his head, the Diadem of Lombardie, on a stately Gennet, trap∣ped with Gold, a Canopy of Tyrian Silk, with Gold Fringe, borne above his Head, by foure Noble men of especiall note, on each side of him (for he was a
lover of learning, and learned men) a ve∣nerable Bishop, the one named Otho, the other Othello, in their pontificall Attire, mounted on red Horses (to signifie, that by them the Almighty power dispenseth his Judgements and mercies.) Then followed all the Nobillity of that Kingdome (according to their severall Gradations) cloathed and mounted like petty Princes, as you see in a sharp win∣ter night, when the lesser Luminaries of Heaven are congregated [as if met in counsell, to contrive the ruine of their So∣veraign Lady Phoebe] one farre exceedeth another in luster; so was it amongst this Noble train, all strove for precedency, so that there could not be a parity: after these, came five Troops of Celestiall Choristers on foot, habited in black, with Palms in their hands, singing Paeans all the way, and playing on severall sorts of Instruments, to which their tuneable voyces, so admirably accented, that some would needs conceit, they were now taking their journey to Elizium, with their King and his Councell.
After these, came the Prince Rhoxenor, with Cheribrert and two more, all clad (like himselfe) in black, their Horses of the same colour, to the exceeding wonder of all men. After whom, came the Queen Lucinda, mounted on an Unicorn (a woman though in yeares, of exceeding comlinesse, tall of stature, majestick of countenance, having the work Queen, written in her forehead) with all her traine of Ladies following her, deck'd in all the spoiles of nature. Like so many Constellations, convened in the upper Region of the Air, their contracted luster forced the Sunne (that greedily gazed upon them, to confesse, that his own Climine was rivalled by the meanest there) to muf∣fle his glorious head in a Cloud, so that Lu∣cinda, attended by these, seemed another La∣tona, glyding ore the Spartane Tageytus, with all her train of Nymphs. Amandus, with Pallante, Venantius, Palladius, and the chiefest of his Com∣manders, drawing neare the King, deserted their Horses, and standing on foot, were honoured with Clodomers hand, which they
affectionately laid their lips to; the two Church-men, Otho, and Othello, congratu∣lating Amandus arrivall, briefly, but pi∣thily. Then came the Prince Rhoxenor, who salluted Amandus at so great distance, as (considering their affectionate intimacie formerly, beyond that of Pylades, and Orestes, or Damon, and Pythias) much a∣mazed him; Cheribrert seemed so much ravished with joy, that the Organs of his speech, were quite damn'd up, yet he made many humble and obsequious congees. Amandus found it no fit time, now, to en∣ter into dialogue with Rhoxenor, or to en∣quire the cause, that had so incredibly e∣stranged him, and therefore he refrained himselfe, and counterfeited a mirthfull cheare, and the rather (for that the Prince having joyned himselfe to his Father) seeing Lucinda came on, with all her beau∣tious traine, (in the principall ranke of whom, he assuredly expected to have blest his eyes, with the sight of his divine Lady Sophronia) who likewise offered Amandus, and his associate Friends, the same honour
that Clodomer before had done, which they submissively accepted. But Amandus (none blame him for it) was in great anxiety of mind (as the odd∣nesse of his gesture well denoted) at the strange carriage of things, he perceived the King beheld him, but with halfe a face, seeming more to reflect upon his Officers (Venantius, and Palladius) then himselfe; then, the Prince to meet him (at such a time) in swarthy weeds, salluting him at more distance, then a country Gentlewo∣man would view the Lyons at first time; and what was more horrible then Hell, not to have the sight of Saphronia his soules life (whom he had left to Clodo∣mers tuition, and protection) these severall ill boading Omens: his jealous Fancy contracted into one ominous apparancy, which prompted him to prognosticate some strange Revolution had happened during his non-residency from Verona, yet such was the noble temper of his soule, so great his Magnanimitie [imboldned by his Innocency] that heresolved, not so much as tacitely to repine, but to waite
patiently, and (to humane veiw) content∣edly, till time should make a discovery, to the clearing of all doubts, and so fortified with this (truly heroick) resolution, he set forward to the City. CHAP. VI Venantius, and Palladius, having bargain∣ed with an English Curtezan, &c. are very Scurvily handled. NOW for that the Reader will have enough of dolourous dis∣course, ere the History be brought to a period; it will not be amisse, if I recite one pleasant passage, that happened to the two Co∣lonels, Venantius, and Palladius. The Girpids thus subdued, by the bles∣sing of heaven, upon Amandus prowesse, it was thought fit, no longer to keep the Army in pay (the maintenance of which, must needs prove an intollerable burthen to the Subject, especially the Kingdome
not needing a visible force) and therefore Clodomer having bestowed great gratuities, and rich gifts (befitting his own magnifi∣cence, and their merits) upon the severall Commanders of the Army; with a largis to be distributed amongst the common Souldiers, commanded them Immediate∣ly to be disbanded, with a Proclamation of thanks, for their good service. Venantius, Palladius, Paradine, and An∣selmus, the four principall Commanders under Amandus (I mention not Pallante, for he kept close to the Generall, entirely loving, and entirely beloved of him) these Disciples of Mars, who subsisted by blood and sweat, having now no further em∣ployment, in this Kingdome, resolved to put themselves, under the governance of the Duke Medina, Generall of a potent (Spanish) Army, for the invasion of Fer∣tile France, but ere they left Verona, they swore to make tryall, what Wine and Women the City afforded. Being much of the mind of too many Martiallists, managing the Army of the late King of England, whose vinall and
venereall appetites have ruined the glory of all former and future Princes. In order to this resolution, they resort to the signe of the Goddesse Venus, scitu∣ate on the east side of the City, (it seemes, that Pest houses, and Bawdy houses there, have equall appointment) a Tavern, kept by one Antonio Ronsardo, a Venetian, who had to wife an English woman (a Rene∣gado from her first Mate, of comely fea∣ture) named Mariana (one, who when in England, was more afraid of a Shrove-tuesdayes Battery, then a guilty Wretch to view the face of an angry Judge) here being arrived, they were soon conducted into a tipling Tenement, where they be∣gan to drink like Dutch men, Clodomers, Lucindas, Rhoxenors, and Amandus healths were deeply cellebrated, and now being well heated with Wine, they knockd for Mariana the Mistresse of the house, who came simpring into their company, like some nice Sister of the new edition; and yet ere she parted, received her Sallary, to make the Beast with two backs, with one and tother that night.
Having received her Coin, viz. forty Crownes, she left them to their mirth, who began to roar and sing, no English Royster beyond them; Venantius (as well as his new conceived hyccup would per∣mit) began to sing this Catch: Let the Campe stay, and the Knapsack-bearers want their pay till to morrow; We all are agreed that Bachus shall bleed, till drinking hath drowned our sorrow. What gaind Phillips Son, such Conquest and Fame, And great Julius Caesar so glorious a Name, But tipling in Triumph, sans limit or aime. Pewh (quoth Palladius) there is no mel∣lody in these Madrigals, no Songs please me, save those that are dedicated at least by a Cupid; heare mine, and with that he be∣gan to sing this.
Song. Why so coy and nice dear Lady, Pray you, why so nice? You long to make your Lord a Daddy, Is kissing then a vice, pray you, why so nice Why those Pearles fetcht from the Ocean And those Gems of price? You know we men have heat and motian. These must needs entice maugre all advice. Why this Tyre with care contorted, Why this Silk-worms toile, And why these haires curiously sorted Bedew'd with sacred Oyle save our bloods to boyle? If Resolution arme your heart 'Tis horrid Tyranny, For to transluce us with Loves Dart And yet no cure apply you are our mallady.
By this time they had sufficiently fud∣led themselves; the vapourous steam of both Ellements, I mean, the fumosity of Wine, and the reaking sent of that Indian Weed, now so common in use, began to foment a civill war in their crazed nod∣dles, to the infinite prejudice of their fee∣ble braines, who now no longer able to stand upon their guard, yeilded themselves captive, to the disposall of their merci∣lesse Conquerours; Paradine and Ansel∣mus (the onely moderate men of the four) made a shift to grope the way to their lodgings, but Venantius and Palladius, re∣solved not to give their money for no∣thing, although they were very diffident of some imbecillity already seized on their neather nerves. Well, it now grew late, Mariana comes up to give them notice, that it was high time, to betake them to their rest. Sweet beauty (quoth Venantius) we shall not tantalize long, in expectation of your society. Doe you doubt me (quoth Mariana) be confident, I will be better than my word
to you; and so departed. They imagi∣ning, by the word Better, she intimated, that she would be with them sooner then perhaps they thought, not imagining what after happened, and doubting nothing, went to bed together. Now you must understand, that Mari∣ana perceiving Venantius and Palladius, to be Commanders of the Army under A∣mandus (by whose Proclamation, it was death for any Officer, or Souldier, to sol∣licit another mans wife) and well know∣ing, that they durst not attempt any thing afterward, should she use them for the pre∣sent never so coursely, had resolved to receive their money, but not to yeeld them the Commodity they bargain∣ed for; and therefore had told them, that though her husband Ronsardo was out of town, yet there were so many Lodgers in the house, (who took strict notice of her actions) that she could by no means wait upon them in their own Chamber; yet (said she) if you dare run a little ha∣zard, for the thing you seem so to affect, all my Lodgers being in bed, the lodging
where you are to rest to night, stands just over my Chamber, where is a Trap-door, of which I have the key; and when I perceive all quiet, will steale up, and open it my selfe (but take heed you preserve no Candlle unextinguisht) descending with you into mine own Chamber, where you may enjoy your wishes till morning. This they were so foolish to beleeve, and waited her approach accordingly. Venantius was the better Servant to Venus of the two, and therefore he infor∣ced himselfe to watchfullnesse, but Palla∣dius (having drank hard) was no sooner in bed, but he fell fast asleep, when not long after, up comes Mariana in the darke and finding no Candle in the Chamber. Oh (quoth she) this is well done, to put out the light: (quoth Venantius) although I could have wish'd a veiw of that ground I am to till, yet (for your sake Lady) I am content to act all things in tenebris: come (quoth she) all things are prepared below, there we may enjoy the reflection of a Taper without fear, which that we might doe, I have on purpose planted
one, in a darke lanthorne under the ta∣ble. Excellent creature (quoth Venantius) this shall for ever bind me to thee, body, and soul, let us descend: then perceiving Palladi∣us snoring by him, he endeavoured to rowz him, with pushing, and pinching, and at last, with much adoe, did so. You are a sure card (quoth Mariana) I perceive, and in a fit capacity to cut capers. Hang him dullard (quoth Venantius) let him ene snore till morning, I'le war∣rant you (Lady) you will find enough of me. By no meanes (quoth Mariana) for so we may be betraid; the Gentleman may perhaps wake, and finding himself alone, make a clamour. Palladius, half drunk, half sober, be∣tweene sleeping and waking, leaping out of the bed, would needs be the first that descended, which he did, departing so si∣lently (as Venantius imagined) down the stayres, that he much marveiled there∣at.
(Quoth he) sure Palladius is acquainted with those steps, and is not so drunke as I thought him to be. May be so (quoth Mariana) now (Sir) take your progresse, I must goe last, be∣cause of locking the doore, that nothing may be discerned in the morning. Venantius, hastily putting one of his feet forward to find a staire, was cheated of his expectation, and violently preci∣pitated into a Jakes, adjacent to the com∣mon shoare, where he found Palladius swearing and cursing, as he were mad. Mariana having lodged her Lovers, de∣parted (laughing) to her bed. But Venantius and Palladius were in a very stinking condition, and almost suf∣focated with the norsome steame, evapou∣rating from that heap of dung with which they were invironed, almost up to the chins, so that the feare they were in, quite expelled their drunkennesse, and they be∣gan now to cogitate how they might find delivery out of that dirty labyrinth, which with much adoe they attained, wandring so long till at last they came to the head
of a clear river, where they bestowed some time to cleanse themselvs, and then joyned noddles, to consider which way to take (na∣ked as they were.) But that which was the greatest corasive to their minds, they con∣cluded it impossible to recover any dama∣ges of Mariana, or to plague her for their punishment; and therfore resolving to make the best of a bad matter, they set forward very fairely towards Paradines lodging, of whom (after some dispute) they gained admittance, where I leave them.
THE LOVES OF SOPHRONIA AND AMANDVS The Second Book. CHAP. I. Great Revelling, and a Masque at Court, its Presentation: Amandus, in great sorrow for his Mistresse. ARrived at Verona, Aman∣dus gave thankes to the people for their forward zeal, who with loud Ac∣clamations, (so that the Earth rang againe) pray∣ing the Heavens to showre downe their
choisest blessings upon him, departed to their homes. This popular Applause, as it no whit contented Clodomer, so it put Rhoxenor, and Cheribrert, into a cold sweat: The King seemed highly to honour Amandus, whom the Nobles and Courtiers (who, as in a clock, are the lesser wheeles, all pliable to the circular motion of the great one) generally imitated. Amandus was lodged the next Chamber to the King, who feasted him with all variety of Cates, and curious Wines: The Earth, the Sea, and Aire, were all plundered of their eat∣able Inhabitants, so that Lucullus (had he been there) would have repined at such expensive prodigality; so that for sump∣tuous, and luxurious fare, not Ninus Suc∣cessors; nor Cleopatra when she feasted Julius Caesar; or Mark Anthony, was comparable. Without, was continually heard the sound of Cornets, Shagbots, and Flutes: Within, the pleasing melo∣die of Lutes, Vials, and Virginals; yet all this while no speech of Sophronia. The Prince associated Amandus, (tis true)
but so, as if he had come on Embassage to denounce war, and not as his (sometime) deare and bosome friend. This, Amandus seemed to take no no∣tice of, knowing things could not long hang in suspence: This was the twelfth day that Amandus had been a Courtier, when the King commanded Linus, his chief Poet, to devise a Masque, sutable to the present occasion (to be presented on the morrow, in the golden Theater) which Linus accordingly performed: And the King, with Rhoxenor on his Right hand, and Amandus on his Left, with all his Nobilitie at distance: And Lucinda, with all her Traine of Ladies at her feet, all things in readinesse, There was discovered The Nymph Parthenope appearing, laid along on the brinke of a calme Sea, and there awaked by the noise of Trumpets and Drums; after her regreet (upon her for∣mer repose, and present miseries) Courage, and Fidelity, appeared to comfort her, who,
having made a faire promise for the time to come, departed, and, Jupiter appeared from above, in a calm and Serene Skie, sending her, for the more assurance of his word, his Messenger, Mer∣cury, who descended from Heaven in a Cloud, bringing with him, Peace, and Publick Tranquilitie, and joyning with Parthenope in a dance, The Scene closed. This Device was exceedingly applaud∣ed by the King, and all there present. Amandus (though he seemed attentive) could give but a very slender account of what he had seen, and heard, the re∣flection of his eyes being reversed in∣ward, and his thoughts wholy busied a∣bout Sophronia, so that (to him it appea∣red) he beheld a Matachin, and not a Masque. Yet though Poison, and Poniards, and all Instruments of ruine, were obvious to the eye of his mind, he cries, rarely plotted, and excellently presented. Sol then giving place to Diana, put his hor∣ses
to pasture, in Neptunes watry Mea∣dowes. CHAP. II. The Kings Discourse with Amandus in private. A Discovery of his Fathers wrongs. The Prince, and Cheribrert, justifie his Mistresse lewdnesse. His di∣stemper. THE King perceiving by A∣mandus countenance (how∣ever imbellished with feign∣ed smiles) and his gesture, (however modellized into a pliant Garbe) that he was much troubled about somewhat, that he would be glad to heare, and yet ws a∣fraid to aske, carrying him with him one day alone into the Privy Garden, (com∣manding that none whatsoever should dare to interrupt him for an hour) he entred
with him into a pleasant Arbor, situate be∣neath a Mulbery tree, whose Fabrick was fashioned of creeping Vines, intermin∣gled with blushing Roses; sitting him downe (willing Amandus to accompany him, since they were alone) he began thus to expresse himself. Amandus, YOu cannot be ignorant (I am sure) what a tender regard I have ever disco∣vered towards you, from your infancy, even unto this present; I need not men∣tion how I found you at first, with what Indulgence I have nurtured you, and to what an height of honour my smiles have raised you; though I could say your Fa∣ther (I confesse a Peer of great Magna∣nimity, and of a vast Estate) left you, a desolate Orphan (his prodigality having reduced him to such penury, that I was forced to support him out of my owne Revenew▪ and I could say, that I have gi∣ven you education, no whit inferiour to my Sonne Rhoxenor; and for your ca∣pacity at present, I think I need not tel you;
you cannot but find your selfe to move in the Apogaeum of Honour. The King would have proceeded far∣ther; but Amandus (who could no longer keep silence) thus interrupted him. Royall Sir, I Know not to what Port the winde of your praeludium may designe you, nor am I greatly timerous to stand the shock of that thunder this lightning portends: But I must tell you (Sir) it is not King∣ly in you, to upraid him (whom I have hitherto thought) your vertuous Can∣dour prompted you to pitch upon, with those benefits, which you voluntarily were pleased to think him worthy of. My Father Sir, you did ill, and (were you not my King, I would tell you) basely beneath your selfe, to mention, your self occasioning his ruine, first by Banish∣ment (so fearefull were you of his grow∣ing greatnesse) and next by a State pro∣ject, procuring a forfeiture of his goods; then indeed, having made him a Beggar, you made it your charitie to afford him
honourable reliefe, while the vertuous Euphrania, my Mother, and my faire Si∣ster, Eudoxia, were forced to rely on an Annuall Pension, stated upon them by my Unkle, then Duke of Fridland. For me, I acknowledge my self obliged in all the bonds of Gratitude, to your Princely care: But give me leave to be sensible, that my Fathers Inheritance, (though it equal∣led not the extent of an Imperiall Mo∣narchy in limits) had he enjoyed it, had been a Dowry sufficient (in all respects) to have afforded me the same qualifica∣tions that you have bestowed: And for the Spheare wherein I now move, I know I enjoy it altogether by your suf∣frage, but I should injure Heavens or∣dination, if I should make my selfe ig∣norant, that my actions have merited more then hath hitherto been conferred upon me. How often (Sir) have I been your Bulwark, and Brazen wall, suppressing Intestine Commotions, and repelling for∣raigne Invasions; how often have I
thrust my person betwixt you and dan∣ger? the very scars, (the memoriall of those once gaping wounds) which in sun∣dry mortall Battailes I have received for your sake, may plead my deserts to be far above your rewards: Have I not (now lately) vanquished, and vassalized, your ancient irreconcilable enemies, the Girpids, proffering to undertake so des∣perate a service, when all your paper He∣ro's, and curtaine Champions, were devi∣sing how to abscond themselves, like ti∣merous hares, and not to meet their e∣nemies, like undaunted Lions? Have not I— Hold (quoth the King) I perceive thou wilt soone shoot up (by the helpe of thine own fancie) from a pigmey, to a Piramid. All thou hast done, hath been but a sub∣jects duty, but I would have told you (Amandus) had not your passion been too predominant, over the reverence due to my person, that Sophronia, your Mistress, (at this Amandus started) is [since your absence] grown a foule loose whore. At this, Amandus stood like another
Phineas, having viewd the head of some Gorgon, which the King perceiving, (quoth he) I say (Amandus) that your Mistresse, Sophronia, is a traytresse to your love, and her own honour. You would have thought Amandus had been trans-elemented (had you be∣held him at that instant) but at length, recollecting himself a little, he answered in a distracted tone. But dares Clodomer report this, and not feare a Thunder-bolt (with sawcy Salmoneus) should pound him (as Ana∣charsis once in a morter) to peices? You are my King (Sir) I know you beare Divinitie about you, which is your pro∣tection, else by the wronged innocence of that abused Lady, were you ingirt with circular flames, and managed oakes, with as much facility as children wield bulrushes, the hilts of this sword should kiss your heart. Sophronia fals, I wil sooner beleeve a Panther may be made to fetch and carry like a Spanniel; the Moone drawn down by the beating on a kettle;
or conceit with a Perspective Glasse to peep into Heaven, as once harbour a thought, that Sophronia can be perfidi∣ous. The King seeing him in such a rage, began to doubt, that his Person might be endangered, and therefore thought it best to expostulate in a calme Dialect: (quoth he) I now see the old Proverb verified; facile credimus, quod volumus, but let not Amandus foole himselfe, into a faith of that which is not, if I bring thee not ap∣parent proofe, such strong evidence, that thy selfe (unlesse madnesse make thee in∣credulous) shalt acknowledge, thou hast to long been an Heritick. Proofe (quoth Amandus) for Heavens sake (Sir) delight not to torture him, that honours you; why the Angels retaine not more immaculate purity, than that ex∣cellent Lady layes claim to. I see (quoth the King) it will be hard to dis-inchaunt thee, if thou dar'st not give credit to my Allegation, my Son Rhoxe∣nor, and honest Cheribrert, shall give thee
more ample Testimonie. He had no sooner utter'd this, but Rhoxenor, and Cheribrert came into the Garden, the King beckning to them to approach, which they did; Amandus not having patience, to wait the leisure of time, went to meet them, with so irefull a coun∣tenance, that they might easily guesse the horror he had within, meeting them halfe way (quoth he) to Rhoxenor, Sir, I expect to find mercy at your hands, as you are noble, and have ever entertained a pleasing thought of Amandus, tell me plainly, and possitively, is it in your knowledge, that my Sophronia is lost to that goodnesse, which once diefide her hu∣mid substance. Yes (quoth Rhoxenor) these eyes have seen that libidinous Strumpet, folded in the Armes of Cheribrerts Groom. Too true my Lord (quoth Cheribrert) I must needs acknowledge, her Letcher was my Servant, a tall steele chind fellow (the reason perhaps, why she affected him) but such was the devotion I bare to your
name and honour (whose love I knew to be grounded on the firme foundation of reall worth) that I slew the Caitiffe with my own hands. Peace Screitchowle (quoth Amandus) I know thee to be Serquilinium mendacio∣rum, what woman may be trusted, if So∣phronia be false? Come (quoth Clodomer) let us depart to the Pallace, and there discourse further of this businesse. No (quoth Amandus) the constitution of my Soul agrees not with that Climate, the Pallace is scituate in a very noysome pestilentiall Aire, the Lake Avernus is Pa∣radice to it. And so (with a distracted look, with∣out taking leave of any) he flag away from them, departing to his Chamber, (where he found his friend Pallante;) the King, Rhoxenor, and Cheribrert (not know∣ing how to conster his words at parting) departed to the Pallace, concluding (all the way they went) that Amandus must be sent to his grave, or themselves expect to lie in the Dust.
CHAP. III. Sophronias complaint in prison; her Mo∣thers Ghost appearing, forewarnes her, of future events. I Feare I have too long for∣gotten to mention the un∣fortunate Sophronia, and therefore (if the Reader please to visit a Prison with me) we will walke to Castle Angellina, and make enquiry, how that excellent La∣dy brooks her restriction. Who having been under the power of Janitorius (for so was her Keeper called) his Keys, almost the space of twenty dayes, began (like some caged Philomel) to be in love with Sollitude. Sorrow sat in so lovely a shape upon her brow, that he that had seen her sit in that sollemn posture, would have been enamoured on Adversity, and (contrary to the practise of all mankind hitherto)
have courted affliction with more affecti∣onate desire, then young Virgins haste to meet their beloved Paramours; she bel∣ched not forth execrations against Rhoxe∣nor, or Cheribrert, nor taxed the Celestiall Powers of Tyranny, and Partiallity, In∣voking Demogorgon, or Proserpina, but bore her Injuries like some captive Saint, with so resolv'd and mild a Sufferance, that the most Inoxerable Phalaris, or Esi∣lino himselfe, would have been moved with compassion to have seen her. One day, weary with walking to and fro in her Chamber, she layd her selfe down on her Bed, which she abundantly watered with her teares, numerously di∣stilling from the Lymbecks of her bright and heavenly eyes. Which as they fell, Juno gave com∣mand to Cupid (by the power of his God∣head) to thread on a part of that string, which loving Ariadne gave to the faith∣lesse Theseus (which conducted him out of the Cretan Laberinth) which she wound a∣bout her Arme, tucking up her sleeves, to shew her gawdy Wrists.
I say, casting her delicate Body on her homely Bed, she began thus to com∣plaine. Ah my deare Amandus, little dost thou know, to what misery thy faithfull Sophro∣nia (for thy sake) is exposed; O let the whispering Winds convey the story of my woe into thy eares, or some heavenly Cherub instruct thy intellect (for certainly, with∣out a miracle thou canst not have notice) of my abode, in this dreadfull ominous Den; ah Rhoxenor, canst thou imagine the O∣limpick Dieties, will ever remaine deaffe to my complaints, and not (at length in vindication of my innocency) raine So∣doms destruction, on thine, and that Vil∣laine Cheribrerts head; for if such wick∣ednesse scape unpunished, then let no man tremble (for the future) to provoke the ven∣geance of Heaven, by all manner of vile, and impious Acts. Having thus said, she forsook the bed, and departed to that window, opening towards the Sea; she had not been there long, beholding the billowes dance quar∣relling lavaltoes, but up comes (the Kepers
wife) the old Crone that attended her, (named Morpa) with a nosegay in her hand, a bottle of wine, and a dish of fruit, (for Rhoxenor had commanded she should have all civill respect) and setting them downe, making a curtsie, departed. Sophronia looking behind her, and viewing the bunch of flowers, (after she had smelt to them) took pen, inke, and paper, and wrote this ODE For to perfume our burying, All the flowers of the Spring Doe meet; man flourishes a time, And these have but their growing prime. Wee'r set, we grow, we turn to earth, Such is our progresse from our birth. Adiew all sensuall appetites, Adiew ye Courts, and all delights; The sweetest breath, and clearest eye, Have no perpetuitie. As shadowes wait upon the Sun, This is consequently done.
Who'd seek by Trophis, and dead things, (Like some vaine, ambitious Kings) To leave a living name behind? Hoping in bags to catch the wind. Having finished these verses, she threw away the paper, and in a very pensive manner sate her downe in a chaire, lean∣ing her Alablaster Face on her Ivory Hand, on one side of the Table, finding her self much disposed to sleep. Morpheus had scarce seized on his lea∣den Mace, with an intent to make prize of her senses, when she heard the noise of many instruments, conspiring in one concord, to make a Coelestiall harmony, to her great admiration, which caused her to listen very attentively, when on a sud∣den, the perfect shape and similitude of her deceased mother, the (sometime) ex∣cellent Euphrania, appeared to her view, apparralled all in white, her countenance the same when living, but more bright and polished, who spake to her after this manner.
From high Olimpus I am come, Ever blest Elizium, For to forewarne thee what shall be Thy Fate, for the futuritie. Amandus (thy espoused Lord) Hath quel'd the Girpids by his sword; Now's in Verona, feeles much smart, And woe, not knowing where thou art. Rhoxenor triumphs in his ill; Cheribrert laughs, to have his will: But all the heavenly powers agree Punishment for their treacherie. Lucinda shall, forfeit her breath, While she bewailes Rhoxenors death: And then, if thou applaud the thing, Thou shalt be partner with a King. When many sorrowes thou hast past, Expect triumphant joy at last. Having said this, Euphrania's Genius de∣parted from her (so shadowes glide, and clouds vanish) leaving her in a very plea∣sing Rapture; where also I am compel∣led to let her remaine a while without no∣tice, for Amandus deeds call upon me for divulgement.
CHAP. IV. Amandus (beleeving Sophronia to be false) is very invective against women. Pal∣lante defends them. Flavia (poisoned by Cheribrert) ere she dies, discovers the villanie of Rhoxenor and Cheri∣brert, to Amandus. His Resolution thereupon. YOU heard before, that A∣mandus had left the King, the Prince, and Cheribrert, in the Privy Garden, and was returned to his chamber in great perplexity. Where being arrived, he found his friend Pallante busie in making verses, (for he was an indifferent good Poet, affecting the Muses more then (perhaps) they affected him) who, seeing him ap∣proach in so distracted a manner, looking as he had been affrighted with some hel∣lish Feinds, he began to enter into dia∣logue
with him, imploring him to disco∣ver, what uncouth accident had so amazed his Senses, but not one word did Aman∣dus retribute, but throwing himselfe up∣on the bed, he tore his haire, and smote his brest, in so ruthfull a manner, that Pallante could not forbeare to shed store of teares, to behold his friend in such anguish. After he had a long time wrought his owne distemperature, he burst forth into these expressions. Oh wretched Sophronia, thy faithlesse heart hath wrought my temporall and e∣ternall ruine; I might have been fore∣warned, by the Example of King Philip and Olympia; Paris and Helena; Alex∣ander and Rosana; Hercules and Dejani∣ra; Hannibal and Tamyra; Anthony and Cleopatra; Nero and Agrippina; how I reposed confidence in so weake a piece, as Sophronia: who would give credit to the protestations of so fraile, and foule a thing, as woman? Whose lives are filthy; whose persons without shame: false in their words;
doubtfull in their acts; in whom, wise men ever found peril, and fooles suffer in∣jurie. I now am content to credit that fond legend of the Aegyptians, amongst whom it is a received opinion; That the River Nilus breaking forth, over-run the Earth, and that certaine pieces thereof, cleaving together, the Sun-beames fervently refle∣cting thereon, produced many wild beasts, and amongst them, was found the first woman. Fie for shame (said Pallante) are you not asham'd to vent forth such execrable blasphemy, against that Divine, and more then Angelicall Sex. Oh (quoth Amandus) could'st thou be capable (friend) of the misery that I suffer, (exeeding that of Ixion, or Titius) thou wouldst say I had cause to be Saty∣ricall. Could hell contrive a more su∣perlative mischief, then that she, whom I affected dearer then my own life, a Lady of such high Birth, and (ere this) of such superiour Eminency, that Princes have contested for her favour, glad to purchase
her smiles with the forfeiture of their Crownes, should prostitute her silken limbs to the sordid use of a dirty droyle, whose living sprung out of the horse∣dung? Horror, horror. Having thus said, he began anew to practise violence upon his owne person, raving, and foaming so, that Pallante be∣gan to fear the losse of his senses; and therefore sitting down by his beds side, he began thus to speak. My Lord (quoth he) I beseech you, be not so much the Author of your own dolour; how know you, but your So∣phronia is guiltlesly calumniated, and a∣bused? (Quoth Amandus) Hell, and Furies, the Prince Rhoxenor, and Lord Cheribrert, surprised her in the very act of shame. My Lord (quoth Pallante) because they say it, therefore will you credit it? Observe the circumstances, and you will find you have great cause, maturely to deliberate, and strictly to scrutinize, ere you give your censure. I cannot, nor dare not suspect the Prince, as conscious
of any ignoble Act: But for Cheribrert, I dare call him villaine to his face; (you know that he hath ever hated you) and who knowes whether that malicious Ca∣ca-daemon hath not contrived this com∣plot? I am sure you have not yet seen Sophronia, since your returne to Verona; what injustice then is it, for you to de∣nounce your doom, ere you have heard the party accused speak. Thou speak'st very well, and notably to the purpose, my excellent Friend, (quoth Amandus) I confesse I was too rash, although (I fear) not too confident. Having said this, he deserted the bed, calling for wine, and drinking freely with his friend, both sitting downe by a Ta∣ble, where Amandus found Pallante's pa∣per of Verses, in which (himselfe now being in Love) he had made Aericina's ar∣med Sonne, to give this Invitation, to all Lovers, within a flight shot of him.
CUPIDS Invitation to his BOWER. ODE. LOve expels all cares and feares, With musick that out-vies the Spheres; And with Soule-melting Lullabies, Doth calme all passions that arise; Which give a motion to the Stones, With their sweet alluring Tones. Hands, and lips, and eyes invite, See the snowy Virgins white. Here's many Alexanders brave, As many Hellens faire I have, Only for to wait on me, They attired richly be. You shall have her in plenty, lavish Whatsoe're the Sense can ravish. The Driades have stolen by theft To me, and their green Groves have left; And in this my Bower green, Sol, Neptune, Thetis, have been seen. I can give you Tagus Sand, Never saile out of the Land.
I have golden Fleeces store, Never goe to Cholchos shoare. The Elizian Fields are in my plaine, Therefore the shades you haunt in vaine. Jove to me his Court doth bring, With his Ganimeds to sing. Carelesse of Argus hundred eyes, Or of jealous Juno's Spies. For nothing else the Gods made night, But for to screene Eovers delight. Amandus having read these Verses, (quoth he) I find (friend Pallante) that you are very amorously inclin'd, and write with a Quill, pluck'd even from Cu∣pids wing. My Genius ever led me to (that with which my present condition best suites) Solid and Grave Subjects, dressed in Prose: But that you may see I have sipt off Hellicon, and slept some minutes on Parnassus; I will endeavour, (by the help of the nine) to write some few numbers. I have now to doe with Tombs, and Death-beds; Funerals, and Teares; so fetching a Deaths head, which he alwayes gave a residence (nocturnally)
by him, he set it down before him on the Table, and wrote these Verses; Though here on earth men differ, in the grave There's no distinction; all alike they have. Then must the Conqueror, with the captive spred, On one bare earth, as in the common bed The all commanding Generall hath no span Of ground allowd, more then a common man. Folly with Wisedome hath an equall share, The foul, and faire, to like dust changed are. This is, of all mortality, the end: Thersites now with Nereus dares contend; And with Achilles he hath equall place, That living, durst not look him in the face. The servant with his Master, and the maid, Stretch'd by her Mistress; both their heads are laid Upon an equal pillow; subjects keep Courts, with Kings equal, & as soft they sleep, Lodging their heads upon a turfe of grasse, As they on Marble, or on figur'd brasse. He had scarce finished these Verses, when Flavia, (Sophronia's quondam wait∣ing woman) came in, in great hast, and falling downe at his feet, besought
him to hear her a few words, and to give credit to her last breath, for (quoth she) I feele the poison powerfully to oppe∣rate. Speak (quoth Amandus) ere thou catch an everlasting cold, and shalt be heard no more, what important matter doth thy tongue labour with. (Quoth she) it is not unknowne to you, that I once served your vertuous Sophro∣nia (I must be briefe in my discovery) as became her, in whom she reposed so great confidence, and had still continued her loyall Servitrex, had not the black Soul'd Cheribrert deluded me, to my destruction and her ruine; who knowing himselfe not able to win me to satiate his lust (and knowing I would not deny him lawfull love) perswaded me he meant to make me his Wife, enjoyning me (as the first tryall of my love) to aid him in the prosecution of a businesse; for the fulfilling whereof, he had strongly engaged himselfe, which was, (O Sir, pardon my trercherous Levity) to admit Prince Rhoxenor [who, he said, was greatly enamoured on Sophronia] to her Bed; this I was wonne to, but the
devillish Cheribrert, did but feign this de∣vice to me; for he so ordered it, that his Groom (whom he afterwards slew with his own hands, for fear his villany might be detected) entred the Chamber, and the Innocent Sophronia. She would have proceeded, but the ve∣nemous potion had by this time so en∣feebled her facculties, that she fell down all along, and (with a feeble tone, using these words; My Lord, be assured, that Sophronia is the most vertuous Lady in the world. I would discover more, but the Poy∣son hath dispersed it selfe all over my heart; I am the occasion of all this ill, and goe, I know not whether) with a greivous groan dyed. What pen can expresse, or what heart thinke, the extream astonishment that hap∣pened to Amandus, to heare these dying words of Flavia. Oh yee Immortall Powers (quoth he) what fatall end have yee reserved me for, have I escaped the Girpids fury, and swam a Sea of blood (like another Coesar, with one hand cutting my passage through the
Waves, and holding in the other, a Pro∣clamation of Peace and Tranquility) to my native Country, to be put upon the defiance of my Soveraignes Sonne, whom to challenge I dare not [the Law making such a proposall, the highest Treason] was this Rhoxenors revenge for Sophroni∣as deniall, to prostitute her immaculate Chastity, to his rapide Luxury, conspi∣ring with that Hell hound Cheribrert, to ruine her life and fame, and in her, my name and honour. This I Prognosticated (quoth Pallante) and durst have divulged it, though I could not desert the severall circumstances, ac∣cording as you have heard them narra∣ted. Oh (quoth Amandus) can Rhoxenor be so treacherous, he that was once so excellently good, now so diabollically vi∣tious; Heaven knows where they have disposed my souls life, and the glory of her Sex, the vertuous Sophronia; but I procrastinate the time too long, dares Pallante swear to joyn with his friend, in a noble and just revenge.
Dares (quoth Pallante) you wrong your own judgement and my fidellity; if you are master of one anxious thought, were I to follow thee (like another The∣seus with his Hercules) to the black and dismall shades of Dis; or (with Orestes and his other selfe) to give and receive Death, we falling by mutuall wounds, to put a period to our terrestiall terrors, A∣mandus should finde me every way pliable to his own wish. Spoke like a true friend (quoth Aman∣dus) and then kneeling down (Pallante accompanying him) he drew forth his Sword, and laying their hands upon the Weapon [like another Brutus, and Colla∣tine] they joyntly Swore. Never to permit the closure of their eyes, till they had wiped away Sophronias staine, with Spunges, made of the hearts of Rhox∣enor and Cheribrert. So kissing the Hilts, they arose, of whom read more in the following Chap∣ter.
CHAP. V Amandus kils Rhoxenor, the manner thereof; he and Pallante escape. IT was somewhat late in the evening, when Flavia made her escape to A∣mandus, and therefore it was unknown, whither she had conveyed her self, though Cheribrert had sent Inquisitors all about the City; and being conscious of his own guilt, and timerous, that Flavia had discovered all she knew, he resolved to steale forth the City that night, only himself and one Servant, on horseback, taking with him, store of Gold and Trea∣sure (the occasion of his after ruine,) where I leave him to the horror of his own thoughts, and return to Amandus and Pal∣lante. Who imagining (as indeed it was) that (perhaps) Flavia was not noted (because of
the darknesse of the night) to take her journey to them, they resolved to bury her privately (which they did, throwing her into a deep Well, near adjacent to the house) and to take no notice (for the pre∣sent) of her discovery, till they should finde opportune admittance to Rhoxenors per∣son. That night they passed away, discour∣sing on various Subjects, sometimes won∣dering at Rhoxenors pravation, another time plottiug, how they might infranchise Sopbronia; but Aurora appearing [in the Horizon, with her purple hair hanging a∣bout her eares, which she was soon forced to seclude, under an azure cawle, for fear Sol should findge them with his beams] they both armed themselves; Amandus commanding his Caroach to be fitted (with his friend) entred therein, comman∣ding the Chariot driver, to direct his way towards the Pallace. There arived, they disburthened the Caroach of their persons, and walking on foot to the Pallace Gate, the Guard (knowing them to be Personages emi∣nently
gracious in the Kings eye) gave them free admittance. So they passed forwards, towards Rhoxenors lodgings with like facillity, all offering them conduct, till they came even to Rhoxenors Chamber, who the day be∣fore (O the fatallity, that governes some mens actions) had been guilty of that, which he never before was noted for, viz. excessive tipling, which he had so pro∣foundly plyed, that he was conveyed to his Pallace (the night before) in a drunken dreame, to which stupidity, he was yet vassalized; Amandus (presuming on his owne eminent familiarity with the Prince) comes to the Chamber doore, demanding entrance, the Chamberlain wondered at such an unwonted demand (more Cere∣monies usually observed, ere the Prince was to be spoke withall) demanded who was there. 'Tis I (quoth Amandus) and my friend Pallante, who desire permission to speak with the Prince, about important busi∣nesse. The Chamberlain (knowing Amandus
voyce) opened the door, and Amandus and Pallante entring in, the Chamberlain (to shew himselfe too obsequiously officious, as not daring to prie into their privicies) left the room, and so (as it happened) sa∣yed his life. Amandus (perceiving Rhoxenor asleep) at his entrance used these words to Pal∣lante. See (quoth he) how supinely this perfi∣dious Prince sleeps, who could immagine this beautifull Image, included such an ugly Feind within it? I will kill him thus sleeping, and send his leprous soul to Hell, ere Pluto expect it. By no meanes (quoth Pallante) let his own tongue first doom him, ere you give him his passe for the other world. With that Amandus indeavoured to a∣wake him, crying, my Lord, my Lord, the Prince. Rhoxenor opening his eyes, and behol∣ding Amandus, and Pallante, by his Beds side, a strange & unwonted feare seized on him (as if by instinct he had known their intents) but he would not seem to be ama∣zed,
and therefore replyed. Noble Amandus, worthy Pallante, wel∣come, what businesse more then ordinary, hath brought you hither, so early in the morning? Your highnesse (quoth Amandus) errs in the computation of time, for the Sunne hath already measured almost a thousand leagues; the reason of my abrupt ap∣proach, is occasioned by a Dream I had this night, concerning Sophronia. Sophronia (quoth Rhoxenor) let the name of that Purple Strumpet be lost to your memory; I wonder you are so slow to bring her to condigne punishment. Oh the Devil (quoth Amandus) dost thou hear this Pallante, and with that word pulling a Dagger out of his pocket, thou staine to the Stock of Kings (quoth he) the hand of Truth hath puld of thy Vi∣zard, I am acquainted with thy clande∣stine projections, with that villain Cheri∣brert, I know thy attempting Sophronias Chastity, her deniall, and thy ignoble revenge.
And with that word he stabd the Pon∣niard up the hilts in his short ribs, which wounded him greiviously but not deadly. Oh hold thy hand (quoth Rhoxenor) I confesse I have been (as thou thy self art at present) to much a slave to my passions, and have indeavoured the ruine of the most noble Lady in the world. For which (quoth Amandus) I thus sa∣crifice thee on the Altar of revenge (no other way vissible suiting with my in∣tents) and therewith again stabbed him with his Ponniard, through the throat, which occasioned an egression of all the breath in his body, so that after a little strugling, he became soullesse. By this time the Chamberlain was re∣turning▪ to know the Princes pleasure, in order to his Apparell for that day, com∣ming to the door, & perceiving Amundus, his face besprinkled, and his hands bedew∣ed with blood, he took a large leap back∣ward, more then twenty paces, crying, Treason, Treason, Treason, the Prince is murtherd, the Prince is murtherd: whereat the Kings Guard, in great astonishment,
drawing their swords, came towards Rho∣xenors lodgings, and were encountred halfe way by Amandus, and Pallante, with their weapons drawne, the Guard not doubting to make prize of their persons, cryed out to them to yeild themselves, but were soone taught to know, that Despe∣rate men, goe doubly Arm'd: Some had their hands, others their legs, and some their noses pared away; others lay vomi∣ting out their heart blouds; none, but ei∣ther disabled by wounds, or by death. So that Amandus and Pallante, had time to make their escape into the City, where arrived, Amandus cryed all the way, Those that love me, follow me. The peo∣ple, (who entirely affected him) arming themselves, followed him in heaps. Venantius, and Palladius, (as luck was, not having yet made riddance of their lately received Arrears) were tipling in a Taverne, and hearing the noise of the people, and espying Amandus (all bloudy) with his sword drawne, waited on by an armed multitude, they began to sing pae∣ans to the blind Goddesse, Fortune, and
the great Sword-man, Mars, that once a∣gain they were like to have employment in the heart of their native Countrey; and thrusting themselves into the midst of the prease, they proffered their service to Amandus, who kindly accepted them; with whom I leave them, and returne to the body of dead Rhoxenor. CHAP. VI. The Confusion of the Court and City, up∣on the Rumour of Rhoxenors Death. Lucinda dies (with griefe) over her dead Sonne. The City being divided, the one part for Amandus; the other for Clodo∣mer; there happeneth a soure Skirmish. Amandus, and Pallante, taking an Arme of the Sea, recover the Kingdome of Polonia. SUch a confused clamour as men make when eager fire hath fallen upon many Fa∣bricks at once, in some po∣pulous City, Mulciber chal∣lenging
the Heavens; or such a Tragick tone, as the Inhabitants of some besieged Town accord in, when their Furious E∣nemies are already entred their Chiefe Fort; Slaughter, and Rapine, Revelling in each corner: Such, and no other, was the wild Alarme given throughout the Court, and City, men mingled together in multitudes, but the more part knew not wherefore they were met together, the Courtiers being afraid every man of his fellow, and the Citizens expecting every minute to be buried in their own ruines. Newes being brought to Clodomer and Lucinda, of the murther of their Sonne, (by their Generall Amandus hand) Grief, and Wonder (like two contrary winds striving for Soveraignty) a long time maintained a Civil War within them; but at length, Griefe got the upper hand, and so prevailed over their Senses, that for some minutes, their tongues wanted the use of their Creation; but at length, re∣covering themselves, (like another di∣stressed Priam, with his forlorne Hecuba) they set forward, to visit their dead Son,
whom when they beheld, what griping pangs their hearts endured, only those can imagine, whom Fate hath exposed to the like affliction. Clodomer could not speak for weeping; but Lucinda, falling upon her dead Sonne, tore her haire, bath∣ing his bloudy wounds, with briny drops, making this pitifull complaint over him. Ah my deare Sonne (said she) is this the fulfilling of that expectation, my Selfe, thy Father, and all Lombardy had cause to have of thee? Could the cruell Destinies finde no other subject whereon to practice their Tyranny, save thee? Poore Lucinda! why did Lucina (pitying thy pangs) propi∣tiously ayd thee, for the production of a Son, predestinated to so direfull an exit? She would have said more, but the greatnesse of her grief, at once bereft her, both of speech, and life, so that she fell down dead by her murthered Son. This to behold, so exasperated the King Clodomer, that like one bereft of his wits, he ran raving up and down the City, be∣seeching his subjects to take pity on their distessed Soveraigne, and unanimously to
ayd him, in the discovery of Amandus and Pallante, who had at once bereft them of a most hopefull Prince, and a gracious Queen. It was not long ere he had levied a Power, which he put under the command of Lucius, and Pamelius, (sometimes re∣nowned Captaines, though now by reason of their Age, they affected privacie) who marshalling his Forces, marched towards Amandus, and Pallante; who, with their handfull of men, had intrenched them∣selves on a plaine, three Leagues distant from the City: The King himselfe (re∣solving to fight in person leading them on as their chief Guide, and Captain. Amandus perceiving their approach, re∣solved to give them Battell, and disposed his Forces accordingly. Both Armies being now so neare one another, that they might easily heare the disputes passing on both sides; the King chusing a piece of ground, by nature ele∣vated above the rest of the continent, so that he might see (and be seen) of his whole Army, began to say as followeth.
I Dare be confident, that none of my loyall Subjects here, who (according to their du∣ties) are congregated with me, for the cap∣tivating, and punishing the treacherous, bloudy-minded Amandus, and his trayterous Associate, Pallante, but are able and willing to attest, with what Gentlenesse, and Pater∣nall care (as becommeth the Father of his Countrey) I have hitherto governed them: As also, what an hopefull Prince, and what promising Vertues were obvious in my Son Rhoxenor; and that my Queen, Lucinda, excelled all former Queenes, for the Love, and affectionate Zeale she demonstrated to me, her King, and Husband, and to the Sub∣jects of this Nation; both which, are made away by meanes of the afore-mentioned Traytors. Therefore, I shall not endeavour with elaborate orarory (my loyall Subjects) to kindle courage in your hearts, or to make you sensible, that (besides the losse) great, and infinite shame, not to be expiated by any after performances, will brand us all with the deepest tincture of infamy, unlesse we take just (but severe vengeance) on these sanguine homicides. Not doubting there∣fore
of your courage in so good a cause, goe on, and may Heaven crown your attempts with Victory. Neither was Amandus slack to encou∣rage his men, but standing in the midst of them, made this Oration. My fellow Subjects, VVHom Love to wronged Amandus, (and in him to Justice, and Honour) hath invited to hazard your Lives and For∣tunes; be confident, that I desire not War, or have requested your Ayd, for the Vindi∣cation of any private grudge, or sinister ends of mine owne, but meerly for the preservati∣on of my own Person, and your Rights; both which (unlesse defensive armes prevent it) are like to be swallowed up, in that bottom∣lesse gulfe of Kingly Prerogative, and Arbi∣trary Power. It is not unknown to you (I am sure) with what faithfulness I have ever ser∣ved this faithlesse King; how often I have brought him home conquest, putting the necks of his enemies under his feet: And is it my reward, to have her, whom I love dearer then my life, (whose Vertues are so
splendid, that envy it self cannot fully them) thrown into a nasty Gaole, and branded with the ignominious Epethites of Whoore, and Strumpet, and all, because she denied to sa∣tiate Rhoxenors beastly Lust, whom Ju∣stice, and not my hand, hath sent to the o∣ther World. If this be tolerated, not one of you here present, shall claime the least pro∣priety in her whom he affecteth. Time will not permit me to dilate my self, suffice, you fight with me in a just and righteous cause; the truth whereof, I hope your swords will prove, (though your enemies treble you in number) On then couragiously in the name of Heaven. Having finished this Oration, he led on his Army to joyn Battell with the Kings, dividing them (being all foot) into foure Battailes: The first, himself guided; the second, Pallante took charge of; and the third, and fourth, followed Venantius, and Palladius. Clodomer ordered his Army (after the old Roman manner) in the fashion of an half-moone; the hornes whereof, were managed by Lucius, and Pamelius, and the main Body, by himself.
Both Armies joyning, it was Amandus hap to encounter Lucius; and Pallante, Pa∣melius; all (save the King, being on foot on both sides, for the suddennesse of the action would not permit the mounting of men, or to observe the method of Mar∣tiall Discipline.) Amandus had soon made an end of Lucius, cleaving his head, that his brains dropt out at his feet; and Pal∣lante had given Pamelius so deadly a blow on the face, that he cut his jawes clean in sunder. The King Clodomer shewed himself very valiant, with his own hands having killed Venantius, and Palladius, and massacred above an hundred of the vulgar sort, white Amandus, and Pallante, mowed down all before them, so that their hands were weary of the work of death, their weapons were drunk with bloud, and their bodies were burdened with bloud and sweat; so that, notwithstanding their forces were clean cut in peices, (being raw, unexperienced souldiers, meere Citizens, who till now had never been accustomed to the rigour of War) they had, by their single valours, vanquished the Kings for∣ces,
and taken himselfe Prisoner, had not an huge multitude (from the City) ap∣peared to his reliefe, armed with prongs, pitchforks, and bils, who come on so fu∣riously, that it was impossible, (and had been madnesse) to oppose them: And therefore (overpowred with numbers) A∣mandus having even then encountred Clo∣domer on foot, and forced him to forsake his horse (who was presently protected by those about him) leapt into the Saddle, ta∣king Pallante up behind him, being forced (on a desperate adventure) to take an Arm of the Sea, and swam over, to a part of that continent belonging to the King of Polonia; and Clodomer having gained this bloudy Victory, returned (with those of his Army, whom the late conflict had spa∣red, to the Citie.
THE LOVES OF AMANDVS AND SOPHRONIA. The Third Book. CHAP. 1. Rhoxenor, and Lucinda, are sumptuously Interr'd. Alphonsus (King of Poland) refuseth to deliver up the persons of A∣mandus, and Pallante. Sophronia, brought to her Triall, is acquitted. Clo∣domer loves her. CLodomer, having thus vanquish∣ed, but (to his great vexation) not captivated his enemies, cladding himselfe in purple, (as the manner of Kings is to mourne)
and commanding his whole Court to put on Sables, caused his Sonne, and Queen, to be embalmed, by the Skill of his ablest Physitians, who involved them in lead, the King causing two Stately Tombs to be erected (of the purest Phari∣an Stone) framed by the hands of cunning Architectors, who adorned them so sum∣ptuously, that either of them equalled Mausoleus his Sepulcher, (reputed one of the wonders of the World) in the Cathe∣drall Church, dedicated to the memory of St. Sebastiona, and Albovino, (two ancient famous Kings of that Countrey) which having finished, he dispatched Embassa∣dours to Alphonsus, King of Poland, to let him know, that he harboured his deep enemies, viz. Amandus, and Pallan∣te, Traytors to his Crown and Dignity, whose persons (as he tendred the perpetu∣ity of the Amity betwixt the two Crowns of Lombardie, and Poland) he willed him to deliver up to condigne punishment. But Alphonsus, retaining a noble tem∣per, (knowing Amandus to be a man eve∣ry way accomplished) and sensible of the
wrongs offered by Rhoxenor, (the perpe∣tration whereof, had occasioned his death, and Amandus Infortunity) permitted A∣mandus, and Pallante lest the protecting of their persons might draw a war upon him) to depart his Kingdome without molestation, furnishing them with horses, and Arms, and all things befitting the use of such Knights of Fame. But Clodomer, finding he could not get their persons into his hands, resolved (like another salvage Neoptolemus, who Sacri∣ficed an Innocent Princesse on his Fathers grave) to be revenged on Sophronia, (A∣mandus Mistresse, and for his sake impri∣soned) for his Sons death; and therefore he appointed a day, when (accompanied with all his Nobles) he would cause her to be brought as a Delinquent, and proceeded against as a Strumpet, to publick censure. And therefore he caused many Scaffolds to be erected in the Pallace yard, with a Seat of Judicature for himselfe, and his Peers; where comming (with those whom he had nominated for her Judges) he com∣manded her to be guarded from prison,
thither, as the place appointed for her trial. The most vertuous Sophronia, having newes brought her the night before, that she was to prepare her self against the mor∣row, to plead before the King, and Coun∣cell, was not a whit daunted thereat, (so great courage doth Innocencie inject, and so strongly are those fortified against mundane calamities, whose soules assure them they are falsly calumniated) but attired her selfe all in black, with a veile of the same colour cast over her head, which habit was so far from eclipsing, that it added to her excel∣lent Splendor; as Diamonds set in Jet, are not a whit darkned; nor doth the To∣paz lose its Lustre, though set in lead. In this manner, she set forward with her Guard, (never was so sweet a prisoner brought to the Bar, a thousand Cupids (though unseen) waited on her all the way; Venus her self wept, and the Graces, con∣doled her afflictions, in sanguine teares; the people thronging in heapes to see her, yet amongst that multitude, not a dry eye: Such a silent mourning as the Grecians practised, when they beheld Agamemnons
daughter, faire Iphigenia, in funerall attire, standing at the Altar, ready to be Sacrifi∣ced to Aeolus, was heard amongst this people; every one assoiling her Innocen∣cie, and bewailing her misery. Comming to the place appointed, she was placed at the Bar, where turning up her veile, and discovering her rare Beauty, which was so celestially splendid, that it cast a light round about her, (all mens eies being fixed upon her, as if some shaghair'd Comet had thrust forth his head in the He∣misphere.) The King was exceedingly ra∣vished to behold her, the fire of love burnt about his heart, by degrees corrobo∣rating more and more, till it became one flaming lump of flesh; his colour went and came, a kind of trembling sei∣zed upon all his body: But disguising his passions as well as he could, he comman∣ded her Charge to be read, which contain∣ed these two Heads; 1. That she had been guilty of Inconti∣nencie with Lord Cheribrerts Groome, being taken in the very act of shame. 2. That she had plotted, and conspired
with Amandus, and Pallante, (Capitall Traytors and guilty of the horrid murther (possitively) of Prince Rhoxenor, (conse∣quently) of the Queen Lucinda, and (pro∣bably) of Lord Cheribrert) for the perpe∣tration and performance, of the aforesaid treasonable, devillish, and unparell'd crimes. To this, after a little pause (making o∣beysance to the King and Counsell) she answered. That I may not be condemned as a Mute, and because the Party silent, is thought to as∣sent to what ever is proposed; I wil breifly, though sincerely, make my defence in the presence of the high Immortall Truth, and this Assembly, else I could have been conten∣ted to have suffered in silence, assuring my selfe, that before the Judge of Soules I ap∣peare immaculately Innocent. My conversation from my Infancy, till of late months (assure my selfe) is not unknown to many here; I have indeavoured alwaies, to accrew an unspotted Fame, and (I doubt not) had retained the same, to this very mi∣nute, had it not thus happened. Here she surveyed the Counsell (and
being ignorant of what had lately happen∣ed) not seeing Rhoxenor there, demanded that he might be brought before her, face to face. To which the King ▪though his thoughts told him she was innocent) returned an∣swer. That her pollicy could not wipe away her guilt, she knew, that Rhoxenor (as she had plotted with the cursed Traytor Amandus) was cruelly murthered. To which (with a sober smile) she an∣swered. Be it knowne unto all here, that Lord A∣mandus, being absent in the wars, against the Girpids, in the defence of his Country (unto whom I acknowledge my selfe affian∣ced) the Prince Rhoxenor, finding that all his perswasive allurements were to weak, to remove my firme fixed constancy (conspi∣ring with Lord Cheribrert, a man superla∣tively wicked) by a treacherous wile [ha∣ving corrupted the faith of my waiting-wo∣mon Flavia] hath wrought the present ruine of my fame and honour (by Flavias aide) they one night entred my Chamber (my self
fast asleep) bringing with them, a fellow (whom they had subborned for that purpose) who entred my Bed, which he had no sooner done, but Rhoxenor and Cheribrert (as be∣fore they had plotted) with loud cries awaked me, upbraiding me with lewdnesse, and term∣ing me the blot, and stain of all Ladies in the world. And lest the fellow (moved with remorse or otherwise) should reveale their cursed complot, Cheribrert with his own hands, immediately stab'd his hireling to the heart. Rhoxenor having wrought this villany, so wrought, that I was committed (as a vile person) to Castle Angellina, where I have ever since resided. For the murther of Rhoxenor, Lucinda, and Cheribrert (if it be so, which Heaven forbid) the straitnesse of my restraint, none having been suffered to come near me, save my Keeper, since my restriction, may plead my innocency in that matter. This Sophronia uttered with a very audible voice, and having finished, the peo∣ple gave a shout, crying, She is innocent, she is innocent; which also was the sense of
the whole Counsell, Clodomer himself (though he seemed otherwise) being glad of it, for he was extreamly in love with her. The Court rising, Sophronia (by the Kings command) was conducted to the Pallace, of whom more hereafter. CHAP. II The dreadfull end of Cheribrert. Amandus and Pallante, leaving Poland [being bound for Venice] by an angry Storme, are forced on the coasts of Grecia (the Ship and all else swallowed in the Waves) they save themselves by swimming, and arive on the Flowry Iland. NOw it is high time that I made mention, what became of Cheri∣brert, after his deserting Verona (as you have heard) by night, accompanied only with one Servant. He had not travailed many miles, in∣tending to take his journey, to the utter∣most borders of the Kingdom of Lombar∣dy,
and so take shipping for Spaine, but a crew of Robbers, who subsisted by spoile and rapine, set upon him (imagining to finde, as indeed they did, a good booty) plundering him of all his Gold and Trea∣sure, and stripping him, and his Servitor (who making some resistance was slain) to the bare Skins. Being brought to this miserable exe∣gency (inflicted upon him by divine ven∣geance) he began to think of his many damnable crimes (yet so, as he not repen∣ted of them) and to curse the houre, that ever he ingaged himself (with Rhoxenor) to injure the vertuous Sophronia; he would have cast his eyes up to heaven, and have implored the remission of his charnell contrivances, but he dispaired of attaining audience, at the eares of the in∣censed Diety, and therefore sitting him down upon the earth, he began to wish, that a thurderbold from Heaven might pash him in peeces, or the earth open and receive him, when he might hear an hollow murmuring voyce, sing him this sum∣mons.
Orcus yawnes, the furies yell, Descend accursed Soul to Hell; Earth hates, thy loathed Trunk to have, The Wombs of Wolves shall be thy Grave. Let all take warning, by thy Fate, How they thy crimes, doe perpetrate. This infernall Invitation, so much a∣mazed him, that he would fain have slain himself, but wanted fit meanes to accom∣plish it, and therefore the reprobate wretch, with his own nails, began to tear, and rend the ground, intending to dig his own grave; when (as if sent by some avenging Diety) a crew of ravenous Wolves came running upon him, and tearing him all in peices, buried his loathed body in their hungry mawes: a dreadfull end, worthy so devillish a wretch. And now since we have rambled so farre from Verona, let us speak a little of the noble Knights, Amandus and Pallante, who having left the Kingdome of Poland, imbarqued themselves in a Ship bound for Venice (where Pallante had an Uncle,
named D' Francisco Mendoza, a famous Sennatour of that renowned City) in∣tending to reside there for a time in pri∣vate (though they would not have found it easie, so to have done, Amandus acts having made him so renownedly famous, throughout Europe) and to wait with pa∣tience a while, to see what end, Fortune would put to her own prankes. They had not sailed farre from the Port, but the Winds began to blow very eagerly, the Marriners hoysed all their Sailes a trip, imagining to have found cer∣tainty, amidst the uncertain Waves, when the Skies on a sudden, were obscured, with black and pitchie Clouds; Eurus whis∣pering sad tales in the Sea-mens eares; from the Altantick Ocean came Notus, bringing with him Thunder and Light∣ning, when to encounter him, out flies Boreas, bearing Stormes, and Tempests on his wings, the high wrought Seas, fronted the Skies, wrapping their liequid curles in the clouds, no Sunne, nor Moon, or Starres appearing, so that had Palinu∣rus self been Pilot, he could not have
steer'd aright; the furious waves, rushing together with imbatled power, plow large furrowes in the sides of the Ship; the boystrous billowes, invade, and passe o∣ver her hatches, dashing her against the Rocks; nor could all their pumping pre∣vail, but that each man stood up to the knees in water, the passengers all crying to hea∣ven for help, in such dolefull manner, that it would have compelled an heart of flint to compassionate them, while the Ship (droven by furious winds many thousand leagues) was forced on the Coast of Gre∣cia. But Amandus found not so great toile without, as he found terrour within; his heart beat louder Alarms then the angry Seas, when he thought upon his dear So∣phronia, imagining this punishment was sent from Heaven for his sake, for that he forsook Verona, ere he attempted to infranchise the person of his dearly lo∣ved Lady. Oh Sophronia (said he) who knows what miserie thou endurest for my sake! Clodo∣mer will not faile to shed thy innocent bloud,
in revenge of his wicked Sonne, whom I justly slew. Ah, unfortunate Lovers! thou (I feare) art snatch'd away already, by the hand of violence, upon the Land; and I (by destiny droven) must, ere long, perish in this barbarous element. Pallante endeavoured all he could to comfort him. But (quoth he) it is no time now, to practice a lovers passion, when we expect every minute to become a prey to the devouring waves. By this time the waves came in so fast, hat the Ship began to sink; and the Ma∣ster, and Pilot, seeing there was no hope, let downe the cock-boat into the Seas, in∣tending (with Amandus and Pallante on∣ly) to trust to the mercy of the watry ele∣ment, in that dimunitive vessell: But so numerous and eagre, were those perishing passengers in the finking Ship, (every one desirous to preserve his life) that though they endeavoured to hinder their ap∣proach with their swords drawn, they could not, but that the little Skiffe, being over∣charged with numbers, chose rather to be choaked with the salt Seas, then harbour such mercilesse oppressors.
But Amandus, and Pallante, (being well skilled in swimming) perished not amongst the rest, but bore up above water, ma∣king way with their hands and feet, (while Neptune with all his Tritons gazed upon them, imagining, another Melicerta, with Saron accompanied, had divided the dusky waves) not ceasing to brush the blue billowes, till at length they espied a very faire harbour, situate between two Rocks, neere adjacent to a very pleasant Island, where grew (in seemly ranks) great store of pleasant trees, laden with fruit, the ground being garnished (like another Tempe) with all sorts of fragrant flowers, Zephire seeming continually to breath up∣on them; but no house, or humane sub∣stance could they view: To this delecta∣ble Paradice they directed themselves, comming on shoare exceeding faint, and weary, of whom more hereafter.
CHAP. III. The King (being exceedingly enamoured on Sophronia: would faine seem youthfull, making himself monstrously ridiculous. His courting of Sophronia. He invites her (hoping to enjoy her) to Ziva. She kils him there, and escapeth. YOu heard before, that King Clodomer was become a sub∣ject to Cupids Soveraign∣ty, (notwithstanding his late losse) to whose Deity he was now so obsequiously devoted, that (hoping thereby to appear amiable in So∣phronia's eyes) he cast off all former gravity, befitting the estate, and Majesty of a King, apparrelling himselfe in youth∣full habit, shaving away his beard to the very stumps, and poudering those hoary haires on his Scalp abundantly, that they might seem whitened by Art, and not by Nature; moreover, he put a silver hil∣ted rapier by his side, and to his band∣strings
he annexed rings of severall forms, decored with stones of various hewes; and (that nothing might be wanting to make him every way extraordinary) he often exercised his Genius, in ruthfull Rimes, melancholy Madrigals, and dole∣full Ditties, bewailing the cruelty of Cu∣pid; that fit over, he compiled many horrible Hymns, in the praise of his Mi∣stresse Celestiall Feature. The brightness of her Haire, the highness of her Forehead, the neatnsse of her Nose, the handsomnesse of her Hand, the finenesse of her Foot, and the gravitie of her gesture. But this fantastick dotage of Clodomer, was no whit pleasing to his Lords, nor was it well resented by the vulgar (who are ever for the most part, glad of all occa∣sions, that may warrant them to think mean∣ly of their Superiors) some saying he was mad; others, that he was a foole; others, that he was no longer fit to govern. But Clodomer, (though he were suffici∣ently sensible of the various whisperings, and repinings against him) was so wed∣ded to his fancie, that he could as easily
cease to be mortall, as cease to be a Lo∣ver, yet all this while he made no disco∣very to Sophronia, only some amorous glances often banquetting with her, and sometimes griping her moist palme; ap∣pointing her lodgings neere his owne, where she was attended, as she had been the greatest Princesse in the World. Sophronia perceived (well enough) what wind filled the Kings Sayles, but took not the least notice thereof, ever ap∣pearing disconsolate, pensive, and desirous of solitude. Clodomer would fain have had men to have thought that he afforded So∣phronia such accommodation, meerly out of love to her inherent vertues, and eminent worth, and not as desirous to winne her to his embraces: But now, being resolved to languish no longer, but to break the matter unto her (after banquetting, as was his usuall manner) he led her alone with him into the Privy Garden, where he thus solicited her.
Madam, I Am sensible, it cannot but seeme more strange to you, then an Africk monster, hat I, who (by reason of my wrongs) am an implacable enemie to Amandus, whose man∣date hath imprisoned you so many weeks, and whose rage would have bereft you of life, should implore your smiles [aged as I am] and be solicitous to winne your love; but such is the all-commanding power of Venus Sonne, that except I may enjoy your sweet society, (though a King) I am the most mi∣serable wretch under the Cope; nor can I de∣spaire, but the softnesse of your temper, (con∣sidering the worth of my proffer) will prompt you to embrace that candidly, which is by me proposed fervently. Sophronia having heard him, burst forth into a great laughter. I see (quoth she) that Letchery (like the plague) takes in a bloud; though Rhoxe∣nors Syre (Sir) you are his heire (I mean to his affections) the truth is (speaking far from heart) I am obliged, Royal (Sir) to
you, in all the bonds of love, and grati∣tude; and (since I see Amandus slights me) shall prostrate all is mine to be dispo∣sed of at your pleasure. Clodomer was so over-joyed to heare this, that (sure if he had not lost them long before▪ he had now forfeited his wits; but taking her about the waste, he so embraced her, and beslavered her, that the pennance she endured then, was worse then the imprisonment she lately suffer∣ed. Clodomer imagined all Cock-sure now, and after many assurances of his fi∣delity, and entire affection, he besought her, that they two, with one Castril, his creature, (a slave that for pence would have prostituted his owne mother, or wife) might take their journey in a close Chariot, to a Village some five leagues from Verona, named Ziva, and there (quoth he) we may have opportune occa∣sion, to take the full fruition of our loves. Sophronia, though she hated his person, more then poison; and his love, worse then Lucifer; yet consented to accompa∣ny him, which was performed the next morning accordingly.
The chast Lady being put upon this pe∣ril, (which she accepted, knowing it was in vain for her to withstand Clodomers power) who, in case she had given him a deni∣all, [would have procured her certain ruine] had conveyed that morning into her tresses, her bodkin, which (to avoyd suspition) she had folded up in her curles, over which she cast a white veile. Arrived at Ziva, they were received at a Countrey Farmers house (whom Castril had prepared before hand for that purpose) where entring the best cham∣ber that Graunge afforded, after a repast with wine, and junkets, so hasty was Clo∣domer to have his bane, that he would needs anticipate the approaching night, (like another Heliogablibus, who made day his night, and night his day) the Sun ha∣ving yet scarce attained his altitude. The chast Sophronia (whose heart hung heavy on its strings) (seeming) [willingly to yield her assent] the King [having sent Castril to Verona, with a command to wait on him towards night] entred the baleful bed, Sophronia accompanying him,
where he soon began to shew himself ve∣ry active; but Sophronia (pulling the bodkin out of her haire) with a ghastly look, and a troubled voice, rising up, uttered these words. Canst thou think, thou foolish Tyrant, that what I denied thy wicked Son, I will afford thy villanous self, and that I dare yield up that Fort to thy feeble use, which all the Warriours in the World (Amandus excepted) can never conquer. [Clodomer would have called out for help, but he was so amazed at the sudden∣nesse of this unexpected carriage from his Mistresse, that he became lost to speech] and having said this, also adding; Bear witness, thou Supream ever-living Power, that I am forced to this outragious Act, for the preservation of my chaste Ho∣nour, she stabbed him to the heart, who strugling to arise, she againe lodged her bodkin in his brest, which prevented his arisall, and dismissed his soule. Having done this dreadfull deed, she threw the bed cloathes cleane over him, and locking the doore, and taking the
key with her, she departed; of whom more ere long. Sol driving his Carre towards the An∣tipodes, and night arising in sullen mists, Castril, (according to the Kings com∣mand) arriving where he left his Master, finding the doore lockt, imagined the King had not yet enough of sport, and therefore he went and walked for the space of two houres, in a neighbouring Grove; returning againe, and finding the doore as he left it, he began to call, saying, My Lord, My Lord, but receiving no answer, he grew extreamly perplexed, and began to doubt some danger, and therefore he resolved to force open the doore, which he did; entring, and approaching the bed, seeing the curtaines decently drawne, and the cloathes stretched at full length, he began to think, the King, and his Mi∣stresse, being tyred with active recreation, might be both sound asleep, and began to curse his hasty intrusion; but drawing nearer, he perceived the Kings counte∣nance very much altered, of a pale, ashy, and bloudlesse hew, and turning downe
the cloaths, he beheld him almost covered in his own gore, having two wounds, the one on his side, the other betwixt his paps; whereat he flung out of the room (like a man distracted) tearing his haire, and scratching his face, crying, Treason, Treason. But of the issue of this, read more hereafter, for I must now returne to A∣mandus, and Pallante, whom we left in the Flowry Island. CHAP. IV. The description of the Flowry Island. A∣mandus and Pallante (having resolved Agenors Riddle) are received, and en∣tertained by him, in his Castle. I Have inform'd you, that the noble Knights, Amandus, and Pallante (by miraculous sup∣portance) escaped the danger of drowning, and that (with great diffi∣culty) they at length arrived on a very fer∣tile Continent.
The Species of things appeared so glo∣rious round about them, that they were warranted to think they had lighted upon that Eden which Adam lost, but they wondred they found no Inhabitants, assu∣ring themselves, that so happy a place could not be devoid of those who were appointed to enjoy those benefits, that na∣ture (who doth nothing in vain) had there prodigally bestowed. Having gathered some grapes, dates, oranges, and pomgranates, (plenteously produced in that plat of ground) they sat them down under an Almond tree, and (aswell as their weaknesse would permit) began to refresh themselves with those excellent fruits. It was now twilight, neither day, nor night; they had not sate long, but they might espie a comely Knight, mounted upon a stately Steed, clad in the habit of a Grecian, (for indeed that Island was part of Grecia) a great company follow∣ing him, on horse-back, (all seeming men of worth and quality) who with Agenor, (for so was the Knight called) had been
hunting of the Badger, who espying two men naked (with fruits before them) un∣der a tree, imagined (as indeed it was) that they were shipwrack'd on that Coast. Amandus, was tall of Stature, big of limbs, of a sterne (yet pleasing) countenance. Pallante, something lower, not so well set, yet of a more feminine aspect. Their persons (though naked) gave A∣genor cause to think, that they were above the degree of common men, and pitying their calamitous condition, he alone rode up to them, enquiring of Amandus (who understood the Greek tongue very well, being a man excellently learned) what ac∣cident had exposed him (and his associ∣ate) to such a direfull distresse; Amandus returned him answer. That they were Knights of the King∣dome of Polonia, (for he would not dis∣cover his capacity, and condition) and be∣ing bound for Spaine, by the wilfulnesse of the winds, had their Ship swallowed in the mercilesse waves, and themselves for∣ced (swimming for their lives) upon that Continent; adding, that he had a hope,
they were throwne among a people, who were acquainted with Civility, and knew how to be hospitable. Feare not (said Agenor) but I will so provide, that you shall have entertain∣ment, be fitting Knights of worth, (such as in my esteem you are) only I feare I shall not be able to afford you the courte∣sie I would, for that by a Law, ratified by my Predecessors, none may have the entertainment due to adventurous Knights, in my Castle, but such as can unfold the Riddle that shall be proposed to them. At this, Amandus, and Pallante, great∣ly wondred, Amandus desiring him to propose his Riddle, for (quoth he) I doubt not but to explain it. Apollo and Mercury ayde you (quoth Agenor) and so calling his company un∣to him, he pulled a Schedule out of his pocket (included in a silken bag on which (in capitall letters of gold) was en∣graven this;
RIDDLE. Whats that a faire Lady most of all likes, Tet ever makes shew she least of all seeks: Thats ever embrac'd, and affected by her, Yet is never seen to please, or come nigh her: But a poor mans thing, yet doth richly adorn her, Most serv'd in her night-weeds, does her good in a corner: Most cheap, and most deare, above all worldly pelfe, Is hard to get in, but comes out of it selfe. To this, Amandus (after a little pause) answered; Good Fame, is that which a vertuous La∣dy most of all desires. Yet makes it not known that she affects to accrew it. It is ever embrac'd and affected by her. For she must persevere in vertue, or her Glory dies. Serv'd in her night-weeds. For Ladies that weare their night-weeds come least abroad. But a poore mans thing. For many of mean fortune attain to ho∣nest Fame. Richly adornes her.
For nothing is more excellent in a wo∣man then vertuous chastity. Is hard to get in, and comes out of it selfe. 'Tis no easie thing, for a Lady so to de∣mean her self, that she shall be esteemed vertuous; but being attained, whether she will or not, she shall be well spoken of. You are witnesses (quoth Agenor to his Associates) that this Knight, in the behalf of himself, and his friend, hath resolved the Riddle. All replying they were. You are nobly welcome (quoth Age∣nor) to the Flowry Island; then dispatch∣ed he one of his Train to his Castle, com∣manding him to bring two suites of Ap∣parell, with their appurtenances, with two horses, the one for Amandus, the other for Pallante; which being performed, they having cloathed themselves, and be∣ing mounted, departed with Agenor to his Castle.
CHAP. V. Sophronia, entertained by the Shepherd Crates, and his wife Phillida. The description of his Cottage. Sophronia becomming a Shepherdess, sings the praise of the Countrey life. SOphronia (as you heard) ha∣ving made riddance of her Royall Remora (in great feare) travailed so long as her tender limbs were able to beare her delicate body, till at length she arrived neare a large over-growne Wood, whose aspiring branches almost kiss'd the Clouds; towards which, di∣recting her way, she saw where a shep∣herd was making melody to his fleecie Flock, on his oaten reed, singing this song. Thus work we Fortunes discontent, To behold our merriment. We harmelesse Shepherds do despise The anger of the Destenies.
That which makes the Gown man pine, The Souldier curse Wars discipline, Begets our solace, no austere Phalarian Tyrant is our fear; Secure content, and quiet rest, No groanes, or cries of men opprest; Age is no trouble, Death but sleep, And we till Death, our vigour keep. Sophronia, with great delight, listned unto the Shepherds Song, and approach∣ing near him, the good old man thought that some Diety, mask'd in a humane form, was making towards him. Hail gentle Shepherd (quoth Sophronia) Silvanus, Pryapus, Pan, Pales, and all the Silvan dieties (and indeed, in naming one, I name all) be propitious unto thee and thy faire flock; and heaven (said Crates) for so was the Shepherd called, give thee (faire Lady) the full fruition of all thy desires: My present condition (quoth Sophronia) will not permit me (gentle Sir) to be tedious in my orratory, for that I expect every minute to be surprised, by a barbarous Earle of this Country, from
whose hands I have this day escaped (for the preservation of my chaste honour) be pleased therefore, to afford me an homely russet Coat, in exchange, for these gawdy Garments, together with shelter for some few dayes in thy Cot∣tage, till this storme be blown over, and to gratifie thy love, take these Jewels (of sufficient vallue, to make thee Lord of all this champion Country) as my gift. For your Jewels (quoth Crates) I must not, dare not accept of them, they are the Plague and Poison of honest mindes, but if my homely Cottage, may be wor∣thy of the acceptance of so divine a crea∣ture; command it (Lady) as my self, and all I am master of. Away went Sophronia with Crates to his Cottage, which was builded by a bank side, at the root of a Sycamore Tree, whose broad branches quite overshadow∣ed his shallow roffe; the Cottage it selfe was erected of grasse Turfes, so cu∣riously contrived, that it seemed rather framed by Nature then by Art, being all over of a verdant hew. Entred therein,
she espied many shelves of Cheeses, and pans of Milke, with large flitches of Ba∣con; Phillida (Crates wife) was exceed∣ingly abashed, to behold a creature of such bright beauty, so gloriously appa∣ralled, enter her homely habitation, ima∣gining that Juno, or Latona, had descen∣ded from Heaven (as of old, when the In∣nocency of Shepherds, made them worthy the society of the deathlesse Dieties) to visit their humble dwelling: but Crates soon took off her wonder, informing her the occasion of her arrivall; then Phillida heartily welcomed her, and spreading a homespun cloth upon an unpolish'd Ta∣ble, she adorned it with Cream, with But∣ter, with her choysest Cheese, and finest Bread, and taking a brown Bowle (bor∣rowed out of the body of an Almond Tree) repleated it brimfull of healthfull Sider, Crates and Phillida (with many congeis and ducks) proclaiming her wel∣come. Having refreshed her selfe with these rurall Cates, she put off her gorgeous hab∣bit, and atired her selfe in a Coat of russet-gray,
binding up her golden haire in a packthread Cawle, and putting homely Buskins upon her feet, taking a hook in her hand, she led forth her Sheep day by day, folding them each night, in as seemly a manner, as if she had been Crates, not Almonios Daughter. Exceedingly pleased with this rustick life, sitting one day, upon a bank of Flow∣ers, her Flock grazing by her, she sang these verses, in the praise of the country life. While I the glad and smiling ground doe strew, In these most pleasant Groves, whose verdant hew, Allure great Pan and Pales here to sport, Forgetting quite the pleasures of the Court; Resting securely, void of ghastly feare, How well were I, were my Amandus here No Souldier here doth wipe his Sanguine Blade, Made drunk with blood, no Lording doth invade The poore mans House, or Land; no foule Sedition, No Edict, Remora, or Inhibition, Vexeth my quiet peace, my Flocks I keepe Secure, and dreadlesse of all danger sleepe. The fruitfull Vine the Poplar tall doth clip, Wo bowes his head, sweet Nectar for to sip. The lowing Heards, far off I doe behold, Feeding on Meadowes all off burnishd Gold. My head with mellow Apples I adorne, And Peares more ruddy then the blushing morne.
When Jove forceth his Thunder through the Skie, To empt the store of his Artillery, Into a Grove of Bay I doe retire, And reverence (not fear) his noise and fire. O happy country life, thrice blest they are, Who are contented with their houshold Lare. And wrapt in Goats skins, as securely rest, As those that doe on Tyrian Tastry feast, And sleep on quilted Down Beds, all the Pride Of Norimberge, or Turky sought to hide, Their glorious nakednesse; oh happy Fate, That still attends the humble Shepherds state. Crownes are compos'd of cares, and Honours be, But the insaring Gins of Destinie; The purblind Goddesse takes delight to wrong, None save the rich, the haughty, and the strong: Here without shew of feare, securely I Doe rob the earth of her Embroyderie. The Primrose, Lilly, Calaminth are here, The Violet, Paunsy, Pagle, and Kings-Speare, Smooth Ladies Smocks, with Hare hels, and the Flower, That cheifly springeth in Adonis Bower; The Myrtle, Spiknard, Gowlands, and the Rose, Sops dipt in Wine, Oxe eye, the lips of Cowes; This is the life thats free from cares, and feare, Oh that my sweet Amandus were but here. Here leave we Sophronia, and look back to Verona, and see how the rumor of Clo∣domers death is resented. Castrill having declared the time when, the place where, and by whom Clodomer was made away, the Nobles were so farre
from deploring that heavie Accident (being now grown weary and ashamed, of Clodomers absurd unkingly deport∣ment) that they lift up their hands to hea∣ven, thanking the great power, that had benignly bereaved them of so besotted a Prince; and the common people (who are ever delighted with change) sang Pae∣ans to Providence, that had taken off their burthensome Head, without hurt to the Body politick; but neither the one nor the other, had any true cause of rejoycing (though Clodomer had forfeited the es∣sence of a King, by giving too much scope to his fond loving Lunacie) for the Girpids being assured that Amandus was wandring about the world, and that King Clodomer was dead, resolved to break in peices the yoake of bondage, that Amandus had put upon them, and to invade those that had vassalized them.
CHAP. VI The description of Agenors Castle; he declareth to Amandus, the reason, why he proposed the Riddle, as also, that no Women inhabited there, containing the History of Sinoris, and Eugenia, A∣genors Kinsman ariving from Spaine, declares newes very pleasing to Aman∣dus; he and Pallante (furnished with a Ship, and all other necessaries) set saile for Verona; the Lombards receive him triumphantly as King. Sophronia (having been much sought after by A∣mandus) at length discovers her selfe; the mutuall joy of the two Lovers; the cellebration of their Nuptials, and Coro∣ronation. NOw if my compasse, and my card be true, I shall ere long, put in at the wished Port. You have heard before, of the strange entertainment that Amandus and Pallante, found in the Flowry Iland,
and that Agenor (the Lord of that Coun∣try) courteously conducted them to his Castle; which was scituated on an high promontory, surrounded with all sorts of Trees, set in seemly rankes, in the midst whereof, ranne a demi-River, watring those pleasant plants. The Castle was framed all of Median stone, of Ovall forme, yet so vast of extent, that it seemed a petty City; it was surrounded with a Wall of Marble, on which at equall di∣stance, and of just proportion, were an hundred Towers: before the Castle lay a Pond (invironed with a living Wall of Eglantine, fed by a Christaline Spring) repleat with all sorts of Fish; in it (most lively carv'd in stone, by the skill of some cunning Dedalus) sat the Rector of the Seas (according to the Poets) earth sha∣king Neptune, on a Sea Horse, his Trident in his hand, all his Tritons (bestriding severall Fishes) about him, who (by wondrous Art) sounded their silver Trumpets, as they had been living sub∣strnces, to their great admiration.
Being entred the Castle, they found it exceeding glorious; the wals were hung round with cloth of gold, in which were represented many famous ancient Stories; the destruction of Troy; the renowned entercourse of the Loves of Hero, and Le∣ander; to the exceeding delight of all that beheld them; they were brought by Age∣nor, into a large Hall, paved with Aggats, and most richly garnished, where intreat∣ing them to sit downe, he began to say as followeth. I assure my self (my noble guests) that you much admire the reason that occasi∣oned my proposall of the Riddle, as also, (that in so happy an Island as this) what is the cause, your eyes have hitherto not visited one Female; the Origen of both these, I shall declare to you, briefly, and truly. About an hundred yeares since, there ru∣led as Governour over this Island, a Lord of great Fame (my Fathers Father) named Sinoris, who had to wife, a Lady nobly des∣cended, of great Beauty, and passing Wit, named Eugenia.
Now it happened, that Sinoris became exceedingly intimate with a Lord (of a neighbouring Isle) called Alsatia, [himself nominated Ariaspes] they mutually feasted each other, nothing of note being acted in either Isle, without the joynt assent one of an∣other, their Friendship being knit so strong∣ly, that it seemed impossible for the hand of Fate to dissolve it. Long time they maintained this Amity, till it happened, that Ariaspes became greatly enamoured on Eugenia, who, at first seemed to abhor his lewd desires, but at length was wonne to let him enjoy that, which she had sworn to preserve only to the use of Sinoris; yet carried they the matter a long time so clandestinely, that Argus could not have discovered their private compliance. Now it happened, that a Lady of this Island, of excellent Feature (a great En∣chantresse) was no lesse taken with Sinoris, then Ariaspes with Eugenia, and by Let∣ters, and otherwise, manifested the same; but Sinoris so entirely loved his Wife, (whom he esteemed superlatively vertuous) that he could not be wonne to hearken to her
allurements. Cassandra, (for so was the Enchantresse called) perceiving her endea∣vours were fruitless, on a time appearing to Sinoris (sitting alone in study) told him, that he neglected her love, to doat upon one that was false as a falling Star, or glow∣wornes fire, who secretly (yet frequently) cor∣nuted him, by the help of Ariaspes, Lord of Alsatia. You may imagine how exceedingly Sino∣ris was amazed to hear this, neither did he give credit to her words, yet with much in∣treaty, was wonne to make triall thereof: Cassandra (by the power of her Spels) ha∣ving transformed him at all points like A∣riaspes, he was easily admitted to ride in his own Saddle, which he had no sooner at∣tempted to doe, but Cassandra restored him to his own shape. What tongue, or pen, can expresse how exceedingly Eugenia was astonished at this accident: She would have fled away from the presence of her incensed husband, but he laying hold on her, shut her up in pri∣son for some dayes, and then (with the as∣sent of all about him) caused her to be torn
in pieces by wild horses; the rage he con∣ceived for her abuse, being so great, that he immediatly banished all women out of the Island, ordaining for the future, that none of that Sex should inhabite here; he also devised the Riddle that you lately resolved, commanding, that none save those who could give the meaning thereof, should have enter∣tainment in this Castle, but to be lodged else where in the Island. Amandus, and Pallante, could not chuse but smile, to heare of this strange Law, and that the execution thereof should be so strictly observed: But (quoth Aman∣dus) how then is this Island replenished with Inhabitants, (women being excom∣munitated from among you?) Our wo∣men (like us) said he, have an Island of their own (surrounded by the Sea) whom once every yeare we accompany, and if men-children be brought forth, we receive them; but if females, they abide with their mothers. But (quoth Amandus) were it not bet∣ter that this absurd Law were abrogated. No (quoth Agenor) that we dare not
doe; for our fore-fathers being sworn to it by the vertue of the same oath, (we be∣lieve) all their posterity are engaged, and obliged successively. And besides (quoth he) we ave experi∣mentally found, that Heaven is exceeding∣ly pleased with the observation of this Law; for before this was decreed by Sinoris, this Island was but indifferently fertile, but now it exceedeth all the Islands in the World, for fatnesse, and richnesse of soile. Fie (quoth Amandus) that you should be so grosly superstitious, to imagine, that the absence of women, occasioneth you blisse; by the immortall power, I admire, that your fruits are not blasted, and your Land curst to a barrennesse, that is destitute of such celestiall creatures, as women are. While they were thus discoursing, the Tables were furnished with all manner of curious, and luscious wines, and choysest cates; which while they were feasting with, behold Agenors Kinsman, a young man, of rare beauty, and gallant deport∣ment, was newly arrived from Spaine, (his Ship laden with very rich commodi∣ties)
whom Agenor, bringing in by the hand, presented to Amandus, and Pallan∣te, who saluting him (as Agenors Kins∣man) and understanding he came from Spaine, besought him to afford them his presence a while, and to relate what In∣telligence he had received in those parts; who presently told them, that while he resided in that Kingdome, Embassadours arrived there from Lombardy, (Emissaries being dispatched for the same purpose in∣to all parts of the world). To make enquiry for one Lord Amandus, sometime Generall to Clodomer, King of that Countrey (who was dead) for that they resolved, to make the said Amandus, their King; which they were the rather induced to doe, for that the Girpids had rebelled, and were now upon the borders of that Kingdom. This Newes made Amandus, and Pal∣lante, look one upon another, like men dropt from the Clouds. Dear Sir (quoth Amandus to Agenor) I am that Amandus, so greatly sought after, now if my So∣phronia be but safe, I am every way happy. Agenor (starting to heare this) and are
you that Amandus (quoth he) whose name, Fame so delighteth to celebrate; give me your pardon (Sir) that I have yielded you no greater respect, and let my igno∣rance plead my excuse. Oh (quoth Amandus) you excell in all noblenesse: what think'st thou, (quoth A∣mandus to Pallante) may not Fortune yet make us amends, for all her unkindnesse. I doubt it not (quoth Pallante) I be∣seech you (Sir) make all the hast you can into your native Countrey, you know not (despairing to finde you) but they may otherwise determine then you have heard. But how (quoth Amandus) may wee find Transportation? Take no care for that (quoth Agenor) I will furnish you with a winged Vessel, able Mariners, and all things requisite for your voyage. You heap favours upon me (quoth Amandus) which if I faile to retribute, my strength, and sense, forsake me at once; but dear friend, let all things be in readi∣nesse by to morrow morning. They shall (quoth Agenor) and having
so said, (after he had accompanied them some few minutes) he departed to pre∣pare all things in readinesse for their jour∣ney, which he punctually performed, ap∣pointing them a strong, but nimble Vessel, and Sea-men, lusty of body, and well skilled in marine Affaires. Amandus and Pallante, were lodged that night in a rich chamber, but took little rest, their thoughts were so busied, in de∣vising how to manage affaires for the fu∣ture; rising early in the morning, Age∣nor had prepared a stately Banquet for them, (himself honouring Amandus, as if he had been the greatest Prince in the World) after which, he (with a chosen Traine) brought them on Ship-board, where they again, were richly feasted; and then with teares in his eyes (so great was Agenors love to Amandus, who could hardly forbear, as also Pallante, to afford him the like womanish Responsion) he committed them to the mercy of the Winds, and Seas, returning to his Castle. So calme were the Waves, and so fa∣vourable the Winds, (as if, with the Du∣lichian
Guide, Amandus had them in a bag) that within three dayes, they had sight of their native Countrey: Aman∣dus, all the way (as indeed he had rea∣son) highly extolled the Noble dispositi∣on of Agenor. Doth Fame Record (quoth he to Pallan∣te) greater Hospitality ever extented hi∣therto, by any stranger, to unknown Guests, then Agenor hath manifested to us? I should blaspheme truth (quoth Pallan∣te) should I not confesse it, and strenuously endeavour (at least in some part) to compen∣sate it. The Winds, and Seas proving so fa∣vourable, that they arrived (without least preturbance) at the Famous City Verona, putting in at the Harbour called Neptunes Cave. No sooner was their approach bru∣ted abroad, but the Inhabitants of the City ran unanimously to meet him, salu∣ting him their Lord and King, the Peers and Nobles of that Kingdome resorting to him with great Joy, of their owne accords, swore fealty and homage unto him, conducting him (and Pallante) in
great Pomp and State, to the Palace of the late King Clodomer. But Amandus (though exalted from the dunghill of Affliction, to a Throne of happinesse) found no content within; nor could he have conceived any comfort, had he been made the Sole Monarch of the World, without the society of his deare Sophronia; whom enquiring for, answer was made, that (in the defence of her cha∣stity) having slaine King Clodomer, she had ever since absconded her self, none knew where; which caused Amandus to send Inquisitors all about the Kingdome, to make strict search for her, but all their labour proved to no purpose, to Amandus exceeding discontent. Sophronia perceiving by the discourse of Crates, and Phillida, that Amandus was re∣turned, and received as King, and had sent Messengers into all parts of the Kingdom to make discovery of her, was so over∣come with joy, that she swouned away, and became dead, but was soon recovered by Crates, and his wife, who laying her upon an heap of wool, so chafed her tem∣ples,
plying her with warm cloaths, that they quickly restored her to  wonted strength; which she was no oner Mi∣stresse of, but she besought th Shepherd Crates, to afford her his company to the City, to the which he willingly assented: Sophronia having deserted her gowne of grey, and put on her own apparell, made Crates her Guide to Verona. Arrived there, she directed her way to∣wards the Palace; some of the Courtiers knowing her, strove, which first should be the Messenger of such happy newes; but Amandus hardly credited their words: But ophronia being brought unto him, (who was sitting very pensive under a Canop f State) he no sooner had sight of her, but leaping from his chaire, (let∣ting fall his mantle for hast) he ran unto r, and embraced her in his armes, (nei∣er of them able to speak a long time for eeping) for, as the greatest grief, so no ubt the greatest joy, hath the least ut∣erance; breathing their soules into each other, and enjoying such mutuall happi∣nesse, that none, save those that have pro∣ved
the  assions, are able to expresse, they ag o consummate their long di∣sturbed ptials, the morrow. Whi as accordingly performed, in great Pomp, and State, befitting the dig∣nity of a King and Queen. And here, out of the affection I beare to their memo∣ries, I cannot but afford them this Nup∣tiall Song. EPITHALAMIUM HEavenly faire Urania's Son, Thou that dwel'st on Hellicon; Hymen, ô thy brows empale To the Bride, the Bridegroome Take thy Saffron Robe, and c With sweet flowred Marjorum Yellow socks of woollen weare, With a smiling look appeare: Shrill Epithalamiums sing, Let this day with pleasure spring: Nimbly dance the flaming the Pi Tree, Only dedicate to thee. Take in that fair hand of thine, Let good Auguries combine,
For the paire that now are Wed, Let their joyes be nourished, Lik a Myrtle, ever green, Owned by the Cyprian Queen, Who fosters it with Rosie dew, Where her Nimphs their Sports pursue. Leave th' Aonian Cave behind, (Come, ô come with willing mind) And the Thespian Rocks, whence drill Aganippe watens still. Chastest Virgins, you that are Either for to make, or marre, Make the Ayre with Hymen ring, Hymen, Hymenaeus sing. Amandus and Sophronia, being thus in∣corporated by holy Church, to the Gene∣rall Joy of the whole Realme, all Hymns mixing in one concord. Shortly after, they were in Solemn manner, Crowned King and Queen of Lombardy, Reigning long, and happily. FINIS.
