S759 11906838 50723
BALLIOFERGVS▪ OR A COMMENTARY UPON THE Foundation, Founders and Affaires, OF Balliol Colledge, Gathered out of the RECORDS thereof, and other ANTIQUITIES. With a brief Description of EMINENT PERSONS Who have been formerly of the same House. Whereunto is added, An exact Catalogue of all the Heads of the same Colledge, never yet exhibited by any. Together with TWO TABLES, One of ENDOWMENTS, the other of MISCELLANIES. By HENRY SAVAGE, Master of the said Colledge. OXFORD, Printed by A. & L. LICHFIELD, Printers to the University. 1668.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino GILBERTO, Divina Providentia Archiepis∣copo Cautuariensi, totius Angliae Primati & Me∣tropolitano, nee non Academiae Oxoniensis Can∣cellario munificentissimo. CƲm Paternitas vestra, Praesul amplissime, in tali fastigio collocata res nostras non solum curare dignetur, verum etiam earundum curam Visitatori pru∣dentissimo demandare; evidemur, cum Lystrensibus, videre deos hominibus assimilatos ad nos descendere, labascens & anhelans nostrum corpusculum non minus infortunio quam senio confectum exsilire & ambulare jubentes. Quapropter hoc commentariolum quasi taurum vitta∣tum ad vestibula aedium Lambethanarum adducenti immolare, omniaque fausta nobis polliceri fas sit; Id∣que a te imprimis, Illustrissime Praesul, Quem Aca∣demia Patronum munificentissimum, omnisque Anglia magnificentissimum una praedicant: quippe moles illa Oxoniensis tuis solius impensis in sublime exurgens, prae illis omnium splendorem Academiae antehac molien∣tium, merito superbit.
Unum pro cunctis fama loquatur opus. Quo pacto divorum basilicas ab impietate & impuri∣tate palam grassante vindicabis; atque adeo Enochi se∣culum, pietate & charitate juxta ac mundo nutantibus, in tantum restitues, ut haud inepte dicere licuerit cae∣ptmesse Oxoniae invocari nomen Jehovae. Macte igi∣tur virtute tua, Amplissime Praesul, & Deus optimus maximus tuam Paternitatem multiplici benedictionum genere ornatam quam diutissime servet incolumem. Sic precatur Supereminentiae tuae Cultor humillimus. H. S.
Admodum Reverendo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino GULIELMO Divina Providentia Lin∣colniensi Episcopo, Collegii de Balliolo Oxon: Visitatori meritissimo. COlendissime Praesul, Johannes de Balliolo abnepos Ber∣nardi de Balliolo Castri Bernardensis in Palatinatu Du∣nelmensi conditoris, Collegium Balliolense, in susten∣tationem 16 Scholarium inchoavit, Anno Dom. 126. Quod sic inchoatum, Dervorgilla Domina de Galweda ab Regia Scotorum stirpe, & sic à duobus utrinque Fergusiis oriunda (unde opus hoc Balliofergusii titulo honestare visum est) continuavit, statutisque donavit: quas utrius∣que filius Johannes de Balliolo, postmodum Scotorum Rex; di∣plomate suo confirmavit circiter Annum Domini 1287. Post hujus vero obitum filius ejus Edvardus de Balliolo Rex itidem Scotorum factus (impensis Philippi Somervyle equitis aurati & aliorum) numerum Scholarium ibidem adauxit: in quorum gratiam, nova statuta [suggerente eodem Philippo] Dervor∣gillianis addidit, Anno 1340. quae opera Simonis Episcopi Londin: in unum corpus tandē coaluerunt, An: 1364. Verū illis perperam consarcinatis Episcopi Winoniensis & Carleolensis medicas apponentes manus, hodierna condiderunt, Anno D. 1507. Magistrum unicum, numerum Sociorum denarium paremque Scholarium Collegio decernentes: quod autem nunc, interventu benefactorum duodenario sociorum nume∣ro, Scholarium verò octodenario gaudet, praeter quatuor Scholares oriundo Scotos, in quorum Salarium Episcopus nu∣per Roffensis octoginta libras sterlingorum annuatim soluen∣das testamento legavit. Verùm haud latet Paternitatem vestram Nautis nocte sub∣lustri frustra cum tempestate luctantibus sphaeras quasdam ig∣neas
conspici solere; idque illis tristissimum ostentum est si quando solitarius ignis est, felix, cum gemini. Haud dissimile nobis hodie contra decumanos adversae fortunae fluctus remi∣gantibus accidit; cum non ita pridem solitarius ignis nobis, proh dolor, una cum Londinatibus, naufragium minitatus est: nunc demum gemini in pectore tuo juxta ac Reverendissimi Archipraesulis accensi, incolumitatem nobis spondent & diu∣turnitatem; quo fundatores verius audituri estis quam Visi∣tatores; quum non minor provincia sit labans aedificium sta∣tuminare, quam in culmen extruere: quippe illud totum si∣mul moliri opus est, hoc moras patitur & gradus. 'Et ne huic rei, nedum mihi deesse videar, minutum meum in hoc gazo∣phylacium audax conjeci, eo primordia hujus Collegii arces∣sere gestiens, ne spectris vel supposititiis Mecaenatibus pro ve∣ris & legitimis diutius parentaremus. Opus interim vestrum in se satis meriti habiturum est, dum decus hujus duxero ma∣ximum, sub vestris vexillis meruisse. Paternitati vestrae omni officio devinctissimus, H. S.
Neque hos nominatissimos & egregios viros praetereundos duximus, quin ipsos, una cum ceteris, quotquot Collegium hoc hone∣starunt, plurima salute impertiremus; viz. Baronettos. Gulielmum Dominum Sandys. Dominum Hen: Littleton, Dom: Gualterum Williams, Dom: Johannem Lowther, Dom: Franciscum Edwards, Milites. Dom: Thomam Wendy militem de Balneo. Dom: Johannem Price, Dom: Johannem Finch, Dom: Edvardum Hobbs, Dom: Thomam Hanbury, Dom: Henricum Janson, Doctores in Theol. Edmundum Hoskins, servientem ad Legem. Paulum Hood, Thomam Washbourn, Thomam Good, Egidium Thorne, Obadiam Grew, Ambrosium Atfield, Doctores Med. Timotheum Baldwin, Doctorem L. L. Timotheum Clark, Thomam Waldrond, Robertum Fielding, Georgium Castle, Johannem Atfield, Thomam Moor, Armigeros. Franciscum Popham, Ricardum Atkins, Pergrinum Hoby, Thomam Powis, Samuelem Baldwin, Carolum Smith, Johannem Evelyn, Henricum Brown, Brigesium Nanfan, Johannem Harris, Thomam Fowk, Richardum Coling, Thomam Horton, Richardum Vernon, Johannem Bearcroft, Davidem Williams, Johannem Carter, Johannem Fleet, Robertum Oldisworth, Thomam Southcot, Thomam Lister, Gulielmum Savage, Thomam Cornwall, Matthaeum Herbert, Johannem Brown, Richardum Herbert, Samuelem Dingley, Jacobum Pit, Franciscum Fitzherbert, Johannem Seymour, Robertum Cresset, Henricum Pudsey, Gulielmum Oakley, Davidem Slocombe, Richardum Walwyn, Gulielmum Bard, Georgium Skippe, Henricum Sandys, Henricum Jeffreys, Georgium Weld, Johannem Kyrle, Robertum Rodde, Johannem Spark,
Jehannem Mouldisworth, Johannem Gayer, Gulielmum Franklin, Nathanielem Adams, Richardum Lyster, Georgium Sprye, Gulielmum Tomkins, Johannem Windford, Rowlandum Wood, Thomam Stephens, Jonathanem Rashleigh, Humphredum Courtney, Johannem Barker, Pontisburium Owen, Richardum Philipps, Johannem ap Thoma Wigmore, Johannem Horton, Richardum Evelyn, Georgium Dickenson, Henricum Swale, Gulielmum Lowther, Johannem Beare, Johannem Tomkins, Gulielmum Talbot, Praeb: Brist: Nothanielem Tomkins, Preb. Wig. Thomam Tomkins, Sacel. Archep. Cant. Timotheum Woodruff, B D. Georgium Ashwell, B. D. Johannem Williamson, Clericos. Harbartum Boughton. Gulielmum Dowling. Gulielmum Evet. Thomam Stanniford. Edvardum Web, Gulielmum Hide, Johannem Vernon, Johannem Vernon jun. Thomam Carless, Gulielmum Elks, Andraeam Broomhall, Johannem Best, Nicolaum Levet, Franciscum Wheeler, Hugonem Chibnall, Samuelem Filer, Josephum Stretch, Franciscum Hore, Georgium Abrahall, Bryanum Alder, Gulielmum Martyn, Richardum Tristram, Crowch, Gulielmum Mose, Errata majora sic corrige. Pag. 5: lin. 28. for after read before, in the Marg. read derivation. l. ult. r. mesmes. p. 10. l. 1. r. Cabasila. p. 25. r. Conncil. p. 15. l. 24. r Dervorgilla. p. 18. l. 4. r. of. p. 20. l. 3. r. Garcionem. l. 22. for , r. . p. 21. l. 2. r. . l. 33. r. . p. 22. in marg. l. 17. for Heccate, r. Hecate. p 23. l. 3. r. c̄essaverint. p. 24. l. penult. r. Mickle. p. 32. l. 35. r. Siloe. p. 43. l. 35. r. Magistri. p. 44. r. suffecerint. p. 48. l. 12. for renunci, r. renunciet. l. 40. r. amittat. p. 52. l. 3. for 39. r. 36. l. 6. r. 63. p. 56. l. 34. r. ejusdem. p. 60. l. 5. r. cassa∣mus. p. 71. l. penult. r. Humphredi Lancastriae, &c. p. 77. l. 18. r. Sermons. p. 78. l. 20. r. Royal. p. 85. l. 14. r. Periham. p. 114. l. 25. r. Valteline. p. 119. l. 7. for Physick, r. Philosophy. p. 120. l. 25. r. Me∣tropolitane. p. 100. l. 23. r. Volumes.
SECT. I. Called al∣so Johannes de Brittannia, in the Records of the Tower. IOHN BALLIOL [stiled Baron by Mathew of Westminster] the son of Ber∣nard Balliol; who was the son of Edward Balliol; who was the son of John Balliol; who was the son of Bernard Balliol of Ber∣nards Castle in the Bishoprick of Durham [as appears by our Records] so called from the said Bernard the first Founder] [as Mr. Camden writes] whom Hector Boëthius the Scotish Historiographer entitleth Lord of Balliol, Harcourt, Dampat and Horne, all Mannours or Seigneuries in France. This John de Balliol first here named, but the last in order of time, I find by Historians to be one of those Nobles which were the devotes [to speak in the words of Caesar] of Henry the third of that Name, King of England, and paid him their assistance against the Barons, Anno 1264. particularly against the Catiline of the Common∣wealth [so Simon Mountfort is termed by Mr. Camden] and is therefore deservedly ranked, both by Name and Coat of Arms, with the Heroes of those times, on the inside of the North Aile or wing of that magnificent Structure of the said King Henry, viz. the Abbey of Westminster; the Aile I mean which is extended in length from the crosse Aile of the said Church, to the Belfree westward. The opposite wing is adorned with the like number of Names and Sheilds. The said Coat of Armes of John Balliol time hath begun to eat: the tooth whereof, and that of Theon together are the devourers, that of the being, this of the merit of things and Per∣sons. For a timely prevention whereof, in our present subject, it seemes
to me not unseasonable to observe that the Coat of Arms of the said John Balliol, is the very same which our Colledge owing to him its first instituti∣on, gives, viz. a Sheild Rubies, with an Orle Pearl: the simplicity of which Coat is an argument of the venerable antiquity of the same, as it is of the natural priority of the Elementary bodies before the mixt: and its the very same that Hugo de Balliol son and Heir of the said John gave; but that, Hugo, to note himself to be descended from Alan of Galloway, great Grand-child to Fergus Prince and Lord of Galloway by his mother Der∣vorgilles side, bare in the Sinister Canton of the said Field, the Lion, as may Which, be∣ing almost 400 yeares since, is as much as 240 pounds is now. h. e. six score▪ pound each Horse.appear by his own Seal set to a bond, which he the said Hugh gave to the Executors of his Father for the payment of *Ten Marks at Pentecost 1269, for two Horses which he bought of them, as part of that personal Estate of his Fathers, which he left to his Lady Devorgille and his other Executors for the continuance of this Colledge, which he in his life time, had so hap∣pily begun. Which Bond [as well for the antiquity thereof as for the proof of some of the premises] I thought fit to insert. Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vel audituris Hugo de Balliol filius & heres quondam Domini Johannis de Balliol salutem in Christo. Noveritis nos teneri Executoribus Testamenti quondam predicti Domini Johannis Patris nostri in decem Marcis bonorum & legalium sterlin∣gorum, pro duobus Equis, ad opus nostrum ab eisdem emptis solvendis apud Fodringh. eisdem vel eorum alteri infra Petecosten proximè venturam Anno gratie Millefimo Ducentesimo Sexagesimo Nono, sine actionis dilatione. Ad quam quidem solutionem fideliter ad terminum predictum observandam, Obli∣gamus nos Ecclesiastice districtioni: ut ad predictam solutionem modo predicto observandam per censuram Ecclesiasticam distringamur. Et si contingat pre∣dictos Executores dampnum molestiam cujuslibet aut gravamen icurrere; tam hujusmodi exceptioni, quam principali debito volumus Executoribus obli∣gari & plenarie suis simplis sciis. sine ulteriori probatione satisfacere. In cujus rei Testimonium huic Scripto Sigillum Nostrum fecimus apponi. The which Seal hath this Inscription in the Ring thereof, viz. {inverted †} Sigil∣lum Hugonis de Balliol. Out of which Bond we may further observe, that as John de Balliol our Founder was English, so the place of his residence was in England, and that at Fodringheye, being his, not as his own Inhe∣ritance [as Bernards Castle formerly mentioned was, where his residence he sometime also had] but in right of his wife Dervorgille, a Lady many waies of Noble extraction, both English and Scottish: by reason of the latter whereof, it was that John de Balliol, another of her sons by our said Founder, came after the death of her [and his Elder Brother Hugh] to lay a succesfull claim to the Scottish Crown. And so I pass to Dervorgille
our Foundress; but not without this short remark upon the aforesaid Fo∣dringheye [which is that in Northamptonshire, and belonged to the Earls of Huntingdon, being of the Royal Race of Scotland] namely that it was now the Palace of a Princess of Scotland, which afterwards became the Prison of its Queen Mary, who having formerly resigned up her Crown in Scot∣land, did here with the like meekness of spirit, the Head that had born it. The circumstances of whose sufferings, 'tis not my business to dispute or re∣late; but the event gives way to this Note upon it, viz. How dangerous a ing it is, first to be perswaded to lay claym to a Crown, and afterward to fly for succour to the head that wears it. SECT. 2. 'Tis true that John de Balliol was Earl of Huntingdon and Lord of Galloway, yet not in his own right, but in that of his wife Der∣vorgille who was Lady of Balliol in right of John de Balliol her Husband; and by common right, Countess of Huntingdon, as being Daughter to Margaret Eldest Daughter to David Earl of Huntingdon, which David was Son to Henry Earl of Huntingdon, which Henry was Son to David King of Scots by Maud Daughter and Heir to Voldosius Earl of Huntingdon, which was the reason, as some will have it, why John de Balliol her Son and King of Scots did Homage to Edward, the First, King of England, though I much doubt whether this Earldome were suffered actually to devolve unto her, in as much as she is, in no Record whatsoever, styled Countess or Lady of Huntingdon, nor her Husband John de Balliol Earl thereof, though they enjoyed the Lands and Castle of Fodringheye thereunto belonging, as hath been said; only she gave the Armes of the Earl of Huntingdon in her Seal, as in the next Sect. I shall shew. Dervorgille was also Heir at the Common Law to the Earldom of Chester, as being Eldest Daughter to Mar∣garet Sister to John [surnamed of his Nation Scot] Earl of Chester and Hun∣tingdon dying without issue, who descended on their Mothers side from Hugh Bohun, alias Cavel Earl of Chester, and his wife Beatrice Daugh∣ter to Lucie Lord Cheif Justice, by Maud their Eldest Daughter. But the issue Males failing, the Kings of England would not suffer so great an Honour and Command, as was that County Palatinate to devolve to the Distaffe, allowing to the said Maud and her Sisters somthing else, which they accepted, by way of compensation, for the clearer evidencing where∣of, I shall consider the Seal she gave, the Armes she bare, and the Pedegree of her and of John de Balliol. SECT. 3. Her Seal which is affixed to her Statutes, free from any defacings, Is her Image in Front, or Face dressed in a Dowagers habit, like to that of a Nun, all in Relief or Bosse, Bearing in her Right Hand an Es∣cocheon and an Orle upon it, as being Lady of Balliol: which Title you may observe to be placed first in the Border of her Seal on this upper side.
In her Left Hand she holds the Lion for Galloway. This Galloway, saies Mr. Camden, had in times past, Princes and Lords over it: of which the first Recorded in Chronicles, was Fergus in the Raign of Henry the First, Her Picture in the Master's Hall holds a Lion Gules i a Field Ar∣gent, neither has the Lion a Crown, and therefore the Painter was mistaken who drew it, have∣ing no pattern but this Seal she gave.King of England; who gave for his Armes, A Lion Rampant Argent, Crowned Or, in a Field Azur. * The Eldest Son of this Fergus was Vc∣thred, the Son of which Vcthred marrying a Sister of William Morvill Constable of Scotland, begat Alan of Galloway and Constable of Scotland, Father to Dervorgille, by Margaret Eldest Daughter to David Earl of Huntingdon before mentioned. Below on the Right Side of her is an Es∣cocheon Charged with Three Garbes or Sheaves of Wheat, as being Grandchild to Hugh Bohun alias Cavel Earl of Chester, whose Coat that was. On the Left side below, and opposite to the last spoken of, is an Escocheon Charged with Piles in Point, Born by her Ancestors Earls of Huntingdon and Northumberland. In the Ring of this upper side of the Seal, is this Inscription. viz, ✚ S. Dervorgille de Balliol filie Alani de Galewad'. On the Reverse is a Lion in the first place in Pale with the aforesaid Coat: and therefore it is that Galewad' is the first put in this inscription. In the place of a Crest it hath a Thistle in bud only, and not in flower; to shew, haply the possibility in her line, not the possession of the Crown in her self: having on the right side thereof the 3 Garbes aforesaid, and on the left the Piles aforesaid, with this Inscription in the Ring thereof, viz. ✚ S. Dervorgille de Galewad' Domine de Balliolo. SECT. 4. I should not have written any thing in vindication of the name Dervorgille but that I find others takeing notice of the divers write∣ings of it, as of a matter of reproach to the person; it being in our present Statutes, Devorguilla; in other places, Devorgoyle; in her Statutes, Devor∣gulla; This last only, is capable of abuse, and that by no other then a pit∣tiful English Rencountre. But the Orthography of her Name is Dervor∣gille: which by a Gallicism usual in the English tongue, is pronounced Dervorille: and the letter E in the end of the Name, by an other Galli∣cism of E feminine is pronounced almost like A with us, which hath oc∣casioned the change of E into A. But to preserve the force of the Greek γ in the G of her Name, which in the French pronunciation is lost, when ever it comes before the Vowel E or I, some have put O between, and written it Dervorgoyle; some U, and written it Dervorguille; some U with∣out I, as in Dervorgulle. All which had been superfluous, had they un∣derstood the reason why, in the English tongue ge is sometimes pronoun∣ced je, and sometimes γ; and gi is pronounced sometimes γι, and some∣times ji; which is, that our language indeed is Saxon originally: but be∣cause of the Norman Conquest, the French having made as great an im∣pression upon it, as upon our Nation, those which we receive from the French, or from other Languages through their mouths, are uttered accord∣ing
to the French mode; but those which are Genuine, according to our own. Hence it comes to passe that generation is pronounced jeneration, and ginger is pronounced jinger. The same is true of gely, gender, gentle, gene∣ral, George, german, giant, Register, and so of all the rest that can be named, because they are all borrowed words. Whereas get is pronounced γεt, and give is pronounced γιve, so also girle, girdle, together, begin, and all the rest that can be named, because they are genuine. And this Rule is so general that it admits of no exception: which even learned men not observing have sought for the reason of this diversity in the Consonants that follow, and not in the Nation to which the words owe their beginning, or first cra∣sis, inquiring what ge signifies before t, and what before n: and by the like kind of vain investigations; not unlike the observations of those who look for the wind in the Weather-cocks Tail. Nor will it be amiss [the occasion offering it self] to consider the pronunciation of Arch, in divers words: which in some is pronounced Arsh, in others Ark, as for example, we pronounce Architect as Arkitect, and not as Arshitect. So Archangel we pronounce Arkangel and not Arshangel. Whereas we pronounce Archbishop as Arshbishop, and not Arkbishop, so also Archpriest is pronounced Arsh∣priest. The reason is because the words Architect and Archangel come to us immediately and purely from the Latin, and not from the French, for they have no such word as Archangel, bur their word is Archange and no more, nor is there any of the French Fancy in Architect, which it may call its own: whereas Archbishop seemes to have a nearer affinity to Archeves∣que in the French, then to Archiepiscopus in the Latin, But indeed the dirivation of Bishop from either, is so obscure, that its accounted a word of our own (as all words justly are wherein there's a Cra∣sis) and the composition of it with Arch, to be our own, and therefore we give it our own pronunciation, which herein agrees with the French as nere as our tongues can frame themselves to it.as for Archpriest, it is manifestly derived from Archprestre, the French word. Some alledg the foresaid way of considering what comes after: As for Example. If Arch comes before a Consonant, then say they, it is pronounced Arsh, but if after a Vowel, then it is pronounced Ark, but they are confuted by Arch-enimy, Arch-instrument, Archer, Arched, Arch-heretick, &c. all which are pronounced by Arsh. But to return and apply althings that have been said, to our present purpose. Dervorgille being genuine, the G is to be pronounced as γ without the aid of those forementioned interpo∣sitions to make it good. And now having spoken of Consonants, something may not be unseaso∣nable to be spoken of Vowels, in answer to the objection against  which comprehends the number of the Beast, which is 666 Rev. 13. The Objection is, that the Latins write it not by (ει) but by (i) simple; where∣unto hear what Johannes Grossius Genevensis upon the Apocalyps answers, 'est une indigne puerilité que cette objection là: car il est tout notoire, & que les Grecs escriuent souvent par () l' (i) Latin, & que le latins mesme pronon∣coient
par () laquelle prononciation est encore aujoured' huy commune & ordi∣narie entre les Anglois. Behold here our pronunciation of the vowel (i) as () approved by a stranger which some of us affecting singularity pronounce like our () never considering, that as the French hath an () masculine, and an () feminine, so we have an (i) masculine, which is pronounced as () and an () feminine, which is pronounced as we pronounce () And albeit some doe reject this word , as an unfit word containing the number of the Beast. Yet first I say, 'tis as antient as Irenaeus, who alleadges it to this purpose. Secondly, it is as, if not more, probable then , which Grotius saies was a name of Trajan, where he to find 666 in it, writes it with a (ς) in the end, saying that they commonly read it so, for a simple (σ) signifies 200, and so it will be 860, and not 666. SECT. 5. And now for their Pedegree, I might derive Dervorgille as high as Arletta Mother to William the Conquerour, and Richard Earl of Aurenches, and from the Earles of Gloucester and Oxford, and last of all from Beatrice Daughter to Lucie Lord cheif Justice. Yet I shall ascend no higher that way, then Maud the Daughter to Hugh Bohun alias Cavel, by the said Beatrice Lucie, whom he married, all the rest, being to be seen in Fern's second part, intituled Lacies Nobility. Nor shall I ascend the other way any higher then David King of Scots, who married Maud Daughter and Heir to Voldosius Earl of Huntingdon and Northumberland, for it would prove tedious, as it is superfluous. I shall only fill up this Sect. with that of Barclay in his Icon animorum, viz. Centum & octo Reges a primo Fergusio in Jacobum numerantur. Which agrees with the list of Hect. Boethius. SECT. 6. The foundation of this Society is commonly taken to be laid, Anno 1263. and indeed, all things considered, it could not be later; and that because John de Balliol, next Year following, listed himself [as also did Robert Bruis] in that great Service in the behalf of Henry the third, against the fore-mentioned Mountfort, and the rest of the Baron-Rebels, during which time he could not be vacant to such a work: where∣fore the Service being like to be hot, as it proved [He and Bruis, yea and the King himself, being taken Prisoners at the Battle of Lewis] 'tis more then probable he made a timely provision for his Eleemosynaries here, be∣fore he took up Arms. And Anno 1269. we finde him to be dead, and his personal Estate taken into the hands of his Executors towards the continuance of the Colledge, according to his last Will and Testament: Nor was it likely that He should go about such a work in Oxford then, when the King threatned the ruine of the University, upon the displeasure His Majesty conceived against the Scholars, whereof 15000 are said to have departed from Oxford, and most of them to Northampton, more an∣noying
David K. of Scots descended from Fergus. Maud Daughter and Heir to Voldosius, Earl of Huntingdon and Northumberland. Malcolm King of Scots the Eldest Son. William King of Scots the second Son. Henry Earl of Huntingdon the Third Son. Daughter to Earl Warren a Planta∣genet. Hugh Bohun Earl of Chester. g g a Alexander King of Scots. David Earl of Huntingdon. Maud Daughter of Hùgh Bohun Earl of Chester. Alexander King of Scots. Bernard Balliol. * Fergus Prince and Lord of Galloway. John, Sur-named of his Nation Scot. John Balliol. * What were the Armes of this Fergus see Sect. the Third. Edward Balliol. Ucthred Prince and Lord of Gal∣loway. Bernard Balliol. Son of Ucthred. Sister to William Morvill Consta∣ble of Scotland To fill up this blanck, you may Note that the Armes of this Henry Hastings, are an Escocheon charged with a Manche (i. e.) Manica in Latin, and a Sleeue in English. Alan of Galloway. Margaret Eldest Daughter. Henry Hastings. Alda the Third some say Fourth Daughter of Da∣vid Earl of Hun∣tingdon. John Balliol Foun∣der of Balliol Colledge. Dervorgille, Daughter to Alan of Galloway and Margaret. Rob. Bruis. Jsabella the Second Daughter. Hugh Balliol, Son and Heir to Jo. Balliol. John Balliol King of Scots, Second Son of John Balliol. ☟ Hugh Rebelled a∣gainst King Henry the Third, as some say, but it may be mistaken for Guido Balliol a Kinsman. Edward Balliol King of Scots. The Kings of Scotland. This Hastings Armes are the same that the present Earl of Hunt∣ingdon gives, by wch and by the Name of Henry Hastings he is listed in Westminster Abby with John Bal∣liol, our Founder, and the rest aforesaid. John Speed makes Fergus Prince of Galloway to be descended from Henry, Earl of Huntingdon, which by reason of the uncertainty of it I have derived it by a Black Train. Place this after Page 6.
the King in the Battle there, then all the Rebels Army did be∣sides. About which time, John de Balliol's House at Fodringheye was plun∣dred of 100 marks sterling, and his Cattel driven away: whereof Bald∣win Wake the plunderer, one of the Rebels party [whom Matthew Paris writes to have been taken among the rest at Northampton] afterwards ob∣liged himself to restitution, and of whatsoever else should be found out upon him by a lawful Jury; and all this under his Seal, remaining in our custody. There's another Bond besides this from Thomas Musgrave, for a certain sum of money to be paid to Jo: de Balliol, or to his Assigns, at Bernards Castle aforesaid, at several times; which allows me the liberty of conjecture, That the said Balliol was dead before Pentecost, 1266. in as much as the last payment then intended to be made, was not made ac∣cordingly, though secured under the severest penalties: which occasion∣ed the transmission of the Bond unto the hands of Jo: de Balliol's Execu∣tors, and thence unto the Colledge with other things, which we shall hereafter have occasion to declare more at large. But that he was living at Bartholomew-tide, 1265. must be acknowledged from the then dating of the Obligation, which yet remains uncancelled in our custody: by whose instigation [after his deliverance out of Prison, and return to Ber∣nards Castle aforesaid] together with that of the King of Scots and Robert Bruis, the Northern parts remaining unconquered, rose up and recovered all the rest of the Land to the King; the loss whereof, had before been a sad consequent of that no less sad defeat at Lewis, as writes Matt: of Westminster. SECT. 7. And that the Society was of ancienter date then the pre∣sent Site of the Colledge is, is clear from thc place call'd Old Balliol Hall, in a Lease of it long after granted us, viz. 3 R. 2. Anno Dom. 1389. by the University, Mr. Robert Aylsham being then Chancellor thereof, and Thomas Tirwhit our Master, which Old Balliol Hall, with its Garden and Appurtenances, was scituate between a Tenement of Saint Frideswids on the West part, and a certain Garden of the Master and Scholars on the East, and extended it self from the Kings-street, or Kings High-way of Candych on the South, to the Garden of the said Tirwhit Master of the House on the North. The area whereof (Garden and all I sup∣pose to be meant) was 96 Foot in length from North to South, and 47 Foot in breadth at the South end, and 41 at the other. The name of Sparrow-Hall, which the Ʋniversity calls it by, might be given it before our Foun∣der first took it of them, or else since, by some under-Tenant of that name, who used it for a place of entertainment for Students, the Col∣ledge having no longer use for it in that kinde: Of which old Balliol-Hall, the House lately leased forth to Dr. Baily's Son, and in the possession of Jackson the Stone-cutter, must be a part, inasmuch as in some Writings
it is said to be bounded by the corner House on the West, which must be true of part thereof, the whole (Garden and all) being 96 Foot in length, extending a great way farther. From this Old Balliol-Hall, the Society probably removed Eastward to the next Tenement save one to it, which may be the reason why that Tenement was called New Balliol-Hall. But be it as it will, we finde Dervorgille to have left them setled in Horsmon∣gers-street, in the Buildings of her on purchasing, which stood about the upper end of the present Quadrangle: This being then called Horse∣mongers-street, as will evidently appear by the bounds thereof East and West, in its due place: which was also enlarged by several Halls taken in, which stood here, as hereafter I shall shew, whereof one was probably St. Hughs Hall; but where it stood, unless at the East end of the Qua∣drangle, In Dauphiné, which was part of the King∣dom of Bur∣gundy.I cannot tell. This St. Hugh was Bishop of Lincoln, in whose Diocess Oxford then was: He was born at * Grenoble in Burgundy, who up∣on the importunity of our King Henry the second, came over and accept∣ed the Priorate of Wittham in Somersetshire, and afterward this said See, whose Body, after his death, which was at London, was carryed thence to the Gates of Lincoln, and thence more solemnly to the Cathedral-Church there, viz. upon the shoulders of two Kings, h. e. of England and Scot∣land; and from the Church door to the Choir, by a great number of Pre∣lates, Anno 1200. which was 62 Years before the Foundation of our Colledge, and 20 Years before his Canonization, and 82 Years before his Bones were translated out of his Coffin into a Silver Chest, which was done the same Year that Dervorgille gave us Statutes, and two Years be∣fore Oliver Sutton Bishop of Lincoln confirmed our Colledge. One thing Bishop Godwin notes of him (besides what he cites out of Parisiensis) viz. That visiting Godstow, and seeing the Herse of Rosamund covered with silken Tapistry, and demanding whose it was; the Nuns answered, That it was Rosamunds, a great Benefactrix to their House: which he no sooner heard, then he commanded her Carkeis to be digged up and buryed in the Church-yard; affirming, That such honour ought not to be done to a Strumpet. The like was his severity in other things from the time that he first became one of the Chartreux. SECT. 8. But, to return, this unnatural War receiving now a pe∣riod, and those Victories [as all gained upon Rebels do] having made the King more King, and the Subject more subject, a serenity of times en∣sued proper for an improvement of John dd Balliols Foundation; which improvement owes it self in the first place to the piety of Dervorgille his Lady Dowager; and next, to the bounty of succeeding Benefactors. But before I descend so low, I shall touch upon the motives, wherewith our Founder serv'd himself to build this Colledge, then styled by the name of Balliol-hall: The first doubtless, was the honor of God, it being the
pole upon which his own Loyalty to the King, and the Charity of Der∣vorgille, in pursuance of his Design, did move: whereof she hath given a large Testimony in the Preamble to her Statutes, which she left unto us, though attended with the common Errors of those times. The second was the good of his own Soul, as thereby purchasing the Prayers of his Beneficiaries for his good success in the service he went upon, and for the better fitting of his Soul for heavenly Mansions, by what accidents soever it should be divorced from his Body. I easily yield too, that he also swimming with the stream of those Times, would not be displeased at the thoughts of some future Commemoration of himself, at the least ima∣gining that it might do him good, but could do him no harm: And more I shall not need to say, there being not wanting such as are apt enough to draw hence Arguments against Church and Colledge Lands, and to make the highest improvement of those as well as of these, to the justification of their own Sacriledge. But where such Prayers made had respect to the re-uniting of the soul to the body, they are like to get but little by it. Commemoration of good Persons hath been anciently received in the Church; insomuch, that they no oftner celebrated their Divine Services, then they recited the Holy Diptychs, as may be seen not onely in the Ec∣clesiastical Hierarchy of Dionysius Areop. c. 3. but, which is more, in St. Basils Liturgy, translated by Masius out of the Syriack, and used ge∣nerally through the whole Greek Church. In these were written onely the names of Persons both living and dead: That wherein the names of the dead were written, was recited as propos'd thereby to the Church as a pattern of their imitation, and occasion of Thanksgiving: But the other wherein the names of the living were registred, was recited that the Church might follow them in their practice; or else, by their Pray∣ers might get them confirmed in good, or reform'd from the Error of their evil way. But in process of time these names, it seems, swelling to such a multitude, they contented themselves with a general Comme∣moration, onely a few Particulars excepted, as may be seen in orher Li∣turgies. So that at last, the Diptychs contained the whole Canon of the Latine Mass, as Lindanus observeth upon St. Peters Liturgy in Bibliotheca Patrum, and that out of the ancient Diptychs of St. Gregories Church in Biscay in Spain: for the fashion whereof, saith he, they were distinct, a foot and a half high, licatiles duae valvulae, after the maner of a Book which the Mysteries ended, were closed again. This recital was, at first, called recitatio  plicarum, Dionys. Eccl. Hier. c. 3. which in pro∣cess of time came to be corrupted into  animarum, as is observed upon Cassander in Liturgicis; which, if true, might give a Collateral oc∣casion of Prayer for the Souls departed. At length they began to bethink themselves of a place or state from whence they would have them deliver∣ed; whether Paradise or Abrahams bosome, or places void of all grief
and sadness, and light, or green and refreshing places, as Nicolaus Cabu∣sila relates▪ in Expos. Liturg. c. 40. whereunto they seem to have been lead by the Opinion of the Platonicks, and the Expressions of Virgil re∣membred by St. Augustine, de Civ. Dei, l. 21. c. 13. which Queree they being unable to determine, confuted themselves out of their own Opini∣on: which, I believe, gave occasion to the Papists to settle upon the pro∣fitable Error of Purgatory, and to us to expunge out of our Liturgy all Prayers of that nature, contenting our selves with a general Thanksgiving for Saints departed, and a general Prayer for the accomplishing of the number of the Elect, and the hastening of Gods Kingdom, that we with them may have our perfect Consummation and Bliss, both in Body and Soul, in his eternal and everlasting Glory, where they rest from their la∣bours, and their works follow them, Rev. 14. v. 13. and less charity then this we ought not to have for them, who had so much for us: The which, as it is our duty, so 'tis the happiness of our Church that we have a set Form of Common Prayer [which none in the Christian World have ever been wanting in, before the Introduction of the Scotish new Fangle] but the want of an exact Rubrick [such as we have] gave a liberty of using, some one form, some another; as did Sarum, Hereford, York, Lincoln, Bangor, &c. all of them framing a kinde of Directory to themselves: and so by circumstantial alterations, they came at last to alter the Substan∣tials, till in fine their very follies were held for Celebrations of their Church Festivals, turning the holy Consecration of Bishops, and Episco∣pal Administration, into a meer Christmass gamble; which is rightly ob∣served and justly censured by that famous Councel of Basil [established afterwards in France by the pragmatical Sanction of Charls 11. by the ad∣vice of a General Assembly of States at Burges] The Autographum of which Councils Epistolary Transactions, with the Popes Seal affixed, was sent by Sir Tho: Roe the Kings Ambassador at Constantinople, to our University, and received in Convocation with great solemnity, Dr. Smith being then Vice-Chancellor: The which Council I wonder not that Mr. Gregory takes notice of, in his Episcopus Puerorum, the most authentick Record produced in that Disquisition. One Abuse more I cannot but note, censured in the same Session, viz. De pignorantibus cultum divinum. which was, That when any Canon of a Church had contracted a Debt, he would obliege himself to his Creditor by Oath; That in case he paid it not at the time appointed, he would forbear Divine Offices, which ought not to have been without the formality of an Ecclesiastical Censure, which Hugh Balliol oblieged himself to submit to [in case he paid not for the two Horses which had been left by his Father, our Founder, in his last Will, for and towards the perpetuation of the House] by the Bond recited Se∣ction. 1. Note, that there's another pragmatical Sanction of St. Lewis, dated Anno 1268. mense Martii, against the unjust exactions of the Court
of Rome, &c. noted by Rebuffus, upon the Concordates between Leo 10. and Francis the first, Anno 1555. SECT. 9. Now for that which follows: As Varro is cited to have distinguished the times of the World, the common subject of History into three Intervals, viz. : the first uncertain [i. e. to Ethnicks] which was from the Cration to the Flood, of 1656 Years: The second Fabulous [to the Ethnicks also] from the Flood to the beginning of the Olympiads, h. e. to the Year 3174: The third Hi∣storical, from the first Olympiad forwards: So, if it be lawful, parva mag∣nis componere, we may divide the subject of our Colledge History, though not in every respect precisely distinguishable, according to its successive Intervals: The two first whereof, that is, the  and  I shall purge my subject of at first, that the stream of my History may run down the clearer to these our Times. The  concerns, 1. The Number of Scholars appointed by our Founder; wherein some, having no other light to guide themselves by then our present Statutes, have pitch'd upon the Number therein stated: But by the Statutes of Sir Philip Somervile, it seems clear to me, That they were at least Sixteen; the which were al∣lowed one poor Servitor to attend them at the Table, by the Statutes of Dervorgille. And this Number of Fellows [called Scholars before] was Found by Sir Philip Somervile, in the House even then when his Sta∣tutes were set forth: whereunto he added six Scholars under them and one Chaplain, besides what Chaplain or Chaplains had been placed there be∣fore upon the Charity of other Benefactors, which I shall take notice of as they lye in my way. But be the Number what it will, it was to receive an increase or diminution according to the increase or decrease of the Revenue, provided they exceeded not their set Allowance; which was so large, that of poor Scholars [which they were to be at their first reception] they might become rich, as is observable out of the Statutes of Dervorgille, and particularly may be noted of Walter de Fodringheye, the first▪ Principal [for so the Head was then called] that ever was of the House: who be∣ing chosen out of the number of the Scholars, did, without any addition to his former allowance, over and above the fruit of his own providence, grow too big for the place; insomuch, that having resigned it, he became at last a Benefactor to this Foundation, whereof he had been formerly a Eight pence then as good as a mark now, and more.Beneficiary, which was Anno 1311. as by the Letters Patents of the then King does appear. In the second place, the  concerns their set allowance, which seems to have been * eight pence per week; inasmuch as I finde no mention made of any less, but of an increase of thus much to Eleven pence then, as good as 18 shillings 4 pence now. Twelve pence then as good as twenty shil∣lings now.eleven pence per week, made by Sir Philip Somervile, in case his Rents yielded so much, as well for the 16 Scholars of the ancient Foundation,
as for the 6 Scholars of his own; though it were intended to be * twelve pence per week by Sir William Felton, who to that end, as also for the aug∣mentation of the number of Scholars, gave us the Benefice of Abboldesly, and the Manor thereof, in the Fourteenth Year of King Edward the third over England, and over France the first; which was at, or immediately before the time of Sir Philip Scmerviles Statutes. And then what allow∣ance now, would answer to such so long since, I shall not precisely deter∣mine, though I cannot judge it to have received less then a twentifold improvement; when even in Queen Elizabeths days, Sir Richard Baker notes [but by the Year of our Lord, viz. 1533. which he placeth it in, it must be Hen. 8. his days] that a fat Ox was sold for 26 shillings, and a fat Sheep for three shillings four pence, and other things about the same pro∣portion. And even in our Records I finde, that for the building of a Barn at Abboldesly Rectory, the Colledge contracted with one Jo: Har∣wold a Carpenter for 100 shillings, Anno Dom. 1391, which now would cost 100 pound. SECT. 10. But the  is, that of Lesley Bishop of Ross, who writes, That our Colledge was builded and endowed with ample Reve∣nues by Jo: Balliol King of Scots. The second contrary hereunto, is, That Lands of great value were setled upon the Colledge for its maintenance, by the true Founders; but were taken away again, forsooth, by Jo: Balliol King of Scots. These are meer Empusa's, having no more to go with but one leg, which is the imagination of their Author. The first where∣of, needs no other confutation then the Evidence of this History, which shews, That his Father and Mother Founded this House, and endowed the same with a competent Revenue. I confess 'tis a common, but almost impardonable Error of Historians, to pin their Faith on other Mens sleeves, when they cannot, or will not, take the pains to finde out the truth: So impatient of labor, saith Thucidides in his History of the Pelo∣ponesian War, with many is the search of truth, that they are apt to turn to, and take for current that which is next to hand. Five or six more besides Lesley, write the same with him, deriving it by Tradition one from ano∣ther, or else all from some single Author of credit amongst them, which becomes like a Dog of good creance in the Pack, which at a loss, no soon∣er spends, then all the rest follow him with open mouths, without ever laying their noses to the ground: And of these, some say it was Anno 1263. Pitsaeus saith, That An. 1263. and yet in the time of Edw. 1. (which is a flat contradiction) Jo: Balliol K. of Scots, an E∣xile in Engl. built this Coll. Balaeus, in the life of our Rog: whelpdale, saith, That Jo∣hannes de Bal∣liolis Scoto∣rum Rex con∣didit Collegi∣um Ballionea∣se & honestis possessionibus locupletavit.Others, 1262. Others, 1265. all of them make their contra∣diction the greater in adjuncto, by how much they are nearer the truth for the time: inasmuch as Jo: Balliol was not King of Scots till Anno 1300, a meer Childe when our Colledge was Founded, and then a younger Bro∣ther too. Some have Knighted our Founder, and say, That our Colledge was built by Sir Jo: Balliol, being then an Exile, 1262. But I demand,
How could he be an Exile in England, and himself an English Man, and three or four of his Ancestors? or what Record [for I never found any] is it that gives him the Title of Miles, or Eques auratus? The reason of their gratification might be in favour of his Son John, King of Scots, least the said King should be accounted an Hibris, in Erasmus his sense in his ; or a Mule in the sense of those, who by a like Metaphor have called Cyrus so, for being more noble on his Mothers then Fathers side; and that by regarding his Personal Atchievements onely, being ig∣norant perhaps of his noble Extraction: But I am afraid they were led hereunto by the Title of Dominus, given him in Latin, which they had no other English for but Sir. Some come in and say, That albeit John Balliol King of Scots builded not this Colledge, yet he Endowed it, or at least made large additions to the Revenue. But if this be true, then this Revenue must be in France, England, or in Scotland. The first I never heard any one affirm, though he might have enough there to do it withal, about Gailzard in Normandy, the Castle whether he retired himself, and where he dyed very old and blinde, as Hector Boethius writes; albeit the other four fore-named Seigneuries the same Hector Boethius elsewhere af∣firmeth to have been given to Edw: of Caernarvon with the French Lady, which he the said Edward marryed. The second I have searched for in the Tower of London, and found nothing of it. The third were most likely to be found amongst the Scotish Records there: But these were then so lately brought thither by Cromwel, that they had not been digest∣ed into method, and now are return'd again (since His Majesties return) up∣on the Petition of the Scots, inasmuch as they concerned their Estates, as was pretended: But upon search made, there was found the whole proceeding in the matter of the Covenant, which Argyle and his Complices would not have had discovered. Till some of these can be produced to prove their Assertion, it must pass for a Fable: and if any one of them were true, 'tis very pro∣bable we might find something in our Treasury which might give us a light in the business; it being very strange that our Predecessors should have been so careful as to have preserved personal & such transient things, as old Bonds for the payment of monies, which now for hundreds of Years have been past recovery, meanwhile neglect things of so great con∣cern as the real Endowment of our Colledge. Now for the second, Where could any Land fall into the hands of John Balliol King of Scots power to take away? If you say in Scotland, indeed you may sooner per∣swade men to believe it, then to take the pains to go thither and find it out. But I demand, How our Founder being English, should leave Land to this Colledge in Scotland, who never had any there, unless in right of his Lady Dervorgille? The which, had John Balliol King of Scots taken it away, certainly his Son and Successor Edward Balliol, would have re∣stored again, since we find him so much a Well-willer to his Grandfathers
Benefaction, that he confirmed the Land and Statutes unto us, which Sir Philip Somervile gave, as hereafter more at large shall appear. I might let these things bleed to death upon these Considerations; but that which at once cuts the Throat of the Dispute, is, That we find John de Balliol, afterwards King of Scots, confirming his Fathers and Mothers Charity, as I shall hereafter shew by the Deed it self under Seal, so far was he from the guilt of this Sacriledge. Indeed this Balliol, when King, making with his Scots an impression upon the Territories of Edward the first, King of England, who had fastened the Crown on his Head before, was rendered odious to the English for this his Ingratitude; which also occasion'd the said King Edward his Demand of those three fore-mention∣ed Seignuries, with 60000 Crowns in Gold upon the Marriage aforesaid: which was done, saith Hector Boethius, to be revenged on Balliol for joyn∣ing with the King of France against him: And it happens in Fame as in Fortune, that He who is falling shall not want help to his precipitation. 'Tis the first stone that is thrown at a Man, which may be said to kill him, all the rest being cast upon him by example: and thus it fared with John de Balliol King of Scots: He was guilty of this Ingratitude, and therefore Fame must render him so of the other Crime. But Arguments seem not to be wanting for his defence in this too. The worst that can be said of him is a kind of an Apology for him, and 'tis of Tacitus, viz. That Be∣neficia eousque laeta sunt, dum exolvi possunt; ubi multum antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur: which is as much as we are wont to say, viz. That great Injuries and great Curtesies are never forgiven. The second is, That having now no need more of the King of England for his settlement, he thought hereby to come into favor with his Scots for his preservation, ha∣ving lost their affections before for swearing Fealty to the King of Eng∣land, which his Scots would be tender of suffering him to do; though in∣deed it were a due, in regard the Scotish Kingdom, from the very first establishment thereof in Britany, hath been held of the Kings of England in Vassalage: whose several Kings Homages are Recorded in Verse by Harding, even from the time of Athelston, as we find in Bakers Chro∣nicle in the time of And this Homage was demanded by K. H. 8. and justified by the sword. See our Chronicles in temp. H. 8.Edw. 4. The third is, That paying his devoir to the King of England, he would have infring'd the League with, and for∣feited the protection of France, signified by the double Tressure counter∣flowr'd, wherewith the Scotish Lion is guarded. The fourth is, that of Buchanan, who writes, That Macduffe a great Man in Scotland, being slain, his Brother little hoping for Justice there, appealed to the King of England for redress: at the hearing whereof, Balliol King of Scots being commanded to descend from the Bench to the Bar, took the matter in great indignation. The fifth is, That herein the King of Englands Ob∣ligation laid upon John de Balliol King of Scots, was the less, when in the decision of the Controversie between the said Balliol and Bruis, he
had done no more then what he must have done to any of his Subjects; it being clear that Balliol was Heir at the Common Law to the Crown of Scotland: Nay had he, in a Case between Subject and Subject, determined an Inheritance to an Heir of a younger Sister, he might have assigned to the right Heir something in Compensation: but what Compensation could have been made for a Kingdom? This Act therefore of Edw. the first, rendred him the Justinian of the Scots, as other things gained him the title of the English Justinian. From whence nevertheless some [as Hector Boethius notes] have endeavored to eclipse the Honor of Edw. 1. and of that Bruis [who by the Scots was surnamed The Noble] saying, That King Edward promised Bruis the decision of the Crown to him, pro∣vided, he would hold it of him in Vassalage; and that Bruis should an∣swer, That he would not betray the Liberties of his Country for a King∣dom: and yet that the same Bruis afterwards, at the Fight at Dunbar a∣gainst Balliol, should privately charge all his Friends to give back from the rest of the Scots, upon a promise made him by King Edward, that he should be King in case of Victory: which being so done, did so disanimate the rest of the Scots, that they yielded the day, and became a subject of spoyl to the Enemy. But King Edward, Though he loved the Treason, esteemed the recompense too good for the Traytor. SECT. 11. Now from the  and , I proceed to the , and herein first to the Original Government. The House [for it's called Domus sive Aula de Balliolo] was governed at first onely by Procu∣rators of the Founders own appointment, till Devorgilla gave it Statutes: whereby, amongst other things, she impowered the Scholars to choose them a Principal out of their own Company. The Tenor whereof, word for word, and letter for letter, is as follows; Devorgulla de Galweda Domina de Balliolo dilectis in Christo fratri Hu∣goni de Hertilpoll, & Mro Willo de Menyl salutem in Domino sempiternam: Ʋtilitati filiorum & scolarium nostrorum Oxoniae commorantium affectu▪materno providere cupientes, omnia inferius annotata volumus mandamus & precipimus ab eis inviolabiliter observari. Ad Honorem sc. Domini nostri Jesu Christi & gloriose matris sue Marie, nec non & Sanctorum omnium. Imprimis volumus & ordinamus quod Scholares omnibus & singulis teneantur diebus Dominicis & festis Principalioribus divino interesse officio, nec non ser∣monibus seu predicationibus in eisdem festis & diebus nisi contigerit aliquem ex eis impediri propter urgentem necessitatem vel evidentem utilitatem, ceteris vero diebus diligenter Scolas exerceant & studio intendant secundum Statuta Universitatis Oxonie, & secundum formam inferius annotatam. Ordina∣mus etiam quod Scolares nostri teneantur, nostris Procuratoribus obedire in omnibus que ex, nostrâ Ordinatione concessione commissione ad orum regi∣men,
& utilitatem pertinere noscuntur. Item Volumus quod Scolares nostri ex semetipfis eligant unum Principalem, cui ceteri omnes humiliter obediant in his que officium Principalis contingunt secundum Statuta & consuetudines inter ipsos usitatas & approbatas. Predictus autem Principalis postquam le∣gitime fuerit electus nostris Procuratoribus presentetur, nec aliquid de suo officio exerceat, antequam ab eis auctoritate nostra in prefata officio fuerit institutus. Ceterùm statuimus quod Scolares nostri procurant tres missas celebrari singulis annis solenniter, pro anima dilecti mariti nostri Domini Johannis de Balliol, & pro animabus predecessorum nostrorum omniumque fidelium defunctorum, imo & pro nostra salute & incolumitate. Ita quod prima missa celebretur in prima Hebdomada Adventus Domini, & secunda in Hebdomada Septua∣gessime, & tertia in prima Hebdomada post octavas Pasche: & fiant predicte misse de Sancto Spiritu, vel de Beata Virgine, vel pro defunctis secundum dis∣positionem Procuratorum. Singulis etiam diebus, tam in prandio quam in Caena dicant benedictionem antequam comedant, & post refectionem gra∣tias agant: Et orent specialiter pro anima dilecti mariti nostri superius nomi∣nati, & pro animabus omnium predecessorum nostrorum imo & liberorum de∣functorum, pro incolumitate etiam nostra & liberorum ceterorumque amico∣rum nostrorum vivorum: Item & pro nostris Procuratoribus secundum for∣mam antiquitùs usitatam. Et ut melius provideatur sustentationi pauperum ad quorum utilitatem intendimus laborare, volumus quod ditiores in Societate Scolarium nostrorum ita temperatè studeant vivere ut pauperes nullo modo gra∣ventur propter expensas onerosas; & si contigerit totam communitatem Scolari∣um nostrorum in expensis communibus aliqua septimana excedere portionem à nobis eis impersam, volumus & precipimus districtè quod ad solutionem illa∣rum expensarum excedentium, nihil omnino recipiatur ultra unum denarium in una septimana ab eis qui secundum discretionem, & arbitrium Procurato∣rum nostrorum judicantur impotentes & insufficientes ad talem illarum ex∣pensarum solutionem faciendam. Si aequalis portio deberet ab omnibus Sociis exhiberi, praedicta tamen nolumus excedi ad magnam vacationem quae durat à Translatione B. Thomae Martyris, us{que} ad festum B. Luce, nec etiam ad septimanas in quibus occurrunt festa Nativitatis Dominice Circumcisionis Epi∣phanie Pasche & Pentecostes, nec inaliis casibus in quibus Procuratores no∣stri judicavrint illud omittendum. Volumus etiam Procuratores nostros di∣ligentem habere examinationem super prefata Scolarium nostrorum impotentia & quod Scolares ipsi ad Procuratores accedant cum omni confidentia pro eorum necessitate intimanda. Et si contigerit aliquem vel aliquos de Scolaribus no∣stris contra ordinationem illam murmurare, aut occasione istius ordinationis pauperiores verbo vel signo aliquo provocare, volumus quod Scolares nostri te∣neantur sub juramento nobis prestito nomina taliter murmurantium aut provo∣cantium nostris Procuratoribus revelare: qui quidem Procuratores habita su∣per hoc sufficienti probatione, autoritate presentium sine spe redeundi ipsum vel ipsos ejiciant indilatè. Statuimus etiam, quod Scolares nostri communiter
loquantur Latinùm, & qui passim contra fecerit, à Principali corripiatur; Et si bis aut ter correptus se non emendaverit à communione mense separetur per se comedens & ultimus omnium serviatur: Et si incorrigibilis manserit per Hebdomadam, à Procuratoribus nostris eficiatur. Volumus etiam quod qualibet altera Hebdomada inter Scolares nostros in eadem domo disputetur unum Sophisma & determinetur, & hoc fiat circulariter ita ut Sophistae oppo∣nant & respondeant, & qui in Scholis determinaverint determinent, Si verò aliquis Sophista ita provectus fuerit quod merito possit in brevi in Scolis determinare, tunc ei dicatur à Principali quod prius determinet domi inter Socios suos. In fine autem cujuslibet disputationis praefigat Principalis diem disputatione sequentis, & disputationem regat & garrulos cohibeat & assig∣net Sophisma proximè disputandum, opponentem respondentem & determina∣torem ut sic melius valeant providere. Consimili modo fiat qualibet altera Hebdomada de questione. Praecipimus etiam Scolaribus nostris firmiter in∣jungentes, ut  a Corpore's Case (such as Will: Wright the Master gave in the Raign of Phil: and Mary. See the Register) wherein the Priest carryed the Host. It was the Dea∣cons Office Portare, i. e. to move and remove the Altar, and all the Implements of it, Aug. lib. quaest. ex u∣troque mixt. nam utique Altare portaret & vasa ejus; which if not St. Augustines, it was one that lived be∣fore him, vid. Cens. in append. tom. 4. oper. Aug. p. 416. See the Holy Table, name and thing.Portatorium quod eis pro anima dilecti mariti nostri concessi∣mus diligenter custodiant, nec aliquo modo permittant illud impignorari, vel quocunque titulo alienari. Habeant etiam Scolares nostri unum pauperem Scolarem per Procuratores nostros assignatum cui singulis diebus reliquias mense sue teneantur erogare, nisi Procuratores nostri illud decreverint omittendum. Ʋt autem omnia & singula predicta à nostris Scolaribus tempore Procurato∣rum quorumcunque inviolabiliter observentur, presens scriptum Sigilli nostri munimine roboravimus. Datum apud Botel in Octavis assumptionis gloriosae Virginis Marie, Anno gratiae M C C. octogesimo secundo. SECT. 12. The Office of Procurators, [in whose hands had been the Government of the House from the very first Foundation till now] did not upon the choice of a Principal cease; the said Principal and Scholars being strictly obleiged to obey them, as you may observe in the perusal of these Statutes of Dervorgille, two years after the publication whereof, which was 1284 did she under her Seal, put a final establishment to the House for perpetuity, by Letters full of Piety and Publick-spiritedness, di∣rected to R. Sclikebury a Minorite: to whose discretion she thereby com∣mitted the choice of her Attornyes and Procurators to be made in her Name; the Scholars, before this, having chosen Walter Fodringheye to be Principal according to the Statutes. Whereupon Dervorgille and the rest of the Executors of John de Balliol had made a Grant to the said Walter Fo∣dringheye, Principal, and the Scholars, of all the Goods of John de Balliol sor rhe perpetuation of the House. Ad perpetuationem domus de Balliol quam ille feliciter inchoavit & perpetuare decreverat, si mortis auctor & vite sii concessisset suum adimplere propositum, are the very words of the Grant,
dated Anno 1282. Whereupon divers obligations were now Sealed to the said Walter Fodringheye anc the Scholars, for the payment of moneyes due to John de Balliol: whereof one was from Walter Balliol Rector of Wickford, for the payment oe 59 pounds sterling 1282: and another from Stephen de Ewn Rector de Milford, for the payment of 44 pounds 13 shillings 4 pence, part of the 100 pound assigned to him by John de Balliol's Executors of the debt of Alan Fitz Count [Ex debito Alani Filii Comitis] This Bond was dated in festo Sancte Margarete 1285. SECT. 13. The said Grant of Dervorgille, and the rest, was backed with the Authority of the Bishop of Lincoln by Letters under his Seal, which first gives the Society the Style of Master and Scholars, the Tenor whereof is as followeth. Vniversis sancte Matris Ecclesie filiis, ad quos presentes litere pervenerint. Oliverus permissione divina Lincoln Episcopus, salutem in Domino. Cum Nobilis Mulier Deoque devota Dervorguilla de Galewich Domina de Balli∣olo ad honorem & laudem summe & individue Trinitatis gloriosissime Virginis Marie genitricis vnici Filii Dei, Beate Virginis & Martyris Katerine, a totius Curie Celestis, & ad utilitatem totius Ecclesie Militantis & stabilimen∣tum Ʋniversitatis Oxon pro anima Nobilis Viri Pie Recordationis Domin Johannis de Balliolo quondam sponsi ejus, & pro animabus omnium Predeces∣sorum, ac pro salute propria omniumque Successorum, Locum quendam cum Edificiis & omnibus pertinentiis quem Domum Scolarium de Balliolo censuit nuoupandum, in nostra Diocesi apud Oxon, ubi viget studium generale, de novo ordinaverit, & in subsidium perpetuum sustentationis Magistri dicte Do∣mus de Balliolo & Scholarium ejusdem assignaverit, eosque Philosophiam audire decreverit, & quousque in artibus cessaverint inibi commorari, Ex qui∣bus incliyti moribus & scientia prediti exeuntes in religionem & alibi mag∣num fructus cumulum produxerint, & adhuc majorem Domino producent, Locumque predictum sen domum terris possessionibus ac variis proventibus in tantum pia devotione dotaverit atque ditaverit, quod studentes ibi congrue po∣tuerint sustentari, sic quod nostri debitum officii charitatis & pietatis opera com∣probaverit, precipue que dvinae laudis ampliationem, curie caelestis veneratio∣nem & totius Ecclesiae Militantis exaltationem ac vniversitatis predicte fulci∣mentum respiciunt & honorem. Nos dicte Nobilis Domine devotionem in Do∣mino commendantes sciatis dictorum Magistri & Scolarium Locique praedi∣cti seu domus perpetuationem cum terris possessionibus & rebus aliis eidem do∣mui appropriatis seu appropriandis in posterum ratam habentes, & gratam ipsum approbamus, & tenore presentium confirmamus idemque stabilitatis & firmitatis perpetue, quantum ad nos pertinet, robur plenissimum impertimur. Salvis piscopali auctoritate & Lincoln. Ecclesiae dignitate. In cujus ei tesstmonium sigillum nostrum presentibus est appensum. Datum apud Lidgton Secundo Junii, Anno Domini MCCLXXXIIII.
SECT. 14. By which Letters it appeares that the House is Dedi∣cated to Saint Katerine in particular: whom Spondanus in his Epitome of Baronius, will have to be an abbreviation of Hecaterina. [a Name, saies he, which seemes to be derived from Hecate given by the Gentils, she being a Gentile born viz. at Alexandria, though afterwards she might haply be called Dorothea, as Ruffinus names her at what time she became Christian] though whence she took the name of Dorothea, Spondanus does not find, saying she was better known by the name of Katerina, and so she is written in the rest of our Records * as well as here, and indeed Dorothea and Ka∣terina have two distinct Holydaies in the Kalender, viz. Dorothea, Feb. 6. and Katerina, Nov. 25. Now by what has been said it will appear how little reason there is for any to marvel. 1. Why she's written with K. and not with C. and much lesse upon consideration that even Karissimus is so too. And that it is so, is evident by several writings, which is a∣greeable to the manner of the antients, with whom the Letter C of the Moderns had mostly the force of an S, as in ΑΣΣΑΡΙΟΝ  assarium. So it is written in Arias Montanus his apparatus de Siclo, and in the Specimen of the antient Greek Characters exhibited in Prologom▪ ad Biblia Polyglot. out of the Alexandrian Mss. Ps. 1. v. 1. viz. ΜΑΚΑΡΙΟ∣ΣΑΝΗΡΟΣΟΥΚΕΠΟΡΕΥΘΗΕΝΒΟΥΓΗΑΣΕΒΩΝ, &c. . In which Specimen there are divers Characters that are found indifferently both in Greek and Latin Alphabets, which comes to pass by reason that as the Latin Alphabet owes its Original to the Greek; so the Greeks, after the Roman Conquest, received from the Latines both Lerters and Words too: such as , Mat. 27. 65.  Mark, 15. 16.  Joh. 2. 15. So that it will be in vain to inquire unto what Alphabet the Letter C doth originally belong: the inquiry should rather be, what force it carries in either Language? In Greek it seemes to have had alwaies the force of an S, it being a Σ: but in Latin it hath a middle pronunciation between that of K and S, as Quintia∣nus Stoa hath acutely noted in verse, as may be seen in Scapula's Lexicon. C Linguam adpulsos compellit ad usque molares. K Fauc es formant media cum parte palati. S Cum fit peragit colliso sibila dente. The pronunciation therefore of K beginning at the Throat, that of S, at the Fore-teeth, that of C, between both; it followes that C hath a mid∣dle pronounciation between K and S, the which being very difficult, its pronounced sometimes like K, and sometimes like S. For the preserva∣tion of the force whereof in the French and Spanish Languages, where it has the consonancy of S its noted by a little s at the foot of it: as in façon,
which is pronounced fasson, and Alanson, which is pronounced Alanson, and Garçon, which is pronounced Garson (from whence Garcio in Sr. Philip Somervyles Statutes, comes, h. e. a Boy. Magister habeat Gartionem fibi mi∣nistrantem) with many other words in French. Alcamiento rebellion in Spanish, Alcanado obteynd Coraon the heart which are pronounced Al∣samiento, Corason, Alcansado, with an abundance of other words. And these things serve in short to justify the Ancients against those Moderns, who are ever apt to censure those times and persons of ignorance, and that so high∣ly as if no reason could be given of many things they wrot and spake. I shall instance in Thomas Aquinas [because he flourished about this time] his Syndersis: which they will have, sorsooth to be a great peice of igno∣rance; when indeed it argued rather knowledge both in the signification and pronunciation of the Greek. The word  is rightly defined by him, to be a natural habit of practick principles, which He, part 1, hath written in Latin Characters Syndersis, because that wheresoever τ followes ν, it has the consonancy of a δ, as  is pronounced panda, a thing ob∣served by the natural Greeks to this day. Upon the same ground P con∣ceive it to be, that Lud. Vives upon St. Aust. de Civ. Dei l. 22 c, 11. ex∣cuseth Tully for writing  insteed of  in his relation of Aristotles opinion, l. 1. Tusc. q. saying that they are the same in pronunci∣tion. Modern Editions therefore have done amiss in reading it  in the Text, and  in the Margin▪  in neither: where∣by they have made it not Tullie's but an effect of their own ignorance. Qu bene vertendo & describends malè ex Ciceronianis bonis sua fecerunt non bo∣n b Ter. Ench. in prolog.we need goe no further then our own language for the proof of th An Errour observed even in Lucians time, Anno 110 who in his Di∣alogue called  (h. e. judicium vocalium) wherein Σ brings his Action against Τ, making the 5 vowels Judges of the controversy, saies that T hath not only been injurious to Σ, but also to Δ and Ζ and THgr;, and almost all the Elements of the Letters▪ for saies he, Surripuit mihi meam  pro qua vult dici , quod sane contrarium est om∣nibus legibus.premises: wherein we find Abington or Abinton to be pronounced and written Abindon or Abingdon: so also Huntington Huntingdon; Farington Farindon. Cicero therefore in Oratory saies, that Ʋsum loquendi populo concessi, scientiam mihi reservavi. And Quintil. saies, Orthographiam consu▪ etudini servire, ideoque saepe mutari. And to Apologize, not for Letters only and pronunciation, but for words, which we may hereafter meet with in these Records, or elsewhere, I will alleadge that of the Poet. Multa renascuntur quae jam cecidere, cadentque Quae nunc sunt in honore vocabula, si volet usus Quem penes arbitrium est & jus & Norma loquendi. But to return from this digression, to our St. Katerine again, I say in the Second place that if this, and that of Spondanus be true, they are mistaken
that have written the word with an H as Catherina: and they more, who imagine it to be derived from , and therefore [imagining a mistake in the  Gregorian Kalender word Catherina, which our Rubrick followes] they write it Catharina, which Errour both our Universities have been guil∣ty Printed at Paris 1583.of, in their Books of Verses upon the Arrivall▪ of our Queen, and her Mar∣riage to our Soveraign Lord K. Charles the Second: perhaps led thereunto by the Breviary and Mass-Book, in both which it is Catharina, but falsly. For the writing of the word Catharina in the Roman Calender seems to be grounded upon the Legend of St Catherine, the summe whereof is as fol∣lowes. This could be but a Regulus, Egypt being subject to the Ro∣man Empire, and so had been from the time of Cleopatra. And this Regulus or Governour is said to be,  the best, but a Gentleman of Rome. There was at Alexandria a King, called * Cost▪ very rich and glorious, but for a long time without issue, and being Pagan, offered many Sacrifices to the Gods for issue: but, because Devils cannot Create a humane Soul, they were all in vain: Mean while a certain Philosopher, named Alphoa∣bius dwelt in Greece, to whom the said King sent to know whether he should have any issue by his Queen? To whom the Philoso∣pher made answer, that it proceeded not from any defect in nature, but Divine Providence, and therefore advised him to offer Sacrifices. But the King replying that many Sacrifices had been offered already, the Philosopher rejoyn'd, that though we call many Gods, yet reason dictated that there was one above all the rest, * and therefore advised the King The Gentiles, in those times, did make, for the most part, these divisions of Gods. That there was One Great God, others were little ones: so Epi∣phnius l. 3. tom. 1. hres. 76. Dus primus dat omnibus om∣nia; dij vero omnibus aliqua largiuntur, Jamblichus de myst. c. 33. Alios esse superos Deos, Alios inferos. Arnob. l. 7. which and much more, is collected of them by the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 4. c. 15. de opitib opi∣nionum Gentilium▪de Deo.to cast one Image of Gold to the great God of gods, and to doe Sacrifice to him for issue, which the King commanded to be done accordingly. But besides the intent of the Artisan, there came forth the Image of our Crucified Saviour, which when brought into the Temple, all the Idols fell down be∣fore. Whereupon shortly after, the Queen was delivered of a Girl; which, from the ruine of the said Idols, was named Ca∣therina, which implies Ruine; for it is compounded [or rather followes the composition] of  and , capio, corripi or invalid, which by reason of the aspitate in , is made  in composition, and  in the Praeterperfect Tense; and therefore Pomrius in his Sermons de S. Cath. is mistaken, who writes her Catharina, and yet saies it signifies Ruina; where∣as he should have written it Catherina; for  is deturbatio, or ever∣sio *. But to follow this Legend a little farther: She is said to have learn∣ed 2 Cor. 10. 4▪ . ad eversionem seu destructi∣onem muniionum. 2 Cor. 13. 10. . ad dificationem, & non ad destructionem.all the Liberal Arts by 13 yeares of age; for which reason, she was call∣ed Gemma by the Masters of Greece. Her Father, upon his death bed, charged her to worship this great God of gods, and his Image. Secondly, not to Marry any but one equall to her self in Bloud, Beauty, Learning, and
Riches. Now Father & Mother being both dead, she held the Reyns of the Kingdome with much wisdom, afterwards she travelling to Alexandria lost her way, and lighted upon the Cell of an Hermit, where beholding a Crucifix, she said that that man and she worshiped the same God; and after long discourse she was perswaded by the Hermit to be Married to Christ, as having all those Conditions, which her Father required in her Match∣ing: She yeilded, and dreaming that she was Married to Him, found a Ring upon her Finger in the morning. After this, she confuted many Philosophers, whom Maxentius the Emperour set to dispute with her. She converted the Soldiers which were to guard her in Prison, and after to Ex∣ecution. She caused the Wheeles to be broken which were presented to her to torment her. At last she was beheaded, whose Body the Angels took and buried in Mount Sinai; out of whose bones continually flows an Oyle, which cures the Members of all languid persons. The strangeness of some part of this Relation is enough to make a man distrust the truth of the whole: Wherefore I shall adhere to my Katerina [for if Spondanus be (as he seems) ashamed of the Legend, I see no cause for me to be in love with it.] and that without derogation hereby to the Honour of St. Katerine, or our gratious Queen, who bears the same name, whom Married to our So∣veraign K. CHARLES my Muse thus bespeakes. Qualiter h. e. Por∣tugaliae.Imperium peperit Daughter of Pr. Edw. Son of Ema∣nuel King of Portugal, Mo∣ther to Theo∣dosius Father to Ioh. Duke of Braganza.Caterina Braganzae Taliter id Magno pariat Caterina Brittanno. Quae Caterina [quasi Hecate∣rina & per e∣penthesi Hec∣caterina, ab Heccate] vir go & Martyr. Spond. ad an. 307. Hecate n. no∣men est Dianae▪ Junoni, & Proserpinae accomodatum: quae & tergemina dicitur vel triformis, habens Imperium Lunae, Aeris & subterranearum divitiarum▪ quod C A R. II. hisce nuptiis acquisivisse videatur.Caterina cluens, plus quam Heccaterina vocetur Ʋt cui Tergeminae sors sit superanda d Dianae. Carolus, hâc socia Thalami, Plutonis ad antra Proferat Imperium, sub quo Mercator ad Indos Aequora tutus aret, loculos distentus & auro Quod Tagus & rutilâ volvit Pactolus arenâ. Heroes pariter peperit quos regia Juno, Baetica queis facies, huic vectigalia solvant, Tertia ne dsit tandem Cui summa potestas, Lysiadum ingenio novus & monstrabitur orbis In Lunâ. Imperium non est sed inane quod optas, [Satque super{que} tuum variantia lumina sensit Qualia vel rapidis velox Latonia bigis] Carole, sed castis adolere altari tedis Cum sponsa tali, & quanto felicior es, qui Hanc cuperes, quàm qui totum sibi posceret orbem! These Verses (though Printed in the foresaid Book) I have again Print∣ed here, because that the Supervisors of the Presse have there mistaken them.
But to return; it appears by the premises, That it was not intended that the Scholars of the first Foundation should continue in the House any longer then Quous{que} in Artibus cessaverit, h. e. till they be Masters of Art compleat, in opposition to Inceptors, sc. Beginners or Commencers, as the Cambridge word is, which they preposterously use for such as do stand in the Act, and become compleat Masters. But the rigour of this Sta∣tute was taken off by the Pope of Rome, as I find it verified under the hand of a publick Notary, wherein is specified the Gift of Abboldsley by Sir William Felton; which Instrument bears date, Anno 1520, when Ri: Stubbys was Master: though the Mannor was given, and the Appropria∣tion of the Benefice made long before, as hereafter we shall see. And now the fourth thing observable is, That these Letters of the Bishop give a date to a Deed that bears none: Which is a Writing wherein Dervor∣gille did confirm to God, and to the Blessed Virgin Mary, and to the Principal and Scholars of Balliol, all the Land, with the appurtenances thereof, which Robert Waldron formerly held in Stamfordham and the Howgh in the County of Northumberland [besides the Lands which Sir Jo: de Swinbourn gave them there, that are contained in a Deed by it self] the which Lands, she and the Coexecutors of her once Husband John de Balliol, of happy memory, did buy with a certain parcel of money, as∣signed thereunto by him in his last Will and Testament, Sealed with her own Seal; which must be done before the Bishops Letters of Confirma∣tion: 1. Because therein mention is made of Dervorgilles having even then endowed and enriched the House with divers Possessions and comings in; which, as far as I find and can guess, could not be understood of any other then these. Secondly, because no mention is made [in this Writing] of St. Katerine, which is an Argument that it was of ancienter date then the Bishops Letters, which entitles her as well as the B. Virgin to the Pa∣tronage of the House. SECT. 15. Now that the foresaid Lands in Stamfordham and Howgh were of themselves a Mannor, appears by the first Lease of them that ever was set since they were the Colledges; which Lease was grant∣ed by Walter Fodringheye, the first Principal [whom the Scholars made their Attorney to that intent] to Jo: Lucchefield, viz. That the said Walter had let to him all the Land in the Village of▪ Stamfordham and the Howgh, which belong to the Domain with the Farms, and Rents of free Tenants, Cottages and Husbandmen, with a Mill, Pastures and Feedings, with all other Appriseaments and Approxiaments within and without the Village, excepting the Courts and Amerciaments, &c. and this upon payment of 16 l. 18 s. sterling per annum, which now a Man would think could not be less then 340 l. per annum; and so much I am informed the whole an∣nor to be now at. To this, if you adde the ten Marks due from Hugh
Balliol▪ Sect. 1. now as good as 240 l. and the 100 Marks plundred by Baldwin Wake, worth about 2000 l. now, Sect. 6. and the debt due from Musgrave, ibid. besides those from Walter Balliol and Steven de Ewre, as good as 2000 l. now is, Sect. 12. its enough to render the Colledge very considerable, as being between 4000 and 5000 l. to this may be added, the Houses which Devorgille gave in Oxon, besides the site of the Colledge which cost her 80 Marks sterling, which is as good as 1000 l. now is. Yet so it was, that in Anno 1403. all our Lands in Howgh and Stamfordham, were set for 4 marks 3 s. 4 d. per annum: whereupon I clude, That all our Mannors and Demesns given by Dervorgille, were quickly lost, those onely of Sinburns gift remaining [with exemption from doing any Suit or Service for them at the Court of Stamfordham and Howgh, as by a Let∣ter of Record may appear] of which Lands I take the Rent of 4 marks 3 s. 4 d. aforesaid to be understood; which now a man would think to be improved to 50 or 60 l. This is now set with the Rectory and Demesns of Mickle Benton in one Lease. But the loss of the foresaid Mannor might give occasion to ignorant persons of the ill report raised on John Balliol King of Scats: But why [if any such thing had been done by any of that Family] might it not rather be by Hugh de Balliol, elder Brother to the said John? which Hugh, never paid us for his two Horses before men∣tioned: whom had he been just to his Fathers Elemosynaties here, God might have blessed with longer life to the enjoyment of that Kingdom which his younger Brother John de Balliol lived to possess; a name ne∣vertheless, which proved as unhappy to Scotland, as it had to Eng∣land before, and did to France afterwards. Another reason of di∣minution of Rents [though not of the sweeping away of whole Man∣nors] may be the Tenants living upon the Borders of both Kingdoms, with whom it is no news to deceive their Landlords. In Anno 1412. the Rectory of Benton and Killingworth, and Westdade, with the members there∣of, were set at a Rent: but sub cautione si Scoti omnia vastaverint: so now when they have a minde to make any defalkation of Rent, then Scoti om∣nia devastârunt, or some such thing must fall out, by which Artifice they have, since the beginning of the War, not onely defalcated our Rent, but brought us 500 l. in their debt for Quarter and Contribution: yet so ho∣nest have they been at their last renewing, that they have confessed double the Acres which we demanded of them, according to our old Terriers; and the reason they give, is, That the Acres mentioned in our Terriers are Bishops Acres, one whereof is two of our Statute Acres, which▪ con∣tain forty Perches in length, and four in breadth, and in all 160: and up∣on the last renewing of their Lease, they entred into a Bond of 500 l. to bring in a perfect eier upon Oath, within three Years, of all our Lands in the Howgh, Simfordham and Muckle Benton, &c. which they holdfrom us by Lease.
SECT. 16. Now Dervorgill having bought all the Buildings and place in Horsmongers street without North-gate, in Magdaen Parish, lying between the Land formerly belonging to Jeffrey le Saser on the one part, and the Land of Walter Feteplace on the other, of Thomas Ewe, Son and Heir of John de Ewe Burgess of Oxford, for 80 Marks sterling [as good as 1000 l. now is] and some small quit Rents, as appears, by a Writing without date [wherein she's written Dervourgwilla] gave all the place, Buildings and Appurtenances which were Hers there, to Walter Fodrigheye Principal, and the Scholars of Balliol in Oxon: Witness Oliver Bishop of Lincoln, and Mr. Roger Rodwell then Chancellor of the University, 1284. which was the Manon of the Scholars, as may be seen upon the back-side of Ewes Deed to Dervorgille: whereon is written this, viz. Feoffamen∣tum See the fol∣lowing confir∣mation, from John Balliol afterwards K. of Scots, and Son to our Founder.Thome de Ewe, de Aula nostra in qua manemus: whereof the  Stable and Coach-house, with the adjoyning Tenement next the Ball∣court, with other appurtenances, were not a part; whereof more here∣after. After this, viz. 13 Ed. 1. it appears by Letters Patents, that Dervorgille obtained a License from the King of giving to the House one Messuage [no Balls House] in the Suburbs of Oxon: and this must be about the Year 1286. Her doing of good works continued so long, that they trod upon her heels to Heaven: for the last time that ever we read of any Act of hers, is 1287. when the Executors of Jo: de Balliol, with the consent and assent of her Ladyship, resigned all their power into the hands of Walter de Fodringheye and the Scholars, viz. as well that which they had of or in the Goods of John de Balliol as any other, to any intent or purpose; unless Richard de Sclikbury should happen to be alive, to whom Dervorgille had committed the choice of Attorneys and Procurators for the House, as we said before. After these things we finde John de Balliol [afterwards King of Scots] confirming as well the then Site of the Col∣ledge, as the Lands in Howgh and Stamfordham [given by her] under his Seal [which is the very same with his Fathers and the Colledges] in haec verba. Omnibus Christi fidelibus presens scriptum visuris vel audituris. Johan∣nes de Balliolo filius Domini Johannis de Balliolo salutem in Domino sem∣piternam. Noveritis me vidisse & inspexisse scriptum Karissime Domine ma∣tris mee Domine Devorgille de Galwichia Domine de Balliolo de feofatione & perpetuatione domus Scolarium de Balliolo Oxonie suo sigillo signatum in hec verba. In nomine Sancte Trinitatis & individue unitatis patris fili & Spiritus Sancti, Amen. Gloriosissime▪ Virginis Marie, Virginis & Martyris Katerine beatissime totius{que} curie celestis & ecclesie militātis. Ego Dervorguil: de Galwichia D: de Balliolo in ma propria viduitate & legia potestate ō∣stituta, cupiens & volens quandā Eleemosynā Oxon: prpetuare ubi viget studiū generale, quam bone memorie Ds. Joh: de Balliolo sponsus meus Karissimus cujus anime propitietur altissimus pietatis intuitu quondā suscitante ibidē. Pr
anima videlicet dicti sponsi mei perdilecti & pro animabus patris mei matris mee & omnium predcessorum meorum sc. & pro salute propria prois mee & om∣nium successorum meorū do concedo & in perpetuum pro me & heredibus meis confirmo Mro Waltero de Fodringheye Principali & Sociis suis Scolaribus dictis de Balliolo in Universitate Oxon studentibus & eorum successoribus per legitimam electionem societatem illam intrantibus & in ea commorantibus se∣cundum quedam statuta ad hoc specialiter ordinata & meo sigillo rborota to∣tam The Colledge first setled in Horsmongers∣street.placeam cum edificiis & omnibus suis pertinentiis quam emi de Thoma de Ewe filio & herede Johannis de Ewe burgensis Oxon in Horsmongerstreet in Parochia Beate Marie Magdalene in suburbio Oxon quam quidem pla∣ceam cum edificiis predictis Principali & scolaribus & eorum successoribus pro loco habitationis in perpetuum concedo & assigno. Quem etiam locum do∣mum Scolarium de Balliolo censeo nuncupari, in qua dictos Principalem & Scolares & eorum successores in forma predicta ad dictam societatem electos perpetuo moraturos esse decerno. Cui siquidem domui & scolaribus in eadem, concedonte Domino in perpetuum moraturis totam terram de Stamwortham & de le Howh in Comitatu Northumber. cum omnibus suis pertinentiis concessi assignavi & in subsidium perpetue sustentationis predictorum Principalis & Scolarium & eorum successorum pro me & heredibus meis confirmavi. Quam Call'd Wal∣droa before.quidem terram executores Testamenti Domini Johannis de Balliolo, dilecti sponse mei supradicti emerunt dudum de Domino Roberto * Walraven, pro quadam summa pecunie in dicto Testamento ad hoc specialiter ordinata. omnia vero superdicta dictis Principali & Scolaribus & eorum successoribus dedi concessi & assignavi & libera voluntate mea pro me & heredibus meis confir∣mavi in liberam puram & perpetuam Elemosynam. Et ego & heredes mei omnia predicta dictis Principali & Scolaribus & eorum successoribus, contra omnes mortales warrantizabimus acquietabimus & futuris temporibus de∣fendemus in omnibus & per omnia secundum tenorem cartarum quas cis inde confeci meo Sigillo roboratarum. Et ut hec mea doatio assig∣natio warrantizatio acquietatio & defensio pro me & heredibus meis di∣ctis Principali & Scolaribus & eorum successoribus robur perpetue firmitatis & stabilitatis obtineat presenti scripto sigillum meum est ap∣pensum: his testibus Dominis Antonio Dei gratia tune Dunelm. Epis. & Olivero eadem gratia Episc. Lincoln. Dominis Hugh de Ewre, Johan: de Call'd Rod∣wee before.Swinburn, Roberto de Menevile, Waltero de Camhowe militibus, Mr Rogero de Rowelle, tun Cancellario Ʋniversitatis Oxon: Mro Simone de Gandauno, tum ejusdem ville Archidiacono, Domino Roberto de Avenel, tunc Rectore Ecclesie de Stamwortham, Johan: de Erington, Ricardo Bene∣wich, Willielmo de Saulton, & aliis. Ego vero Johannes de Balliolo filius & Heres Domini Johannis de Balliolo, omnibus predictis inspectis & bene & distincte intellectis ipsa omnia & singula prescripta in omnibus & per omnia secundum quod liberius quietius vel melius predictum est pro me & heredibus meis concedo ratifico & in perpetuum confirmo. t ut
hec mea concessio ratificatio & confirmatio pro me & heredibus meis in omnibus & singulis perpetuum robur firmitatis obtineant, hoc scriptum si∣gillo meo roboratum predictis Scolaribus fieri feci, his testibus Dominis Gilberto de Ʋnfraude Comite de Angus, Roberto filio Rogeri, Rogero de Lo∣necaster, Hugone de Euer, Roberto de Insula, Waltero de Camhowe, Johan∣ne de Swinburn, Hugone de Subyny, Roberto Bertram de Bottal, Rogero Mandat, Rad. de Effingdene, & aliis. There is another Grant of the same John de Balliol, to the very same intent and purpose, and for the most part verbatim the same, witnessed by the same persons, but written with a far different hand: Onely I take one thing material to be observed, viz. That in the Conclusion of the other, He is written barely Filius Domini Johannis de Balliolo; but here he is written, Filius & Heres Domini Johannis de Balliolo: and that there∣fore the former was either before the death of Hugh de Balliol, and this after; or else for that omission that was judged insufficient, and there∣fore received a speedy emendation according to the Tenor hereof. But notwithstanding this confirmation of John de Balliol, Son to our Founders, and afterwards King of Scots as hath been said, I finde no Disclaimer of the Heirs of Robert Waldron, or Walraven, of the Land in Howgh and Stamfordham, bought of him by Dervorgille as aforesaid [a thing requi∣site and usual in those times] which might be the reason why we lost them. Yet doth not this free the Heirs of our Foundress, or of John de Balliol her Son, from the obligation of the Warranties they have given us, in hec verba, sc: Contra omnes mortales, not against their Heirs alone, war∣rantizabimus acquietabimus & futuris temporibus defendemus: which might probably have wrought upon the Royal Spirit of King James, had Doctor Lilly urged it in his Petition, and had not his mistake in the beginning occasion'd a sudden rejection thereof without perusal; which mistake was, That John Balliol King of Scots was our Founder, which that learn'd King knew to be otherwise. SECT. 17. Now K. Ed. 1. taking occasion to banish all Jews out of this Kingdom, with Licence to sell or carry away their moveables onely, all their Lands came into the Kings hands as Escheats. Now I find that of Jews Houses in Oxford, the King, in the nineteenth Year of his Reign, granted to William urnel Provost of Wells, nine Messuages, with their Tenements and Appurtenances [whereof seven were in the Parish of St. Aldates, one in St. Martyns, and another was a School of the Jews] one of those nine Messuages was call'd The Synagogue, where∣unto did belong the entrance in at the great Port or Gate, and the sollar over it; from which great or broad Port o Gate, as it is thought, the House of the Students [now Pembrook Colledge] was call'd Aula Late∣portensis,
or Broadgates-hall. This Synagogue and Port was given to Stephanus de Cornubia, Master of this House, and the Scholars, 35 Ed. 1. The rest of the premises, together with ten Shops, did the same William Burnel bestow upon our said House: For the confirmation whereof, we have Licence of Mortmain, and other Letters Patents from the King, a confirmation of the Gift from Queen Margaret, 8 Edw. 2. [which King was her Son] the disclaim of Edward Burnel, Heir to rhe said William, with all other circumstances of Law contain'd in a multitude of Writings; which makes me wonder how it comes to pass that we have scarce one of those Houses remaining to us in St. Aldats Parish, and none of the shops. [That House in Grandpont [vulgò Grampool] though in the same Parish See Sect. 18. in Alban-hall.now, yet then in St. Michaels at the South * Port [which St. Michaels hath been since consolidated with St. Aldats] being of another Founda∣tion] unless it were to make way for the Building of Christ Church, called the Cardinals Colledge. And indeed it was mostly to that end; in recompense whereof, we were promised Lands, Houses, or Money, but never received any, as appears under the hand of a Publick Notary of the Bishop of London, Anno 1529. The Year before the Donation of these Houses, viz. 7 Edw. 2. I find that Henry Harla, Professor of Divinity, was Chancellor of the University, and so was he the Year following: but who was the next Year I do not find: The Chancellors place being not made perpetual before 21 Ed. 4. John Russel Bishop of Lincoln be∣ing the first that ever so enjoyed it, as Godwin of Bishops will tell you: But this by the way. SECT. 18. But in order before this, I should have mentioned the gift of Richard Hunsington and Walter Horkstow, who gave two Messuages; one call'd St. Hughs-hall, the other Hert-hall, Anno 18 Edw. 1. confirm∣ed by Letters Patents. It appears by a Court Roll of the Major of Oxon, held Mercurii in Festo Sancti Edw. Regis, Anno Edw. 3. 19. that we had a Tenement in St. Mildreds Parish [the Church whereof stood where Lincoln Colledge Ball-Court now is] called St. Hughes-hall, which my Friend, who brought me a Transcript of the Record, would have to be understood of this St. Hughs-hall, which I contend to be part of our Colledge: he supposing it not to be so, but that it was the Site of the Divinity School [which the University pays us Rent for, to this day, whereof elsewhere] But whatever the name of the said Site of the Di∣vinity School was, it is as clear as may be that they are distinct things given us by distinct Benefactors: for this St. Hughes-hall, which I will have to be a part of our Colledge (together with that Hert-hall) was given, as you see, by Richard Hunsington and Walter Horkstow, Anno 18 Edw. 1. but the place of the site of the Divinity School was given by Jeffrey Horkstow and Richard Staynton, Anno 11 Ed. 2. He will like∣wise
have Hert-hall here mentioned too, to be that slip of Ground an∣nexed to Alban-hall, which is proved to be otherwise by the same obser∣vation. This Hert hall being given by Rich: Hunsington and Walter Hork∣stow, but that piece of Land was given by Richard Hunsingoure, of the legacy of Walter de Fodringheye, whereof elsewhere. Many Halls bear∣ing the same name heretofore, no Argument can be drawn Hart-hall, which remains to this day, is confessed to be neither of these, which ar∣gues many Halls to have been of the same name.from the Identity thereof to the sameness of the places; * nei∣ther is it likely that we should pay four shillings a Year quit Rent to the King for that piece of Ground by Alban-hall (as the Record imports) and receive but two shillings our selves from Merton Colledge There are Writings wch mention a Hart-hall of ours, given by Ric: Hunsin∣goure in Saint Johas Parish, for the which we were to pay 4 s. per annum to the Hospital of St. John: but neither could this be that he mean∣eth, for the reasons afore∣said. And now mention being made of Saint Johns Parish, we must note that there were two St. Johns; the one Saint John de Mer∣ton, which was so called, be∣cause annexed to Merton Col. the other St. Johns Chappel just opposite to that, and on the other side of the Town, which now joyns to Hert-hall: At the four Gates also of the Town, were four Churches, viz. St. Michaels at the North Port, St. Michaels at the South Port, St. Bodocks at the West Gate, and Trinity Chappel at the East. Bullocks-lae is not so called from a corruption of Bodock, but from one Bullock a Scavenger, who obtain'd leave of building a House there, whose precedent others followed: before which time, it was a void place to receive, as I am informed, the dirt of the Town; as also all that Green was, which lyes on the North-side of the Way to High-bridge, and levelled about 30 Years since.. Now besides these Letters Patents, I finde another Charter of a latter date for the confirmation of Chimers-hall and the Schools, as also for the confirmation of those places for the enlarge∣ment of our House standing near them: of one whereof Walter Fodring∣heye was the Donor [which three places must be where the Site of the Colledge now is, as St. Hughes-hall and Hert-hall probably were] But the said Chimers-hall was in Sydyerd-street, in the Parish of St. Edward the King; and this was given by Hugo de Sancto Yvon, and Jeffrey Horkstow, 4 Ed. 2. whereof [sc. Chimers-hall] more hereafter. The Year before this, viz. 3 Edw. 2. two places of Land in Horsmongers street, for the en∣largement of the House, were given by Gilbert de Pomfrait, and Thomas Humbleton, which lay between the Land of John Slatter on the West, and the land of the Monks of Durham on the East, containing 180 Feet in length, and 50 Feet in breadth, which is all the East part of the Col∣ledge. This is half way met by a piece of land extended from the Street Westward to the Colledge Garden, which we hold from Magdalen Col∣ledge, the Lease whereof was renewed Anno 1663. with one other Te∣nement extending from the way over against the East end of St. M. Mag∣dalens Church, to the land of the Monks of Dunelm, now Trinity Col∣ledge; passed over by Jeffrey Sawser to Walter Fodringheye, with liberty to give it to this Colledge by a Deed without date (but it may be known from the observation of the time in which Fodringheye lived) obliegeing himself to acknowledge a Fine; which I only note by the way, that Fines were then wont to be levyed. And this Tenement seeming to meet that gi∣ven by Ponfrait and Humbleton, as it were at right Angles, does therewith bound all the back parts of the Colledge on two sides; the one abbutting on the little Garden and part of the Back-side of Trinity Colledge on the
East, and the other on the same little Garden on the North, and answers in length to the measure of 180. (centum & quater viginti, as it is in the Deed) feet before given (at the least) for the length; the breadth of 50 feet, extending from Trinity lane end, to the Chimney next the Colledge Gate. In the Box, cornering the Foundation of our Colledge. SECT. 19. Anno Dom. 1293. * Oliver Bishop of Lincoln did grant to the Master and Scholars [for so they are call'd in the Grant] Li∣cense, That, in as much as by reason of the frequency of Disputations and Lectures, they could not attend Divine Offices of the Parish Church [then in the Patronage of the Abbot of St. Mary Oseney] they might celebrate them in their own Oratory within the House, not prejudicing the Parish-Church in regard of Oblations and Obventions: Provided also, That they visited the Parish Church in the greater Solemnities of the Year, as other Scholars were bound to do to the Parishes wherein they lived, as in the said Grant is signified, wherein no leave was given them of celebra∣ting the Sacraments, which was that which the House aymed at, not one∣ly as a convenience, but an advantage to themselves; but was never granted them [till it was done by the Authority of the Pope] though they afterwards prepared a better Fabrick, which they called by the name of St. Katerines Chappel. Indeed its being owned by a Saint, and that such a Saint as they esteemed St. Katerine to be, methinks should have moved the Bishop: But why they should think to have it done upon the naked account of Chappel, more then of that of an Oratory, there was little reason, if we regard a Chappels first institution, which was to be onely a portable Oratory, all others being fixt and standing. The French Historians [as it seems by the Treasury of the History of France] make mention of a certain silken Banner of a Vermillion colour, call'd Oriflam∣me, from the Flames of Fire and colour of Gold represented therein; which Ensign they say, was never born but in a Battle against Infidels: but when once their Kings abused it against the Christians, it vanished as it came, that is, by Miracle. This Standard was kept in the Church of St. Denys in France (near unto Paris) wherein, as in our Westminster Abbey, their Kings are Interred: But some say, that the English being rendered Masters of Paris, burned the Banner with the Maid of Orleans. This Oriflamme, they say, was the Cope of St. Denys; and that their Kings not able to have the Body of St. Martin entire for their ordinary Guard, found a means to have his Cope, which in French is called Chappe or Chape; and commonly their Kings, who could not assist at the publick Service, were wont to have Clergy Men who followed them with portable Oratories, which they called Chappels and Chapelains, from this Chappe, h. e. Cope of St. Martin, and that other of St. Denys: and so much for the derivation of the word Chappel. Though portable Oratories Sozo∣men
testifies to have been first invented by Constantine, who in his War∣like Expeditions carryed about a Tabernacle, made after the form of a Temple, wherein the Assemblies were gathered together for Gods Wor∣ship, l. 1. c. 8. But notwithstanding these things, the Parisians think not themselves destitute of a Guard, viz. The most Rich Cabinet of St. Geneuefue, whom they esteem the Protectress of their City [though St. Denys be tutelar Saint of France in general] and therefore they supersti∣tiously ascribe the same power to this Rich Cabinet made to the honour, and kept in the Church of that Saint there, as others have done to Talis∣manical Figures: the Hebrew derivation whereof seems to be from , whence comes  stella, draco, and  numerus: inasmuch as they were Greek : &  dicn∣tur effectus stellarum. Arab.  tishm.made according to and under the Figure of some Constellation or number of Stars then ascending, called Vultus Celestes, especially Draco or Ophi∣uchus, for the effects of these two are much alike, according to Junctinus in speculo Astrologiae, viz. That they which are born under them shall be Marsi [Sons of Circes] able to mitigate and cure the stingings of Serpents: whence some superstitiously conceive, That the Brazen Serpent lifted up in the Wilderness, was such a kind of Talisman. And these kindes of Fancies they have extended to the defence of places, saying, That before the taking of Constantinople, the Talismans thereof were thrown into the Thraian Bosphorus. * But if the Constellations themselves have no These are, by some, thought to be the Teraphim mentioned in Scripture, and that Labans Images were such, vid. Seldenum de Dis: syr. The manner of making such, is set down by Schedius, de Dis Germa∣nis, cap. 31. and by Grotius in cap. 31. Gen. where the Hebrew Word is Teraphim, which Reb. stole away, least Laban from them should learn which way they went; or (as Josephus) that they might be a refuge against their pursuers: but Grotius upon Judg. 17. and upon os. 3. notes Teraphim to signifie as well good as bad Angels. The good Teraphim , says Grotius upon Judg. 17. Cherubinorum formam habuisse cens. Hieron. The Colossus at Rhodes is said by some to have been a Talisman, which was overthrown by an Earth-quake, as is testifyed by Pliny; and the Brass whereof it consisted, was carryed away by Mehua the Sultan of Egypt, successor to Selyms, Anno Dom. 660. It was seventy Cubits in height; and although it were hollow, nine hundred Camels were laden with it. This might possibly give Answers and Inti∣mations of things, by such kinde of Artifice as the Papists make their Images to speak, to sweat, and to wep.such efficacy, how should the Images made under them have any? But that tbe Constellations themselves have none, is clear from hence, name∣ly, That they are [according to reformed Astronomy] removed 30 degrees Eastward from the places they once held, the vertue remaining where they were before, as receiving it by impression made by that part of the Primum Mobile which was at first, and still continues directly over the same places; which they leaving, leave together with it their former vertue behinde them. The like may be said of this, and of many other Saints, viz. That they hold not those places in the reformed Sphere & Ca∣lenders which they have held heretofore, & at this day hold in the Roman; those vertues once ascribed to them, being acknowledged to remain in the Christians Primum Mobile alone, who is Yesterday, to day, and the same
for ever. But that the Brazen Serpent should be a Talisman, is disproved from the very matter of it, which naturally not cures, but increases the grief arising from the bitings or stingings of Serpents; which was thought to have been done by Moses of purpose, that the Cure might not owe it self to any thing in Nature, but to the Institution of God, ordaining it purely to be a Typical representation of our Saviour Christ nayled to the Cross, upon whom whosoever looketh with the eye of Faith [as the Isra∣elites did upon this with that of the Body] shall be cured of the stings of the Fiery Serpents of sin. Aes naturliter nocet , sed Deus cum vim suam eximie vult ostendere operatur per contraria, says Grotius upon Numb. 2. 9. And albeit Moses were skilful in all the Wisdom of the E∣gyptians, he could not derive this use of the Heavenly Configurations from them: for although they acknowledged these Vultus Coelestes, yet, nor they nor the Caldeans ever used them otherwise then ad ; the Greeks afterwards abusing them, ad fata geniturarum praenoscenda, &c. Berosus, qui ipsefuit ori∣udo Babylo∣nius, primus scholam Grae∣cis aperuit Chaldaeorum discipliaae qui post tempor Alex: magni vixit, Salmas.says Salmasius, de Annis climactericis in Praefat. * It cannot be denyed that the Caldeans and Egyptians made use of the Planets in their Divinations, from whom the Jews learn'd their Superstition: whence the Prophet Mica saith, c. 5. v. 12. Et exscidero praestigias è manu tua, adeò ut Planetarii non sint tibi, so Junius and Tremellius translate this, and that of Jerem. 27. 9. but this is nothing to the Configurations of the Fixed stars. And as for any disaster that may happen to a place, it is rather to be ascribed to Bel∣shazzars Tekelman, as I may so call it (then to these Talismans) viz. the Figure of a Hand writing its doom thus: Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting, therefore God hath numbered thy happiness and finish∣ed it: The Author of Judgements being Gods hand commonly working in means; and the subject of them, Man, too light upon the weights. It was therefore well said of an English-man, who was one of the last Boat that loosed from Calais upon the surrender of that Town to the Duke of Guise, in the time of Queen Mary; when a French-man calling to him in a jeer from the shore, and asking him, When he would return a∣gain? he answered in good earnest: When your sins are greater then ours. Though the French, proud hereof, commend the English-man for it; yet God doth not ever apparently use such an exact proportion of Judgments in this World, as we learn from the example of the Tower in Shiloe: and the Heathen Poet could say, —saepe Diespiter Neglectus, incesto addidit integrum. SECT. 20. By this time now had the Abbot and Convent of Moun∣treul in France (by License obtained from the King of England) sold a Soke of Land, and several Houses in St. Lawrence Jury London, toge∣ther with the Advowson of the Church of St. Lawrence, to William [Facetus] Faucet; which said William gave them to Henry Faucet, and
the said Henry to Hugh Wickenbrook, called Hugo de Vienna: which said Hugo de Vienna lastly bestowed them upon the Master and Scholars, Anno 1294. Next Year after this, the Church of St. Lawrence was made an Appropriation to the Colledge by the consent of the Incumbent, the Bishop, Dean and Chapter of St. Pauls; and last of all by the confirma∣tion of the then King. The Composition then made, was, That the Col∣ledge should take all the Tythes, Fruits and Oblations whatsoever, to their own use; and that the Vicar should content himself with 100 s. per annum, ari∣sing out of the less Tythes and Oblations: and so he did till Anno 1549. when an Indenture was made between the Colledge and Brogden the then Vicar, whereby the Colledge granted him 20 l. per annum, with a House to live in, during the time he continued Vicar there [but not to his Suc∣cessors] the Vicar having formerly lived in a House built at the charge of the Parish, the Colledge allowing them the Porch and Vestry by way of Compensation, provided that this latter were used as a Vestry for ever, and not Farmed out. This was Anno 1390. Afterwards, viz. 1392. 2 Ric. 2. the Colledge, with the consent of the said King, signified under the Broad Seal, gave a House to the Vicars, provided they paid to the Colledge 20 s. per annum for ever: all which may appear by 57 seve∣ral Writings. Now the Oblations and Obventions of such a Parish as that, could not make the Profits thereof less then 200 l. per annum better to the Colledge then they are, which by reason of the Reformation, are ceased. SECT. 21. Anno Dom. 1310. Hugo de Warkeneby, and William de Socham, gave us four Messuages with the Area adjoyning, and the Ap∣purtenances, in the Parish of St. Mary the Virgin, in the street of the School of Arts, to find some Chaplain in the Chappel of St. Katerine within our House, for the daily Celebration of Divine Offices; which they had bought of William Solby, Burgess of Oxford. These Houses and Pla∣ces, together with the Schools formerly mentioned, Sect. 19. [besides which it does not appear that the University had any other for the Arts] we perceive now to be lost, without as much as the honour of the name left us, which we formerly had by the name of Balliol-hall and Balliol-schools: and as for the Area, we must understand that into the Schools of Arts, no Under-graduates were permitted to enter, as to the doing of any Exercise therein, but were left to dispute in the Area, or Court-yard ad∣joyning: which in French being Parvis, our Answering of Generals, is thence call'd answering in Parvisiis, or in Parviso: which Exercise they now perform [though in the Schools, yet] under the protection of a Ba∣chelor of Arts, whose Formality is a License to read Logick, &c. to enter into the Schools, to dispute, & reliqua peragere, qu ad gradum Baccalaurei in artibus pertinent: and so much for that.
SECT. 22. Anno 13 Edw. 2. which was about the Year, 1320. twelve Acres of Medow, commonly called Bayly-mead, were given by Mr. Hunsingoure to the Master and Scholars, to find a Chaplain for the ce∣lebration of Divine Offices in the Chappel of St. Katerine, within the Mansion of the said Master and Scholars, confirmed by Letters Patents of the said King, to be held of the Manor of Wotton, for the Service of 15 d. per annum. King Edw. 4. afterwards understanding more Rent then this to be exacted by his Receivers, did by His Letters Patents confirm it up∣on the old Rent of 15 d. per annum, though our new Rebels re-assumed those old Demands. But upon Remonstrance made by us of the premi∣ses, This Bayly∣mead Mr. Nap∣per holds by his Wifes life.they went not to tryal with * us. The same Richard Hunsingoure had, before this, viz. 9 Edw. 2. given and confirmed to the Master and Scho∣lars of the House of Balliol for ever, All that Tenement, with the Houses, Curtilage, and all other the Appurtenances in the Parish of St. John de Merton, lying between Alban-hall and Lomb-hall, which Tenement he had of the Legacy of Walter de Fodringheye, Canon of Lincoln [and pro∣bably he who had been Master before] witness Mr. Henry Harcla, then Chancellor of the University of Oxon, Jo: Ducklington Major, Robert Wa∣thington and Jo: Kilward Bayliffs, &c. This is at present Leased to Mer∣ton Colledge (and makes up a part of Alban-hall) the measure whereof is specified in the Lease. In the eleventh Year of the same King Edw. 2. Jeffrey Horkstow and Richard de Staynton, gave a Tenement within the Walls of Oxford, in the Parish of St. Mildred; which is that whereon the Divinity Schools stand, as is evident by the Lease thereof granted to the University of 99 Years, beginning 1427. in the fourth of Hen. 6. Viz. Anno 1661.which is about 234 Years since: The Lease is therefore expired * now 135 Years. The Rent is 7 s. per annum: The measure of the Ground is precisely set forth in the lease, together with the situation thereof, by the name of one void place of land within the Walls of Oxon, situate between Exeter Colledge on the West part, and the School-street on the East: from whence one end abbuts upon Exeter-lane towards the North [this Exeter-lane was the Pomaerium between Exeter Colledge and the Town∣wall, which before the building of the present Chappel there, was our way to the Schools] and the other Head of it abbuts upon the Ground or Tenement of the Abbot and Convent of Dorchester, and of Balliol-hall, by Mildred-lane to the South-ward; and it contains in length from North to South, 171 Feet and 5 Inches; and the greatest breadth thereof in any place is 130 Feet: For the more precise measure whereof, I must re∣fer you to the Deed it self, yet remaining in our custody entire without the least violation made, Thomas Chace being Chancellor of the University, and Robert Burley Master of the House: by both whom, it was desired that a change might be made (as soon as by Law it could be contrived) of this land for Sparrow-hall (which we call Old Balliol-hall) which we hold
from the University at the Rent of 2 s. per annum; consideration being to be had of the inequality of the Rents: the over-plus whereof [which is 5 s.] was to be made good to us upon some other place, &c. as by the Deeds may appear: which thing was lately attempted to be done, but by reason of Dr. Langbaines death, then Custos Archivorum, to whom the management of such things did belong, it did not obtain its effect, and that especially because the Books were drawn, and therein the onely Cau∣tion that was allowed us for the 5 s. per annum, was Beef-hall: which be∣cause a part of Pembrook Colledge I refused, as being no Town-house, and improper for us to enter into and distrain for our Rent in case of non∣payment at the day; besides that in the same Books they had couched all other places, where the Site of the other Schools now is, which were ne∣ver intended in the exchange. Another piece of Land anciently belong∣ing to our House, is a Garden and Curtilage lying between Exeter-hall [for so that Colledge was then call'd] on the West, and Schools-street on the East, now part of Exeter Colledge Garden; whereof more hereafter. And although I find but one Writing of Manger-hall, and that without date too; yet for the antiquity thereof I shall cast it in here, though where it stood I cannot shew. But all those Halls or Messuages whose si∣tuation is not noted, stood probably, where the site of the Colledge now is, viz. This of Manger-hall, together with St. Hughes-hall and Hert-hall, Sect. 18. also Saucer-hall and New Balliol-hall, noted Sect. 7. where∣unto may be added Margarets-hall (whereof more hereafter) and of this I am certain, but the rest I leave in medio till farther proof can be made pro or con. SECT. 23. And now we having, by the charity of our Benefactors aforesaid, gained two Chaplains, others began to entertain thoughts of a more elegant Chappel for us. For Anno Dom. 1327. Nich: Luceby then [Custos] Warden of our House (for so he's there called) and Mr. Thomas Otham, Chancellor of the University, and others, were Wit∣nesses The Abbot of Reading was one of those that had Votes in Parliament. See Spelman's Glossarium.to a Deed under the Seal of the * Lord Abbot of Reading: wherein is set forth, That the said Abbot had delivered to the Scholars of the House of Balliol, Oxon, As good as 400 l. now.20 l. sterling for the Soul of Adam le Poleter, Burges of Reading, for the building of the Chappel of St. Katerine of the same House: whereunto the said Ab∣bot added * 10 marks, besides a Glass Window of 10 l. and more (such is 10 marks and 10 l. almost as good as 400 l. now is, a Gift otherwise scarce worthy of him, he being one of the 27 that had place in Parliament, whereof 25 were Abbots, and the other two were Priors, viz. The Prior of Coventry, and the Prior of St. Johns of Jerusalem, according to Ascanius Tamburinius: The reason whereof is given by Spelman in Glassario; where speaking of the quantity of the penultima of Abbatis in the Gen. Case, he proves it to be long, by diffe∣rencing it from Abbatis, or Abatis for an Hostler, &c. thus Abbatis ad caenam, dat equis Abbatis avenam.his expression) for the same Chappel. And now as we had License from
Oliver Bishop of Lincoln, to celebrate Divine Offices in our own Oratory, within our House, as hath been said: The same was obtained from his Suc∣cessors Henry, John, and Thomas, which appears under the Seal of the said Thomas Bishop of Lincoln, Anno Dom. 1346. The same License also, and upon the same Conditions as all former were, was given by John B. of Lincoln, Anno 1368. In which last, our Oratory is called St. Katerines Chappel, and in none of the former. But as in those there was a tacite, so here was an express Exception of administring the Sacraments therein: A thing very strange, when upon the Petition of the House Pope Urban had given a License for it in the second Year of his Pontificate, as appears by the Record thereof (the hindrance whereof had been Oblations and Obventions, the great ore of those times, which was not endured to be touched.) Besides which License of the Popes, to celebrate Sacraments and all other Divine Services in our own Chappel, within our House, with exemption from all Duties to be done or paid to the Parish Church; we are freed from paying of Tythes for any Houses of ours, either in the Parish of St. Mary Magdalen, or in all Oxford besides, as may appear by the Instrument it self, in the Box (in our Treasury) called Magdalen Pa∣rish Box, whereunto I refer you: But because time and some accident has begun to deface the Popes License, I shall here insert it verbatim. rbanus Episcopus servus servorum Dei Dilectis filiis Magistro & Sco∣laribus Collegii Clericorum domus de Balliolo de Oxonia Lincoln. Dioc. salutem apostolic. ben. P ia devotorum Deo & Ecclesie desideria que divini cultus augmentum ac ipsorum quietis commodū respicere dinoscuntur apostolico favore prosequimur, eisque benignum impertimur assensum. Exhibita siquidem nobis pro parte vestra continebat quod vos in quadam capella sita intra septa domus vestre de Balliolo de Oxonia Lincoln. Dioc. jux∣ta statuta dicte domus per vos juramento vallata singulis diebus per proprios sa∣cerdotes divina officia facere celebrari ac certis diebus eisdem Misse & horis canonicis personaliter interesse tenemini. Nos vestris in hac parte supplicatio∣nibus inclinati ut in capella predicta singuli vestrum qui fuerint in presbyteratus ordine cōstituti & alii Presbyteri dicte domus Missam & alia divina officia eti∣am in festis majoribus summissa & alta voce ure Parochialis Ecclesie & cu∣juslibet alterius in omnibus semper salvo celebrari valeatis quibuscunque Con∣stitutionibus Apostolicis contrariis nequaquam obstantibus devotioni vestre au∣ctoritate Apostolica tenore presentium indulgemus. Nulli ergo omnino hominum liccat hanc paginam nostre concessionis infringere vel ei asu temerario contra∣ire. Si quis autem hoc attemptare presumpserit indignationem omnipotentis Dei & beatorum etri & Pauli Apostolorum ejus se noverit incursurum. Dat: Avinioni xvi Kl. Maii Pontificatus nostri Anno secundo.
This cannot be understood of Urban 6. (and therefore must precede that of John Bishop of Lincoln) inasmuch as his immediate Predecessor, Greg. 11. had reduced the Apostolick Seat to the City, because the Ita∣lians began to revolt from it, by reason of its so long continuance at A∣vignon, which had been the Seat of four Popes besides himself; who though he was created at Avignon, dyed at Rome: where also his imme∣diate Successor, Urban 6. aforesaid was created, sate, and dyed: Nor why we (having obtained this License from the Pope) should receive ano∣ther afterwards from the Bishop of Lincoln (and that disadvantageous too) do I understand, unless by reason that the Publick Notary having put no Protocollum thereunto, 'twas thought not Authentick; or else because the Bishop thought it safer to contradict the Popes Authority, then to displease the Abbot of Osney, in whose gift St. Mary Magdalen Parish Church then was, as is aforesaid; or then to undergo the displeasure of God, and of his Apostles Peter and Paul, who are there made the Vindi∣cators of such contempt. Yet notwithstanding all this, we are not one∣ly permitted, but enjoyned to celebrate and receive the Sacraments in our Chappel by the Injunctions of the Bishop of Lincoln's Commissioners in their Visitation, had in this Colledge Martii 4. 1565, which are set down Sect. 31. verbatim. SECT. 24. Anno 1340. 15 Edw. 3. Besides a Grant made of the Domaine Lands in Mickle Benton by Rokysborow, an Agreement was made for the maintenance of six Scholars above the ancient number, and one Chaplain, to be maintain'd out of the Lands given by Sir Philip Somer∣vyle, viz. Two Cottages and six Acres of Land, with the Appurtenan∣ces in great, h. e. in Mickle Benton aforesaid, which are call'd The buts: and in the Statutes of Sir Philip Somervile the Advowson of the Church of Mickle Benton is also mentioned, with duabus carrucatis terre arabilis, & viginti acris prati; h. e. as some interpret it, as much as two Ploughs will Till in a Year, Charrue (which comes from *(Or Carru∣ca from Char∣rue) the Lan∣guage of the Gauls (now pre erved in the Italian, French, and Spanish Lan∣guages) being not a corruption of the Latin, as the vulgar Error is; but the condition wherein it now is, proceeds from the light Impression that the Latin hath made upon it (as the learn'd Breerwood observes in his Enquiries of Languages) And it is doubtless antienter then the Latin it self, having Declensions and Conjuga∣tions of its own, which resemble not those of the Latin at all: Declining all Words by Articles, as all Eastern Languages (except the Arabick) do, and not by variation of Terminations of Cases, as the Latin and Greek are wont to do.Carruca) being a Plough in French, the same some say is two Hides of Land. The which two Car∣rucata or Hydes of Land, together with the said 20 Acres of Meadow, were further assured by the Release of Sir Philip's Heir, and other neces∣sary Circumstances of Law. The next Year after this, the Rectory of Mickle Benton was appropriated to the Colledge by the Bishop of Dur∣ham, as appears by divers Writings. An Extract of the Instrument of the said Bishop is as followeth. Habeant Vicarii totam terram ad dictam Ec∣clesiam
ab antiquo spectantem libere sicut Rectores tenere solebant: nec non de∣cimas lane & agnorum & pullanorum & vitulorum, lacticinii & alias deci∣mas minutas quascunque. Magister autem & scolares integre percipient de∣cimam Garbarum & feni totius Parochie predicte. procurationes Vicarius per∣soluet. Cancellum etiam supportabit quoad modicas & quotidianas refectiones: concerning which, we have almost 30 several Writings. Amongst which, are the Statutes of Sir Philip Somervile, confirmed by Edw: Balliol and the Bishop of Durham. About which time, or the Year before, the Recto∣ry of Abboldesley, with the Mannor thereof [whereunto Beeston was an∣next, though since divided] was given to the Colledge by Sir William Fel∣ton, for the augmentation of the Commons of the Fellows from 8 d. to Clement 6. who sate ten Years.12 d. the week, and for supply of Clothes and Books, with other Neces∣saries. The which Rectory was appropriated to this House by Pope Cle∣ment, a competency being reserved for the support of the Vicar there: by whom it was also granted, that the Scholars might continue in the House after they became Masters and Doctors, having been formerly ex∣posed to vant and beggary [by the foresaid rigour of Dervorgilles Sta∣tutes] All which, though it appears by a Publick Notary, Anno Dom. 1520. yet I shall fetch it from the Originals, and therein you shall per∣ceive the reasons why, I said before, this Benefaction was about the same Year that Sir Philip Somerviles Statutes were made, or the Year before. For the Deed of Gift from Sir William Felton of Abbotsley Rectory, cum pertinentiis, to the Master and Scholars, and their successors for ever, was first made in festo Sancti Martini in Hieme, Anno Dom. 1340. confirmed by Letters Patents, 14 Edw. 3. over England, and over France the first; which was a Year before Sir Philip Somerviles first Grant, which was 15 Edw. 3. as I have already noted. Livery and Seisin was likewise given by him to Balliol Colledge, Anno 1340. as by another appears. Yet I find another Deed of Gift of Abbotsley, of the said Sir William Feltons, dated 1341, Robert Skelton being then Chancellor of the University, which was after Sir Philip Somerviles gift, and after his Statutes confirm∣ed by Edw. Balliol, as is evident by the date thereof. But the Composi∣tion of Abbotsley for the Vicar, and consequently the Appropriation of the Rectory to the Colledge was not made till Anno Dom. 1361, by John Synwell Bishop of Lincoln; which was 20 Years after, and at∣tested by John Williams then Bishop of Lincoln Anno 1628. (Which At∣testation was occasioned by the negligence of the Society: who those rather to search at Lin∣coln, then the Records at home.). By which Composition, The Vicar was to have 60 Acres of Domain Land, and all manner of lesser Tythes and Oblations whatsoever, and of what sort soever; as also all Mortuaries living and dead, the Tythes of Mills, and whatsoever is known of Right or Cu∣stom to belong to the alterage of the Church aforesaid, and 3 l. a Year from the Colledge: A dwelling-house competent, having one Hall, one Chamber, one Kitching, one Stable and one Grange: The Colledge were to repair the
Chancel, and pay Arch-deacons Procurations: The Vicar to repair the Vest∣ments and books belonging to the Church; to pay Synodals, to provide bread and wine for the Sacrament of the Altar, Frankincense, Wax and Rushes through all the Church, and Light in the Chancel; to pay the Tenth and Pro∣curations of Cardinals, and other Apostolick Nuncio's pro rata, which rate is six Mark sterling: The Colledge to have all the Tythe of blade and hay. And if there be any Ambiguity, the Bishop was to decide the Contro∣versie. Another Composition was made by the Abbot of Huntingdon, by vertue of a Commission directed to him from John Bokingham Bishop of Lincoln, successor to John Synwell aforesaid, at the request of Robert Os∣good Vicar on the one part, and the Master and Scholars on the other, ac∣cording to the power which the Bishop reserved to himself and Successors in the first Composition; which Composition of the Abbot of Hunting∣don, was made according to Instructions given in his Commission, which were onely to assign to Osgood, and his Successors, a House with such and such Rooms, which were ordered in general without mention made of the place, or of Garden, or of ingress or egress: All which, are by the Abbot assigned to be on the East part of the Rectory, together with Timber to build the Kitchin back-house and barn, which had then all lately been burnt down: The Vicar was also assigned to build a barn of 70 foot in length, and 22 foot in breadth. But other things mentioned in the first Composition, the Ab∣bot meddles not with, as being besides his Commission: The which Com∣mission was given and executed, 1364. three Years after the first Com∣position made. After this, the next thing I find was a Lease made of Ab∣botsley for 45 marks a Year, dated Anno 1374. (Frank Pledge and Court held, 1 R. 2.) A second made to Robert Bateman and Jo▪ Sekyll, reserving the keeping of the Court, and all Emoluments thereof, and of the Tenements, Anno 1386. A third set for 43 marks per annum, Anno 1389. And Anno Dom. 1395. there happened a difference between the Colledge and William Willesthorn Vicar, on the one part, and the Parish on the other, touching the maintenance of the Clerk of Abbotsley Parish Church, in relation to ringing Hora aurorae, or The Day-bell, and Ignite∣gium, h. e. Courfue, and Offices done for the Saints, &c. This was heard before the Archdeacon (Tho: Barry one of the Fellows being made Pro∣ctor for the Colledge) and composed; the Parishioners promising to be perpetually silent for the time to come, under the Seals of six of them set to the Instrument; and that the Colledge and Vicar for those things should be left to their own liberty. As for the License granted by Pope Clement for the Scholars continutnce in the Colledge till Masters and Do∣ctors, it was necessary, (though made after Sir Philip Somervyles Statutes, whereby the inconveniences of Dervorgylles Statutes were obviated) in as much as her Statutes were still in force; the which interfering with those of Sir Philip, occasioned future grievances and alterations. In the
next place we find a Court held at Abbotsley, 5 H. 4. another 12 H. 4. together with divers Rentals, &c. The next is a Lease for 17 l. per annum, 29 H. 6. Before which I should have noted a Lease set by William Bran∣don Master, and the Scholars, 19 H. 6. for 22 l. per annum. In the next place, we have a boundary of all our Lands in Abbotsley, taken 32 H. 6. In the next place, a Rental of Abbotsley and Beeston, annexed in the time of Thomas Cisson, Master of this Colledge, 5 H. 8. In the next place, a Lease for 17 l. 19 s. 5 d. per annum, Anno Dom. 1524. Item, a Court held at Abbotsley by the Master and Scholars, 44 Eliz. the Jurors 14. the Tenants 8. Item, a Court Baron held, 5 Car. 1. for the Master of Bal∣liol Colledge, by Christopher Mead Steward; the Homage was six. Item, a Court-Roll of a Court held in the name of the Colledge, by Mead Stew∣ard of the Court, 7 Car. 1. Jurors five, Tenants admitted three. Item, a Lease set to Anthony Hare for three Lives, dated 1615. at the usual Rent: The said Anthony hath hereby power granted him to keep a Court Yearly, and is enjoyned to return the Court-Rolls to the Colledge; for which, 3 s. was to be allowed (which Covenant, the Tenants there have never observed) the Colledge discharging him of Vicar-Bishop and Arch∣deacon. The said Lessee gave also a Bond of 500 l. for the performance of Covenants. In the last place, I find a true and a perfect Terrar of all Lands, Domaine and Copy-hold, taken Aug. 30. 1621. And so having given an account of Abbotsley, I return to Sir Philip Somervyles affairs, and therein to his Statutes; which are as followeth. Edwardus Dei gratia Scotorum Rex, ex primeva fundatione. Magistri & scolarium Aule sive Domus de Balliolo in Oxon: fundator. Universis & singulis ad quos presentes pervenerint salutem in amplexibus salvatoris. Cartam Domini Philippi de Somervyle Domini de Wichnore militis, & sta∣tuta in eadem carta contenta Magistrum & Scolares aule sive domus de Balliolo in Oxon: concernentia sigillis bone memorie Domini Ricardi dudum Dunelm: Episc: & venerabilium virorum Religiosorum Domino∣rum Prioris & Capituli Dunelm: Reverendi viri & discreti Domini Can∣cellarii Universitatis Oxon: & Magistri & Scolarium aule sive domus de Balliolo in Oxon: una cum sigillo dicti Domini Philippi de Somervyle consignata inspeximus, & in nostra presentia perlegi fecimus in forma que sequitur verborum: In nomine Sanctissime & individue Trinitatis Patris & Filii & Sp: Sancti, & gloriose Virginis Marie, & beate Caterine Virginis & Martyris omniumque sanctorum. Ego Philippus de Somer∣vyle de summi rerum & bonorum opificis bonitate confisus, ejusdemque gratie qui vota hominum pro sua voluntate ad bonum disponit & dirigit fidenter innisus animique revolutione sepe sollicitus si quid sui no∣minis honori retribuamus pro his que mihi in hac vita tribuit abundan∣ter: Advocationem ecclesie de Micklebenton comitatu Northumber: &
in Diecesi Dunelm: cum duabus Carrucatis terre arabilis & viginti acris prati in Campis ejusdem ville Magistro & Scolaribus domus de Balliolo in Oxon: & eorum successoribus in augmentationem numeri scolarium & ad sustentationem eorundem in perpetuum pro salute anime mee & dilecte sponse mee Margarete & ad honorem & gloriam Domini nori Jesu Christi & S. Katerine Virginis ac Martyris contuli caritative▪ quam quidem collationem spontanea & libera voluntate ac deliberato consilio approbo ratifico & confirmo & apud eosdem Magistrum & Scolares ma∣nere in perpetuum dispono sub forma & conditionibus infra scriptis tam quoad personas quam ad regulas earundem annuente Domino sine con∣tradictione integre observandas. Hanc igitur formam quoad omnia infra scripta de communi consensu Magistri & Scolarium predictorum statu∣endam dispono. Quod ultra numerum sexdecim Sociorum secundum an∣tiquas observantias, à Sociis dicte domus usitatas secundum facultatum sufficientiam, dicte domui pertinentium. Sex scolares facultati artium intendentes per socios dicte domus de novo sint electi. in quorum ele∣ctione nec non in, sustentationis gratia, admissione, illi qui de locis propinquioribus illi loco ubi beneficia antedicta, dicte domui per me collata situantur oriundi fuerint: dum tamen in eis vel eoum aliquo tres conditiones in antiquis ordinationibus nominate videlicet magis pauperes magis proficientes & magis morigerati inveniantur precipui sint & primi. Sit autem in dicta domo superior perpetuus in eadem domo commorans, qui Magistri nomine perpetuo nuncupetur vir in spiritualibus & tempo∣ralibus circumspectus qui Scolaribus in ipsa domo commorantibus ac mi∣nistris altaris aliisque omnibus officiariis seu famulis quocunque modo censeantur, qui ad exteriorum seu interiorum administrationem seu re∣gimen fuerint deputati pertineat & presit, omnesque ei tam Scolares quam altaris ministri officiarii & quicunque alii famuli tanquam suo su∣periori in his que effectum suum contingunt pareant & intendant. De conditionibus quoad ejus institutionem electionem seu destitutionem & alia ipsum tangentia, ea firmiter observentur que super hoc inferius sunt annotata. Volo autem & ordino quod de numero Scolarium domus supra∣dicte, eligantur secundum formam subscriptam sex Socii dummodo in facultate artium fuerint regentes qui Sacre Theologie facultate audiant, quibus etiam in vacationibus aliis facultatibus liceat intendere decreta & decretales per biennium duntaxat audire. Dispono etiam quod electio Magistri perpetui secundum formam inferius annotatam celebretur con∣vocatis omnibus Sociis presentibus & absentibus justa causa & necessaria, dummodo sine notabili difficultate venire poterint, injungat Principalis vel locum ejus tenens omnibus & singulis in fide proficere domui quam fideliter: duas elegant artists qui cum Principali domus predicte seu cum ejus locum tenene in scrutinio sedebnt qui per communitatem ele∣cti coram seniore secundum ejus statum in domo juramentum prestent
corporale & idem juramentum in propria persona coram eodem seniore prester Principalis quod non per se alium vel alios aliquem vel aliquos ad dicendum pro aliquo in Magistrum eligendo induxerit vel induce quovismodo contra voluntatem propriam & spontaneam, & ad id jura∣mentum observandum quilibet socius domus supradicte virtute sui jura∣menti per eundem seniorem firmiter astringatur. Jurent etiam omnes & singuli tactis SStis. in presentia omnium sociorum quod fideliter & absque personali acceptatione & spe remunerationis facte vel in futurum faciende pro tali dicant quem melius scientē magis potentem & majorem Zelum habentem sciverint ad domus negotia expedienda. Quo fact Principalis & alii duo per communitatem electi vota fingulorum fideli∣ter sedendo audiant in secretis & scribant & ipsum Magistrum fidelite denuncient in quem major pars communitatis consenserit. Et si contin∣gat aliquos vocum paritatem obtinere, per saniorem partem communi∣tatis nominatus in Magistrum sit electus. Saniorem vero partem ex pre∣rogativis in scientia & prioritate domus aliisque consimilibus ex quibu unus alio vel una pars altera in Collegiis sanior solet numerari, voca decerno. Electione quidem Magisti celebrata faciat eum Principal vel senior secundum statum suum in domo coram communitate jura quod statuta & ordinationes per me editas fideliter observabit. Ite volo & dispono quod Magister sub forma predicta electus cum licenti Comitatus ad Manerium meum de Wihenore ante officii sui executione mittatur & Domino ejusdem Manerii qui pro tempore fuerit se offer si quis fuerit de sanguine meo dominus dicti Manerii pro tempore illo  causam sui adventus exponat, qui sine exceptiore contra formam electi nis seu contra personam electam & absque omni contradictione per pr dictum Dominum illius Maneii in Magistrum dicte domus sit receptu Si autem Dominus ad dictum Manerium presens non extiterit, suffici si Custodi dicti Manerii se presentet & causam sui adventus exponat.  autem contingat hereditatem meam inter sorores esse divisam seniori so roi vel ejus heredibus dum de sanguine meo fuerint ad dictum Maneri um de Wichenore dicti Magistri sub forma prescripta fiat presentatio: d ctus vero Magister cum de predicto Manerio Oxon: redierit Cancellari vel ejus Commissario Vniversitatis qui pro tum fuerit, Priori seu Custo∣di Monachorum Dunelm: Oxon: studentium ibidem pro voluntate Domi∣ni Prioris Dunelm: deputato & duobus Magistris extrinsecis assidentibu per Principalem & unum de senioribus vel per duos seniores presente∣tur: a quibus sine contradictione omnimoda confirmetur, coram quibu prestet juramentum corporale ordinationes & constitutiones per dictu Dominum Philippum de consensu predictorum Scolarium editas fideli∣ter observare, & idem juramentum prestet ad Manerium de Wicheor coram domino predicti Manetii si tempore sui presentationis oinus dictus presens extiterit, Cancellario vero vel ejus Commissario, Priore
seu Custode Monachorum predicto aut dictis duobus Magistris extrinsecis in hac parte negligentibus vel alias qualitercunque predictam confirma∣tionem expedire nolentibus, hoc ipso quod eisdem ut predicitur sic ele∣ctus presentatus fuerit pro confirmato habeatur. Et Consimilis forma quoad admissionem cujuslibet dicte domus electi ad intendendum Sacre Theologie & quoad ejus receptionem coram memorato Cancellario vel ejus Commissario Priore seu Custode Monachorum predicto ac dictis duobus Magistris extrinsecis punctim observetur. Hoc etiam in eadem domo specialiter observetur ut circa eos qui ad heologiam fuerint eli∣gendi diligenti sollicitudine caveatur ne qui vel quis preter honestum vel honestos castos pacificos & humiles ad scientiam habiles ac proficere vo∣lentes admittantur, quos per communitatem de Sociis dicte domus dum tamen in artibus rexerint eligendos esse dispono sub hac forma. Con∣vocet Magister domus supradicte communitatem omnibus & singulis in Sacramento Domini prestito firmiter injungendo quod fideliter & sine personarum acceptatione favore omnimodo & affectione quacunque post∣positis alium vel alios ad facultatem predictam eligant quos verisimiliter per experientiam probabiles ad proficiendum in facultate predicta magis habiles & morigeratos sciverint & ille vel illi in quem vel in quos pars major communitatis consenserit ad Theologie auditionem sint electi. Si autem contingat aliquos de eligendis paritatem vocum obtinere, senior secundum ejus statum in domo preferatur. Electus vero vel electi ad intendendū Sacre Theologie in sexto anno sue auditionis opponat & per unum annum vel duos si videatur communitati expedire oppositionem & in nono vel decimo anno Librum Sententiarum legat & in duodecimo vel tertio decimo anno in eadem facultate incipere teneantur, nisi ex causa legitima vel honesta impediatur. Audiat & Magister dicte domus quam∣cunque Redditus, usually writ∣ten here with a double dd.facultatem voluerit. Sic etiam Numerus scolarium pro reddi∣tibus meis dicte domui eligendorum ut predicitur quorum quilibet un∣decim denarios per manus sui Magistri vel eoum qui ad proventus dicte domus recipiendos vel reserandos fuerint deputati percipiat, ita tamen quod singularium sociorum commune in dicta domo ex aliis redditibus venientium ad undecim denarios per redditus meos predictos augeantur. Si autem victualium Caristiam accidere contingat singulorum soio∣rum dicte domus commune secundum arbitrium Magistrum & Com∣munitatis ad quindecem denarios inclusive septimanatim accrescant. Volo autem quod quilibet dictorum scolarium quatuor denarios percipi∣at pro septimanis maxime festivis sicut in septimana natalis Domini & Pas∣che & aliis consimilibus ultra id quod solebat per septimanam predictam percipere. Magister siquidem cameram sibi soli habeat deputatam & gar∣cionem sibi ministrantem qui secundum ordinationem dicte communitatis suam sustentationem percipiat de Communi. Quia vero extraneos ad di∣ctam domum pro negotiis ejusdem accedentes sepius a Magisto reipi
oportebit Dispono quod propter sic accedentes & communitatis honesta∣tem pro se & suis commensalibus si sibi videbitur expediens in Camera propria prout aliis sociis ministratus mensam minime excessivam habeat de communi & eo tempore duntaxat; nisi egritudinis vel alterius cause rationabilis necessitas eum urgeat & compellat. Dictus autem Magister quadraginta solidos pro suis necessariis annuatim de communi percipiat cum facultates reddituum meorum ad hoc suffecerint quousque per me vel per alios seu per communitatem pro eo commodius fuerit ordinatum. Dispono etiam quod idem Magister juramentum prestet corporale ut de sua administratione & de omnibus bonis dicte domui spectantibus coram communitate vel aliquibus ad sua ratiocinia audienda per communitatem deputatis annis singulis die sancte Margarete seu tempore aliquo per communitatem assignando fidelem reddat rationem qui suo similiter mi∣nisterio interius & exterius prout rei qualitas & temporis seu loci ne∣cessitas aut utilitas poposcerit sollicite intendat, qui etiam annis singulis omnia bona ad dictam domum spectantia per se vel per alium de Sociis discretum ad hoc per communitatem electum si communitati expediens visum fuerit visitet diligenter nec non & quantitatē bonorum in lois sin∣gulis estimet & taxet, ipsamque estimationem & taxationem fideliter in scriptis redigat & redacta in scriptis Scolaribus dicte domus deferat & assignet, ut deinde cum sua ratiocinia fuerint audienda fidelitas ipsorum ratiociniorum ex collectione ipsius scripture certius valeat apparere. Et computo dicti Magistri plenarie soluto si quod de bonis dicte domus ultra expensas per communitatem allocatas residuum fuerit infra mensem a die solutionis sui computi Thesaurariorum custodie reddere seu cautionē pa∣lam exponer aut alio modo communitati satisfacere teneatur. Quorum si qua fuerit residua partem in usum Sociorum & partem pro oneribus supportandis prout Magister & communitas decreverit dispono conver∣ti. Si autem contingat dictum Magistrum brevi egritudine infirmari, ple∣na sibi portio sua pro rata proportione temporis vel alia sustentatio com∣petens & minime excessiva ministretur de communi. Aliis vero Scola∣ribus predictis in predicta domo insirmantibus ex tunc dummodo pro ne∣cessitate vel utilitate domus fuerint destinati exhibitio consimilis fiat de communi. Si autem dicti Magistri incurabilis fuerit egritudo, nec de ejus convalescentia spes extiterit ratione cujus ipsum Magistrum circa do∣mus negotia laborare non posse nec ut deceret Magistratus officium ex∣ercere communitas decreverit, eo ipso suo cedere officio teneatur, & se∣cundum formam electionis Magistri prescriptam loco ejus alius eligatur & sustentationem secundum arbitrium communitatis competentem pro suo perpetuo habeat de communi. Si autem alicujus predictorū scolariū in∣curabilis fuerit egritudo propter quod ad victum alias consequendum aptus non fuerit, novem denarios extra domum septimanatim pro suo perpetuo de communi si quicquam uberius alibi non obtinuerit ratione
reddituum dicte domus per me collatorum percipiat caritative, dum ta∣men ad hoc domus sufficiant facultates. Item ordino & dispono quod qui∣libet socius in sua admissione prestet juramentum corporale quod non procurabit perse nec per alios nec scienter faciet quo minus ad Collegi∣um aliud uberiois exhibitionis in dicta universitate eligatur, quod si ipsum ad Collegium aliud hujusmodi eligi contigerit eo ipso in ejus per∣sona cesset domus exhibitio supradicte. Magister tamen ipse ad hujus articuli observationem se noscat non astringi. luret etiam quilibet soci∣us in sua ad dictum domum admissione quod jura & possessiones dicte do∣mus ubique terrarum pro suis viribus defendet & conservabit, & ad eo∣rum meliorationem fideliter laborabit & cum ad meliorem fortunam Deo dante pervenerint in licitis & honestis promovebit & maxime in consi∣siliis & auxiliis pro defensione & conservatioe jurium dicte domus & eorum melioratione semper adhibendis, & quotiens opus fuerit fidele consilium dicte domui si ab eo requiratur constanter adhibebit. Si autem dictus Magister de patrimonio aut spiritualitate seu quovis alio modo de certo ad valorem quadraginta librarum promotus fuerit sui officii regi∣mine ex tunc non utatur, & a beneficio dicte domus penitus excludatur: eandem & formam pro quolibet alio socio si quovismodo predicto ad va∣lorem centum solidorum promotus fuerit ordino observari. Item cum dicti Magistri industria honestas & diligentia preceteris necessaria sit & oportuna ne per ejus negligentiam quod absit vel insolentiam dicte do∣mui eveniant dispendia aut pericula graviora premissis adjicio & dispono ut cum Magister dicte domus qui pro tempore fuerit per dilapidationem bonorum domus predicte inutilis aut sui officii negligens executor seu luxuriosus vel notabiliter vitiosus ut inferius de sociis notatur repertus fuerit trina monitione per Principalem de consensu communitatis legiti∣m moneatur ut ab his insolentiis & negligentiis se omnino compescat, qui si post trinam incortigibilis appareat aut a predictis se abstinere neglexerit, de eo Cancellario vel ejus Commissario & Priori seu Cu∣stodi & Magistris extrinsecis supra-dictis fiat denunciatio qui de ejus excessibus & processibus contra eum factis summarie informati ipsum sine dilatione qualibet ab officio Magistratus ammoveant, qui si ad pre∣dicta facienda venire recusaverint, vel quorum si quis noluerit infra tri∣duum post legitimam denunciationem eis factam Principali & dicte do∣mus communitati liceat Magistrum hujusmodi ab officio Magistratus de∣ponere, & ipso deposito alium loco illius forma vero predicta in Magi∣strum eligere. Si autem aliquis sociorum predictorum homicidium aut adulterium furtum rapinam perjurium sacrilegium vel simoniam vel ali∣quod grave delictum committat seu gravem lapsum carnis vel notam tur∣pitudinis aliquam inurat quod absit per que grave scandalum in dicta do∣mo poerit suscitare, aut quisquam eorum rixosus seu jurgiorum inter soios suscitator creber extiterit, vel eorundem socioum atrox percus∣sor
aut quod plus est Magistro vel Principali seu aliis intollerabilis in so∣cietate predicta cum aliquo premissorum per facti notorietatem seu alias legitime fuerit cnvictus, transgressor hujusmodi a domo & exhibitione ejusdem penitus excludatur. Insuper Magister dicte domus associatis sibi duobus de antiquioribus & discretioribus scolaribus dicte communi∣tatis omnes discordias inter eosdem scolares exortas & omnium urgia sive delicta levia inter eosdem existentia absque strepitu vel dilatione infra domum propriam eorundem prout Magistro & illis antiquioribus vi∣debitur audiant pacificent & decidant. Si quis etiam disputationibus sue facultatis sive scolis diebus legibilibus vel officiis divinis debito modo non intendat, vel si in villa vel extra villam in tempore non debito fue∣rit vacabundus, vel si modo minus honeste in disputationibus mensa vel aliis actibus contra Magistrum vel socium se habeat, ratione cujus scan∣dalum vel incommodum domui predicte vel sociis notabiliter eveniat, volo quod Magister predictus cum illis duobus sibi associatis quemcunque in aliquo premissorum delinquentem invenerint puniat corrigat & reme∣dium imponat prout qualitas delicti secundum eorum estimationem ra∣tionaliter id exposcat. Et si quis eorum ordinationi parere noluerit per∣substractionem Commune sue per quindenam puniatur. Si quis autem hujusmodi transgressor pro suis forsan demeritis per Magistrum & sibi as∣sidentes tertia vice legitime correctus & per suarum communarum sub∣stractionem totiens punitus se ab hujusmodi malifiiis refrenare noluerit tanquam incorrigibilis & rebellis a dicta societate finaliter expellatur. Ejectis autem a domo prefata omne beneficium dicte domus & partici∣patio bonorum ipsius penitus denegetur, & eis ratione ammotionis seu ejectionis hujusmodi contra Magistrum domus dicte aut scolares, seu quoscunque alios de dicta domo aliqua actio competat vel regressus sive agendo sive appellando sive querimoniam deponendo sive in integrum▪ re∣stitutionem petendo sive cujuscunque curie sive secularis sive ecclesiastice literas obtinendo seu literis a quibuscunque vel per quoscunque obtentis utendo contra suam ammotionem memoratam quntumcunque. Si alias probitatis & vite merita suffragentur ne bona dicte domus in levibus ina∣niter expendantur. Item in ammotione dicti Magistri cum ex causis su∣perius annotatis fuerit ammotus censeo observandum & istud in admissi∣one sua a quolibet sit juratum. Ne autem ob crimina leviora ut superi∣us expressum est vel offensas leves ejectis aut studium desiderantibus om∣nis denegetur humanitas si in posterum digs penitentie fructus egerint, & Magistrum seu scolares domus supradicte agendo vel appellando aut per modos alios superius nominatos occasione sue objectionis nequaquam procuraveint molestari, seque ad loca & beneficia ipsius domus humili∣ter petierint de novo admittantur ea ex speciali gratia premissis non ob∣stantibus si poterint concedi si hoc Magistro & scolaribus videatur expe∣diens. Ordino etiam quod per preces vel literas alicujus domini nullus
in socium predicte domus admittatur nec pensio alicui per preces vel li∣teras alicujus magnatum ratione redituum meorum penitus conferatur. Capellanum siquidem in doo supradicta esse decerno & censeo tempore perpetuo moraturum qui per me & heredes meos dicte domui presente∣tur & a Magistro & sociis absque contradictione aliqua admittatur dum tamen idoneus fuerit & honestus pro me & sponsa mea pro anima domi∣ni Rogeri de Somervyle pro venerabili patre domino Ricardo Dunelm: Episcopo heredibus meis & parentibus nec non & dicte domus benefa∣ctoribus in perpetuum celebraturus, qui se inter scolares dicte domus tolerabiliter honeste & modeste se gesserit ac dicto ministerio diligenter vaaverit in dicta domo perpetuo i voluerit conversetur omnem domus exhibitionem quoad victum & cameram quam aliquis de scolaribus pre∣dictis ut superius decretum est percepeit pro tempore more sue in dicta domo integraliter percepturus. Quem si publica turpitudinis nota invo∣luerit prout de aliquo sociorum quoad ejus correptionem & correctionem & a dicta domo finalem expulsionem nec non occasione sue ammotionis Ammotio, herein always written with a double m m.actionem statuta de socio vel de sociis ejiciendo vel ejiciendis prescripta sine contradictione mei nedum meorum seu cujuscunque alterius titulo vel nomine strictius observentur. Quo ejecto vel decedente si nec per heredes meos alius dicte domui loco illius intra mensem postquam nobis de ejus recessu constiterit presentetur, ad predictum Magistrum & sco∣lares dicte domus capellani electionem quotienscunque sic contingentem solummodo spectare dispono, qui electus sic ut predicitur celebrabit, & si quem capellanum per me presentatum vel per me vel heredes meos presentandum semper predictos Magistrum & scolares eligendum ad ser∣vitia dicta ei incumbentia adimplenda ex causa quacunque aptus non fu∣erit, a dicta domo & exhibitione ejusdem ammoveri dispono, & alium loco ejus forma ut predicitur subrogai. Capellanus vero pro me & sponsa mea quamdiu vixerimus in omni die trium lectionum preerquam a Pascha usque ad festum Sancte Trinitatis, utendo illo officio Salus Po∣puli cum propria collecta secret; & postill: eidem officio pertinent: cele∣bret. In aliis vero festis novem lectionum & duplicibus nec non in fe∣stis prius exceptis de aliis Sanctis prout sibi videbitur opotunum eidem liceat celebrate, In quibus nisi magnum duplex festum fuerit, post pri∣mam collectam, collectam specialem dicat & in suo operimento pro no∣bis suppliciter & devote exoret. Si autem me viam universe carnis in∣gredi contingat sponsa mea vivente, missam de Requiem cum propriis collectis & Placebo & Surge cum commendatione omni die trium lectio∣num pro salute anime mee forma ut predicitur & omnium fidelium de∣functorum celebret devote aliquam collectam pro salute sponse mee quamdiu ipsa vixerit jugiter diendo. Utroque autem nostrum viam u∣niverse carnis ingresso Missa de Requiem pro nobis & personis predictis ac pro omnibus benefactoribus domus supradicte forma ut predicitur per predictum Capellanu devotis celebretur. Insuper singulis annis die anni∣versarii
obitus mei Missa de Requiem cum nota & Placebo & direge prece∣dētibus pro salute anime mee & omniū fideliū defunctorū celebretur. Cui misse & exequiis singuli socii qui pro tēpore fuerint teneantur personali∣ter interesse. Consimilis autē forma quoad anniversariā sponse mee dilecte Margarete penitus observetur. Ad hec quidem omnia & singula prescripta fideliter observāda quilibet Capellanus per me & heredes meos dicte do∣mui presentatus vel presentandus seu per communitatem electus vel ele∣gendus dicta officia forma ut predicitur celebraturus tactis Sacrosanctis corporale prestet juramentum. Juret etiam Capellanus sua ad domum ad∣missione secreta domus clam vel palam nemini revelare unde damnum vel scandalum dicte domui socio vel sociis poterit evenire. Qui etiam in sua ad domum admissione renunci per verba expressa omni future Actioni Juris remdio cujuscunque tam Canonici quam consuetudinarii & civilis si forsan ob sua demerita a dicta domo ipsum ejici contingat in futurum. Juret etiam omnes ordinationes per me pro profectu dicte do∣mus & honestate ordinatas & quecunque alia privilegia dicte domu quantum in eo fuerit observare. Item habeant dicti scolares qualibet die Sabbati missam cum nota de Beata Virgine, quando aliam missa cum nota celebrate seu in Ecclesia Parochiali vel alibi in missis Vniver∣sitatis non teneantur. Cui misse in honorem gloriose Virginis celebrat omnes Capellani intrinseci nisi ex causa legitima fuerint impediti ceteriu socii dicte domus quos propter actus scolasticos seu propter aliam causa legitimam coram Magistro vel locum ejus tenente approbatam minim impediri contigerit interesse teneantur. Quam quidem missam Capell∣nus celebraturus & quilibet alus Capellanus domus predicte in Capell eorum celebraturi pro me & sponsa mea teneantur specialiter exorar Ceterum omni die Veneris quando illam antiphonam antedictam in di∣cta Capella cantari contigerit & in gratiis in mensa dicendis nomen me∣um & sponse mee per Capellanum seu aliquem soium dicte domus inte nomina precipuorum benefactorum recitentur, po nobis specialiter exo∣rando. Illud insuper est attendendum quod si locus habitationis seu sco∣larium predictorum studio vacantium congregatio causis aliquibus eme∣gentibus que facile numerari non poterunt ad locum alium transferat nihil eis commodi, juris vel possessionis depereat in predictis redditib vel rebus aliis sibi assignatis vel deinceps ex pia largitione fidelium assig∣nandis, sed omnia eis nihilominus integra remaneant durentque he ordi∣nationes he & alie in posterum promulgande atque previlega ipsi dom concessa & futuris temporibus concedenda dum tamen hanc ordinatio∣nem tam re quam nomine teneant & observent, sic tamen quod nome fundationis antiquum Collegium non admittat sed sicut prius domus d Balliolo nominetur. Nec est intentionis mee eorum fundationem anti∣quam aut regulas vel statuta tollere sed ea potius presentibus confirmare: & si quid Contrarium legibus dictorum scolarium statutis vel consuetudinibu antiquis ad quas vel que dicte scolares fuerint urati in hac ordinatione me
compertum fuerit, nolo dictos Scolares ad illud observandum aliquates obligari, sed antiqua o non obstante firmitur observentur. Sicut autem in premissis sex socios eligi ratione reddituum per me dicte domui collato∣rum ordinaverim & quemlibet socium & Cappellanum undecim denarios 11 d. per week then, 18 s. now. 40 s. then, a∣bove 40 l. now: which two things made the Masters place above 60 l. per an∣num, besides Chambers and all Perquisites.septianatim, & Magistrum quadraginta solidos ultra communas suas pro suis necessariis de bonis dicte domus ratione reddituum predictorum una cum augmento communarum forma ut predicitur ordinaverim. Volo tamen & ordino quod omnia & singula in premissis ordinata observentur, sicut & quatenus ad hoc domus supradicte per me caritative collate suffi∣ciant facultates. Premissis etiam adjiciendo decerno quod si redditus in presente dicte domui assignati aut in posterum ex pia largitione fideli∣um assignandi excreverint numerus scolarium in dicta domo studio Theo∣logie vacantium, quatenus augeri poterit augeatur. nisi de conferendis in futurum per donatores ipsos aliter contigerit ordinari. Et ne aliqui de scolaribus predictis ignorantiam horum futuris temporibus quovis∣modo pretenderent statuo quod singulis annis in festo Sancte Margarete presens scriptum coram omnibus publie recitetur. Item Statuo ordino & ad premissa adjicio quod Prior seu Custos Monachorum Dunelmensium Oxon: studentium per Priorem Dunelm: prefectus Collega sit in omnibus Cancellario predicto vel ejus Commissario tam in admissione quam con∣firmatione Electi in Magistrum dicte domus de Balliolo & prestatione ju∣ramenti de ammotione ejusdem Magistri in casu quo fuerit ammovendus de quibus supra fit mentio nec non & illorum quos continget eligi ad in∣sistendum Theologie facultate. Ipse quoque Prior seu Custos cum dicto Cancellario vel ejus Commissario exerceat omnia que circa dictos electos fuerint exercenda: sic autem idem Prior seu Cuos una cum Magistris intrinsecis quibus dicte sex scolares vel plures si bona excreverint presen∣tari debent cum eligantur, plenam quoque potestatem cum aliis Magi∣stris habeat ad eosdem scolares examinandum admittendum vel etiam re∣pellendum & ad omnia alia exercenda circa eosdem que circa alios sco∣lares in eadem aula existentes per dictos Magistros extrinsecos exercere consueverint tempore retroacto. Volo insuper statuo & dispono quod Episcopi Dunelmenses qui pro tempore fuerint prefatos Magistrum & scolares ad denunciationem dicti Prioris seu Custodis Monachorum Du∣nelmensium ad observantiam premissorum quoad electionem sex scolarium & Capellani ratione reddituum per me collatorum ad presens nec non ad numeu studentium in casu excrescentie reddituum eorundem cum ac∣ciderint ut premittitur ampliandum ac quod omnia alia & singula supe∣rius expressata possint compellere viis & modis canonicis prout sibi magis videbitur expedite. In quorum omnium testimonium & perpetuam fir∣mitatem tria instrumenta tenoris consimilis sunt confecta. Quorum cuilibet sigilla Reverendi Patris Domini Ricardi Dei gratia Dunelm: E∣piscopi Religiosorum viorum dominorum Prioris & capituli Dunelm:
venerabilis viri domini Cancellarii Universitatis Oxon: & Magistri & scolarium Aule de Balliolo predictorum una cum sigillo meo apponi pro∣curavi. Quorum etiam instrumentorum unum penes dictos Priorem & Conventum aliud penes prefatos Magistrum & scolares tertium vero pe∣nes heredes & aignatos meos volo ordino & dispono perpetuo remane∣re. Et nos Ricardus permissione divina Dunelmensis Episcopus ad roga∣tionem Domini Philippi ac Magistri & scolarium predictorum ad corro∣borationem statutorum seu ordinationum predictorum quatenus rite & canonice sunt eita quatenus ad nos pertinet sigillum nostrum decimo octavo die mensis Octobris, Anno Domini Millesimo CCCmo quadragemo in Mannerio nostro de Dukeland presentibus duximus apponendum. Jure consnetudine & dignitate nostris & Ecclesie nostre Dunelmensis in omni∣bus semper saluis. Et nos Prior Ecclesie Dunelmensis & ejusdem loci con∣ventus omnia & singula supradicta rationabiliter statuta ordinata & de∣creta per Dominum Philippum memoratum ac autoritate pontificasi dicti reverendi patris ut premittitur roborata ad instantiam dicti domini Phi∣lippi Magistri & scolarium prefatorum quantum in nobis est de nostro consensu unanimi ac appositione Sigilli nostri communis Capituli Du∣lm approbamus ratificamus & etiam confirmamus Dat: in domo nostra capitulari Dunelm: vicesimo quarto die mensis octobris Anno Domini supra∣dicto. Et nos Cancellarius Universatis antedicte ad rogatum dictorum domini Philippi Magistri & scolarium domus supradicte in testimonium premissorum quatenus rite & legitime sunt ordinata in crastino purificatio∣nis beate Marie anno supradicto sigillum officii nostri presentibus apposui∣mus. Et nos Magister & scolares domus supradicte submittentes nos & domum notram de Balliolo predictam ex certa scientia pure sponte ju∣risdictioni & correctioni venerabilis in Christo Patris Domini Dei grata Dunelm: Episc: qui pro tempore fuerit quod ecclesiam de Micklebenton & quoad omnia alia & singula supradicta nos & dictam ecclesiam contin∣gentia jurisdictionem predicti venerabilis patris scienter in corroboratio∣nem confirmationem & perpetue rei firmiaem omnium & singulorum superius expressoru sigillum nostrū comme presentibus duximus appo∣nendum Dat: Oxon: in Aua de Balliolo in crastino purificationis beate Ma∣rie Anno Dom: supradicto. Nos igitur Edwardus Rex Scotorum antedi∣ctus ac Magistri & scolarium aule sive domus de Balliolo in Oxon: ab an∣tiquo fundator dictam cartam atque statuta in eadem contenta omnia & singula tanquam juri congrua & rationi consona approbamus ratificamus & quantum in nobis estpro nobis & successoribus nostris confirmamus non obstantibus quibusunque statutis contraiis privilegiis seu consuetu∣dinibus ab antecessoribus nostris ante hec tempora editis concessis appro∣batis seu confirmatis. In quorum omnium testimonium Sigillum nostrum presentibus fecimus apponendum. Dat.
To these Statutes thus confirmed by Edward Balliol, is put the Seal of Sir Philip Somervyle, which is a Field (Semée) powdered with Crosses Fi∣chées, charged with Three Spread-Eagles: wherein it is provided, amongst other things, That nothing contrariant to the Statutes of the first Foun∣dation be binding to these: of which sort, are the Rules given to Fel∣lows to be chosen to the profession of Divinity, when once they become Regents; and after so many Years, to become Bachelors in Divinity, &c. as having no Foundation in, but rather overthrowing the Statutes of Der∣vorgille, which allow neither Masters nor Bachelors in Divinity to be in the House; the rigour whereof was fain to be taken off by the Pope him∣self, as hath been said. But to take things in that order as they are in these Statutes of Sir Philip, the first for our purpose, is, That over and above the 16 Fellows, which had of old been in the House, the Fellows wete to choose six Scholars, born in places nearest to the site of the Lands by him given, and those the poorest, the best and the greatest Proficients. 2. They were to choose a Master by a formal Election, to be called by the Principal or his Vicegerent; which Master was no sooner elected, then they were bound to present him: 1. To the Lords of the Mannor of Wicknore in Northumberland (so long as they were of the Posterity of the said Sir Philip.) 2. To the Chancellor of the University of Oxon, or to his Com∣missary. 3. To the Warden of the Monks of Durham (now Trinity Col∣ledge) and others, Masters of Art: who without all contradiction were to admit him. The which Durham Colledge, or place of the Monks of Guil: Camden & alii per∣stringuntur.Durham, Mr. Camden in his Britania will have to be built and endowed by Thomas Hatfeild Bishop of Durham: so also Godwin of Bishops (in the Life of the said Thomas Hatfeild) Pitsaeus and others whom they follow. Which Durham Colledge, Pitsaeus says, was for eight Monks and seven Clerks, to be placed there at the discretion of the Prior of Durham: But they had a Prior of their own, as is evident from these Sta∣tutes.Put it is clear to be otherwise from the very date of these Statutes, which was Anno Dom: 1340. whereas Durham Colledge, pretended to be built by the said Hatfeild, was Founded Anno 1350. and Hatfeild himself not advanced to be Bishop of that Sea before about 1345. But it's yet more evident, in that these Statutes were confirmed (as we see) by Richard (that is Richard Bury) Bishop of that Sea, and immediate Predecessor to the aforesaid Thomas, which had been 10 Years before the Foundation of Hatfeilds pretended Colledge, had the same been of no greater Antiquity, and so our Master had been to be presented to a mere Idea: And therefore that which the said Bishop Godwin, in the Life of the said Learned and pious Prelate Richard Bury aforesaid, says to be an erroneous Tradition, is a very truth, or nearer to it then the o∣ther; namely, That the said Richard Founded the said Durham Col∣ledge, unto the Warden or Prior whereof [by reason of the de∣pendance of him and his Society upon the Priory of the Cathedral of Durham] our Master was to be presented. But that which takes away the
Bone from both of them, is that noted Sect. 18. viz. The Land given by Pomfrait and Humbleton, 3 Ed. 2. Anno Dom. 1309, bounded one way by the Lands of the Monks of Durham, which was 39 Years before either of the terms fore-mentioned. Adde hereunto the Land passed over by Sacer to Fodringheye, Sect. 18. which was Anno 1282. and therefore 27 Years more, and consequently 66 before Hatfields or Bury's time. But to return, they were in the third place to choose six Fellows out of the whole number for the study of Divinity, whereof they were to be capable as soon as they became Regents: and the Parties so Elected, in the sixth Year of their Election, were to oppose; and in the ninth or tenth Year, to read the Master of the Sentences [which answers to our Reading the Epistles of St. Paul, and is the Formality of a Batchelor in Di∣vinity] unless hindred by some lawful and reasonable cause. Fourthly, They were to remember the Benefactors in the Grace, as well as Offices. Fifthly, Of the Chaplains which were then divers, they were to have one perpetual in the House to be chosen by Sir Philip and his Heirs, &c. Sixthly, The number of Scholars to be design'd for Divinity, were to in∣crease according to the increase of the Revenues [provided that his Scho∣lars, and those of the ancient Foundation, had 11 d. per week] unless future Benefactors should otherwise Ordain. Lastly, The Bishops of Durham [to whose Jurisdiction the Colledge did submit] had power given them to enforce the due execution of the Premises, upon infor∣mation given by the Prior or Warden of the Monks of Durham afore∣said. SECT. 25. Now the Beneficies of Fillingham, Risom and Bratle∣by, in the County of Lincoln, did once belong to the Abbot and Convent of the Monastery of the Holy Trinity at Aurenches [so Exaquium is cal∣led in a French Deed] in the Diocess of Constance in Normandy, of the Order of the Benedictines. But in regard of the Troubles at Sea, occasi∣oned chiefly by the Wars between the two Kingdoms, the Bishop of Con∣stance aforesaid, at their Instance, gave License to sell the said Livings, as appears under his Seal in Writing, dated Mar: 3. 1343. And Thomas Cave Rector of Welwick, for the good affection he bare to the Master and 100 l. then, as good as 1500 l. now.Scholars of the House of Balliol in Oxon, had left in the hands of Wil∣liam Brocklesby Clerk, 100 l. sterling, to buy these three Benefices; that out of the Profits thereof, in case they might be transferred to the proper use of the said Master and Scholars, the number of the Scholars might be increased: All which, will appear by this following Indenture, which is the very first Record wherein Balliol is written with a single L.
Hee Indentura testatur quod cum Magister Thomas Cave Rector Ec∣clesie de Welwick, ob affectionem quam habuit versus Magistrum & Sco∣lares domus de Baliolo in Oxon: liberasset Wilhelmo de Broclesby clerico centum libras sterlingorum ad emendum ad opus dictorum Magistri & Scolarium de Abbate & Conventu de Exaquio in Normannia advocationes Ecclesiarum de Fylingham, Brotleby & Rysum, in Com: Lincoln, ac idem Thomas jam defunctus in Testamento suo ordinasset inter cetera quod si dicti Magister & Scolare dictas advocationes habere & easdem Ecclesias in proprios usus adjungere possent, quod de fructibus earundem numerus solaium augeretur ibidem. Ita tamen quod ipsi servent regulas & sta∣tuta prime fundationis domus predicte, dictus Wilhelmus de Broclesby qui cognovit se recepisse pecuniam predictam ex causa predicta obligat se & executores suos ad solutionem dictarum centum librarum po dictis advocationibus emendis ad opus Magistri & scolarium in omnibus prout superius continetur. Ita tamen quod dicti Magister & scolares inveni∣ant securitatem predicto Wilhelmo de Broclesby ac heredibus & executo∣ribus predicti Magistri Thome ad augmentandum numerum scolarium in dicta domo quam cito appropriationem dictarum ecclesiarum vel aliqua∣rum earundem fuerint assecuti juxta facultates & valorem ecclesiarum appropriatarum vel ecclesie appropriate in hac parte. Videlicet augen▪do numerum suum de tot scolaribus quot de exitibus & proficuis dicta▪rum ecclesiarum seu alicujus earundem de claro proventibus ad opus di▪ctorum Magistri & scolarium poterunt rationabiliter sustentari: qui etiam in dicto Testamto continetur quod dictus Magister Thomas volui▪in eventu quo dicte advocationes ad opus dictorum Magistri & scolarium adquiri non possent, quod dicte centum libre liberarentur pauperibu scolaribus infra domum predictam de Baliolo, Ita quod numerus scolari▪um ibidem augeretur juxta discretionem dicti Wilhelmi de Broclesby▪ Idem Wilhelmus volens implere voluntatem dicti Magistri Thome in ha parte cōcedit solvere prefatis Magistro & scolaribus in eventu quod dict advocationes adquiri non poterunt, dictas centum libras in forma predi∣cta. Ita tamen quod dicti Magister & scolares eandem pecuniam po∣nant sub bona custodia & eam servari faciant quous{que} aliquas possessione inde adquirere possint pro augmentatione numeri scolarium in eadem domo: & quod quam cito aliquas possessiones inde adquisiverint ipsi re∣cipiant scolares in majori numero in eandem domum & os sustentabu prout ipse possessiones adquirende ad hoc rationabiliter sufficere vaeant. Et nihilomins ipse Magister & scolares facient a die dat: hujus inden▪ture in futurum aliqua specialia suffragia pro anima ejusdem Thome i Missis celebrandis & aliis orationibus faciendis in domo predicta. Pro∣viso semper quod si amissio in Mari vel itinere vel alia casualitas fiat  pecunia predicta dum tamē idē Wilhelm: non fuerit in culpa, quod ipse ve executores sui inde versus dictos Magistrum & scolares non onerentur &
quod expense necessrie & solutiones ex hac causa facte eidem Wilhelmo & executoribus suis allocentur prout idem Wilhelmus & executores sui dicere velit super sacamentm suum. In cujus rei testimonium fit hoc scriptum indentatum. Unde parti penes dictum Wilhelmum remanenti sigillum commune dicte domus de Baliolo apponitur & altera pars ejus∣dem indenture penes predictos Magistrum & scolares sigillo predicti Wilhelmi remanet roborata. Dat: Londini quinto die Martii, Anno Dom. Millesimo trecentesimo quadragismo secundo. 1342. Now these three Benefices were accordingly bought, and the Appropria∣tion thereof to the Master and Scholars, and their successors, is warrant∣ed by many Writings, particularly by two Letters Patents of King Edw: one to give Licence for selling and buying of them; the other for the confirmation of the Purchase to the Colledge, upon the conditions afore∣said. The first whereof I omit: the later is as followeth. Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglie & Francie & Dominus Hibernie: Omnibus ad quos presentes litere prevenerint salutem. Sciatis quod cum sexto decimo di Maii, Anno Regni uostri Anglie sexto decimo de gratia nostra speciali concesserimus & licentiam dederimus pro nobis & heredibus nostris quantum in nobis fuit Abbati & Conventui de Exaquio in Normannia quod quod ipsi de advocationibus Ecclesiarum de Filyngham, Brotleby & Rysom, in Com: Lincoln, Feoffare, possent Wilhelmum de Broclesby, & Thomam de Cave Clericos, habend: & tenend: eisdem Wilhelmo & Thome & He∣redibus suis de capitalibus dominicis feodi illius in perpetuum, & eisdem Wilhelmo & Thome quod ipsi advocationes predictas a prefatis Abbate & Conventu recipere & tenere possent sibi & heredibus suis predictis sicut predi∣ctum est. Similiter Licentiam dederimus specialem eo non obstante quod ad∣vocationes predicte in  nostra inter ceteras possessiones Religiosorum alieni∣genrum de potstate Francie existunt: & insuper concesserimus eisdem Wil∣helmo & Thome quod ipsi advocationes predicta dare possint & assignare dilectis nobis Magistro & scolaribus de la Baliolhalle Oxon: habend: & te∣nend: prefato Magistro & scolaribus & successoribus suis in perpetuum: Ita quod ipsi recepti advocationibus illis ecclesias illas appropriare & ea sic appro∣priats in proprios u tenere possent sibi & successoribus sui ut predictum est. Statut de terris & tenementis ad manum mortuam non ponendis edito non ob∣stante. Ac prefati Abbs & Conventus postmodum unanimi consensu per scri∣ptum suum dederint & concessrint prefato Wilhelmo, dicto▪ Thoma tuno de∣functo, advocationes predictas cum omnibus juribus & pertinentiis spectantibus ad easdem habend: & tenend eidem Wilhelmo heredibus ac assignatio suis in perpetuum: dictu{que} Wilhelmus pen carta suam advocationes easdem cum omnib jnibu & pertinenti suis predictis Hugoni de Corbriggt Magistre scolarium an predicte & soiis  scolaribus ejusdem aule habend: & tenend:
sibi & successoribus suis. Jam dederit similiter & concessrit virtute concessio∣n nostraru & Licentie predicte prout premissa  in nostis literis, quam predictorum Abbatis & Conventus ac ipsius Wilhelmi scripto & Carta pre∣dictis plenius exprimuntur. Nos ex abundanti & ut predicta ceteris eviden∣tius liqueant tum donatiom & concessionem predictorum Abbatis & Conven∣tus quam donationem & Concessionem ipsius Wilhelmi predictorum ratas ha∣bentes & gratas eas pro nobis & heredibus nostris sicut superius annotantur ac∣ceptamus approbamus confirmamus & concessimus perpresentes. In cujus rei testimonium has Literas nostras fecimus fieri patentes. Teste meipso apud Westmonasterium vicesimo octavo die Februarii Anno regni nostri Angl: de∣cimo octavo, Reg: in vero nostri Francie quinto. These Letters Patents did Queen Eliz: totidem verbis, confirm, toge∣ther with all other Letters Patents made by her Predecessors in favour of this Colledge, under her Great Seal: Which, with other Letters Patents of the same Queen hereafter to be mentioned, are inclosed together in one long Charter Box, or black Case. But so it was, that Fylingham, the most considerable of all the three, the Masters of the House holding by Presenta∣tion, and Dr. Piers Master thereof being Incumbent, He did let a Lease of 99 Years of the whole Rectory, 13 Eliz. for the Rent of 22 pound per annum, to be paid to the Master who was then to be Incumbent, the Lessee being obliged to pay the Curate. Here then I shall insert all Acts material that have been made in the premises, recorded upon our Regi∣ster according to the dates they bear. Ordinatum & constitutum est ex consensu Reverendissii in Christo atris permission divina Lincoln Episc: Collegii nostri de Baliolo in Universitate Oxon: Visitatoris Magistri Francisci Babington Sacre Theologie Professoris, Magistri sive Custodis dicti Collegii, & omnium sociorum ejusdem: Anno Dom. 1560. & Anno Regni Domine Elizabethe Dei Gratia Angl: Francie & Hibernie, Regine fidei defensoris, &c. Secundo die vero Augusti viceso. Ʋt [ob diversa incommoda nostro Collegio de Baliolo predicto ex crebra Ma∣gistrorum sive Custodum mutatione & discessione incidentia] quoties & quan∣docnnque post-hac Rectoria nostra de Fylingham, Lincoln: Dioces: ad nostram donationem & presentaetionem spectans vacare contigerit, jnxta statutum de Magistri residentia Magistro sive Custodi offeratur & donetr. Ita tamen ut quocun{que} modo a dicto Collegio quilibet post-hac futurus Magister sive Custos nostri Collegii discesserit sive per liberam resignationm sive per justam privatio∣nem predictam Rectoriam etiam cum omnibus suis juribus & pertinentiis dicto Collegio relinquat impropriatm Magistro Collegii perpetuis futuris temporibus si fieri possit. Preterea quis{que} ita discedens slvet dicte Domine Regie heredi∣bus & assignatis suis Heriotam ut vocant & finem pro terris nostris in veteri Woodstock & Wootton in Com: Oxon: predict: pro qualibet mutatione &
discessione Magistri sive Custodi a dicto Collegio pro consuitudine debita. Ad cujus ejusdem observationem Magister sive Custos quiscun{que} fuerit in prima sua admissione Visitatori admittents dabit fidem, &c. per me Franciscum Babington, Magistrum Coll: Ball: Oxon. per me Ric: Shaughues. per me Arthurum Garcew. per me Radulphum Lathmum. About 10 Years after this, it was that Dr. Piers aforesaid, made the fore-mentioned Lease, beariug date Febr: 26. 1570. but according to the Colledge Register, it was 1571. and indeed it was not to commence till St. Marks day following, which was in the Year 1571. Whereupon a Decree was made by the Bishop of Lincoln, the Master and Fellows; as followeth. Anno Dom: 1571. die vero Maii 17. A Magistro & Sociis Collegii de Balliolo in Ʋniversitate Oxon: cum assensu Reverendi in Christo Patris Tho∣me Lincolniensis Epis: ejusdem Collegii visitatoris ordinatum Statutum & pro se suis{que} successoribus perpetuis futuris temporibus decretum est, ut quicun{que} in posterum Magister sive Custos predicti Collegii futurus est, is antequam ad officii executionem in dicto Collegio admittatur, juramento Visitatori in prima sui admissione prestito firmiter se obstring at ista se observaturum. Prim quod Rectoriam de Fillingham in Com: Lincoln: predict: quandocun{que} eadem a Sociis Collegii predicti offeratur, acceptabit, nec eam recusabit ullo modo aut ulla de Causa quamdiu dicti Collegii Magister extiterit. Secundo quod ean∣dem Rectoriam nulla de causa resignabit aut relinquet quamdiu ipse Magister existit dicti Collegii: Quandocunque tamen a dicti Collegii Gubernatione sive per resignationem sive per deprivationem aut ulla alia de causa recedet, suum justitulum & clameum in eadem Rectoria resignabit & relinquet intra unum ensem proxime sequentem. Tertio quod quamdiu dictus Magister predictam Rectoriam de Fyllingham habuerit persolvet singulis annis in tres publica Le∣ctiones in Communi Aula ejusdem Collegii habendas, viz. Graecam Diale∣cticam Rhetoricam Octo libras trdecim solidos & quatuor denrios prelecto∣ribus earundem Lectionum qui in dicto Collegio eisdem die modo & forma qui∣bus coteri ejusedem Collegii officiarii eligentur, aequa portione ad quatuor usitatos anni terminos distribuendas. Proviso tamen quod iis duobus annis qui∣bus primitiae sive primi fructus ejusdem Rectoriae persolvendi sunt, dicti pre∣lectores sex libris contentierunt, eisdem modo & temporibus quibus supradictū est persolvend. Et ut hec decreta perpetuo observentur dictus Reverendus
Pater Lincoln: Episc: & Magister Socii{que} Collegii predicti nomina sua sub∣scripserunt. Thomas Lincoln. Adam Squier. Johannes Tunkis. Adam Hill. Robert Persons. Johannes Wilson. Wherefore, Anno 1659. the Colledge call'd George Saunderson Baro∣net, Lord Viscount Castleton, the Lessee of Fillingham, and the Incum∣bent Mr. Ra: Hollingworth into Chancery, to the end that discovery might be made thereby, by what warranty they held so considerable a thing, so much to the prejudice of the Foundation, without Rent or Acknow∣ledgement? Whereunto my Lord Castleton demurred: But Mr. Holling∣worth answered, That he knew not any Title we had thereunto; which how truly, may appear not only by the Premises, and upon our own Re∣gister, wherein his Suit with my Lord Castleton [with the very state of the Case it self] is recorded, but also by the said Hollingworths own Letter, which is as followeth. To the Right Worshipfnll Dr. LAWRENCE, Master of Baliol Colledge, in Oxon these present, or in his absence to his Vicegerent. Worthy Sir, All due respects premised, having very good hopes now to overthrow that unreasonable and most unconscionable long Lease of the Parsonage of Fil∣lingham, whereof your Colledge is Patron, I am bold to crave your assistance, as heretofore I did from Dr. Parkhust and the then Fellowes, in my former chargo∣ble Suit, whom I ever found ready in that kind, as some I suppose of your now Fellows may well remember. Nor indeed doth it make onely for my benefit, but for the Colledges also, to have the said Lease overthrown, there being many Years yet to come therein. Neither do I desire to put you to any charge, but onely request, That I may have Dr. Pierce's admission to the Mastership of the Colledge by the Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1570. mense Maii, as I remember, under Seal to shew in evidence before the Judges, as I had it be∣fore, being a very material thing in the Case, and I shall faithfully return i
again to the Colledge as I did before, either by this Bearer Mr. Ellis, or his Father, or whom you shall be pleased to appoint, and ever remain, Yours, in all good Offices to be commanded, Rod: Hollingworth. Lond: June 2. 1647. In which Letter, he very truly professes the Patronage of the said Be∣nefice to remain in us, and our readiness to assist him in the overthrowing of the Lease, &c. For my Lord of Lincoln, Williams (whose Chaplain Mr. Hollingworth was) did by his Letter to the Master and Fellows [at the reading whereof I was present] signifie, That the said Living was in the Lapse, with desire that we would give Mr. Hollingworth a Presenta∣tion; and if so, then his Lordship would adde only a Corroboration thereof, to the end that the Colledge might not suffer in their right to the Advowson: which desire of his Lordship we yielded unto, and gave him a Presentation under Seal. But what use he made thereof, I cannot say: but two of our Fellows did afterwards travel to Lincoln Assizes to testifie on his behalf, where Mr. Hollingworth obtained only a special Ver∣dict; the which (Troubles coming on) enforced Mr. Hollingworth to a Composition. But it seems by the aforesaid Letter, that in 1647. he re∣vived his Suit, and then brought my Lord to terms, which, as I have heard, made up Mr. Hollingworth's allowance, in all, to be worth 60 l. per annum, with the 22 l. per annum reserved upon the Lease. And whe∣ther this were well performed to him, or he pleased with the allowance, I cannot say; but so it was, that, since the King came in, he tryed another fall with my Lord Castleton, who, at the Assizes, laid him on his back u∣on a meer misnómer: for he writing himself sometimes Rodolphus, some∣times Radulphus, sometimes Radolphus, his Adversaries found out that he had been presented by the one, and brought his Action by the other: He offering to justifie them to be all one, whereunto the Judge is said to have replyed, That then Joan Both derived from the same Original.and Jane were both one name. [He was either surprized in the business, or else he wanted a good and able Lawyer to extricate him out of that present difficulty; such was St. Ives in the matter of his poor Hostess at Tours in France. We read in the Annals of Britania Armorica, written in French by Alan Bouchard, but afterwards augmented and Printed in French at Paris, 1531. that in the Year 1303. this St. Ives was eminent, born in the Bishoprick of Treguier, one of the nine in Britany aforesaid, all whose Bps. are suffragans to the Archbishop of Tours: He is famous (amongst other things) for pleading the cause of that his Hostess, a poor Widow of Tours, against two crafty Merchants, who delivered her a full Purse, upon condition that she should not deli∣ver
it to either singly, unless they came both together. A little after, one of them, under pretext of an urgent necessity, required the Purse of her, which she delivered to him, pretending that his Fellow stood by the goods he had bought in the Market in expectation of the money. The Purse was no sooner thus delivered to the one, then the other came to de∣mand it; nor would he take any answer, but brings his Action against her for 200 Crowns of gold, which he pretended to have been in the Purse. The Night before the hearing, St. Ives came to her House, and demand∣ing what news, she said, Very bad on her part, for to morrow she was in danger of being condemned in 200 Crowns of gold. St. Ives received a relation of the matter, bade her fear nothing. On the morrow, the Case being opened by the Plaintiff, St. Ives said, That he was for the Widow (he was a professed Advocate for those who went to Law in forma pauperū) and that she had with much adoe procured the money, and said, Let them according to their Conditions come both in place, and they should receive it; which answer, the Judge allowed of. Whereupon that cunning Mer∣chant waxed pale with fear; and the matter being further examined, he was hanged within three days, as one who might have put Iron into the Purse instead of Gold. How many cheats were here complicated, I shall not now stand to observe, nor how the Law is many times made use of to undoe persons, and rob them of their right. This St. Ives was, upon the Petition of rhe Country, Sainted 50 Years after his death. He was a Priest and an Advocate too, and was buryed in the Cathedral Church of Treguier, with this Epitaph, Sanctus Ivo fuit Brito; Advocatus, & non latro; res miranda. For want of such a Lawyer, our Hollingworth was fain to become non-suited.] The rectifying of which mistake (if he in∣tended it) was prevented by his death: who indeed, during his life, did so well season that great Parish with his Doctrine, that he left not behind him one Factious or Fanatick person in the place. But a question may be made, Why the Masters of the House, bound by Oath to accept of the Presentation to the Rectory of Fillingham, by vertue of the foresaid De∣cree of 1571, did suffer it to Lapse into the hands of Strangers? where∣unto I answer, That that Obligation was taken off by a later Decree; the Tenor whereof is as followeth. Anno Dom. 1615. Jan. 14. Unanimi consensu Magistri & omnium soci∣orum Collegii de Balliolo in Ʋniversitate Oxon: una cum assensu Reverendi in Christo Patris Ricardi Episc: Lincoln: ejusdem Collegii Visitatoris diversas ob causas specialiter moventes & ad ejusdem Collegii bonum atque emolumen∣tum & ad vitanda quedam gravamina apprime spectantes Concordatum ordi∣natum at{que} statutnm est nos{que} supra nominati concordamus ordinamus at{que} sta∣tuimus Actum illud & Decretum, Anno Dom. 1571. Die mensis Maii 17. De▪Rectoria Fillingham in Com: Lincoln: a Magistro Collegii virtute jura∣menti
in prima admissione prestandi acceptanda at{que} non resignanda ne{que} relin∣quenda quamdiu dicti Collegii Magister existit reliquis{que} inde consequentibu circumstantiis de cannonibus in Ecclesia Fillingham & Lecturis in Collegio Magistri sumptu habendis ab hoc tempore irritum ac nullum fore. Id{que} ea∣dem qua decretum est autoritate irritum facimus cassumus annullamus & nu∣mero decretorum expungimus, Ne deinceps de jure valeat Neve ultra Magi∣ster ulla ejus particula teneatur. In cujus rei fidem & testimonium. Nos omnes supradicti Visitator Magister & Socii nomina nostra Subscripsimus, die & anno supradictis. R. Lincoln. Rob: Sarum, Mag: Coll: Ca: Morley. Jo: Chenellm. Edw: Wilson. Nath: Williams. Rob: Chepman. Rob. Godfrey. Jo: English. Jo: Churchar. Gul: Armeston. SECT. 26. Margaret-hall before-mentioned, Sect. 22. was bought by Cave and Brocklesby, both mentioned in the recited Indenture and Pa∣tent of Fillingham, Rob: Paynink then Chancellor, and witness to the Grant. And in the tenth of Ric: 2. I find a Licence from the King to Hamond Haskman and Thomas Cinlow, to give three Tofts and one Gar∣den, with the appurtenances contiguous to the House of the Master and Scholars of Balliol-hall, for the enlargement of their Mansion; and this written Margarets-hall on the back-side thereof, in a hand as old, if not the very same, as that within is. But that these two are the very same [is very improbable] the Indentity of names being no good medium to infer the sameness of things, as before I have noted; besides the vast interval between 14 Edw. 3. (for about that time Brocklesby lived) and 10 Ric. 2. viz. 46 Years. In the same foresaid 22 Sect. we made mention of Saucer-hall; this was given 13 Ed. 3. The Year before, that Messuage of ours in St. Giles's Parish, together with the Land in Walton-fields thereunto be∣longing, was given 12 Edward 3. One other Tenement in St. Giles's Parish was given 6 Edw. 3. A third Messuage and Garden in St. Giles's Parish, was given 39 Edw. 3. The House and the Appurtenances in St. Peters Parish in the Bayly, given by Jo: Burton Bedel of the University, 49 Edw. 3. There are also six Writings tyed together, of six Houses in St. Ebbs Parish: whereof one was given in the Reign of Edw. 3. another
by George Nevil B. of Exon. The corner Tenement, over-against Can∣dych, was given 1 R. 2. but when or how the Tenement adjoyning to it, which is now the South-part of the Katherine-wheel, came to be the Col∣ledges, I doe not find; the said Tenement seemed to have belonged to St. Fridisweds, as being formerly described to be on the west-part of Old Balliol-hall. I thought it might possibly have been exchanged for the Sy∣nagogue and great Port in St. Aldats Parish, which were taken away, to∣gether with the rest of our fore-mentioned Houses, npon the building of Christ-Church; but that I find under a Publick Notaries hand, 1529. that we never received any thing in compensation of them, though largely promised, as before is noted, Sect. 17. That which now is the Katherine-wheel, was given us 3 Ric. 2. as being described in the Deed to be direct∣ly opposite to the East-end of Magdalen Church. In the same Year also, John Duke and Julian his Wife, gave a Messuage and Shop in St. Giles's Parish: so that four Messuages were given in St. Giles's Parish, but three of them only remain to us: whereof, unless two united and made one since, I cannot shew a reason. And last of all, a shop under a room be∣longing to Oriel Colledge in St. Marys Parish, was given 8 H. 4. which is part of Mr. Cryps's shop, late Book-seller in the High-street. There is mention made in a Deed without date (and therefore very ancient) of a Messuage situate between a Tenement of the Universities, called Old Balliol-hall on the West, and a Tenement of the Master and Scholars of Balliol-hall, call'd New Balliol-hall; which Tenement stood next to, or upon part of that ground where now Hammonds Lodgings do stand, which have been formerly call'd the New buildings. I shall shew hereafter how it came to be called Hamond-hall, or Hamonds Lodgings. These Lod∣gings were either intended to be drawn out farther, or else were cut off to make room for the Masters Garden, as appears by the Door and Mor∣taises for Joysts left, to be seen at the end thereof. But that there have been Buildings farther East-ward from thence, appears by the Oven, and other Evidences found upon the late reparation of the Wall towards the street adjoyning; which Ovens mouth was found to be lower then the ground we there tread upon, so much is the Earth swelled up again to∣wards its natural rotundity; if it be true, that (as some Geographers would have it) the Earth in general has such inclinations, and is daily experimented in the parts thereof: where we see the Mountains willing to abate daily of their proud tops, by the abundance of stones falling from thence towards the Valleys; and the humble Valleys swelling up, as if they would meet them half way for an accommodation into a level, as is experimented in all Meadows, and may be seen by our old Colledges, whereof time hath half buryed some in that Earth they once stood above; and had done all the rest, had they not been kept from sinking quite into their Graves, by the bounty of Pious Benefactors: Were these things to
be ascribed, as some think, to the sinking of Buildings, 'twere strange that they should never leave sinking, and that so equally too, that the Eaves, for the most part, hold the same proportion of height in every part, and the same level as ever they did. But be it as it will, the pre∣sent excrescences of some parts of the Earth are so inconsiderable to the whole, that it holds the proportion of a moth or dust to a ball, as some note Cleomedes to have affirmed. We usually say, That the Earth and the Sea make one Globe, and therefore without all consideration (as some have had) of the depth of the Sea, the highest Mountain in the World has been found scarce to bear such proportion to the semidiameter of the Earth, as is that of one to a thousand. Nevertheless, the uneveness of the Earth, how small soever in it self, is of much concern to those that people it, for the advantage that is in it, as well for the conveniency of habitation, as for quantity of ground, which is much greater, being measured by the Arks, then by the Hypoteneuses or Subtenses according to which it were to be measured, were it perfectly round: unto which roundness, notwith∣standing, did the Earth incline, it would not receive its accomplishment in the time that the World (according to the Opinions of Men) is to en∣dure, the motion towards it being so slow as it is: which may be proved from the buildings which are noted, Sect. 19. to be given by Sawser to Fodringheye, to be confirmed to the Colledge, which are none else but the Masters Stable and the adjacents, though serv'd at first for Lodgings for Scholars; which, I am confident were never since that time, new built; and yet the Earth is not swell'd up above four or five Foot in this Four hundred Years space. But in the Condition, wherein now it is, it something resembles the old remainder of Brasenose Colledge or Hall in Stanford in Lincoln shire, but that that stands more upon the declining of a Hill: alike squalid it was and had nothing [when I visited it] remaining in it self whereby to own that Name, besides the Brazen Nose which held the Ring of the Door. And now to stay the Reader a little longer, I would have him note that some Cantabrigians, willing to prove their University the Ancienter of the two, would have ours to be of no longer standing then that Brazen-Nose and of the return [for it was no more] of part of it from thence [which gave occasion to that Oath given to Proceeders, Quod non leges vel au∣dies Stanfordiae tanquam in Schola generali] which was at the least 100 years after the first Foundation of this our Colledge. Old stories are not enough to decide this, or any other Controversy, but reall Records only: Now a Record they have, but none ancienter then Maud the Empresse, as I have heard Sir William le Neve larentiux confess, (though a great Champion for Cambridge Eldership) which Record is to be found in the Tower, and tis a Patent which she gave them for [and what was it?] the Founding of a Grammar School, which is not enough to entitle it to the
Name of a University, ot Studium generale. Had ours learned its Acci∣dence no sooner then that, it would not have been so early espoused to the Liberal Arts, and Divinity it self, as to have brought forth Three Thou∣sand Children, which the malice and violence of the Townsmen enforced to depart hence to Cambridge, Reading and Maidstone, in the time of K. John; though in a short time they returned to their Mother again, and that at the Petition of the Town it self, who therein professed that they could not subsist without them. And this gave the first occasion of that Duty of the City of Oxford, of Swearing to maintain the Priviledges of the University, as another did of Offering 63 Pence; all which may ap∣pear by the Records of our University under the Seal of the Town of Oxon. The Oath is to be taken at the appointment of the Vice-Chancellour: and the Offering of 63 Pence (which is for the 63 Schollars which were slain) is yearly upon St. Scholastica's day, which is Feb. 10. Now I doe not The Towns∣mens Oath took its rise from the sus∣pendium Cle∣ricorum in K. John's time: But the Offer∣ing on S. Scho∣lastica's day, not till the great conflict, Anno 29▪ Edw. 3.marvel that they returned from Reading and Maidstone, yet it seems strange that they should be so easily brought back from Cambridge, if it were at that time a University or Studium generale: but the Petition of the Town, backt with the Mediation of the Bishop of Tusculum, the Popes Legate then here, did prevail with them to return to this place, so famous, that it deserved the Name of The Foundation of the Church, in the time of K. H. 3. and continued so numerous, thay swarmes of Scholars, fled to Stanford in the Raign of Edw. 3. where they remained till called back to their old Hive, wherein they have ever since lived under the same Priviledges with the rest, who made room for them, the want whereof has ever been the occasion of new Colonies, as well of Men as of Bees. SECT. 27. This our Colledge did not long flourish under the Statutes of Sir Phillip Somervyle interfering with those of Dervorgille, for Anno 1364. Simon Bishop of London was specially deputed Commis∣sary from the Apostolical Sea to doe what in Equity he judged meet, in order to the peace and quiet of the House, upon view had of the First and Second Statutes, and upon further information, which otherwis might be given him. The Letters Apostolick by him with all reverence received, did he send to be perused, and to be ordered by Mr. John Hethingham Chancellour of the University of Oxon, and Hen. de Whitfield Provost of Queens Hall in Oxon, both Professours of Divinity, and Mr. Ralph Orgum Inceptor in the Civil Law, to be transcribed; with Command by Apo∣stolick Authority to send him those Letters back again with true Copies of the first and second Statutes, and such further faithfull informatiou as might enable him the said Bishop of London to proceed in the premises accordingly. This done, the said Bishop of London gave us a new body of Statutes: Which could I come to the sight of, I would have here inser∣ted; But I find them not in our own Archiues, not yet in the Registers
Office of the Bishop of London, if those I imployed to search there deceiv∣ed me not. I wonder how we should loose such a Monument as those were, by which the Colledge was governed for so many years, even till the Compiling of our Satutes now in force. Nevertheless it seemes, by what I shall shew, it was therein provided, that in Case any statute seemed too These Rectors made inquisi∣tion into the gravamina, and certified, as under Seal▪ appears in Clarkenwell▪ Box, London.rigorous or too remiss in the Judgment of the Rectors (which were, it seems, first ordeyned by those Statutes, and dyed with them too) and of the Master and major part of the Company, it should be in the bosome of the Bishop of London to relieve or reform, which was twice done after∣wards. viz. Annis Domini 1433 and 1477. the occasion whereof will ap∣pear by the recitall, which you shall have of the first Correction entirely, without omission of any thing; the second in part only, the rest contain∣ing meerly the times and matters of disputations; between which, and our Statutes concerning Disputations now in force, I find no materiall, yea scearcely circumstantial difference, which renders the transcription unne∣cessary, my business being not to write what every one in the Colledge knowes already. The thing that the Bishop of London's Statutes would be seen for, is, cheifly whether therein any mention be made of a Visitor of the Colledge, and how qualified, and with what power vested? because Q. Whether Jo. Longland were not by these Statutes Visitor who is reckoned up in our Regi∣ster among our Benefactors as Visitor, or whether so chosen after the new Sta∣tutes?in the book of our Statutes now in force. C. 2. which is, De horum Sta∣tutorum editionis causa & conditorum auctoritate, it is said that Visitator qui∣dam ex fumo exiguo eam excitavit flammam, quae & Magistrum & Socios profugavit, Collegii bona profuse effudit, unumquodque a suo ordine removit. However I observe from these corrections, that as the Second Statutes or∣dained a Master above the Principall, so these did set up Rectors above the Master: and as the foresaid Clause of our present Statute seems to im∣ply, a Visitor above all. And haply these Rectors might be in lieu of Pro∣curators, whereby the House was at first governed, as hath been said, and those not abolished by the choice of a Principal till the death of Ric: de Sclikebury, to whom the nomination of them was committed, or the death of Dervorgille in whose name they were to be nominated by him: but without any Proviso made for a supply of their mortality. The first correction of the Bishop of Londons Statutes, runs thus: Universis Sanctae Matris Ecclesiae filiis, ad quos presentes literae pervene∣rint. Robertus permissione divina London: Episc: salutem gratiam & benedictionem. Cum inter Statuta Collegii aulae sive domus Balliol: Oxon: Lincoln: diocess inter cetera reperiatur quoddam statutum in quo sic cavetur. Quod si contingat quod aliquod statutum premissum videatur sociis nimis grave vel nimis remissum secundum judicium Rectorum Magistri & majoris partis Comitivae, habeat tunc Episc: London: potestatem dictum statutum corrigen∣di mitigandi diminuendi addendi mutandi, nec non aliud statutum faciendi, quod sibi ad honorem Dei & utilitatem dicti Collegii videbitur expedire. Ac
insuper cum inter statuta reperiatur quoddam aliud sub hac forma. Impri∣mis statutum est quod in dom de Balliolo semper sint tot scholares quot com∣mode ex fructibus redditibus proventibus ejusdem domus secundum limitatio∣nem expensarum infra in statutis annotatam poterunt sustentari, qui de seipsis habeant unum Magistrum cujus officium duret quamdiu se bene gesserit in off∣cio, propter tamen defectum notabilem ammoveatur sub forma inferius annotan∣da vel si beneficiatus fuerit ad verum valorem decem librarum annuatim vel qualitercunque sibi fuerit provisum perpetuo aliunde ad tantam summam, quo casu post tres menses à tempore pacifico possessionis adepte, dictarum decem libra∣rum ipso facto noverit se ammotum. Quod quidem statutum prout sufficien∣ter informamur videtur Rectoribus Magistro & majori parti Comitive dicti Collegii fuisse & esse nimis grave atque damnosum propter nonnulla pericula & incommoda que occasione ejusdem statuti prefato Collegio sepius evenerunt, & verisimiliter amplius evenient in futurum nisi celerius de oportuno remedio sit provisum. Nos igitur volentes hujusmodi periculis & incommodis obvia∣re ac utilitati & quieti dicti Collegii Magistri sociorum & scolarium ejusdem cum favore prospicere, ad instantiam rogatum & supplicationem prefatorum Rectorum Magistri Sociorum & Scholarium predictum Statutum sub for∣ma subscripta duximus corrigendum mutandum & emendandum, & sub for∣ma subscripta corrigimus mutamus & emendamus & in loco ilius statuti in∣seri volumus subscriptum statutum. Viz: Imprimis statutum est quod in domo de Balliolo semper sint tot Scolares quot commode ex fructibus redditibus & proventibus ejusdem domus secundum limitationem expensarum infra in statutis annotatam poterunt sustentari Qui de seipsis habeant unum Magistrum cujus officium duret quamdiu se bene gesserit in officio licet ad quancunque sum∣mam promotus fueit, aut aliunde sibi perpetuo ad summam hujusmodi sit provisum, propter tamen defctu notabilem ammoveatur sub forma inferius annotanda, & quicunque vacante officio Magistri ibidem fuerit eligendus liceat sociis sive scholaribus ipsius domus de aliis quam de seipsis si hoc eis videatur expediens beneficiatum vel non beneficiatum eligere in Magistrum, dum tamen sic electus socius juratus ejusdem domus prius extiterit cujus officium duret si∣cut prius ouamdiu bene se gesserit in officio licet ad quamcunque summam pro∣motus fuerit, vel aliude perpetuo ad summam hujusmodi provisio sibi fiat: propter tamen defectum notabilem ammoveatur sub forma in statutis plenius an∣notata. Quod quidem statutum nostrum hujusmodi sic denuo factum in loco prioris statuti de cetero precipimus & mandamus firmiter observari Jura∣mentis predictorum Magistri & Sociorum sive scolarium priu prestitis & aliis si que visa fuerint huic statuto contraria non obstantibus quibuscun{que}. Que omnia & singula Ʋniversitati vestre innotescere volumus per presentes. In cu∣jus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum fecimus his apponi, Dat: in Mannerio nostro de Stebbenhith Octavo die Augusti, Anno Dom: MCCCCXXXIII. & nostre consecrationis anno secundo.
The which Statute concerning the Master, and that concerning Dispu∣tations, were both amended afterwards by Thomas Bishop of London. That concerning the Master was amended by the Insertion of this Clause, viz. Vel aliqui olim Capellanus ejusdem domus qui in dicta domo continue stri per annum & amplis & poste  beneficiatus fueri competeter. By which Clause inserted, was given a liberty of choosing one who had been formerly Chaplain, as well as one that had been formerly Fellow, into the Masters place. That which concerned Disputations, was much like that now in force with us, and ends thus, viz. Proviso semper, Quod si placuerit Magistro dicte domus dispuare re∣spondere replicare interesse aut regulare predictas disputationes tam logica quam Philosophicas quinetiam Theologicas, quod hec poterit exequi ad ejus litertatem & in Magistri absentia regat vicem gerens & in eorum absentia senior so∣cius presens qui non est arguens vel respondens. Que quidem statuta nostra hu∣jusmodi sic denit facta in locis priorum statutorum de cetero precipimus & mandamus firmiter observari Juramentis predictorum Magistri & sociorum sive scolarium prius presitis & aliis si que visa fuerint his statutis contraria in aliquo non obstantibus quibuscunque. Que omnia & singula Ʋniversitati in∣notescere volumus per presentes incujus rei testimonium sigillum nostrum appo∣suimus. Dat: in Mannerio nostro de la Wykh: An. D. MCCCCLXXVII. Aug. XXVII. & consecrationis nostre XXVIII. SECT. 28. In the fourth Year of R. 2. the Master and Scholars of our Colledge, called then Balliol-halle, gave to Canterbury Colledge, now part of Christ-Church Oxon: a messuage called Chimer hall, formerly men∣tioned, lying towards Kings-street, called there Sydeard-street East, and the Garden of the said Canterbury-Colledge West, North and South [which must be just opposite to Oriel Colledge] as appears under the eal of the said Canterbury Colledge: In which Seal is represented [in regard of that Colledges dependance on the Prior of Christ-Church in Canterbury] Austin the Monk, in a Pulpit with his Cross and Banner, Preaching to the barbarous Infidels [for such the Saxons then viz. When that Austin was senthither.were] with this Inscription in the Ring of the Seal, which is not oval but orbicular; viz. Sigillum Collegii Aule Cantuarie in Oxonia: upon which consideration, the Prior and Convent of the said place granted, Anno Dom: 1393. and in 17 R. 2. to Mr. Tho: Tyrwhit Master, and the Scholars of our said Colledge, and their Successors, an annual Rent of 26 s. 8 d. to be taken off their Mannor of Newington and its Appurtenances, in the County of Oxon, at the Feasts of Easter and Michaelmas, by equal portions for ever: which Grant was the same Year confirmed by the said King his Letters Patents, with Licence to distrain upon the foresaid Mannor in case of non-payment at either or any of the said Feasts. But upon the dissoluion of Religious Houses, and
the return of the Lands into their Crown, the Rent was not paid, till Dr. Cotes, Master of our Colledge, and the Scholars thereof, had it decreed to them and their Successors, by the Chancellor and Court of Augmen∣tations, in 34 H. 8. to be paid, together with the arrearages due from the dissolution, by the hands of the particular Receiver of the Court of Augmentations of the Revenues of the Crown, in the said County of Oxon, for the time being. All which, may appear by the Exemplification of the said Decree under the Great Seal, and several other Writings in our Archives in Oxford, and Canterbury Box there. This Rent was recei∣ved down to the taking away of Cathedrals, by the late Rebellion, and that for many Years by the hands of Auditor Squib in London, who told us, That we were never like to receive it more, unless we bought some of the Lands belonging to the Church of Canterbury, and so got it allowed in the Purchase. To this purpose a Sollicitor was imploy'd at Worcester-house, for the Purchase of a Quit-rent of about 38 s. per annum, upon a Mannor in Kent, or some other such small matter then left unsold. But since that time, I never heard of the Sollicitor or Business: It may be that the greediness of Purchasers went between him and home; for Men having devoured the whole dishes of the Church, they were ready to fall toge∣ther by the Ears for the scraps. But how the dissolution of Canterbury Church, either first or last aforesaid, should extinguish our Rent setled in maner aforesaid, restat inquirendum. At present, this Rent is acknow∣ledged to be due from the Receivers of Kent: To which purpose, Sir Ed∣mund Sawyer, Auditor for Kent, gives a Debentur; which being shewn to Mr. Owen, Receiver for Kent, he pays it, and hath paid since the coming in of the King. After this, one House was given to the Colledge in Grand-pont (vulgo Gram-pool) call'd by the name of Rack-hall, situate in St. Michaels Parish at the South Port [which Parish is now part of St. Aldats] which had been the Land of Thomas Coventry Burgess and Al∣derman of Oxford, sold by him 8 H. 6. the several Conveyances are 18. this House is now Leased to Crayford the Baker. And Anno Dom. 1443. 22 H. 6. the Abbot of St. Mary de Osney granted to our Colledge a Te∣nement in Juse-lane, near the then The Law School stood on the North side of Christ-Church Qua∣drangle, in the Parish of St. Frideswide (for it hath been a Parish.)Law School; the which, because a Lease long since expired, I shall make no further enquiry after, nor reckon it amongst our Losses, though passed over to the Cardinals Colledge, when White was Master, as y the Deed appears. SECT. 29. Though Thomas Chace, a York Man by birth, were Ma∣ster of this House, 12 H. 4. about Anno 1410. yet he became not our Be∣nefactor till he was Chancellor of the University; which was, 1427. 4 H. 6. or later. When he built the loer part of our Library, adjoyn∣ing to the Hall (at which time the Hall it self probably might be built)
the upper part thereof, which is adjoyning to the Chappel, was built by Robert Abdy Master of this House▪ about which time, that which is now the Mastets Hall, was built by B. Gray (the great Furnisher of our Library with rare Manuscripts) as appears by his Coat of Arms engraven in Stone upon the three Brachets, under the out-side of the Bay Window thereof. The very fashion of the Building speaks it to have been the Chappel, & to have been done after the mode of those Times; unto the Building or Glazing whereof, George Nevil (of whose several Preferments you shall hereafter understand) might contribute, in as much as his Coat of Arms are to be seen yet in the West Window of the same place; together with Beauchamps Coat of Arms, who was Earl of Warwick before this George Nevil's Brother: But Beauchamp's Heirs males failing, the Earldom of Warwick devolved to his Sister, whom Nevil marrying, he was created Earl of Warwick in her Right, if I well remember. But be this as it will, this said Hall having been a Chappel, and built no longer agoe, it makes void the common Cabale, that it was a Parliament House. Indeed, Par∣liaments are sacred things, and not mis-becoming a Chappel, when not employed to Religious Exercises; nor am I ignorant, that the House of Commons at Westminster was once a Chappel: moreover, I have seen Courts of Justice made after the fashion of this said Hall, with such a Bay Win∣dow at the East end thereof, for the celebration of Divine Offices there∣in, even the Courts fitting, which take no more notice thereof, then of the Elevation of the Host, which they are warned of by the ringing of a little Hand-bell, whereupon they all uncover and adore: But the time of Parliaments held at Oxon, or of the building of the Room, makes it uncapable of either of these uses. We had many Benefactors in those times, mentioned in the Windows of our Library, whose bounty was most∣ly imploy'd in building, and partly in adorning the Colledge with Win∣dows, or enriching the Library with Books. In the East Window of the Library, looking into the Chappel, is the Picture of St. Katerine, in the right light thereof, with her Wheel before her, and her Sword behind her, with this Motto▪ Si servitis ei, vos tegit aula Dei. In the other light is Thomas Chase and his Fellows adoring her, with this Motto. 1. Hic tibi dans celis Thomam Chase comitantes. 2. Hanc patrona velis munire domum famulantes. In the first Window, on the South side of the Library, is the Coat of Arms of George Nevil [which are the same with those in the Masters Hall aforesaid, and on the top of the Divinity Bedels staff which he gave] in pale with the Arms of his Archiepiscopal Sea, in the first light: and in the second light of the same Window, is a Coat of five Annulets argent, in a Field gules, quartered with Chequey, Or and Sable, with this Motto,
in a wreath about them; viz. the first about the first, and the second about the second. 1. Fige dies cursum nec perdat virgo triumphum. 2. Conditor ecce mei Skipton Ricarde fuisti. And now since mention is made of the Arms of his Archiepiscopal Sea, which was York, it's requisite to know the difference between these and those of Canterbury. Canterbury bears a Staff in pale Sol, and upon the top of that a Cross patée Luna, over all a pall Luna, but not fringed. But the ancient Arms of York differed from these, in that the Cross on the top of the staff was Sol, and the pall was fringed, as there may be seen: though the Arms of the same Sea be at present clean another thing, but when thus changed, I cannot shew: nor doe I find that the Heraulds at this day doe So they did at the Funeral of William Juxon, Archb. of Cant.paint the present Archiepiscopal Arms of Canterbury in any thing differing from those anciently appropriated to the Sea of York. The two Coats of Arms in the second Window, on the same side, have likewise these Verses in a wreath about them; viz. The first, the first; and the second, the second. 1. Inclitus ille Thomas Horrow fenestratuit me. 2. Ad tempus mensis vocitati rite Decembris. The third Window in the like manner hath two Verses. 1. Gaudeat unita totalis & hec comitiva. 2. Claram luce fore Carpenter nempe Johannes. Below is, Orat pro anima Johannis Carpenter, & Johannis Herys, with the Pi∣cture of John Herys, not of John Carpenter. Johannes Harrisius primus & precipuus Thomae More secretarius, 1579. confessor, obiit Namurci reg∣nante Eliz. scripsit collectanea ex Sanctis Patribus. But I suspect that this is not our Herys. The fourth Window, in the first light, hath a Coat that bears pale of nine pieces Azure and Gules, over all a Chevron Argent, charged with three crosses pometées Or, and a Mitre on the point. with this Motto, 1. Me tuus Antistes Vigornia fecit honore. The second hath this Motto; viz. 2. Conditor ipse mei Warter Ricarde fuisti. The fifth Window hath Bishop Gray's and Abdy's Arms (whereof more anon) with this Motto, 1. Hos Deus adjecit, Deus his det gaudia celi. 2. Abdy perfecit opus hoc Gray presul et Ely. Under is, 1. Orate pro bono statu Magistri Johannis Spens. The sixth Window. 1. Hi duo mitrati pro donis sint memorati. 2. Sint consummati celesti sede locati.
The seventh hath in one light, the Arms of Thomas Percy Earl of Wor∣cester, which are the same with the Earls of Northumberland in University Colledge Hall: and those of Nevil Earl of Warwick in the other light, with these Verses in Wreaths about them. 1. Sunt benefactores Comites hic nobiliores. 2. Luceat eterna Lux his requiesque superna. The Eighth is in honor of William Firbit of Bridlinton in Yorkshire. Firbit Wilhelmus semper sit mente retentus. or, commune. Et Bridlintone domus additur extra corone. The Ninth, Has aliquando fores vitro clausere priores. Claustri Mertone vigent mercede corone. The Tenth hath a Scheme of the Holy Trinity in one, and the Blessed Virgin Mary with the Babe, in the other; given by Robert Brotliber of Malvern in Worcestershire, with these Verses. Gilberti Brotliberi Malvernensisque Johannes. Contiuuis annis place at sociis ministrare. And now mention being made of Malvern: it were worth a Mans Jour∣ney to go to see the Fabrick of the Church viz. The Church of the Priory of Gr: Malvern.thereof, built after the Mo∣del of Gloucester Cathedral; but especially the Glass Windows, wherein are to be seen all the Stories of the Old and New Testament, every one of them under-written what it is: amongst which, is to be seen the Pi∣cture of the Holy Trinity, by as great a Solaecism as Brotlibers and John of Malverns Scheme is done by Ingenuity: to represent a visible Nature by colours, is as if a Man should go about to paint white with a Chark-coal, or light with darkness it self; to say nothing that it entrenches upon the Heresie of the Anthropmorphites: But, Qui fingit sacros, auro vel marmore vultus, Non facit ille deos; qui rogat, ille facit. On the North side of our said Library, the first Window hath the Arms of Bishop Gray, which are a Lyon rampant arg: in a Field gules, a Border engrail'd argent: and Abdy's Arms, which are a Shield argent, a Chevron sable, between three Eagles displayed of the second. I call them Eagles, not Eaglets or Allerions, because they have both feet and beaks; for Geliot writ∣ten in French.Geliot in his Indice Armorial, says, That Allerions sont petites aigles qui n' ont ny bec ny jambes: that is to say, Allerions are little Eagles, which have neither beak nor legs: The Verses in Wreaths about these are, 1. Conditor ecce nevi structus hus fuit Abdy. 2. Presul & huic Edi Gray, libros conlit Ely. Below this, is, Orate pro bono statu anime Magistri Roberti Abdy Magistri hujus Col∣legii, qui istam partem edificavit.
The Second Window hath Arms, and these Verses about them in Wreaths, as all the other have; viz. 1. Me fecit socius hic Stanhop nempe Radulphus. 2. Militis esto memor Wooddem Deus optime tutor. The Third Window harh Nevils Arms in pale with those of the Sea of York, in one light, and by themselves in the other. 1. Sit presul alma tibi requies sine fine Georgi. 2. Me fordas vitream Stavely Wilhelme fenestram. The Fourth Window hath these Verses in a Wreath about the Coats of Arms. 1.—Somnum— 2. Me Ptrus Pekkam vitravit sponte fenestram. The Fifth Window hath likewise about the Arms, Asperaflabat hyems brumoso frigore fervens. Cum Miniorita vilis fuit ista fenestra. Peneath is, Orate pro Johanne Burton, quondam socio hujus domus. The Sixth Window hath the Arms of Tho: Chace, which are a Shield argent, charged with three Talbots heads erased sable. A Talbot is proper∣ly any Dog yoaked (like a Hog) to keep him out of the Vineyards, when the time is for them to be fenced. But our Heraulds, it seems, restrain it to dogs of Chace; but the Verses are, 1. Condidit hanc Edem Thomas Chace me{que} vitravit. 2. Huic superis sedem des sibi nate David. Below is, Orate pro statu & anima Magistri Thomae Chace de Ebor: Th: Pro∣fessoris, Cancellarii Hiberniae, Oxon: et S. Pauli, London: olim hic Socii fratris mei, Anno Dom. 1431. The Seventh Windows Verses imply, That Clifford Bishop of London was a greater Benefactor, then to own the Glazing of a Window. 1. Clifford Ricardus Antistes Londoniensis. 2. Fusis expensis tale non avit opus. Given by Nich: Herbury, Archdeacon of Gloucester, therefore under∣written thus; viz. Orate pro anima Magistri Nich▪Herbury, quondam Archi: Gloucest: The Eighth Window, given by Jo: Patrick, valet of the Wardrobe to Humphrey Duke of Lancaster and Gloucester, hath the Dukes Arms, which are those of England, but bordered argent, with these Verses, 1. Fecimus hanc claram vitro splendente fenestram. 2. Ʋt gratis nostri meminerit debitis. Orate pro anima Johan: Patrick, quondam valette de Wardroba Lanca∣striae, Ducis Gloucestriae.
The Ninth Window. 1. Me fecerant quos scuta notant prius hic comitantes. 2. T. Skelton dicti milesque Whelpdail{que} Robertus. The Tenth. Hanc Socii quondam duo perfecere fenestram. Wombwelle Robertus, Thomas Barry{que} vocatus. These Arms of Wombwelle and Barry, and Chase too, are in the Win∣dows of the Colledge-hall. This Barry was Fellow here, 1395. as is noted before, and consequently lived in the time of Chace. The false Metre and Grammar, is not to be ascribed to the ignorance of the times (which produced so many Learned Men, even in this Colledge, Ubi tunc temporis nobilium juvenum corona celebris renascentem imbibebat elo∣quentiam, as hereafter you shall hear) but to the Glaziers or others, who composed such as these according to their own understanding, or some traditional Conceptions. There's one Marble Grave-stone in the Church of St. Burien, near the Lands-end in Cornwal, which having a Cross on it, the People take it to be some▪ Deans Grave-stone [for the Parson is now call'd Dean of Burien, and it had once Prebendaries too, as Mr. Camden writes] but that it's no such matter, that which is engraven in the border thereof, doth sufficiently testifie: The true reading thereof may be this, Clarie la femme Geffrei De Bolleit is a place in that Parish, which I had occasion to know, ac∣companying some Friends that have E∣states in the Parish.Bolleit gist icy, Dieu de l'ame ayez mercie! Qui prient pour l'ame auront Dix jour de pardon en ce mond. I shewing my Transcription to a Gentleman a Roman Catholick, and an Antiquary, asked him, Who promised that ten days of pardon to whom∣soever should pray for her soul? He answered, That it was a traditional thing, and ad placitum sculptoris, who might have put 100 days as well as ten, had he pleased: The Application is easie. SECT. 30. I do not find any conveyance to the Colledge of the Houses now leased out, one to Formerly to Rich: Carter, Anno Dom. 1626. then commonly known or cal∣led by the name of the Golden Phe∣nix.Miller, and the rest to the Bradshawes, in St. Margarets Patens, and Rood-lane in London: but I find several Letters of Attorney made, for giving of possession from person to person, from the time of Edw. 3. to 1 Edw. 4. when Robert Kirkam, Custos Rotul: Can∣cellarie, Richard Friston Clerk, William Morland, Parson of St. Mary Bow London, gave power to Robert Abdy Clerk, to give Livery and Seisin of them to George Nevil, Bishop of Exeter, and Lord Chancellor of England, William Bishop of Ely, William Lambton, Robert Lowson, and William Appilby, Clerks, who, 'tis like, were Trustees for the Colledge (William
Lambton being then, or the same Year, Master) which was the way they took, it seems, during the Wars between the Houses of Lancaster and York, without mention made of the trust, for fear of Forfeitures, I sup∣pose, and may be collected from the Pardons which the Colledge sued forth under the Great Seal of K. H. 6. and K. Ed. 4. yet in our Colledge, we have another Pardon from K. Ed. 6. too, which must be upon some o∣ther account. But now for the situation of the foresaid Houses; it was thus described, viz. between a Tenement of the Colledge of the B. Vir∣gin Mary by Guild-hall London on the West part, and a little venue cal∣led St. Margarets Patyns-lane on the East part, and a little venue called Smiths-lane, alias, St. Andrews Hoberds-lane on the South, and a Tene∣ment called Patesden Rent on the North part. I find also, that after the end of the said Wars, John Segden Clerk, and Master, or (Gardianus) Warden of our Colledge, and [confratres) Fellows, did set a Lease of the said Houses to three Citizens of London for 20 Years, at the Rent of four Marks sterling, dated Anno 1473. and 12 Ed. 4. As for our Farm at O∣dyngton in Oxfordshire, anciently called Otyndon, in a Deed without date: I find it by the said Deed to have been the Land of William le Poure, Son and Heir of John le Poure, who by that Deed convey'd it to William, the Son of John Urlewyne of Otyndon. After this, viz. in the time of Ed. 3. I find it to be Brahall's Land of Otyndon, passed over to him by Stryvyn of Otyndon. Afterwards, it came to be the Land of one Saunders, 1 H. 5. in which name it seems to have continued till 5. Edw. 4. when it was con∣veyed by a Daughter and Heir of Thomas Saunders, and her Husband Wil∣liam Wellis of Otyndon, to Nich: Blunt and Agnes his Wife, who made a Release thereof to William Kyrby of Otyndon and Alice his Wife, Apr: 20. in 3 H. 7. which said Kyrby and his Wife, upon the same, conveyed it to John Russel Bishop of Lincoln, James Stanley Dean of St. Martins London, William Bell, William Stephyns, John Smith, Richard Barningham, John Southwood, Clerks. But by another Deed of April 27. in the same Year, did the said Blunt and his Wife grant it to the said Kyrby and his Wife, who, upon the 29 day of the same Moneth, convey'd it to William Bell, John Smith, Richard Barningham, John Southwood, Clerks, in trust, 'tis like, for the Colledge, William Bell being then, or soon after, Master of the House, whom Richard Barningham succeeded. The Conveyance is general, of all the Messuages, Lands and Tenements, Meadows of Pa∣sture and Pastures, with the Appurtenances, which were the aforesaid Blunts. This said Farm is now held by a Lease of Lives, granted to A∣braham Watson, and hath been so held by him and others time out of minde. SECT. 31. Richard Barningham Master, and the Scholars of Bal∣liol, obtained Letters from Pope Julius, directed to Richard Bishop of
Winchester, and to the Bishop of Carlisle [upon the Motives expressed in the second Chapter of our now Statutes; which is, De Statutorum editio∣nis causa & conditorum auctoritate] make us a new Body of Statutes, which was done accordingly, Anno Dom. 1507. (and testified by a Publick No∣tary, with his Protocollum put thereunto) wherein the number of Fellows is stated to be ten, with a Master over them, which are bound to apply themselves to the study of Divinity, and to take Holy Orders upon them, at or before four Years standing Masters of Art. The Master, and every Graduate Fellow, is to have the Presentation of one Scholar, to be ap∣proved by the Master and the two senior Fello vs: the business of which Scholars, is to serve the Master and the Fellows by whom they are pre∣sented, provided they be not so exercised and opprest with business, as to hinder their studies. Of this number of Fellows, two are to be Priests before elected, though but Bachellors of Arts, whose peculiar Office is, to say Mass daily: and these were in lieu of the several Chaplains before∣mentioned, who by little and little came to have the same Priviledges as Fellows. One Lease I have observed to be set by the Master, cum con∣sensu totius Capituli; and the Bishop of London's Statutes makes them as capable of being chosen Masters of the House as any of the Fellows: wherefore, in these Statutes, they are incorporated into our Society, and bear the name and priviledge of Fellows in every thing, besides the per∣formance of Divine Offices, which is their own Peculiar. This Statute concerning the two Priest-Fellows, hath been generally observed, unless it be in the clause of their being ordeyned Priests before their election: for I find upon our Regester anno Dom: 1564 Maii 12. that George God∣sell Bachelour of Art was chosen in socium sacerdotalem, albeit he was not ordeyned: but took an oath to be ordeyned, Quam primum fieri potuit, which might give an occasion to the Decree made by William Bishop of Lincoln, Doctor Lillie Master and the Fellows, in our book of Statutes, which are the most exact and concise body that ever was made us; to the perusall whereof I must refer the Reader; and shall make my further ob∣servation only upon that of the Visitor. By these Statutes we are enabled to chuse a Visitor of our own, after the same manner and forme as the Ma∣ster is to be chosen. Hereupon I find that Richard, Bishop of Winton be∣came Visitor of the Colledge acting as Visitor, insomuch that Anno Dom: 1511. Feb: 16; he sate judicially Visitor, received the Resignation of Richard Barringham B. D. also sware and admitted Thomas Cisson lawfully elected Master into the Room of the said Barningham, as may be seen in the Box of Admissions of Masters. To the said ishop of Winton succeeded Lawrence Stubbys: wch Lawr: Stubbys resigned his office of Visitor into the hands of W. White Master of the Colledge 25 H: 8. But after this viz: An. D: 1545. William Wright was admitted Master by the Bishop of Lincoln as be∣ing Visitator Generalis, for so he is call'd in the instrument of the said ad∣mission
[prestito juramento de observandis statutis & consuetudinibus Collegii in quantum humana fragilitas patitur] upon the same account I conceive it was that the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury admitted Doctor Lawrence Master, by reason of the suspension of the Bishop of Lincoln, Anno 1637. I have heard indeed, that the said Bishop of Lincoln demur'd to the visitation of the Arch-bishop Laud, but he prevailed not in it: for his Grace proceed∣ed in his Visitation of Lincoln Diocese, as fotmerly Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury had done, Anno 1411. Jan: 21, in the sixteenth year of his translation, as appears by an Instrument under the Seale of the said Thomas Arch-bishop of Canterbury, which remaines with us being concerned in the Visitation in regard of the Appropriations which we hold of Abboldsley and Saint Lawrence▪ the one in the Diocese of Lincoln, the other in Lon∣don: whereof we were call'd to, and did shew Evidence of the Appro∣priation, as by the Instrument aforesaid more fully may appear; wherein although he be stiled, Legatus Sedis Apostolicae, yet he adds, Jure nostro Metropolitico actualiter visitantes. But to go on: In the Charter for the Foundation of Christ-Church, Oxon: bearing date Novemb: 4. in the 38 Year of H. 8. there's a Proviso, in haec verba, viz. Proviso tamen, Semper quod dictus Episcopus Lincoln: & successores sui habebunt omnem & omnimodam jurisdictionem & potestatem infra Collegia vocata Lincoln Colledge, Oriel Colledge, Brasenose & Bayliole, quae an∣tehac idem Episcopus aut antecessores sui sive eorum aliquis ratione fundatio∣nis sive dotationis eorundem Collegiorum sive eorum aliquis habuerunt tenue∣runt vel exercuerunt, habuit tenuit vel exercuit. The Proviso leaving the Bishop of Lincoln in his former power in these Colledges, notwithstanding the erection of the Bishoprick of Oxon, it appears on our Register, That upon Jan: 2. 1557. the Visitation of Tho: Watson Bishop of Lincoln, began by Commissaries, which were, Mr. Wright Archdeacon of Oxford, and Master of this House, Tho: White Warden of New Coll: both Doctors of the Laws; which Visitation continued till the said Reverend Father was Imprisoned at London, Anno 1571. Tho: Bishop of Lincoln, with the consent of Adam Squire Master, and the Fellows, made us Decrees, which are in number seven, all entred in our Statute Book. All the following Decrees written in the said Statute Book [excepting that concerning Fellow-Commoners, dated Anno 1610] are a Collection of Decrees, made not only 1574. but formerly: for I find upon our Register the Decree concerning the payment of Battels within 15 days after the end of the Quarter, to be made verbatim 1554. [which was about seven Years after the foresaid Proviso] subscribed, Jo: Lincoln. James Gloucester, Master. Jo: Smith. Gul: Talerius. Anth: Garnet. Brianus Nedamus. Alanus Higginsonius. Bartimeus Greemes.
Anno Dom. 1565. Nicholas Bishop of Lincoln, and Visitor of the Colledge of Balliol, cited the Master and Fellows to a Visitation, forbid∣ing them all Elections. Nevertheless they, in obedience to the Statute, admitted Thomas Coventry and John Tunkis Fellows, having fulfilled their Year of Probation; especially since the Bishop of Lincoln could not In∣hibit an Election prescribed by Statute: And by their date, it should be the same Bishop that by his Commissioners made us these Injunctions fol∣lowing. Injunctions ordained by Mr. Thomas Goodwine, Mr. Lawrence Humphrey Doctor of Divinity, Mr. Richard Barber, Commissioners to my Lord of Lincoln, in their Visitation had in Bayly Colledge in Oxon, the 4th of March, Anno Dom. 1565. left to be perpetually observed within the said Colledge, and confirmed with the putting of their hands in the Margent. 1. IMprimis, it is Ordered and Decreed, That the Communion shall be duly ministred and given into the hands of the Communicants, ac∣cording to the Order set forth in the Book of Common Prayer; and that all and every person and persons being of lawful Years and Discretion, shall at the least three or four times in the year reverently receive it, and that the contemners or refusers thereof shall pay every time 3 s. 4 d. at the dis∣cretion of the Master to be levyed. 2. Item, That all Fellows-Commoners, and others, sojourning within the House, shall resort to the Chappel in the time of Service and Com∣mon Prayer; and then and there shall behave themselves in such godly manner, that they hinder not the Word of God to be read or sung, or di∣sturb others: which Ordinance whosoever breaketh, shall pay 12 d. and if after admonition, and twice correction, he or they do refrain to come, as is above ordained, then he or they, whosoever he be, shall be at the discretion of the Master, put out of the House. 3. Item, That Publick Prayers in the Morning shall be said in the vul∣gar Tongue, as is through the Queens Majesties Dominions used; and that every common Scholar or Bachelor within the said House, not frequent∣ing the said Prayer, shall for every time so offending be punished with stripes, if he be under correction, or else have one farthing set on his head, at the discretion of the said Master.
4. Item, That as well Divine Service, as the Sacrament of the Supper of the Lord, shall be said in the Chappel of the said Colledge, to the which, all the House shall diligently repair, and not to the Parish Church. 5. Item, That all Primers; not allowed by the Queens Majesty, and all superstitious Books, be neither in Publick Prayer had or used, but be brought and delivered to the Master forthwith, to be abolished. 6. Item, That such Books for Divine Service be brought and used in the said Colledge, as is mentioned in the Queens Majesties Injunctions; as the Bible, Communion Book, David's Psalters, and the Book of Ho∣milies. 7. Item, That all the Service be distinctly and openly pronounced, as it is set forth in the Book of Common Prayer. 8. Item, That the Prayers at the usual times, and the Graces at Meals, shall be said or sung within the said Colledge, without Invocation of Saints, or Prayer for the dead. 9. Item, That the Master bring with him all his company to the Ser∣mon, especially if they be solemn and ordinary, otherwise the absent shall pay 2 d. at the discretion of the Master, if he be not upon reason∣able cause licensed by the Master. 10. Item, There shall be a Minister chosen within one Moneth, accord∣ing to the Statute. Scripta per me Johannem Ball, notarium publi∣cum Linc: Dioces: 10 Martii, Anno supra∣dicto in meo proprio cubiculo in Collegio sive Edibus Christi in Ʋniversitate Oxon. These things I have heaped up together, as belonging to the Visitor, and the exercise of his Authority here; though some of them, in order of time, were done after those that follow; viz. The buildings of the Chappel. SECT. 32. The Chappel, called the new Chappel, that now is, was built in the Reign of K. H. 8. (at the charge of the House, assisted pro∣bably by the contribution of Friends) for I find, that in the 13th year of the raign of H. 8. [which was about Anno 1521.] an Agreement was made with a Mason of Burford, for the finishing of the 3 Windows thereof on the Quadrangle side, and one Window of the Treasury on the same side; the rest may be presumed to have been finished before, viz. 9 H. 8. which by a mistake in our Register is written 19 H. 8. which if true, it were af∣ter the glazing of the Windows: But how long it was, before it received its perfection [both for Stone-work and Lead, with the Frame that bears it up] I cannot shew precisely: But that it was before Anno 1529. is evi∣dent
by the date of the glazing of the Windows, it being then, that Lawrence Stubbys gave the East Window, which is so fair, that the Founder of Wad∣ham Colledge is said to have offered the Society 200 l. for it, to glaze the East Window of his Chappel, as representing in lively Colours and ex∣quisite Postures, the Passion, Resurrection, and Ascension of Christ: but the Chappel being fair, they thought not that Window too gawdy for it; and I would they had not thought the Leads too heavy, I am sure others did not, for weaker Frames at the Schools upon which they were laid. The South Window was at the same time glazed by Richard Stubbys, containing the whole Story of the Martyrdom of St. Katerine: The next to that, was of the Gift of Dr. Wentworth, Fellow of this House, containing the story of Hezekiah's sickness and recovery: that opposite thereunto, containing the story of Philip and the Eunuch, was the same year given by Richard Atkins Esq; of Gloucestershire, and Fellow-Commoner of this Colledge; about which time, the whole Chappel was lined and adorned with Joyn∣ers work, at the cost of the Colledge and of many Benefactors, one of the greatest whereof was Mr. Popham of Littlecot, who had been of the House, and gave One hundred pound; in memory whereof, his Arms engraven in Wood, are placed over the Screen doors of the Choir. The second best, was Mr. Boughton, Sub-dean of his Majesties Chappel Royol, who gave 50 l. so that now it gives way to none of those of the lesser Colledges for beauty and proportion. One of the Chappel Windows appears, to be given by one of the Comptons (a Knight) Sir William Compton, of the Ancestors of the now Earl of Northampton, both by his Name and Coat of Arms, and probably he gave towards the structure it self: for his Cha∣rity was great, if it were answerable to his Piety, which his posture (with his Ladies) wherein he is represented in the same Window, shews to be devout. 1530. SECT. 33. In the 31 Year of Hen. 8. The site of the Monastery of Clerkenwell, was setled by Act of Parliament upon the Duke of Nor∣folk; and in the 35 Year of the same K. H. 8. it was setled, by the con∣sent of the Duke of Norfolk, upon the King again by Act of Parliament; then in the 37 Year of his Reign, he granted it to Walter Henley and John Williams, Knights, to be held in Capite. After the death of Sir Walter Henley, his Widow Dame Margaret Henley, conveyed one Mes∣suage, two Gardens, and one Cottage or little House, to John Bell, 7 Edw. 6. (wherein Bell afterwards lived) after this the said Lady Henley marryed Thomas Roberts Esq: The same Roberts sold the Sisters House and Garden to John Bell, Nov. 19. 2 and 3▪ Year of Phil: and Mary, and he the said Roberts and his Lady acknowledged a Fine. This Sisters House, and the before-mentioned Messuage, with the Appurtenances aforesaid, the said John Bell did give to our Colledge, March 9. 2 and 3 of Phil: and Mary.
After the death of John Bell, our Colledge was questioned in the Exche∣quer for the House, Gardens and Cottage, sold by my Lady Henley, and given by John Bell without Licence (the whole Case is recited in a Copy of a Rowl out of the Exchequer) thereupon the transgression was pardon∣ed by Letters Patents, Febr. 1. 3 and 4 of Phil: and Mary; and the Houses by the same Letters Patents confirmed to the Colledge. But Elizabeth Sackville the Prioress being living (3 Eliz.) was thought to have a right to the Sisters It being her Free-hold for her life, the like I heard urged by Serjeant Maynard, at a Committee in the Painted Chamber, on the behalf of the Heads and Fellows of Houses in Oxon, saying, That it was their Free-hold, and they could not be disseis'd thereof, nor disfranchised of the Corpora∣tion: whereunto Serj. Wild, then Chair-man, answered, That though Sir James Bag were one of the Corporation of Plimouth, He was never∣theless disfranchised by a De∣cree of the Star-Chamber: But Serjeant Maynard reply∣ed, That by a motion made, shewing it to be against Law, he was restored.House, which she did the same Year, Septemb. 8. release to the Colledge; The bounds whereof, are the Church on the West, John Bells own House, bought as afore∣said, on the East of it, and the Church Yard on the South, as appears by the Deed, and several Leases since set by the Col∣ledge of all the Houses, which are also noted as being within the Precinct of the said Monastery, not only by the said Leases, but also by the Original Deeds. Part of one of the Gardens belonging to the premises [for now they stand divided into three] hath been challenged by the Parish there; insomuch, that one Goodcoale, sometimes Minister of the same, being Con∣fessor to the condemned Persons in New-gate, did [in the time that Dr. Juxon was Bishop of London, and Lord Treasurer] cause a door which had been Masoned up, to be broken open [which had been the way for the Prioress to come into the Church] and the dead Bodies of Executed persons, with others who dyed of the Plague of Pestilence, to be buryed there; out of which, 'tis like, he suck'd some advantage. But com∣plaint being made by us to the said Lord Treasurer, his Lord∣ship made an Order, remaining still with us, for the quiet possession of the premises; which we continued till Anno 1659. when they, taking advantage of the Times, put us to new troubles. But the Day no sooner began to dawn, then all those Spirits betook themselves to their Dens a∣gain. The end for which that sometimes Reverend Bishop of Worcester did give the premises to the Colledge, was, for a stipend to be paid to two Scholars born within the Diocess of Worcester, whose Will therein hath been ever observed. This Bishop, John Bell, by the Arms Robert Hooper was Master, 10 Eliz. not mistaken for Ri∣chard Hooper Master. See in Clerkenwell Box, and that o admissions.over the Gate of three Church Bells, is judged to have built that and some of the Front of the Colledge: but hereof we have no other testimony. SECT. 34. In Oxford and Canterbury Box, there is also a Deed to Exeter Colledge for exchange of our Land before-mentioned adjoyning to that House, for a House and Garden lying near to ours: which House and
Garden must be, by the description thereof, upon part of that ground where Hammond's Lodgings now stand: for it is set lying and being on the North part of the way, leading from Balliol Colledge to Magdalene Church, on the West part of the Wall of Balliol Colledge aforesaid, and therefore it extendeh it self further that way then now it does, viz. quite to the low Wall end without▪ and on the East part of certain Tenements belonging to Balliol Colledge aforesaid. Upon further consideration of the aforesaid exchange, the Rector and Scholars of Exeter Colledge, did covenant to pay to the Master and Scholars of Balliol aforesaid, a yearly Rent of 2 s. 6 d. for ever, to be issuing and going out of a Tenement of the said Rector and Scholars in Magdalene Parish, to be paid at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel only; and for non-payment thereof, the Master and Scholars of Balliol may, by the same Deed, distrain upon the aforesaid Tenement; or (in case of insufficient Distress to be found there) upon any other Tenement belonging to the said Exeter Colledge in the City of Oxon, or Suburbs thereof: All which, appears in an Indenture under the Seal of the Colledge of Exeter aforesaid, dated Octob. 6. Anno 14 Eliz. After which exchange so made, I suppose the said House was new builded; from whence, it obtained the name of the New Buildings: but whether done by the Colledge, or any Tenant in performance of Co∣venants made with the Colledge, I cannot shew. But I find it to have been Leased out to one John Wilson, at the time of William Hammond's benefaction. The Lease it self I have not seen; but it appears by an In∣denture, bearing date Febr: 14. in the 36 of Q Eliz. That William Ham∣mond of Guilford, in the County of Surrey Esq lent to John Apsley Esq in the County of Sussex, the sum of 1100 l. for non-payment whereof, he was to be seised of a Rent charge of 100 l. per annum, to him and his Heirs for ever. But then, in case the Rent charge were redeem'd by the payment of the said 1100 l. then the Will of him the said Hammond was, That the said Eleven hundred pounds, with Three hundred pounds more, should be paid over to my Lord Mountague, Anthony Garnet, and John Brown Esq for the advancement of our Colledge. The said Garnet, with the consent of the other two, did receive several sums as part of the said 1100 l. & namely 200 l. at one time: which 200 l. was lent to Dr. Ainsloe, Doctor in Physick, for the good of the Colledge, till the rest should be received: for the payment whereof, the said Ainsloe and Sir Henry Lee became bound. Moreover, the said Ainsloe became bound to the said Lord Mountague in a Bond of 100 l. for the payment of 20 l. per annum for divers Years. Now my Lord Mountague, Ainsloe and Brown being dead, there passed a Decree in Chancery against Garnet aforesaid, that the said two Bonds should be delivered to the Colledge; and my Lady Moun∣tague, with the rest of the Executors and Assigns of my Lord Mountague, did appoint George Abbots, Master of Arts of the Colledge, to receive
that 200 l. of Ainsloe, and upon Receipt thereof, to pay it over to the Colledge, further enabling the Colledge to ask and take of the said Exe∣cutors of Hammond the said 300 l. mentioned in the said two Obligations. Now whether the said George Abbot, or the Colledge, did receive any part of the forementioned sums, it appears not. But I find that the foresaid Garnet, in pursuance of the said Decree, did surrender the fore∣mentioned Lease of the New Lodgings [thence call'd Hammonds-hall] to our Colledge, by his Deed, bearing date 35 Eliz. which Lease had been bought by the said Garnet, and the rest of Hammond s Executors, as is probable, to the same intent and purpose: The which Tenement, by this means, became part of the site of the Colledge, and so remains. By which, and divers other cases of our own, we may see how the Charity of good Persons is mostly left unto the trust of those, who either neglect it, or lick their own Fingers with it: so that very little or nothing falls, as here it did, to the share of those to whom its intended. Only by the taking in of this Lease [which time and patience would have worn out] we gained Lodgings for two Fellows more, which were added to the Foun∣dation by the Charity of Peter Blundel, and the Lady Periham. SECT. 35. To all Benefactions already mentioned, and some here∣after [because lying together with others of later date, but of more mo∣ment] to be mentioned, we have a Licence of Mortmain added, with a Besides the Pardons gran∣ted by H. 6. & Ed. 6. which are in the Box of Admissions of Masters, & of the Founda∣tion of the Colledge; which Pardons are formerly mentioned.Charter for the Being and Stile of our Colledge; which [having been formerly divers, and many Inconveniencies ensuing thereupon, being some∣times written [The Principal and Scholars] sometimes [the Principal and Fellows] sometimes [the Warden and Scholars] sometimes [the Master and Fellows] sometimes [the Master, Fellows and Scholars &c.] as in the said Charter is observed] is thereby appointed to be [The Master and Scholars of Balliol Colledge] and none other: The which stile we use to this day; and have so used it ever since the date of the said Charter, which was Auno 30 Eliz. Who by other Letters Patents laid up, together with these, in the same Charter Case, had formerly, viz. 29 Eliz. con∣firmed not only the Foundation and Statutes of John de Balliol, but also other Letters Patents before▪mentioned; with others given by her Pro∣genitors for the behoof of this Colledge, which are therein verbatim reci∣ted. The ancient Benefactions I find Recorded likewise in the Tower, ver∣batim.So that were all other Records of our Colledge lost, & these mention'd in this Section onely remaining, we had enough to shew for the substance of all our Colledge Revenue; excepting some few Candle-Rents here in Oxon, and other accessions to this House, of greater moment indeed, but made after the date of all the Premises. And upon this alteration of the Stile of the Colledge, a new Seal was Fabricated, with the Image of St. Catherine in it, having her Sword in one hand, her Wheel in the other, and her Crown upon her head, with the several Coats of Arms placed, as
in Dervorgilles Seal before-mentioned: the Seal in use immediatly be∣fore, being the Image of the B. Virgin Mary, in bosse or haut reliefe (as the French call it) sitting with a Crown upon her head, with the Babe in her hands (nobili sane solacismo) as Beza calls it (upon another occasion) en∣vironed with St. Kat: and all the Saints, with this engraveur in the Ring; viz. Sigillum commune Domus Ball: servata, sancta, pia virgo domui tuae de te propitiam. SECT. 36. In K. James's Reign, many things were done for our Colledge, some of them relating to things of ancienter date; one is con∣cerning our Quarries at Heddington, which, though time out of minde in the possession of our Colledge and of their Lessees, yet Mr. Broom, Lord of that Mannor, pretended title to, endeavoring by all means to suppress the Land-marks thereof, having gotten into his own hands some Evidences which appertained to the Colledge in relation to the Premises. But upon complaint made by the Colledge in the Chancery, 10 Jac. It was De∣creed [and the Decree we have under Seal] that we should enjoy the said Quarry, and Land thereunto belonging, as it was meered out by one Richard Comely, containing on the West side 21 Pole and 5 Foot, at 16 Foot and a half to every Pole; on the East side 20 Pole and 5 Foot: In the breadth on the North end, 7 Pole and 15 Foot, and on the South end 8 Pole: Mag: Coll▪ Quarry lying on the West side of the said Acre, & the Land of Magdalen Colledge lying on the North side thereof, and the Land of Mr. Broom on the South and East-sides. By the same Decree we have also free liberty of digging, carrying away, using, imploying, con∣verting, &c. as by the said Decree in Odyngton Box more at large may ap∣pear. But before this, viz, August 36. Anno 1605. Mris. Mary Dunch gave an Exhibition to the Colledge, charged upon North-morton in the County of Brks, as by the Composition thereof appears. And Jan: 20. 1607. John Brown B. D. and Vicar of Basingstoke in Hampshire, formerly Fellow of University Colledge, but first Scholar of this House, confirm∣ed by Indenture to us, 2 l. 12 s. per annum for ever, as a Rent-charge out of certain Lands in Rutherwik in the said County of Southampton, for one Exhibitioner or Scholar; to be paid him by 12 d. per week, according to his residence, as by the Composition more fully may appear. SECT. 37. Although our Land at Tackley, and some of our Lands at Old Woodstock and Wotton, are anciently belonging to our Colledge, and confirmed by the Letters Patents mentioned in the former Section [but of whose gift I do not find] yet because other of our Lands there [and those the greater part of all] were bought in K. James's his Reign, I shall men∣tion them together in this place. The Land at Tackley appears upon our Register, to be confirmed to us by K. H. 8. who took us Tenants for it.) The ancient Lands in Woodstock and Wotton, I find confirmed unto us by
the same K. H. 8. by the name of one Messuage and one Yard Land in As appears by a Court∣roll of 33 H. 8.Old Woodstock, called Heynes; one other Messuage and half Yard Land in Old Woodstock, called Jewels; and one more Messuage and half Yard Land in Wotton; and this done by receiving our Homage for them: but it appears by a Survey, that Balliol Colledge hath two Yard Land and a half in Wotton and Woodstock, which is half a Yard Land more then in the Ho∣mage is mentioned: All which, and many more, seem to have been the Lands of Thomas Harrow Clerk, and passed over by him to divers persons joyntly, 9 H. 8. as it's recorded in our Register, by a full recital of the Deed it self. The other Lands of ours in Old Woodstock, are the third part of the Certes (now written Sartes) bought of Thomas Ely and Nicolas Lucie, for 6 l. 6 s. 8 d. in 11 Jac: reputed worth 1 l. 13 s. 4 d. per annum, as amongst other things by the Deed is expressed. See Nashes surrender, 13 Jac. Rex. Annoque Dom. 1615.Seacoales, with other Lands, and the rest of the Sartes bought of Hierome Nash for 700 l. being part of moneys given by Peter Blundel, Founder of Tiverton School in Devon, in the last Year of Queen Eliz: upon which considera∣tion, 13 Jac: our Colledge did agree with his Feoffees to maintain one Fellow and one Scholar for ever, to be chosen and sent from Tiverton School as aforesaid, as amongst other things may by the Composition ap∣pear. Before the purchase of these Lands of Hierome Nash aforesaid, he the said Nash was Tenant to our other Lands, which lying intermingled with his, a Controversie arose, Which were ours? and which were his? whereupon, by mutual accord of the Colledge and him, ours were set out precisely, as appeats by a Deed to that purpose, bearing date Octob. 16. Anno 13 Jacobi. The particulars of the Land, afterwards purchased by the Colledge of him the said Nash, are expressed and bounded in a Sche∣dule annexed to our Deed of purchase, bearing date, Novemb: 24. follow∣ing; which Lands, together with others of the said Nash in Old and New Woodstock and Wotton, were the Lands of William Seacoal of Stanton-Wyard in the County of Oxon, who convey'd them to Michael Nash, by a Deed bearing date, Octob. 9. Anno 6 Eliz. Now these Lands thus bought of him are so small, and the charge is so great, that the said lands were set almost at a Rack-rent to defray it; and falling into the hands of beg∣garly Tenants, the Colledge hath of late Years, lost at least 200 l. by them: So that the Damnum emergens, by letting in these new comers, and these to share in Offices and Perquisites; and the Lucrum cessans, by the lessening of our Rent, makes the old Foundation groan under the burthen, which happen'd to be the greater by the dis-honesty of the Chapman, who sold away the best parcels of his land to others; leaving to us the open Fields, wherewith he thought us as easie to be taken, as Larks are there by a Day-net: and some of those, 'tis thought, were our own before too. And lastly, That no allurement might be wanting to catch us by, he tempted us with a handsom well-situated House: not forgetting that of the Poet.
Aspicis ut veniant ad candida tecta columbae Accipiat nullas sordida turris oves. These misfortunes some have ascrib'd to the unluckiness of the place, it being never known that any Man thrived upon it: But this hath been the usual Apology for bad Husbandry, which is the reason why our Chapman sold it, and our Tenant grew poor upon it, besides the Suits in Law where∣with he was continually embroyled, for land of his own adjoyning. I should rather ascribe it to the non-performance of Blundel's Will, by esta∣blishing a Fellow and a Scholar, he intending it for two Scholars only. Some will be ready to say, That it hath followed Fortunam Loci, h. e. the Colledge which was cheated in the first Foundation lands, and hath been since many times abused, as herein, so in other things before, and here∣after to be mentioned, ascribed to the superstitious uses whereunto the House was consecrated, viz. the honor, not of God only, but of the whole Choir of Heaven, to whom Prayers, Supplications, and Intercessi∣ons were wont to be made. Whereunto I answer, That this hath been ever the Argument of Sacriledge, and at this day is, for the sales of Bi∣shops lands and other Church Revenues, and holds as well against the most flourishing Colledges of England as against this. But in the first place, these Benefactions were no Acts of constraint, they being all done or in∣tended before the persons lay upon their Death-beds, and consequently not sollicited thereunto by their Confessors, which was the matter of an Anno Dom. 1646.Appeal, I remember, once at Rouen in the great Chamber of Parliament, viz. for the Cassation of a Testament, whereby the Testator gave all his moveables and one Years Rent of his lands to a Religious House, inasmuch as the Curat having his soul in his hand, one would presume it to have been done by an Act of constraint: for by the Civil Law, it is not permit∣ted to any one to perswade a Moribund to bequeath any thing to any per∣son but his Tutor, his Physician, or his Servant, inasmuch as the last Will ought to be free. The matter was so learnedly and readily argued on both sides, that the Court gave no Sentence in the Cause. On the same day there was another Process, touching a Testament which had been sign'd by the Testator before it was read unto him, by reason of the feebleness of his hand, not able to expect the reading thereof: whereupon, the Appel∣lant demanded the Cassation of the same: But it was pronounced good by the sentence of the Court, as a thing freely intended by the Testator. Secondly, then I say, That though those Constellations of Saints were in her [as in others] religious Horoscope, as carryed away with the common Error of the Times; yet she made God, whose honor is first regarded by her, the Lord of her Ascendent. The like hath the good Lady Periham done [those Constellations being by the Reformation removed out of the places they held in our Founders time] who for the promoting and in∣crease of Learning and Religion, hath annexed one Fellowship and two
Scholars places to the old Foundation for ever, with 40 s. per annum to the senior Fellows Scholar; but with a more equitable Proviso then any is in Blundel's Composition, and more suitable to that of the Founders Statutes; which is, That the Revenues decreasing, the allowance of her Eleemo∣synaries should decrease proportionably: which otherwise, had not been agreeable to the Founders Statutes, wherein it is provided, that Decres∣centib us reditibus decrescat numerus Sociorum: Wherefore she chose rather to have part of the maintenance of her own Scholars withdrawn, then in this case leave them to rob us. And all this was done by the direction of George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, as is recited in an Indenture of mutual Release between his Grace and this Colledge, to whose discretion it was by her wholly left, to what uses, and in what Colledge in Oxon her Charity was to be imployed. To the end and purpose aforesaid, the said Lady Beriham did (18 Jacobi) give to the said Archbishop the Farm call'd Borough-farm, with all the Members and Appurtenances whatsoever in Medmenham and Hambleton, in the County of Bucks, yet in lease for a∣bout The Lease dated 18 Jac.13 Years to come; which Interest of his Graces, did he Release to the Colledge by the foresaid Indenture, dated Octob. 9. in 4 Car. 1. An∣noque Dom. 1628. But some of the Trustees judging part of this Estate See the Boxes of Borough-Farm and Prince-Risbo∣row.to lye convenient for themselves, took it, and left us that at Prince-Risborow for it. Thus our Pious Benefactrix beteem'd her Scholars rea∣sonable Messes of Commons, but her Cooks licked their own Fingers in dividing of them. Not far from this Prince-Risborow, we have another Farm of an ancienter Donation, viz. at Morton near Tame, conveyed by George Nevil Archbishop of York, to several Trustees, 14 Ed. 4. convey∣ed to Nevil by Botelet, conveyed by Botelet to Jacket, conveyed to Jacket by Pyron, and to Pyron by Wolundun, 14 Ed. 3. and so up, till we come to Writings without date. And besides this, I do not know of any thing that I have not mentioned, unless the George in Woodstock, bought of one Mead (13 Car. 1.) with 100 l. given us by a Benefactor, and 60 l. added thereunto. SECT. 38. Seaven Fellowships and six Scholarships, given by Wil∣liam Tisdale, were upon the point of being setled here, upon such terms as should be agreed upon between the Abindonians and the Colledge, and allowed by George Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace. Three hun∣dred pound of the Money given by Tisdale to the foresaid intent and pur∣pose, was delivered into the hands of the Colledge, wherewith (with the addition of 40 l. or thereabouts) were bought Caesar's lodgings, with all the Houses and Appurtenances adjoyning, for a present Receptacle for the said six Scholars, which were there received and setled accordingly, re∣ceiving their Exhibitions by the hands of our Bursars, viz. Dring, Lee, Crabtree, Allen, Bowles and Read: whereof Crabtree dyed of a stab with a
Knife, given him by the unlucky hand of a Fresh-man of three Weeks standing: the rest continued here in expectation of a settlement for them∣selves and the intended Fellows here (whereof they were to be the first) which was to be upon the mutual accord of this Colledge and the Abin∣donians, by whom they were to be sent hither from that School. At the last, Articles, such as the Abindonians desired, were agreed on by the Colledge, subscribed by the Master and Fellows: which are as followeth. Articles of Agreement, between the Major, Bayliffs, and Burgesses of the Town of Abington, and the Master and Scholars of Balliol Colledge, concern∣ing the Incorporating into the said Colledge seaven Fellows and six Scholars, of Mr. Tisdale's Foun∣dation, mutually assented unto, if so be it shall seem good to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury his Grace. IMprimis, It is agreed, That the said Colledge be endowed with the Lands purchased for the Fellows; provided, That if the said Lands and Endowment shall be by any means impaired, there shall be a decrease of the number of Fellows and Scholars, according to the Statute of the ancient Foundation. 2. That the surplusage of the Money that remains of the Profits of the said Lands, amounting unto about Eight hundred pounds, be delivered to the use of both the Foundations. 3. The seven Fellows and six Scholars of Mr. Tisdale's Foundation, to be Incorporated and made parcel of the Body, by the name of Master and Scholars: But by their private Orders, and in the House to be distinguish∣ed; viz. Mr. Tisdale's Fellows, and Abingdonian Scholars. 4. The said Colledge to provide convenient Lodgings for the Scholars of the said Foundation, during the time they shall continue Scholars. 5. That the Scholars already chosen, shall so continue, until such time that Money be raised out of their Revenues for to provide convenient Building to receive the full number of the Foundation, and then the said Scholars to be Fellows, and more Scholars chosen. Provided, That the Money levyed out of the Yearly Rents, shall remain in the Chamber of the Town of Abingdon, until such time that there be raised a competent sum to erect Buildings, uniform to the said Colledge, the Colledge al∣lowing Ground for the said Building; and that the Election of the said
Fellows and and Scholars respectively, shall be immediatly after the finish∣ing of the said Building. 6. That out of the said Eight hundred pounds, or thereabouts, all charges in setling of the said Lands by Conveyance, or otherwise, shall be discharged. 7. That the seven Fellows of Mr. Tisdale's Foundation, shall equally receive all Profits and Commodities with the Fellows of the ancient Foundation, and shall be equally capable of all Offices, Preferments and Priviledges whatsoever in the said Colledge. 8. That the six Scholars of Mr. Tisdale's Foundation shall receive the full allowance by the Will, or what shall answer in full proportion to the said allowance, as shall be suitable to the Customs of the Colledge. 9. That the six scholars of Mr. Tisdale's foundation shall enjoy their said places untill they shall be Masters of Arts, or untill either by death, resignation or preferment, according to the statutes of the said Colledge, their places shall become void. 10. That in a void place of any schollar, the election of one other to be made within three months by such, and in such manner as is limited by the Will, and then to be presented and admitted, if he be worthy. 11. That the Master of the Colledge for the time being, shall receive out of the Revenues of Mr. Tisdale's donation, the summe of Twenty▪pounds by the year. 12. That there being seaven fellows and six schollars chosen out of the said school of Abington, no more of the said school be chosen into any place of the antient Foundation. Subscribed, Jo: Parkhurst, Magister Coll: Bal. Edw: Wilson. Johannes English. Johannes Churchar. Tho: Crane. Tho: Chambers. Aegid: Thorn. Johan: Pits. Rich: Trimnell. Rob: Parry. Whil'st these things were pending, the Abingdonians, instead of pur∣suing the intent of Tisdale, which was to make his Fellows and Scholars an additional part of a Foundation, entertained thoughts [by the help of the Charity of Whitwick] of Founding a new Colledge of it self; which they did effect, without regard had at all to the said Condescensions of our Colledge [though publish'd time enough to have hindred it] which could not have been greater, without manifest Injury to the ancient Foundation,
violence offered to the Statutes themselves: which thing was so little re∣garded in Blundel's Composition, that it is to be fear'd, That it hath been none of the least occasions of those various Providences we have seen come to pass, & ad beneficium & beneficiarios. The place the Abingdonians pitc'd on, was Broadgates-hall, where that they might take such footing, as that nothing might be able to remove them; they made the Earl of Pembroke, then Chancellor of the University, the God-father of this new Christned Hall, calling it by the name of Pembroke Colledge: King James the Founder of it, who then raigned; but (ad onera & costagia) at the cost and charges of Tisdale and Whitwick, allowing these only the privi∣ledge of Foster Fathers, as appears by the Natalitia which I shall here in∣sert.
NATALITIA COLLEGII PEMBROCHIANI OXONII. 1624.
Reverendissimo in Christo Patri Georgio Archiepis∣copo Cantuariensi dignissimo, totius Angliae Pri∣mati & Metrapolitano, patrono nostro colendissimo. QƲi te non audet accedere, non novit benignitatem Tuam, Prae∣sul Amplissime; qui te multis interpellat, peccat in mores, Ecclesiam, Rempub. quibus sub pientissimo Rege, optimoque Prin∣cipe, prudentissima tua pietas praesidet. Paucis ergo habeto gra∣titudinem Tuorum Pembrochiensium, rationem redditam actorum in natalibus Collegii hujus nuperi; in honorem & solatium Tuum, qui benefacta Tisdalli Tui non malè locata laetabere. Tisdalli Tui verè dicimus, affectu, institutione, benefaciendi foelicitate Tui. Propensissimè Is semper in te affectus, multis annis à te religiosè, pi institutus, ad hanc munificentiam piam per te edoctus, anima∣tus. Per illius piam memoriam; per pietatem Tuam, Te submissè obtestamur, Reverende Pater, nos velis fundatore nostro, amico Tuo orbatos, inter filios tuos numerare. Putato, ut Legatum Tisdalli munificum Tuae fidei concreditum, sic Legatoris nos Tuae tutelae commendatos. Quo obsequio filii nativi patri devincti sunt, aut esse debent, eodem nos paternitati Tuae obstrictos habebis; in∣ter reliquos Magistrum Collegii, Eum qui per 30 plus minus annos, pietatem, doctrinam, prudentiam Tuam verè, intimè est reveri∣tus, futurus semper est Amplitudini Tuae devotissimus Servus, Tho: Clayton. COllegium Pembrochiae in Ʋniversitate Oxon: ex fundatione Jacobi Regis ad onera & costagia Thomae Tisdale & Richardi Wihgtwicke, constat ex uno Magistro, decem Sociis & decem Scholaribus cum privilegiis & immunitatibus concessis per Li∣teras Patentes Regias datas Junii 29. 1624.
Hae literae patentes lectae fuerunt publicè in Aulâ Collegii Pembrochie Augusti 5. 1624. Quo die admissus fuit Magister Collegii, & facta est Transmutatio Aulae Lateportensis in Colle∣gium Pembrochianum. In quâ transmutatione habitae sunt Orationes sequentes. Thomas Browne Studiosus non Graduatus Commen∣salis Collegii. SEntio Lateportenses (salvam enim adhuc vobis antiquum hoc nomen, mox antiquandum) sentio, inquam, aures vobis ad unum omnibus ar∣rectas quò se ferat Oratio mea avidè expectantibus, &, ut ita dicam, au∣diturientibus an in invidiam Pembrochianorum an in gratiam dicturus sur∣rexerim: Quaenam verò sunt ista perperàm interpretantibus mala, quae à me quasi in Aulae funere lamentis veris, atque quod dicitur, spirantibus  velitis? En, Aulam vestram vagam, &  (quem enim hujus domus patrem, aut fundatorem recolimus? in tutelam recepit Me∣caenas nobilissimus, de Aulâ Collegium, de Lateportensi suo indito nomine Pembrochiense, de lateritiâ, ut ita dicam, idque si durationem spectes, verè marmoreum facturus, quod ne ipsa quidem invidia, nisi fluens aspi∣ciet. An illum qui hujus beneficii author, & fundus nobis extitit, qui mutationem hanc parturiit, pietatis criminis rerum sistemus, postulabimus benevolentiae dati{que} nobis rectè aestimantibus beneficii invidiam faciemus? Quis tam improbus, & nullâ fronte qui haec dicat? Quid enim? jura no∣stra, si quae fuerint, salva omnia, quanquam quae Lateportensium jura, quas privatas rationes putemus tanti? ut cum de communi bono agitatur, non prorsus jaceant, & Collegio Pembrochiano fasces submittant? Eadem ta∣men jura omnia, idem Magister & Principalis, eaedem aedes, nisi quod nobiliores, Lateportensis Pembrochiensis & vice versâ Pembrochiensis Late∣portensis, Tros Tyriusque hoc tantùm discrimine, quòd nos priùs titulo nescio quo fortè Ironico appellatos, jam verè magnificum nomen insigniet. Quis ergò Lateportensium cum ex Aulae antiquae ruderibus Phaenicem Pem∣brochianam excitatam viderit (quod nunc tantum non fit) non ostentabit damnum suum, & gratulabitur sibi tam utilem nominis jacturam? Intret jam Pembrochianum in portas nostras, nec non etiam in animos; hanc La∣tiportensem nostram apud te (vir ornatissime)  deponimus, durum enim fuerit dicere telinquimus, apud te, inquam, auspicatò depo∣nimus mox pro Aulâ Collegium, pro Principali Magistrum recepturi.
Johan. Lee Art: Baccalaur Scolaris Collegii. QUidni demorsos Cleanthis ungues sapere, & lucernam olere Cicero∣nianam debet, quae arae Lugdunensi adornatur Oratio? ne Oratoris incuria cum Ajace in spongiam, & fama in dentem impingat Theoninum. De meà igitur famâ quidni jacta videatur alea? cum in hoc Areopagita∣rum Theatrum velut in Epicurei intermundia subito delapsus sim homun∣cio, festinâ nimis obstetricante editam proditurus Orationem quasi ex somnifero vacunae foco, ipsoque Epimenibus specu prodeuntem. Elegis∣sem (Academici spectatissimi) Tacitae potius cum Numâ litasse, quam in tam celebrem irruisse conventum, illotis (quod aiunt) manibus, & salsâ minus molâ propiio Tisdalli Genio litaturus; nisi maluissem à vobis me∣dium imperitiae digitum, quam ab illo conversum ingratitudinis pollicem demereri. Meum me huic scopulo Prometheum affixit pientissimo Tis∣dallo gratulandi officium; qui suos huc usque passus videtur manes foelici Aesonis omine nunc demùm recoquendus, novâque cum Euyclice donan∣dus vitâ. Gallum debemus, candido serenissimi Claytonis Aesculapio cu∣jus unius beneficio velut gustato Glauci gramine, nostri in his aedibus revixit Tisdallus; & lugubri Libitinae suspensâ Cupresso nactus est viva∣cem nominis in aeternum victuri Cedrum. Euge, Abingdoniensis, plaude nunc demum, propitiae Junoni litato, Genioque indulgeto Schola, quae Solem hodiernum, tanquam illam Acessei lunam avidis jamdudum oculis expectasti: En foelix unione notandus, tibi jam tandem illuxit dies, in quo foelici opem ferente Lucinâ, Musas enixa es Pembrochianas. Totum nunc certè lustrum elapsum est, ex quo tu harum aliquas immaturo quasi Seme∣les partu radi obstetricante Minervâ exclusisti: quae celeberrima Ballioli seminaria veluti Jovis foemori insutae & excoctae Pembrochianos nunc gesti∣unt coronare lares. Hasce Musas (ornatissimi Lateportenses) quae vestrum in limine faventem salutarunt Janum, facilem Jovis vestri Hospitalis tesse∣ram impetraturas spero. Adeò ut sanctum quasi Jovem lapidem juratae vo∣biscum ineuntes foedus in unum cum Apolline vestro coalescant Hermo∣phroditum. Piis indies precibus vestro litant Hymenaeo, & deorum om∣nium conjugalium incerant genua, genialem Dei vestri tutelaris ambien∣tes torum; sperâmus tam pias Musas (faventibus Gratiis) voti damnan∣das, earumque (nullâ interim Penelopes texendâ telâ, aut moris necten∣dis) Zonam solvendam praestolamur. Ne gravemini (viri de Musis me∣ritissimi) omnibus dejectis de cardine controversiis, ad quas componendas novâ plerumque viri plac opus est; obviis ulnis procantes amplexari Mu∣sas: quae si vestram demereri gratiam poterint, de alterius cujuscunque Museae splene, & formicae bile, nil pensi habent. Insuper, ut nihil desit, quod suam Caio Caiam legitimis pactam tabellis arctissimè conjungat, oran∣di estis, ut deponcano & antiquato Lateportensium nomini nuncium mit∣tentes,
nomine gaudeatis succidaneo, & libentèr (quod benè vortat) Pem∣brochienses audiatis. Amandetur interim ad Chrispini Lippi scrinia cum blattis ac tineis rixatura multiloqua invidiae , quae suas à ventis ferendas in nos eructabit de plaustro contumelias incassùm nostrum per tam Latas portas egressuram exprobraturas Myndum. Pinge duas angues (pia ma∣ter Accademia) quo minus profana ausit invidia in cineres mingere Tisdal∣linos; ex his enim speramus aliquando (nullis interim expectandis Grae∣corum calendis) magnificas Musis surrecturas moles, reliquarum aemulas, prae quibus Memphitica pyramidum miracula in Augiae stabulum commi∣grasse viderentur. Agite (celeberrimi Pembrochienses) vestrum solamini, & exhilarate Larem, quem (deterso vetustatis situ) velut exutum pannis Ulyssem opulescere videmus, Tysdalli in primâ cerâ haeredem futurum: quem per se clarissimum magis indies inclarescere non dubitamus, magnas quoquo versus literarum colonias deducturum. Suam hinc arripiat Zoilus calumniandi ansam, qui nedum in scirpo non tam invenire, quam facere satagit: qui saniosas vitiorum vomicas obelo suo indignas summâ tantùm cute titillare solet; at protractae in arenam virtuti Rhinoceroticam semper impingit narem: Naevos vellicare  susque deque habet invidia: in amabili quocunque, vel ipso Veneris sandalio gestit scabros fatigare den∣tes; & praetereuntium digito si quid dignum occurrat, in hoc suum vel frangere genuinum non gravatur. At verò non vereor eam soboli Tysdal∣linae vaticinari famam, quam albo invidiae calculo insignitam, vel ipse in∣clusus tauro Perillus reboaret; eamque his aedibus gloriam non dubito ac∣cessuram, quam vel ipse quoque livor (salvis Codri iliis) plenis in per∣petuum decantabit buccis. Interim quam arcto nexu munificentissimo Tisdallo emancipati sumus? qui nos haeredes ex asse constitutos, nec non ornatissimo Whitwicko qui plus quàm sextulâ aspersos in tantum fortunae su∣pra omnem invidiae aleam positae spem, erexit censos capite homunciones. Gratâ etiam memoriâ semper recolendus est à nobis, qui ad clavum Ec∣clesiae Anglicanae sedet Reverendissimus Praesul, fiduciarius Tisdalli haeres; qui nostras utroque cornu nutantes jamdiu fortunas grato tibicine suffulcire dignatus est. Caeterùm (Mecaenas ornatissime, dignissimique municipii Abingdoniensis proceres) nobis aere vestro planè obrutis, aut novae impe∣trandae sunt tabellae, aut tristes quam primùm advenerint calendae, luridus miseris expectandus Druso: nisi malitis, ut conductae à Musis Cratiae sus∣pensis nostris omnium bonis libellos dejiciant se vobis in aeternum obliga∣turae. Ut ut (vigilantissime Collegii Pembrochiani magister) tuos tibi sem∣per indelibatos exopto honores, quibus siqua uspiam Aesopica intumescens in bovem rana illud ex veteri comoediâ  ggannire ausit, (vindice Nemesi) ruptis demum iliis debitas luat coaxantis invidiae poenas. En ha∣betis (Academici) ad nictantem planè lucernam nullâ olei impensâ elucu∣bratum Collegii Pembrochiani encomium: in quo concinnando res postula∣vit, ut pluteum cderet caput scaberet, ungues ad vivum roderet redivi∣vus
aliquis è vobis eloquentiae Camillus. At rem dicam, duplicem impre∣sentiarum nactus sum Spartam, ad quarum alterutram satis pro merito or∣nandam, lateribus Milonis & toto Ulysse opus esse videatur: hunc enim pulverem emensus, jamjam à Baliolensi accersor pluteo, ad commovendam Gowrian machinationis camarinam. Dum duplicem hanc humeris Aetnam sustineo, à posticis temperate sannis (Academici) meque in tantas angu∣stias redactum, curvatis à tergo ciconiarum collis nequaquam dignum ju∣dicate, utcunque rem tanti ponderis tam dissolutis aggredientem scopis. Quod unum reliquum est vos ad unum omnes (ornatissimi Academici) per sacrum Academiae Genium oratos velim, ut piae munificentissimi Tisdalli urnae pientissimis parentetis votis: Mollem tam charo Musis capiti cippum precamini: & bonis avibus inauguratas vestris auspitiis approbate, calculis ornatae, faustisque acclamationibus Musas salutate Pembrochianas. Matth: Turner, Art: Mag: Prelector Philosophiae. EOne res jam recidit (Lateportenses) ut nos veteres Coloni migremus, & novis istis in nostrâ domo regnum possessuris jure & loco cedamus? Sanè quod dixit Tribunus quidem plebis apud Livium, cum plebi connu∣bio patritio interdictum esset, quid hoc est aliud, inquit, quàm exilium intra eadem maenia, quàm Relegationem pati? idem de Lateport:  fortè à re natâ alienum, &  non erit: Intra eosdem pa∣rietes nostros, intra eadem tecta, non relegationem quidem, aut exilium, sed quod aeque novum est, , sed migrationem pati, sed in pro∣priis penatibus tantùm non hospites videmur. Quin si sero resipitis ali∣quid Lateportense, obviam itis hominibus  in alienâ nec vacua quidem illâ invadentibus, quin interceditis Collegio, quin jura vestra vo∣bis à majoribus tradita sarta tecta servatis, & Aulam vestram  animam agentem, & vix tantillum spiritus reliqui habentem, quo haec novissima verba jam abituriens in auribus vestris  relinquat, Au∣lam, inquam, antiquam; jam si fas fit dicere, moriturientem, quam ne fuisse unquam posteri nostri fortè vel fando audituri sunt, ab imminente morte asseritis, & a novo isto nomine vindicatis. . Quid enim est ratione rectè subductâ, cur quis tantas hâc in re tragaedias excitet, cur coelum quasi ac terras misceat, & in invidiam Pembrochiano∣rum ore plus quàm tragico exaggeratum eat mala nostra, nondum consti∣tuto, an si ponitùs excusserit, mala, an secùs, fuerint: Siquidem rem rectè aestimantibus fortasse etiam imputandam fuerit nobis hoc damnum non adeò prout primâ videbatur fronte incommodum, & non spernendi beneficii loco censendum. Ecquis enim parvi faciat novarum familiarum
adjectiones, & novae adaugendam hanc nostram Coloniam quasi  cujusdam accessionem. Non ignoti, nescio qui de triviis homines, diverso Rectore, diversis affectibus quasi ex alio genere mortalium repen∣tè in unum collecti hûc confluunt, eadem omnes castra & Hyberna tendi∣mus. Idem nobis mutato titulo, non animo Magister, & Principalis, Tros Tyriusque huic nullo, nisi virtutis discrimine spectatur: & quod hujus beneficii caput est, Aula nostra Reverendissimo Domino Archiepiscopo, illi Britanniae nostrae oraculo, & honoratissimo Domino Cancellario nostro, li∣terarum & Literatorum patrono, nec non vobis (quibus haud minima de∣betur gratia) Abingdoniensibus, tanti aestimata est, ut quasi de sparsis Ab∣syrti membris nullo firmo quidem inter se vinculo colligatis, annuente Regum optimo Jacobo, in corpus benè compactum, omnibusque quod spe∣ramus Whitw: Tisd:numeris absolutum, impensis & sumptibus nobilis illius Piorum  coalesceret, & instar decantati istius in fabulis Aesonis, aetate depositâ venerandos illos antiquitatis canos jam revirescentes ostenderet. Com: Pemb:Quid tandem aliud est Collegium Pembrochianum, quàm Aula Lateporten∣sis recocta, addo etiam renata, & si nobilem illum hujus Domus aeternùm  addiderim, certè hodierno die Aulae nostrae Encaenia agere, non Dns. Dr. Clayton Princip:funus ducere videamur. Quibus tandem herbis, nisi in animo tuo (Medi∣corum pater) olim insitis, quo alio quam tuae humanitatis succo, quibus nisi virtutum tuarum , & carminibus posita canitie repubescit Aula Lateportensis; Fallor, aut sola tua  bonitas, te etiam silente, viris optimis author erat, ut in alia Musarum domicilia tantùm , in nostrū oculos infigerēt, quo philtro, quo fascino obstricti, nisi quo, tu, in om∣niū affectus gratissimā exerces Tyrannidē? Qua tandē in re , Lateportenses, aut jure nostro decedimus, vel specie tenus nisi fortè quae∣dam st, ut Imperiorum, ita Collegiorum & Aularum arcana, nescio quae, ego non video, ut autem fuerint, fuerint etiam alia insuper incom∣moda (nam quid ferè undique placet?) quis tam adeo de faece homnncio est, qui id quod suâ tantum interesse putat, publico bono antiquius habeat, aut suâ causa & privatis nominibus aegrè ferat communem utilitatem? Certè non solum non dubitaverim, sed etiam contenderim, nominem esse, ut ut hujus domus , & indigenum Aulae Lateportensis Alumnum, qui non obviâ voluntate affirmet  hâc mercede valdè placuisse sibi ā∣num suúm quantum quantum fuerit, & non protinus exclamet tanti fuisse. Rationes putemus, Lateportenses (gratiam verò mihi facite errois hujus, nec dum enim scio, tam obviam, & familiari apud nos consuetudine rece∣ptam Dom. Dm. Clayton Magistrum.appellationem dediscere) Rem, inquam, ad calculos vocemus, Sociis aucti sumus, quâ verò re,  diminuti? In animum illum verè Lateportensem, nullo unquam inhumanitatis pessulo obditum, sed bonis omnibus latè patentem intromissi illi, quid, an continuò nos ejecti: Nun∣quam sat scio hic obtinebit vetus illud verbum invidiâ plenum, . Nihil intererit inter Magistrum
& Principalem, nisi quòd nunc à pluribus amabitur, coletur, qui ipse omnes ut ut plurimos amabit ut singulos. Hujus quidem humanitate freti, non so∣lùm non iniquis animis ferimus hos transitus rerum, sed pronis etiam, & quod dicitur, obviis ulnis amplectimur. Quin igitur non disparibus fron∣tibus honorem portas nostras pulsantem intromittimus, & unanimi salu∣tantium (ut ita dicam) vultuum concentu unum, eundemque virum am∣plissimum (in cujus purâ putà industriâ Lateportensis gloriae cardo vertebatur, & olim Pembrochianae vertetur.) hodierno, (ut ad honoris cumulum acce∣dant etiam auspitia) hodierno, inquam, die, quinto quidem, sed vel recla∣mantibus poetis, verè nobis festo, non , ultimum Aulae Latepor∣tensis, & primum (quod faelicitèr vortat) Collegii Pembrochiani divino, humanoque calculo approbante Magistrum auspicato salutamus. Tho: Clayton Medecinae Professor Regius Magister Collegii. Dr. Prideaux Vicecancell: Oxon: Rob: Baro Dormer: Gul: Dormer, frater Baron: Dnus J: Smith Dnus Francis: Godolphin, e∣quites aurati▪ Dr. Featly. Procuratores Academiae. Magistri alii multi, Aula plena. Major item Recorda∣tor & Burgen∣ses Abing: NOn ego, vos Domini, longo sermone morabor, Multae sint gratiae tibi, Reverēde, qui secūdo jam itinere benignâ tuâ operâ, hoc ipso in loco, me & res meas, Aulares, Collegiales promovere dignatus es; vobis multae, Honoratissime Baro, cum honorabili fratre tuo, Ornatissimi, amicissimi omnes, qui presentiâ vestrâ benevolâ Aulam hanc Aularum an∣tiquissimam, Collegium hoc Collegiorum novissimum ornare voluistis. Nemo, puto, hoc mihi Magisterium invidebit: ego mea omnia infra invi∣diam, sunt apud me miseranda multa, magnum nihil, nihil invidendum. Nec est, quod mihi succenseat quispiam si quis haec benefacta, alibi locata voluerit, expectarit. Testem habeo, in Domo meâ omni exceptione majo∣rem, neminem (benè novi) contratestantem, me nec magnates, nec mino∣res, planè nullum, nec verbo, nec scripto, nec pretio, nec prece, de hâc Prefecturâ sollicitasse. Quū verò ita placuerit serenissimae Majestati Regiae, Augustissimo Jacobo, Monarcharum optimo, Regi à Salomone sapientissimo, literatissimo, Literarum Patrono maximo, quum ita voluerint Reverendis∣simus Archiepiscopus, Ecclesiae, Academiae, Collegiorum, literatorum, Pa∣ter pientissimus, Honoratissimus Cancellarius noster, mihi speciatim sem∣per colendus, nobis Pembrochianis, Academicis omnibus aeternùm hono∣randus, Alii magnifici▪ ornatissimi, probi viri, qui de nobis non malè sen∣serunt, Provinciam capesso lubens. In quâ administrandâ non tam laeta∣bor de commodo aut imperio, quàm de amore meorum & occasione, quae dabitur, benefaciendi merentibus benè. Deus optimus maximus, imperia, obsequia nostra, conatus, studia, proposita omnia dirigat in gloriam suam bo∣num Ecclesiae & Reipublicae, in honorem Academiae, & Collegii Pembro∣chiani.
Now this Rejeton or Rejecton, is Emissarius Palmes, or an Off-set.Rejeton had no sooner taken root, then the Master and his company called the Master and Society of our Colledge into Chancery, for the restitution of the foresaid 300 l. which had been imploy'd towards the Purchase of the Lodgings aforesaid: whereunto the Society at first were generally inclined to demur [my Lord Keeper Coventry, who had been of the Colledge, promising a gracious hearing] but in fine, it was referred to my Lord of Canterbury aforesaid; who, upon hearing, deter∣mined that the Colledge was to pay the said 300 l. to the Master and So∣ciety of Pembroke Colledge (decreeing the Lodgings and Garden adjoyn∣ing to our Master, as a compensation of the loss of the 20 l. per annum, which He and his Successors should have had, if the Pembrokians had been setled with us; and the rest of the adjoyning Tenements to the payment of the Lectures, which failed with the failure of Fylingham) upon the De∣cree made 1615. Sect. 25. But knowing our Treasury to be empty of such sums, bade us go home, be obedient to our Governor, and Jehovah jire Deus providebit: whereupon his Grace paid down 50 l. of the said 300 l. presently; the other 250 l. we gave Bond for, to be paid half yearly till the whole were satisfied. The which sums, as they grew due, His Grace did likewise pay; which we exprest our thankfulness for, by so ma∣ny several Epistles: which being written by the Fellows severally accord∣ing to seniority, it came descendendo to my turn to pen the last. Now this 300 l. together with 100 l. more, which was probably imployed to the making of the present Seats and Shelves in the Library, we owe to his Grace. So that if Stars had any special influence upon inferior things, we might safely say, That this Colledge hath been subject to unhappy ones. And amongst all its Chronoeratores or Domines Temporum, 'tis hard to judge whether has had the more malignant Aspect upon it, viz. The Thievish glance of Mercuries Eye, or the Fiery looks of Mars: yet we have never wanted Benefactors, who have lent us Bladders which have kept us from sinking: Amongst whom, one eminent hath been the late Right reverend Father in God, the Lord Bishop of Rochester, who hath added to the ho∣nour of our Founders, in the enlargement of their Foundation, four Scho∣lars, with 80 l. per annum maintenance for them, in haec verba. Item, I give out of my Manor of Swayton, for the maintenance of four Scholars in Scotland fourscore pounds yearly and for ever; which said Scho∣lars shall be placed in Balliol Colledge in Oxford, there to enjoy their Annuities or Exhibitions until they are Masters of Art, and fit to be admitted into Holy Orders according to the Church of England. And the said Scholars are to be chosen from time to time by the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishop of Rochester.
To say nothing of the advantage that may hence accrew to the Scots themselves (in the capacity they have already by our Statutes of being hosen Fellows here, as well as any other persons of any place or Nation atsoever are) that to us will be (besides the Obligation of Interests) the filling of Chambers, Tuition, taking of Degrees, Honor, &c. things whereunto our Colledge seems to be mainly designed; which Baits, whilest others nibble at, I wonder they should go about to prove them sha∣dows to us, who have lost one part of five of our Colledge Revenue, by the late dreadful Fire in London, besides what damage it hath sustained by the late unnatural War, and the Fine upon renewing of the Lease of the Impropriation of St. Lawrence Jury London, now within two Years and half of expiration, which could not have been less worth then Five or six hundred pounds at 10 Years purchase. SECT. 39. But whatever hath been the condition of this Colledge, as being a part of the Material World: It gives way to few in relation to the Intelligible, as I may so say, It having been the Nursery of so many Learned Persons, and others desirous of good Letters: A List of some whereof I am now to exhibit. Walter de Fodringheye. The first Principal, who became a Dignatary, viz. Prebendary of Lincoln. Johannes Duns Scotus. There's as much contending for the breeding place of this rare Man, as hath been for the birth of Homer: We conjecture him to have been of this Colledge of Balliol, inasmuch as he was by Country of Northumberland, and of Duns there, as might be seen not only in Pitsaeus, but before every Volumn of his Works in Mss. in our Library, of the gift of Bishop Gray, but torn off in the time of the late War; and for that in Northumberland was the first Endowment of our Colledge. He liv'd Anno 1300. which was after Dervorgilles Statutes (but before those of Sir Philip Somervyle) yet not after the time when it was granted by the Pope that the Scholars might live in the House after they became Masters of Art: and therefore he might for that reason depart from this to Merton Colledge. But if this be not current, I shall give you in exchange William Bishop of Worcester. But whether he were William de Lynna, or William Whitlesey, afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, I am not sure: whereof this was Bishop of Worcester, 38 Ed. 3. that the 43 of Edw: 3. and immediate successor of this Whitlesey. I find not either of them chalenged by others.
Jo: Wickleff. Mentioned in five several Writings in Abbotfley-Box, by a Pub∣lick Notary, April 9. 1361. There were two of the name Masters of this House: The later is he of whom we now write: He was first Fellow hereof, then Master, and w he that gave the name to the Wicklevites. His Letter written to the Pope, is to be seen in Fox▪s Acts and Monuments. Whom Balaeus commends as li∣berally, as Pitsaeus spends his black mouth upon. He was publick Reader in Divinity in the University. He set up the Doctrine of the Waldenses, who were called Lollards in England; who being also written Lolleards, seem to be so called quasi Low-Lords, that is, Levellers: who though Reformers of Religion, yet the hostile manner wherein they assembled themselves, gave occasion to the Laws which were Enacted against them, Temp. Hen. 5. and of that Oath given to the High Sheriffs of Counties to persecute the Lollards to death: (That which Mr. Fox in his Acts and Mo∣numents urgeth against Alanus Copus, in defence of Sir John Oldcastle, the Lord Cobham (that the Act of Parliament was falsified, in that the consent of the Commons was not found in it) proves only that the Commons had then no Vote in Parliament, as to the making of Laws; but the falsify∣ing of the Act, it proves not at all.) Which damnable Doctrine of Re∣bellion, Religionis ergo, cannot be ascribed to Wickleff, the University giving testimony to his great Learning and Integrity of Conversation, Anno Dom. 12 Years be∣fore the Coun¦cel of Con∣stance, and 29 Years after his death.1402. And all our Colledge Records wherein he is men∣tion'd, do speak him a Man of great Trust, in the Reign of K. R. 2. which things were witnessed by his very Enemies. He is said to have writ∣ten 200 Volumns against the Pope: He translated the Bible into English. See the Catalogue of his Books exhibited by Balaeus. His Bones were, by the Decree of the Councel of Constance, taken up and burned 41 Years af∣ter his death, which Councel was called Anno Dom. 1414. Jo: Waltham. He was Fellow of this House, and Sub-Dean of York: He gave as a Legacy to the Colledge Notingamum Anglum in Mss. super quatuor Evan∣gelia. Although he be placed in our Colledge Library Catalogue, Anno 1492. or thereabouts, yet the very writing of Balliol with a double LL in the midst of the word, shews it to be at least as antient as the gift of Fy∣lingham, &c. when it began to be written ordinarily with a single L, (which was 1343.) as I have observed; which variation begat writing of it sometimes Bayly Colledge, sometimes Bayliolle, sometimes Bayly-hall Colledge, whereby the true Founders came to be forgotten, instead where∣of Men became the Adorers of Fancies. This kind of negligence, a∣bout those times, became the Mother of Ignorance, which spread it self so far, that it stirred up the Industry of after-times to correct it.
William Wilton. Fellow of this House, Professor in his Faculty: but in what that was, Pits doth not know; but it could be no other then Divinity by the Sta∣tutes of this House made by Sir Philip Somervyle: After which, he lived here and wrote many things; namely, Super Priora Aristotelis. l. 2. Quaestiones de Anima. l. 1. Mss. Bibl: B. C. Super Ethica. l. 10. He was Chancellor of the University of Oxon: 1373. according to Twine Apol: antiq: Oxon: but noted to have given Books to our Library, 1492. There were two other Wiltons mentioned by Pitsaeus, both named John; one lived 1310. the other, 1360. In neither of which is our Colledge con∣cerned; and Tho: Wilton, 1470. Roger Whelpdale. He was Fellow of this House, and afterwards Provost of Queens Col∣ledge Oxon: as they of Queens would have him to be; but of this Balaeus takes no notice: and lastly Bishop of Carlisle, a great Mathematician. He wrote many Books, whereof these are to be found in our Colledge Li∣brary. Summularum Logicalium. l. 1. De Universalibus. l. 1. De Aggregatis. l. 1. De quanto & Continuo. l. 1. De Compositione Continui. l. 1. De rogando Deo. l. 1. According to Balaeus, he lived in the time of Edw. 3. He is noted to be the first that enriched our Library with Manuscripts, besides those of un∣certain donation. Thomas Chace. He was Dr. of Divinity, Fellow, and afterwards Master of this Col∣ledge, Chancell: of Oxon, Ireland, and St. Pauls London. He built part of our Library, vid. Sect. 29. Humphrey Duke of Gloucester. He was Duke of Gloucester and Earl of Pembroke, of the Royal Blood: for he was Son of Henry the fourth, Brother of Hen: 5. Uncle (and Pro∣tector) to Hen: 6. chief of the Kings Bed-Chamber. He was a great Lover of Aretine and Gandidus, Italians, as Leland witnesseth: He was of this House, and one of the most Learned and Eloquent of his Age: He built that magnificent Structure of the Divinity School, and Library
over it [though some do conjecture from the great number of Coats of Arms in the roof of the Divinity School, that this was built by a com∣mon contribution] It is said, That order was given for the taking of it down, as a thing too superbe for a Building of that nature, which he en∣riched with 129 of the rarest Authors procured from Foreign parts at a very great charge, besides innumerable other Books of less value. After whose Example the other two parts of the Library, which cross this at both ends, was founded and furnished by Sir Thomas Bodely [since which time it hath received the access (amongst others) of rare Manuscripts of the gift of William Earl of Pembroke, Sir Knlm Digby, William Arch∣bishop of Canterbury; together with the whole Library of Mr. Selden, which is therein placed by the appointment of his Executors, Men emi∣nent for their Learning, and skill in our Municipal Laws.] And this Building hath received such further improvement, as if it strove not only to fetch out, but to go beyond the Copy given by our Duke Humphrey: for the great Gate of the Schools, and Tower over it, is of that height and excellence, that I know nothing of that nature comparable to it, being adorned on both sides within the Quadrangle, with five Stories of double Pillars of five several orders and dispositions, viz. The Tuscane, Dorick, Ionick, Corinthian and Italian; all improved by the skill of Architecture, which will not be solely espoused to the Fancies of Antiquity. Adde hereunto the Theater now on Building, begun by the most Reverend Fa∣ther in God, Gilbert Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, which once finish∣ed will as far exceed all the rest, as any one part thereof now goes be∣yond the other. So great a promoter was this Duke of Learning as well by the pattern he left behind him, as the cost he was at, and that as well of time bestowed in study, as in money imploy'd towards the work aforesaid. He was a skilful Astronomer, and wrote, Tabulus directionum. l. 1. Ad Abbatem Sancti Albani. l. 1. De sua donatione. Ep. 1. Ad viros cruditos. l. 1. At length, in the Parliament at Berry, Feb. 24. he was stifled with Feather-beds at mid-night by the Suffolk Faction: His Body was honor∣ably Interred at St. Albans, Anno 1447. Temp. Hen: 6. Rob: Twaytes. He was Master of this House, and Dean of Aukland: and more of him I cannot write, unless that he gave Books to our Library, which though many others have done, I note him as being a Dignatary, 1451. which, or any other promotion, he might hold with his Mastership by the Bishop of Londons Statutes, a thing which by former Statutes was not allowable.
John Tiptoft. He was of noble Parentage, but nobler for his Atchievements, and most of all for his Inclinations to good Letters. His Father was John Tiptoft, a Peer of this Realm, his Mother the incomparable Lady Jocosa; by both of these he was consecrated to Vertue and good Letters, born at Everton in Cambridge shire, saith Leland, brought up in this Colledge, wherein, saith the same Leland, Tunc temporis & Nobilium juvenum corona celebris renascentem imbibebat eloquentiam. He was created Earl of Worcester, and at 25 Years of age Lord high Treasurer (High Constable, saith Camden, Pitsaeus, in Appendice Cent. 2. calls him Rob: Tip∣toft, and sets him in Anno 1294. in the reign of Ed. 1. but falsly.in Worcester shire) of England: and was Beheaded, Anno 1471. He wrote many Orations full of Roman Eloquence. To Pope Pius the second. l. 1. Ad Cardinales. l. 1. Ad Paavienses. l. 1. Epistolarum ad diversos. l. 1. Et ejusmodi alia plura. He Translated out of Latin into Enligsh, Publius Cornelius, and Caius Flaminius, of true Nobility. l. 2. Cicero de amicitia. l. 1. Et de Senectute. l. 1. and other good Authors. Jo: Freus, vulgò John Free, or Phrëus in Leland. London and Bristol contend for the Birth of this John Free. Leland will have him to be his Cun∣tryman, h. e. a Londoner. He was Fellow of this Colledge: He became an admirable Philosopher, Lawyer and Physician: He became Publick Reader of Physick at Ferraria, afterwards at Plorence and Fadua, where he was made Doctor in the Facul∣ty. He wrote to his Mecoenas Tiptoft abovesaid, Earl of Worcester Expostulationem Bacchi. l. 1. De rebus Geographicis. 1. Petrarchae Epitaphium. 1. Epistolas familiares. 1. Carmina diversa. 1. Epigrammata. 1. De Coma paruifacienda. 1. Per plagiarios surreptos: as Dr. James testifies: but these two, and only these, are in Manuscript in our Library. Librum Geographiae. 1. Contra Diodorum Siculum poetice fabu∣lantem. 1. He translated out of Greek into Latin, these following, as Balaeus te∣stifies. Diodori Siculi Bibliothecam. l. 6. Xenophontis quaedam. 6. Synesium de Calvitio. 1.
And many other things wherein he imployed his Pen well; for a Trans∣lation which he dedicated to Paul the second, Pope of Rome, he was re∣warded with the Bishoprick of Bath and Wells, a Moneth after he went to Rome; where he dyed before he could be Consecrated, but not without suspition of Poyson from some Competitor. 1465. George Nevil. That great Earl of Warwick, Richard Nevil [who, as in a stage for some Years, did set up and depose Kings at his pleasure] had a Brother which was this George Nevil, whom yet but young, he promoted to high Honors: for, being Chancellor of the University of Oxon [where he studyed and became Fellow of this Colledge] he was consecrated Bishop of Exeter, Nov. 25. 1455. not yet 20 Years of Age. Afterwards, viz. 1460. he was made Lord High Chancellor of England, till his Brother the Earl be∣ing sent by K. Edw. 4. upon an Embassy into France, he was put out of his Chancellorship, and another, viz. Stillington, Bishop of Bath and Wells substituted in his place. But afterwards, Henry the sixth being taken, George Nevil was permitted to be promoted to the Archbishoprick of York, and consequently Metropolitan of all Scotland. Three Years were not hence expired, when Edward was devested of his Kingdom, committed to the Custody of this Archbishop of York: and Hen: the sixth being delivered out of Prison, restored to his own again, which he had before held for al∣most 40 Years. But Edward enduring an easie Imprisonment, made, by the aid of his Friends, an escape, recoverr'd his Kingdom, took K. H. 6. and this Archbishop [who had formerly taken him into Custody] But mind∣ful of former Obligations, he let him, viz. Nevil Archbishop forth a∣gain; but suffered K. H. 6. to be murthered in the Tower. And it was scarce a Year after, but K▪ Edward committed him Prisoner again, and plunder'd him of the worth of 20000 l. at his House at Moor in Hert∣ford-shire (among which, is recorded a Mitre set with Gems of a great value, whereof the said King made himself a Crown) Time and death having lost him his Friends before; He lay Prisoner after this for the space of four Years, at Calais and Guines in great want, the Revenues of his Bishoprick mean-while being sequestred for the use of the King. This his Calamity began 1472. and he was, 1476. by the Intercession of his Friends, let out of Prison; and dying of Grief, he was buryed in his own Church. In his time, did Pope Sixtus the fourth divide the twelve Bishopricks of Scotland from York, and subjected them to St. Andrews, which he erected into an Archbishoprick. This our Nevil was a Benefa∣ctor to our Colledge in Books, Building, &c. And at his Installation, he made a Feast of a Magnificence unheard of in our Age, Recorded by Bishop Godwin (Bishop first of Landaffe, and then of Hereford.)
The Bill of Fare. Of Wheat, quarters 3000 Hogsheads of Beer 1200 Hogsheads of Wine 0416 Hipocrist Hogsheads 0002 Fat Oxen 0080 Wild Bulls 0006 Fat Weathers 1004 Porkers 0300 Calves 0300 Geese 3000 Capons 3200 Pigs 0300 Peacocks 0100 Cranes 0200 Goats 0200 Chickens 2000 Pigeons 4000 Rabbets 4000 Bitours 0204 Ducks 4000 Hernsewes 0400 Phaisants 0200 Partridge 0500 Woodcocks 4000 Plovers 0400 Curlewes 0100 Quailes 0100 Egrets 1000 Rees 0200 Stags above 0400 Bucks above 0400 Roes above 0400 Hot Venison Pasties 1506 Cold Venison Pasties 4000 Dishes of Gelly parted 1000 Dishes of Gelly plain 4000 Tarts 0400 Cold Custards 4000 Hot Custards 2000 Pikes 0300 Breams 0300 Sea Calves 0008 Porpaises 0004 Ministers or Officers serving at the said Feast. Earl of Warwick, Steward of the Archbishop. Earl of Bedford, Treasurer. Lord Hastings, Controller. Lord Willowby, Sewer. Baron of Buckingham, Cup-bearer. Sir Richard Strangways, Taster. Nine Knights Martials of the Hall, besides Esquires and Servants. Serjeant of the Basin to the King was here so. Keepers of the Plate▪ John Graystock John Nevil John Braynock Over-seer of the Hall.
Guests in the Hall. High Table. The Archbishop himself. Bishops of London Ely Durham on the right Hand. Duke of Suffolk Earl of Worcester Earl of Oxford on the left. Second Table. Ten Abbots and eleven Priors. Third Table. Five Barons and eight and forty Knights. The fourth Table. Dean of York. Dean of St. Severine. Canons of York. The fifth Table. The Mayor of York. The Major of the Staple of Calais. Chief Citizens of York. The sixth Table. Four Barons of the Exchequer. And Lawyers six and twenty. The last Table. Four Kings Servants. Guests in the chief Dining-Room. At the Ʋpper Table. The Duke of Gloucester▪ Sister to the Duke of Suffolk at his right hand.
Countess of Northumberland at his left hand. Countess of Westmorland at his left hand. Two Daughters of the Earl of Warwick at the same Table. The second Table. Four Barons and Twelve Noble Matrons. The third Table. Their Waiting Gentlewomen. Guests in the second Dining-Room. The first Table. One Dutchess. Two Countesses. Three Baronesses. The second Table. Two Baronesses. Eight other noble Ladies. Guests in the great Dining-Room▪ First Table. Bishops four viz. Lincoln. Lichfield. Exon. Carlisle. The second Table. Three Earls. Two Barons. Three Bannerets. Third Table. Fourteen Gentlewomen. Fourteen Gentlemen. In the Hall again. Gentlemen  Yeomen 412 twice.
In the Sollar. Servants of Nobles 400 twice. In other places. Officers and Servants 1000. Cooks 62. Scullions, &c. 515. The first Course consisted of Fifteen Dishes. The second Course Of thirty three Dishes. Which I must refer you to Bishop Godwin for. Thomas Gastoing. He was Doctor in Divinity, Fellow of Balliol Colledge, and Chan∣cellor of the University: This may be the same with Thomas Gasconius in Pitsaeus, and Thomas Gascoign, called also Vasco in Leland. Hunfletae in∣ter Brigantes nobili lco natus, saith he. Pitsaeus notes him to be Anno 1460. and that he wrote many things, viz. Dictionarium Theologicum. lib. 3. Septem flumina Babyloniae. l. 1. Veritates ex scriptura. l. 1. Ordinarias lectiones. l. 1. Sermones Evangeliorum. l. 1. Vitam Hieronymo Stridonis Senioris viri ad miracu∣lum cum eloquentis, tum docti, quem mirifice coluit. Ita Balaeus etiam. Stephanus de Cornubia. Stephanus de Cornubia was Fellow of this House: He travelled beyond Seas, and became Doctor of Physick in Paris, Anno 1460. He hath left no memorial of himself with us, but the gift of Galen's Works to our Li∣brary; but hath written, Subtiles suas & omni admirations digas morali∣tates, viz. In Pentateuchum. libros 5. In libros Regum. l. 4. In 12 Proph-minores. l. 1. teste Pitsaeo.
William Gray. He was Bishop of Ely, Doctor in Divinity, born of a Noble Family, viz. of the Lord Grays of Codnor. His ingenuity and towardliness gave occasion to the great care that was taken for his Education, which began in this our Colledge. Afterwards, at Ferraria in Italy, he was an Auditor of Guarinus Veronensis, and got to himself praise by his skill in polite Lan∣guage, and various knowledge of things. He is said to have written much both before and after he▪ received his Mitre at Rome: Neither was he a mere Scholar, his Wisdom making him K. H. 6. his Procurator at Rome. After his return thence, he was made Chancellor of England. He gave all his Books, consisting of rare Manuscripts, to our Library; built part of our Colledge, and bestowed much upon the building of Ely Cathedral, where he was buryed, Anno Dom. 1478. More of this Prelate in the next that here follows, viz. Robert Abdy. Robert Abdy a Gentleman of a good Family, as is evident by his Coat of Arms, was bred up in this Colledge in the time of K. Hen. 6. became Fellow here about the first Year of K. Edw. 4. Anno 1461. and Master of the same about the 17th of K. Edw. 4. viz. Anno 1478. in which place he continued till the time of his death. He built half of the present Library of our Colledge. The fore-mentioned William Gray and he are nevet put asunder in places where they are remembred, as particularly in the Colledge Library: wherein are [as I have formerly noted] 21 Win∣dows curiously painted; every Window having two Coats of Arms, with Verses in painted Wreathes about them: In one of which Windows on the South side their Arms are placed, and none's else [for each Window hath two only] the Verses about them are, Hos Deus adjecit, Deus his det gaudia coeli. Abdy perfecit opus hoc, Gray Presul & Ely. And in the uppermost Window, on the North side, their Coats likewise are with these Verses, Conditor ecce novi structus hujus fuit Abdy. Praesul & huic Aedi Gray libros contulit Ely. This Robert Abdy lies buryed in the Nave of St. Mary Magdalen Church [within the Parish whereof this Colledge stands] under a Marble stone, which had once a border of Brass about it, signifying his Quality and the time of his death; but it's now lost. In the middle of the said Stone is yet remaining his Image in a Plate of Brass, with these Verses under his Feet.
Testis sis Christe quod non jacet hic lapis iste Corpus ut ornetur, sed spiritus ut memoretur. Quisquis eris qui transieris tu respice plora: Sum quod eris, fueram quod sis, pro me precorora. Abdy. John Tartays. He studyed many Years in this Colledge, as Balaeus witnesseth, even till he became Master of Arts; he wrote Summas Logicales. l. 1. with other things Quaestiones Naturales. l. 1. with other things which he testifies to have been in our Library. Richard Clifford. Richard Clifford, supposed onely to be brought up here because not chalenged by others, and a worthy Benefactor to this House; as is im∣plyed, though not particularized in the 7th Window on the North-side of our Library, in these Verses, Clifford Ricardus Antistes Londinensis Fusis expensis tale non avit opus. He was first Bishop of Worcester, where, having sate about six Years, he was translated to London, Octob: 13. 1407. and Anno 1414. being sent to the Council of Constance, he made a Latin Oration before the Emperor and Cardinals. In that Council that Of 50 Years continuance, begun by Cle∣ment the Anti-Pope at Avig∣non, against Urban: 6. fit∣ting at Rome: to Clement succeeded Be∣nedict: 13. in the same Schism; but, according to Caranza, Greg: 12. who promised to resign his Pontificate, in case Benedict like▪wise would uot refuse it: but Benedict leaving Avignon, and flying into Catalonia, Gregory entered the Re∣vocation of his Promise: both of them were deposed by the Council of Cardinals at Pisa in Italy, and A∣lexander 5. substituted in this place, which increased the Schism: hereupon Gregory flyes to Ariminum, where he remained till the Council of Consiace: Alexander 5. lived at Boonia. vid. plura Sect. 23. in fine.lasting Schism had an end, and Mar∣tin the fifth was declared the sole true Pope. In his Election it was, by the Authority of the Council Ordained, That 30 Electors should be added to the Cardinals, whereof one was to be our Bishop of London: neither were there wanting amongst them that thought of making him Pope. Certainly he was the first that nominated Cardinal Columna, who, with the consent of the rest, was declared Pope, and took on him the name of Martin. This Prelate dyed August 20. 1421. and lyes buryed in St. Pauls, near to the Tomb of Sir Christopher Hatton. Dr. Ble. Fellow of this Colledge, and Arch-deacon of Ely, 1478▪ a Benefactor to our Library.
John Bell. John Bell brought up in this Colledge Doctor of the Laws, Arch-deacon of Gloucester: He was confirmed Bishop of Worcester, August 11. 1539. where when he had sate only four Years, he left it, as his Predecessor had done before him. He afterwards lived and dyed in his own house in Clerken∣well London, which he left (inter alia) to the Colledge: and was buryed in the same Parish Church, where he lyes undet a plain Marble-stone on the North-side of the Chancel, with this Epitaph engraven upon it. Contegit hoc marmor Doctorem nomine Bellum. Qui belle nexit Praesulis officium. Moribus, ingenio, vitae probitate vigebat, Laudato cunctis cultus & eloquio. Anno 1556. Aug: 11. John Cotes. Brought up in Magdalene Colledge Oxon, Master of this House, and afterwards Bishop of Chester, 1556. Mariae 4. thus Bishop Godwin of Bishops writes, but there is some mistake in it: I find George Coats Doctor of Divinity to have been Master, 1539. John Cotes I find not at all. James Brooks. James Brooks was Master of this Colledge, Anno 1554. and Bishop of Gloucester at the same time, where he succeeded Hooper. He was a Learn∣ed Man and an Eloquent Preacher: But by delegation from the Pope he condemned to the Fire those Excellent Men, and Holy Martyrs, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer, who were burnt in the Town-ditch, commonly cal∣led Candych, over against this Colledge. John Piers, and Adam Squier. John Piers was Doctor in Divinity, Dean of Christ Church, and Master of this Colledge both together: He was admitted here, May 23. 1570. resigned it again, 1571. He was consecrated Bishop of Rochester, 1576. and then made Almoner to the Queen. From Rochester he was translated to Sarum: at last, Anno 1588. after the death of Archbishop Sandys, he was advanced to the Archbishoprick of York, dyed 1594. The next Master was Adam Squier, D. D. and  great Mathematician. I know of no∣thing he has left in Writing behind him. Robert Persons. Robert Persons was Socius Sacerdos of this Colledge, commonly called Chaplain-Fellow; and consequently entered into oly Orders when but
Bachelour of Arts [for so 'tis required of every one that is to be chosen Chaplain-Fellow] He resigned his Fellowship, Anno 1573. Feb. 13. with dispensation granted him to keep his Chamber and Scholars as long as he pleased; and his Commons to be allowed him till Easter following: But afterwards he turned Jesuite, received Orders from the Church of Rome, aud became Rector of the English Colledge there, Anno 1587. He wrote Responsum ad Edictum Reginae Angliae. l. 1. De Sacris alienis non adeundis. l. 1. A Christian Directory, or Book of Resolution, an excellent Piece, in two parts. l. 1. Novam Anglic: reip: reformationem. l. 1. De 3bus Angliae conversionibus. English. l. 3. Martyrologium Catholicum, against Fox. l. 1. Censuram Catholicam contra Hanmerum. &c. l. 1. The Defence thereof, Anno 1582. l. 1. Contra Edvardum Cocum de antiq: legibus Ec∣clesiast: Angl: extat. 1606. l. 1. De successione Regni Angliae. l. 1. Modestam admonit. contra Fr: Hastingum. l. 1. De mitigatione erga Catholicos in Anglia. English. l. 3. These are all reckoned up by Pits. There's a Manuscript written with his own hand in our Library, stiled Epitome controversiarum hujus temporis. By all which appears, That it was the wisdom of the Society to use that gentleness and moderation as they did, towards a Man of his excellent parts, wavering in his Religion, and already wandring in his mind towards Rome, to the end that thereby they might allure him to stay: which had they prevailed upon him to have done, it had been good service to God, and an acceptable one to the Queen of England, which the events of things proved to be true. Christopher Bagshaw. About the same time was Christopher Bagshaw Fellow of this House; afterwards, likewise changing his Judgment, he travelled beyond the Seas, and being a Man of parts, became Doctor in Paris, and one of the Faculty of Sorbon. He lived long after this, even to the time of King Charles the first, as I have been informed, and was wont to say, He hoped to see a reduction of England to obedience to the Church of Rome, and then he would come and repossede his Fellowship again here, inasmuh as he was never expelled, nor did he resign his place as Father Parsons had done.
Robert Crane. Robert Crane Fellow of this House, a Man of that prudence in the Eye of the University, that he was chosen Proctor thereof, 1581. nor could it be said of him as 'twas of that Emperor Galba, viz. That he was om∣nium consensu dignus Imperio si non imperasset: for they approved of his government so well, that they made choice of him the Year following: and all this when Proctorships went not by Cycle but by Suffrages, and so continued to do till the Cycle was thought fit to be made as best suit∣able to the present time. Thomas Holland. Thomas Holland was Fellow of this Colledge, Dr. of Divinity, and Regius Professor, all at one time. He was chosen Rector of Exeter Col∣ledge, and a great Patron of Dr. Prideaux, as appears by Dr. Prideaux's own Epistle to him, put before his Introductory Tables to the Greek Tongue, a task imposed upon him by Dr. Holland, whom he thus bespeaks viz. Pietatis & eruditionis nexu, non spectabili minus quam suspiciendo viro, D. D. Hollando, S. S. T. Professori Regio, omnibus à me nominibus patrono venerando. It were a sufficient Eulogy of either, to say they were Friends one of the other; which puts me in mind of the Epitaph of Sir Fulk Grevil in Warwick Church, viz. Servant to Q. Eliz. Councellor to K. James, and Friend to Sir Philip Sidney. He never went any Journey, but he took solemn leave of his Fellows, with this Benediction. Commendo vos dile∣ctioni Dei, odio Papatus & omnis superstitionis. He went beyond others in Reading, and beyond himself in disputing. Him succeeded Robert Abbots. Thomas Wenman. Thomas Wenman was Fellow of this House, and Publick Orator to the University, 1595. He hath left nothing, neither would he leave any thing in Writing behind him: because that whatsoever he had left us, must needs have fallen short of his Perfections, inasmuch as the best part of an Orator dyes with him. Robert Abbots. He was of this Colledge and Fellow here: from hence he became Par∣son of Alhallows in Worcester: from thence he was preferred to a Living in Leicestershire, which had been refused by Dr. Reynolds, President of Corpus Christi, and George Abbots then Master of University Colledge: from thence he was chosen Master of this House, and then made Regius Professor of the University, in Divinity, whose Patent for the place is in our Treasury, in the Box of Admissions of Masters. He was also a frequent Preacher: He wrote all his Sermons in Latin only, and Preached them out
of the Latin Copy: they were begun to be translated into English by a Mr. Chap∣man a worthy person.Fellow of this Colledge, but he receiving small encouragement from whence he expected much, went not through with the work. After that the said Robert Abbots had, by Writings extant, confuted the Errors of the Pontificians, he was consecrated Bishop of Sarum, Anno 1615. One Book not yet Printed, is his Commentary upon the Epistle to the Romans: the Original Manuscript Copy whereof is in the University Library. In this, saith B. Godwin, he matched the happiness of Seffride B. of Chiche∣ster, That he, being a Bishop, saw his younger Brother Archbishop of Canterbury, viz. George Abbots. Him succeeded in this Colledge, the Reverend and Learned Doctor Parkhurst. George Abbots. George Abbots was Fellow of this House, proceeded Dr. in Divinity here, then he became Master of University Colledge; afterwards conse∣crated Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, 1609. Decemb: 3. and the be∣ginning of February following, he was translated to London; where he had not sate a Year, before, by the prudent judgement of King James, he was designed Successor to Bancroft at Canterbury, and Privy Councel∣lor; whose Learning, Eloquence, Vigilancy, and unwearyed Study in Writing, in a Man so overwhelmed with business, Posterity will celebrate, though I be silent, says Bishop Godwin. He wrote a Book of Geography, which Dr. Heylen took for the ground-work of his. Another Book called, Look beyond Luther. A third contains his Questions stated in Vesperiis. He new publish'd Foxes Acts and Monuments, with an addition of the Per∣secution in the Valtoline. Lawrence Kemis. Lawrence Kemis was Fellow of this House, Companion in Travel, and Councellor in Designs to the Renowned Knight Sir Walter Rawleigh, who gave him his History of the World which he bestowed on our Library. Sir Walter not For one was sent with him that lookt nar∣rowly to him. See the Decla∣ration of King James upon that Voyage. capable of his advice in one thing abroad, he chose [and an ill choice it was] rather to become felo de se, then scrupling an , to return home and become a State-criminal. This fact of Kemis was like that of Torquatus Silanus, who killed himself upon a bare accusation. Tac. Hist. l. 15. c. 8. of whom Nero said, That he should have had life granted, if he would have expected the Judges clemency. Here was the difference, That the Case of Torquatus Silanus was better, but his Judge worse then that of Kemis. Hen: Bright, Mr. Moor, and Dr. Hyde. Henry Bright was Probationer-Fellow of this House, and afterwards chief Schoolmaster at Worcester for above 40 Years before his death: the
number of Scholars under him and the Usher, were usually 300: out of which he furnished the Universities, and especially this Colledge, with many Scholars well grounded in the Latin and Greek Tongues, 3 or four whereof were usually Fellows of this House together. A Man he was of that incomparable diligence and method in his Vocation, that he seem'd to be born to that only: this and his temperance, spoke him a Man natum ad reformandos hominum mores. He became Prebendary of that Church of Worcester (in which City he was born) seven Years before his death; for which Prebend a Patent had been procured him before by one that had been his Scholar, and at last Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England, viz. Lord Coventry. At the same time Mr. Moor was Prebendary of the same Church, formerly Fellow of this Colledge too. And Dr. Hyde Prebendary of Sarum, once of this Colledge, Father to the Reverend Dr. Tho: Hyde late Chanter of Sarum, and sometime Commoner here. Tho: Lord Coventry, and Tho: Coventry Fellow. Thomas Lord Coventry was of this Colledge, a great Lawyer: who be∣came Kings Attorney [in which Dignity he procured Mr. Bright's Patent aforesaid] last of all Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, wherein he lived for the space of 17 or 18 Years, which he resigned up by his death. He was born in Worcestershire, Father to my Lord Coventry who was likewise of this House; and Son to Thomas Coventry sometimes Fellow of this House (and afterwards a Judge at Westminster) see Sect. 31. and more in the description of Tho: Lord Coventry the second. Dr. Wakeman. Dr. Wakeman was Fellow of this Colledge, a Learned Man: but hath left no memorial of himself, besides Sermons Preached at Court, &c. Printed 1605, and a Treatise call'd the true Professor. Dr. Tho: Holloway, and Mr. Boswell. Dr. Thomas Holloway born in Worcester, and Scholar to Henry Bright there, Chaplain-Fellow of this House, afterwards Vicar of St. Lawrence Jury London; an excellent and assiduous Preachet there: exceedingly re∣spected of his Parishioners, which is wonder, he being presented by the Colledge: After his death, immediatly succeeded him Mr. Boswell (Fellow of this House too) after his return from Spain, with the Earl of Bristow: which Mr. Boswell gave many Books to our Library, a Person of known equal worth and integrity with the other. Edmund Lilly. Edmund Lilly D. D. was many Years Master of this Colledge, as ap∣pears by the Catalogue of Masters. He was an excellent Divine, univer∣sally
read in the Fathers, all whose Opinions he would reckon up upon any Question at Divinity Disputations in the Colledge; and that with such volubility of Language, and rivers of Eloquence, as made all covet to hear him, and his very Enemies to admire him. He was Chaplain to Q▪ Eliz. and had been preferred by Her, had not his long-winded Sermon displeased Her, when State-business occasioned Her to enjoyn him brevity. Mr. Wilkinson. 1610. Mr. Kery▪ Mr. Wilkinson Fellow of this House, dyed in the Vacation after the Act, wherein he was compleated Master; of which Act he was designed senior: in which place he came off with universal approbation. He left Logick and other Notes behind him, which are since either lost, or under a Hos ego versiculos, &c. He read the Logick Lecture with that vigour, elo∣quence, and prolixity, that drew on every Scholars admiration, and his own death: whom Mr. Kery endeavoring by hard and unseasonable study to fetch out, dyed likewise young. There have not been wanting those since, who, for their assiduity in the same, have deserved equal commen∣dations with them: But these late times have taught men to have more care of their Lives, and less of their Duty. Mr. Wood. Mr. Wood was bred up at Tiverton School, and Fellow here in that Com∣position place: A Man of singular Parts and Learning. His head would, and did endure study several whole days and nights together, without in∣termission, eating, drinking, or sleeping, which his Body could not long doe: and this occasioned a lameness in his leg, upon which he dyed. A little before his death, he went to the Chappel upon Crutches, and Preach∣ed a Sermon, taking this for his Text, Have pity on me, O my friends! for the hand of God hath touched me. That this eminent person lived no lon∣ger, I reckon among the misfortunes of that place. Him one White should have succeeded in the Fellowship, but was rejected by the Society for his deformity; which was a Canonical Impediment to one who was necessa∣rily to be Priest, but kept his Scholars place as long as he lived in the Col∣ledge, which was till Master of Arts, Anno 1624. Jo: Popham. John Popham Esq; of Littlecot, was of this House Fellow-Commoner, and Pupil to Mr. Chambers, admitted with his Brother, Anno 1618. gave us 100 l. towards the lining of our Chappel: in memory whereof (as the greatest Benefaction towards that work) his Arms are placed upon the Skeens of the Chappel, just over the door.
Dr. Tho: Clayton. Dr. Clayton was of this Colledge, where he proceeded Master of Arts: afterwards he became Principal of Broadgates-hall, and Master of Pembroke Colledge, Regius Professor in Physick for many Years. He was a good Linguist, to whom great Avicenne might speak and be understood without an Interpreter. A good Divine too: and this his skill he did so seasonably exercise towards his Patients, that it rendred him worthy of double honour. Dr. Denison, and Tho: Bunbury. Dr. Denison, Doctor of Divinity of this Colledge. He lived many Years Vicar of St. Maries in Reading, an excellent Preacher: He wrote an acute Treatise of Auricular Confession, &c. Him succeeded Dr. Bun∣bury of this House too, but sequestred, and created Doctor, 1642. George Sing. George Sing was Commoner of this Colledge, and Master of Arts here, 1617. Afterwards preferred in Ireland by the Lord Primate Hampton, to be his Chancellor and Vicar-general: After that, viz. about Anno 1639. advanced to the Bishoprick of Cloyne; and from thence to the Arch∣bishoprick of Tuam, in which Dignity he dyed. Elias Fareley, and Mr. Kery. Elias Fareley was born in Worcester, Scholar to Henry Bright there: Af∣terwards, viz. about Anno 1617. admitted of this Colledge, where he proceeded Bachelour of Arts: But as soon as he had time for Master, he crossed the Seas, and became Priest in the Church of Rome, and at pre∣sent he is said to be the chief Favorite of the Popes, and in likelyhood to be the next Cardinal. A while before his flight, I heard him make an ex∣cellent Oration before the Master and all the Colledge, upon this Theme, viz. Achillis lachrymae Patroclum mortuum sic alloquuntur: which though in his own turn, yet he intended as a Funeral Oration upon Mr. Kery then late Fellow of the House, a young Master of Arts, of great expectation with all, and no less in the affection then the judgement of this Fareley. But at another time [whether before or after this, I doe not remember] he declaim'd upon this Theme, viz. Propria quae maribus foemineo generi tri∣buuntur; for which he was justly reproved, by the Reverend Master, Dr. Parkhurst, as arguing a levity of Nature so incident to those that change their Religion, that Astrologers do undertake to find this in their Horoscope, vid. Junctinum in speculo Astrologiae.
John Greaves. John Greaves was of this Colledge, from whence, for his singular Learn∣ng, he was chosen Fellow of Merton Colledge. He made a great improve∣ment of his knowledge by his Travels into the East: Last of all, he be∣came Publick Professor of Astronomy in Oxford, and Gresham Colledge London: He wrote a Description (or rather publish'd it) of the Grand Sig∣ours Sraglio, Anno 1653. He Translated out of the Arabick, Abul Feda. Out of the Persian, Nasiroddin Al Tusi, and Shah Kolgi. He hath written a Discourse of the Roman Foot, and Denarius. A Description of the Pyramids of Aegypt: and translated a Tract, De siglis Arabum & Persa∣rum Astronomicis, out of Anonymus Persa. And besides, the Geographick Tables of Nassir Oddin, the Persian aforesaid. He hath translated a second of Ʋlag Beïgi Tartari. Ʋna cum Hypothesibus Planetarum Shah Kolgi, a∣foresaid. He hath himself written, Elementa Linguae Perficae. J: Clabrook. At the same time that this J: Greaves was chosen at Merton Colledge, stood S Clabrook of this House: who missing a place turn'd Popish Priest, and now at last is advanced to the dignity of a Chanoine in some of the hi∣ther parts of France or Flanders, as I am informed. A great Opiniatre he was; but so conscionable, that he took order for the discharge even of the least of his Debts here. Tho: Lawrence, D. D. Thomas Lawrence was Scholar of this House, then Fellow of All-Souls; and lastly Master here, and Margaret Reader in the University, and con∣sequently Prebendary of Worcester: an excellent Preacher, exquisite in the Elegancies of the Greek and Latin Tongues. Bishop Elect to a Sea in Ireland: but Death and the Rebellion hindred his Consecration. The Headship of this Colledge he resigned under his hand, Anno 1647. John English Tho: Chambers both of Wor∣cester. John English was born in Worcester, Scholar to the foresaid Hen: Bright. He became Fellow of this House, and Dr. of Divinity, Anno 1630. And lastly Prebendary of Gloucest: till wearyed by the Rebellion, and wasted by a Quartain Ague, he dyed, Anno 1648. Contemporary with this, was Tho: Chambers, the greatest Tutor at that time in this Colledge. Edward Sylvester. Edward Sylvester was born in Mansfield in Notinghamshire, Master of Arts and Bachelor of Divinity of this House: a professed Tutor in the
Latin and Greek Tongues, in a private House in Oxon. He bred up many Scholars to the Universities, whereof three he lived to see Heads of se∣veral Houses at one time in this of Oxford. He was Interpreter to Me∣trophanes Critopylus. Matthew Turner, Thomas Saxby. Matthew Turner was of this Colledge, from whence he went to be a Tutor in Broadgates▪hall, where he became Reader in Physick: upon which account he made one of the Orations in the Natalitia of Pembroke Col∣ledge, Sect. 8. He had skill in the Oriental Languages: He wrote (as he professed to me) all his Sermons in Greek. He was Chaplain to the Leiger Ambassâdor, Viscount Slego in Paris; by whom he was preferred to Hom-Lacy, and another Benefice in Herefordshire: where he dyed about the Year, 1656. This Matthias Turner was Scholar here to Dr. English, and so was Thomas Saxby: this was of the Foundation till Master of Arts, after which time he became a Preacher in London at Fanchurch: He imitated Mr. Shute of Lombard▪street, and went beyond him. Lastly, he became Vicar of Sunning near Reading, where he dyed much about the time of the others decease. Dr. Tooker. Doctor Tooker Commissary for Berkshire, Dr. LL. whom I thought not fit to omit, to let the World know that this Colledge hath afforded Law∣yers (as well as Divines and Physitians) in which Faculty this Doctor Tooker was eminent. He was a Benefactor to our Chappel. Metrophanes Critopylus. Metrophanes Critopylus was a Grecian born, and came into England to be instructed in the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church; and in order thereunto, to learn the Latin and English Tongues. To these ends, he addressed himself to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Abbots, who sent him to this House, where he continued till about the time of his depar∣ture out of England, which was about Anno 1622. After his return into his own Country, he became Patriarch of Alexandria, which in the Coun∣cel of Nice, was ordained to be one of the Patriarchal Cities; the other three being Antioch, Rome, and Constantinople. He wrote, as some suppose, the Confession of Faith, which went under the name of Cyrill Patriarch of Constantinople, in Greek, αχθ, 1629. which Confession was with a Censure upon it, Printed at Rome, 1632. the Title whereof is, . that is, The condemnation of the Confession of the Calvinists, as it was set forth in the name of Cyrill Patriarch of Constanti∣nople: with this Condemnation and Confession is Printed an Answer to
the Anathematisms of Cyrill Patriarch of Alexandria, and Predecessor to our Critopylus; wherein the said Anathematisms are acknowledged to be genuine, though they decry the said Confession as spurious. [And indeed Cyrill himself confesses, That they were at first written in Latin, but by himself, and afterward turned into Greek by himself also: whereunto he added Answers to certain Interrogations concerning the principal Heads of Controversies between us and the Church of Rome: in every one whereof he declares for us, and against them, Anno Dom. 1631. αχα.] The said Anathematisms, as in the matter of Primacy, the great sore of all that must not be touched, so in most things besides, are most contrariant to the do∣ctrine of the Church of Rome transcribed from his own hand, αχς h. e. 1616; wherein he stiles himself thus. viz: . h. e. Cyrill by the mercy of God, Pope and Patriarch of the great Ci∣ty of Alexandria, and Judge of the whole World. Nay Cyrill of Constantino∣ple himself was said, by the hereafter mentioned Conopius, to have been strangled by the contrivance of the Romish party, because he refused to acknowledge the Primacy of the Pope at old Rome [for Constantinople is called new Rome by the Greeks themselves, and particularly in the premi∣ses] which his successor was contented to swallow whilest gilded over with the hopes of a Patriarchate. The Patriarch of Mosko believes (and all the Russians with him) that he hath gotten this bone from them all; al∣beit 'tis not 400 years since they received the Christian faith; nor 80 years since he was first stiled Patriarch; contenting himself before with the Title of Metripolitane. Their Religion could not be sound, they receiv∣ing it from the Greek Church with all their superstitions: and as for the Patriarchate; The Patriarch of Constantinople being banish'd by the Turk from Constantinople, he resided in Chio, which the Russians call Sio, till about Anno 1588; the Patriarch of Constantinople or Sio being banished, as some say, by the Turk; or as others say, deprived by the Greek Clergy, came to Mosko; where he resigned his Patriarchate, and translated it thi∣ther; since which time they are made believe, that they have a Patriarch invested with the same right and authority that the other had: of which superstition of theirs the subtill Greek made good advantage, and depar∣ted with a rich booty into Poland, whether their Patriarcship were currant or not. Nathaniel Conopius. Nathaniel Conopius was a Cretan born, and trained up in the Greek Church; He became , or Primore to the aforesaid Cyrill Patriarch of Constantinople: upon the strangling of whom by the Visir [the Grand Signeur of the Turks being not then returned from the Siege of Ba∣bylon] he fled over, and came into England, addressing himself with Cre∣dentials
from the English Agent in Constantinople, to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Land, who allowed him maintenance in this Colledge, where he took on himself the Degree of Bachelor in Divinity, about Anno 1642. And lastly, being returned home, he became Bishop of Smyrna. He spake and wrote the genuine Greek [for which he was had in great Ve∣neration in his Country, others using the vulgar only] which must be un∣derstood of Prose too, for Poetical Greek he had not, but what he learn'd here. As for his Writing, I have seen a great Book of Musick, as he said, of his own Composing: for his skill wherein, his Country-men in their Letters to him, stiled him : but the Notes were such as are not in use with, or understood by any of the Western Churches: Yet I have often heard him sing these Words, and this Tune following, which we have set to our Notes. . That their Musick was sung in parts, the difference of Ages inferring different Voices; and the difference of Voices, common to Men of the same Age, do sufficiently prove. For Schot in his Natural Magick proves, That a Symphony may be made by Beasts, which he demonstrates by an Iconism of Cats and Sicilian Asses, according as they have been experi∣mented to have done by an artificial Contrivance, supplying their want of reason. But whether the parts of their Church-musick were generally counterpoint [as the Learned Mr. Gregory of Christ Church hath said] I cannot say. But it seems by Clemens Alexandrinus, Paed. l. 2. c. 4. that Chromatick Harmony was known to, and in use with some in his days, though disallowed by him, which Opinion of his, was agreeable to the custom of that Church under Athanasius, where (in singing) the Voice was but a little varyed, which ight be called a lowd Reading rather then Singing: which kind of Musick St. Austin also approves, though St. Am∣brose's way [who first brought it into the Latin Church, as the same Saint Austin testifies in his Confessions] he doth not disallow. And the said Clemens himself admits of modest and chaste Harmony, which he opposes to such Chromatick Musick as is described by him to be A wicked and artifi∣cial flexure of the Voice, used in their Bacchanalian and Meritricious Meet∣ings, not much differing from some Cathedral Musick which I have heard in France, where one (in the time of Divine Service, and he the Organist of that Church) upon the Organs played set Almaines and Corantoes instead of Voluntaries. So that the result of all will be only this, viz. That it's not meet to sing Holy Hymns with Tunes borrowed from prophane Songs:
which one (whom I could name) endeavoring to introduce here in Eng∣land, was justly censured in the High Commission, who, it seems, did herein imitate Ephrem Presbyter of the Church of Edessa: Quem Theo∣dretus i (say the Magdeburgenses, Cent. 4. c. 6.) ad impios, sed suavis∣mos modos, Harmonii cujusdam, accommodasse pias & sacras materias. That otherwise Chromatick Musick [in a good [and now current] sense] which Clemens takes in an ill, may lawfully and lawdably be used, we learn from the example of David himself; of whom hear St. Austin, de Civ. Dei, l. 17. c. 14. Erat autem David vir in Canticis eruditus, qui Harmo∣niam Musicam non vulgari voluptate, sed fideli voluntate dilexerat: eaque Deo suo qui verus est Deus mystica rei magnae figuratione serviens, & diver∣sorum nomine snorum rationales moderatos{que} concentus, concordi varietate compactam bene ordinatae Civitatis insinuat unitatem. h. e. David was a Man skilful in Songs, who loved Musical Harmony not with a vulgar delight, but with a faithful desire: and thereby serving his God, who is the true God by a mystical representation of a great thing; and under the notion of divers sounds, he insinuateth rational and moderate Concents by an agreeable variety, the com∣pacted unity of a well ordered City. The truth whereof, God grant may ever flourish in this Church, and in this Colledge in particular. Amen. Christopher Prior. Christopher Prior the Son of Tho: Prior Prebendary of Gloucester, was brought up under Mr. Langley Schoolmaster of Gloucester Colledge. He was Scholar of this Colledge, and the first that I as Fellow ever present∣ed. He became Doctor in Divinity and Principal of New-Inne Hall, whereunto the Marquis of Hartford then Chancellour of the University [whose Chaplain he was] nominated him, Rogers being sled over to the Parliament party. Afterwards he was made Prebendary of Sarum in the room of Dr. Prideaux, whose Preferment to the Bishoprick of Worcester made it for him: These Preferments, with others of equal value, lost by the prevalence of the Rebels party, he had regained with Jobs Compensa∣tions, had he lived till the return of the King; which Death prevented half a Year before. He came hither the best Grecian that ever since my time hath been admitted of this Colledge, and was furnished with other parts of Learning accordingly, which he lost no time to improve. Peter Wentworth. Peter Wentworth was first of Magdalen-hall, then Scholar of this House, where he proceeded Bachelor of Arts, and was at the same time Collector by a general suffrage, no Proctors nomination. He was Fellow here, and after, having taken the Degree of Doctor in Divinity upon him, he was preferred to the Deanry of Armagh in Ireland; which I may call not an Archiepiscopal only, but a Patriarchal Deanry, the Archbishop of Ar∣magh
(whose Cathedral that is) having three other Archbishops subject unto him, which cannot be said of any one of the Western Church, be∣sides the Pope of Rome. He out-lived this Dignity, lost his Children, and all that he left there upon his flight into England: where being extreamly weaken'd by a dead Palsey, wherewith he had been a long time affected, he chose rather then to return to a place so fatal to his Body and Estate, to settle upon the Parsonage of Hasley in Oxfordshire, whereof he dyed Par∣son. The place he dyed at was Bath, Anno Dom. 1662. Thomas Lord Coventry, the second. Thomas Lord Coventry, Father to the Lord Coventry now living. He was Pupil here to Edw: Wilson B. D. and Fellow of this Colledge, under whose Tuition he profited in vertue and good letters; besides the honour he had to be Son to such a Father, as was Thomas Lord Coventry Lord Keeper of the Great Seal aforesaid. Stapleton de Tribus Thomis, writes of one of his Predecessors, Sir Thomas Moor, That after Sentence given in a certain Cause, called for another: whereunto answer was made, That there was none depending; which he caused to be registred in perpetuam, rei memo∣riam. And although the like happened not in this Thomas's time, 'twas not because he came short of That Thomas in clearness of Judgment, and quick dispatch of Causes, but by reason of the contentious disposition of the Times wherein he lived; which filled not that Court only, but that of Requests too, with Suits, where Men came to be relieved against their own Acts: whereunto he was wont to answer, That he sate not there to make Wise men of Fools. [It is there also said, Sir Thomas Moor being a Mem∣ber of the House of Commons, Temp. H. 7. and opposing the unjust exa∣ction of the K. promoted by Empson and Dudley, was moved to acknow∣ledge his Error; who answered, That he had committed none: neither would ever confess himself guilty, where he was not sure of pardon. This had been to expect relief against his own imprudent Act in a Criminal Matter, as Lord Keeper Coventry's Orators aforesaid craved in Civil Causes, and in both to be made Wise men of Fools.] Yet in this viz. Lord Keeper Co∣ventry.he excelled that Thomas, viz. That he dyed not in jest. Robert Smith. Robert Smith, Son to Sir John Smith by the Lady Isabella, Sister to the Earls of Warwick, Holland and Newport, was, with his Brother Charles▪ Scholar to Mr. Silvester aforesaid here in Oxon, and afterwards of this Col∣ledge: where he spent his time in the study of good Letters, till he took on him the Degree of Bachelor of Arts. He then travelled beyond the Seas [as his Father had done before, who dyed in Sienna in Italy] After his return he marryed the Countess of Sunderland, a Lady of incomparable Beauty, and a true Sidney; by whom he had a Son not long before his
death: In whom also dyed all the vertue and sweetness of disposition, that a mere Mortal Nature was capable of, and answerable to that of his Grand∣mother by the Fathers side, First marry∣ed to Sir Tho: Smith, Father to Sir John aforesaid, and afterwards to Sir Robert Sidney Earl of Leicester, Grand-father to the Countess of Sunderland by a former Wife.the Countess Dowager of Leicester, under whom he had his first education. Davenport and Wild Chief Barons. Davenport, him I should have named as contemporary with my Lord Keeper Coventry: He was of this House, and became a known excellent Lawyer (and was wont to say, That Sir Edward Cook commented learnedly, but it was upon a wrong Littleton.) Last of all Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, and so continued till his death, He was one of the common Contributers to the last adorning of our Chappel, as was Lord Chief Ba∣ron Wild, who was about the same time of this House: whose sole Daugh∣ter and Heir hath been many Years marryed to the Right Honorable Lord De la Warre, one of the antientest Barons of this The third Baron.Kingdom. But for∣asmuch as I am uncertain whether the said Baron Wild be dead, I have not given him a distinct place in my Calender: and here I shall desire my Reader to let him stand as a Statua Mercurialis to point out the excellen∣cies of his Daughter, as the way to true honour. Sir William Throckmorton. Sir William Throckmorton, was Son to Sir Thomas Throckmorton of Tort∣worth in the County of Gloucester: He lived in this House Pupil to George Abbots (afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury, as hath been said) Fellow of this Colledge, who to his dying day was wont to call Sir William his Son. A Pupil he was worthy of such a Tutor; for he had proved the Eye and Mouth of that County, had not his expence in the preservation of the Forest of Dean [in the Confines whereof his Ladies Estate lay] caused his unhappy Retirement. He was Friend to the Church and Church-men, and setled so many Impropriate Tythes upon the Parish Church of Tyrley, as doubled the Vicarage thereof, he being then Lord of that Mannor. Sir Baynham Throckmorton. Sir Baynham Son to Sir William was likewise of this House, Pupil here to Dr. Thorne, now Arch-deacon of Buckingham: He was of Clowerwall in the Forest of Dan, which descended unto him by his Mother [and is now the seat of his Son, called also Sir Baynham Throckmorton, one of the Knights of Parliament for Gloucestershire.] He was a faithful Soldiar and Servant to the King, and dyed one of his Majesties Privy Chamber.
Dr. Higgs. Dr. Higgs was Fellow of this Colledge, and Tutor here to the now Re∣verend Rector of Lincoln Colledge Dr. Hood: He became Beneficed in the West, where, after he had lived many Years, desired nothing more then to see his old Mother this Colledge again; which he did, and dyed in the way homeward before the War. Lord Wenman. Lord Wenman was Fellow-Commoner of this Colledge; whose worth is so well known in these parts, that what I could write, would be but a diminution to his Merit. He gave us a very fair Silver and gilt Bowl: but of such Monuments, the late Rebellion left us none. He being but lately deceased, may conveniently be placed here. Edward Wilson. Edward Wilson, B. D. and Tutor to Thomas Lord Coventry, as is afore∣said, was much a Scholar, and as much a Gentleman: who after having lived many Years senior Fellow of this House, was Beneficed at Bampton, whom resigning his place, The Reverend and Learned Dr. Thomas Good, now Canon of Hereford, succeeded. He was taken at length with a dead Palsie, under which he laboured divers Years: during which time, he made Plutarch much of his Diversion, and Bellarmine, De arte bene mo∣riendi, much of his serious study (wherein one in his condition could not be very assiduous.) Let no man startle at this; for Bellarmine, notwith∣standing the much adoe that he makes about the merit of good Works in his Polemical Divinity, professes here, That it's the safest way to trust in the Mercies of Christ. Lastly, for a memorial o himself, he left us the Brazen Eagle in the Chappel. Dr. Gerard. Dr. Gerard was a greater Friend to the Church, then his Brother Sir Gilbert, though a Church Tenant. He was first Fellow Commoner of this Colledge; from whence he was chosen Fellow of All-Souls, where he became Professor of the Laws in this University. Dr. Page. Dr. Page was of this House, where he lived till he was of some reason∣able standing, Master of Arts; and was then chosen Fellow of All-Souls, where he proceeded Dr. of Divinity, and a worthy Divine he was, very well versed in the Greek Fathers. Wind was a great enemy to him, and he as great an enemy to the Winds and Tempests of Religion: to which end, he wrote a Book called The Peace-Maker, or a brief Motive to U∣nity
and Charity in Religion. He translated Thomas a Kempis, of the mi∣tation of Christ, whose Legacy, to the Church was Peace. He wrote a∣gainst Prin, concerning the bowing at the name of Jesus: and another Tract of Schism, occasioned by another. At last, he dyed in a good old age at his Benefice, leaving his Books, &c. to Mr. George Ashwell some∣times Scholar of this House, and afterwards a Worthy Fellow of Wadham, but at present Rector of Hanwell. Mr. Rous. Mr. Rous, alias Rus, was Scholar of this House, and afterwards Fellow of Oriel Colledge, and Protobibliothecarius of the University for many Years. He was successor to Dr. James, and predecessor to the Learned Dr. Thomas Barlow, the Reverend Provost of Q. C. and Margaet Pro∣fessor. Sir Robert Parkhurst. Sir Robert Parkhurst, Son to Alderman Parkhurst sometime L. Major of London (and so Nephew to Dr. Parkhurst our Master) was of this House, where he lived studiously and soberly: but of his Atchievements I am not able to give any account. Only he gave divers Books to our Library. Thomas Hicks, and John Parkhurst. Thomas Hicks was born about Stratford upon Avon, and was educated in quality of a Commoner in this House: where he lived till he was of some good standing Master of Arts: and then was made Chaplain of Christ Church, by the worthy Dean Dr. Duppa, to whom he dedicated his Trans∣lation of some of Lucian. He was a skilful Limner as well as Poet, and drew the Picture of the Reverend Dr. Parkhurst, as he sate at Divine Service, or Divinity Disputations in the Chappel, and presented it to his acceptance. And could he have drawn the Image of his mind, as he did it in Face or Front, as Limners are wont to speak, he might have present∣ed that as comely as this: for he was a Man of singular Learning, Gravity and Piety, frequent in Preaching, and vigilant in the Government of this Colledge, whereof he was Master, as may be seen in the Catalogue; whom we owe to Magdalen Colledge wherein he was educated: He was sometimes Proctor of the University, then Chaplain to Sir Henry Nevil Lieger Ambassador at Paris, who gave him afterwards the Benefice of Shillingford; next he became Chaplain to the Lord Archbishop of Can∣terbury, Abbots, who gave him Newington, both which he resigned by his death, aged 74 Years, having left his Headship of this Colledge one or two Years before.
Francis Finch, and Sir John Finch. They were both Scholars to Mr. Sylvester aforesaid here in Oxon, and afterwards Fellow-Commoners of this Colledge. Francis betook himself at length to the study of the Law, and became Barrister: He had not been long in practice, but he dyed; yet he lives still in those several pieces of Ingenuity he left behind him, wherein he falls not short of the best of Poets: and because Est finitimus Oratori Poeta, he might have proved ex∣cellent in that too, having so incomparable a precedent as his Brother Sir Heneage Finch. As for Sir John, he betook himself to the Study of Phy∣sick, travelled into Italy, and there became Doctor in the Faculty, and publick Reader thereof in several places. He hath been in England, and visited this his aged Mother since the return of the King, but is gone back into Italy again, where his further Atchievements I must leave Posterity to celebrate. * Thomas Price. Thomas Price was Scholar of this House, of my nomination, afterwards Fellow of the same, and dyed May 1665▪ not yet Bachelor of Divinity, but as Learned of his time as any that I ever knew of this Colledge. He went Chaplain in the Voyage to Algiers, and the taking possession of Tangiers, whereby he came to be acquainted with the Impression that Ara∣bick, wherein he was skill'd, made upon the Spanish Tongue. He was as mindful of Curtesies as any, and forgetful of Injuries beyond parallel; which made him seem best to those that stood most in his way to prefer∣ment. He made a Copy of Verses in commendation of one that had been his Competitor for a Fellowship the first time he stood, and got it from him. The which (without robbing the other of that his due) may serve in a sort for his own Epitaph; viz. Pungente homines stylo Erubescat pagina. Salvo homine tui recîdit vulnus Ingenii acies: Nec toxica effundit Calamus Acutus sanè, non aculeatus. Moribus vivere malles, quam more: Alienam agit vitam saeculi vivens genio, Et extrà se quaerens Exul: Seipsum perlegit Stoicus. Et Statim Sphalmata corrigit.
[Arctatur humano Cortice malorum Ilias] Vitiorum speculando contrahit imagines, Non vitia: Quid ni istas dicam Idêas Mentis Harpyiarum  Arab: Est imago ma∣gica sub certo Horoscopo in∣sculpta & consecrata ad rem ipsam fu∣gandum. Di∣cuntur etiam  qui imagunculas concineant mirabisi saepe eventu. Coel: Rhod: Lect: antiq: l. 1. c. 15.Telesmata? Aut Animalis Paradisi Spectra in Paradiso formidabili forma qui terrebant Adamum ne illuc rediret.? Perpendat Lector, In anoche, & apoche Passionem, & quadragesimam, Epictetum, Arrianum, Simplicium, Stoae olim incolas Jam Portae Proselytos. John Lee. This was he who made one of the Speeches written in the Natal: Coll: Pemb: and one of the six Scholars sent from Abingdon School to our Coll: of Baliol, which were afterwards translated from hence to Broad gates now Pembrook Colledge. He was an indefatigable Student, and of proficiency answerable. He died soon after his going to Pembrook Colledge. It may be said of all the other five together compared to him as was answered of of Mercuries Picture in the fable compared to Jupiter's and Juno's. viz. That he that would buy these two, should have the third into the bargain: He wrote an Enterlude never published, or Acted. Mr. Berry. He was first Scholar of Corpus Christi Colledge, from whence he was removed to this house, and Fellow of Peter Blundells foundation here, so made by the appointment of Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench Westminster, Anno 1601. a man of that learning and integri∣ty, that he may seem of purpose to be set here as a Copy for all his Succes∣sours in that place to write after. He hath left only two sermons in print behind him, viz: an Assize Sermon, and a Visitation Sermon, very well worth the perusall. He was many years Cannon of Exeter, and dyed Anno 1667. aged 87 years; such was his symmetry of parts, and exact temper of body, that he might have lived to an hundred years, had he not contra∣cted an ulcer occasioned by a fall.
Sir Edmund Fortescue, Fellow Commonerand Edmund Ellis, Fellow of this House. Sir Edmund Fortescue Knight, sometimes Father to our Sir Edmund, pre∣ferred Edmund Ellis to the Benefice of East Allington in the County of Devon, after he had continued a worthy Member and Fellow of this House for many Years together. After the death of both these and the return of the King, our Sir Edmund was, I had said, created Knight and Ba∣ronet; but that it cannot be said of him, that Materiam superabat opus, much less that it was ex nihilo, unless the Name and Resemblance which a King bears of God will have his Acts of Regality called Creations. It were a sufficient Eulogy of him to say no more, then, That he was one who deserved such a Wife as his now Relict was: Yet I shall adde the Cha∣racter given him by the Pen of Edmund Ellis, son to the aforesaid Edmund, and Fellow of this Colledge too, but now Rector of the said East Alling∣ton, whereunto this our Sir Edmund Fortescue presented him. In Memoriam Clarissimi Viri Dni E. F. Militis, & Baronetti. Ante Annos Animum gessit, Nec sibi, nec Aliis sais notus: Variam habuit, & Fluctuantem Indolem Suo nimirùm Vacillantem Pondere. Sub ipsâ Juventute maxima exhibuit Gemi Politici Indicia: In SENATUM tandem adscitus, Quando non fuit in Terris quò ultrà pergeret, In Patriam emigravit Coelestem. Decembris 30.—66. Posuit E. E. FINIS.
Procurators, Principals and Masters. PRocurators first ordain'd 1263. 45 Hen: 3. Appointed by Dervorgille 1266. 48 Hen. 3. Walter Fodringheye, Principal 1282. 08 Edw. 1. Hugo de Warnakeby 1296. 22 Edw. 1. Stephanus de Cornubia 1308. 34 Edw. . Richard Chikewelle 1309. 03 Edw. 2. Henry de Seton 1323. 17 Edw. 2. Nicolaus Luceby 1327. 01 Edw. 3. John Wickleff 1340. 14 Edw. 3. Hugo Corbrigg 1344. 18 Edw. 3. John Wickleff 1361. 34 Edw. 3. Thomas Tyrwhit 1374. 47 Edw. 3. William Lambert 1406. 08 Hen. 4. Thomas Chace 1410. 12 Hen. 4. Robert Burley 1424. 02 Hen. 6. Richard Stapilton 1429. 07 Hen. 6. William Brandon 1432. 10 Hen. 6. Robert Twaytes, alias Thwates 1451. 29 Hen. 6. William Lambton 1461. 01 Edw. 4. John Segden 1473. 12 Edw. 4. Robert Abdy 1478. 17 Edw. 4. William Bell 1496. 10 Hen. 7. Richard Barningham 1504. 18 Hen. 7. Thomas Cisson 1511. 03 Hen. 8. Richard Stubbys 1518. 10 Hen. 8. William White 1525. 17 Hen. 8. George Cotes 1539. 31 Hen. 8. William Wright 1545. 37 Hen. 8. James Brooks 1547. 01 Edw. 6. William Wright 1555. 03 Ph: & M. Francis Babington 1559. 02 Eliz. Anthony Garnet 1560. 03 Eliz. Richard Hooper 1563. 06 Eliz. Robert Hooper 1567. 10 Eliz. vid. Sect. 34. in Margine▪ p. 79. John Piers 1570. 13 Eliz. Adam Squier 1571. 14 Eliz. Edmund Lilly 1580. 22 Eliz.
Robert Abbots 1609. 06 Jac. John Parkhurst 1616. 13 Jac. Thomas Lawrence 1637. 12 Car: 1. George Bradshaw 1646. 21 Car: 1. Henry Savage. 1650. 03 Car: 2. Note, That all the Masters [except Walter Fodringheye, the first] pre∣ceding Barningham, are here set down, not according to their Admissions, which are not known, but according to the Dates of some Acts done by them, or in their time; the Records whereof we have remaining with Except those of Chikewelle and Seton, temp. Ed. 2. which I owe to the Town Ar∣chives.us. So that if any be omitted, 'tis because they were Faineants or Bibulus's. Nam Bibulo fieri Consule nil memini.
A TABLE Referring to the ENDOWMENTS OF THIS COLLEDGE. NOrth Morton. Sect. 36. p. 82. Berkshire. Beeston. 24. p. 38, &c. Bedfordsh. Borough Farm. 37. 84, 85. Bucks. Prince Risborow. 37. p. 85. Rotherwick. 36. p. 82. Hampshire Abbotsley. 24. p: 38. Huntingdō Canterbury Rent. 28. p. 66. Kent. Fylingham. 25. p. 52. Lincolnsh. Risome. 25. p. 52. Brtleby▪ 25. p. 52. St. Lawrence. 20. p. 32. London. St. Margarets Patyns 30. p. 72. And Rood Lane. 30. p. 72. Clerken-well. 33. p. 78. How. 14. p. 23. &c. Northumb. Stamfordham. 14. p. 23. &c. Mickle Benton. 24. p. 37, 40. Westlade and Killingworth. 24. p. ibid. Morton in Tame Parish. 37. p. 85. Oxfordsh. Old Woodstock. 37. p. 82, &c. Wotton. 37. p. 82, &c. Tackley. 37. p. 82, &c. New Woodstock. 37. p. 82, &c. Steeple Aston. 22. p. 34. Odington. 30. p. 37. Heddington. 36. p. 82.
Divinity School. 22. p. 34. Oxford Ci∣ty and Su∣burbs. Exeter Colledge. 34. p. 80. Merton Colledge. 22. p. 34. Magdalene Parish. 38. p. 85, &c. The same 26. p. 60. &c. The same. 18. p. 28. The same. 16. p. 25, &c. St. Giles's Parish. 26. p. 60. St. Maries Parish. 26. p. 61. The same. 21. p. 23. St. Martyns Parish. 17. p. 27. St. Mildreds Parish 22. p. 34. St. Edwards Parish. 18. p. 29. St. Aldats Parish. 17. p. 27. St. Ebbs Parish. 26. p. 60. St. Peters in the Bayly. 26. p. 60. St. Michaels at the South Port. 28. 67.
A Table of MISCELLANIES. ALlowance of Fellowes. Sect. 9. Balliol Colledge Schools. 21. Balliol King of Scots. 10. Battle at Dunbar. 10. Bachelour in Divinity. 24. Brazen Serpent. 19. Cambridge Antiquity. 26. Canterbury Colledge. 28. Chaplain-Fellows first made. 31. Chaplains distinct from Fellows. 21, 22, 24. Chappels. 19. 1. Chappel, 19. 2. Chappel. 19. 3. Chappel. 29. 4. Chappel. 32. Characters. 14. Commencement, the Cambridge word conf: 14. Corpore's Case, what? 11. Dedication of the Colledge to St. Katerine. 14. Divine Offices. 19, 23. Divinity School. 22. Durham Colledge above 60 Year ancienter then either Hatfield or Bury's time, the pretended Foun∣ders. 24. Earth swells up daily. 26. St. Edwards Parish. 18. . 14. Establishment of this Colledge by 1. Dervorgille. 11. 2. Bishop of Lincoln. 13. 3. John Balliol King of Scots. 16. 4. Edw: Balliol K. of Scots. 24. 5. Queen Elizabeth. 35. Exeter Colledge. Sect. 34. Fillingham. 25. Founders of this Colledge, who, and when. 6. Garcio and Garcon, what? 24. Genealogy. 5. Generals. 21. Halls, as Alban-hall. 22. Brasenose-hall. 26. Broadgates-hall. 17. Chimers-hall. 28. Herte-hall. 18, 22. Hammond-hall. 26. St. Hugh's-hall. 7, 18, 22. Lomb-hall. 22. Manger-hall. 22. Margaret-hall. 22, 26. New Balliol-hall. 7, 22. Old Balliol-hall. 7. Rack-hall. 28. Sparrow-hall. 7. Saucer-hall. 22, 26. Hills daily sink down. 26. Homage done by Scotland. 10. Homage done by John Balliol K. of Scots. 2. St. Hugh, 7. St. Ives. 25. Jewes banisht. 17. Juse-lane, or [in other Writings] Jury-lane. 28. Katerine, unde? 14. Letters Patents. 25, 35, 17. Levellers. 39. Library of the Colledge. 29, 39. Library and Schools. .
Licence from the Pope, &c. for ce∣lebration of Divine Offices. 2. Lollards, what? 39. Masters of this Colledge. 3, 13. Mackduffe. 10. Maud the Empress. 17. Meadows grow higher. 26. Metrophanes Critopylus. ψ. St. Michael's Church at the South Port. 17. St. Mildreds Church. 22. Mitigation of Statutes. 24. Mortmain. 35. Musick in Gods Worship, what kind? 39. p. 121. Number of Scholars at first. 9. Offerings by Townsmen, why? 26. Oriflamme. 19. Parlement at Rouen. 37. Parvisum, or Parvisia. 21. Pembroke Colledge. 37. Primacy of Pope denyed by the Greeks. 39. p. 120. Principal. 11. Procurators. 11, 12. Pronunciation of Letters. 14. Portatorium, what? 11. Prayer for the dead. 8. Queen of Scots. 1. Rectors of this Colledge. 27. Risome. 25. Russians, when converted to Christ▪ &c. 39. p. 120. Sacrilegious Objections answered, 37. Site of the Colledge, first where? 7, 16. Statutes of 1. Devorgille. 11. 2. Sir Philip▪ Somervyle. 24. 3. Bishop of London. 27. 4. Present Statutes. 31. Style of the Colledge, what? 35. Synderesis. 14. Talismans. 19. Tekelmans. 19. Testaments ought to be free. 37. Tythes, the Colledge freed from in Oxford. 23. Visitors. Bishop of Durham. 24. Bishop of Winchester. 31. Bishop of Lincoln. 31. Others. 31. Others. 27. Writers, and others eminent of this Colledge. 39. Wickleffe Master of this House. 39. Yorks Archbishop, Primate of Scot∣land. 39. p. 104. Yorks Archbishop deprived of Scot∣lands 12 Bishopricks. ibid. FINIS.
