T1078 R4910 12633109 64821
A TRUE NARRATION Of that Horrible CONSPIRACY AGAINST King JAMES And the whole PARLIAMENT OF ENGLAND, Commonly called the Gun-Powder TREASON: Written in Latine by Jacobus Augustus Thuanus, Privy-Councillor to the King of France, and President of the Supream Senate of that Kingdom. Faithfully rendred into English. LONDON, Printed for John Leigh at the Sign of the Blew Bell by Flying-Horse Court in Fleet-street. 1674.
The History of the Powder-Plot, Translated out of Thuanus, lib. 135.MDCV. NOw shall we in a contiued Relation declare that Horrid, and by all Parties justlySo detestable it seems it was to some of the Students of the English Colledge at Rome, that being informed of the discovery of the Plot, Sixteen of them (abhorring such jugling and bloody De∣signs) forsook the Colledge, slipt into France, some of them turning to the Church of England, whither they came. Foulis, Hist. of Popish Treasons, li. 10. c. 2. p. 692. detested Conspiracy entred into a∣against the King of Great Britain; which being dis∣covered about the end of this year [1605] was in the next year suppressed by the Death of the Conspirators. To the Petition for Liberty of Conscience made by the Pa∣pists in the former Session of Parliament, and rejected by the King, there was a rumour there would be another preferred at the next Sessions, (which had been now often deferred) which should be in no danger of being denyed as the former, but should carry with it a necessity of being granted by the King whither he would or not. Therefore those that mana∣ged the Affairs of the Kingdom under a generous and no wayes suspicious King, fearing nothing worse, did make it their business to avoid such Petitions, and that necessity that did attend them. But among the Conspirators it was con∣sulted,
not, how they might obtain the Kings savour, which they now despaired of; but how they might revenge that repulse, though with the ruine of the Kingdom, which the other never thought of. The beginning of these Counsels are to be derived from the latter end of Q. Elizabeth. For then, as appeared afterwards by proofs and confessions, Robert Winter (to whom Oswald Tesmond alias Greenwell, of the Society of the Jesuits joyned himself as his Companion) was by the advice of Hen. Garnet, Provincial or Superiour of the said Society in England (Robert Catesby and Francis Tresham of the Gentry, instigating) pri∣vately sent into Spain, in the name of the Catholicks, with Letters Commendatory to Arthur Creswell of the same Society living in Spain,Dec. 1601. Mandatis. and with Commands to the King; of which this was the summe. That he should forthwith send an Army into England, for which the Catholicks would be ready in Arms as soon as it came over. In the mean while that he should assign yearly Pensions to some Catholick Gentlemen. Furthermore, that he should insinuate it to the King, that there were some Gen∣tlemen and Military persons that were aggrieved at the Pre∣sent state of things, whom he might easily draw to his Part, by relieving their necessities. And whereas the greatest diffi∣culty, after the Landing such an Army, would be for supply of Horses; they in England would take care to have Two thousand Horses ready provided upon all occasions. This thing was secretly transacted by the Mediation of Creswell with Petrus Francesa Secretary to King Philip, and Franciscus Sandovallius Duke of Lerma, and he affirmed that the thing would be very acceptable to King Philip, and that he had offered his utmost assistance: that it was also agreed among them of the Place of Landing. For if the forces were great, then Kent and Essex would be most commodious for their Landing; if less, Milford in Wales; and that King Philip had promised by Count Miranda toward that Expedition Ten hundred thousand Crowns.Decies centena aureorum M. Stored with these promises, Winter returns into England, and acquaints Garnet, Catesby, and Tresham what he had done.
These things were transacted under Q Elizabeth: who dying about this time, Christopher Wright who was privy to these Matters, is speedily sent into Spain,Mar. 1603. who bringing the News of the Queens Death, presseth the business of the Pensions and the Expedition.Sir Will. Stanly. With him was sent from Bruxells by William Stanly, Hugh Owen, and Balduinus, (one of the Society of the Jesuits) Guido Fawkes,22 Jun. 1603. with Letters to Creswell that he should speed the business. To him was given in Command, that he should signifie to the King that the Condition of the Catholicks, would be more hard under the new King, then it had been under Q. Elizabeth; and therefore that he should by no meant desist from so laudable an Enterprize. That Milford lay open for an easie Landing to Spinola. But the slate of things was changed by the death of the Queen, and King Philip returned an Answer worthy of a King, that he could no longer attend to their Petitions, for that he had sent Ambassadors into England, to treat of Peace with the new King. Therefore despairing of their design as to King Philip, the Conspirators fly to their last and desperate Counsels, and in the first place they make it their business to satisfie their Con∣sciences, and that being done, they confirm their resolutions to attempt some great Enterprize. And thus their Divines discoursed. To depose Kings, to grant their Kingdome to others, it in the power of the Supream Judge of the Church; But all Hereticks being ipso jure separated from communion of the Faithful, are every year on Holy Thursday,Caena Domini. excommunicated by the Pope. And this holdeth not only in Professed Here∣ticks, but in those that are covertly such, because being repu∣ted ipso Jure Excommunicate they do incur the (same) Pe∣nalties, which are ipso facto deserved by professed Hereticks. From thence it follows, that Kings and other Christian Prin∣ces if they fall into Heresie may be deposed, and their Subjects discharged of their Allegiance. Nor can they recover their Right again, no, not though they should be reconciled to the Church. When it is said that the Church, the Common Mother of all, doth shut her bosome against none that
return to her, this is to be understood with a distinction, viz. provided it be not to the damage or danger of the Church. For this is true as to the Soul, but not as to the Kingdom. Nor ought this punishment to be extended only to Princes that are thus infected, but also to their Sons, who for their Fathers Sin are excluded from Succession in the Kingdom. For Heresie is a Leprosie, and an Hereditary Disease: and to speak more plainly, he loseth his Kingdom that deserteth the Roman Religion: he is to be accursed, abdicated, proscribed; neither is he, nor any of his Posterity to be restored to the Kingdom: as to his Soul, he may be absolved by the Pope only. Thinking themselves abundantly secured within by these reasonings, they begin to seek outward strengthenings to their Conspiracy: and chiefly Secresie, which they sealed by Con∣fession, and the receiving of the Sacrament. To this end there was an Oath drawn up amongst them,May, 1604. in which they did engage their Faith by the H. Trinity and the Sacrament, which they were presently to receive, that they would neither di∣rectly nor indirectly by word or circumstance discover the Plot now to be communicated to them, nor would they desist from prosecuting it, unless allowed by their Associates. Thus being encouraged by the Authority of their Divines, they betake themselves to the adventure (as) not only lawful & laudable, but meritorious. This was done before John Gerard of that Society. Unto this, after Confession, by the Sacrament of the Holy Altar, were drawn in, the next May, at first five of the Con∣spirators, Robert Catesby, Tho. Winter, Tho. Percy, Kinsman to the E. of Northumberland, John Wright, and the afore∣mentioned Fawkes called out of Flanders. Catesby, the Author of this Tragedy, thought it not enough that this, or that, or any single person should be aimed at, but that all, together, and at the same time, should be comprehended in this Conspiracy.
For so he reasoned with himself. The King himself might many wayes be taken away, but this would be nothing as long as the Prince and the Duke of York were alive: again, if they were removed, yet this would advantage nothing so long as there remained a Parliament, so vigilant, so circumspect to whatever might happen: or if the Parliament could or the chief Members of it, could be de∣stroyed, there would remain still the Peers of the Realm; so many Prudent Persons, so many powerful Earls, addicted to that Party, whom they could hardly resist, and who by their Authority, Wealth and Dependants, would be able, if occasion should be, to restore things to their former state. Therefore not by delayes, but at one blow all were to be swallowed up, and so laudable an Atchievement was to be brought to effect altogether, and at once. At Westminster there is an old Palace of very great Honor and Veneration for its Antiquity, in which the great Coun∣cils of the Kingdom are used to be celebrated; which by a word borrowed from us, they call a Parliament. In this, the King with His Male issue, the Bishops of His Privy Councel, the Peers, the English Nobility, the Chief Magistrates, and those that are delegated from particular Counties, Cities, Towns, and Burroughs; in short, the Men of greatest Wisdom and Counsel do meet together. Here Catesby thought a convenient place to execute his so long studied and digested Plot: and having made a Vault, and storing it with a great quantity of Gun-Powder, to in∣volve all those together, who could not severally be taken, to∣gether with the King and His Family in the Rubbish of the same Ruines. Therefore when he had dealt with Piercy, and he after many bitter complaints of the King, through impatience, broke forth into these words, That there was only one way left to be delivered from so many Evils, and that was to take the King out of the way, and to that end, as he was ready for any attempt, did freely offer his own Service. Catesby, who was more cautious and cunning, moderated the Gentlemans heat, and, God forbid, said he, that this Head of thine so
dear to all good men should be so fruitlesly exposed to such danger. The business may be undertaken and accomplished, yet so as that you and such as you are may still be preser∣ved for further consulting for Religion and the Publick weal. Then he opens his design in very plausible words, and with like Artifice shews him the manner how it was to be effected. Piercy agrees, and presently hires an House nigh to the place, and very opportune to work his Vault. The Parliament that was called the year before, was deferred till February following.Nov. 1604. Mean while, Tho. Bates, Catesby's Servant, a dextrous Fellow, and one in whom his Master did much confide, being, least he should suspect any thing, taken into the privity of the Fact, when at first he seemed to be mo∣ved at the horridness of the thing, he is sent to Tesmund alias Greenwell, (for those men, that they might the better be un∣discovered, went under two Names, sometimes under three) by whom he was perswaded, and strangely confirmed to the Execution of the design, being made sensible of the Merito∣riousness of the work. Afterwards Robert Keyes, and after him Ambrose Rockwood, and John Grant, were taken into the Plot. III Eid. Xbr. the Vault was begun,Dec. 11. Christopher Witchie, and a little after Robert Winter being also taken into the Society. The work being often intermitted and often repeated, at length the Vault was brought to the Wall of the Court, where a new difficulty ariseth from the hardness of the Wall, and the thickness of three Ells; so that under a long time the work could not be finished, and there were now but a few dayes to the sitting of the Parliament. And now the pertinacious industry of the Workman had almost beat its way through the middle of the Wall, and they seemed not so much to want good minds (to the work) as time, when as the Parliament was put off till the Month of October. Then was Despair turned into Joy, with certain con∣fidence that they should effect their design: and it was ob∣served that whiles they briskly beat upon the Wall, there was a noise heard upon the other side of the Wall. Thither Fawks is sent to enquire out the cause. He brings word back that
there was a Cellar under Ground, from whence they were re∣moving Cole, he beinst lately Dead who had hired that Cellar for his own use. Therefore the Conspirators thinking that Cellar more commodious, by the help of Piercy, let out their o∣ther Houses, and bring all their Materials & hopes into this. Such was the opportuneness of the place (for it was almost directly under the Royal Throne) that so seasonable an accident did make them perswade themselves, that God did by a secret Conduct favour their Attempt. These things happened about the Feast of Easter. The Gun-powder is at their leisure carried into the Cellar from Catesby's House over against the Palace, where it had been with great care and diligence brought together; First, Twenty Barrels are layed in and covered with Billets and Faggots. Then the Conspirators being sure of the good event, began to consult what was to be done after they had effected their Plot: First, they consider'd of taking the Prince, who about that time, they came to understand, would not come to the Parlia∣ment with his Father, contrary to what they concluded in the beginning, and against him they plotted destruction, as one that was no Friend of theirs, and they had found out a way for it. The next care was for Supplies of Money, concerning which they thought they had sufficiently provided. They had also provided that the Peers and Gentry addicted to Popery, should, as much as might be, be exempt from danger. Lastly, they debated concerning calling in Forreign Princes to their assistance; but being doubtful of their faith and secresie, they thought fit not to send to them till they had accomplished their design; for commonly such Actions are not commended but by their Event. They passed their Judgments upon them sevceally, the Spaniards seemed to be more opportune for them, but too remote, and too slow in raising Forces. The French was near, but fearful and suspected for the close league he held with the Dutch. The most present help was from Flanders, from whence they might most commodiously expect Supplies; for which Stanly was designed the Captain or Commander.
Moreover, that they might the more easily deceive the world, and least by their passing to and fro to those places they should give some cause of Suspition, they go their several wayes; some into the Countrey, some a great way out of the Island, waiting for the time appointed for the Execution. Fawks went into Flanders that he might acquaint Stanly and Owen with the whole Matter, nor did he return into England till the latter end of August. Catesby, that he might not be idle in the mean time, gets Francis Tresham and Everard Digby to his Party, agreeing with them for Supply of Money, and the former promisd Two thousand pounds of English Money, the other Fifteen hun∣dred. Piercy, that was prodigal at another mans charge, pro∣mised whatsoever he could scrape together of the Revenues of the E. of Northumberland. In the mean time, Ten more Barrels of Gun powder are added to the former, and four more greater than the rest, upon suspition, least by the moistness of the place, the former should have been spoiled; and again, they are all covered over with a great heap of stones and wood And now the time of the Parliaments convening drew on, which was again put off till the Nones of November.5 Nov. There∣fore the Conspirators did again repeat their consultation, and some were appointed who, on the same day that the Enter∣prize was to be Executed, should seize upon the Lady Elizabeth (the Kings eldest Daughter, who was brought up under the Lord Farrington in Warwick-shire) under pretence of an Hun∣ting Match, which Everard Digby, who was privy to the mat∣ter, had appointed with great preparation at Dunchuroh. Her they decreed publickly to Proclaim Queen. They taking to themselves the Titles of the Assertors of liberty,They purposed when the blow was first given —but the success thereof doubtful, to father the fact on the Puritans. Fuller v. Fou∣lis. p. 690. did nothing less at first than profess themselves the Authors of the Fact, or make any mention of Religion to the People, but purposed to hold that in suspense for some time, and by a Proclamation published in the Queens name to redress great grievances for the present, and feed them with hopes of more for the future, till the Faction growing strong, either by favour or severity of new Edicts, they might draw the People
to their Parts and Obedience; and the odiousness of their fact so by degrees discovering it self would in time, and together with their good success grow off. Nor came it in so long time into the minds of any of them how many Innocents all about them, how many Infants, how many that agreed with them in Religion, how many who perhaps had deserved well of them that vast ruine would over-whelm. Now all things are ready, and the last Scene was going to be Acted, when as by the unsearchable Judgment of God, one who desired to save another, brought destruction both to himself and his Associates. There were ten dayes to the Parliament, when upon Sa∣turday in the Evening a Letter was brought as from a Friend to the Lord Monteagle, but by whom written, is uncertain, and by whom brought unknown. By it he was warned to forbear meeting at the Parliament for the two first dayes of the Session; forasmuch as some great, and sudden, and unsuspe∣cted mischief did threaten that Meeting. The hand of him that wrote it was unknown, and the writing it self purposely so ordered, that it could hardly be read. No date to the Letter, no subscription, no inscription put to it, and the whole composure of words ambiguous. The Lord Monteagle was doubtful what he should do; therefore late in the night he goeth to Robert Cecil Earl of Sa∣lisbury, and chief Secretary to the King, and giving him the Letter, freely declared to him how he came by it, and how little he valued it. Cecil did not make much more account of it, and yet thought it was not altogether to be neglected; and Therefore shewed it to the chief Councellors, Charles Howard, Chief Admiral of the Seas, the Earl of Nottingham, to the Earls of Worcester, and Northampton. The thing being considered of amongst them, although at first sight the Letter seemed of no great moment; yet they thought that not the slightest discovery ought to be despised, especially where the safety of the King was endangered, nor such great care to be blamed in them, to whom the preservation of His Majesty did both by Office and Duty belong.
The King was then gone to Royston, to Hunt. It seemed good to them to determine nothing before they had consulted the King. For they said that they had oftentimes experienced the quick apprehension, and happy conjecture of the King in unriddleing things that were liable to greatest doubtfulness. Upon the Calends of November,1 Nov. the King returned to the City, and forth with Cecil taking him aside, unfolds the mat∣ter, and shews him the Letter, which it seems worth while to insert here for the perpetual remembrance of it; forasmuch as not without cause it afforded such matter of dispute between him and his Councellors. The love which I bear to some of your Friends makes me careful for your safety. Wherefore I advise you, as you love your life, that you would invent some excuse for your absence from the Parliament. For God and Men, as it were by agreement do hasten to punish the wickedness of this Age. Do not make light of this warning, but depart as soon as you can into your own Countrey, where you may securely expect the event. For although no signs of troubles do appear, yet I admonish you, that that meeting shall receive a terrible blow, and shall not see who smiteth them. Do not despise this discovery, it may be profitable to you, it cannot hurt you. For the danger is over as soon as you have burnt this Letter. I hope by the grace of God you will make good use of this Counsell, to whose protection I commend you. The King having read the Letter (though through the generousness of his mind, he was no way prone to suspicion) did conjecture that some strange thing did lye hid under it, and that the notice given, was by no means to be neglected. On the other side, Cecil said, it was certainly written by some Mad man: For no man well in his wits would speak at this rate of a danger which he doth admonish so much to be∣ware of. The danger is over as soon as you shall burn the Letter. How small a danger could that be which should vanish in so short a moment. On the other side the King, in whose breast the first suspi∣tion had now taken deep root, urged the foregoing words, That assembly shall receive a terrible blow, and shall not see who
smiteth them. And whiles walking in the Gallery he deeply thought of these things from one particular to another, it came into his mind that a sudden blow by Gun-powder was in∣tended by those words: For what more sudden then a blow by Gun-powder? Thus the King and Salisbury so broke off their discourse, that the King did strongly persevere in his conjecture. Salisbury to free the Kings mind from fears and cares seemed in his pre∣sence to make light of this notice given; but in the mean time admiting within himself the Kings uncouth and unusual inter∣pretation, and so presently suspecting it, did conclude, that it was not lightly to be regarded. The next day the thing being again considered of by the King, and His Counsellors, it seemed good that the Palate with the places near adjoyning, should be diligently searched, and that business was assigned to the Lord Chamberlain, who upon the Monday which preceded the Parliament, about the Evening, that he might give no occasion of Rumours, goes with the Lord Monteagle to those places: entring into the house that Percy had hired, they found a great heap of Billets and Fagots and Coal in a Vault under ground; and Wineard the Keeper of the Kings houses being there present,Wardrobe. he was asked for what use they were brought in thither? they under∣stood that the house was hired by Percy, and that heap was brought in by him. Moreover the Chamberlain spying Fawks standing in a corner of the Cellar, asked who he was, and what business he had there? Who answered, that he was the Domestick Servant of Percy, and the Keeper of that house in Percy's absence. Having thus done, they return to the Court, reporting what they had seen, and conjecturing worse things then for∣merly they had done. For it came into Monteagles mind upon the mention of Percy, that he was highly addicted to the Popish Religion, that they had formerly been acquainted, and lived as Friends, and it might be that he was the Author of that Letter which gave ground to all this suspition. The Lord Chamberlain among other suspicious matters, did revolve in his mind, that that store of wood in the house of
Percy, where he seldom resided, was not brought in thither to no purpose, and that that Servant of Percy whom he saw in the Cellar, looked like a desperate, wicked Knave. All which things did increase the Kings suspition; who would have that Vault further searched again; but least if no∣thing were found, the Counsellors should make themselves ridi∣culous to the People, as if they were afraid of every light report; and moreover, fearing, least whiles they appeared to suspect Percy, who was allied in Blood to the chiefest Peers of the Realm, they should seem to suspect the Earl of Northumberland himself: yet when the safety of the King did prevail upon them, they so ordered the matter, that search should be made without noise or injury to any. It was given in command to Sir Thomas Knevet, Justice of Peace for Westminster, that in the dead of the Night he should go with a convenient company to that house, and should take Wineard a long with him, under pretence that he had lost some Hangings and Tapestry. Thither Sir Tho. Knevet going, finds Fawks, Percy's Dome∣stick Servant, who under a feigned name called himself John Johnson, before the House booted and habited for a Journey; and he gives command presently to lay hold on him. From thence going into the Cellar, he speedily removes the Wood and Coal, which being removed, the Treason ap∣peared, one little Barrel of Gun-powder being first discovered by it self, and afterward the heap being removed 36 Barrels of different magnitude were found there. Then turning to the Prisoner, and examining his Gar∣ments they found in them tinder, and three Match cords. But he being taken in the Fact, and not able to deny, the case being now desperate, he of his own accord confessed the Crime, and with an unappalled countenance (as he was a man of a resolute mind to undertake any desperate attempt) he added, that it was well for them that they found him be∣fore the house, now lately come out of the Cellar, in which all things were ready: for if they had found him within, he would not have stood to have buried himself and them toge∣ther, by putting fire to the Train.
Knevet having discovered the matter, returns forthwith re∣joicing to the Palace, about Four a Clock in the Morning, and acquaints Salisbury and the Lord Chamberlain; who presently with a noise rush into the Kings Bed Chamber, and tell him the Treason was detected, and they had the Author of it in Cu∣stody and Bonds. The same of this being spread abroad, for in so great a matter of Joy it could not be concealed, the Conspirators fly some this way, some that way, and meet together at Holbech at the house of Stephen Littleton, in the borders of Stafford-shire. Thither came those that were privy to the Conspiracy out of Warwick shire and Worcester-shire; although they were igno∣rant of the discovery of the Plot, having taken away by force from Gentlemens houses their Warr-horses; thereby giving a manifest token what they would have done when they had got the power in their hands, when as they ravaged with such boldness, while the event was yet doubtful. The Leaders of the Faction trusted that great numbers of Men, and a considerable Army would flock into them, as soon as they should appear in Arms. But the Lieutenants and Sheriffs being before, while the Treason was only suspe∣cted, Commanded by the King to ride about their Counties, their attempts were all made void, and scarcely an Hundred of all that number appeared in Arms. And they were encom∣passed by Richard Walsh, High Sheriff of the County of Wor∣cester, who came upon them unexpectedly with a strong power of Men, so that they could not escape. When despairing of Pardon, and their troubled Consciences putting them upon desperate exploits, the Gun-powder that was drying by the Fire, took fire by a sparkle that fell into it, and so suddenly burnt the Faces, Sides, Arms, Hands of the Besieged, that they were rendered unable to handle their Arms, and so lost their strength and courage together. Catesby and Percy, that were most active, together with Tho. Winter, while they betake themselves to a corner of the house, are both shot through with a Leaden Bullet. Winter being wounded, fell into the hands of the Kings Party, both
the Wrights were slain; Grant, Digby, Rockwood, and Bates were taken Prisoners. Tresham whiles shifting his Lodgings in London, he sometime escaped, yet at last was taken. Robert Winter and Littleton a long time wandring up and down the Woods, at last fell into the hands of the Guards, and were all committed to the Tower at London. Being Examined without the rack, (for only Fawks was put under this way of Examination, and that but moderately) they severally discovered the whole series of the matter as we have before recounted, and taxed none in Holy Orders, which many looked upon as purposely avoided, because they were bound by Oath not to do it. When as Franois Tresham had before he dyed in Prison of his own accord nominated Henry Garnet, being admonished thereof by his Wife he wrote a Letter to the Earl of Salisbury, and excusing his too rash confession, he so discharged Garnet as much as in him lay by a solemn adjuration interposed, that he did entangle him∣self in a notorious lye, affirmingHe took it upon his Salva∣tion, even in articulo mor∣tis, (a lamenta∣ble thing) for within three hours after he dyed. Proceedings against the late Traitors. C c 2.3. that he had not seen Garnet of sixteen years; when as it did appear afterward by the con∣fession of GarnetAnd of Mrs. Anne Vaux, who confessed that she had seen Mr. Tresham with Garnet at her house three or four times since the Kings coming in; and that they were at Erith together the last Summer, and that Garnet and she were not long since with Mr. Tresham at his house in Northampton-shire, and stayed there. Proceedings, ibid. that they had often and for a long time together conversed one with another, before the six Moneths last past. Digby confessing the matter as it was in truth endeavouredHe sought to clear all the Je∣suits of those practises whith they themselves have now con∣fessed ex ore proprio. Pro∣ceedings, ibid. Even at the time of Garnets Tryal was current throughout the Town a report of a Retractation under Bates his hand, of his accusation of Greenwell. Proceedings, ibid. to excuse the horridness of the Fact,MDCVI. which he acknowledged and seemed to detect, by the desperateness of their condition: For being made to hope that the new King, upon his coming to the Kingdom, would indulge liberty of Conscience to those of the Popish Religion, and would permit the exercise thereof with some restriction; This being denyed, it drove those miserable men unadvisedly to pernicious Counsels.
Here the Earl of Northampton and Cecil, (who together with the Earl of Nottingham, Suffolk, Worcester, and Devonshire, did sit as Judges in that Cause) interposed, affirming that the King never gave them any hope of liberty, nor ever engaged his word for it; but factious persons did maliciously throw such a report abroad, that they might have a pretence wherewith to excuse both themselves, and such as they were, for the Se∣ditions which they raised in the Kingdom. At length being Convicted and found Guilty, they are condemned to the punishment wont to be inflicted by the Laws of the Realm upon Rebels and Traytors. Everard Digby, Robert Winter, John Grant, and Thomas Bates were Executed at London, nigh the Western Gate of St. Paul's Church in the later end of January. The day fol∣lowing, Tho. Winter, Ambrose Rockwood, Robert Keies, and Guido Fawks, who confessed that they had wrought in the Vault, were Executed at Westmonaster in the Old Palace yard near the Parliament house. Upon this many, who for this cause were banished, or of their own accord changed their Native Soil, were most cour∣teously received at Calice, by Dominick Wikes,Vicus. the Governour there; for so the King commanded. Of whom one was of such a perverse mind that when Wikes did shew himself to bewail his and his Companions fortune, and for their comfort added, Though they had lost their Native Countrey, yet by the Kings grace they had a Neigh∣bouring one allowed them. Nay, saith the other, It is the least part of our grief, that we are banished our Native Countrey, and that we are forced to change our Soil, because every good man counts that his Countrey where he can be well: this doth truly and heartily grieve us, that we could not bring so generous and wholsom a design to perfection. Which as soon as Vicus contrary to his expectation, had heard he could hardly for anger abstain from throwing that man into the Sea, who gloryed in such a Plot as was damned by all men. For so I remember I have heard Vicus often say, when together with Alexander Delbenius, he came courteously upon the account of our Ancient friendship to visit me, a little before he went from us.
The Plot being discovered, the Parliament among publick rejoycings was held with great security. To whom the King made a most weighty Oration, and set forth the inexpressible Mercy of God over all his works, towards Himself, his Family, and His whole Kingdom, largely aggravating the thing from its several circumstances. This temperament beingAnd this con∣clusion with no less truth; That as upon the one part many honest men, seduced with some errors of Popery, may yet remaine good & faith∣ful Subjects: So as on the other part, none of those that truly know and believe the whole ground, and School conclusions of their Doctrine, can ever prove either good Christians or faithful Subjects. He had said a little before, That many honest men blinded peradven∣ture with some opinions of Popery, yet do they either not know, or at least not believe all the true grounds of Popery, which is indeed the mysterie of Iniquity. with great Justice added, That he did not say, All that were addicted to the Romish Religion were to be included as guilty of this Crime: for that there were many among them, who although they are involved in Popish Errors (so he called them) yet had they not lost their true Loyalty to Princes, but did observe the Duty both of a Christian man, and of a good Subject; and that he in return had good thoughts of them: and that he thought the Severity of the Puritans was worthy of flames, who deny that any Papist can be received into Heaven. This likewise was worthy the Wisdom of a most just Prince, that he did Judge that no Forreign Prince nor Common∣wealth, nor none that did manage affairs for them had any hand in this Conspiracy, as who did judg of them according to his own mind and temper, and would think of others what he would that they should think of him. Therefore he did will and require, that when any mention should be made of this Conspiracy in Parliament, every one should speak and think honourably of them. Which thing was done for the respect that he bore to the Spaniards, with whom desiring to keep that peace which he of late made with them, he would not leave any the least appearance of an alie∣nated affection, or a suspicious mind. He added this most generously, That, he would that all men should understand, that resting in Gods protection, the tranquility and quiet of his mind was not at all disturbed by this accident, and that he did wish that his breast were transparent to all,
that his People might behold the most secret recesses of his heart. But when he judged it might conduce much to Example and Publick Security, that he should severely punish the Au∣thors of so horrid a Crime, and because there was a suspition arising from Letters, Confessions and Proofs made, that Gerard alias Braek, Hen. Garnet, Oswald Tesmond alias Greenwell, were either privy to, or promoters of this Conspiracy; therefore upon the XVIII. of the Kalends of February,14 Jan. a Proclamation is published against them, and a reward proposed to him that should discover and bring them to their Tryal, as also a Pe∣nalty added against those who after the publishing of this Proclamation should entertain, nourish, conceal, or be any way aiding the persons named in that Proclamation, or should at all indeavour that those who are accused of this horrid Crime should not be found out and appre∣hended. In order hereunto diligent search is made, and strict en∣quiry after them, who concealed themselves; at length Hen. Garnet and —Hall and Garnets Servant were taken in the house of Abington a Papist, and sent to London, and cast into the Tower. The wretched Servant for fear least he should be forced by torments to accuse his Master, or despairing upon some other account, did lay violent hands upon him∣self in the Prison, and with a blunt knife (for he was not permitted to have a keen one by him) he cut up his own Belly, and drew out his Bowels: and although his wound was bound up yet before he could be Examined, he dyed. Garnet was very gently used in his Imprisonment, as he him∣self afterward confessed. At first be denyed all things; and when it did appear that nothing could be drawn from him voluntarily, and the King that he might avoid calumny was unwilling to use torments upon him, resolves by craft to illude his cautious pertinacy, and to bring him to larger Confessions (who would answer little or nothing) whether he would or not. He secretly imploys a man, who by deep groans, and frequent complaints against the King, and his Counsellors,
and the deplorable condition of the Catholicks in England, did in the end perswade Garnet that he was Popishly enclined, and so crept into intimate familiarity with him. This man he sends with a Letter to a Gentlewoman, that was Imprisoned for her Religion, who kept her family at Whitweb and other places, and received with great hospitality those whom he commended to her. In which Letter he wrote plainly, and yet sparingly: what things he had already confessed, what he was not yet examined upon, and by what means he would excuse those things (which he had confessed) and conceal these. He wrote likewise to Rookwood the Priest, who was Prisoner in another Prison, and wrote his Letter with Ink in the mid∣dle, about some familiar matters that any one might read, but left broad Margents on both sides, which he filled with his Secrets, written with the juice of an Orange, denying all what∣soever he had confessed before the Lords. As to the Spanish Expedition, he said he had obtained the Kings Pardon. As to this last Conspiracy he should avoid Judgment, because he knew they could make no sufficient proofs against him. But however it went, he added, having too high an opinion of himself, that which was spoken of the only Redeemer of the world, It would be necessary that one man should die for the People. The Letter was by the Kings Councellors, who smelt out the cunning, held to the fire, and presently the writing ap∣pear'd, and the fraud was discovered. He being every day more and more confident of his instru∣cted Keeper, told him he did exceedingly desire to have some conference with Hall, his Companion. He promised to bring it about, and brought both of them to a place where they might easily hear one another, and where he himself to avoid all suspition might be seen by them both. In the mean time, he placed two men of known credit near the place who (they knowing no such thing, and minding only the return of their Keeper who was gone abroad) might hear whatsoever passed between them. There each of them freely discover'd what they had confessed, what they had been Examined about, what excuses and evasions (for these were their words) they
had prepared for every particular, and many other such things, which being carefully taken, were delivered to the Counsel in writing. The next day (the Prisoners suspecting no such thing) Delegates from the King came to them, and Examine Garnet and Hall a part, and object to them that they had yesterday held private conference with one another. Garnet thinking they spoke this only upon conjectureUpon his Soul, reiterating it with so many detestable exe∣crations, as wounded the Lords hearts to hear him. Pro∣ceedings, Y 3. stifly denyed it, and forswore it upon the word of a Priest. At last, Hall having confessed the Fact, and he finding that there was no avoiding it, begged Pardon for his contrary asse∣veration which he sought to elevate by a forced Interpretation or Equivocation! And professing that he would speak the truth ingenuously, He answered, that he had hitherto so con∣stantly denyed it, because he knew that no man (living) but one, (he meant Greenwell,) could accuse him as guilty of the late Fact. But now that he saw himself encompassed with such a cloud of witnesses, he would no longer dissemble, but did confess that above V moneths agone he was acquainted by Greenwell with the whole matter. That before that, Catesby had in general told him that the Catholicks in England were attempting some great thing as to Religion, and asked whether if good men should be involved in the danger, this were to be made matter of Conscience. But that he, who had a contrary command from the Pope, that he should not engage in any Conspiracy refused to hear any further of it. That he did pour out Prayers for the good success of the great cause, and amongst other things, used the Hymn that was commonly Sung in the Church, but intended nothing else when he did so, but only prayed God that in the next Parliament no grievous Lawes might be made against the Recu∣sants: so they are called in England, who keeping within their own houses, have their liberty and refuse to Joyne in worship with the Protestants. Garnet being twenty times Examined,12 Feb. and 26 Mar. between the Eids of Febr. and the VII of the Calends of April, two dayes after he is arraigned at the Publick Tribunal in London:The reason whereof the Earl of Salisbury de∣clared at his Tryal. See the Proceedings, Y [Guild Hall.] Here the Crimes are layed to the charge of the Prisoner, by Sir John Crook, which are afterwards enlarged on in a long Speech by Sir Edward Cook, the Kings Attorney General.
Then after Garnes had said something for himself, and especially something concerning Equivocation, he was Examined by Cecil and others, that sate as Judges in that case. And lastly, the Earl of Northampton made a long and elaborate discourse against him, in which he largely handled the Authority which the Popes arrogate to themselves of deposing Princes, and discussed that Chapter of Nos sanctorum, the ground, as he said, of this and such like Conspiracies. At length Sentence is passed by the Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, that Garnet should be Drawn, Hanged, and Quartered. His Plea for himself was only this, that although he did a long time before know of the Conspiracy, by common same and Rumours, (for Greenwell only informed him of all the particulars; but under the Seal of Confession, by the Laws of which he was forbidden to discover it to any man living): yet that he did admonish Greenwell to desist from the Fact which he did very much disapprove of, and to hinder others engaged in Conscience or privity in it. Here Cecill severely reproved him; For, said he, if he did disapprove of the Fact, why did he afford Greenwell the be∣nefit of Absolution before he had by his penitence given testi∣mony that he did truly and from his heart detest the Fact? Furthermore, when as he understood the matter from Catesby, where there was no Seal of Confession, this was sufficient to have made a discovery of the Plot if he had so highly abhorred it as he did pretend. But there were other things that lay heavy upon his charge, and these chiefly which were amongst his Confessions, written with his own hand and sent to the King, viz. That Greenwell did acquaint him with this not as with a sin (he had to confess) but as an Act which he well enough understood, and in which he required his advice and counsel. That Catesby and Greenwell came to him to require his advice upon the matter, and that the whole business might be resolved among them. That Tesmund (for so he was now called, who e'rewhile was Greenwell) and he, did not long agone consult together in Essex of the Particulars of this
Conspiracy. Lastly, when Greenwell asked who should be Protector of the Kingdom; Garnet answered, that that answer ought to be deferred till they saw how things should go. When these things were brought to his remembrance, and did make it appear that he knew of the Conspiracy otherwise then by the way of Confession, all that he answered was, that whatsoever he had signed with his own hand, was true. Being brought to Execution the Third of May being Inventio crucis [Holy rood day] he said, he came thither that day to find an end at length of all the crosses that he had born in this life; that none were ignorant of the cause of his punishment; that he had sinned against the King in concealing it; that he was sorry for it, and humbly begged the Kings Pardon: that the Plot against the King and Kingdom was bloody, and which if it had taken effect he should have detested with all his heart, and that so horrid and inhumane a Fact should be attempted by Catholicks, was that that grieved him more then his death. Then he added many things in defence of Anne Vaux, who was held in Prison, and lay under great suspi∣tion upon his account. Being accused that he had while Q Eliz. was alive recei∣ved certain Breves from Rome,v. Proceedings, Q 3. in which he and the Peers inclined to Popery were admonished, that when that miserable Woman should happen to die, they should admit of no Prince, how nearly soever related in blood, but such as should not only tole∣rate the Catholick Faith, but by all means promote it; he said, he had burnt them, the King being received for King. And when the was again Examined upon the same things, he re∣ferred Henry Montacute who asked him about it,The Recorder of London. to his Con∣fessions subscribed by him. Being taxed for sending Edmund Bainham to Rome, not to return to the City before the Plot should take effect; This he thus excused, as if he had not sent him upon that account; but that he might inform the Pope of the calamitous state of Eng∣land, and consult with him what course the Catholicks should take; and therefore referred them again to his Confessions.
Then he kneeled down upon the Stage to his Prayers, and looking about hither and thither, did seem to be distressed for the loss of his life, and to hope a Pardon would be brought him from the most merciful Prince: Montacute admonished him that he should no longer think of life, but if he knew of any Treachery against the King or Kingdom, that he should as a dying man presently discover it; for that it was now no time to Equivocate. At which words Garnet being somewhat moved, made answer, that he knew the time did not admit of Equivocation; that how far and when it is lawful to Equi∣vocate he had otherwhere delivered his opinion, that now he did not equivocate, and that he knew nothing but what he had confessed. Then he excused himself that he did at first dissemble before the Lords; That he did so because he did not think they had had such testimony and proof against him, till they did produce it; which when they did produce, he thought it as honourable for him to confess, as it would have been at first to have accused himself. He added many things to excuse Greenwell, professing that unless he thought he were out of danger, he would not have discovered the guilt of his dear Brother in this Conspiracy. Then praying that theHe said also, I exhort them all to take heed they enter not into any Trea∣sons, Rebellions, or Insurrections against the King. Catholicks in England might not fare the worse upon his ac∣count, he crossed himself, and after he had commended his Soul to God, the Ladder being taken away, he was hang'd to death. In his behalf Andreas Eudaimon-Johannes a Cretian, of the same Society, wrote anAgainst which Robert Abbot wrote his Anti∣logia, edit. Lond. 1613. 4. Apology, in answer to Sir Edw. Cokes (Book Intituled) Actio in Proditores, (for so much the Title doth imply) published four years after, and approved by Claudius Aquaviva Provincial of the Society, in which chiefly the Doctrine of Equivocation is defended and explained from Scripture, Fathers, Schoolmen, and Thomists; and the ne∣cessity and matter of the Seal of Secresie or Confession is debated, and the chief heads of his Accusation are answered; the Speech of the Earl of Northampton is refuted. Moreover he doth endeavour to evince that Garnet never knew any thing of the Conspiracy but by the way of Confession; and that he did al∣ways abhor the Treason.
Then some things are related of his Constancy at his Death, which are not related in the History of it. And as a conclu∣sion of his Commentary, there is the memorable Story of the Straw upon which the Essigies of the Dead was seen, at which he saith his Adversaries were very much disturbed. Whiles the Body was quartered by the Hangman, some drops of blood fell upon the Straw that was there provided to light the fire. John Wilkinson who was there present, that he might gather some relique of the Body of Garnet, carried home with him an Ear, that was sprinkled with blood, and deposited it with a Gentlewoman,Hu. Griffith's Wife. who kept it with great veneration in a Christal-glass. Afterward it was observed with great admi∣ration, that the Effigies of Garnet was plainly expressed in that blood. Then with great Zeal was the same of the Miracle spread abroad; which others did presently elude by a contrary con∣struction; saying, It ought to seem no wonder if a man brought up among Exiles in Flanders, improved at Rome in Italy, authorized to a Conspiracy in his own Countrey, and breathing nothing but revenge, did as long as he lived thirst after the blood of his Countreymen, should when dead deserve to be pictured in blood. So dangerous a thing it is in these corrupt times to say any thing for the honour of any man in those things which do exceed belief and the common course of Nature, which may not presently be retorted to his dispa∣ragement. This end had this Conspiracy; the strangest that either our, or former ages do make mention of, for contrivance, daring∣ness, or cruelty. For it is often heard of, and fame doth de∣liver it down to posterity, that many Princes are cut off by Treachery, many Common-wealths are attempted by the snares and falshood of their Enemies; But no Countrey, no Age ever bred such a Monster of Conspiracy as this, wherein the King with the Queen, the Parents with their whole Issue, all the States of the Kingdom, the whole Kingdom it self, and in it innumerable Innocents should all be destined to one De∣struction in one moment, for a Sacrifice to the lust of a few enraged Minds.
But it was very well, that that Monster, which they them∣selves that bear the blame of it, do both by word and writing every where detest, being so long before conceived at home, should be strangled in the birth before ever it see the light. A little while after, Isaac Casaubon when he went into England, thinking of nothing less than to be engaged in this business, upon occasion of another Apology sent to him, and by him delivered to the King of Great Britain, wrote an Elegant Epistle to Fronto Ducaeus, in which he sheweth, that Garnet knew otherwise then under the Seal of Confession of the Powder Conspiracy, by his own Confession and Testimony written with his own hand, and doth at large discuss the Do∣ctrine of Equivocation, as ensnaring and pernicious, against the Arguments of Eudaimon-Johannes. Against which, not Ducaeus, but Eudaimon-Johannes doth rail sufficiently. FINIS.
