T1291 R883 12075647 53566
Timothy Touchstone HIS REPLY TO Mr. Christian's Letter, Written in Vindication of the great Worth and Innocence of the EARL of DANBY. UPon my receipt of Yours, I made it my particular care to chide that Naughty-pack J. B. for his severe Reflections relating to the Murder of Sir Edmondbury Godfrey; and shew'd him the infallible testimony I had (meaning your Letter,) to contradict both all himself, and the whole Kingdom has said concerning the ill Conduct, and worse Designs of the Earl of Danby; I urge too, (and effectually as I think) that a Man whose Morals are so well known as yours, ought to be believ'd con∣cerning the pious and good life of your own Master; against the unanimous Testimony of Court, Parliament, and Kingdom; Nay, and his own Letters too. For look you, [said I Mr. J. B.] can any one know more of Thomas E. of Danby then Mr. Christian, who was prefer'd by him to serve the D. of Buckingham; and had the opportunity thereby (as his Grace says) to cheat him of some Thousands: Did not he after this take him again into his own secret Service, and by his advice refuse to resign a Trust his Grace had reposed in him concerning his Estate, except among other things the D. would be content to pay Chri∣stian well for cousning him sufficiently; Did he not by his advice too keep possession of the Dukes House against his will, and pay him no Rent to boot, And tho he were his patron and raiser, did he not particularly at Mr. Christians instigation, Plot and contrive how to take off the Dukes Head. If this be so said I, And deny it if you can Mr. J. B. How then do you think any man should know more of the E. of Danby then Mr. Christian?—Away, away, 'tis a shame indeed (said I) that Men of such notorious lives for Gratitude and Honour, should be thus sus∣spected of the contrary; Nay indeed Mr. Christian in duty to our Friendship, I tickled him away till I made him very serious, whereupon I had hopes he would (as you desir'd) appear and be hang'd, Yet when I requested it of him, he excus'd himself as to that point, for these Reasons. First, He said, that though he had as much respect for Mr. Christian as any man brea∣thing had, that knew him as well as himself, yet he had such present occasion for his life, he could not possibly (but against his will) spare it at that time, by reason (as he says among other things,) there are more Lyers in the world than E. of Di and your self, if a certain Lodging of yours between Hambden and Danby Houses will not plead Possession against the Stamford Evidence when time shall serve, to see whether he would be willing to stay on this side Purgatory, the best place he can expect from the Religion you give him, and the Crimes you accuse him of in your Letter.
Secondly, he says, that he should be particularly unwilling to be hang'd at this time, because nothing, a man says on the Gallows will be believ'd, and he would be loath his last dying words should not find as good credite, as B— or P— so sacred a Testimony; for which, and for the Earl of Danby's sake, they have been so well payed. Besides, I protest I could not well know what to say to him, when he remarked to me the apparent contradiction you your self give to the Testimony brought against those that have suf∣fered for the Murder, when you allow him to have past through my Lady Ann Cooke Lodging at a Eleven a Clock that day: But he confesses that he himself did not see him then, nor after that day at the Earl of Danby's; but he is confident, before the never to be expected time promised in your Letter, of clearing his Lordships Innocence, there will be them will swear the particular passages, as well there, as at Fox-hall, related in the Reflections, have so heated you. I could not tell what to Answer, to make him incline more to hanging; which for your sake I could wish were done, for he's a shrewd Rogue I find, and knows much more of the E. of Danby's Proceedings then will be convenient for his Lordship, if ever he stand his Tryal without clinging to his Pardon. Which as much a Papist as J. B. is, he allows to be more effectual for the safety of the Earl of Danby in this World, then those Chymerical ones the Pope is pretended to grant to such of his Religion, as can but Lye Iustily at their last Ends in the other World; Though indeed friends I must tell you, there be many as wise, and better Protestants then you or I, (nay indeed the Earl of Danby,) that plainly see these are apparent and new invented Calumnies to blear the Eyes of the unthinking rabble from discerning the difference between the Testimonies of seeming vertuous dying men, and these mercinary witnesses, held up till some Designs of Danby's and of others that have out witted him, are brought out. But tell no body that I said any thing of the matter, least Judges and Jury should be more angry and revengeful for evident Truth, then men in this Atheistical Age, will be∣lieve God can be for the blood of so many Innocents: For indeed Mr. Christian 'tis ap∣parent how often your Emissaries of Hell have varied and pollisht their first Depositions since they were mannaged by cunninger Conjurers then your Master, who first raised the Divels. The truth on't is, I learn much of this from J. B. but he swears and vows he had no hand as you conceive in the Catalogue of the Lord Treasurers, nor does not use he says to go so far about for nothing: But if he had talked of his preferment, could have added that a bargain between him and the Lord Clifford, as well as the Duke of Buckingham's kind∣ness created him indeed but half Lord Treasurer in Sallary, whilst his Predecessor lived. Besides he says in much a shorter Paper, he could have shewed such particular passages of his Ministry, whereby he first beggard, and then sold his Masters Honor and the King∣doms; such strange wayes of taking as well as giving Bribes, and such foul passages in Foreign, as well as Domestick bargains, that nothing but your infallible word to the contrary, could have hindred him from being thought (not to say worse) no better a Christian then your self, and how good that is, he refers to those multitudes of people, (that long ago) indeed as long since, as when the four Lords were in the Tower for desiring an end of his corrupted Commoners. We are wont to hear, you hold it out as an undoubted maxime of your own, that it would never be well till some heads flew, rejoycing some gave such fair play for theirs, who they were you meant was easily seen, though they have strangely won the after-game, and brought the bloody minded man himself to the Pits brink. These are J. B's. words, which how able he is to make good, I am confident you will suddenly see; in the mean time hearing you would willingly know him, I assure you he is called John the Brewer, and keeps the Sign of the Naked Truth, a very scandal∣ous Picture at this time, and in as much danger as any Popish one; but there you may find him, if you dare come near the place, where every day you will be sure to find, Your Friend at a dead list, Timothy Touchstone,
