T1528 09427787 43057
To the Kings most Excellent Majestie: The humble Petition of the Baronets, Esquires, Ministers, Gentle∣men, Freeholders, and others peaceably affected in the County Palatine of Lancaster. Shewing to Your Sacred Majestie OVr heart-breaking sense and sorrow for the unhappy Rents and Distractions in Your Majesties Dominions, especially in the Sesion of so grave and godly an Assembly, (most gratiously conve∣ned by Your Majestie) endeavouring the glory of Almighty God in the Reformation of Religion, and the Honour and Weale of Your Majestie, and Your Realms, in setling and securing Your Roy∣all Throne in plenty and peace. But perceiving the long and remote distance of Your Majestie from that Honourable Assembly, to have distracted the hearts of Your good Subjects, and ani∣mated the Popish and malignant party amongst us, and fearing it may expose us to the danger and fury of a for∣raigne foe, retard the setling of the weighty affaires in our Land, and the subduing of the Rebels in Ireland; and finding Your Majesties late Resolution for that expedition, to threaten danger to Your Royall Person, farre more worth then ten thousand of us. We therefore Your Majesties most loyall Subjects out of our zeale to Gods true Religion, Your Majesties Honour and safety, and the Peace and Welfare of Your Dominions; and out of the deepe sence and apprehension of our interest in the same, doe in all humility present and prostrate our selves, and supplication at Your Royall feet, beseeching Your Majestie to returne to Your great Councell (the representative body of Your kingdome) in whom this Na∣tion hath so farre consided, that they have intrusted them with their lives, liberties; and in which multitude of Counsellours there is health and stedfastnesse, and whereby the Royall Throne may be established in Righteousnesse, and we with the rest of Your faithfull Subjects shall continually prayse and pray for Your prosperous and happy Raigne over us. At the Court YORKE the 10th. of MAY, 1642. His Majestie hath expresly commanded me to give you this His ANSWER to your PETITION. THat this Petition as some others of this nature is grounded upon misinformation, and being grieved and highly offended to see how his good People have been and are abused by the false rumours and intelligences, which have procured causlesse feares and apprehensions, referres the Petitioners to the Answers he hath given to the Declaration presented to him at Newmarket, and to the Petition pre∣sented to him the six and twentieth of March, last at Yorke; wherein his Majesty faith you will clearly perceive that he is not gone but driven from his Parliament: his Majesty likewise for your further information of his proceedings and intentions, recommends to your view and consideration his two Messages, and Declaration concernig Hull, and his Message touching the reasons of his refusall to grant the Militia, all which when they shall be fully represented to the rest of your County, he doubts not, but that you will rest very well satisfied of his consent and resolution for the maintaining of, and governing his People by the Law of the Land, his unmovea∣ble resolution for the maintenance and defence of the true Protestant Profession, and the suppression of the bar∣barous Irish Rebellion, and his Majesty faith, that he beleeves you may then finde reason to petition the Parlia∣ment to comply with his Majesties just desires and gratious offers, which is the onely way safely and speedily to cure the present distractions of this Kingdom, and with Gods blesssing to put a happy end to the Irish Rebellion: for the effecting whereof, as his Maejsty hath often said, he will neither spare paines, nor decline any hazard of his Person or fortune. Edward Nichols. London, Printed for N. Alen. May 26. 1642.
