T2840AC 99833577 38054
A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE TRYALS OF Titus Oats FOR PERJURY AT THE Kings-Bench-Barr AT VVESTMINSTER, On Friday and Saturday the 8th and 9th Days of this present May, 1685. WHereas Titus Oats was Tryed on Friday the 8th. of this Instant May for Perjury and Convicted thereof: He likewise was brought to his second Tryal for Per∣jury on Saturday the 9th. of this Instant May, of which, I shall give the Rea∣der an exact Account as they were in Order, beginning with the Tryal of Fri∣day first: The manner thus, About Nine of the Clock in the Forenoon the Court Sat, where was the Right Honoura∣ble Sir George Jefferies Knt. and Bar. Lord Chief Justice of England, Judge Withens, Judge Hol∣loway, &c. Being on the Bench and the Jury called, Oats excepted against some of them, for being of the Grand Jury when the Indictment was found and it was admitted for a just Bar; then the Indictment was read in Latin and English, the substance of which was, that whereas Titus Oats had Sworn and caused to be put to Death several Persons, namely the Five Jesuits, Pick ring, Groves, and Ireland, &c. He Swore that he was at a Consult at the White-Horse Ta∣vern in the Strand, where he being present, and carrying the Papers, in which the Death of King Charles the Second of Blessed Memory, was signed from one Chamber to another, where he said they all unanimously Signed the Kings Death on the 24th. of April, Anno Dom. 1678. The Falsitie of which was proved by these following Evidence, &c. being all Persons of Quality and Estates who hapned to be Students at St. Omers at that time that Oats was there. First, Mr. Hillsley deposed that he came from St. Omers the very day that Mr. Oats pretended that the Consult was in the Strand, and that he left Mr. Oats there; and whereas Oats had for∣merly Sworn that he came over with Hilsley: Hillsley Swore he did not see him all the way: Then Mr. Brnaby Swore that he met Mr. Hillsley by the way, and he saw not Oats with him, and that going on to St. Omers, and Arriving there, within two days after he had met Mr. Hillsley in Kent, he found Mr. Oats at St. Omers, so that he possibly could not be here in Lon∣don; all the rest of the Witnesses for the King, Swore that Oats coming to St. Omers about December 1677. never was to their knowledge out of their Seminory till the Mid Summer 168. But one Night which was at VVatton, a place about two Leagues from St. Omers, and they saw him every day either at Meat or Play, and that he was so remarkable for his odd Carriage, that they took particular notice of him, especially he sitting at a particular Table, and not among
the Boys, by reason of his Age. This was attested by above 20 Witnesses, viz. Lord Gerrard Bromely. —Gerrard Esq —Haggerston Esq —VVright Esq —Price Esq Mr. Arundel, —Tur∣bervil Esq —Thornton Esq —Pool Esq Mr. Dorrel and one Mr. Morgan, one that was then a Papist, but is now a Church of England Minister, &c. Mr. Oats's Questions put to them, was, what Religion they were of, and how long they were there, and what they did there; and offered to ask some things, which was, as my Lord Chief Justice told him, not proper nor fit for them to answer, because of Penal Statutes against Papists: He behaved himself with his wonted Confidence, and seemed to have more Brass in his Face than ever; but my Lord Chief Justice kept him within his Bounds, and gave him all the fair play immaginable; before he began his particular Defence; he made a long canting Harangue how he had been believed by Parliaments, and how several Judges had spoke for∣merly of him, and particularly my Lord Chief Justice; all which being not admitted as Evi∣dence, he was directed by the Court, to prove his being here in April the 24th 78. he produ¦ced one Mrs. Cicely Majo; who Swore that about that time she saw him in a Disguise at Sir Richard Barkers House: He having on a Gray Hat, no Hair, a pitiful Gray Sute. Sir Robert's Coach-man, swore he saw him there in a black hat, a long Black Perriwig and a Cinnamon Sute; besides they disagreed in several things, and so they being but otherwise despicable People, their Evidence was looked upon as nothing worth; and they contradicted Oats's own Testimony, for he swore he was back at St. Omers in the beginning of May, and my Lord Chief Justice asked Oats where he Lodged when he pretended to be here in April and the beginning of May, that he might produce the People of the house to be Evidence for his being here; but he shuffled and would Assign none, which was look'd on by all as a clear Conviction. After this, Mr. Oats to make a Noise caused to be called many great Names to shew what Authority his Evidence once had, viz. my Lord Devonshire, my Lord Clay, who said it was so long since, that they could give small Account of it; my Lord Huntingdon said it is true, he once believed something which he swore, but he did now on his Conscience believe him to be an errant Rogue, and a spiller of Innocent Blood. My Lord Barron Montague being called by Oats, he gave him a slender Character, and that formerly he did not hear him. Mr. VVilliams, Speaker of the House of Commons, Sir George Treby were called, but said lit∣tle or nothing. After Mr. Oats had done with his Evidence, Mr. Attorney General brought in more Evi∣dence for the King, some to prove others to Coroberate. The Witnesses to prove were first Sir George VVakeman, who was formerly quitted at the Old-Bayly: After Sir George was sworn he was asked by Court with what Mr. Oats had formerly sworn against him, viz. of taking 1500 l. to poyson the King; and he answered by Virtue of the Oath he had taken, it was all false. My Lord Castlemain attested the same as to the Treason Oats had formerly Charged him with: then one Mr. Smith, formerly Schoolmaster in Islington was produced, and it was proved that he confessed himself Perjured in favor of Oats's Testimony in the Tryal of the five Jesuits being induced by Fear and Gain. The same was proved upon one Mr. Clay, who was induced by threats and promises of Oats and Sir VVilliam VValler, this was proved by one Davenport a Keeper of the Goal who heard him threaten Clay with Death, unless he would second his Evidence, and he being an Old Weak Man, was drawn in: After the Evidence on both sides had made an end, My Lord Chief Ju∣stice told the Prisoner he had free Liberty to make what Exceptions he pleased, Who then be∣gan a long and Malapart harangue, the chief drift of which, was to prove the Papists ought not to be Credited because they were Papists, and for this produced some Records and Statutes. And to this he was answered by my Lord Chief Justice, that by the same Reason all the Dis∣senters from the Church of England ought to be excepted, and that it was impossible at that Rate that any man should have Right done him. Oats was for the most part all along his speech Impertinent and Saucy, so that my Lord threatned to turn him out of the Court, and after he had spent something more than half an hours time he withdrew of himself, and went out of the Hall, with his Guards a long with him; as he came towards the middle of the Hall, the People began to Shout, and so Shouted him quite out of the Hall. After a little space of Silence, the Solicitor General began to sum up the whole, and continued for three quarters of an hour. When he had done, My Lord Chief Justice began a most Eloquent and Emphatical Speech. Amongst other things, telling the Jury, that this was a Cause that the Honour of the whole Nation was concerned in, not to let a person so publickly infamous, escape Justice. That he was a person of an hardned impudence and Conscience, and not worthy of the Name of the Church of England, that he was Guilty of spilling Innocent Blood, and had
fared no person though never so nearly related to the Crown: And after he had exactly and prticularly Summed up all the Witnesses on both sides: He concluded with these Words, That he was the Blackest Villain upon the Face of the Earth. As these Prodigious Crimes do plainly manifest to every unprejudiced Person. The speech being ended, the Jury withdrew, and after a certain space of time returned again, and brought hm in Guilty of the Indictment. The Second Tryal of Titus Oats for Perjury, in the Pretended Popish Plot. THe Quondam Salamanca Doctor, being on Friday the 8th. of May Convicted of Perju∣ry in Business relating to the pretended Consult at the White-horse-Tavern in the Strand, was on Saturday the 9th. Convicted of most Infamously and Maliciously for∣swearing himself in the Tryal of Ireland the Jesuit: The manner of the Proceedings was in this manner. About Eight of the Clock on Saturday Morning, being the 9th. of this present Month of May (Anno Dom. 1685.) the Court being sat, my Lord Chief Justice, Judge Withens, Walcot, Holloway, &c. being on the Bench, the Jury was called and none accepted against; Oats asking if any had been o the Grand Jury which was admitted for a Barr yesterday; then they being Sworn, the Indictment (which was very long) was read in English, only the Substance of it was, that Oats had Sworn in the Tryal of Ireland, that he was with him at a Treacherous Consult, some day betwixt the 8th. and 12th. of August, Anno Dom. 1678. and that after∣wards he said he was with him upon the same Account the 1st. or 2d. of September, all which was notoriously false as appeared by the following Evidence, After the Indictment was read, Mr. Phips in short opened it, and then one Mr. Waterhouse formerly a Jurior in Irelands Tryal, and one Mr. Harriot a Jurior in the Tryal of the Five Jesuites were called to prove that Mr Oats had formerly been positive to those days: After this the Kings Council began to mannage the Evidence for the King; first were sworn Mrs. Anne and Mrs. Elenor Ireland, the one the Mother and the other the Sister of the abovenamed Mr. William Ireland, and they swore positively they took their leave of him on the 3d. of August in the year abovenamed at his Lodging in Russel-street, and that he went for Stafford∣shire and did not come back till the 14th. of September following; this was back'd by the Oaths of Mrs Duddell and Mrs, Quino. who saw him Bood and took leave of him for his Journey, being the 3d. of August; that Night he came to my Lord Astons house at Standon in Hartford shire; this was attested by my Lord Aston himself and Sir Edward Southcote who saw him there; this being Saturday: On the Monday following in the Company of my Lord Aston and Sir Edward Southcote and their Servants, &c. they went from St. Albans to Northampton, and on the Tuesday to Coventry and Wednesday to Tixal, my Lord Astons House in Staffordshire, where he stay'd till 12th. of August, then he went to Winfreds Well in Flintshire and came back in some of the same Company to Pixal the 17th. of August as was proved by several Witnesses; one Mr. Harrison brought a Note of every day, and Swore he Conducted him to his Lodging in Russel-street the 14th. of September following; Mr. Hobson jump'd with him in every thing as to the Journey, and Swore he saw him at Tixal the 26th. of August; the Journey down from St. Albans to Tixal, was likewise proved by one Mr. Inglethorp, who was in their Company all the way, and is a good Protestant. Mr. Andrew Wet, a Protestant likewise proved Mr. Irelands Journey to Holliwel: Thomas Sawyer swore the same as to Mr. Ireland's going for Holliwel in Flint-shire, a Protestant like∣wise. Mrs. Allen swore Mr. Ireland came to Tixall the 8th. of August, and stayed some Three days, she is likewise a Protestant. Mrs. Jane Harwel swore she saw him at Woolverhampton the 17th. of August and he lay there till the 26th. of the same month; this was back'd by the Testemony of Mr. Ruston: Mrs VVingfield swore she saw him in Stafford-shire the 18th. 19th. 20th. 21st. and 22d. of August. Mr. VVilliam Stanly swore he saw him the 18th. and 22d. of August. Mrs Dorothy Purcel swore to the 8th. 19th. 20th. and 23d, of August; this was back'd by the Evidence of one Mr. Scot.. Mr. William Stamfield a Protestant saw him the 17th. of August: Mrs Cathrine Fowler swore to the 17th that she saw him at VVolverhampton, and she saw him there every day till the 26th. of August. Mrs. Eliz. Gifford swore much what the same, as likwise Mrs. Keeling, but besides
she saw him in Stafford-shire the 4th: of September. Mr. Richardson the same, a Protestant. Mrs. Greaves saw him there the 20, 22, 23, and 25. and Supp'd with him; she declared to the Court (being asked) that he was a Protestant. Sr. Thomas VVhitgrade a Justice of Peace, swore he saw him on the Bowling-Green at Ti∣al the 29th. of August: Mr. Fowler saw him at a Horse Race the 27th. of August. Mr. Ho swore to the 27 and 28. Mr. Dco to the 27 and 31 and the 1st. of September. Sr. Ja Simons swore to the 27 at the Horse Race, where he saw him, as also the 29th. Mr. reen swore to the 27 29 and 31. Mr. Follas a Protestant swore to the 29. Mr. Proctar a Protestant, swore he saw him at Hildersham the 1st. of September. Mr. King swore he  him the 1st of September at Hildersham, and the 2d. at Mrs. Cromptons  swore he was with Ireland at London) this was back'd by the Evidence of Mr. Lee. Mr Biddle or Bedal swore to the 2d. of September, and Mrs. Crompton, Mr. Pal and Mr Holms swore to the 1st. of September. Mr. Gifford to the 2d. of the ame mon where he saw him at Pancradge Fayer. Mr. VVilliam Pendril swore he was at his house the 4th. of September. Mrs. Mary Pendril swore to the 3d. and 4th of the same month. Mr. John Southwell and several others, swore they came with him from Tixal on the 9th. of September to a place in Surry belonging to Sr. — Southcote and than they Arrived there the 13th. of September, never coming near London all the Way, so that it was impossible he should have been in London in Oats his time as he swore to, for he came not there till the 14th. all these gave Circumstances to prove the days: The Question Oats put them was what Religon and whether they had been formerly Winesses in former Tryals; nothing to the purpose: After the Kings Council had done (for they thought they had enough and were ready if Occasion to call for more) Oats began his Defence, which was much such another Cant as Yesterday, viz. He had formerly been beleived, and that the Witnesses were most of them Papists; then he began his paricular Defence, and first called Sr. Edmond VVarcup, who could say nothing to his advantage but disadvantage; then one who was called by the Name of Sarah Pai and appeared, but she said she was not the Woman her Name was Bain, and she knew nothing of the matter, neither had she formerly given Evi∣dence, and desired something for her Journey, Oats said he would take care of her since he had subpaened her from Ʋxbridge: Then Oats called several other Witnesses, but none appea∣red; then he complained that Mr. Jennerson was not there since he was subpaened, and insist∣ed much upon Mr. Bedlow's Dying Evidence and asked the Court, why not these Proceedings against him before? After he had made what pitiful Defence he could, Mr Sollicetor General sum'd up the Evidence and answered every one of his trifling Objections, and told him the reason why this was not done sooner, was because of the unequity of the times and the Packing of Jurys and VVhigg Sheriffs. Then my Lord Chief Justice Jefferirs made a most excellent warm Loyal speech, enlarging much upon what Mr. Sollicetor had, and answer∣ed an Objection of Oats's about the nicity of time, in the example of Susanna; after he had ended his speech and run over the heads of the Evidence, the Jury went out and within a Quar∣ter of an hour, brought him in Guilty of the Indictment. Oats behaved himself with great Impudence, and abused my Lord Chief Justice's his Patience; he went away a great while (by leave of the Court) before the Virdict, as he did yesterday, and met every where the same Welcome he did yesterday, the hooting and hissing of the People: his Sentence will not be given these 5 or 6 nays. LONDON Printed by E. Mallet in Black-Horse-Alley near Fleet-Bridge, 1685.
