U146 11951481 51443
A LETTER To a Member of the CONVOCATION OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD: Containing the CASE Of a Late Fellow Elect of University-College IN THAT UNIVERSITY. LONDON Printed, and to be Sold by John Nutt, near Stationers-Hall. 1699.
A LETTER TO A Member of the Convocation OF THE UNIVERSITY of OXFORD. SIR, YOU may remember, I was Elected Fellow of Uni∣versity-College in December last, but disapprov'd of by the Delegates of Convocation (for such, and not Visitors, I must crave leave to call them) the Reve∣rend the Vice-Chancellor, Doctors of Divinity, and Proctors; Whereupon, as the Statute-Book and Register of that College Directed me, I proceeded to Appeal from that severe Sentence of theirs, to the Judgment of our Supreme and Primary Visi∣tors, the Convocation: The Appeal I then lodg'd, I now de∣sign to Prosecute; and in order thereto it will not, I think, be improper, or unnecessary for me to Premise these Two Things; 1. To make out to you, and, through you, to the Convocation in general, my Right of Appealing, and the Convocation's of Re∣ceiving and Determining my Appeal:
2. To Propose, and Answer those Objections the Master urg'd against me, before Mr. Vice-Chancellor, Doctors of Di∣vinity, and Proctors to prevent their Approbation of me: That, to remind them of a Power, their Ancestors formerly did, and they still may Exercise, and this, to encline them to make favourable use of it to the Redress of my Grievances. To manage the First of these Two particulars aright, will, I foresee, require more Law, more knowledge in the College Register and Statutes than my Misfortunes have yet taught me; therefore I shall leave that part to a Friend, who is able to set off your Title to much better advantage: But to Answer to the Crimes alledg'd against me, as it cannot properly be expected from any other, but immediately from my self, so it is a Task which, notwithstanding all my Troubles, I hope, I need not be afraid to undertake; since Innocency asks only the simpli∣city of Truth, and not much Subtilty, or Law to defend itself. But before I enter upon what I have already propos'd, give me leave, I pray, to acquaint you a little with the Usage which I have all along met with from the Master, especially, for some time before the Election; that in the end you may be the better able to judge, Whether all that Heat, and Vehe∣mency which Dr. Charlett has of late prosecuted me with, did not arise rather from somewhat else, than any Crimes which I have been guilty of. You must know then, I had not liv'd much past Two Years in University-College, till, to my no small trouble and discou∣ragement, the Master began to discover a particular dislike of, and aversion towards me; upon every slight occasion, slight indeed, if I had not given it. He was pleas'd to Sconce, Cross, or Impose me (for these you know are the several Punishments we have in Colleges) expressing at the same time such Anger and Resentment, as that it cou'd not be long doubted whether of the Two he intended more, to Torment the Person, or Pu∣nish and Correct the Offender. This Mr. Hudson my Tutor ve∣ry well knows, who has often express'd both his wonder, and concern at it; and so do all my Contemporaries who have of∣ten pity'd and condol'd my Misfortune: But why, the Master was pleas'd to be thus Severe upon me, more than any other
Scholar besides, neither cou'd they, nor I ever at any time learn. That I us'd to frequent Prayers and Sacraments, duely-perform and attend the Exercise, and other ordinary Duties of the House, I hope, I shall hereafter sufficiently prove to you; and he ne∣ver thought fit to upbraid me with any particular Misdemeanour to my Face, or otherwise privately Admonish me of any by a Friend; and if he had known me guilty of any, how little so∣ever he cared for me, he wou'd so far, sure, have endea∣vour'd my amendment, as to have told me of my Faults. There's one Passage, which, because it was the first occasion the Master had to be angry with me, I must not omit to men∣tion: 'Tis a Custom the Scholars observe in our Chapel, to Rise, out of respect, when the Master comes in, and to conti∣nue standing till the Reader begin; this piece of Ceremony I always perform'd, as duely and constantly, as any of the rest, saving once, when the Reader happen'd to stay a pretty while after the Master, I was so negligent as to fit down, whilst others were so careful as to keep standing; this the Master unhappi∣ly observ'd, and severely Reprimanded me for't; and it was the first pretence he had to find fault with me, and the only time he ever charg'd me with Disrespect; but whatever notice the Master might take of this neglect at present, it was too small and trifling for him sure, to remember long: And there∣fore, I was often told, and greatly suspected myself, that a cer∣tain College-servant, whom for very substantial Reasons I cou'd never agree with, us'd ever to feed and increase with false Sto∣ries and Misrepresentations, the Prejudice the Master at first took against me; but certainly, the Master wou'd not give more credit to the Report of an infamous College Servant, than to the Testimony of the Fellows; therefore I ask his pardon if, while I am guessing at the hidden cause of this strange, and unaccountable Partiality towards me, I happen to assign a less honourable one. Whatever the matter was, as he had be∣gun, so he was pleas'd to continue his Severity upon me, till I came to about Four Years standing, i. e. till I took an oc∣casion to go into Cumberland, a considerable distance from him; but I had not stay'd there much past half a Year, till my Tutor writ to me very kindly to come up in all haste, and appear a
Canditate for a Fellowship which was at that time Vacant: I came up accordingly, took my Degree, and stood for the Fellowship, but happen'd, if some of my best Friends have not since Complimented me, to come up at that time a little too late to succeed in my Atempt: However the Gentleman who now enjoys that Fellowship so justly deserves it, and is so very well beloved in the Society, that, whatever Troubles my Success at that time wou'd have prevented, which have since fallen upon me, I cannot be so injurious to the College, as to wish my self in his Place. But to return: Now that I had had the Hardship to be turn'd by the Fellowship (for my Tutor used ever to call their Electing a Stranger before me at that time a Hardship up∣on me) I was in hopes the Master wou'd in Compassion abate somewhat of his wonted Rigor and Severity towards me, and suf∣fer me to live more easily and quietly under him; nevertheless he began to treat me again at the same or worse rate than formerly, and, as far as I cou'd ghess, was resolved so to con∣tinue; for as my Friends, as well Fellows, as others, have often told me, wherever they happened to mention me to any advantage (for some there ever were who from the beginning designed me better Things than what has befalen me) there wou'd he be sure to Express his uneasiness, and divert the Discourse with a Frown. And indeed this particular Aversion of the Master's towards me, which as I cou'd never learn the cause of it, so I was never any ways likely to abate, did so far affect and discourage me in my Studies, That, tho' I was ever designed for Divinity, and had spent some Years, and taken a Degree in order to't, yet, as my Tutor may very well remember, I advised with him about quitting the Uni∣versity, tho' I had fewer Friends any where else, and did not well know what other Calling to betake my self to. My Tutor was very much against my leaving the Univer∣sity, but quickly after was convinc'd of the reasonableness of my leaving the College; and it was upon this memorable Passage which, because I once thought it had happily ended in the confusion of some malicious Slanderers, and a perfect under∣standing for the future betwixt the Master and me, it will
not be amiss to relate to you at large; The Master was pleased this Year to order me to speak a Speech, a Custom we Annually observe on St. Simon and Jude's Day, in Commemoration of our Founders, but happen'd to give but a∣bout a Fortnights warning to make it in: Hence it was that my Thoughts and Studies being otherwise necessarily engag'd, I was not at liberty to fit and prepare my self for the Holy Sacrament which in the mean time came to be Administred; nevertheless the Master crossed my Name, and appear'd ex∣treamly offended, I heard, at my missing the Sacrament; and when I waited upon him to remind him of the business I had in my Hands, the short warning I had to do it in, and the necessity of finishing it by such a time, he discharged me in a great Passion from speaking the Speech, and sent me away with many bitter Reproaches of Impudence and Confidence; whereupon my Tutor, who knew how busie I was all the Week long, and even Sunday too, in composing and writing a Speech, which was to be repeated Memoriter on Wednesday following, and therefore the more excusable for missing the Sacrament, told me there was no living quietly for me in this College, and advised me to resign my Scholarship (for by this time I had been Elected Scholar of the House) and desire a Decessit; And go, says he, enter your self at Oriel-College, and he was pleased to add, where you need not doubt of a Fellow∣ship; I went accordingly, resign'd my Schollarship, but was for some days deny'd my Decessit: In the mean while came the day of Solemnity when the Fellows thought fit to wait upon the Master, and desire that I might have his leave to speak the Speech: The Master return'd, and therein gave the true reason of all his Wrath and Indignation against me upon this occasion, whatever he was pleased to pretend about my mis∣sing the Sacrament, That he was informed I had a design to abuse him in it, a Crime as far from my Thoughts as it wou'd have been impudent and intolerable; whereupon my Speech was immediately sent for, read over, and returned back to be spoken without any Corrections: After this, the Master was pleased to send for me and deliver me my Decessit, which he before had deny'd me: But meeting with some Friends, who
seem'd sorry to part with me, and my old Acquaintance being desirous of my stay, I was at last perswaded to wait again upon the Master, and beg leave to continue in the College; and here it was that I began to hope that the Master would forget the Prejudice some secret Whisperers had hitherto fomented in him against me, and leave me a fair way to persue his Favour in for the future; for taking occasion to ex∣press how sorry I was that I should have the misfortune to fall under his particular Displeasure, and promising, That, if he would be pleased to discover to me what it was in my Behaviour that so offended him, I would with diligence seek to amend: He was then pleased to answer (for I very well remember the Expression because it was the only one of its kind I ever received from him) Well! well! it is no matter; mind your business and I shall look forwards and not backwards. But for all this, tho' I do not know that he has thought fit to upbraid me with any Misdemeanor whatever from this very time down to this Second Election, i. e. for a whole Year and more last past (for the Crime he charges me with last did not appear to him, he says, till a Week before the Election) you shall hear how kind he has been pleased to be to me since. Tho' I was Senior, and, as you may observe, had once already been turn'd by a Fellowship, and a Senior, you know, they are seldom, or never so unkind as to disregard, especially, when he happens to lie under the discouragement of a former Repulse, Nevertheless, as soon as this Fellowship, which we now Dispute about, sell Vacant, he was pleas'd to declare in behalf of Mr. Denison, my Junior, and begun to talk of appointing an Election out of hand, to fill up the Vacany: But when he understood that the Fellows discover'd more Favour for the Senior than what he either wish'd for, or expected, he then thought fit to suspend it, till in the mean time he might one way or other, ingage a Majority of them against me; and this he endeavours no less earnestly by the Interest, and Intercession of Friends, than his own Solicitations; insomuch, that there was scarce a Day past, wherein some or other did not Speak, or Write in favour of my Competitor; the Master all this time, to facili∣tate his own, and their Endeavours, either quarrelling at, and
despising my Scholarship, or else traducing my Morals, cruel∣ly aggravating every the least Fault, which once in Seven Years time I had happen'd to commit, into a gross Crime, and Enormity: Nay, so fully was he bent to prevent my Success, that, when during the time of this Vacancy, he might have Recommended Mr. Denison, my Competitor, by the Joint-in∣terest of his own, and that of the Fellows, to have been Prefer∣red either at Oriell, or Lincoln Colleges; yet, contrary to all their inclinations, he wou'd have him stay to oppose me; whereas I on the other side, either at that time, or any time else, was capable of appearing but at one other College in the whole University besides our own, nor that indeed with any probabi∣lity of Success: for the Master had shew'd too great a dislike of me, to leave me any hopes of obtaining his Recommendations; or if he, and the Fellows had both been so kind as to have a∣greed together to set me out with a good Character it is not probable it wou'd have availed me very much, when they themselves had thought fit to turn me by a Fellowship once, and were ready to do it again, especially at such a time when it might have been suppos'd, I had a fair Claim to that Vacant One of our own by the Right and Priviledge of Seniority: And what's worse than all this, he was pleas'd to deny me the common favour of a Commutation of Terms, which all the rest of the Chancellors's worthy Delegates thought sit to allow me; whereby he has not only depriv'd me a present of the Benefit and advantage of my Degree (a thing the University is with good reason so tender in as nothing more) but has since found out Means, I am afraid, to debar me of it for ever. When he saw that all, which he had hitherto done, was likely to prove ineffectual, and that after Examinations were over, every Fellow in the House, except Mr. Smith, was pleas'd to Approve of me, he then betakes himself to a foolish, ridiculous Story, which Wanly the Servitor, not without the advice and contrivance of my Competitor, and his Two intimate Cronies Mr. Woods, and Pricket Butler, as I shall more proba∣bly suggest to you, by and by, some Days before had thought fit to inform him of; and what this was, you'll best understand, after I have told what past in the Master's Lodgings, when to my
great surprize, I was Summon'd thither, before the Master, and Four of the Fellows the Day before the Election (for then, and not till then, did I hear a Syllable of this Objection a∣gainst me, tho', it seems, it has for some considerable time been referv'd for a Pinch.) 1. Mr. Woods [A. B.] came and told them, That about a Year and a half agon, he heard me frequently for near a Month together, say, That the Master was a Familiar with such a Gen∣tleman, naming him, as he was with Mr. Tanner, and he took the Word Familiar, to be there meant in a Carnal Sense, for the Young Gentleman who sat at the Table with me at the same time, blush'd nnd ask'd me, If I was not asham'd to talk so? With this, the Master turns hastily about, and asks me in a passion, What I cou'd say to all this? I told him, I never thought, or said such a thing of him, as Mr. Wood saggested, in all my Life. Again, he ask'd me, Whether I ever I hud heard such a Story of him, or no? After some pause, I answer'd Yes, I cou'd not say, but I had once heard such a Story of him (for Mr. Woods had now renew'd that in my Mind, which probably, I should ne∣ver have remembered of my self) but what I had heard was a foolish Jest, told me near 5, or 6 Years ago, of the Master and Editors, and not of Mr. Tanner, or any other Person in particular; and upon further Examination, I at length told him of whom, and in what manner I heard it. Next comes in Mr. Grenwood, [A. B.] and after him Wanly the Informer, each of them in order told their several Stories, which, since they do not affect me, it's not necessary here to repeat. All then, that was Alledg'd against me at this time, was, That I us'd to tell a Young Gentleman, That the Master was grown as familiar with him, as he was with Mr. Tanner. But by next Morning, which was Election-time, Mr. Woods had very much improv'd his Story; it was now no longer the Master was as familiar with such a Gentleman, as he was with Mr. Tanner, That happen'd to be a more soft and modest Ex∣pression of his own, but the Master us'd to Ride such an one, and make him a second Tom. Tanner. With this improvement, the Master Read it to the Eellows when they were met together to
Elect, who thought it very odd, that the Gentleman shou'd va∣ry thus in his Evidence, and since he was such a particular Friend of Mr. Denison's, did not know, but the whole might be a Contrivance to promote his Interest; which they did the more justly suspect, because it was trump'd up the very Day be∣fore the Election, was not deliver'd upon Oath, and whether under his Hand they did not know; for the Master, when they desir'd to see it, refus'd to shew it them; and when they wou'd have Examin'd the Witnesses in his presence, he absented him self, sent for them to his Lodgings, and order'd them to give the Fellows no Information; nay, when Mr. Greenwood, thinking that too great a disrespect to be shewn to the Fellows, ventur'd to come and tell them that little which he knew of the Matter, he forthwith sent for him, and fell to Threaten him again at the same Rate as he had before done when he found him backward to come in a Witness against me, telling him, He wou'd pluck the Gown over his Ears, and Expel him the College: I say, notwithstanding the Fellows thought, that they had hereupon good reason to give no credit to Mr. Woods's Story, and judg'd themselves not civilly Treated, yet, because they wou'd preserve the Peace of the College, if possible, and pay what Respect was due to the Reputation of a Person in his Station, they offer'd the Master, That I shou'd ask his Pardon in what manner he pleas'd, or submit to any Punishment he wou'd inflict for the Crime he suppos'd me Guilty of. After re∣peated offers of this kind to no purpose, they made him this fur∣ther Proposal, That if he pleas'd, they wou'd agree to the put∣ting off the Election till the Gentleman, to whom Mr. Wood said, the Words were spoken to, cou'd be sent for, and that if he, who was equally Reflected upon with the Master, and had the most reason to remember them, wou'd confirm Mr. Wood's Testimony, that then, not a Man of them wou'd any longer appear for me, but deliver me up, and leave me to his Mercy. So different was the Behaviour of the Fellows from that of the Master upon this Occasion, tho the Power in that College is equally in their own Hands, and all Things are to be Determin'd there by a ma∣jority. After several Adjournments that Day, the Master at last seem'd very desirous to have the Election put off for one half
Hour longer; which when the Fellows had agreed to, he sends for Mr. Hinckley, and tells him, he had another Witness, Mr. Denison, and he would Swear to the same purpose; if he thought this material, he might Communicate it to the rest of the Fellows, if not he shou'd keep it secret. Mr. Hinck∣ley return'd, and with very good reason too, That he did not take a Competitor's Evidence to be very material, and for his part shou'd not regard it. The Fellows therefore, knowing me clear from all other Exceptions, and laying no stress upon what Mr. Woods alledg'd without the concurrent Testimony of the Gentleman to whom the Words were spoken, at the next Meeting did me the Honour to Elect me. Thus have I given you a brief Account of the Master's good Inclinations towards me, from the time I was Two Years standing, till the time I was Elected Fellow: Come I to what I at first chiefly intended, namely, To Propose, and Answer those Objections the Master urg'd against me, before Mr. Vice Chancellor, Doctors of Divinity, and Proctors to pre∣vent their Approbation of me. The Election being over, and Mr. Vice-Chancellor, Doctors, and Proctors being met together the Day following in the Master's Lodgings, in order to approve, or disapprove the Party Elected, Dr. Bouchier, the Master's Advocate, Read a long and black Indictment against me, setting me forth, As a notorious neglecter of Prayers, a scandalous despiser of the Holy Sacra∣ments, and an infamous Noctivagator; one who was obstinate and contumacious in his Temper, deaf to all Advice, and proof against Correction; one who had wilfully and deliberately Perjur'd him∣self in the Face of the University, and lasty, had utter'd scanda∣lous Words against the Master, Words too gross and heinous to be repeated. And indeed, if they cou'd but once have made out what they so furiously alledg'd, Mr. Woods [the Master's Se∣cond Advocate] might then with great Justice have inferr'd, That I was neither fit for that Society I was design'd for, nor for any Society at all. But the Proof, it seems, which was brought to make good all the Hard Names Dr. Bouchier was pleas'd to call me, was such, that I have since, to my comfort, heard, several of the Reverend Doctors shou'd say, They were, not∣withstanding
very well satisfy'd with my Character; and Mr. Smith, the only Fellow who oppos'd my Election, was so kind as to confess to me, that very Morning I took my leave of him, That my Friends had bore that Testimony of me, in answer to all other Objections, except that one relating to the Master, that he thought I cou'd not justly be upbraided with them hereafter: But because the Master, and his Friends have, notwithstanding, since been very Cruel in their Misrepresentations of me, at o∣ther Places, as well as at Oxon, threatning, To make all the Bishops in England deny me Holy Orders, I ask you pardon if I enlarge a little upon so just and necessary a Defence. And here, I must readily own, and confess to you, That in all these Seven Years, I have somtimes mist Prayers, at one time or other absented myself from Sacraments, and some∣times been abroad after Nine a Clock; but that I have been so far Peccant in any of these Instances of my Duty, as to come short of those who stand the fairest in the Master's favour, or to lose at any time the Character of a Regular Student: This I hope you will as readily allow me, when I have told you, that the Reverend Mr. Naylor, Mr Hinckley, and the Honour∣able Mr. Bertie, did all Three bear ample Testimony before the Delegates to my Regular Observance of these several Du∣ties; and, if those Gentlemen had pleas'd, they might have heard all the rest of the Fellows to the same purpose, except Mr. Smith, and he, which is Testimony sufficient, can say no∣thing to the contrary. But I pass on to the Charge of Stubbornness and Contumacy. The Instances they bring of this untoward temper of Mind, are Two. The I. Drawn from the manner of resigning my Scho∣larship. The II. From my not asking off Sconces. In answer to the first of these, I need only refer you to what I have already set down Pag. 5, 6. where you may observe, I did not in a bravading manner throw up my Scholarship,
but with the advice of my Tutor resign it; and that too, upon a very prudent Consideration, in hopes, after some proof given there of my Manners and Behaviour, I might succeed in a Fel∣lowship at Oriel-College, since, according to the Usage I met with from the Master, I cou'd not expect one in our own. But I happen'd to make use of a Word in my Resignation, which I understand since, gave some offence: It seems I call'd my Scho∣larship Portiuncula exhibitionis, and the reason was, because that same Benefaction us'd to be held formerly entire, and gi∣ven all to one: But the Fellows upon discovery of the Donor's Will, saw reason to divide it, and gave one Half, which was Fifty Shillings a Year to me, and I thought I had hit upon a very proper Word to express the half of a Scholarship, tho' I am very sorry to find that the propriety of the Word shou'd be misconstru'd resentment. 2dly. As to the second Instance of Stubbornness, my not ask∣ing off Sconces. For the first Two Years, or more, I believe, I was never Sconced at all; and afterwards, as I remember, the Master and Dean us'd always to give them out to the Poor, lest they shou'd be troubled every time with this and tother Scho∣lar asking off his Penny and Two Pence; and so say all my Contemporaries; some of whom, never ask'd off a Sconce in all their time. Of late, since the Master has expected it, I have for the most part ventur'd to go and ask them off, tho' I was sure, when ever I went, to be very roughly receiv'd. Some few times indeed, I have forborn to ask them off, chusing ra∣ther to lose my Sconces, than to remind him of them, to his, and my own uneasiness. Since the Master has forgot it, I crave leave to remind him of another Instance besides of my Stubbornness and disobedience towards him, which is this: Soon after I had succeeded in this Scholarship, which I a little before mention'd, there was another fell Vacant, better than the former, and the Master fore see∣ing that I was likely to be Advanc'd to't, sends for Mr. Hinck∣ley, whom he suspected wuo'd prove my Friend, and tells him; There was a Young Gentleman, naming him, in the College, whom he had a great kindness for, and ask'd him, What he thought of Electing him into this Scholarship? My Friend was
pleas'd to make kind mention of me at that time, saying, I was Senior, and he thought, the Fellows cou'd not well deny me, if I shou'd happen to stand sor't: But, added he to the Master, here are several North-Country Fellowships in the House, and if you will please to be so kind as to give him any hopes of obtaining your Favour, when in time he shall become capable of one, I sup∣pose, he will for the present be glad to recede, and give place to whom you think fit. This he agrees to, and word was brought me, of the fair opportunity I had, of engaging the Master under promise hereafter to be kind to me. Which you may he sure, I was very glad to embrace, dreaming of nothing, but of the North-Country Fellowship the Master was to help me to, and little thinking, he wou'd prove the only means to turn me out of one, and after∣wards Expel me, into the bargain. But after all this stubborness, and contumacy, the Master was pleas'd to upbraid me with, I hope, he cannot say, but I carried him readily all the Imposi∣tions he ever thought fit to set me, and that too, when others, who were Impos'd at the same time, were never call'd upon for theirs; and that I waited upon him duely, and submissive∣ly upon all occasions, tho' I have often gon Three or Four times before he wou'd allow me to see him: And Lastly, I Appeal to the several Officers of the College (whom I have had occasion now and then, to appear before) who are all rea∣dy to deliver a much different Character of my Temper. I proceed to that heavy and black Crime of wilful and deliberate Perjury, a Crime which they themselves, to be sure, must needs distrust the proof of, else I do not see what occasion they had to trouble themselves any farther. It seems they produce you a Letter from a Country Attorney, who tells them, That My Father died in such and such Circumstan∣ces, and left me an Estate of one Hundred and Twenty Pounds per Annum: This Estate they say I made away with upon taking my Degree, to avoid the Charges of Compounding, and so they fetch about the Crime of Perjury. Perhaps word might be sent this Attorney, that I was courting a Fortune instead of standing for a Fellowship, which made my Coun∣try-man give such an Honourable Account of my Estate; how ever a Person of Quality, whose Honourable Father was
my Guardian, and therefore he may very well be supposed to know my Circumstances somewhat better than their Country Attorney, upon notice given him of this Objection against me, sent the Fellows a much different and truer account of my Fortune; so that, there remains nothing for me to add more, but to leave them to answer for the uncharitableness of their Censure. I have gone thus far in the Indictment, and I hope clear'd myself too, as far as I have gone, of the Aspersions cast upon me; and now to give you a sufficient Testimony, once for all, of my Carriage and Behaviour, in opposition to all other Exceptions, as well as these. Be pleased to consider, that the Fellows were so well satisfied with it, that not a Faction, or a Party, but every Fellow in the House, except Mr. Smith, declared on my side, as well those who were ab∣sent, as those who were present; nay, those very Fellows, who were otherwise willing to oblige the Master, could not by all his Sollicitations be drawn from me, till their last Ob∣jection was raised against me, and then only, to suspend their Votes, not to give them against me; and this is more, I hope you'll pardon the Vanity of the Observation where it is so necessary, than any Candidate in our House, who was once ever oppos'd, can boast of. Come we now to their last and greatest Objection name∣ly, The Words said to be spoken against the Master; but be∣cause the Master did not only prefer these Words as an Ob∣jection against my Manners and Behaviour, and thereby got me tum'd by the Fellowship; but, when that was done, for the very same Words commenced his Action against me in the Vice-Chancellor's Court, and procur'd my Expulsion, and that too, whilst an Appeal was depending; and since the Evi∣dence given in against me before the Reverend the Delegates, happened to be repeated afterwards in Court, not without some Alterations and Additions, as well as fresh Witnesses produc'd, I shall for the present wave what was Sworn con∣corning this Particular in the Master's Lodgings, and hasten to Examine their Proof, where I find it delivered at large: only before I go any farther, give me leave to say a Word or two to
what the Master it seems was pleased to tell the Delegates, about his denying me my Degree, and his Admonishing me one time about my missing the Sacrament; 1. He was pleased to tell the Vice-Chancellor Doctors and Proctors, that the reason why he deny'd me my De∣gree was, because I went about to get a Letter without first acquainting him with it, a Reason very different from what he was pleased to give me; for not mentioning a Syllable of my going to get a Letter without first acquainting him, he told me, As I had stay'd so much longer than I needed to have done Undergraduate for my own pleasure, so I shou'd be forced to stay as long Batchellor for his. But how I behaved myself upon this occasion, I shall here punctually relate to you. When I became standing for my Master's Degree (which was in Mi∣chaelmas Term last) I waited upon Mr. Smith, the Senior Fellow (for the Master was at that time absent) to desire leave, that the Terms which I had kept supernumerary to my Batchellor's Degree shou'd be transferr'd, and accounted to my Master's (a favour every day asked, and as commonly grant¦ed in the University) Mr. Smith seem'd very well satisfy'd but withall told me, It wou'd look more respectful to wait the Ma∣ster's return, and take his leave; accordingly, as soon as I had desired the Register to draw me up a Letter, and lodge it ready in Mr. Sherwin, the Beadle's Hand, I stay'd and ex∣pected the Master's return; The Master being come, I waited upon him, desiring of him the same Favour, as I had done of Mr. Smith: He neither granted nor deny'd it me, but took time to consider of it; whereupon I went straight to Mr. Shewin, and order'd Him to have a care not to present my Letter to the Delegates till further notice: Mr. Sherwin accordingly, as he was going to get other Letters Subscribed ready for the Con∣vocation, calls to know what he must do with mine: I pro∣mis'd to come an Hour after and tell him: Whilst I went to learn the Master's Resolution, Mr. Sherwin, whether to save labour, or presuming more upon the Master's Favour than I durst do, gives my Letter amongst the rest to be Sign'd, and when I came to bid him lay it aside, I found it to my surprize Subscrib'd by all the other Delegates; however, I did not of∣fer
to make any Use or Advantage of it; and what the Ma∣ster can quarrel at in all this, I cannot imagin, unless it be for coming officiously to ask his Leave to commute my Terms, which no Body, it seems, is oblig'd to do; But however Things have since happen'd, I am loath to repent of any re∣spect which I have pay'd him. 2ly, He says, He one time sent for me, and cordilly ad∣monished me about missing the Sacrament, and withall, was so kind as to give me Arch-Bishop Tillotson's Discourse concern∣ing frequent Communion to read over: I returned soon after, delivered back the Book, and told him very pertly I did not like the Doctrine. I very well remember about Six of us (amongst whom were the two Evidences, Mr. Wood, and Mr. Denison,) mist Sacrament once; the Master sent for us, and ordered us for our Punishment, to Translate the Treatise above-mention'd in∣to Latin; in some competent time I finished the Translation, and carry'd it (which by the bye, none but Mr. Laurence and I ever did) but that the Master was neither so kind, at that time, as to admonish me about missing the Sacrament, or re∣commend that Book to me, any otherwise than the bare or∣dering me, amongst the rest, to Translate it might imply, all those Six can bear me witness; and I solemnly declare, That neither upon that occasion, or any other, did I offer to ex∣press to the Master my like or dislike of the Doctrine there de∣liver'd in any manner whatever, as I remember; and if I had done it, as the Master pretends, I am apt to believe he wou'd have given me good cause not to have forgot it. This being said, I pass on to tell you, That after the De∣legates had thought fit to disannul the Election, I little thought then of Appealing from their Sentence: I comforted myself in my loss, as well as I cou'd, with the Zeal and Affection my Friends had openly shewed me upon this occasion; and was more sorry to think I was to live apart from a Socie∣ty, which appeared to love me so well, than any thing else: but when I heard the Master of Arts, from whose Voices I ex∣pected relief in Convocation, talk compassionately of my Case, and Dr. Charlett, not satisfy'd with the loss of my Fellow∣ship
began afresh to threaten me with Expulsion; and when I saw Mr. Denison, who from a Friend and a Competitor had turn'd my Accuser, going to be Elected by the Master, and Four of the Fellows, into that very place he had before Sworn me out of I was then either encouraged or provoked to Ap∣peal: And indeed I dare almost put it upon any one to say, whether in the like case he wou'd not have done, as I have; for, to put the matter as they wou'd have it, Mr. Denison heard me now and then make merry with some odd Words at Table, which he interpreted to imply Scandal upon the Master, but it seem'd so light a thing to him at that time, that he did not think it worth his time, either to advise his Friend to forbear, or to inform the Master of the Abuse; about Two Years after I was likely to carry away a Fel∣lowship before him, he calls to mind this old Affront past upon the Master, and tho' he did not go and inform the Ma∣ster of it, he set Wanly to do't, and came in himself for a Witness; or else, I pray, what shou'd make Wanly so busie with it just at this time above all others, he had heard this Story a Year and a half ago in a very gross manner from Mr. Bruch, but nevertheless did not think it worth his time to take notice of it? Or how at last cou'd he tell the Master that I was con∣cerned in't, since he had heard this matter from another, and never at any time from me? Why now Mr. Denison, I sup∣pose had told him, as he had done Mr. Greenwood a little be∣fore the Election, That I had likewise said, that the Master B—Tom. Tanner, (for so it seems he made me speak) and if the Master did but know this of me, I shou'd never come in Fellow. This made Wanly go, about a Month before the Election, very considently to desire Mr. Elstob to inform the Society of this Objection against me, and this occasioned that Wise Debate, Prickett confest in Court, Wanly and he held, whether was the properer Person of the two to discover this ridiculous Story to the Master; and lattly, this occasioned those dark and secret Cabals, Mr. Wood, Mr. Denison, Wanly, and Prickett the Buttler used to hold frequently before the Election in the Cellar, and elsewhere, which, the Batchellors an all tell you, I ever expressed my Fears and suspicions of:
and indeed this Club was resolved, it seems, whatever came on't to secure Mr. Denison the Fellowship; for when Mr. Greenwood, after I had been reprobated, began to talk of standing for't, Wanly told him in a very menacing manner, He had not best think of any such thing, for they would soon rout him out as they had done the other before him. It was not then out of any duty or obligation, that they inform'd of these words of mine (for then they must have inform'd of them as soon as they had heard them) nor out of any injury they saw done to the Master's Reputation (for what Injury cou'd be done the Master's Reputation by Words, which no body re∣membred but themselves?) no, but they wanted a sufficient Objection to turn me by the Fellowship to make room for Mr. Denison; and some such Story wou'd they have trumped upon Mr. Greenwood, if he had succeeded: Well then might I Appeal and try, if happily I cou'd regain my Right, which I had for no other reason been bereft of, but because Mr. Denison shou'd have it. The Appeal being lodg'd, and the Master not thinking fit to condescend to any Terms of Accommodation, or indeed, give me any assurance of Pardon, not so much as privately, and by a Friend, in case I wou'd wave my Appeal and submit (I say assurance of pardon in case I wou'd have submitted, for hints and items to submit, I confess, I had many, but withall I cou'd get no private Promise, or security made me of pardon if I wou'd have submitted) and I on the other side being very loath to forego the advantage of my Appeal, and entirely trust to his mercy, who, as he had before resolutely refus'd all ten∣ders of Satisfaction, how great soever, when the Story was pri∣vate, and within our own College, much more I thought wou'd he do so, when it was become the publick Talk and News of the Town, and the Votes of the Heads of Houses had past in his favour: The Master, I say, not thinking fit to send me a∣ny private assurance of pardon, in case I wou'd submit, and I without such assurance, justly fearing lest my Submission shou'd be misconstru'd a Confession, and subject me to some further in∣conveniency, Matters were for some time at a stand, till on the 15th. of Ian. 9 8/9 I was Summon'd to Appear in the Vice-Chancellor's
Court, at the Suit of the Reverend Dr. Charlett, and the Reverend Mr. Tanner. And here, in the first place, I have good reason to complain, That Dr. Bouchier, who Prose∣cuted me so earnestly before the Delegates, and with all the Aggravations the Zeal of so Learned and Eloquent an Advo∣cate cou'd suggest, shou'd, nevertheless, sit as my Judge, and give Sentence upon a Charge which he himself, but some Days before, had manag'd and dress'd up against me; but with all due regard to so great Character, and without reflection up∣on the Justice of his Proceedings, I shall fairly State the Facts which were alledg'd against me, and then, according to a deer bought Distinction, return Answer to them in a double respect: I. I shall make Answer to them, as they are Alledg'd to set forth matter of Scandal and Defamation upon the Reverend Dr. Charlett, and the Reverend Mr. Tanner; and so relate my Expulsion: II. As they set forth an Objection against my good Manners and Behaviour; and so relate my Reprobation. The Depositions are as follow. 1. Mr. Woods Swears (to comprise the strength of his Evi∣dence in as few Words as I can) That sometime after I had miss'd a Fellowship of University-College, which happen'd on Feb. 23 9 6/7 [almost Two Years agoe] he heard me at Table in our College-Hall say, That Arthur (meaning the Master) did ride Tom. Tanner (meaning Mr. Tanner Fellow of All-Souls-College) and made Mr. K. a second Tom. Tanner; these Words he heard me repeat frequently, for near a Month together, insomuch, that Mr. K. who sat at Table with me at the same time, blush'd, and ask'd me, If I was not asham'd to talk so? By which Expressions he understood, that I meant the Master B—'d, these Two Gen∣tlemen; for so the Word Ride, in his Iudgment, and that of Debauch'd Persons, as apply'd to Men does import. And fur∣ther added, That when I was charg'd with the Words, as above Sworn to, before the Fellows, I deny'd indeed the Words, but said, I cou'd produce my Author.
2. Mr. Denison backs his fellow Evidence Mr. Woods in e∣very particular, saving, he was not present, when I said, I cou'd produce my Author. And moreover, Swears, he heard me use the Word Clapperclaw, as well as Ride, and the one, as well as the other, in his Iudgment, signifies to B—r: And another thing, That he had heard me call the Master Roger. 3. Pricket Swears, I us'd to call him Pimp, and particularly one time Pimp Master general to the Lodgings; and he thereby understood, I meant he was turn'd Procurer for the Master. 4. The Honourable Warden of All Souls Depos'd, That I said before the Delegates, in these, or such like Words to this ef∣fect; If I had said the Words above mention'd, I had my Author for them; and again, That when I was ask'd by one of the Do∣ctors, Whether I would clear my self upon Oath, I answer'd, I wou'd not. The Depositions being thus set down, I am first to make Answer to them as they are Alledg'd to set forth matter of Scandal and Defamation upon the Reverend Dr. Charlett, and the Reverend Mr. Tanner. I. To begin with the last Witness first (for if, what this Ho∣nourable Gentleman says, seems to imply, I have either con∣fest, or cou'd not deny the Charge, there's an end of the Dis∣pute.) As to the Story about the Editors, I own'd both before the Fellows, and before the Delegates, I had heard it, tho' not any time this 4, or 5 Years, and for that, I told them my Author, Mr. M. but that I ever mention'd such a Story my self, or heard these Words the Two Witnesses Swore to, ei∣ther from Mr. M. or any body else, so apply'd, I always flat∣ly deny'd. 1 That I did not say this Clause [If I had said so, I had my Author for't] before the Delegates, with respect to the Words Sworn against me, as Mr. Warden wou'd have it, is evident, because, this is the very thing some misinform'd one of the Reverend Doctors of, at the Visitation, and he earnestly tax'd me with; I was very positive in my Answer, That I never had said such a thing, and complain'd to Mr. Hinckley, and he to Mr. Smith, of the mis-information given in against me: Mr. Smith own'd it a Mistake, and went, very honestly, when all
was over, to have it Corrected: And it cannot be suppos'd, that I shou'd make a confession of a thing, and at the same time vouch and prove a denyal of it too. 2. That I did not say so upon my Examination before the Fellows, as Mr. Woods Alledges, and as some misinform'd one of the Reverend Doctors, is likewise evident because, Mr. Smith and Mr. Hudson, besides the Two other Fellows, Mr. Naylor and Mr. Hinckley, who both agree I said no such thing, at the time spoken of, being call'd to deliver upon Oath, what past before them in the Master's Lodgings, did neither of them, agreeably to what Mr. Smith had before own'd to Mr. Hinckley at the Visitation, mention a Syllable of this parti∣cular, which if I had said, they cou'd not in that time have forgot it, nor wou'd have omitted to relate what was so appo∣site to the purpose. 3. As to the Second Clause of Mr. Warden's Evidence, 'Tis true, I was ask'd, and Mr. Warden himself, as I remember, whether I wou'd clear my self upon Oath? I returned, and the Reverend the Principal of Jesus was pleased to joyn with me, I conceiv'd I was not obliged to answer to that Question; and so I answer still, because if I shou'd swear, and that ne∣ver so righteously, I shou'd not perhaps escape Censure, which notwithstanding the ill Opinion some are pleased to harbour of me, I shou'd be very loath to incur for a Fellowship. II. As to Pricket the Butler (that I may dispatch him out of the way) this is the Man that I more than suspected did always abuse and misrepresent me to the Master; and I ever did, and still do from my Conscience believe him to have been the occasion all along of the Master's Prejudice, and Aversion towards me, and the better part of the College, when they dare once talk freely, will tell you the same. Whether hereupon, I might be apt sometimes to call him Pimp, I cannot justly say; but that he shou'd understand, or at least I mean the Word in the sense set down, neither will any body believe, when I have told the Passage which he at large related to the Court. I came (he says) into the Buttery one time, about a Year and a half ago, and finding myself Sconced Six Pence by the Master's Or∣der,
I fell immediately a scolding very furiously with him, and told him, he was always running to the Master with one idle Story or other, and I suppos'd this was the result of one of them? But I vow'd I wou'd not ask it off, and he might tell the Master so, if he wou'd, for he was Pimp Master General to the Lodgings. The Expressions, which I here in a passion, and upon a sur∣prize threw out, I must with shame own, are Rude and Dis∣respectful; but no body, I dare say, wou'd make any doubt, what I meant here by the Name Pimp, the fore-going Words too plainly shew, I meant, he us'd to carry Stories to the Ma∣ster, and had just been telling some one or other of me, which caus'd the Master to Sconce me: And Pricket too, to be sure, understood it aright, for he had but upon Election Day, when he was purposely Examin'd, as to what he knew, concerning this Particular, given under his own Hand, That he knew no∣thing at all relating to't, but what he had heard from Mr. Woods, and Mr. Denison. But he ventur'd it seems, to strain a Point, to serve his Old Friend at parting, and kindly help me for∣wards when I was going. 3. These Two being dispatch'd, I come to Examine the joint Depositions of Mr. Woods, and Mr. Denison. which before I enter upon, I cannot but complain to you, that I shou'd be oblig'd to Answer to any thing the later of these Two Gentlemen thinks fit to Swear against me: For when he Swore against me before the Delegatas, What was he doing but Swearing me out of the Fellowship to make room for himself? This the Right Reverend the Late Bishop of Oxford was very well aware of, and therefore, as I am told, ask'd at that time, Whether if the Fellowship shou'd happen to be be declar'd Vacant, Mr. De∣nison wou'd not become a Candidate for't? And it was answer'd by the Master, or some of his Friends, No, no: But 'twas ob∣serv'd, when Mr. Denison was afterwards Elected That, that Worthy Person, with some others, did not come to approve of him. And now again when he appears a Witness against me in the Vice-Chancellor's Court, What does he else but Swear me out of the University, the better to secure himself in his Fellowship? 'Tis doubly hard upon me therefore, that he shou'd be allow'd not only to Swear me out of the Fellowship
to make room for himself, but suffer'd to Swear to keep him∣self in't: But before all be done, you'll easily perceive, with∣out my telling of you, that Mr. Denison is more than ordinari∣ly interested in the matter. Allowing then, that Mr. Denison, and his intimate Cronie Mr. Woods, heard Words repeated for near a Month together, at a publick Table, which no body there present, besides them∣selves too, ever heard once, no not that very Gentleman, who, they say, made answer to them, and rebuk'd me for them (tho' I must own at the same time he told me so, he added, what I cannot very well tell whether it makes more for, or against me, That if he had heard them, he shou'd not have thought it worth his while to have remembred them:) allowing, I say, what I can by no means grant to be true, yet neither do these Words of themselves signifie what the Witnesses wou'd make us be∣leive, nor are there any Circumstances, or Reasons sufficient for their wresting of them to such a signification: And lastly, If all this was granted, yet the term of Time limited for the Action, is already elaps'd, the Words having been spoken a∣bove a Year ago. 1. Who those Loose and Debauch'd Persons are, with whom to Clapperclaw and Ride, pass current for such Obscene Practi∣ces, Mr. Woods and Mr. Denison, it seems, know best. To Clapperclaw, wherever I read, or heard the Expression, signi∣fies no more than to Whip and Beat one. So Hudibrass, 2 Can. 2 Part p. 280. —The inward Man, And outward, like Clan and Clan, Have always been at Daggers drawing, And one another Clapperclawing. Not that they really Cuff and Fence, &c. and you shall commonly hear Nurses or Mothers, especially in the North of England, cry out to their Children I'll Clapper∣claw you: So to Ride, is often transferr'd from its common and usual signification of managing a Horse, to that of managing a Man, or ruling him, ad libitum & arbitrium, as Priest Ridden,
The Rich Ride the Poor; and what makes the Expression more proper in this Case, is, the Master himself has been heard to use it, saying, He cou'd Ride such an one. Since the Words then do not of themselves signifie what the Witnesses suggest, where are the Circumstances and Reasons for the wresting of them to such a signification? 1. Say they, The Words were spoken about a Month or six Weeks after Mr. Clavering' s Election, and 'tis to be suppos'd, you might speak them in the Sense alledg'd, out of Resentment, and by way of Revenge upon the Master, because you was at that time laid aside. In Answer to this, I must observe to you, That these Two Witnesses Swore before the Delegates▪ to about a Year and half ago, without any relation, or reference had to Mr. Claver∣ing's Election, or so much as mention'd: But before Mr. Vice-Chancellor, Mr. Denison, to bring them nearer to Mr. Clavering's Election, Dated the Words in April 97. a Quarter of a Year higher than before, and Swore to them with express reference to that Election; I say, Mr. Denison, for tho' Mr. Woods did equal∣ly advance the Date of the Words with Mr. Denison, and say, The Words were spoken indeed, after Mr. Clavering's Election. Yet he wou'd not suggest that they bore any relation to that E∣lection; whereas Mr. Denison was pleas'd to say, I was vex'd, he believ'd, because the Master at that time did not Vote for me, and thence I came to utter such words against him: But Mr. De∣nison, you must understand, by this time was Elected into the Fellowship, therefore no wonder if he thought himself obliged to go beyond his Brother Witness, and do something Extraordi∣nary upon his Promotion. However it is well known, if I had reason to Quarrel with any body upon that Election, it was myself, or some of my best Friends; I had had long e'er this too too great Experience of the Master's Aversion towards me, ever to hope for his Vote at the Election of a Fellow, and it is not probable, that I should be much vexed to find I had miss'd of that, which I durst neither hope for, nor expect. Besides, if I had been so wickedly minded, as Mr Denison gives out, I think, I shou'd scarce have chosen either those Words, or that Place, he talks of, to have exprest my malice in, but Words more serious, and a Place more private, and judg'd it
more both for my purpose, and safety so to have done. Last of all, Wou'd I have brought in a Man, whom all the Col∣lege so deservedly Esteem, and whose intimate Acquaintance I still pride myself so much in, to have been a sharer in this Scandalous Report; for such is the Gentleman, they tell you, I I directed my Discourse to at Table, and whom, as well as Mr. Tanner, it seems, I said the Mr. Clapperclawed. The frank and open manner then in which, they say, I deliver'd myself, and the tenderness and regard every body has for the Reputati∣on of his Friend, might have sufficiently declar'd the innocence of my Thoughts, whatever sense, or interpretation they had thought fit to put upon the Words. 2. Say they, And what does plainly demonstrate your meaning∣in these Words, you confess that Mr. M. told you, That the Ma∣ster B—'d the Editors, and what he calls B—ing, you call Clapperclawing. You, see Sir, what advantage they are pleas'd to take of my Honesty and Simplicity, and just such use wou'd they have made of my Submission. But to the purpose; Mr. M told me once an idle Jest of the Master and Editors, which neither he, nor any body else, took any further notice of: About Two, or Three Years after, I happen'd to talk concerning the Master, Mr. Tanner, and another Person, must I therefore needs allude to a Story told me so long ago, wherein neither Mr. Tanner, nor this Gentleman's Name, was so much as men∣tion'd, and in such Words too, as are confessedly Prov'd to imply no such thing, as this Story exprest. If this does any way demonstrate my meaning, it must demonstrate it to be somewhat else sure, than what these Gentlemen wou'd have it. What remains therefore, but that the Words, if spoken, shou'd be constru'd in their usual and common acceptation, which, as before prov'd, will amount to no more than this; Here's one Scholar falls to Rally another of his Acquaintance, and tells him, The Master governs and manages him as he pleases, just as he does Mr. Tanner (for Mr. Tanner was ever known to be very observant of the Master, but there was no such Report as now there is, till Mr. Woods and Mr. Denison misconstruing these Words of mine, as they pretend, found it of late for their
interest, to set it about, and in very express Terms) he gives him gentle correction to keep him in due order and submission: And what's all this but some Taunts and Jeers, such as pass often merrily and innocently enough amongst Young Scholars, which the Gentleman being offended at it, asks the t'other, Whether he's not asham'd to talk so? And in this, or the like Sense must the Witnesses too, after all, have understood the Phrases a∣bove mention'd, for Mr. Woods, and he indeed is the only Person to be regarded, being ask'd in Court, Whether during the several times he heard me repeat them at Table, he al∣ways took them in a loose, immodest Sense? Answer'd, as will be Attested by Three credible Persons than present, Sometimes he did, and sometimes again he did not; Notwithstanding all the Circumstances and Reasons which they pretend to. 3. And to conclude this part, Admitting that the Words were never so express, yet the Civil Law, which is the Rule of their Judgment in the Vice-Chacellour's Court, says, Injuria verbalis solvitur spatio anni utilis; the term of time then limi∣ted for the Action is already elapsed, the Words, according to their own Evidence, having been spoken almost two Years ago, unless the Master can first make it appear, that he never heard of them till sometime within this Year: I say, and I crave leave to insist upon't, tho' the Words were never so Ex∣press yet the Master, before in Law he can recover any Da∣mage, or exact any Punishment of me for speaking of them, must first make it appear he never heard of them till some∣time within this Year, which if he can do it, is one great Argument to me they never were spoken at all. Thus much then for the Words as they are Actionable, and relate my Expulsion: come I to the Second thing proposed, Namely; II. To make Answer to them as they are alledged to set forth an Objection against my Manners and Behaviour, and so relate my Reprobation. And here I might justly be thought to have prevented all further trouble in this Particular, since what is not proved can be no reasonable Exception against me; and how far their Proof falls short, I have already observed to you: But because the Learned Dr. Boucher says, That Visitors
in this Case need not wait for a strict and legal Proof, but may proceed Juxta conscientias, and according to their Belief, I shall, allowing all my Adversaries urge in this Particular to be true, fairly state the Matter, and leave the Convocation to agree what Rule they had best be guided by, the Law, the common Stan∣dard of Justice, or their own private Opinions; and whether, if they do perchance believe me guilty of a few nonsensical Words, they may not notwithstanding, in Reason and Discre∣tion admit me Fellow of a College. To allow then what my Prosecutors were never yet able to prove, I happened unluckily in jesting now and then with a cer∣tain Acquaintance of mine, (a Gentleman who wants neither Sense of Honour nor Gratitude to vindicate either his own or the Master's Reputation where he shou'd perceive them injur'd) to allude in some odd comical Language to a foolish Story, which I had once heard of the Master and Editors; and is this then such an unpardonable Offence in Youth, sometimes to have talked rashly and indiscreetly by way of Merriment and a∣mongst his Companions, that, almost two Years, after he shall for this, and for this alone, be turned out of a Fellowship which he has honourably and fairly been Elected into? If I had re∣ported such a thing as this of the Master abroad, or by secret Whispers and slie Suggestions insinuated the truth of it, but a∣mongst our selves, and in our own College, well might I then have been deem'd an unworthy Member of a Civil and Ingenuous Society: but since, at worst, I happen'd only to throw out a few odd ridiculous Words, which no Body ever after so much as re∣membred, except Mr. Woods and Mr. Denison, nor they think fit to inform of them till at length for their own private advantage more than for any disrepute, which, they saw, had befallen the Master; as I have already shewn: In a Word, since it appears that, if I did speak these Words, I neither designed nor inten∣ded any harm, either to the Master or any body else, nor ac∣cordingly did they ever receive any, I think I have done enough, if not to satisfie Dr. Charlett, yet, to wipe away the Objection, and acquit my self as a good Christian in that, when the Ma∣ster thought sit to insist upon this Offence, I offered more than once to ask his Pardon in what manner he pleased, or submit to
any punishment he wou'd inflict; Nay, after he had got me turn∣ed by the Fellowship, and for one and the same Fault, was go∣ing to Expell me the University, nevertheless I readily con∣sented to as fair a Character of him and Mr. Tanner, as their Friends thought fit to give them, and publickly declar'd in open Court, I never thought or imagined them guilty of the Crimes they were pleased to think themselves accused of: And now, if either of these Two Gentlemen will please to pre∣scribe me any other method whereby I may clear their Repu∣tations in this particular more effectually than hitherto I have done, I promise them, after all, instantly to set about it; for God forbid that it shou'd be said, that I in any wise, in any manner had occasioned such a groundless Report to be spread abroad of any Man, and shou'd not be willing by all means possible to clear him of the Scandal of it: But it is easie for any to observe that Dr. Charlett needed neither to have broke the Peace of the College, nor been thus injurious to me, if he had not design'd something more, than the vindi∣cating his own Reputation. I have now I think, at length gon, thorough all the Objecti∣ons brought to prevent my being Approv'd, saving, that the Two Witnesses last mention'd, do somewhere or other add, That they have heard me talk against the Discipline of the House; Mr. Denison, for instance, at the Three Tun-Tavern; (for as to that particular, of saying, The Master Rogered such an one, which Mr. Woods Swore to before the Delegates, but Mr. De∣nison and he, do both contradict afterwards in Court, saying, I call'd the Master only bare Roger, I shall wave my Answer to't till they Swear a Third time, to fix the Allegation) what it was those Gentlemen heard me talk against the Discipline of the House, since they have not thought fit to tell, I am not able to shall only therefore, in the Conclusion, observe to you, how se∣verely I am dealt with, when every idle Word, which Two Designing Persons have at one time or other heard to drop from me concerning the Master, or the Discipline of the House, shou'd pass current, for a mighty Exception against me, whilst my constant Obedience and Submission both to the one and the other lie all the while unregarded.
The Sum of the whole is this, The Master, as a certain Gen∣tleman, if you will not take my Word for't, in due time and place will make it appear upon Oath, was resolv'd Three Years ago and upwards, that I shoud never succeed Fellow of Univer∣sity College, if he cou'd hinder. Hence, no doubt on't, came all that Rigor and Severity which, as I have said, upon little, or no occasion he us'd to Treat me with, that, since the ordinary Course of my Life and Conversation, was not greatly to be complain'd of, he might happily provoke me by ill Usage, to say, or do what he might afterwards take advantage of: And hence it was, after all his Pretences, he did not stick to deny me my Degree, which at the Expence of my Time and Fortune, I was now become capable of, because that wou'd have been one good argument more at the Election, for my preference to Mr. Denison; insomuch, that it's justly question'd, Whether or no, a Bachelor of Arts is capable of being Elected at all? And now when Examinations, with which, he had threatn'd me so severely, were happily concluded, and all his other Slanders and Reproaches of me (for so, I hope, I may safely call all his other Objections, since every Fellow in the House accoun∣ted them such) were laid aside and disregarded, pursuant to his former Resolution, he casts about, and enquires after such Stuff and Giberage, as you have heard: I say Enquires after for I cannot conceive, with what Confidence, Wanly, Denison, or whoever of them was the Informer, cou'd go and pretend, as he must do, great damage and injury done the Master's Reputa∣tion by a Story which he himself had knowingly, and wilfully conceal'd for so long together, unless the Master had first en∣quir'd after this or the like matter, or given him some private Encouragement so to do; nor would he, when he had once found what he thought he cou'd make an Objection of, admit of any Satisfaction, or Submission, of what kind soever; No, not when it was offer'd him by all the Fellows of the House; nor wou'd he by any means be prevail'd upon amicably to Adjust, or Comprimise the Matter within his own Society, but must hurry me away before the Heads of Houses, to have me turn'd out of my Fellowship, and Expell'd the University, for a Ridi∣lous Story which, in spight of all I cou'd do, or say, he wou'd both Prove and Publish to his own Discredit.
Being therefore put by my Degree, if for any at all, for a Reason which, if I had been Candidly dealt with, shou'd rather have hasten'd than have stop'd my promotion to't; and being for a Reason as good as the former, i. e. for Words of a general and doubtful signification, and such, as by the Construction of all the Law in the World, can never be made Criminal, depriv'd of my Free-hold, Expell'd the University, and turn'd out into the World to seek my Fortune; I have purpos'd, as I at first told you, to Prosecute my Appeal to Convocation, who alone can do me Right: Hoping that, that Venerable Body, will, as their Predecessors in like Cases, have done before them, Exer∣cise their Priviledge to their own Honour, and the comfort and satisfaction of the Injur'd. Nor does Expulsion, as far as I can understand, at all weaken my Right of Appealing, how craftily soever it was design'd to destroy it. The University, and a College, I am told, are Two distinct Corporations, and I may forfeit the Priviledge of the one, and retain the Right of the other. The King has Power to Found a College in the University, but he cannot make the Members of his College, Members of the University; that requires an Act of the Con∣vocation, to Receive and Incorporate them into the University. We have a Modern Instance of this, Worcester-College has all the Rights of a College, that is, By the King's Letters Parents it is become a Corporation; but the Fellows of that College, as such, are not Members of the University: So that the Privi∣leges of the University, and of a College may subsist apart, and the Right of the one, may be enjoy'd by him who is no Mem∣ber of the other. Otherwise indeed, a Fellowship wou'd be a very precarious thing, if a Man must be depriv'd of it when∣ever a Master of a College in his Passion, or Prejudice, resolv'd to have him Expell'd. But this, with the Right of Con∣vocation, which otherwise, I had design'd herewithall to have sent you, being to be Argu'd speedily in Westmin∣ster-Hall, I shall not further enlarge upon't, but patiently expect the Determination of the Court. Wishing there∣fore, whatever becomes of my Appeal, that Unanimity and Concord may for ever flourish in that Society to which, upon many Accounts, I am so much oblig'd to, and, that none ever
after me may have the like Reason to complain of Dr. Charlett, I conclude, Yours to command, C. U. THESE are to Certifie, whom it may Concern, That we, the several Fellows, Masters, Batchelors, and Commoners of University-College in Oxon, whose Names are here subscrib'd, Have for some time known C. U. [A. B.] Member of the said. Col∣lege, most of us Five, or Six Years, some more or fewer accord∣ing to our several standings, and that we can safely, and with a good Conscience Testifie, That he the said C. U. according to the best of our several Observations, has behav'd himself soberly and honestly in his Conversation, diligently and industriously in his Studies, and has been ever held of good Repute, as well for his Learning, as Manners: In token whereof we set our several Hands. Fellows John Naylor. John Hinckley. Alb. Bertie. John Nevile. Robert Clavering. Bachelors. Ryley. Greenwood. Burlton. Nicholson. Cobden. Masters Tho. Coney. George Carter. Late of University. John Potter. Late of University. Matthew Holbech. Late of University. Commoners. Ibbetson. Thornhill. Nash. Banner. Burman. Heyward.
