W2498B R219991 99831431 35894
A CHARTER of Regulations to the East-India Company, by Their Sacred Majesties King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, under the Great Seal of England, Dated the 28th. of September, 1694.
WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of England, &c. To the Governour and Com∣pany of Merchants, Trading into the East-Indies, &c. Greeting. Whereas by our Charter, Dated the 7th. October, 1693. We did appoint Sir Thomas Cooke, Francis Tyssen Esq; &c. to be a Body Corporate and Politick, by the Name of the Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trad∣ing to the East-Indies. under the Provisoes therein mentioned. and did grant them several Liberties, Powers, &c. wherein is the Proviso fol∣lowing of several Directions, &c. viz. which if the Company don't conform unto if made before the 29th. Sept. 1694, and put under the great Seal, then We may make void these Presents,
and the Powers and things herein contained, to cease and be void. And whereas by Our other Charter of the 11th. Nov. last, several Regulations, &c. are prescribed pursuant to that Proviso. and also the following clause, obliging the Company to act according to such Orders, Regulations, &c. as we should make and put under Our Great Seal before the 29th. of Sept. 1694. Or else to be liable to have this Charter, and that of the 7th. October determined, and the Powers and Grants therein contained, NOW KNOW YEE, That in pursuance of the said two Provisoes,
And by vertue of what o∣therwayes we may lawfully put in execution, We do by this Writing under our great Seal, by Advice of our Privy Counc Order and Direct, That every Person qualified to Vote by our last Charter, or otherwise in a General or other Court, to be hereafter holden by the Company, shall before admittance to give in such Votes, take an Oath before the Go∣vernour, or Deputy, or any one of the Committees. if required by any Member of the Company having 1 l. Stock in his own Right, and not in Trust.) That he or the so desiring to Vote is then really intituled to so much Stock for his or her own Use and Right, and not in Trust, as qualifies them to give in the Votes they desire. Which Oath the Governour, Deputy, or any of the Com∣mittees, are required to ad∣minister. Every Person not taking such Oath, shall not be ad∣mitted to give any Vote, nor their Votes be of any avail. None to be Free but Subjects Natural Born or Indenized. Every Person who by plura∣lity of Votes shall be Elected Governour, Deputy, or of the Committee, shall before his being, or acting as such, take an Oath in the General Court before the Governour, &c. that at the time of his Electi∣on and taking his Oath, he is intituled in his own right and not in trust, to so much Stock as qualifies him for such Election.
Which Oath the said Gover∣nour, or Deputy, &c. are required to administer. And if such Person do not take the same, his Election shall be void, and the Court shall proceed to a new Election, according to the Directions in this and the last Charter. No Person or Persons that is or shall be Chosen Gover∣nour, or Deputy of the Com∣pany, shall continue in their places for more than two Years together. And no Person that hath served therein two years to∣gether, shall be capable of being re-elected till two years after. If above sixteen of the last years Committee-men be new Chosen at the next An∣nual Election, the Supernu∣meraries who have the few∣est Votes, their Election shall be void, and others chose in their stead, so that at least Eight new ones shall be E∣lected. And whereas by the Charter of the 11th. Nov. 1693. We did Order, That the said Governour and Company should not Licence any Per∣son to Trade, or Ship to Sail, into or from the East-Indies on private Account, on pain of making void the last two Charters. Now we do hereby direct, That the said Governour and Company may Licence the Commanders and Mari∣ners of their Ships, to trade in such Commodi∣ties, and to such a value as a General Court shall allow of, and not otherwise.
Due Entries being made thereof, and the Duties paid at the Custom-House, before the Landing, notwith∣standing the said Charter. And whereas by the said Charter we Ordered the said Governour and Company Yearly to Export 100000 l. worth of Goods of English Manufacture, &c. To the nd the Truth there∣of may appear, We do hereby Order them to give  unto Us, in Our Privy Council, in the Month of August Yearly, a true Account fairly writ∣ten under the Governour or Deputies Hand of the Na∣ture, Quantity, Value and Cost of such Goods Export∣ed Yearly. And from what place. And Oath made thereof by the Proper Officers of the Company. And We do hereby Order, that none of the Goods so Exported shall be again Landed in England, or carried else-where than within the Limits of the Companies Charter. If any Six or more of the Adventurers, having each 1000 l. or more, in his own Right, and not in Trust, and qualified to Vote by the last Charter, shall at any time hereafter by Writing under their Hands, delivered to, or left for the Governour, or De∣puty, at the East-India-House, Request a General Court may be called. The Governour, or Deputy, shall within Eight Days af∣ter Summons a General Court accordingly. Which, or any other, shall not be broken up without Consent of the Maority of the present Members capa∣ble to Vote.
All private Committees of the Company shall be Cho∣sen by the General Court. No Governour, Deputy, nor any of the Committees, shall Lend any of the Companies Money, unless previously Authoriz∣ed by the General Court. No Goods of the Compa∣nies shall be delivered to a∣ny Person, till the Money be actually paid for the same, or Security given to the Companies Satisfaction. No Court of Committees, nor any Members of the said Company, shall by any Agreement bind the General Stock of the Company, for Receiving or Delivering Stock, without leave of a General Court. The Companies Cash shall be entirely kept in Effective Money within their own House. And always be in the Custo∣dy of Three at least of the Committees of the Treasury. And by them issued out to the Cashire, as the Compa∣nies Occasions require. No Sum of Money shall be allowed on the Companies Account, but where it shall appear when, to whom and for what it has been paid; Except only where the Ge∣neral Court shall previously Authourize any to dispose thereof without Account.
The Company notwithstand∣ing the Clause afore-recited of the Late King Charles's Charter, Dated the Third of April, 1561. Shall after two Years hence, In Case We shall require the same in Writing, make present payment of their Customs, due on Goods by them im∣ported, and be allowed Discount of Four Pounds Ten Shillings per Cent. per Annum, in Lieu of the said two Six Months, and Six Pounds Five Shil∣lings per Cent. on Additional Duties, in Lieu of the Four Three Months allow'd by Act of Parliament. If the said Charters of the 7th. October, and 11th. Nov. or any other Charters of the Companies, or these presents, or the Con∣tinuance thereof in whole or part, shall not be profitable to Us or Our Realm. Then after Three Years warning, all the said Char∣ters shall be determined and Void.
And the said Governour and Company shall no longer continue a Corporation. The Governour and Compa∣ny shall, by Writing, under their Common Seal, to be Ap∣proved of by Our Attorney or Sollicitor General, declare their Acceptance of and Submission to the two Last, and this present Charter. And in Default thereof, not Act as a Corporation.
WILLIAM and MARY, By the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, &c. To the Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, and to all others to whom these Presents shall come Greeting. Whereas in and by a certain Charter, or Letters Patents, under our Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster, the Seventh day of October now last past, We did make, constitute, ordain, declare and appoint Sir Thomas Cooke Knt. and one of the Alder∣men of our City of London, Francis Tyssen Esq; George Earl of Berkeley, and divers other persons therein named and described, should be a body Corporate and Politick, in Deed and in Name, by the Name of the Governour and Company of Merchants of Lon∣don, Trading into the East-Indies, under, and subject to the Provisoes and Conditions, and upon the Terms therein mentioned, and we did thereby give and grant unto the said Governour and Company, and their Successors several Liberties, Powers, Priviledges and Immunities, in which said Charter or Letters Patents, there is, amongst other things therein contained, a Clause or Proviso in the Words, or to the effect following, that is to say, Provided always, and upon condition nevertheless, and Our express Will and Meaning is, that if the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, do not accept of, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter, Act according to, and put in due and effectual Execution, and submit and conform in all things unto such orders, directions, additions, alterations, restrictions and qualifications relating to the constitution, continuance, determination, rights, powers or priviledges of the said Company, or the Government thereof, or of the said Governour and Company, or the encourage∣ment, management. regulation or advancement of Trade, or of the present or future Joynt-Stock of the said Company, or con∣cerning any future Subscriptions to be made by way of increase or addition to the Joynt-Stock, or for ascertaining the true values of the said Joynt-Stock, at and during the times of any such future Subscrip∣tions, which, and as We, Our Heirs, or Successors, by the Advice of Our or Their Privy Council, shall from time to time, at any time before the Nine and Twentieth day of September, which shall be in the Year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety and Four, think fit to make, in∣cert, limit, direct, appoint or express in or by any further or other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or Instrument under Our or Their Great Seal of England, Then, and in each and every of the Cases aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors by Letters Patents, under Our or Their Great Seal of England, to determine, revoke and make void these Presents, and the Grant hereby made, and from and immediately
after the passing of such Letters Patents of revocation or determi∣nation under the Great Seal of England, These Presents, and all the Powers, Priviledges, Grants and other things herein contained shall cease, determine, and be absolutely void to all intents and purposes, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding. And where∣as, in and by one other Charter, or Letters Patents, under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the Eleventh day of November now last past, divers orders, directions, additions, alte∣rations, restrictions, regulations, qualifications, and other matters and things are contained and prescribed, pursuant to the said Pro∣viso in the said first Charter, and therein is also contained a Clause or Proviso in the Words, or to the effect following, that is to say, Provided alwayes, and upon condition nevertheless, and our express Will and Meaning is, and we do hereby order, direct and appoint, and the said Governour and Company do hereby agree, That if said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, do not accept of, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter Act according to, and put in due and effectual Execution, and submit and conform in all things unto, as well all and every the orders, directions, additions, al∣terations, restrictions, qualifications, matters and things herein before expressed, as also all and every such further, and other orders, di∣rections, additions, alterations, restrictions and qualifications relating to the Constitution, Continuance, Determination, Rights, Powers or Priviledges of the said Company, or the Government thereof, or of the said Governour and Company, or the Encouragement, Ma∣nagement, Regulation or Advancement of Trade, or of the pre∣sent or future Joynt-Stock of the said Company, or concerning any future Subscriptions to be made by way of increase or addition to the Joynt-Stock, or for ascertaining the true values of the said Joynt-Stock, at and during the times of any such future subscripti∣ons, which, and as We, Our Heirs or Successors, by the Advice of Our or their Privy Council, shall from time to time, at any time before the Nine and twentieth day of September, which shall be in the Year One thousand Six hundred Ninety four, think fit to make, incert, limit, direct, appoint or express in or by any fur∣ther or other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or In∣strument under Our or their Great Seal of England, then and in each and every of the Cases aforesaid, it shall and may be lawful to and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, by Letters Patents under Our or their Great Seal of England, to determine, revoke and make void, as well these Presents, and the Grant hereby made, as also the said Charter or Letters Patents, bearing date the Seventh day of October last past, herein before mentioned, and all and every, or any the matters and things therein and herein contained; and from and immediately after the passing of such Letters Patents of Revo∣cation or Determination under the Great Seal of England, as well these Presents, as also the said Charter or Letters Patents, bearing Date the Seventh day of October last past and all the Powers, Pri∣viledges, Grants, and other things therein and herein contained, shall cease, determine, and be absolutely void to all intents and purposes, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding, As in and by the said several Letters Patents, relation being thereunto respectively had, may more fully and at large appear. NOW KNOW YEE, That by vertue and in pursuance of the said two Provisoes in the said Charters and Letters Patents mentioned, and by vertue of all other Powers, Wayes and Means, which We
have, or can, or lawfully may make use of, or put in Execution, We do by this Writing or Instrument under Our Great Seal of England, by the Advice of our Privy Council, Order and Direct, That every Person who by having One Thousand Pounds, or more, in the Stock of the said Company, is or shall be by vertue of our said last Charter, or otherwise qualified or intituled to give one or more Vote or Votes in any General or other Court to be at any time or times hereafter holden for the said Company, shall at the time of holding of every such General or other Court, and before such persons shall be admitted to give any Vote or Votes in any such Court, take an Oath before the Governour of the said Company or his Deputy, or some one or more of the Twenty four Committees of the said Company then present, if thereunto re∣quired by any Members of the said Company then present, having One Thousand pound or more, in the Stock of the said Company in his own Right, and not in Trust for any other, That he or she so offering or desiring to give any Vote or Votes in any such Court, than is really and bona fide Interested in and Entituled unto so much of the Stock of the said Company for his or her own Use, and in his or her own Right, and not in Trust for any other Person or Per∣sons as doth Entitle him or her according to the Directions and Qualifications mentioned in Our said last Charter, unto such Vote or Number of Votes in a General, or other Court, which he or she then does or shall Give in, or Offer or Desire to Give, (which Oath the Governour or his Deputy, or some one or more of the Twenty Four Committees of the said Company Then present, shall, and are hereby Authorized and Required, from time to time, to Administer accordingly). And if any such Person or Persons so Required to take such Oath, shall Refuse or Neglect to take the same, Then he or she so Neglecting or Refusing, shall not be Ad∣mitted, nor have any Capacity to Give any Vote or Votes in any such General, or other Court, Nor shall any such Vote or Votes be of any avail, Any thing in the said recited Charters, or either of them, or other matter or thing whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding. And We do hereby further, in like manner, Order and Direct, That no Person shall be admitted to the Free∣dom of the said Company, that at the time of such Admission shall not be a Natural born Subject of this Realm, or Naturalized or Indenized. And we do hereby further, in like manner, Order and Di∣rect, That every Person who shall by Plurality of Votes be Elected Governour or Deputy Governour, or any of the Twenty Four Com∣mittees of the said Company, shall before he take upon him to be, or to Act as Governour, Deputy, or one of the Twenty Four Committees, take an Oath in the General Court of the Company, before the Governour, or Deputy, or one or more of the Twenty Four Committees of the said Company, (not being a party con∣cerned) That such Person so Elected Governour, or Deputy Go∣vernour, or one of the Committee at the time of such Election, or Giving of Votes as aforesaid, was, and at the time of taking such Oath is, really and bona fide Interested in, and Entituled unto, so much of the Stock of the said Company in his own Right, and to his own proper Use, and not in Trust for any other, As by, and according to Our said last Charter, Doth Qualifie and Capacitate such Person or Persons to be Elected Governour or Deputy Gover∣nour, or one of the Committees of the said Company respectively, Which Oath the said Governour, Deputy Governour, or any one of the said Twenty Four Committees (not being a party Concerned
in that present question) is, And are hereby respectively, from time to time Authorized, and Required, to Administer accordingly; and If such Person or Persons so Elected, into any the said Offices or Places respectively, shall Refuse or Neglect to take the same, Then the Election, and Votes given for the Election of every such Person so Refusing shall be void. And the said Company shall from time to time proceed to a New Election, according to the Direction and Qualifications in this and our said last Charter, as if the said Refuser or Refusers had never been Chosen, And as if no Votes had been given for such his Choice and Election. And We do hereby further, in like manner, Order and Direct, That no Person or Persons that Now is, or hereafter shall be Chosen Governour, or Deputy Governour of the said Company, shall continue in the Office or Place of Governour, or Deputy Governour, or either of them for more than Two Years together; And that no Person or Persons that shall have served in both or either of the said Offices of Governour, or Deputy Governour of the said Company by the space of Two Years, together, shall be Chosen, or Capable of being Chosen, into either of the said two Offices or Places, within the space of Two Years next after the end of the last of those Two Years wherein he served either as Governour, or Deputy Gover∣nour. And we do also hereby, in like manner, further Order and Direct, That the Twenty Four Committees of the said Company shall be Yearly Chosen; and if at such Election, more than Sixteen of those for the last Year shall be Chosen, The Election of so many of them as are above the Number of Sixteen, and have the fewest Voices, shall be Void, and others Chose in their stead, so that there shall be Yearly, at least, Eight that were not of the Com∣mittee the precedeing year. And whereas, in and by the said last mentioned Charter, bearing Date the Eleventh day of November, in the Fifth Year of Our Reign, It is provided, And We did thereby Order and Appoint, That the said Governour and Com∣pany of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, or their Successors, should not at any time then after, Licence or per∣mit any Person or Persons whatsoever, to Trade or Traffique, or any Ship or Ships, to Sail or pass into, or from any part of the East-Indies, on any private Account whatsoever, and that if any such Licence, or Permission, should be granted contrary to Our said Order and Appointment therein before declared, That then, and In each such Case, as well the said Last mentioned Charter, or Letters Patents, as also the said Letters Patents bearing Date the said Seventh day of October last past, and all and every the Powers, Grants, Matters and Things in both the said Letters Patents contained, should Cease, Determine, and be utterly Void to all Intents and Purposes, Any thing to the Contrary notwithstanding. Now We do hereby Order and Direct, That the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, May at any time hereafter Licence, and permit, any Commanders, Officers and Seamen, which from time to time, or at any time hereafter, shall be Employed by the said Company, in the Ships of, or belonging to, or in the Service of, the said mompany, and set out upon the said Companies Account onely, to Trade and Traffique in, and to Im∣port in such Ships, from any part of the East-Indies, for and upon the Account of such Commanders, Officers or Seamen, only such Commodities and Goods, and such proportion thereof, as shall be from time to time permitted, and allowed of, by the Majority of Votes at a General Court of the said Company for the time being,
and not otherwise; Due Entries being made thereof, and the Duties Due for the same, being paid, or secured, at, or in, our Custom-House of the place where the same shall be Imported, before the Landing thereof; The said last-mentioned Provisoe, Direction, or Appointment, contained in the said last-mentioned Charter, to the Contrary notwithstanding. And Whereas, We did also in, and by, the said last-mentioned Charter, or Letters Patents, Order and Appoint. That the said Governour and Company of Mer∣chants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, should Yearly, and every Year, During the Continuance of the said Joint-Stock, Export, and Carry, to the East-Indies, so many Goods of the Growth, Product, or Manufacture of this Our King∣dom of England, as should Amount to the Value of One Hundred Thousand Pound at the least. To the End therefore, That the Truth and Certainty thereof may be made to appear to Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do hereby, in like manner, Order and Direct, That the said Governour and Company, for the time being, and their Successors, Do and Shall give in, and deliver, unto Us, Our Heirs and Successors, in Our, or Their Privy Council, Yearly, and every Year, in the Month of August, A True Account, or Inventory, fairly Written and Signed by the Governour, or Deputy Governour, of the said Company for the time being, Containing the Nature, Quantity, Quality, Value and Prime Cost, of all such Goods of the Growth, Product or Manufacture of this Our King∣dom of England, as in the last precedeing Year have been Exported, and Carried to the East-Indies, on the said Companies Account, Together with the Place, Town, or Port, from whence the said Goods were Exported to the East-Indies, And, That Oath be made of the Truth of such Account or Inventory, by the proper Officers, or Servants, of the said Company, concerned in such Ex∣portation. And We do hereby further, in like manner, Order and Direct, That None of the said Goods, or Commodities, so Ex∣ported, shall be again Landed in Our Kingdom of England, Domi∣nion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, or be carried to any other Countrey or Place, but into the East-Indies, or some place within the Limits, or Bounds, of the said Companies Charter. And We do hereby, in like manner, further Order and Direct, That in Case any Six, or more, of the Members of the said Company, who shall then each have in the Stock of the said Company, One Thousand Pounds, or more, for his own Use, and in his own Right, and not in Trust, or for any other, and qualified to Vote in a General, or other Court of the said Company, as by the said last-mentioned Charter is Directed, shall at any time or times hereafter, by any Writing under their Hands, to be delivered unto, or Left for the Governour, or Deputy Governour, of the said Company for the time being, at the East-Inia-House, or other usual place of Meeting of the said Company, Request the said Governour, or Deputy Governour, to Call a General Court of the said Company, That then, and so often, the said Governour, or Deputy Gover∣nour, shall within Eight Days next after such Writing shall be Delivered, or Left as aforesaid, Summon a General Court accord∣ingly; And that the same being so Assembled, as also any other General Court, which shall be at any time hereafter Assembled, shall not be broken up, or Dissolved, without the Consent of the Majority of the Members of the said Company then present, and Capable to Vote in such General Court as aforesaid. And We do hereby further, in like manner, Order and Direct, That all and every
Private Committees of the said Company, shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, be Chosen and appointed by the Majority of a General Court of the said Company, and not by the Court of Committees of the said Company. And We do hereby, in like manner, further Order and Direct, That the Governour, Deputy Governour, and Committees of the said Company for the time being, or any of them, shall not Lend, Nor shall it be in the Power of them, or any of them, to Lend any Money of or belonging to the said Com∣pany, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, unless previously Enabled or Authorized to do the same by the Majority of the Ge∣neral Court. And further we do, in like manner, Order and Direct, That No Goods whatsoever, of or belonging to the said Company, shall be delivered to any Person or Persons whatsoever, until the Money be actually paid for the same, or such Security given, as shall be approved of by a Majority of Votes, in a Court of Com∣mittees of the said Company. And We do also hereby, in like man∣ner, Order and Direct, That no Court of Committees of the said Company, or any Member or Members of the said Company, Do, or shall at any time or times hereafter, Make or Enter into any Contract, Article or Agreement, with any Person or Persons what∣soever, whereby to Oblige, or by means or reason whereof, the General Stock of the said Company, or any part thereof, shall or may be Obliged or Bound, either for Receiving or Delivering of Stock at a Price Agreed on, without Leave first had or obtained in that behalf, by a Majority of Votes in a General Court of the said Company. And We do hereby, in like manner, further Order and Direct, That the Cash of and belonging to the said Company, shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter, be entirely kept in Effective Money, within the Companies House in Leaden-hall-Street, London, Or in such other House or Place where the said Company shall meet, and sit for the Dispatch of the Companies Business. And further, That the Money, and Cash of the said Company for the time being, so to be kept as aforesaid, shall always be and Remain in the Custody of Three at least of the Committees of the Treasury, of, or belonging to, the said Company for the time being, to be by them issued out to the Cashier of the said Company for the time being, in such Sums as the Companies Oc∣casions shall or may from time to time Require. And We do hereby, in like manner, further Order and Direct, That No Sum or Sums of Money whatsoever shall be allowed by or upon the Account of the said Company, but in such Case, where it shall appear when, to whom, and for what, such Sum or Sums of Money was, or were paid; Except in such Cases where, by Authority of a General Court of the said Company, any Committee, or Member or Mem∣bers of the said Company, shall be previously Authorized, and Im∣powered to Dispose of the same without account. And whereas, Our Late Royal Uncle King Charles the Second, in and by certain Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing Date the Third day of April, in the Thirteenth Year of His Reign, Did for Him, His Heirs and Successors, Grant to the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, That when, and as often as any Custom, Poundage, Subsidy, or other Duties should be due and payable unto the said Late King Charles the Second, His Heirs or Successors, for any Goods, Wares or Merchandizes whatsoever, to be returned out of, or from, any the Islands, Ports, Havens, Cities, Towns or Places therein mentioned, unto the Port of London, or
any of the Havens, Creeks, Members or Places to the same Port belonging, That the Customers, and all other Officers for the time being, of the said Late King, His Heirs or Successors, for or con∣cerning the Receipt of Custom, Poundage, Subsidy or other Duties, to whom it should or might appertain, should upon the Request of the Governour and Company of the said Merchants of London, Trading to the East-Indies, or any their Agents, Factors or Assigns, Give unto the said Governour and Company, their Agents, Factors or Assigns Six Months time for the payment of the one half, and after Those Six Months ended, Other Six Months for the Payment of the other half of their said Customs, Poundage, or other Sub∣sidies or Duties, Receiving good and sufficient Bond with Surety, to the use of the said late King Charles the Second, his Heirs and Successors, for the true payment of the same accordingly, And up∣on Receipt of the said Bond with Surety, from time to time to Give unto the said Governour and Company of Merchants of Lon∣don, Trading into the East-Indies, for the time being, their Agents, Factors or Assigns, Their Cocquets, or other Warrants, to take out and receive on Land the same Goods, Wares and Merchan∣dies, by vertue thereof, without any Disturbance. And whereas Wee Think it Requisite for our Service, that some Alteration be made in that Matter, We do therefore by these presents, in like man∣ner, Order and Direct, That the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies and their Suc∣cessors, Do and shall, from and after, the end of Two Years com∣mencing from the Date hereof, (In Case We, Our Heirs or Suc∣cessors, by any Writing under Our, or their Royal Sign Manual, shall require the same) Make present payment of all the Customs, Subsidies, Additional and other Duties, Due and payable to Us, Our Heirs or Successors, for such Goods and Commodities as after the end of the said Two Years shall be Imported into Our Port of London, or any the Havens, Creeks, Members or Places to the same Port belonging, by or upon the Account, or in the Name of the said Company, And in consideration of such present payment, the said Governour and Company, and their Successors, shall be allowed to Deduct and Discount after the Rate of Four Pounds Ten Shillings per Cent. for a Year, for all the said Customs and Duties so paid, in Lieu and Recompence for the two Six Months, given them by the said Charter for payment thereof. And shall also be further allowed for all the Additional Impositions and Duties now payable by the said Company, (other than the Duties of Tonnage and Poundage) after the rate of Six Pounds and Five Shillings per Cent. by way of Discount for present pay∣ment, in Lieu and Recompence for the Four Three Months al∣lowed for payment thereof, by the several Acts of Parliament by which the said Duties are granted. And We do hereby, in like man∣ner, Order and Direct, That if it shall appear to us Our Heirs or Successors, That the said two Charters, or Letters Patents, bear∣ing Date the Seventh day of October, and the Eleventh of No∣vember now last past, or any other Charters, or Letters Patents, heretofore made, or Granted to the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, or these Presents, any or either of them, or the continuance of them, any or either of them, in the whole, or in any part thereof, shall not be profitable to Us, Our Heirs, or Successors, or to this Our Realm, That then, and from thenceforth, upon and after Three Years warning to be given to the said Company by Us, Our Heirs or
Successors, under Our or their Privy Seal or Sign Manual, The said several Letters Patents, bearing Date the said Seventh day of Octo∣ber, and Eleventh day of November now last past, and other the said former Charters or Letters Patents, and the Regulations in these Presents contained, and every of them, shall Cease, be Void, and Determined, to all Intents, Constructions and Purposes. And the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trad∣ing into the East-Indies, from and after the end of the said three Years, shall not Continue to be, nor shall Act as a Corporation, or Body Politick, but shall be wholly Determined; Any thing therein or herein contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And We do hereby also, in like manner, Order and Direct, That the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, Do and shall, before the First day of December next Ensuing, by an Instrument in Writing, under their Common Seal, to be approved of by our Attorney, or Solicitor General, Declare their Acceptance of, and Submission unto the said Charters of the Seventh of October, and Eleventh of November last past, and all and every the Regulations, Matters and Things therein and in either of them contained; And also their Acceptance of, and Sub∣mission unto these Presents, and the several Matters and Things therein contained. And if they shall Refuse, or Neglect, so to do, that Then the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading to the East-Indies, from and after the said First day of December next, shall not continue to be, nor shall Act as a Corporation, or Body Politick, but shall be wholly Determined, any thing to the contrary Notwithstanding. In VVitness whereof, VVe have Caused these Our Letters to be made Patents. VVitness Our Selves at VVestminster, the Eight and Twentieth Day of September, in the Sixth Year of Our Reign. per ipsos m & Reginam. Pigott.
