W3023 R25185 8791868 41833
STATƲTA PACIS: Or A perfect Table of all the Sta∣tutes (now in force) which any way concerne the Office of a JUSTICE of Peace. Cleerly also setting down the se∣verall duties of Sheriffes, Head-officers of Corporations, Stewards in Leets, Constables, and other Officers, so far forth as the said Statutes do in any sort concern them. Faithfully collected, and al∣phabetically digested un∣der apt Titles. By E. W. Horace. Quicquid praecipies esto brevis, ut citò dicta Percipiant animi dociles, teneántque fideles. LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher and J. Young. An. Dom. 1644.
The Preface. ALleit this Table holds forth to publike view a perspicuous Compen∣dium of such a forme of subordinate govern∣ment, for the tranquil∣lity and quiet of this Realm, as no part of the Christian world hath the like, as Sir Ed∣ward Cook affirmeth in the last part of his Institutes, cap. 31. Neverthelesse, the Au∣thor thereof would not have been guilty of so much presumption, as to have suffered it to see the light, had he not been earnestly impor∣tuned so to doe by a worthy friend of his, very well experienced in that kind of Government; upon this assurance, that it might be usefull, not only for him that made it, as most Tables are; but likewise for all others, that desire to he acquainted with the jurisdiction of Justices
of Peace; as well those who are to govern by it, as others that are to yeeld obedience unto it. For in this little volume you may readi∣ly discover the substance of all the Statutes (now in force) which any way concern the Of∣fice of a Justice of Peace, alphabetically di∣gested under proper Titles, and set down in or∣der of time, as they were made. In tenui, sed non tenuis fructúsve, la∣bórve. Howbeit, professing it self nothing else but a Table, let the Reader be admonished not to depend too much upon the letter thereof; but rather to have recourse to the Statutes at large, when and as often as he shall make the least scruple or doubt of any thing therein a∣bridged: Neverthelesse, it is confidently be∣leeved, that he shall find the sence of the Sta∣tutes therein mentioned, to be as plainly and fully reported as can possibly be expected from a Table: And forasmuch as a Just. of P. receives Instructions for the execution of his Office, not only from statute law, but likewise from his Commission and Oath of Office, behold them also here premised; to the end that upon view of all of them together, hee may be cleerly directed what course to run. The Commission, as it was reformed Ter. Mich
32, & 33. Eliz. by all the then Judges of Eng∣land, (as is testified by Sir Edward Cook, ubi supra) hereafter followeth in these words; Carolus Dei gratia Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, & Hiberniae Rex, fidei defensor, &c. Praedilecto & fideli A. B. &c. necnon C. D. E. F. &c. salutem. Sciatis, quod as∣signavimus vos, conjunctim & divisim, & quemlibet vestrum Justiciarios nostros ad pacem nostram in Comitatu nostro B. conservandam, ac ad omnia ordinationes & statuta pro bono pacis nostrae, ac pro conservatione ejusdem, & pro quieto re∣gimine & gubernatione populi nostri e∣dita, in omnibus & singulis suis articulis in dicto Comitatu nostro (tam infra li∣bertates, quam extra) juxta vim, formam, & effectum eorundem, custodiendum, & custodiri faciendum. Et ad omnes, con∣tra formam ordinationum vel statuto∣rum illorum aut eorum alicujus, in Co∣mitatu praedicto delinquentes, casti∣gandum & puniendum, prout secundum formam ordinationum & statutorum illorum suerit faciendum, Et ad omnes illos qui alicui, vel aliquibus de populo nostro de corporibus suis, vel de incen∣dio
domorum suarum, minas fecerint, ad sufficientem securitatem de pace vel bono gestu suo erga nos & populum nostrum inveniendam coram vobis, seu aliquo vestrum venire faciendum: Et si hujusmodi securitatem invenire re∣cusaverint, tunc eos in prisonis nostris (quousque hujusmodi securitatem inve∣nerint) salvò custodiri faciendum. Assignavimus etiam vos, & quosli∣bet duo, vel plures vestrum (quorum aliquem vestrum A. B. C. D. E. F. &c. unum esse volumus) Justiciarios nostros ad inquirendum per Sacramen∣tum proborum & legalium hominum de Comitatu praedicto (per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit) de omni∣bus & omnimodis feloniis, veneficiis, incantationibus, sortilegiis, arte ma∣gica, transgressionibus, forstallariis, re∣gratariis, ingrossariis, & extortionibus quibuscunque: Ac de omnibus & sin∣gulis aliis malefactis & offensis (de quibus Justiciarii pacis nostrae legiti∣me inquirere possunt, aut debent) per quoscunque & qualitercunque in Co∣mitatu praedicto factis five perpetratis, vel imposterum ibidem fieri vel attem∣ptari
contigerit: Ac etiam de omni∣bus illis qui in Comitatu praedicto in conventiculis contra pacem nostram, in perturbationem populi nostri, seu vi armata ierunt, vel equitaverunt, sen imposterum ire vel equitare praesumpse∣rint: Ac etiam de omnibus iis, qui∣ibidem ad gentem nostram mayhe∣mandum vel interficiendum in insidiis jacuerunt, vel imposterum jacere prae∣sumpserint: Ac etiam de hostellari∣is, & aliis omnibus & singulis personis, qui in abusu ponderum vel mensura∣rum, five in venditione victualium, contra formam ordinationum & statu∣torum, vel eorum alicujus inde pro communi utilitate Regni nostri An∣gliae & populi nostri ejusdem editorum deliquerunt, vel attemptaverunt, seu imposterum delinquere, vel attemptare praesumpserint in Comitatu praedicto: Ac etiam de quibuscunque Vicecomiti∣bus, Ballivis, Seneschallis, Constabu∣lariis, custodibus Gaolarum, & aliis Of∣ficiariis, qui in executione Officiorum suorum (circa praemissa seu eorum ali∣qua) indebite se habuerint, aut impo∣sterum indebite se habere praesumpse∣rint;
aut tepidi, remissi, vel negligen∣tes fuerint, aut imposterum fore con∣tigerit in Comitatu praedicto: Et de omnibus & singulis articulis & circum∣stantiis, & aliis rebus quibuscunque, per quoscunque & qualitercunque in Comitatu praedicto factis five perpe∣tratis, vel quae imposterum ibidem fie∣ri vel attemptari contigerit, qualiter∣cunque praemissorum vel eorum alicu∣jus concernentibus plenius veritatem: Et ad indictamenta quaecunque sic co∣ram vobis, seu aliquibus vestrum capta five capienda, aut coram aliis nuper Ju∣sticiariis pacis in Comitatu praedicto facta five capta (& nondum termina∣ta) inspiciendum: Ac ad processus in∣de versus omnes & singulos sic indicta∣tos, vel quos coram vobis imposterum indictari contigerit (quousque capian∣tur, reddant se, vel utlagentur) facien∣dum & continuandum: Et ad omnia & singula felonias, veneficia, incantati∣ones, sortilegia, artes magicas, trans∣gressiones, forstallarias, regratarias, in∣grossarias, extortiones, conventicula, indictamenta praedicta, caeteraque o∣mnia & fingula praemissa secundum le∣ges
& statuta Regni nostri Angliae (pro∣ut in hujusmodi casu fieri consuevit aut debuit) audiendum & terminandum, & ad eosdem delinquentes & quemli∣bet eorum, pro delictis suis, per fines, redemptiones, amerciamenta, forisfa∣cturas, ac alio modo (prout secundum legem & consuetudinem Regni nostri Angliae, aut formam ordinationum vel statutorum praedictorum fieri consue∣vit aut debuit) castigandum & puni∣endum. Proviso semper, quod si casus diffi∣cultatis super determinatione aliquo∣rum praemissorum coram vobis, vel ali∣quibus duobus vel pluribus vestrum e∣venire contigerit; tunc ad judicium inde reddendum (nisi in praesentia u∣nius Justiciariorum nostrorum, de uno vel de altero Banco, aut unius Justi∣ciariorum nostrorum ad Assisas in Co∣mitatu praedicto capiendas assignato∣rum) coram vobis vel aliquibus duo∣bus vel pluribus vestrum minime pro∣cedatur. Et ideo vobis, & cuilibet vestrum mandamus, quod circa custodiam pacis, ordinationum, statutorum, & omni∣um
& singulorum caeterorum praemis∣sorum disigenter intendatis, & ad cer∣tos dies & loca quae vos vel aliqui hu∣jusmodi, duo vel plures vestrum (ut praedictum est) ad hoc provideritis, super praemissis faciatis inquisitiones, & praemissa omnia & singula audia∣tis, & terminetis, ac ea faciatis & expleatis in forma praedicta; facturi inde quod ad justiciam pertinet, se∣cundum legem & consuetudinem Re∣gni nostri Angliae: Salvis nobis a∣metciamentis, & aliis ad nos inde spe∣ctantibus. Mandamus etiam tenore praesenti∣um Vicecomiti nostro B. quod ad cer∣tos dies & loca (quae vos vel aliqui hu∣jusmodi duo vel plures vestrum, ut prae∣dictum est, ei ut praedictum est, scire feceritis) venire faciat coram vobis, vel hujusmodi duobus vel pluribus ve∣strum (ut dictum est) tot & tales pro∣bos & legales homines de Balliva sua (tam infra libertates quam extra) per quos rei veritas in praemissis melius sciri poterit & inquiri. Assignavimus denique te praefatum I. C. custodem Rotulorum pacis no∣strae
in dicto Comitatu nostro: Ac pro∣pterea tu, ad dies & loca praedicta, brevia, praecepta, processus, & indictamenta praedicta, coram te & dictis sociis tuis venire facias, ut ea inspiciantur, & de∣bito fine terminentur, sicut praedictum est. In cujus rei testimonium, &c. Datum, &c. As concerning the Oath of Office, Ju∣stices of Peace were at first enjoyned to take it, by the Statute of 13. R. 2.7. which Statute you may hereafter see in Title Justices of Peace, Clause 16. And afterwards by the Statutes of 1. E∣liz. 1. and 7. Jac. 6. they were also or∣dained to take the Oathes of Supremacie and Obedience, which Oathes you shall also hereafter finde in Title Recusants, 8, and 88. The Oath of Office is this that followes; Yee shall sweare, That as Justice of the Peace in the County of B. in all articles in the Kings Commission to you directed, yee shall doe equall right to the poore and to the rich, after your cunning, wit, and power, and after the lawes and customes of the
Realme, and statutes thereof made: And yee shall not be of counsell of any quarrell hanging before you: And that yee hold your Sessions after the forme of Statutes thereof made: And the issues, fines and amerciaments that shall happen to be made, and all for∣feitures which shall fall before you, yee shall cause to be entred without any concealment or imbezzelling, and truely send them to the Kings Exche∣quer. Yee shall not let, for gift or o∣ther cause, but well and truely you shall doe your Office of Justice of the Peace in that behalfe: And that you take nothing for your Office of Justice of the Peace to be done, but of the King, and fees accustomed, and costs limited by the Statute: And yee shall not direct or cause to be directed any Warrant (by you to be made) to the parties, but ye shall direct them to the Bailiffes of the said County, or other the Kings Officers (or ministers) or other indifferent persons to doe execution thereof. So help you God. Lastly, for conclusion of this Preface, I conceive it not impertinent to annex there∣unto
the substance of two Statutes, necessary to be knowne by every Iustice of Peace before he enters upon his Office; the first is 2. H. 5. Stat. 2. Cap. 1. which provides, That Ju∣stices of Peace shall be made of the most sufficient persons dwelling within the Counties, by the advice of the Chancellour, and of the Kings Counsell; and that no forraine dweller shall ex∣ercise such Office, except Lords, Ju∣stices of Assise, and chiefe Stewards of the lands and Seigniories belonging to the Duchie of Lancaster. And concer∣ning their residence in the Country, see more hereafter in Title Justices of Peace, 20. The other Statute is 4. H. 7. cap. 12. whereby the King commandeth all Justices of Peace diligently to exercise their Of∣fice; to the end, that his people by that meanes living in peace, and enjoying their owne, husbandry may flourish. Hee also chargeth all, both poore and rich, that shall suffer any grievance from others (wherein a Justice of Peace may intermeddle) that they forthwith make complaint thereof to the next Justice of Peace, and having no remedie there, to the Justices of
Assise, if it be not long before their co∣ming into that Country; but if it be, then to the Chancellour for the time being, and then the King will send for the Justice so neglecting his duty; and in case he shall find him guilty thereof, will cause him to be put out of the Com∣mission, and otherwise punished accor∣ding to his demerits, &c.
An Alphabeticall Table, by the perusall whereof the Reader may the better acquaint himselfe with the Titles contained in this Book. A ABjuration 1 Actions popular 1 Ale-houses 4 Aliens 10 Almes-houses 10 Archery 10 Apprentices 12 Armour 12 Arrests 12 Arrow heads 13 Artificers 13 Assise of Ale and Beer 13 Attainders 13 B Badger 13 Bailiffes 14 Bailinent 15 Bakers 17 Barges 17 Bastardie 17 Beer 18 Bell-metall 18 Benhurst hundred 18 Bigamie 18 Boat-men 18 Books 21 Bowes 23 Brasse 23 Bridges 25 Brewers 26 Buggery 27 Burglary 27 Burning of houses &c. 28 Butchers 29 Butter 29 Buts 30 Buying of Tiles 30 C Calves 30 Captains 30 Carre-men 41
Carrier 41 Cattle 41 Certificate 44 Cerciorari 44 Challenge 45 Champertie 45 Cheese 45 Citation 45 Clergie 45 Clerk of the Peace 48 Clerk of the Crowne 48 Clerk of Assise 48 Clerk of the Market 48 Cloth 48 Coine 48 Commons 48 Commissions 48 Conies 49 Conjuration 49 Conspiracie 49 Conspirators 49 Convictions 49 Cooks 49 Copper 49 Corn 49 Coroners 51 Costermongers 52 Cottages 52 Covin 53 Counterfeit letters &c. 53 Counterfeiters of the Ks. seal or coin 53 Coupers 53 Crosse-bowes 54 Currier 54 Cursing 54 Custome, Customers 54 Cutpurse 54 Cutting out of tongues, &c. 54 Cutting of a pond head 54 D Deeds 55 Deer 55 Divine Service 55 Dying, Dyers 55 Drapery 55 Drover 59 Drunkennesse 59 E Ecclesiasticall Court 60 Egyptians 61 Embracery 62 Endictments 62 Enquests 62 Escapes 62 Escheators 62 Estreats 63 Excommunicate per∣sons 64 Extortion 64
F Faires 64 Fasting-dayes 64 Feasants 64 Felonie 65 Felons goods 67 Fighting and quarrel∣ling 67 Fish, fishers, fishing, 68 Fish dayes 73 Fishmongers 75 Force, forcible entry 75 Forrests 77 Forestallers 77 Franchises 80 Fruiterers 80 Fuell 80 G Games 81 Gaole, Gaolers 81 Gold, Gold-smiths 81 Grain 82 Green wax 82 Guns 82 Gunners 85 H Habeas corpus 85 Hares 85 Hats 85 Hawkes 85 Herring 92 High-wayes 92 Holidayes 97 Horse bread 98 Horses 98 Hospitals 103 Hostlers 102 Houses of Correction 103 Huy and Crie 103 Hunters, Hunting 105 I Jesuits 108 Images 108 Imbezelling of a Re∣cord 108 Imbracery 108 Indictments 108 Informations 109 Ingrossers 110 Inholders 110 Inmates 111 Inquests 111 Inrolements 111 Inventories 111 Jurors 112 Justices of Peace 113 K Kidder 119 Kings Bench 119 L Labourers 119 Lader 132 Larcenie 132 Latten 132 Leather 133 Letters of Administra∣tion 144
Liberties 144 M Mainprise 145 Maintenance 145 Malt 150 Marches 148 Mariners 149 Markets 149 Marshals of the Kings Bench 149 Marshalsie 149 Marshes 149 Masons 149 Matrimony 149 Measures 152 Millers 152 Money 152 Mortuaries 153 Murder 154 N Newes 156 O Oatmeale 156 Oathes 156 Old field dike in the Isle of Ely 156 Ordinary 156 Outlawed persons 157 Outlawries 157 P Pannell 157 Pardon 157 Parks 158 Parliament 159 Partridges 160 Paving 160 Penall Statutes 160 Perjurie 160 Petty Treason 162 Pewter 162 Physicians 162 Pillory 163 Plague 163 Playes 165 Ponds 167 Poor people 167 Poulters 172 Powdike in Norfolke 172 Poysoning 172 Presentments 172 Priests 172 Prisons, Prisoners 173 Probat of Wils 175 Processe 175 Prophecies 175 Purveyors 176 Putting out of eies 188 Q Quarrelling 188 Quarter Sessions 188 R Rape, Ravishment 188 Record 190 Recusants 190 Regrators 224 Riots 224 Robbery 229
Rogues 229 Rome 230 S Sacraments 230 Sacriledge 237 School-masters 237 Scotland 237 Seminary Priests 237 Servants 237 Service divine 237 Sewer 237 Sheep 238 Sheriffes 238 Shipwrights 243 Shoomaker 243 Silver 243 Skinners 243 Souldiers 243 Stabbing 244 Stewards of Lects 244 Strangers 244 Supersedeas 244 Sundayes 245 Swans 245 Swearing 245 T Tanner 246 Testimoniall 246 Tiles 246 Tinne 247 Tithes 248 Toll 248 Transportation 248 Treason 249 Trespasse 249 V Vagabonds 250 Victuall, Victuallers 259 Vintners 261 Under-Sheriffe 262 Usury 262 W Wages 264 Wagoner 264 Wainman 264 Wales 264 Warrens 265 Watches 265 Watermen 266 Wax 266 Weares 266 Weights 266 Wild fowle 283 Wines 283 Witchcraft 285 Witnesse 286 Wood 286 Wooll 286 Writs 286 FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 40. line 7. read 33. and l. 33. r. 39. p. 52. l. 5, & 6. r. land, being free-hold and inheritance. p. 56. l. 4. r. 39. El. p. 69. l. 10. r. conservators of the Sta∣tutes. p. 70. l. 32. r. former. pag. 88. l. 26. r. Ste∣wards in Leets. p. 103. l. 6. r. felons. p. 105. l. ult. r. before himselfe. p. 116. l. 12. r. Banneret. p. 120. l. 5. r. within like time, shall. p. 150. l. 11. r. of this Sta∣tute. & l. 12. r. after it. p. 152. l. 22. r. from the King. p. 163. l. 19. r. of them. p. 167. l. 21. r. by two. p. 225. l. 33. r. 13. H. 4. p. 236. l. 32. r. 26. p. 238. l. 20. r. by the. p. 252. l. 28. r. as shall be assigned by six or more of the privie Councell, whereof the Lord Keeper, &c.
STATUTA PACIS: Or A perfect Table of all the Statutes (now in force) which any way concern the Office of a Justice of Peace. Abjuration, see Title Bailment 1. Hunters 1. Recusants 51, 52, 58, 61, 62, 69. and Weights 18. Actions popular, and Informa∣tions. I. STat. 4. H. 7. cap. 20.  Recovery in an action popular by Covin shall be no bar of an action su∣ed for the same thing bona fide. II. Here the defendant attainted of collu∣sion shall suffer two yeers imprisonment to be prosecuted within one yeer. III. No release of a common person shall in this case discharge an action popular. IV. Yet no collusion is in this case averra∣ble, where the point of the same action, or the collusion it self hath been tried by verdict.
V.  Stat. 18. El. 5. An Informer shall ex∣hibite his suit in proper person, and pursue it by himself, or by his Atturney in Court, and that by way of information or originall acti∣on, and shall have no deputie; and all this in pain of 10. l. and the pillory. VI. A note of the time of exhibiting the Information shall be truly taken, and from thenceforth it shall be accounted to be of re∣cord, before which time no processe shall is∣sue out upon it. VII. The Clerk that makes out the pro∣cesse shall endorse the Informers name, and also the statute upon which the information is grounded, in pain of xl. s. VIII. No Jury shall appear at Westmin∣ster for a tryall upon any penall law, when the offence was committed above 30. miles from Westminster, except the Atturney gene∣rall, for some reasonable cause, require the same, Clause 17, 18. IX. No Informer shall compound with any defendant before answer; nor then, but by consent of Court, in pain of 10. l. and the pillory. X. Where the Informer delaies or discon∣tinues his suit, or otherwise is non-suit, or overthrown, the Court shall assigne costs to the defendant, to be immediatly levied by ex∣ecution issuing out of the same Court. XI. Justices of Oyer and Terminer, Just. of Ass. and Just. of Peace in their Sessions have power to hear and determine these of∣fences.
XII. This Act shall not restraine Actions brought for maintenance, Champerty, buying of Titles, or Imbracerie, nor any certaine person, or body politique, to whom any for∣feiture or penaltie is especially limited, nor certaine officers, which have lawfully used to exhibite Informations 15. and 18. XIII. Stat. 31. El. 5.  Informers hereto∣fore restrained by order of any Court, shall not pursue Actions popular. XIV. In popular Actions the offence shall be layed to be done in the Countie, where in∣deed it was done; or otherwise, if the defen∣dant traverse and disprove that point, the plaintiffe shall be barred. 18. XV. This Act doth not restraine officers, which have lawfully used to exhibite infor∣mations, nor Actions brought for Champer∣tie, buying of Titles, extortion, offences against the stat. of 1. El. 11. (concerning the light landing of Marchandize and custome of sweet wines) concealing of Customes, &c. corrupt Usury, Forestalling, Regrating, or Ingrossing, when the penaltie shall amount to 20. l. or above: For in all these cases the of∣fence may be laid in any County. 18. XVI. Popular Actions, where the King on∣ly hath the forfeiture, shall bee commenced within two yeares; where he hath onely a part, and the Informer the rest, within one yeare; and in this last case upon default of prosecution, the King hath two yeares after that one yeare: but this is to be understood, where a shorter time is not limited by any stat.
XVII. All sutes for using unlawfull games, or any Art or Mystery without being brought up in it, and for not having Bowes and Ar∣rowes according to the statute, shall be pro∣secuted at the Assises or Sessions of the Countie, or at the Leete, within which the offence was committed, and not elsewhere. 18. XVIII.  Stat. 21. Jac. 4. Actions popular shall be prosecuted before Just. of Ass. Nisi prius. G.D. Oyer and Ter. or of P. onely in the Counties, where the Offences were com∣mitted, except for Recusancie, maintenance, Champertie, buying of Titles, concealing of Customes, &c. or transporting of Gold, Sil∣ver, Munition, Wooll, Wooll fels, or Leather. XIX. Upon default of proving, that the Of∣fence was committed in the same Countie, the defendant shall be found not guilty. XX. The Informer shall make oath, that the offence was committed in the same Coun∣tie, where the Action is laied, and within one yeare before the sute commenced. XXI. The defendant in a popular Action may plead the generall issue, and yet give spe∣ciall matter in evidence. Alehouses. Drunkennesse. I.  Stat. 5. & 6. E. 6.25. None shall keepe Alehouse without Licence granted ei∣ther in Sess. or by 2. Just. (1. Qu.) in paine of 3. dayes Imprisonment without Baile and not to be enlarged without Recognisance by him∣selfe and two Sureties, that he shall not keepe
Alehouse any longer; the certificate of which recognisance and offence shall be a sufficient conviction at the Qu. Sess. to fine him. xx. s. 30. II. The Qu. Sess. or two such Justices have power to put downe Alehouses at their discre∣tion, and to take Bond and suretie of Ale∣house-keepers by Recognisance, that they use not unlawfull games, or other disorder in their houses, for which Recognisance the parties bound shall pay 12. d. and whereof cer∣tificate shall be made at the next Qu. Sess. by the two Justices, that take it, in paine of five markes. III. Just. of P. have power to inquire after the breach of this last Recognisance, to award processe thereupon, and to heare and deter∣mine the same at their discretions. IV. This Act shall not restraine the selling of Ale and Beere in Townes where Faires are kept, during the time of the Faire. 34. V. Stat. 1. Jac. 9. No Innekeeper, Victu∣aller,  or Alehousekeeper shall suffer any town∣dwellers to sit tippling in his house, in paine of x. s. nor sell lesse then a full Ale quart of the best Ale or Beere, or two quarts of the small for one penny, in pain of 20. s. And here, the view of one Justice, or proofe by two wit∣nesses upon oath before one Justice, is suffici∣ent conviction. 16.22.23. & 28. VI. The penalties aforesaid are given to the poore of the parish, where the offence is com∣mitted, and are to be levied by the Constable, and Churchw. by distresse, which (after six dayes) may bee sold to satisfie the penaltie:
and for default of distresse the partie delin∣quent must suffer imprisonment, till hee pay the penaltie. VII. Here, every officer that neglects to levie the said penalties, or to certifie (within 20. daies) the default of distresse shall forfeit likewise to the poore xl. s. to be levied (upon warrant from one Justice) by distresse, and fale, as aforesaid, and upon default of distresse shall incurre commitment, as before. VIII. The Officers, or other parties recei∣ving these penalties shall be accomptable to the succeeding Officers, and other parishio∣ners. IX. None shall intermeddle to put this Act in execution within either of the Uni∣versities, save onely the Magistrates of the same. X.  Stat. 4. Jac. 4. None shall sell Ale or Beere to an unlicensed Alehouse-keeper, save only for the expence of his houshold, in paine of 6. s. 8. d. for every Barrell, and so more or lesse according to that proportion. XI. This Offence shall bee prosecuted in the Qu. Sess. and the forfeiture shall be equal∣ly divided betwixt the prosecutor and the poore of the Parish. XII. The Officer that shall levie the poores Moity shall deliver it to the Church∣wardens and Overseers of the Parish, or one of them, and they shall in convenient time make distribution thereof to the poore, in paine that both the Officer and they shall for∣feit respectively double the value of that Moi∣ty,
to be recovered and imployed, as afore∣said. XIII. Stat. 4. Jac. 5.  One convicted of Drunkennesse in Court, or before a Judge, or Justices in their severall limits, shall forfeit v.s. to the poore, to be levied and imploied, as the penalties of 1. Jac. 9. and in case hee be not able to pay it, shall remaine in the stockes six houres. 6.7. and 28. XIV. Here the officer which neglects to levie the said penaltie shall forfeit 10. s. to be levied and imployed, as aforesaid. XV. A towne-dweller, which is convict to sit tippling in any Inne, Victualling house, or Alehouse, by the view of one Justice, or the proofe of two witnesses, shall forfeit ten groates, to be levied and imployed, as afore∣said, and being not found able to pay it, shall remaine in the stooks foure houres. 24. XVI. These offences, as also those mentio∣ned in 1. Jac. 9. shall be inquired of, heard, and determined at the Assises, at the Sessions, in corporate townes, and in Leetes. XVII. One convicted the second time of drunkennesse shall be bound in ten pounds with two sureties to the good behaviour. 25. XVIII. All Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, Ale-cunners and Sidemen, shall bee charged in their oathes to present the said offences. 27. XIX. This Act shall not restraine Ecclesi∣asticall Jurisdiction, nor the two Universities. XX. None shall be twice punished for one offence.
XXI. The offenders against this Act shall be prosecuted within six months. XXII.  Stat. 7. Jac. 10. An Alehouse-keeper lawfully convicted for any of the of∣fences forbidden by the stat. of 1. Jac. 9. or 4. Jac. 5. shall be disabled to keepe Alehouse within three yeares after. 26. XXIII.  Stat. 21. Jac. 7. One witnesse, or the parties owne confession, shall be sufficient to prove the breach of 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. and the oath of the partie confessing shall bee sufficient to convince any other. XXIV. No person whatsoever shall sit tippling, in any Inne, Alehouse or victualling house, in paine of the forfeiture mentioned in 4. Jac. 5. to be levied and imploied, as there is expressed. And here the view of one Justice, the parties owne confession, or proofe by one witnesse, shall be sufficient conviction. The delinquents oath shall likewise be taken to convince any other. XXV. The like view, proofe, or confession shall convince a drunkard, as well for the penaltie of 5. s. as for the binding of him to the good behaviour according to 4. Jac. 5. XXVI. An Alehouse-keeper offending against 1. Jac. 9. or 4. Jac. 5. according to the alterations of this Act is disabled to keepe Alehouse within three yeeres after. XXVII. All Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tithingmen, Ale-cunners, and Sidemen shall be charged in their oathes to present the offences committed against 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. according to the alte∣rations of this Act.
XXVIII. Stat. 1. Car. 4. The Inne-keeper,  Alehouse-keeper, or Victualler which suffers any person whatsoever to sit tippling in his house shall incurre the penaltie of 1. Jac. 9. to be proved, levied and imployed, as in that sta∣tute is appointed. XXIX. Vintners which doe also keepe Innes, or Victualling houses shall bee taken to be within this Act, as also within the stat. of 1. Jac. 9. and 4. Jac. 5. XXX. Stat. 3. Car. 3.  None shall keepe Alehouse without licence, in paine to forfeit 20. s. to the poore, which the Const. and Churchw. (upon warrant from the Justice before whom the offence is proved) shall levie by distresse, which (within three daies) may be sold to satisfie the penaltie: And in case the delinquent hath not wherewithall, the said Justice shall commit him to the Const. to be openly whipped. And here, the view of one Just. the confession of the partie, or proofe by two witnesses is sufficient Conviction. XXXI. Here the officer, that neglects to execute the warrant, or to punish the offender, shall suffer imprisonment without baile, or pay 40. s. to be imployed as aforesaid. XXXII. In this case if the Alehouse-keeper offend the second time, he shall be commit∣ted to the house of correction for one Month, and for the third offence shall not be thence enlarged, but by order of Sessions. XXXIII. The Offender once punished by this Act shall not bee againe punished by 5. & 6. E. 6.25. & contrà.
XXXIV. This Act shall not restraine the selling of Ale and Beere in Faires. Aliens, S. Archerie, 9. & Brasse, 9. & Victuall, 3. Almes-houses, S. Poor people, 15. Archerie. I.  Stat. 33. H. 8.9. Parents, and Masters shall provide for each of their sons and male∣servants (betwixt the ages of 7. and 17.) a Bow and two shafts, and cause them to exercise shooting, in paine of 6. s. 8. d. II. Sonnes and maleservants (betwixt the ages of 17. and 60.) shall be furnished with a Bow and two Arrowes, and practise shooting therewith, in paine of 6. s. 8. d. III. None under the age of 24. yeares shall shoot at any standing marke (except at Ro∣vers, changing his marke every shoot) in paine of 4. d. a shoot, and none above that age shall shoot at any marke of 11. score distance or under, in paine of 6. s. 8. d. a shoot. IV. None under the age of 17 yeares shall shoot with a Bow of Ewe, except his parents be worth 10. l. per Annum in lands, or 40. markes in goods, in paine of 6. s. 8. d. V. The Inhabitants of every towne shall continue their Buts in good repaire, in paine of 20. s. for every three months default. VI. For every Bow made of Ewe, the Bow∣yer not inhabiting in London or the Suburbs
thereof shall make foure, and the Inhabi∣tant there two Bowes of other wood, in paine to forfeit for every such Bow unmade 3. s. 4. d. 12. VII. Fletchers of London may sell seaso∣nable timber to forraigne Fletchers without prejudice. VIII. Artificers of Archerie (not Freemen, nor paying scot and lot) shall remove their abode from London, and the Suburbs thereof to what other place they shall be assigned by his Majesties Councell, the Lord Chancelor, Treasurer, Privy Seale, or one of them, in paine of xl. s. for every day they make their abode contrarie to this Act. IX. Aliens shall not convey Bowes and Arrowes out of the Realme without his Ma∣jesties Licence, in paine of Imprisonment without baile, untill they shall make fine to the King, to be set by (at least) two Justices in Sessions, or give security for the same; nei∣ther shall they use shooting, in paine to forfeit their Bowes and Arrowes to bee taken from them by any of the Kings Subjects. X. Justices of Ass. G.D. and of P. in Sess. and Stewards in Leets shall heare and deter∣mine the Breach of this Act. XI. The one Moity of all these forfeitures is given to the prosecutor, and the other, where there is no Leet, is given to the King, and where there is a Leet, to the Lord of that Leet. XII. Stat. 8. El. 10.  The clause of 33. H. 8.9. which enjoynes to make Bowes
of other wood then Ewe, shall not binde any Bowyer dwelling in London, West minster, or Southwarke. S. Arrowheads 1. Actions popu∣lar 17. Apprentices, S. Labourers. Armour, Armed men. I.  Stat. 2. E. 3.3. None shall come with force and Armes before the Kings Justices, or other his Ministers, nor goe or ride armed in affraie of peace, in paine to forfeit their Armour, and to suffer imprisonment at the Kings pleasure. II. Justices of P. and other officers have power to put this Act in execution, and the Justices of Ass. shall inquire of their default in that behalfe. III.  Stat. 7. R. 2.13. None shall ride in Harnesse, contrary to 2. E. 3.3. in paine to forfeit the same. IV.  Stat. 20. R. 2.1. The statutes of 2. E. 3.3. and the 7. R. 2.13. shall be duly ob∣served, upon the paines contained in the said Stat. of 2. E. 3.3. and besides to make fine to the King. S. Recusants. 125. Arrests, S. Sheriffes.
Arrow-heads. I. Stat. 7. H. 4.7. Justices of Peace have power to punish such as make defective Ar∣row-heads. Artificers S. Labourers. 20. Assise of Ale and Beere, S. Victu∣all 5.7. & Weights. Attainders, S. Certificate 1. Badger, Lader, Kidder, Carrier, Drover, Transporter of Graine &c. I. STat. 5. El. 12.  None but a married man and housholder of the age of xxx yeares at least shall take upon him to bee a Badger, &c. neither hee without Licence in open Sess. of the Countie, where hee hath dwelt by the space of three yeares before, un∣der the hands and seales of (at least) three Justices (1. Qu.) in paine of 5. l. which Li∣cence shall remaine in force for one yeare on∣ly from the date thereof. And all Licences otherwise granted shall be void. II. The Justices of Peace in Sess. shall (at their discretions) take Recognisances of Badgers &c. that they shall not forestall or ingrosse, or put in practice any Act contrary to 5. & 6. E. 6.14. III. The Clerke of the Peace shall write and enter the Licence and Recognisance, and
his Fees shall be, viz. for writing the Licence 12. d. for writing the Recognisance 8. d. and for entring them both into a Register Booke 4. d. which Booke hee shall bring to every Sessions. IV. This shall not give liberty to any Badger, &c. to buy graine out of the Market (to sell againe) unlesse there be speciall words in his licence to warrant the same, in paine to forfeit for every time so offending 5. l. V. The one Moity of these forfeitures is given to the Queene, and the other to the In∣former. VI. The Queenes Moity shall be estreated according to the usuall manner, and the In∣formers levied by fieri facias, or Capias; But when the sute is wholly the Queenes, the whole forfeiture shall be estreated for her use. VII. Justices of P. have power to heare and determine these offences in Sessions, by inqui∣sition or verdict; or otherwise upon the oath of two witnesses (at their discretions) and to make processe thereupon. VIII. This Act shall not restraine Pur∣veyors of Cities and townes corporate; nei∣ther yet the Inhabitants of the Counties of Westmerland, Cumberland, Lancaster, Che∣ster, and Yorke. IX.  Stat. 13. El. 25. The Statute of 5. El. 12. is confirmed. S. Forestallers, 5.12. Bayliffes, S. Sheriffes.
Bailement. I. Stat. 3. E. 1.15. Persons outlawed,  and such as have abjured the Realme, Pro∣vours, and such as be taken with the manner, Prison-breakers, theeves openly defamed, Appellees by Provours (during the life of such Provours) house-burners, Counterfeiters of the Kings Seale or Coyne, excommunicate per∣sons, and Traitors, are not replevisable by common writ or without writ. II. Persons guiltie of Larcenie by enquests (taken before Sheriffes or Bailiffes) or of petty Larcenie (not before detected, nor accessary to any felony) or onely guilty of some light su∣spition, are baileable by good sureties, for which the Sheriffe shall be answerable. III. Stat. 5. E. 3.8.  Marshals of the Kings Bench shall not baile felons. IV. Stat. 3. H 7.3. Two Justices (1.  Qu.) have power to let to baile persons baileable by law, untill the next Quar. Sess. or G.D. and shall there certifie the same in paine of 10. l. V. Stat. 1. & 2. P.M. 13.  None shall be let to baile, which are forbidden to be bailed by 3. E. 1.15. VI. None arrested for Manslaughter or felony, or suspition of the same, (being baile∣able by law) shall be let to baile, save only in open Sess. or by two Just. (1. Qu.) being both present at the time of such bailement, which then shall be certified (together with the examination of the Prisoner, and the In∣formation of the Accusers) under their owne hands at the next Gaole delivery, and the said
examination and Information shall be taken before the bailement. VII. The said Justices have power to bind by Recognisance all such as can declare any thing materiall against the Prisoner to ap∣peare at the next Gaole delivery, and shall there make certificate of the said Recogni∣sance. VIII. The Justices that offend any Branch of this Act are lyable to be fined by the Justi∣ces of Gaole delivery. IX. This Act shall not restraine Justices within London and Middlesex to let to baile I risoners, as heretofore they have used, only they shall certifie their examinations, Bonds, and bailements at the next Gaole delivery of their Jurisdiction, in paine to bee fined, as aforesaid. X. Every Habeas Corpus or Certiorari for the Removall of a Prisoner shall be signed by the Chiefe Justice or one of the Justices of the Court out of which the Writ issues, in paine of five pounds to be forfeited by the Writer. XI.  Stat. 2.3. P.M. 10. One accused of Manssaughter or Felony, which, for want of baile, is to be sent to the Gaole, must be ex∣amined by the Justice, before he sends him thither, and the Accusers must bee bound over to give in evidence against him, whose Infor∣mation must also be taken and committed to writing within two daies after at the farthest, and all certified in at the next Gaole delivery, as by the stat. of 1.2. P.M. 13. is limitted, up∣on the penaltie therein expressed.
Bakers, S. Victuall 2.10. Weights 2, 4, 5, 9. Barges, S. Boatemen. Bastardie. I. Stat. 18. El. 3.  The two next Justices (1. Qu.) may take order as well for the pu∣nishment of the mother, and reputed father of a Bastard Child, as also for the reliefe of the Parish, where it is borne, by charging the said mother, and father with the sustentation thereof, by payment of mony weekly, or other∣wise. II. If the mother or father performe not the said Justices order, they shall suffer im∣prisonment without baile, except hee, she or they give securitie to performe it, or else to ap∣peare at the next Quarter Sess. and also to abide the order of the greater part of the Ju∣stices there, if any shall be there made; if not, then to performe the order made by the two Justices. 5. III. Stat. 7. Jac. 4.  Justices of Peace shall commit to the house of correction lewd women, which have Bastards, that may be chargeable to the Parish, there to be punished, and set on worke one whole yeere; and if they offend againe, they shall not be from thence enlarged without putting in good securitie not to offend so againe. IV. Stat. 21. Jac. 27.  It shall be murther for a mother to conceale the death of her Ba∣stard
child, unlesse she can prove by one wit∣nesse (at least) that it was still-borne. V.  Stat. 3. Car. 4. All Justices of Peace within their severall limits and Sess. may doe and execute all things concerning that part of 18 Eli. 3. which concernes Bastards, that by the Justices of Peace in the severall Coun∣ties are by the said statute limited to be done. Beere, S. Corne, 1. Bell-metall, S. Brasse, 15. Benhurst hundred in Com. Berk. S. Hue and Crie, 8. Bigamie. I.  Stat. 1. E. 6.12. A Bigamus being a felon shall be admitted to his Clergy, as well as any other. II.  Stat. 1. Jac. 11. A Bigamus shall suffer death as a Felon, unlesse he or she have had no notice, that the husband or wife was living within seven yeares before, or the Mar∣riage severed by divorce. III. This felonie shall cause no corrupti∣on of blood, or losse of dower, or inheritance. Boatmen, Watermen, Barges, Boats, &c. I.  Stat. 26. H. 8.5. Justices of the Peace within the Counties of Glocester and Summer∣set in Sess. shall bind keepers of Ferries over
Severne by Recognisance with good sureties, that they shall not transport any Passenger out of England into Wales, or the Forrest of Deane, or from thence into England before Sun rising, or after Sun set, unlesse such as they know, and will answer for; And besides the parties so offending shall thereby incurre fine and imprisonment. II. Stat. 2. and 3. P. M. 16.  At the first Court of Aldermen in London next after the first of March, out of the Watermen betwixt Gravesend and Windsor, there shall be eight chosen for overseers, which shall have power to keepe good order amongst the rest. III. Two Watermen shall not carry any, but where one of them hath exercised that profession two yeares before that time, and hath been allowed by the greater part of the said Overseers, under their knowne seale, in paine to be committed to one of the Counters by the said Overseers for one month, or for lesse time, as the offence may deserve. IV. No single man, which is no house∣holder, nor retained as an Apprentice, or as a servant for one yeare at least shall exercise that profession, betwixt the places aforesaid, in paine of like imprisonment. V. The Lord Maior, and Aldermen of London, and the Justices of Peace within the Counties adjoyning to the River of Thames, upon complaint of any two of the Overseers, or of any Watermans Master, have power not only to heare and determine any offences committed against this Act, and to enlarge
any Waterman, unjustly imprisoned by the said Overseers, but likewise to inflict punish∣ment upon the Overseers themselves, in case they shall unjustly punish any person by co∣lour of this Act. VI. A Wherry that is not twenty two foot and a halfe long, and foure foot and an halfe broad in the Midship, and sufficient to carry two persons on one side tight, shall be forfeit; in which Case the King and Queen shall have the one Moity, and the Informer the other. VII. The Waterman, that withdraweth himselfe in time of pressing, it being proved by two witnesses before the said Maior, Alder∣men, or Justice, and two of the said Overseers, shall suffer a fortnights imprisonment, and shall be prohibited to row any more upon Thames for a yeare and a day after. VIII. The Overseers shall not only call the Watermen before them, direct them, and Register their names, but likewise examine their boats before they be lanched, whether they have due proportion and goodnesse ac∣cording to this Act. IX. If the Overseers refuse or neglect their office, they shall forfeit 5. l. whereof the King and Queene shall have one Moity, and the In∣former the other. X. The Court of Aldermen shalll assesse the Fares of Watermen, which being subscri∣bed by two of the Privy Councell (at least) shall be set up in Guildhall, Westminster-hall, &c. And the Waterman that takes more then according to the Fares so assessed, shall
for every such offence suffer halfe a yeares im∣prisonment, and forfeit 40. s. viz. the one Moity to the King and Queen, the other to the Informer. XI. Stat. 1. Jac. 16.  No Waterman shall retaine any Servant or Apprentice, unlesse he himselfe hath been an Apprentice to a Wa∣terman by the space of five yeares before, and not an Apprentice under the age of eighteene yeares, or for lesse time then seven yeares, in paine to forfeit for every such offence 10. l. viz. the one Moity to the King, and the other to the Informer. XII. This Act shall not restraine Water∣mens sonnes of convenient growth and strength, and formerly trained up in rowing, but that they may be allowed to serve as Ap∣prentices, and to carry passengers from place to place at the age of sixteene yeares. XIII. The eight Overseers shall yearely upon the first of March, and the first of Sep∣tember cause openly to be read in their Com∣mon Hall, all their orders made, or to be made; in paine that every of them for every such default shall forfeit twentie nobles, viz. the one Moity to the King, and the other to the Informer. Bookes, Images. I. Stat. 3. & 4. E. 6.10. All popish Bookes in times past used for service of the Church shall be utterly abolished and forbid∣den to be used within the Kings Dominions.
II. All persons whatsoever having in their custodie any popish Bookes, or Images carved or painted, which have been taken out of, or yet doe stand in any Church or Chappell, shall destroy the said Images and deliver the said Bookes to the Major, Bayliffe, Constable or Church-wardens of the towne, where such bookes then shall be, to be delivered over to the Archbishop, Bishop, Chancellor, or Com∣missarie of the same Diocesse, to the intent the said Bookes should be by them openly burnt, or otherwise defaced, in paine to forfeit, for the first default 10. s. for the second 4. l. and for the third imprisonment at the Kings will. III. The officer shall within three months deliver over the said Books unto the Archbi∣shop, Bishop, &c. and they shall within for∣ty dayes after burne or deface the same, or cause them to be burned or defaced, in paine to forfeit respectively 40. l. a peece, whereof one Moity is given to the King, and the other to the Informer. IV. Justices of Assise, and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to inquire, heare and deter∣mine these defaults, and offences. V. Images upon Tombes shall remaine, unlesse the dead person have beene commonly taken for a Saint. VI. Primers set forth by H. 8. purged from sentences of invocation, or prayer to Saints, shall be still retained. S. Recusants, 17.123.124.
Bowes, S. Archerie. Brasse, Latten, Copper, Bell∣metall, Pewter, &c. I. Stat. 19. H. 7.6. None shall sell,  or change brasse, save only in open Faires and Markets, or in their owne houses (except they be desired by the Buyer of such wares,) in pain of 10. l. 12. II. None shall cast or worke Brasse or Pewter, but according to the goodnesse of metall wrought within London, in paine to forfeit the same, viz. one Moity to the King and the other to the finder. III. Hollow ware of Pewter called lay metall shall be wrought after the Assise of Lay met∣all in London, and shall be marked, in paine to forfeit the said wares, or (being sold) the price of the same to be divided as aforesaid. IV. None shall use (in the selling of Brasse or Pewter) any false beames or weights, in paine to forfeit 20. s. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, and in case he be not able to pay it, he shall be (by the head officer) committed to the stocks, till the next Market day, and then stand upon the Pillory. V. Searchers of Brasse and Pewter in every City and Borrough shall be appointed by the head officers of the same; and in every Coun∣ty by the Just. of P. at their Mich. Sessions. And in default of Searchers in Cities and Boroughs any other person (skilfull in that
mysterie) by oversight of the head officers may take upon him the search of defective Brasse, which being found either by him or the other searchers, shall be equally divided, as aforesaid. VI.  Stat. 4. H. 8.7. The Statute of 19. H. 7.6. is confirmed, and besides it is enacted, that in Cities and Boroughes search of defe∣ctive Tinne and Pewter shall be made by the. Wardens of the Craft of Pewterers, and in townes, where no Wardens are, searchers shall be appointed by the head-officers there, which said defective Ware shall be forfeited and di∣vided, as in the former statute. VII.  Stat. 25. H. 8.9. None shall buy or take by exchange any wares made of Tinne or Pewter out of the Realme, in paine to forfeit them, and also the value thereof in mony. VIII. Officers may search and seise wares brought into this Realme contrary to this Act. IX. No stranger borne shall worke any Pewter or Tinne in England in paine to forfeit the same. X. No Pewterer shall teach his trade in a forraigne nation, in paine to lose the Privi∣ledge of an Englishman. XI. Licences and Placards to wandering Brasiers and Pewterers shall be void. XII. The penalties mentioned in 19. H. 7. and in this present Act shall be equally divi∣ded betwixt the King and the finder. Stat. 33. H. 8.4. XIII.  Stat. 33. H. 8.4. The statute of 25. H. 8.9. is confirmed.
XIV. None shall withstand the search of Brasse, tinne, pewter, &c. in paine of 5. l. to be divided, as in the former Statutes. XV. Stat. 33. H. 8.7. and 2. E. 6.37.  None shall convey out of this Realme Brasse, Cop∣per, Latten, Bell-metall, Pan-metall gunne-Metall, nor shroffe metall, cleane or mix∣ed, tinne and lead only excepted. Bridges. I. Mag. Cart. 9. H. 3.15.  No towne nor Freeman shall be distrained to make bridges, or Bankes, but such as of old time, and of right have beene accustomed to make them. II. Stat. 22. H. 8.5.  Foure Iustices (1. Qu.) shall in Sessions inquire, heare and determine the annoyances of Bridges, and of the high∣wayes adjoyning within 300 foote next vnto the said Bridges, and shall also charge such as should repaire them by sending forth pro∣cesse, or setting paines, as they shall think fit. III. When it cannot be knowne, what pre∣cinct should repaire a Bridge, or way, they shall be repaired by the County, Riding, or Corporation, within which they are scituate, and if they happen to be scituate in two of such precincts, the Inhabitants there shall re∣paire their severall parts respectively. IV. The said foure Iust. have power to call before them the Constables, or two able men of every parish, and by their assent to make a taxe and Collectors to levie the same
by distresse and Sale, and also to make Sur∣vey ours of the said decayed Bridges, and wayes, unto whom the Collectors shall pay the money levied, which said Collectors and Surveyours shall render an Accompt vnto the said Iustices upon pain of Imprisonment without Baile. V. The said Iust. may in this case send pro∣cesse out of their jurisdiction, which the offi∣cers, to whom it is directed, shall obey and serve, in paine to be fined by the said Iusti∣ces. VI. This Act shall not extend to the five Ports nor to the members of the same: save only, that their officers shall have such power to reform annoyances of Bridges and wayes there, as the Iust. of P. have elsewhere by force of this Act. VII. The said Iust. shall allow to the said Collectors and Surveyors their reasonable charges. VIII.  Stat. 3. Ja. 23. An Act for the new making and keeping in repaire of Chep∣stow Bridge. Brewers. Stat. 23. H. 8.4. The forfeiture of a Brewer, that doth sell his vessels of Ale, and beere for more then they shalbe assessed at by the Iustices of the County, or the head offi∣cers of a Corporation within their severall limits respectively, is x. s. for any vessell greater then a Barrell, 6. s. for a Barrell, 3. s.
4. d. for a kilderkin, 2. s. for a firkin, and 12. d. for every lesse measure to be equally divided betwixt the K. and the prosecutor. S. Purveyors, 56. Victuall, 2.10. weights, 4.7.13. Buggery. I. Stat. 25. H. 8.6.  Buggery shall be ac∣counted felony and the Offender therin shal not have his Clergie. II. Iustices of P. have power to enquire, heare, and determine this offence. III. Stat. 5. El. 17. The Statute of 25. H. 8.6. is revived. Burglary, House-breaking. I. Stat. 3. & 4. E. 1.  Hue and Cry shall be made after Burglers. II. Stat. 23. H. 8.1.  Clergie shall not be allowed to any principall or Accessarie that is found guilty of Burglary, when the owner, his Children or Servants shall be in the house, and put in feare, Stat. 1. E. 6.12. by night or by day, Stat. 4. & 5. P.M. 4. III. Stat. 25. H. 8.3. Clergie shall not be allowed to a Burgler, that stands mute,  or makes peremptory Challenge of above xx. Stat. 1. E. 6.12. IV. Stat. 5. & 6. E. 6.9.  Clergie shal not be allowed, although the Burglarie be commit∣ted without the notice of the owner, Chil∣dren or Servants, any of them being with∣in
the house, or precincts of the same; So it is also for Burglarie committed in Boothes, or Tents. Stat. 18. El. 7. V.  Stat. 39. El. 15. Clergie shall not be allowed to any that feloniously takes away any thing in the day time, amounting to the value of 5. s. out of any dwelling house or out∣house, although no person be within or neer the same. S. Clergie. Felonie, 15. Burning of Houses, &c. I.  Stat. 23. H. 8.1. Clergie shall not be allowed to the principall or Accessary that is found guilty of the malicious burning of a dwelling house or a Barn of graine. Stat. 4. & 5. P.M. 4. II.  Stat. 25. H. 8.3. Nor to the wilfull Burner of a house (according to the tenor of 23. H. 8.1.) which stands mute, or makes per∣emptory Challenge of above xx. Stat. 4. & 5. P.M. 4. Includes the Accessarie also. III.  Stat. 37. H. 8.6. For the malitious burning of waynes or Carts loaden, Heapes of wood, or the frame of a house, the offen∣der shall suffer as in case of Felonie, and shall forfeite his goods and profits of his lands during his life, but his wife shall have her Dower, and his heir the inheritance, only out of profits of the lands the heire shall sa∣tisfie damages to the partie grieved. S. Bailement, 1. Clergie.
Butchers. I. Stat. 51. H. 3.  Butchers that sell conta∣gious flesh, or that died of the Murren, shall be presented and punished. II. Stat. 4. H. 7.3.  Butchers shall kill no Beasts in London, any walled towne, or Cambridge (except Barwicke and Carlile) in pain to forfeit for every Oxe, 12. d. and for every other Beast 8. d. to be equally di∣vided between the K. and the prosecutor. III. Stat. 3. & 4. E. 6.19.  A Butcher shall not buy Cattell, and sell the same againe a∣live, in pain to forfeit the one half to the K. and the other to the prosecutor. Note that the Statute of 24. H. 8.9. which prohibiteth Butchers to kill weaning Calves under the age of two yeares is expired. See 21. Jac. 28. S. Forestallers, 5. Leather, 13. Victuall, 2.10. Weights. 14. Butter, Cheese. I Stat. 3. & 4. E. 6.21.  None (except Inholders, and Victuallers in their houses) shall buy any Butter or Cheese to sell again, save only by retaile in open shop, Faire, or Market, and so, not above a wey of Cheese or a Barrell of Butter at one time without fraud, in paine to forfeit double the value thereof, to be equally divided betwixt the K. and the prosecutor.
II.  Stat. 21. Jac. 22. The Statute of 3. & 4. E. 6.21. shall not extend to the Retaylers of Cheese in London, Westminster, or Southwark, having served seaven yeares in that trade, and not uttering above 4 wey of Cheese, or 4. barrels of Butter at one time, without fraud. III. Justices of P. in Sessions have power to restrain the retailing of Butter & Cheese, during which restraint those that retail shal be lyable to the penalty of 3. & 4. E. 6.21. and 5. & 6. E. 6.14. which see in Forestallers. S. Corne. 1. Butts, S. Archerie. Buying of Titles, S. Maintey∣nance. Calves, S. Leather. 12. Captaines, Souldiers, Musters, Marriners. I.  STat. 1. E. 3.5. No man shall be com∣pelled to arme himselfe otherwise then in times past, neither shall any man be compelled to go out of the Shire, save where necessity requires, and the sudden comming of strange enemies into the Realm, and then it shall be done as in times past for the de∣fence of the Realme. II.  Stat. 1. E. 3.7. Whereas Commissioners
have heretofore prepared men of Armes, and conveyed them to the K. in Scotland, Gas∣coine, or else where, at the Charge of the Shires, whereby the Commons have beene much impoverished: The King will, that it shall be done so no more. III. Stat. 18. E. 3.7. Men of Armes, Hob∣lers,  and Archers chosen to goe in the Kings service out of England, shall be at the Kings wages from the day that they depart out of the Countries, where they were chosen, till their return. IV. Stat. 25. E. 3.8.  None shall be bound to find Armes, but by tenure of Land, or grant in Parliament. V. Stat. 18. H. 6.19.  It is felonie for a Souldior (retained to serve the King in his warres) not to go with or depart from his Captaine without License. VI. Officers shall arrest Souldiers, which within their terme limited come on this side the Sea without Letters Testimoniall of their Captaine, and shall retaine them, untill the cause of their return be tried. VII. Justices of P. have power to hear and to determine their offences. VIII. Stat. 7. H. 7.1. A Captaine,  which shall not have the whole number of his Soul∣diers, or not pay them their due wages with∣in six dayes after he shal have received them, shall forfeit all his goods and Chattels and suffer Imprisonment, 25. IX. It is felony for a Souldier retained to depart from his Colours without License,
for which he shall not enjoy the benefit of his Clergie, 15. X. Justices of P. have power to enquire, heare, and determine this offence of depar∣ting without License, and the tryall thereof shall be in the same County, where the Soul∣dier is apprehended, 15. XI. This Act shall not be prejudiciall to Captaines: when Souldiers die, or otherwise depart without any default of theirs; so that they therewith acquaint (at Land) the Tre∣surer of the warres within ten dayes after, or (at Sea) the Admirall at their next mee∣ting with him. XII.  Stat. 3. H. 8.5. This act is in all parts the same with 7. H. 7.1. save only that it shall not extend to Captaines & Souldiers in Bar∣wick, Wales, Calis, & other places in France: nor to Captaines having under them Re∣tinue of Souldiers, or for non-payment of the Kings wages to Captaines houshold servants. XIII.  Stat. 2. &. 3. E. 6.2. A Souldier that maketh away his horse or Armes (proofe thereof being made before the chiefe Com∣mander) shall suffer imprisonment without Baile, untill he hath satisfied the party, at whose charge he was sent out. XIV. If such a Souldier escape from the Armie without punishment, he shall be ly∣able to the same to be inflicted upon him by any Justice of P. in those parts, where he shall be apprehended, unlesse he bring suffi∣cient testimony from the Commander, that the horse, or Armes were otherwise lost, or
imployed in the Kings service. XV. It is felonie (without benefit of Cler∣gie) for a Souldier retained, to depart with∣out licence of his Commander, wherupon Ju∣sitces of P. may proceed as in case of felony. XVI. The Commissioner or Captain, that licenceth any person retained, and assumeth another for gaine, or which giveth to any li∣cence to depart without warrant from the Commanders, shall forfeit xx. l. to the K. for every person so let go. XVII. The Lievtenant generall, or other officer, which receives more wages for Soul∣diers then there is cause, and doth not every moneth (by a note in writing) acquaint the Treasurer of the Army with every Soul∣diers entry into pay, death, or departure, shall forfeit 5. l. to the K. suffer one moneths Imprisonment, and lose his place. XVIII. None but the Commander shall licence any in paine of Imprisonment both of the Licencer and Licenced at the discre∣tion of the said Commander. XIX. The Lievtenant generall shall com∣mand this Act to be proclamed in the Ar∣my once every moneth, and every Gover∣nour in his Fortresse once every three moneths. XX. Every person which shall informe the Lievtenant of any of these offences, shall have a moneths pay, belonging to him that is faulty. XXI. This shall not prohibit officers to re∣taine yearly 6. s. 8. d. for the Coat of a yeo∣man;
and 13. s. 4. d. for that of a Gentle∣man, neither shall it be prejudiciall unto them, when the lack of Souldiers is not through their default, nor when they have under them a retinue of Souldiers, nor for nonpayment of the K. wages to their hous∣hould Servants; neither shall it extend to prohibit relief of tenants or friends towards service in war, or the detaining of Souldiers wages upon lawfull Causes. XXII.  Stat. 4. & 5. P. & M. 3. He which absenteth himself from the Musters, or doth not bring thither his best furniture, shall by the Commissioners be committed to Prison without Baile, unlesse he immediately agree to pay xl. s. to the K. and Q. which shall with∣in two moneths be estreated in the Exche∣quer by the said Commissioners, or any two of them. XXIII. Commissioners and others in au∣thoritie taking any reward to discharge Souldiers, shall forseite tenne times so much. XXIV. The one moity of the abovesaid forfeitures is given to the K. and Q. and the other to the prosecutor. XXV. A Captaine or other officer, which detaines his Souldiers wages shall forfeit three times so much unto the same Soul∣dier. XXVI. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. and Stew∣ards in leets have power to heare and deter∣mine these offences, and the Just. of Ass. or P. upon Conviction of the offender may
commit him to prison without Baile, untill he hath satisfied the abovesaid penalties to the K. Q. and prosecutor, or where there is no prosecutor to the K. and Q. alone. XXVII. Offences committed during the time of Service, shall be heard and deter∣mined by the chiefe Commander. XXVIII. This Act shall not discharge ser∣vice of warres incident to the tenure of Land. XXIX. The offender of this Act shall not be twice punished for the same offence. XXX. None shall under colour of Service of warre incident to the tenure of land ex∣act any other thing, then what shall be im∣ployed in present service, and shall be resto∣red againe to the owner, when the service is done, at least so much thereof, as shall not be spent or lost in the service. XXXI. Inhabitants within Cities, Bo∣roughes and Corporations shall be mustred at home by the head officer and one other (at least) to be joyned with him by Cōmissi∣on, or otherwise. XXXII. Stat. 5. El. 5. The Stat. of 18.  H. 6.19 shall in all points extend to Mar∣riners and Gunners, aswell as to Soul∣diers. XXXIII. Stat. 39. El. 17.  Wandering Souldiers, and Marriners, and all others wand ring as Souldiers or Marriners, which will not settle themselves to worke, or have not a testimoniall under the hand of some one Just. of P. neere the place of their lan∣ding,
setting downe the place, where they landed, the place whither they are to passe, and the time of their passage, or ha∣ving a testimoniall exceed the time there∣in limited above fourteen dayes; or Coun∣terfeit a testimoniall, or produce one which they know to be counterfeited; shall in all these cases suffer as Felons without benefit of Clergie, 51. XXXIV. Iust. of Ass. G. D. and of P. in their Sess. have power to proceed against these offenders as in case of felonie without Clergie, unlesse some sufficient man (allowed by the Iustices) will enter into a Recogni∣sance of x. l. to the Q. to retaine the offen∣der for one whole yeare, and to bring him to the next Sess. of P. & G. D. after the year en∣ded. And if he within the yeare depart that service without licence, he shall afterwards suffer as a felon without Clergy. XXXV. Souldiers or Marriners, which fall sick in their passage home, shall be excu∣sed, though they exceed the time limited in their testimoniall, So that they performe this Act in convenient time after their Re∣covery. XXXVI. If, when they come home, they cannot get worke, the two next Just. (upon their complaint) shall take order, that they may be provided of work, or otherwise shall tax the whole hundred for their Relief untill work may be had. XXXVII. The Souldier or Marrinet (li∣cenced by a Iust. of P. to whom he shall make
his poverty knowne) having not wherewith∣all to beare his charges home, may ask and take Relief, So it be in his direct way home, and within the time limited by his Li∣cence. XXXVIII. These offences shall cause no Corruption of Blood. XXXIX. Stat. 43. El. 3.  The more part of the Just. of P. yearely in their Easter Sess. have power to charge every parish towards a weekly reliefe of maymed Souldiers, and Mariners, so that no parish pay weekly above 10. d. nor under 2. d. nor any County, which consists of above 50. parishes pay above 6. d. one parish with another; which summes so taxed shall be assessed in every parish by the parishioners or (in their default) by the Churchwardens and Constables, or (in their default) by the next Justice or Justices of Peace. XL. The Const. or Churchw. of every parish have power to levie the tax of exery person refusing to pay it, by distresse, and Sale, and (in their default) the said Justice or Justices next adjoyning. XLI. The tax being thus levied, the Const. or Churchw. shall deliver it quarterly (ten dayes before every quarter Sess.) to the high Const. of their Division, who shall de∣liver it over to the Treasurers of the Coun∣ty at the same quarter Sess. XLII. The Treasurers shall be Subsidie men, viz. of x. l. in lands or xv. l. in goods, and shall not continue in their office above
one year, rendring up their Accompts year∣ly at Easter Sess. or within ten dayes after, to their Successors. XLIII. The officer or his executor, &c. that failes in payment of the Summes levied, shall forfeit viz. the Churchw. or Const. xx. s. & high Constable xl. s. which the Trea∣surers have power to levy (by distresse and Sale) in augmentation of their Stock. XLIV. The Treasurer or his executor, &c. that hath beene negligent to execute his office, or to render the Accompt within the time above limited, shall be fined by the I. of P. in the Sess. 5 l. at least. XLV. The maymed Souldier or marriner, which was prest, shall repaire (if he be able to travell) to the Treasurers of the County, where he was prest, if he were not prest, then to the Treasurers of the County, where he was born, or where he last dwelt by the space of three yeares, at his election. But if he be not able to travell, then to Treasurers of the County, where he lands. XLVI. He shall bring to any of the Trea∣surers aforesaid a Certificate under the hand and Seale of the chief Commander, and of the Captaine, under whom he served, con∣taining the particulars of his hurts and ser∣vices; which Certificate shall be also allow∣ed by the Muster-Master, Generall, or the Receiver generall of the Muster-Rolls un∣der one of their hands. XLVII. Vpon such a Certificare the Trea∣furers aforesaid may allow him Reliefe to
maintayne him untill the next Q. Sess. at which the more part of the Justices may al∣low him a pension, which the Treasurers shall pay him quarterly, untill it shall bee revoked, or altered by the said Iustices, And this Allowance to him, that hath not borne office, shall not exceed x. l. To an officer, under a Lievtenant xv. l. and to a Lievte∣nant xx. l. XLVIII. When Souldiers, or Marriners arrive far from the place where they are to receive relief, the Treasurers there, shall give them relief and a Testimoniall, where∣by they may passe from Treasurer to Trea∣surer untill they shall come at the place re∣quired, and this shall be done, upon the bare Certificate of the Commander, and Cap∣taine, although they have not as yet obtained any allowance thereof from the said Muster-Master, or Receiver generall of the Muster Rolls. XLIX. The Treasurers shal register their Receits and disbursments and enter the names of the parties relieved, and also the Certificates, by warrant whereof the disburs∣ments are made, The Muster-Master also, or Receiver aforesaid shall register the names of the parties, and the Certificates by him allowed; And the Treasurer returning or not allowing the Muster-Masters Cer∣tificate shall hereupon subscribe, or endorse the cause of his disallowance. L. Iustices of P. in Sess. have power to fine a Treasurer, that wilfully refuseth to
give relief, which any two of them (appoin∣ted by the rest) may levy by distresse, and Salc of his goods. LI. A Souldier or Marriner, that begs or counterfeits a Certificate shall suffer pu∣nishment as a common Rogue, and shall lose his pension if he have any, 3.3. LII. The Surplusage of this Contributi∣on shall be imployed by the more part of the Justices in Sess. upon charitable uses, accor∣ding to Statutes made for reliefe of the poore, and punishment of Rogues. LIII. In Corporations the Justices there shall put this Act in execution and not the Iustices of the County, and shall be lyable to fines, as well as other Iustices, if they misuse their power therein, and shall appoint a Col∣lector of this tax, which shall have the power, and be subject to the penalties limited (by this Act) to high Constables of Counties. LIV. The forfeitures accruing by this Act shall be imployed as the Surplusage a∣bovesaid, or otherwise kept in angmentation of the Stock, as the more part of the Justices in Sess. shall direct. LV. When out of the County, where the party was prest, a fit pension cannot be satisfied, it shall be supplyed by the Counties, where he was born, or where he last dwelt by the space of three yeares. LVI. This Act shall not prohibit the Ci∣ty of London to make a tax (if need require) differning from that above limited (35.) so that no parish pay above 3. s. weekly, nor
above or under 12. d. weekly one parish with another. S. Boatmen, 7. Felonie, 16. Recu∣sants, 112. Carman, S. Holydayes, 2. Carier, S. Badger, Holidaies, 2. Cattel, Sheep. I. Stat. 3. H. 6.2.  None shall transport Sheep beyond Sea without the Kings Li∣cence, in pain to forfeit them. II. Stat. 25. H. 8.13.  None shall keepe in his owne possession at one time above two thousand Sheep in paine to forfeit for eve∣ry sheep kept abvoe that number 3. s. 4. d. to be prosecuted for a Subject within one year, and for the King within three; But here Lambs shall not be accompted at Sheep till Midsommer twelve moneth after their fall. III. If any happen to have more sheep then two thousand by reasō of any executor∣ship or Marriage, they shall not be impeach∣ed by this Law, So that within one year af∣ter they put off so many, that at the end of that year they may not have above two thou∣sand: neither shall a Child during his nonage (nor any person for him) be endamaged by this Act, which Child shall have by legacy above 2000. Sheep given him.
IV. Iustices of P. have power to heare and determine the offences committed against this Act, but shall not set a lesse fyne, then is limited by the same. V. Every temporal Subject may keepe upon his own demeasne lands as many Sheep as he will, or for the maintenance of his house, above the number of 2000. notwith∣standing this Act. VI. How Fouldcourse and quillets of Lands in Norfolk and Suffolk shall be used, and to which quillers this Statute shall ex∣tend, see the Statute at large. VII. A thousand of Sheep (meant by this statute) shall be accompted after the rate of fixscore to the hundred. VIII. None shall take to farme above two Farmes together, unlesse both the Farmes be scituate in the same parish where he dwels, in paine to forfeit 3. s. 4. d. for every weeke he takes the profits of them. IX Spirituall persons shall keepe Sheep, as they have used to do, notwithstanding this Act. X.  Stat. 3. & 4, E. 6.17. None shall buy any Cattel but in open faire or Market, and not sell the same againe in the same faire or Market in paine to forfeit double the value thereof. XI.  Stat. 2. & 3. P. & M. 3. He that kee∣peth above 120. Sheep or 20. Beasts upon severall pasture ground apt for milch kyne, & not commonable shall yearly for every 60, Sheep or 10. Beasts keepe one milch cow,
and for every 120. sheep or 20. Beasts reare up one Calfe in paine to forfeit for every Cow or Calf not so kept or reared xx. s. viz. the one moity to the K. and Q. the other to the prosecutor, if he cōmence his sute within one year after the offence committed. XII. Just of P. in Sess. have power to hear and determine the Breach of this Sta∣tute. XIII. This Act shall not bind those, which keep sheep or feed Beasts only for their own provision. XIV. Stat. 8. El. 3.  None shall transport sheep beyond Sea, in paine to forfeit all his goods, to suffer one yeares imprisonment, to have his hand cut off in some open Mar∣ket, and for the second offence to suffer death as a Felon. XV. This Statute shall not extend to Cor∣ruption of Blood or forfeiture of Dower. XVI. Just. of G. D. and Just. of P. have power to heare, and determine this offence. XVII. The aforesaid goods forfeited shall be divided betwixt the Q and the pro∣secutor. XVIII. Stat. 7. Jac. 8 the Statute of 2.  & 3. P. & M. 3. Shall extend as well to grounds which have beene or shall be made seve∣rall after, as to those made severall before the making of the same Statute. See But chers. 3. Forestallers. 7.10.
Certificate. I. Stat. 34. H. 8.14. All Clerkes of the Crowne, Clerkes of Assise, and Clerkes of the Peace shal certifie the effect of all Indict∣ments, outlawries, convictions, or Attainders (taken before them) into the Kings Bench within 40. dayes after the taking of them, if it be then terme time, if not, then within 20. dayes after the beginning of the Term next ensuing, in pain to forfeit for every default 40. s. to be divided betwixt the K. and the prosccutor. II. The Clerk of the Crowne shall certi∣fie the effect of such indictments, &c. unto Just. of G. D. or Just. of P. which write for the same, in paine to forfeit for every name not certified, 40 s. III. This Act shall not extend to Clerkes of the Crowne, P. or G. D. or to Preno∣taries in Wales, Chester, Lancaster, or Duresme. Certiorari. State. 6. H. 8.6. The Justices of the Kings Bench have power to remand Prisoners and Indictments (removed thither by writ) into the country where the offences were commit∣ted, and also to command the Just. of G. D. and of P. to proceed there against them ac∣cording to Law. See Bailement, 10. Supersedeas, 3.
Challenge. Stat. 22. H. 8.14 None arraigned for Petty Treason, Murder or Felony shall be admitted to any peremptory chalenge above the number of xx. Champerty, S. Maintenance. Cheese, S. Butter, weights, 37. Citation, S. Ecclesiasticall Court, 8. Clergie. I. Stat. 3. E. 1.2.  A Clerk convict for fe∣lony, and delivered to the Ordinary shall not be enlarged without due Purgation. II. Stat. 4. H. 4.3.  A Clerk convict shall make purgation according to a Constituti∣on made by Simon, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury. III. Stat. 4. H. 7.13.  The benefit of Cler∣gie shall be allowed but once. IV. A convict person shal be marked openly before the Judge upon the brawne of his left thumb, viz. with an M. for Murder, and with a T. for any other Felony. V. He that is within orders upon asking of his Clergy, shall shew his orders, or his Ordinaries Certificate. VI. Stat. 23. H. 8.1.  None (except Clerks within orders) which by the Law shall bee found guilty of Petty Treason, Murder, Sa∣criledge,
burglary, Robbery, or housebur∣ning, nor their accessaries shall be admitted to the benefit of Clergie. VII. A Clerk within orders, being prin∣cipall or Accessary to any of hte offences a∣bovesaid, shal not be admitted to his purgati∣on nor be enlarged by the Ordinary, untill he shall have bound himself with two good sure∣ties before two Just. (1 Q.) to be of good behaviour. VIII. The Ordinary may degrade a Con∣vict person, and send him to the Kings Bench, where the Justices shall have power to give Judgement upon him, according to which he shall be executed. IX.  Stat. 25. H. 8.3. None shall have bene∣fit of Clergy, which being accused of any of the offences mentioned in 23. H. 8.1. are found guilty, stand mute, challenge above xx. or answer not directly, although the of∣fence were committed in another County then where they are tryed. X.  Stat. 28. H. 8.1. Such as be within holy orders shall receive no other benefit of Cler∣gy then others doe Stat. 32. H. 8.3. XI Stat.  1. E. 6.12. All Felons shall have the benefit of Clergie save only such as are found guilty of Murder, poysoning, Burgla∣ry, Robbery, Horsestealing, or sacriledge, or which upon their Arraignement for any of the same offences confesse the same, stand mute, or make no direct answer thereunto. see 2.3. E. 6.33. XII. A Pecre of the Realme for his first
offence of Felonie, though he cannot read, shall be admitted to his purgation, as a Clerk convict. XIII. Stat. 4.5. P. M. 4.  Accessaries (be∣fore the face) which are found guilty of Petty Treason, Murder, Burglary, Robbery, or house-burning, or which upon their Ar∣raignement for these offences, stand mute, challenge above xx. or answer not directly, shall not enjoy the benefit of Clergie. XIV. Stat. 8. El. 4.  He that is delive∣red to the Ordinarie, and admitted to his Clergie, shall (notwithstanding his Purga∣tion) answer for offences formerly commit∣ted. XV. Stat. 18. El. 7.  An offender admit∣ted to his Clergie, after burning in the hand, shall not be delivered to the Ordinary, as hath beene used, but shall thereupon be en∣larged by the Justices, before whom such Clergie shall be granted, or by them detey∣ned longer in Prison at their discretion; so it be not for longer time then one whole year. XVI. He that shall be admitted to his Clergie, shall notwithstanding that, answer for other felonies. XVII. Stat. 1. Ia. 8.  He that stabs or thrusts any person not having a weapon drawne, or not striking first, so that he dies thereof within six moneths after, although it be not of malice forethought, shall not enjoy the benefit of Clergie. XVIII. This Act shall not extend to charge
any with stabbing or thrusting when it is done only Se defendendo, by misfortune, or in chastising his Childe or servant with no pur∣pose to commit Manslaughter. S. Burglary. Clerk of the Peace. I. Stat. 37. H. 8.1. The Custos Rotulorum shall appoint the Clerke of the Peace, who may execute the same Office, by a deputy if he please. II. This Act shall not restraine the Arch-Bishop of York, the Bishops of Duresme, or Ely, nor any other, who by the Kings Letters Patents, or otherwise, have (before the ma∣king of this Act) power to choose a Clerk of the Peace within any precinct or liber∣ty. S. Badger. 3. Certificate. 1. Clerk of the Crown, S. Cer∣tificate. Clerk of Assise S. Certificate. Clerk of the Market, S. Weights. Cloth. S. Drapery. Coine, S. Money. Commons, S. Horses. Commissions, S. Just. of P.
Conies, S. Hunting. Conjuration, S. Witchcraft. Conspiracy, S. Labourers, 3. Masons. Conspirators. I. Who be Conspirators, See Stat. 33. E. 1. II. Their punishment, and what Justices shall inquire of them, viz. Just. of both the Benches, & of Assise, See Stat. 28. E. 1.10. Mainteynance, 8. S. Felony. Convictions, S. Certificate, 1. Cookes, S. Victuall. Copper, S. Brasse. Corne. I. Stat. 2. P. M. 5.  None shall transport any Corne, Bcere, Butter, Cheese, Hering or wood beyond the Seas, or into Scotland, in paine that the owner shall forfeit the Vessell, wherein it shall be carried, the owner of the goods double that value, and the Master of the ship all his goods, and suffer one yeares imprisonment without Bayle; The one Moy∣ty of these forfeitures to be to the K. and Q.
and the other to the prosecutor. II. If one licenced to transport Corne, victuall, or wood, transport more then his licence will warrant, he shall forfeit the tre∣ble value and suffer one years imprisonment without Baile. III. Hee that hath licence to transport Corn, victuall or wood, shall imbark all at one place, in paine to forfeit the same, and besides all his goods: The one Moity to the King and Queen, and the other to the prosecutor. IV. Justices of Peace (within three years after the abovesaid offences shall be commit∣ted) have power to hear and determine the same, and also to examine the Masters and Marriners of ships concerning the pre∣misses. V. This Act shall not restraine lthe trans∣portation of Graine when Wheat is sold for 6. s. 8. d. Rye for 4. s. & Barly for 3 s. the quarter (save only to the K. and Q. enemies) nor the victualling of ships, nor be prejudi∣ciall to the Admiralls jurisdiction. VI.  Stat. 13. El. 13. The Lord presi∣dents, and the Councells in the North and Wales, the Justices of Assise in their Cir∣cuits, and the Justices of Peace in their Ses∣sions have power to licence or prohibite the transportation of Corne at their discreti∣ons, Provided their order be first approved by the Queene or her Councell, which also may be countermanded by the Q. proclama∣tion, if there be cause for it.
VII. Stat. 3. Car. 4.  Corne may be trans∣ported to the Kings Allies, when wheate is sold for 32. s. Ry for xx. s. Pease and Beans for 16. s. and Barly or Mault for 16. s. the quar∣ter or under. S. Badger, Forestallers, 6.10. Corners. I. Stat. 3. E. 1. Officium Coronatoris,  See the Statute at large. II. Stat. 3. H. 7.1.  A Coroner shall execute his office according to law, in paine of 5. l. and shall have for his Fee, 13. s. 4. d. of the goods of the Murtherer, if he have a∣ny; if not, then out of such Amerciaments as shalbe set upon the Towneship, that suffered the Murtherer to escape. III. Stat. 1. H. 8.7.  Where one is slaine by misadventure, the Coroner shall then also execute his office without Fee, in paine of 40. s. IV. Justices of Peace have power to en∣quire of, and punish the defaults and extorti∣ons of Coroners. V. Stat. 1.2. P. M. 13.  The Coroner shall bind by Recognisance all such as can declare any thing materiall against the Murtherer to appeare at the next G. D. and shall there make Certificate of the said Recognisance, as also of the Evidence and inquisition taken before him, and all this, in paine to be fined by the Just. of the said G. D.
Costermongers, S. Victuall, 10. Cottages. I. Stat. 31. El. 7. None shall erect, or convert a Building to be a Cottage for habi∣tation, unlesse he lay foure acres of land of an Inheritance so neere unto it, that they may be conveniently occupied with it, in paine to forfeit to the Q. Majesty x. l. for every such erection or Conversion, and 40. s. a moneth for the Continuance. II. No owner or occuptier of any Cottage shall place or willingly suffer any more fa∣milies then one to co-habite therein, in pain to forfeit to the Lord of the Leet x. s. for every moneth he so continues them to∣gether. III. Justices of Assise, Justices of Peace in their Sessions and Lords of Leets have pow∣er to hear and determine these offences. IV. This Statute shall not restraine the e∣recting, making or continuing of Cottages in Market townes, or for Labourers in mynes or quarries within one Miles distance from the said Mynes or Quarries, or Sea∣faring men within one Miles distance from the Sea or a Navigable River, or for a Kee∣per, Warrener, shepherd, Heards man, or im∣potent person.
Covin, Collusion, S. Actions popular, 1, 2, 3, 4. Counterfeit Letters, or tokens. I. Stat. 33. H. 8.1. A person convict of getting into his hand money or goods by a false token, or Counterfeit letter, shall suf∣fer such corporall punishment, as shal be pre∣scribed by them, before whom hee shall be so convicted, death only excepted. II. The Lord Keeper, the Star Chamber, Justices of Assife, Justices of P. in Sess. and Just. of P. in Corporate townes, have power to heare and determine this offence. III. Two Just. of P. (1. Qu.) have power to commit or bind over such an offender to the next Assise or Sess. IV. The party grieved (notwithstanding the punishment inflicted) is left to his re∣medie at law for the Recovery of his goods against the party offending. Counterfeiters of the Kings Seal or Coyne, S. Bailment, 1. Coopers. 1. Stat. 8. El. 9. Coopers shall sell their Ale, Becre, and Sope Vessell at such rates, as shall be prescribed by I. of P. in their Sess.
after Easter, in paine to forfeite 3. s. 4. d. for every Vessell otherwise sold. Crossebowes, S. Gunnes. Currier, S. Leather. Cursing, S. Swearing. Custome, Customers, S. A∣ctions popular, 15, 18. Re∣cusants, 75, 94. Cutpurse, S. Robbery. Cutting out off tongues, &c. S. Felony, 5. Cutting off a pond head, S. Fi∣shing.
Deeds, S. Inrolment. Deere, S. Hunting. Divine Service, S. Sacraments Dying and Dyers, S. Drapery. Drapery, Clothing. I. STat. 3.4. E. 6.2. Just.  of P. & Head-officers shall in their severall pre∣cincts appoint and sweare overseers, for the due observing of this Statute concerning the well ordering of Cloth. 9. II. An overseer so by them chosen, shall undertake that office, in paine of xl. s. and none shall interrupt him in the execution of his office in paine of xx. l. III. The forfeitures for defaults in Cloth making (mentioned in this Statute) shall be recovered in any of his Majesties Courts of Record or before Just. of P. in their severall limits within one year after the offence com∣mitted, and the one Moity thereof shall be given to the King, and the other to the O∣verseer, that discovers the said defaults, vide Stat. 5.6. E. 6.6. IV. Stat. 23. El. 9.  Two Just. of P. of the County or the Head officer of a Corpo∣ration
may command logwood (which some deceiptfully use for Dying of Cloth) to be seised and openly burnt. V Stat.  39. E. 11. A Just. of P. of the Coun∣ty or Head officer of a Corporation (being also a Just. of P. there) have power to call before them, and examine the Servants of persons supected to use logwood in dying, and (if they shall find cause) to bind over to the next Qu. Sess. both the evidence, and party offending, and upon the Delinquents refusall to be bound shall commit him to pri∣son till he find sureties: They shall also cer∣tisie in at the same Sess. the examinations by then taken, where, if the party offending be convicted, he shall suffer the Pillory and forfeit xx. l. the one Moity to the Q. and the other to the prosecutor. VI.  Stat. 39. El. 20. None shall stretch, or straine any Clothes made on the North side of Trent in paine of five pounds, nor use any Engine to that purpose in paine of xx. l. VII. Northerne Clothes shall be made of such weight, length, and bredth, as by former Statutes is provided upon the paines in the same Statutes contained. VIII. A seale of leade shall be set to every Northern Cloth expressing the length and weight thereof, in pain to forfeit the same: And here, the offender shall also forfeit for every yard, that it wants of due length, 4. s. and for every pound, that it wants of due weight, 2. s.
IX. Overseers shall be appointed and sworn in the County by two Just. of P. & in Corporations by the head officer calling to him the next Just. of P. to make search once a moneth at least for defects in Northerne Clothes, and if they shall find any stretched, strained or sealed with false seales, they shall make presentment thereof at the next Qu. Sessions: And here, he that denies, or with∣holds any faulty Clothes shall for the first offence forfeit x. l. for the second xx. l. and for the third (being thereof lawfully con∣victed by verdict and two witnesses) shall suffer the Pillory. X. The Overseer, that refuseth to appear, or to undertake that office, shall forfeit 5. l. the one Moity to the Queen, the other to the officers that made him overseer. XI. The overseers shall fix a Seale of lead tosuch Clothes expressing the length and bredth of the same together with the word Searched, which shall exempt them to be searched else where. XII. If any (save the said overseers) set to or take away any seale from the said Clothea without warrant, they shall forfeit to the Queene for the first offence x. l. and for the second (being thereof lawfully convicted by verdict, and two Witnesses) xx. l. and besides suffer the Pillory. XIII. Justices of P. Headconstables and overseers shal search & seise ropes, wrinches & other Engines used for the unlawfull stretch∣ing of Northerne Clothes, and none shall
withstand them upon the forfeitures above mentioned for resisting the Overseers, 9. XIV. The Justice, that shall be found neg∣ligent in the due execution of this Act, shall forfeit 5. l. And this and all other forfei∣tures of this Act (except that mentioned Clause, 10.) shall be divided into three parts, whereof the Queene is to have one, the In∣former another, and the poored of the place, where the offence is committed, the third. XV. Justioes of P. have power to heare and determine these offences in their Sess. and Just. of Assise to convict the Just. of P. that are negligent upon proofe by two wit∣nesses, but upon neglect of justice by the said Justice of P. and Just. of Assise the abovesaid penalties are recoverable in any other Court of Justice, and in that case the one half there∣of shall go to the Q. and the other to the Informer. XVI. The owners of Northerne Clothes brought up to be sold in London shall cause them to be brought to Blackwell Hall to be searched drie without wetting, in paine of xl.s. but here the Searcher shall not make his search at such times, when it may be a hin∣derance to the owners market, in paine of v. l. These penalties are likewise given to the Queene, and the Informer. XVII. Stat, 7. Jac. 7. The Sorrer, Car∣der, Kember,  Spinster, or Weaver of Wooll or yarne, that shall be found (by his owne confession or the testimony of one Witnes) to imbesill, or detaine any part thereof from
the true owner, shall incurre whipping, and the stocks, to be inflicted upon them in the Country by any two Just. of P. and in a Cor∣poration, by the Head officer and another joyned with him; And here also the Recei∣ver there of shall incurre the like punishment, and those also in Essex, which use a Reel lesse then two yards about. XVIII. Stat. 7. Jac. 16.  Certaine course Clothes made in the North shall not be sear∣ched or sealed, nor any Custome or Aulnage payed for them. XIX. Stat. 21. Jac. 18. Divers good provisions for the well ordering of Cloth,  and divers penalties to be inflicted for the deceitfull making of the same. XX. Any two Just. of P. may call before them any person suspected for making de∣ceiveable Cloth, and if upon confession of the party or testimony of two witnesses they shall find any guilty thereof, and make Certificate accordingly under their hands and seales to the Churchwardens, and Over∣seers of the parish, where the offence is com∣mitted, those officers shall levie the penalties forfeitedby distresse, the delinquent shall suf∣fer imprisonment. See Labourers. 54. and Weights. 35. Drover, S. Badger, Holy∣dayes. 2. Drunkennesse, S. Alehouses.
Ecclesiasticall Court. 1.  STat. 21. H. 8.5. Nothing shall be given for the Probate of a Will or for letters of Administration when the goods of the Dead exceed not 5. l. save only 6 d. to the Scribe, or Register; Neverthelesse the Judge shall not refuse to prove such a testa∣ment being exhibited unto him in writing with wax ready to be sealed, and proved communi forma, but shall dispatch the aprty without delay. II. For the Probate of a Will, and all other things concerning the same, when the goods of the dead exceed 5. l. but not xl. l. the Jud∣ges Fee is 2. s. 6. d. and the Registers for regi∣string of it, 12. d. and when they exceed xl.l. the Judges Fee is 2. s. 6. d. as before, and the Registers as much: or the Registers may re∣fuse the 2. s. 6. d. and take a 1. d. for every ten lines of the Will, each line being conceived. to containe ten Inches in length: And for these fees they shall dispatch the party with∣out any frustratory delay. III. For letters of Administration, when the goods of the dead exceed 5. l. but not xl. l. the Officers Fees are only 2. s. 6. d. IV. Lands devised to be sold. shall not be accounted any of the Testators goods. V. The Judge shall not refuse to receive an Inventory indented which the executor or administrator tenders him in Court to∣gether with his oath to verifie the same.
VI. The Fee for the copy either of a will or Inventory is the same with that above al∣lowed to the Scribe for Registring the will, or else the Scribe or Register may take a x. d. for every ten lines of the length afore∣said. VII. The officer that takes more then his due Fee shall forfeit that excesse to the par∣ty grieved, and besides x. l. to be divided be∣twixt the King and the said party grieved. VIII. Stat. 23. H. 8.9.  The Fee for the seale of the Citation is 3. d. See Tithes. Egyptians. 1. Stat. 1. 2. P. & M. 4.  He that trans∣ports into this Kingdome or Wales certaine lewd people, which cal themselves Egyptians, shall forfeit xl. l. II. Their continuing in England, or Wales by the space of a moneth, shall be ad∣judged Felony without Clergie. III. Hi that obtaines License, letter, or Pasport for them, shall forfeit xl. l. IV. The forfeitures aforesaid shall be e∣qually divided betwixt the K. and Q. Maje∣sties, and the prosecutor. V. Stat. 5. El. 20.  Any person whatsoe∣ver consorting with Egyptians by the space of a moneth, shall be adjudged a felon with∣out Clergie. VI. This act shall not include Children within foureteene yeares of Age, nor Peo∣ple
in Prison, so they void the Kingdome within foureteen dayes after tehy shall be en∣larged, or reforme their course of life. VII. None borne within this Kingdome and Wales shall be compellable to void the Land by the Stat. of 1.2. P. M. 4. but only to leave their naughty Course of life. Embracery, S. Maintenance. Enditements, S. Indictments. Enquests, S. Jurors. Escapes, S. Felony. 7. Escheators. 1.  Stat. 23. H. 6.17. An Escheator shall not take above xl. s. for the execution of one Writ in one County, and that only when his labour and Costs require it, otherwise he ought to take lesse. II.  Stat. 12. E. 4.9. None shall take u∣pon him to be an Escheator or Deputy to an Escheator, unlesse the Escheator himselfe hath Freehold within the County worth xx. l. per Annum, in paine of xl. l. III. His Deputy or Farmor shall be a suf∣ficient man, and shall Certifie into the Ex∣chequer his deputation within twenty dayes next after it is made, upon the like
paine of fortie pound. IV. Justices of P. in Sess. have power to heare and determine these defaults, and to give Judgement for the recovery of the said forfeitures, which are to be distributed be∣twixt the K. and the prosecutor. V. This Stat. shall not restraine Corpo∣rations, which have power by their Charter to appoint Escheators. VI. Stat. 1. H. 8.8.  No Escheator or o∣ther person whatsoever shall sit by vertue of any Commission to inquire of Lands unlesse his lands be worth forty marks per Annum in paine of xx. l. VII. Stat. 33. H. 8.22.  An Escheator shall not take for the finding of an office of lands, that exceed not the cleare yearely va∣lue of 5. l. per Annum, above 15. s. viz. for his owne Fee 6. s. 8. d. for writing the office 3. s. 4. d. for the charges of the Jury 3. s. and for the officers above, that are to receive the office, 2. s. Estreates. 1. Stat. 9. E. 3.5. Just. of Ass.  G. D. and Oy. and Term. before they send their Re∣cords into the Exchequer, shall take Estreats out of them. II. Stat. 31. E. 3.3.  A man or town char∣ged in the Exchequer by the Estreats of the Justices with the detaining of the goods of fugitives, or Felons, shall be discharged upon producing another, that is chargeable.
III.  Stat. 42. E. 3.9. The party Char∣geable by the Estreats of greene wax, upon payment thereof shall see the schedules them∣selves under seale and totted, for default whereof, if he shall be afterwards damnified, the Sheriffe shall pay him treble damages, to be recovered before Just. of P. or other Justices, and shall besides make fine to the King. S. Indictments, 5. Iurors, 9. Iuft. of P. 18. Excommunicate persons, S. Bailment, 1. Fighting, Sheriffs, 4. Extortion, S. Actions po∣pular, 15. Faires, S. Horses, 11, &c. 16, &c. Fasting dayes, S. Fishdayes. Feasants, S. Hawkes.
Felony. I. STat. 9. H. 3.22.  The King shall have Annum diem et vastum in Fe∣lons lands, and then they shall be delivered to the Lords of whom they are holden. II. Stat. 3. E. 1.12. Notorious Felons,  which refuse lawfull triall, shall suffer strong and hard Imprisonment. III. Stat. 1. E. 2.  It shall be Felony for any person to break Prison, being in for Fe∣only, otherwise not. IV. Stat. 5. H. 4.4.  It is felony to multiply gold or Silver. V. Stat. 5. H. 4.5.  It is felony to cut out the tongue, or put out the eyes of any of the K. Subjects. VI. Stat. 8. H. 6.12.  Imbezeling of a Re∣cord, whereby any judgement shall be rever∣sed, is Felony. VII. Stat. 1. R. 3.3.  Justices of P. have in Sess. power to enquire of the Escape of Felons. VIII. Officers shall not seise the goods of any arrested, or imprisoned for suspicion of Felony before his conviction, in paine to forfeite double the value of the goods so ta∣ken. IX. Stat. 3. H. 7.14.  Conspiring by any of the Kings sworne Servants, to destroy the King, any Lord, or Coun∣sellor sworne, shall be adjudged Felo∣ny.
X.  Stat. 6. H. 8.6. The I. of the K. B. have power to remitt out of that Court Prisoners committed for felony or Murder, to be tried in the country where the offence was com∣mitted XI.  Stat. 21. H. 8.11. After Attainder of a Felon, the Justices before whom the Fe∣lony was tried, shall by a Writ of Restituti∣on command the stoln goods to be restored to the right owner. XII.  Stat. 22. H. 8.11. It shall be Felony to break downPowdike in Norfolk, and Old∣field dile in the Isle of Ely. XIII. Iust. of P. there have power to heare and determine this Offence. XIV.  Stat. 24. H. 8.5. There shall be no forfeiture of lands or goods for the kil∣ling of any person, that attempteth to Mur∣der, rob, or burglarily to break any Mansion-house. XV.  Stat. 31. El. 4. It shall be Felony to imbesill any warlike habiliments, or vi∣ctualls provided for Souldiers, and others to the value of xx. s. worth, unlesse the delin∣quent be not prosecuted within one yeare after the offence committed, or otherwise shall discharge himselfe by lawfull proofe. XVI. For this offence none shall incurre corruption of Blood, or forfeiture of In∣heritance, or Dower. XVII.  Stat. 43. El. 13. In the Counties of Cumberland, Northumberland, Westmer∣land, and the Bishoprick of Duresime, the carrying away, or detaining of any person
against his will, the assenting, or aiding to the taking or detaining of any person, the receiving or carrying of Black Maile, the giving of black Maile for protection, or the burning of Barnes, or stacks of grayne shall be adjudged Felony without Clergy, which the I. of Ass. G.D. and P. have power to hear and determine. XVIII. The names of persons outlawed there for felony shall be delivered by the Clerks of the P. to all Sheriffs, Maiors, and other Head officers to be proclaimed throughout all the said Counties; And with them none shall converse, in paine to suffer six moneths Imprisonment, andnot to be en∣larged, till surety be given for the good be∣haviour during one whole yeare after such Imprisonment. XIX. I. of Ass. G. D. Oy. and Term. & of P. have power to punish the negligence of officers in this behalf. XX. This Act shall not impeach the au∣thority of the Lord Wardens of the Mar∣ches. S. Bailment, 3.6.7.11. Clergy. Hunters, 5. Labourers. 1. Masons, Matrimony, 1. Murder, 5. Felonsgoods, S. Felony, 8.12. Fighting and quarrelling. I. Stat. 5.6. E. 6.4. None shall use chiding
words in the Church or Churchyard, in pain of Suspension for so long time as the Ordi∣nary shall think fit, viz. of a lay man ab in∣gressu Ecclesia, and of a Clerk à Ministerio of∣ficii. II. He that useth violent hands there, is thereby excomunicate ipso facto. II. He that is convicted of striking with a weapon there (or of drawing it, with an intent to strike) before I. of Ass. of Oy. and T. or of P. in Sess. by verdict, his own Con∣fession, or two lawfull witnesses, shall by Judgement of the said Justices have one of his Eares cut off, and in case he want Eares, shall be burned upon the Cheek with the Letter F. and shall stand excommunicate Ipso∣facto. S. Maintenance, 7. &c. Fish, Fishers, Fishing. I.  Stat. 13. E. 1.47. Salmons shall not be taken betwixt the Nativity of our Lady, and Martlemas, nor young Salmons betwixt the middest of Aprill, and Midsommer. II. Overseers of this statute shall be ap∣pointed, and sworne to enquire after the of∣fenders, who for the first time shal be punish∣ed by burning their Nets or Engines; for the second by a quarter of a years impri∣sonment; for the third by a whole yeares im∣prisonment: and as the offence increaseth, so shall the punishment. III.  Stat. 13. R. 2.19. No Fisher shall
use any Engine, by which the fry of Fish may be destroyed, upon the paines mentioned in the Stat. of 13. E. 1.47. IV. Salmons in Lancashire shall not be ta∣ken betwixt Michaelmas, and Candlemas. V. Conservators shall be sworne to see this statute observed, and the offenders pu∣nished. VI. Stat. 17. R. 2.9. Just.  of P. shall be Conservatour of Statutes of 13. E. 1.47. & of 13. R. 2.19. and shall have power to search all Weares, least by their straitnesse the fry of fish might be destroyed. VII. Iust. of P. have power to appoint and swear under conservators to heare and determine in Sess. offences of this kind, and to punish the offenders by Imprisonment, and fine, whereof the under conservator, which informes, is to have half. VIII. The Maior or Warden of London hath like power in Thames, from Staines to Lon∣don, and in Medeway, as far as the Citizens grant extends. IX. Stat. 22. E. 4.2.  The contents of Vessells of Salmon, Hering and Eeles, And how fish shall be packed. X. Stat. 11. H. 7.23.  The selling of Sal∣mon and Eeles, their vessells, The packing, searching and gaging of them, and what Fee is due for the same. XI. Stat. 1. El. 17.  None shall use any net, or engine, to destroy the spawne or fry of fish or take salmons, or Trowts out of season, or Pikes shorter then ten inches,
Salmons, then 16. Trowts, then 8. and Bar∣bells, then 12. or use any engine, to take fish, other then an Angle, or a net, or tramell of two inches and an half meshe, in paine to forfeit 20. s. the fish wrongfully taken, and the net or Engine wrongfully used. XII. All persons having jurisdiction of Conservancy upon streames or waters, and Lords of leets have power upon the oathes of twelve men to heare and determine these offences, and shall have all the forfeitures, which accrew therupon, XIII. The steward of a Leet shall give this statute in Charge to the Jury, in pain of xl. s. to be divided betwixt the Queene and the Informer. XIV. Here, if the Jury wilfully forbeare to present offences of this kind, the Steward or Bayliffe shall impannell another Jury to enquire of their default, which being found, the first Jury shall forfeit xx. s. a piece. XV. Upon default of presentment in leets within one yeare, Just. of P. in Sess. Just. of Oy. and Term. and Just. of Ass. in Circuits have power to heare and determine the said offences. XVI. This Act shall not restraine the ta∣king of Smelts, Leches, Mineis, Bulheads, Gudgions, or Eeles with nets or Engines formerly used, so that no other fish be taken therewith; nor shall extend to abridge any Farmer priviledge of Conservancy lawfully enjoyed, or of Fishing in Tweede, Vske or Wye, or in waters set to farme by the Q.
Majesty, So that the spawne, or Fry of fish be not therein wilfully destroyed. XVII. Stat. 5. El. 5.  None shall set price, make restraint, or take toll (except at Kingstone upon Hull) of any Sea fish impor∣ted, in paine to forfeit the value thereof, and here it shall be lawfull to withstand the Toll taker. XVIII. No purveyour shal take any Seafish brought out of a Subjects Ship without the parties consent, in pain to forfeit the double value thereof, and here also it shall be law∣full to withstand the Purveyour; But Com∣position Fish, and Regall Fish are excep∣ted. XIX. None shall buy any herrings of any stranger borne, being not sufficiently salted, Packed, and Casked, in paine to forfeit the said Herrings, or value thereof; But here those Herrings, that happen by Ship∣wrack are excepted. XX. The Stat. of 5.6. E. 6.14. shall not extend to hinder the buying of Sea Fish un∣salted or Mud fish out of English Bot∣tomes. XXI. When the offences aforesaid shall be committed at land, or within any haven or Peere, Just. of P. Maiors and other head-officers in their Sess. have power to heare and determine them by the oathes of 12. men, or otherwise by Information or the the parties Confession. XXII. Here, the forfeitures abovesaid happening in Corporate towns shall wholly
accrew to the Corporation, but happening elsewhere in the Country prosecuted meer∣ly at the Qu. Sute, by Information or other∣wise, shall totally accrew to the Qu. And in these two Cases the sute ought to be com∣menced within one yeare next after the of∣fence committed, but being prosecuted by an Informer they shall be divided betwixt the Qu. and the Informer; And here the sute ought to be commenced within six moneths. XXIII.  Stat. 1. Jac. 23. In the Counties of Somerset, Devon and Cornewall, it shall be lawfull for the Huors of Fish to goe u∣pon any mans ground neere the Sea Coast, to discover fish, and for Fishermen to drie their Seanes and Nets there, without danger of committing trespasse. XXIV.  Stat. 3. Jac. 12. None shall e∣rect a Weare, or Weares along the Sea shore, or in any Haven or Creeke, or within five Miles of the mouth of any Haven, or Creek, or shall willingly destroy any Spawne or Fry of Fish, in paine of ten pound to be di∣vided betwixt the K. and the prosecutor, nei∣ther shall any fish in any of the said places with any Net of a lesse Mash then three In∣ches and a half betwixt knot and knot (except for the taking of Smoulds in Norfolk only or with a Canvas net, or other Engine, where∣by the Spawne or fry of fish may be destroy∣ed, in paine to forfeit the said net or Engine and 10. s. in money to be divided betwixt the poore of the parish, and the prosecutor, and to be levied in Corporations by the
Head officers, and in other places by di∣stresse, and sale of goods upon warrant of a Just. of P. directed unto the Constable, and Churchwardens of the same parish for that purpose. S. Hawkes. 11. Hunters. 1. Lahourers, 46. Fish Dayes. I. Stat. 2.3. E. 6.19.  None shall eate flesh in Lent, or upon Frydayes, Saturdayes, Embring dayes or any other dayes reputed fish dayes, in paine of 10. s. ten dayes Impri∣sonment, and during that time to abstainc from flesh, and for every time offending af∣terwards to incurre double punishment. II. Justices of G. D. and of P. have power to heare and determine this offence, and the forfeiture above said shall be divided be∣twixt the K. and the Informer being prosecu∣tor, within three moneths after the offence committed. III. This Act shall not restraine any per∣son having the K. Licence to cate flesh, or being aged, weak, sick, in prison, Lievete∣nant of the Kings Army, or Governor of a Fort, nor any woman with Child, or in Childbed. IV. Stat. 5.6. E. 6.3.  The evens of all Holydayes commanded by this Statute (ex∣cept S. Jo. the Evangelist and Philip and Jacob) shall be observed for fasting dayes, in pain of Ecclesiasticall Censure. V. When the Holyday Even happens
Sunday, the Saturday is to be fasted. VI.  Stat. 5. El. 5. None shall eate flesh upon dayes usually observed as fish-dayes, in paine of 3. l. or three moneths imprison∣ment without bayle: And they that witting∣ly suffer any such offence to be committed within their house, and doe not discover it to an officer, that may punish it, shall for∣feit xl. s. VII. These forfeitures shall bee divided into three parts, whereof the Queene shall have one, the poore of the parish another, & the Informer the third. VIII. Notwithstanding this Act, licences may be granted upon just causes, on these conditions following, viz. To a Peere or his Lady if he pay yearly for it to the poore of the parish, where he dwels, 26. s. 8. d. to a Knight or his Lady, if he pay 13. s. 4. d. and to any other inferiour person, if he pay 6. s. 8. d. But here, no licence must extend to the eating of Beefe, at any time, or to the cating of Veale betwixt Michaelmas and May day. IX. The Minister of the parish may grant a Licence to a sick person during the time of his sicknesse, and if the sicknesse conti∣nue above eight dayes, shall in the presence of one of the Churchwardens register the same and have 4. d. for the Registring of it, but here, if he grant the Licence without just cause, he shall forfeit five Markes. X. Justices of P. Maiors and other Chief Officers have power in Sess. (within their
severall Jurisdictions) to heare and deter∣mine these Offences, as well by the oathes of twelve men, as otherwise by Information. XI. If any shall by preaching or otherwise avouch, or notifie, that any eating of fish, or forbearing of flesh is necessary for the sa∣ving of the soule, or the service of God, o∣therwise then as other Politique lawes be, shall be punished as a spreader of false news. See Newes. XII. Stat. 35. El. 7.  The above said pe∣nalty of 3. l. is mitigated to xx. s. and that of xl. s. to 13. s. 4. d. Fishmonger, S. Victuall, 2. Force. Forcible Entry. I. Stat. 5. R. 2.7.  None shall enter into lands or tenements by force, in paine of Im∣prisonment, and Ransome at the Kings plea∣sure. II. Stat. 15. R. 2.2.  When forcible en∣try is made into lands or into Church-li∣vings, one or more Just. of P. taking suf∣ficient power and going to the place so kept by force, may commit the offender to the next Gaole, there to remaine convict by the Justices record, till he hath made fine, and Ransome to the King; And herein the She∣riffe, and all others shall be Assistants, in pain of Imprisonment, & great fines making.
III.  Stat. 8. H. 6.9. The Stat. of 15. R. 2.2. shall be duly put in execution, both a∣gainst forcible entry, and also against forci∣ble detainer, although it be after peaceable entry; and all this, at the Costs of the party grieved. IV. When complaint of any such entry, or detainer shall be made to any Justice, or Ju∣stices of P. he or they by precept shall com∣mand the Sheriffe to summon a sufficient Jury, and having by them made Inquity of the force committed shall cause the tene∣ments to be reseised and that as well in the absence, as presence of the party offending; And here the Alienation of Tenements (so entred into or detained by force) for mainte∣nance shall be adjudged void. V. If the Jurors make default Issues are to be set upon them by the Sheriffe thus, xx. s. upon the first precept, xl. s. upon the second, C. s. upon the third, and for every default af∣ter the double. VI. The Sheriffe or Bailiffe that shall neg∣lect his duty here in shall forfeit xx. l. to be recovered against him as well before the Ju∣stices aforesaid, as before Just. of Ass. by In∣dictment, or Bill, and to be divided betwixt the K. and the prosecutor. VII. In an assise of Novel disseisin, or Ac∣tion of trespasse against the party guilty of forcible entry, forcible detainer, or Aliena∣tion, as aforesaid, the party grieved shall re∣cover treble damages. VIII. Head officers and Just of P. of Cor∣porations
have like power within their Franchises, that other Just. of P. have with∣in Counties. IX. This Statute shall endamage none, where peaceable possession hath been enjoy∣ed by the space of three yeares. X. Stat. 32 H. 8.33.  A disseisor dying seised taketh not away title of entry from the disseisee or his heire, except the dissei∣sor enjoyed the tenements peaceably with∣out entry or claime of the disseisee, 5. years before his death. XI. Stat. 31. El. 11.  There shall be no Restitution upon an Indictment of forcible entry or detainer, where the defendant hath been three years next before in quiet pos∣session, and his estate therein not ended. XII. Stat. 21. Iac. 15. Vpon force or de∣tainer,  as aforesaid, a Justice or Just. of P. have power to give restitution of possession aswell unto Tenants for years by Elegit, Sta∣tute merchant, or staple, Coppiholders, or Guardians by Knight service, as unto those that Clayme Free hold or Inheritance. S. Maintenance. 14. Forests, S. Horses. 5. Hunters. Forestallers, Regrator, Ingros∣sers. I. Stat. 5.6. E. 6.14. He that shall buy,
or contract any Merchandize, Victuall, or other thing (in the way) before it shall be brought (by land or by water) unto any Port, rode, Faire or Market, where it should be sold, or shall disswade prople from bringing any such commoditie to any such place, or (being brought) shall perswade them to en∣haunce the price thereof, shall be adjudged a Forestaller. II. A Regrator is he, that buyes any grain, victuall or other commodity in a Faire or Maket and sells thesame againe in the same Fair, or Market, or some other Fair or Mar∣ket, within four Miles. III. An Ingrosser is he, that buyes or gets into his hands any grain growing upon the ground or other commodity above men∣tioned, with an intent to sell the same a∣gaine. IV. The party guilty of any of the offences abovesaid, shall forfeit for the first offence the value of the goods so bought or had, and suffer two moneths Imprisonment without Baile, for the second, the double value, and six moneths Imprisonment without Bail, and for the third shall forfeit all his goods, be set upon the Pillory, and suffer imprison∣ment at the K. pleasure. V. This Act shall not restraine the buy∣ing of Barly or oates to be converted into Mault, or oatmeale, nor the Provi∣sion of Victualling any towne corpo∣rate, Ship, Castle, Fort, or of Barwick, Holy-Iland, &c. or any Fishmonger, In-holder,
Victualler, Butcher, Poultrer, or peopledwel∣ling within one Mile of the main Sea, which use to buy and sell fish, for any thing concer∣ning their severall Mysteries or trading, they retayling the same againe at reasonable prices; nor any Badger, Lader, Kidder, or Carrier, assigned to that office by three Just. of P. and delivering the Commodity out of his hand, within one moneth after he buyes it; nor the taking of any thing reserved upon any lease, so that all these things be done without fraud or forestalling. VI. He that buyeth graine in any market for change of seed, shall bring as much the same day, and sell it, if he can, according to the present Price of graine there, in paine to forfeit double the value of the graine so bought. VII. He that byues any Cattle, and sells the same againe alive within five weeks, shall forfeit double the value therof, during which time he ought to keepe them upon pastrue, which he hath either by graunt or prescrip∣tion. VIII. Justices of P. in Sess. have power to heare and determine the aforesaid offen∣ces by Inquisition, presentment, Bill, or In∣formation, or by the Testimony of two Wit∣nesses, and to extract the one half of the for∣feitures to the use of the King, and cause the other halfe to be levied to the use of the prosecutor by Fieri facias or capias, and when the prosecution shall be at the Kings suite only, to extract the whole to the Kings use.
IX. None shall be punished twice for the same offence. X. This Act shall not restraine the Trans∣porter of Graine or Cattle from Port to Port (allowed by three Justices of P. and not fore-stalling) so that he imbark the same within 40. dayes after he buyes them, and brings back from some Just. of P. or Head-Officer, a Certificate of their unlading agreeable to his Cocket. XI. The offences against this Statute shall be prosecuted within two yeares. XII. This Act shall not restrain a Drover allowed by there Just. of P. (1. Qu.) and sel∣ling his Cattel at 40. miles distance from the place where he bought them: Howbeit such allowance ought not to continue above one yeare. Vide Stat. 31. E. 1. Stat. of Clothes. 25. E. 3.3. and Stat. 2. R. 2.2. And also, Actions popular, 15. Badgers, 2. Weights, 18. Franchises, S. Liberties. Fruiterers, S. Victuall, 10 Fuell. Stat. 7. E. 6.7. A Justice of P. hath power to commit to the Pillory such as are not able to pay the forfeitures for breaking the As∣sise of Fuell.
For the Assise of Fuell, and the penalty of breaking the same, Sec 43. El. 14. Games, S. Playes. Gaole, Gaolers, S. Prisons. Gold, Silver, Goldsmiths. I. STat. 8. H. 5.3.  None shall gild any thing, but Silver, or the Ornaments of holy Church; nor silvers any thing but Knights spurres, or the apparell of a Ba∣ron, or above that estate, in pain to forfeit ten times the value of the thing so gilt, and to suffer one yeares imprisonment. II. Just. of P. have power to heare and determine these offences, and the prosecu∣tor shall have one third part of the forfei∣ture. III. Stat. 2 H. 6.14.  Goldsmiths that work any silver not of the finenesse of Ster∣ling, or shall not set their mark thereon, shall forfeit double the value thereof, to be divided betwixt the King and the Prose∣cutor. IV. Justices of P. have power to heare and determine these offences. V. Stat. 18. El. 15.  Two and twenty ca∣racts are the measure for the finenesse of gold, and eleven ounces and a half for that of silver.
S. Actions popular, 18. Felony, 4. Graine, S. Corne. Green Waxe, S. Estreats. Guns and Crosse-bowes. I.  Stat. 33. H. 8.6. None shall shoot in, or keep in his house any Crosse-bow, Hand∣gun, Hagbut, or Demy-hake, unlesse his lands be of the value of a 100. li per Annum, in pain to forfeit x. l. for every such offence. II. None shall shoot in or have any hand∣gun under the length of one yard, nor hagbut or demy-hake under the length of three quarters of a yard, in pain to forfeit 10. li. And it shall be lawfull for any man, having lands of 100. li. per annum, to seise any such gun, or any Crossebow to his own use, but then he ought to break them within twenty dayes after, in pain of xl. s. III. None shall travell with a Crossebow bent, or Gun charged, except in time of Warre, or shoot within a quarter of a milo of a City, Borough, or Market town, except for the defence of himself or his house, or at a dead mark, in pain of ten pound. IV. None shall command his servant to shoot in any gun, or crosse-bow, except at a dead mark, or in time of Warre, in pain of ten pound.
V. The penalties abovesaid shall be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor. VI. Howbeit the followers of Lords Spiritual & Temporal, & Knights Esquires, & gentle∣men, & the Inhabitants of Cities, Boroughs, or Market Towns, may keep in their houses, and use to shoot (but at a dead mark onely) with guns not under the lengths abovesaid: So may the owner of a Ship for the defence of his Ship; And also he which dwels two furlongs distant form any towne, or within five miles of the Sea-coast, and this last may shoot at any wild beast or fowle, save onely Deore, Heron, Shovelard, Fesant, Partridge, wild Swan, or wild Elkes. VII. Those which have power from the King to take away Guns, and Crosse-bowes, in Forests, Parks, and Chases, may retaine the same notwithstanding this Act; So may likewise Smiths and Merchants, that make or sell them, the severall lengths abovesaid being duly observed. VIII. It shall be lawfull for any person to convey the party offending against this act before the next Just. of P. who upon due ex∣amination and proofe shall have power to commit him to prison, there toremaine till he hath satisfied the penalty, which in this case shall be divided betwixt the King and the party that so takes the offender. IX. Every Placard granted by the King, which expresseth not at what Beasts or Fowl the Grauntee shall shoot; and where the Grauntee entreth not in a Recognizance
of twenty pound in the Chancery, to shoot at no other shall be adjudged voyd. X. Just. of P. in Sess. and Stewards of of Leets have power to hear and determine these offences. XI. When the conviction is in Sess. the whole forfeitures is to be levied to the Kings use: when in a Leet the one half is the Kings, and the other halfe ought to be divided be∣twixt the Lord and the Prosecutor. XII. Here if a Jury shall willingly conceal any thing the Just. or Steward have power to impanel another Jury, by whom if the first Jury be found guilty of concealment, they shall forfeit 20. s. apiece, viz. to the King if it be in Sess. but if in a Leet, then the one half to the Lord, and the other halfe to the Prosecutor. XIII. Forfeitures arising by this act, shall be sued for, viz. by the King, within one year, and by a common person within six moneths, otherwise they shall be lost. XIV. A servant upon command may use him Masters crosse-bow or gun (not prohibi∣ted by this act) so as he shoot at no Fowle, Deere, or other game, and may be a license in writing carry it to any place to be amen∣ded. See Hawks, 26. Hunters 11. XV.  Stat. 2.3. E. 6.14. None under the degree of a Baron shall shoot in any hand∣gun within any City or Towne, at any Fowle whatsoever, or with any haile-shot, in pain of x. l.
XVI. This act shall not restraine those, which according to the value of their land, are authorised to shoot by 33. H. 8.6. So that they forbeare to use haile-shot; And all others, which presume to shoot, shall pre∣sent their own names, viz. (in a Corporati∣on.) to the Mayor or head Officer, and (in the Country) to the next Justice of P. in pain of xx. s. and the said Just. or Head Officer is to see them recorded at the next Sess. in the like paine of twenty shillings, which forfei∣tures are to be divided betwixt the King, and the Prosecutor. See Hawks 26. Gunners, S. Captaines, 32. Labourers, 46. Habeas Corpus, S. Baile. ment, 10. Hares, S. Hunting. Hats, S. Labourers, 47. &c. Hawkes, Hawking, Feasants, Partridges, &c. I. Cart. For. 9. H. 3.13.  Every Free-man may have within his own woods, Ayries of
Hawks, Sparrow hawks, Faulcons, Eagles, & Herons. II.  Stat. 34. E. 3.22. An Hawk taken up shall be delivered to the Sheriffe, who after Proclamation made, shall deliver her to the right owner. III. If the Hawk were taken up by a mean man, and be challenged within foure moneths, the Sheriffe shall retaine her, but if by one, that may keep a Hawk, the Sheriffe shall restore her to him againe. IV. If any doth take and conceale a Hawk, he shall answer the value thereof, and suffer two yeares imprisonment. V.  Stat. 37. E. 3.19. He that steales and carries away a Hawk, not observing the ordi∣nance of 34. E. 3.22. shall be deemed a Fe∣lon. VI.  Stat. 11. H. 7.17. None shall take Feasants, or Partridges with Engins in ano∣thers ground without llicence, in pain of x. l. to be divided betwixt the owner of the ground and the prosecutor. VII. None shall take out of the nest any Egges of Faulcon, Goshawk, Lannor, or Swan, in paine of a yeare and a dayes Impri∣sonment, and to incurre a fine at the Kings pleasure, to be divided betwixt the King and the owner of the ground, where the said Hawkes Egges shall be taken, but to the ow∣ner of the Swan, where Swans Egges are taken. VIII. None shall be are any Hawk of Eng∣lish breed called an Eyesse, Goshauk, Tassell,
Lanner, Laneret, or Faulcon, in pain to for∣feit the same to the King. IX. He that brings an Eyesse hawk from beyond the Sea shall have a Certificate un∣der the Customers Seale where he lands, or if out of Scotland, then under the Seal of the Lord warden or his Lievtenant, testifying that she is a fortaine Hawk, upon the like paine of forfeiting the Hawk. X. None shall take, kill or feare away any of the Hawkes abovesaid from their Coverts where they use to breed, in pain of x.l. to be recovered before Just. of Peace and divi∣ded betwixt the King and the prosecutor. XI. Stat. 5. El. 21.  None shall unlawful∣ly break downe Fishpond heads, or enter into any Charter park, woods, or other grounds and there kill, or chase the deere, or take a∣way hawkes, or Hawks Egges, in pain to suf∣fer three moneths Imprisonment, and to be bound with good Sureties to the good beha∣viour for seaven yeares after. XII. The party grieved shall in Sess. or elsewhere recover treble dammages against the Delinquent, and upon satisfaction shall have liberty to procure his release of the be∣haviour. XIII. Just. of Oy. and Term. and A ssise, and Just. of P. and G. D. in Sess. have pow∣er to hear and determine these offences. XIV. The said Just. of P. upon the offen∣ders acknowledgement in Sess. and satisfa∣ction to the party grieved, shall have power torelease that behaviour.
XV.  Stat. 23. El. 10. None shall kill or take any Fesants or partridges with any net or Engine in the night time, in paine to for∣feit for every Feasant xx. s. and for every Partridge x. s. which if the offender pay not within ten dayes, he shall suffer one Moneths Imprisonment without Baile; and enter into Bond with good Sureties before some Just. of P. not to offend in the like kind within two years after. XVI. The forfeitures aforesaid shall be recovered in any Court of Record, and di∣vided betwixt the Lord of the liberty or ma∣nor, where the offence is committed, and the prosecutor, but in case the Lord shall dis∣pense with the offender, the poore of the pa∣rish are to have his Moity, to be recovered by any of the Churchwardens. XVII. None shall hawk or hunt with his Spaniels in standing graine, or before it is stocked (except in his owne ground, or with the owners consent) in paine to forfeit xl. s. to the owner of the said ground to be recove∣red as aforesaid. XVIII. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. in Sess. and afterwards in Leets, have power to heare and determine these offences. And one Just. of P. may examine such an offender, and bind him over with good Sureties to answer it, at the next generall Sess. if the offence be not before determined at the Assises, or in a Leet. XIX. This Act shall not restrain Fowlers, which unwillingly take Feasants, or Partrid∣ges,
and forthwith let them go at large. XX. Stat. 1. Jac. 27.  Every person con∣victed by his own confession, or upon oath by two witnesses, before two or more I. of P. to have killed or taken any Feasant, Par∣tridge, Pigeon, Duck, Heron, Hare, or other game, or to have taken or destroied the Egs of Feasants, Partridges or Swans, shall by the said Just. be committed to prison without baile; unlesse he immediately pay to the use of the Poore, where the offence was com∣mitted, or he apprehended, xx. s. for every fowle, Hare, or Egge so killed taken or de∣stroied, and after one moneths commit∣ment shall before two or more Just. of P. be bound with two sufficient Sureties in xx. l. a piece with condition never to offend in the like kind againe. XXI. Every person convicted as above∣said, to keep a Grayhound, dog or net to kill or take Deer, Hare, Fesant, or Partridge (unlesse he have inheritance of 10. l. per An∣num, a lease for life of xxx. l. per Annum, or be worth 200. l. in goods, or otherwise be the Son of a Baron or Knight, or heire aparant of an Esquire) shall suffer imprisonment as aforesaid, unlesse he forthwith pay xl. s. to the use abovesaid. XXII. None shall sell, or buy to sell again any Deere, Hare, Feasant, or Partridge (ex∣cept Feasants or Partridges by them reared up or brought from beyond Sea) in paine to forfeit for every Deere xl. s. Hare, x. s. Fea∣sant xx. s. and Partridge x. s.
XXIII. The forfeitures abovesaid shall be divided betwixt the prosecutor and the Poor of the parish, where the offence is com∣mitted. XXIV. Just. of Ass. I. of P. in Sess and two or more Just. of P. out of Sess. have power to heare and determine these offen∣ces. XXV. None shall by any former law suffer punishment for the same offence, for which he shall be punished by this Law. XXVI. This Act shall not restraine one licenced in open Sess. to kill Hawkes meate; but the he shal there become bound by recog∣nisance in xx. l. not to kill any of the games prohibited by this Law, nor to shoot within 600 pace of a Hearnery, within 100 pace of a Pigeon house, or in a Park, Forest or Chase, Whereof his Master is not owner, or keeper; The Clerk of the P. his Eee for such a li∣cence is 12.d. XXVII.  Stat. 7. Jac. 11. Every person convicted by his owne confession, or by two witnesses upon oath before two or more Just. of P. to have hawked at, or destroyed any Feasant or Partridtge betwixt the first of Iuly, and the last of August, shall suffer one moneths Imprisonment without Baile; unlesse he forthwith pay to the use of the Poore, where the offence was committed, or he apprehended, xl. s. for every time so haw∣king, and xx. s. for every Feasant or Par∣tridge so destroyed, or taken. XXVIII. He that shall be punished by this
law shall not again be punished by any other law for the same offence. XXIX. This offence shall be prosecuted within six moneths after it shall be commit∣ted. XXX. It shall be lawfull for the Lord of a mannor or any having free warren, Inheri∣tance of xl. l. per Annum, Freehold of lxxx. l. per Annum, or goods worth 400. l. or their servants (licenced by them) to take Fesants or Partridges within their own grounds or precinct, so they do it in the day time, and only betwixt Michaelmas and Christmas. XXXI. If any (of meane Condition) shall be convicted by his owne confession or by one witnesse upon oath, before two or more I. of P. to have killed, or taken any Fesant, or Partridge with dogs, nets, or engines, he shall by the said Justices be committed to prison without Baile, unlesse he forthwith pay to the use of the poor, where the offence was committed xx. s. for every Feasant or Partridge so killed or taken: and also be∣come bound before one or more I. of P. in a recognisance of 20. l. never to offend in the like kind againe. XXXII. Every Cóstable or head-borough (u∣pon warrant under the hāds of two or more I. of P.) hath power to search the houses of per∣sons suspected to offend against the Law, and the dogs or nets there found, to kill, and cut in pieces, at pleasure, as things forfeited un∣to the said officers.
Hering, S. Corne, 1. High-Wayes. I.  Stat. 1. M. Parl. secund. cap. 5. Justi∣ces of the Counties of Dorset and Sommer∣set shall assesse those Countries towards the repaire of the Cawsey lying between Shafts∣bury, and Sherburne: See the slatute at large. II.  Stat. 2.3. P. M. 8. The Constables and Churchwardens of every parish shall yearely upon Tuesday or Wednesday in Ea∣ster week call together some of their neigh∣bours, and then make choice of two within the parish to be Surveyours of the High∣wayes the yeare following, who shall forth∣with take that office upon them, in paine to forfeit, 20. s. a piece: The said Const. and Churchw. shall ten also nominate foure dayes betwixt that time and Midsommer to be set apart for the Amendment of the high∣wayes, and shall give publique notice there∣of in the Church the next sunday after Ea∣ster. III. The officers and dayes being thus ap∣pointed, every one having a team, or a plow∣land either in arable or in pasture, is char∣geabe to send two able men with a Teame and tooles convenient to worke eight houres upon every one of those foure dayes, in pain
to forfeit x. s. for every day default is made: And every Cottager is bound to work him∣self or to find one to work for him as afore∣said, in pain to forfeit 12. d. for every day. IV. The Surveyours have power to ap∣point, instead of a team two able Labourers to worke as aforesaid, who shall not faile in pain of 12. d. a piece for every day. V. Stewards in Leets have power to in∣quire after the breach of this Act, and to set Fines upon those that make default at their diseretion, and shall within six weekes after Michaelmas deliver indented estreats there∣of under their hands and seales, viz. one to the Bailiffe or high Constable of the liberty and the other to the Constables and Church∣wardens of the parish, where the default was made. VI. In default of {pre}sentmēt therof, in Leets, the Justices of P. in Sess. shal enquire therof, & set such fines as they or two of them (1 Qu.) shal think fit, whereof the Clerk of the P. shall also deliver indented Estreates under hishād, & seal, to the Const. & Churchw. as aforesaid. VII. Their Estreats shall be a sufficient warrant for the Bailiffe or chief Const. to levy the said Fines by way of distresse; and if no distresse can be found, or the party do not pay the fyne wihtin 20 dayes after law∣full demand, he or they shall forfeit double so much: All which fynes, & forfeitures shall be imployed towards the Amendment of the high-wayes. VIII. The Bailisse or high Const. shall
yearly betwixt the first of March and the last of Aprill render unto the Const. and Churchw. unto whom the other part of the Estreats was delivered a true Accompt of the moneys received by him in paine of xl.s. And the said Const. and Churchwardens have power to call the said Bailiffe, or high-Const. before two or more Just. of P. (1. Qu.) to passe his accompt, who have power to commit him untill he shall have satisfied all the arrerages by him received save 8. d. in the pound for his own Fee, and 12. d. in the pound for the Fee of the Steward, or Clerk of the P. and in this Case the succeeding Const. and Churchw. have the same power, that their predecessors had. IX.  Stat. 5. El. 13. It shall be lawfull for Surveyors to turn a watercourse (hurtfull to the high-way) into any mans ditch, or to take rubbish ready digged in or neere any mans Quary, and for default of gravell, &c. elsewhere, to dig in any severall ground, so they forbeare to dig in houses, orchards, gar∣dens, and meadowes, or to make a pit above ten yards broad: But if they fill not the place again with earth (at he costs of the parish) within one moneth after it shal be so digged, they forfeit five marks to the owner of the ground to be recovered by Action of debt. X. The hedges and ditches adjoyning to the high-way shall be kept low and scowred, and the trees and bushes growing in the high way cut downe by the owners of the grounds, which shall be inclosed by the said
hedges and Ditches. XI. Instead of the foure dayes appointed by the Stat. of 2.3. P. M. 8. six dayes shall here∣after be observed. XII. The Surveyors or one of them shall present every default within one month after it shall be made, to the next I. of P. in pain of xl. s. and the said I. of P. shall certifie the same presentment at the next general Sess. in pain, of 5. l. where the Justices shall have power to enquite of the default; And shall set such fyne upon the delinquent as they or two of them (1. Qu.) shall think fit. XIII. Here the presentment of a Just. of P. in Sess. upon his owne knowledge shall be a good conviction, whereupon the Justices in Sessions or any two of them (1. Qu.) may assesse a fyne, as well as upon a verdict of 12 men; Howbeit the Delinquent shall here be admitted to his traverse as in other Ca∣ses. XIV. The Fines assessed in Sess. shall be estreated by the Clerk of the Peace, levied, accompted, and imployed, as by the Stat. 2. 3. P. M. 8. is provided. XV. Stat. 18. El. 10.  A subsidy man ac∣cording to 5. l. in goods or xl. s. in Lands, not chargeable towards the high-ways by the Stat. of 2.3. P. M. 8. or 5. El. 13. shall find two able men to labour in the wayes as by the said statute is appoined. XVI. Every person having a Ploughland lying in severall parishes, shall be chargeable with a Teame or draught in that parish on∣ly
where he dwels: Howbeit having intire Ploughlands in severall parishes, he shall for every one of them find a Teame in the severall parishes where they lye, although he be not inhabitant there. XVII. Every person not scowring his ditches or not keeping low his hedges, trees, and bushes, according to the Stat. of 5. El. 13. shall forfeit for every such default x.s. and for not scowring his ditches in the ground next adjoyning the highwayes, to the end the water may have passage the better, shall for feit 12. d. for every pole so left unscowred. XVIII. None shall cast the scowring of his ditch into the highway, and suffer it to lie there six moneths, in paine to forfeit 12. d. for every load, and it shall be lawfull for the Surveyers to make sluces, where any such Bankes have been heretofore cast up. XIX. The penalties forfeited upon this stat. shall be levied by the Surveyors for the time being by distresse and sale of goods, and shall be imployed towards the Amendment of the High-wayes: but if the Surveyors neglect to doe it within one yeare after the offence commirted, the Const. and Churchw. shall do it, according to the provisions of the be∣fore recited Statutes. XX. I. of Ass. Oy. and Term. Just. of P. in Sess. and Stewards of Leets have power to heare, and determine the said offences. XXI. Certaine provisions for the repaire of Kings Ferry in the Ile of Shippey, and of the wayes leading thereunto.
XXII.  Stat. 39. El. 19. An Ordinance for the Repaire of the high wayes in the Welds of Sussex, &c. used for Iron workes, wherein Just. of P. have power to meddle. See the Statute at large. S. Bridges. Holy-dayes. I.  Stat. 1. Car. 1. All concourse of peo∣ple out of their own parishes for any pa∣stimes whatsoever; as also bearbaytings, bull-baytings, Enterludes, Cōmon playes, & all o∣ther unlawfull pastimes are prohibitedon the Lords day. II. The offender against this law being thereof convicted by the view of one Just. of P. (in the Country) or of a chiefe officer (in a Corporation) or by his own confession, or by the oath of one witnesse before one such Just. or officer, shall forfeit 3. s. 4. d. to the use of the poore where the offence is committed, to be levied by distresse, and sale of goods (upon warrant from the same Just. or officer) by the Const. or Churchw. of the same parish, and in case no distresse can be had, the offender shall sit in the stocks three howres, but this offence ought to be prosecuted within one moneth after it shall be committed; And if the officer be questio∣ned, he shall plead the generall issue,  and yet give speciall matter in evidence. III. Stat. 3. Car. 1. No Carrier with his horse, Wagoner with his wagon, Carman with his Cart, Waynman with his Wayne, or
Drover with his Cattle shall travell upon the Lords day, in paine to forfeit xx. s. for every such offence. IV. No Butcher shall kill or sell any Victual upon the same day in pain of 6. s. 8. d. V. Here the conviction of the offender, and the levying and imployment of the for∣feitures are the same with those of the for∣mer Statute; save only that here two witnes∣ses are not necessary, and the forfeitures may also be recovered by a prosecutor in the Sess. of the County, or in the Court of the Corporation, where the offence was commit∣ted, and in that case the Justice or head-offi∣cer may allow the prosecutor part of the forfeitures, but not above a third part. VI. This Action shall be prosecuted within six moneths; and here also the officer may plead the generall issue, &c. S. Fishdayes, 4. Recusants, 98. Sacra∣ments, 24. Horse-bread, S. Inholders. Horses. I.  Stat. 32. H. 8.13. None shall put to feed upon Forests, or common ground any stoned horse being above 2. yeares old and not fifteen handfull high from the lower part of the hoofe to the upper part of the Wither (every handfull being accompted 4. Inches standard measure) in pain to forfeit the same horse, 15.21.
II. It shall be lawfull for any man to selse to his owne use any stoned horse of lesser statute put to feed upon any such common ground, as aforesaid, so that first (by the As∣sistance of the keeper of the ground or Con∣stable, Bayliffe, Head-borough, or other such officer of the parish next adjoyning) such horse be brought to the next pound, and there (by the officer and in the presence of three other sufficient men) be measured and found lower then that stature. III. Those that refuse to measure, or to be present at measuring of such horse, shall for∣feit xl. s. a peece for every such default, to bee divided betwixt the King and the prose∣cutor. IV. A horse that makes an Escape into such Common shall not be questioned; so he stay not above four dayes after notice there∣of given at the owners house or in his parish Church. V. Forests and common grounds shall be driven yearly at Michaelmas or within xv. dayes after, by the Keepers or officers afore∣said, in paine of xl. s. who have also power to drive them at any other time of the yeare at their pleasure, such power likewise have the owners of such grounds: And here, upon the drift, if any unlikely Tits shall be found, they shall be kild. VI. Just. of P. in Sess. have power to heare and determine these offences. But stewards of Leets only to take presentments of them, which they shall certifie in at the next gene∣rall
Sess. or to the Custos Rotulorum within 40 dayes in paine of 40. s. VII. None shall put upon common grounds or common fields any scabbed or infected horse, in pain to forfeit x. s. to the Lord of the Leet. VIII. This statute shall not restrain kee∣ping of horses under this Stature upon Commons, where Mares are not usually kept. IX.  Stat. 1. E. 6.5. None shall convey, sell or deliver any horse into Scotland or a∣ny other forraine Country without the Kings Licence, in paine to forfeit such horse, and xl. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the Prosecutor. X. Wardens of the Marches, and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to heare and determine these offences, and it shall be lawfull for any of the Kings Subjects to arrest and impri∣son any Scotch man or other that shall con∣vey any horse contrary to this Act. XI.  Stat. 2.3. P. M. 7. Every owner of a Faire or Market shall appoint a Toll-taker where Toll is taken, or a Book-keeper where no toll is paid, to sit there from ten of the Clock in the forenoone till Sun-set, in paine of xl. s. for every default; And this Of∣ficer shall enter into a Booke the names and dwellings of the Buyer and seller, together with the Colour and some pregnant Mark of every horse there sold, in like pain of xl. s. for every default. XII. The Toll-taker or Book-keeper shall
(within one day after) deliver unto the said owner a note of all the horses sold there that day, in pain of xl. s. which note the owner shall subscribe, in the like pain of xl. s. XIII. Sale of a stolne horse in a faire or market without entry in the Book, as afore∣said, and without staying there in open view by the space of an houre at least betwixt ten of the Clock, and Sun set, shall not alter the property of the right owner. But that he may by vertue of this Act seise or replevy him, wheresoever he finds him. XIV. Just. of P. in Sess. shall have power to hear and determine the breach of this Stat. and the forfeitures shall be divided betwixt the King and Queens Majesties and the pro∣secutor, 16, &c. XV.  Stat. 8. El. 8. The Statute of 32. H. 8.13. shall not restrain the keeping of stoned horses of a lower stature in the Fen grounds of the Ile of Ely, or of the Counties of Cam∣bridge, Huntington, Northampton, Lin∣colne, Norfolk, or Suffolk, so that those hor∣ses so kept, be not under thirteen handfull high, according to the standard in the same statute mentioned. XVI.  Stat. 31. El. 12. The seller of a horse in a Fair or Market, which is not known to the Toll-taker, or Book-keeper, or doth not produce one credible person, that is well knowne unto him, to avouch the Sale of the same horse, shall forfeit 5. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, and be∣sides, the sale of such horse shall be voyd.
XVII. The names of the Buyer, Seller and voucher, and the price of the horse shall be entred in the Toll-book, and a note thereof delivered to the buyer under the Toll-ta∣kers, or Book-keepers hand, for which the Buyer shall pay 2. d. XVIII. Just. of the P. in Sess. have power to heare, and determine these offen∣ces. XIX. Notwithstanding such sale, and vou∣cher, as aforesaid, the right owner, or his ex∣ecutors may redeeme a stolne horse, if they clayme him within six moneths after the stealing, at the Parish or Corporation where they shall find him, and make proofe by two sufficient Witnesses before the next Just. of P. in the Country, or before the Head-officer of the Corporation, that the horse was his, and repay to the Buyer such price for the horse, as the same Buyer shall upon his owne oath, before such Justice, or Officer, testifie to have payed for him. XX. An Accessary of a horse-stealer shall not have his Clergy. XXI.  Stat. 21. Jac. 28. The statute of 32. H. 8.13. shall not extend to the County of Cornewall. Hostlers, S. Inholders. Pur∣veyors, 56. Victuall, 2.
Hospitalls, S. Poore people, 15. Houses of Correction, S. Poor people, 5. Vagabonds. Hue and Cry. I.  Stat. 3. E. 1.9. All persons shall be ready to pursue felony, in paine of Impri∣sonment, and great Fines making. II.  Stat. of Winchester 13. E. 1.1.2. & 28. E. 3.11. Fresh Suit shall be made after selons from town to town, and from Country to Country, And if they be not taken with∣in 40 dayes the Hundred shall be answer a∣ble for the damages, or two Hundreds, when the felony shall be committed in the division of those two Hundreds. III.  Stat. 27. El. 13. The Hundred where fresh Suit shall cease shall answer half the damages to the Hundred, wherein the felony shall be committed, to be recovered in any Court at Westminster in the name of the Clerk of the P. of the County, wherein the felony was committed, and here the death, or change of the Clerk of the P. shall not abate the Suit. IV. When in this case damages are recove∣red against one or some few Inhabitants of the Hundred, and the rest refuse to contri∣bute
thereunto, two Just. of P. (1. Qu.) dwelling within or neere the same Hundred shall for the levying thereof set a tax upon every parish within that Hundred, according to which the Constables and headboroughs of every towne shall tax the particular Inha∣bitants, and levy the money upon them by distresse, and sale of goods, and deliver the mony levyed to the said Just or one of them. V. No Hundred shall be chargeable, when any one of the malefactors shall be appre∣hended,  or when the Action is not prosecu∣ted within one year after the Robbery com∣mitted. VI. No Hue, and Cry shall be deeemed le∣gall unlesse the pursuit be both by horse and foot. VII. No person robbed shall maintain an Action in this case unlesse with all conveni∣ent speed he make the Robbery knowne to the next towne village, or hamlet, and with∣in twenty dayes before the Action brought make oath before a Just. of P. dwelling with∣in or neere the Hundred, where the Robbery was committed, whether he know the parties that robbed him or any of them, And if he know them, shall enter into sufficient Bond before the same Justice to prosecute the per∣son or persons, so by him knowne, by Indict∣ment or otherwise according to the Law. VIII.  Stat. 39. El. 25. A remedy for the Inhabitants of the Hundred of Benhurst in the County of Berks for Recovery of such summes of money as shall be gained from
them by force of the Stat. of 27. El. 13. S. Burglary, 1. Hunters, Hunting. I. Stat 1. E. 1.20. Trespassers in Parks, or Ponds shall give treble damages to the party grieved,  suffer three yeares imprison∣ment, be fined at the Kings pleasure, and give surety, never to offend in the like kind again; and if they cannot find surety, they shall ab∣jure the Realme, or being fugitive, shall be outlawed. II. If they be attainted to have taken tame Beasts, they shall be prosecuted as Felons. III. Stat. 21. E. 1. A Forester, Parker, or Warriner shall not be questioned for killing a Trespasser,  that after the peace cried unto him, will not yeeld himself, so it be not done out of some other former Malice. IV. Stat. 13. R. 2.13. No lay man,  which hath not lands of xl. s. per Annum, nor Clerk, which hath not x. l. Revenue per Annum, shall have, or keepe any Greyhound, Hound, Dog, Ferret, net, or Engine to destroy Deere, Hares, Conies, or any other Gentlemans game, in pain of one whole yeares imprison∣ment, which I. of P. have power to inflict. V.  Stat. 1. H. 7.7. If any shall hunt with∣in Forests, Parks, or Warrens in the night time, or disguised, one of the Kings Coun∣sell, or a Just. of P. to whom information, here of shall be made, shall by his warrant; cause the offender to be brought himselfe,
or some other Counsellor, or Just. of P. to be examined, where if he conceale the fact such hunting shall be deemed felony; but be∣ing confessed the offence is onely finable at the next generall Sess. And here a rescous of the execution of any such warrant shall al∣so be deemed felony. VI.  Stat. 19. H. 7. None shall keep any Deeres Haies or Buckstalles (save in his own Forest or Park) in pain to forfeit for every moneth, they are so kept xl. l. neither shall any stalk with any bush or beast to any Deer (except in his own Forest or Park) in pain of x. l. VII. None shall take an old Heron (with∣out his owne ground) in paine of 6. s. 8. d. nor a yong Heron in pain of x. s. for which forfeitures every man that will, may sue by Action of Debt or otherwise. VIII. Any two Just. of P. in Sess. may ex∣amine the offenders abovesaid, and commit them to Prison, till they shall have satisfied the said forfeitures, whereof the said Ju∣stices are to have the tenth part for their paines. IX.  Stat. 3. Jac. 13. None shall (without the owners licence) kill or chase any Deer or Conies in any Parkes, or inclosed grounds, in paine to yeeld treble dammages to the partie grieved, to suffer three moneths im∣prisonment, and to be bound with good sure∣ties to the good behaviour for seaven years after, or to remain still in Prison, till he find such sureties; But here, the party grieved
(being satisfied) hath liberty to release the be∣haviour. X. Just. of Oy. and Term. Just. of Ass. and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to heare and determine these offences, and Just. of P. in Sess. (upon Confession, and satisfaction to the party grieved) have power to release the behaviour. XI. If any person, not having xl. l. per An∣num in lands, or 200 l. in goods or some in∣closed ground used for Deere, or Conies worth xl. s. per Annum (at least) shall use any Gun, Bow or Crossebow to kill any Deer, or Conies, or shall keep any Buckstall, Fer∣ret, dog, net, or other Engine, it shall be law∣full for any person (having lands worth 100 l. per Annum) to take such Gun, &c. from any such person, and to convert the same to his own use. XII. This Act shall not extend to any Park, or inclosed ground hereafter to be made, and used for Deere or Conies, without the Kings Licence. XIII. Stat. 7. Jac. 13. It shall be in the election of the party grieved,  whether he will take for satisfaction x. l. in money or treble dammages, as by the Stat. 3. Ja. 13. is limited. S. Hawkes, 11.21.22.
Jesuites, S. Recusants. Images, S. Bookes. Imbracery, S. Embracery. Imbezeling of a Record, S. Felony, 6. Indictments. I. STat. 1. E. 3.17. Indictments be∣fore Sheriffes,  Bayliffes, or o∣thers, shall be delivered by Indenture to the Justices, when they come to make delive∣rance. II. Stat. 7. H. 5. A remedy against such as doe indict or appeale others of Treason or Felony supposed to be committed in a place within the County of Lancaster,  where there is no such place, concerning which Just. of P. within that County have power to inquire, and to inflict punishment viz. Imprisonment, Fine, and Ransome S. Stat. 9. H. 5.1. 18. H. 6.12. & 33. H. 6.2. III. Stat. 6. H. 6.1. Upon an Indict∣ment of any person in the Kings Bench,  a Capias shall be awarded against him, returna∣ble (at least six weekes after before any
Exigent shall be Awarded. IV.  Stat. 8. H. 6.10. & 10. H. 6.6. Vpon Indictments or appeales (before Just. of P. or others) of persons dwelling in forraine Counties, the Exigent shall be staid, till the returne of a Capias, directed to the Sheriffe of such forraine County for the arresting of the party indicted. V. Stat. 1. E. 4.2. Sheriffes shall deliver all Indictments,  and presentments taken in their Turnes unto the Justices of the P. at their next Sess. in pain of 40. l. who shall arraign, deliver, make process, and proceed thereupon, as if they were taken before them, and shall deliver indented estreats of the Fines to the sheriffe to be levied to his own use; And here, if the sheriffe levy any fine, or cōmit any to prisō by colour of any such indictment, or present∣ment; otherwise then by warrant from the Ju∣stices as aforesaid, he shall forfeit C. l. How∣beit Sheriffes of London shall not be restrained by this Act, nor those who have had fines formerly granted unto them. VI. Stat. 37. H. 8.8. The words cum baculis,  cultellis, arcubus, & sagittis, shall not of ne∣cessity be put in an-indictment; but it shall bee adjudged good without those words or the like. See Certificate, Certiorari, 1. Murder, 4, 5. Informations and Informers, S. Actions popular.
Ingrossers, S. Forestallers. Inholders. I.  Stat. 21 Jac. 21. The Statute of 32. H. 8.41. together with other statutes concerning horsebread is repealed. II. Inholders and Hostlers shall make no horsebread, shall sell their hay, provender and victualls at reasonable prices, and shall take nothing for litter. III. This Act shall not restraine those, that dwell in a thorough fare (which is no market town, and wherein there is no Baker) to make horsebread, according to the just Assise. IV. Just. of Oy. and Term. I. of P. sheriffes in turnes & stewards in Leets have power to hear and determine these offences. V. If any Inholder or Hostler, which hath power (by this Act) to make horsebread, ob∣serve not the Assise, or if he or any other offend this Law in any other kind whatsoever, for the first offence they shall be fined, for the second suffer a moneths imprisonment without bail, for the third be set upon the Pillory, and for the fourth shall be forejudged from ever keep∣ing an Inne again. See Alehouses, 5, 15, 26, 28. Butter, 1. Forestallers, 5.
Inmates, S. Cottages. Inquests, S. Jurors. Inrolments. Stat. 27. H. 16.8. Bargaines, and sales to raise an use of Inheritance, or Freehold, must be by Deed indented and inrolled within six moneths in some Court of Record at West∣minster, or in the County where the Land li∣eth, before the Custos Rotulorum, two Just. of P. and the Clerk of the Peace, or two of them, whereof the Clerk to be one; and here, the Fee to be paid for such Inrolment, when the land is not worth xl. s. per Annum, is 2. s. and when it is worth more, x. s. to be e∣qually divided betwixt the Justice, or Justices then present, and the Clerk of the P. who ought to inroll them in Parchment, and deli∣ver them up to the Custos Rotulorum within one yeare after. See Stat. 5. El. 26. Concerning the inrol∣ment of Deeds in the Counties of Lancaster, Che∣ster, and the Bishoprick of Duresme, and in Cor∣porate townes there. Inventories, S. Ecclesiasticall Court
I.  Stat. 5. E. 3.10. Justices have power to imprison a Juror sworn before them, that shall be attainted to be Ambidexter; and be∣sides he shall be ransomed at the Kings will. II.  Stat. 25. E. 3.3. An indictor shall not be put on Enquests upon delivering of Endictees. III.  Stat. 34. E. 3.8. A corrupt Juror shall be fined, and suffer one yeares Imprisonment; And here, the prosecutor shall have halfe the Fine, and the party grieved his damma∣ges. IV.  Stat. 38. E. 3.12. If a Juror be attain∣ted to have taken any thing by way of corrup∣tion, he shall suffer one whole yeares impri∣sonment and forfeit ten times so much as he hath so taken, to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, and all Embracors in that kind shall incurre the like punishment: How∣beit theso offences shall not be prosecuted by Justices ex officio, but at the suit of the party grieved, or some other. V.  Stat. 11. H. 4.9. Jurors in indictments shall be teturned by the Sheriffes, or Bay liffes, and not nominated by any other. VI.  Stat. 2 H. 5.3. Jurors ought to have lands worth xl. s. per annum ultra reprise; And in the County Palatine of Lancaster, there lands ought to be worth 5. l. per annum. S. stat. 7. H. 5.1.18. H. 6.12.33. H. 6.2. VII.  Stat. 3. H. 8.12. Panells of Jurors returned by the Sheriffe to inquire for the King shall be reformed by the Just. in Sess. (1 Qu.) at their discretions, and the Sheriffe
shall returne that Panell reformed, in pain of xx. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor, who shall not lose his part by the Kings pardon. VIII. Stat. 27. El. 7. No Sheriffe,  or Bay∣liffe shal return Jurors without addition of their dwelling place, nor collect any issues made out against them, without such addition. IX. No Clerke shall estreat any issues a∣gainst any Juror without such addition, in pain to forfeit 5. markes to the King, and as much to the party grieved. See Actions Popular, 8. Justices of P. 25.28. Justices of Peace. I. Stat. 27. E. 1.3.  Justices assigned to take Assises in every County after the Assises taken, shall deliver the Gaoles, but if one of them be a Clerk, the other that is lay associa∣ting unto him one of the most discreet Knights of the County, shall deliver the Gaoles. II. Stat. 1. E. 3.16.  The King will that in every County good men and lawfull, which be no maintainers of evill, or Barretors in the Country, shall be assigned to keep the Peace. III. Stat. 2. E. 3.2.  Clergy men shall not be Justices of Oy. and Term. or Justices of G. D. IV. Stat. 4. E. 3.2.  Good and discreet persons shall be assigned in all Shires of Eng∣land to take Assises, Juries, and Certifications, and to deliver the Gaoles three times in the yeare at least.
V. There shall also be assigned good and lawfull men in every County to keep the peace, and such as shall be indicted or taken by them and are not bailable by Law, shal not be let to mainprise by the Sheriffe or any other Minister, nor otherwise delivered then at the common law. VI. the Just. of G. D. shall have power to deliver the Gaoles of those that stand indicted before the Keepers of the Peace, which Kee∣pers shall send those indictments before the said Just. of G. D. and shall have power to punish Sheriffes, Gaolers, and others, which do any thing contrary to this Act. VII.  Stat. 18. E. 3.2. Two or three of the best of Reputation in the Counties shall be assigned keepers of the Peace by the Kings Commission, who (together with other wise, and learned in the Law) shall have power to heare and determine Felonies, and Trespasses done in the same Counties, and to inflict pu∣nishment, according to Law and reason. VIII.  Stat. 34. E. 3.1. There shall be as∣signed in every County for the keeping of the Peace, one Lord, and three or four of the most worthy of the County with some learned in the Law, who shall have power to arrest and Chastise, rioters, Barretors, and other offen∣ders according to the law, and their owne dis∣cretions, to bind people of evill fame to the good behaviour, and to heare and determine felonies and trespasses done in the same Coun∣ty. IX. All generall inquiries heretofore gran∣ted
within any seigniories for the mischiefes done there, shall from henceforth cease and be repealed. X. The fines imposed by I. of P. for trespasses shall be reasonable and just. XI. Stat. 42. E. 3.4.  All commissions of inquirie (except of Escheatorship) shall be di∣rected to the Justices of the one Bench or other, to the Just. of Ass. or to the most worthy in the Country, and to none other. XII. Stat. 12. R. 2.10.  In every Commis∣sion there shall be but six Justices assigned, who shall keep their Sess. every quarter at least, in pain to be punished at the discretion of the Kings Councell. XIII. Every Justice of P. shall have for his wages 4. s. a day, and the Clerke of the P. 2. s. for so longtime as the Sessions shall last, to be paid by the Sheriffe out of the Amercia∣ments arising at the same Sessions. XIV. No steward of any Lord shall be as∣signed in any Commission, neither shall any association be made to the Justices of Peace after the first Commission. XV. Judges and Serjeants at Law shall not be bound to attend the Sessions, but when they may conveniently intend it. XVI. Stat. 13. R. 2.7.  Notwithstanding the Stat. of 12. R. 2.10. which prohibits the stewards of Lords to be Justices, the most sufficient Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen of the Law shall be put in Commission, and sworne to put in execution without favour all statutes which concern their office.
XVII.  Stat. 14. R. 2.11. There shall be 8. Justices of Peace assigned in every Coun∣ty. XVIII. Double estreats of Amerciaments, at the Sessions shall be made containing the names of all the Justices there present, and the number of dayes they sit, and one of them deli∣vered to the Sheriffe, out of which he is to an∣swer the Justices their wages by indenture, ac∣cording to which the Sheriffe shall be again al∣lowed the wages in the Exchequer upon his accompt; But no Duke, Earle, Baron, or Baro∣net (although he be Justice of Peace, and hold Sess. with the other eight) shall have any wa∣ges allowed him. XIX.  Stat. 17. R. 2.10. In every Com∣mission of Peace two men of Law of the same County shall be assigned to goe and proceed to the deliverance of Theeves, and Felons. XX.  Stat. 2. H. 5.4. Justices of the Peace in every Shire named of the Quorum shall be resiant within the same Shire (except Lords, Judges, Serjeants at law, & the Kings Atturney) and shall keep their Sessions sour times in the year, viz. in the first week after Michaelmas, Epiphany, Easter and the translation of Saint Thomas, being the third of July, and more often if need require. XXI.  Stat. 11 H. 6.6. No suit before Ju∣stices of P. shall be discontinued by a new Commission of Peace. XXII.  Stat. 14. H. 6.4. Just. of Peace in Mid∣dlesex are not compellable to keep their Sess.
above twice in the yeare, notwithstanding the stat. of 12. R. 2.10. Yet may they keep them oftner, if need be, at their discretions. XXIII. Stat. 18. H. 6.11.  None (except men learned in the Law or inhabiting Corpo∣rations) shall be Justices of Peace, unlesse their lands be worth xx. l. per Annum. XXIV. If any be put into the Commission not having lands of that value, and doe not within one moneth after his notice thereof acquaint the Lord Chancellor therewith, or doe make warrant by force of such Commissi∣on, he shall forfeit to the King xx. l. to be di∣vided betwixt the King, and the prosecutor. XXV. Stat. 3. H. 7.1.  Justices of P. have power to impannell an Enquest to inquire of the concealements of a former Enquest, and to Assesse in open Sessions the Amerciaments of the first Enquest at their discretions. XXVI. Just. of P. shall at the next gene∣rall Sess. certifie recognisances taken for keeping of the Peace, where, if the party being called do not appear, those Recognisances shall be certified into the Chancery, Kings Bench, or Exchequer. XXVII. Stat. 33. H. 8.10. & 37. H. 7.  All Just. of P. shall at their generall Sess. endeavour amongst themselves to understand the mea∣ning and intents of all statutes, which concern vagabonds, Retayners, giving Liveries, Signes, Tokens, or Badges, maintenance, embracery, Bowstaves, and Archery, unlawfull games, Forestallers and Regrators, victuall, victual∣lers, and inholders, and of all other statutes
made in this present Parliament, and shall then also advise amongst themselves, how the same may be best put in due Executi∣on. XXVIII. All processe, and proceedings shall be continued from Sess. to Sess. And the said Justices shall in Sess. have power to enquire, hear, and determine the breach of the said statutes as well by verdict as by any other in∣formation, or Confession of the party, and to make processe by Venire facias, Capias & Ex∣igent, under the Seal of the same Justices, or two of them, and also to reform panels of Jurous, according to which the Sheriffe shall make his Return, upon the paine limited by the Stat. of 3. H. 8.12. XXIX.  Stat. 1. E. 6.7. Preferment of a Justice or Commissioner to a higher dignity as to be a Duke, Archbishop, Marques, Earle, Vicount, Baron, Bishop, Knight, Judge, Serjeat at Law, or Sheriff, shall not diminish his pow∣er, 31. XXX. No Suit before any Justices or Com∣missioners shall be discontinued by a new Commission, or by the alteration of any of their names. XXXI.  Stat. 1. M. 8. None shall be Justice of Peace during his Shrevalty, notwithstanding the statute of 1. E. 6.7. XXXII.  Stat. 2.3. P. M. 18. A new Com∣mission of the Peace, or G. D. for the whole County, shall not be a Supersedeas to a for∣mer like Commission granted to a Ci∣ty, or towne Corporate there, being
no Countie. XXXIII. Stat. 1. E. 1. & 7. Jac. 6.  Every Justice of Peace ought to take the oaths of Su∣premacy and obedience, which see in Recu∣sants, 8.88. Kidder, S. Badger. Kings Bench, S. Poore Peo∣ple, 15. Labourers, Artificers, Ser∣vants, Apprentices. I. STat. 21. H. 8.7.  Servants that go a∣way with or otherwise imbezill their Masters, or Mistresses goods to the value of xl. s. worth, with an intent to steale them (be∣ing put in trust therewith) shall be punished as Felons. II. This Act shall not extend to Apprenti∣ces nor servants under the age of eighteene years. III. Stat. 2.3. E. 6.15.  Artificers, work∣men, or Labourers, that conspire together con∣cerning their work, or wages, shall forfeit for the first offence, x. l. to the King, and if they pay it not within six dayes after conviction, they shall suffer 20. dayes imprisonment, and during that time shall have no sustenance but
bread and water; for the second offence hee shall forfeit 20. l. and that not paid within six dayes as aforesaid, shall suffer the Pillory; and for the third offence shall forfeit xl. l. and that not paid within time limited shall again suffer the Pillory, lose one of their eares, and be ever after taken as men infamous, and not to be credited. IV. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. Maiors, Bay∣liffes, & Stewards in Sess Leets & Courts have power to hear and determine these offences. V.  Stat. 5. El. 4. None shall hire, or be hi∣red for lesse time then one whole yeare in the Arts of Clothier, Wollen Weaver, Tucker, Fuller, Clothworker, Sherman, Dyer, Hosier, Taylor, Shoomaker, Tanner, Pewterer, Baker, Brewer, Glover, Cutler, Smith, Farrier, Cur∣rier, Sadler, Spurrier, Turner, Capper, Hat or Feltmaker, Fletcher, Arrowhead-maker, Butch∣er, Cook, or Miller. VI. Every person unmarried, or under the age of 30. years (though married) having been brought up in any of the Arts above said by the space of three yeares, and not worth in lands xl. s. per Annum, or in goods x. l. (and so al∣lowed under the hands and seales of two Just. of P. the Head officer or two discreet Burges∣ses of the place, where the party so brought up hath lived by the space of one whole yeare) nor already retayned in husbandry, the Arts abovesaid, or any other Art or Mystery, or in any service (upon request of any person u∣sing the same Art) shall not refuse to serve for the wages limited by this statute, and being
so retained shall not depart from his or their service without one quarters warning before two lawfull witnesses, or some lawfull cause to be proved before one Justice of P. or Head officer, in paine of imprisonment without baile; but upon submission to per∣forme the service, they shall be enlarged without Fees, which Commitment and en∣largement two Just. of P. the Head officer or two Burgesses as aforesaid, unto whom com∣plaint shall be made, have power to com∣mand, as in their discretions, and upon due proofe shall be thought fit. VII. Every person between the ages of 12. and 60. not already retained in any ser∣vice, nor imployed about husbandry, Mines, Glasse, Coale, Fishing, Sayling, provision of grain or Meale for London, nor Gentleman, born, nor Scholar, in an University, or School, nor worth xl. s. per Annum in lands, or x. l. in goods, nor having a Father, Mother, or other ancestor (whose heire he is) worth x. l. per Annum, in lands, or xl. l. in goods, shall be compelled to serve in husbandry, & shall not depart that service, otherwise then as is be∣fore limited, upon the paine above expres∣sed. VIII. None shall put away his servant be∣fore the end of his term without a quarters warning, or some lawfull cause to be proved by two sufficient Witnesses before the Just. of Oy. and Term. Just. of Ass. Just. of P. in Sess. a Head Officer, or two discreet Al∣dermen, or Burgesses, in paine of xl. s.
IX. No servant having served in one City or towne shall goe to serve in another, with∣out a Testimoniall, viz. (in a towne corpo∣rate, under the seales of the town, & two hous∣holders there, and (in the Country) under the seales of the Constable, or Constables and two housholders there; which testi∣moniall shall be made and delivered to the party, and also registred by the Minister of the place, where the servant last dwelt, for which the Minister is to have 2. d. X. The forme of the Testimoniall is this. Memorandum, that A. B. Servant to C. D. of E. in the County of F. Husbandman or Tay∣lor, &c. in the said County is licenced to depart from his said Moster, and is at his liberty to serve elsewhere according to the Statute in that case made and provided: In witnesse, &c. XI. The servant which sheweth not such a Testimoniall to the chief officer in a Corpo∣ration, or to the Minister, or some officer in any other place, where he is to dwell, shall suffer imprisonment till he procure one; and if he produce not one within xx 1. dayes after his imprisonment, or shew a false one, he shall be punished by whipping as a vaga∣bond; And the Master that retaines a servant without such a testimoniall, shall forfeit five pounds. XII. Those that work by the day or week shall continue at work, betwixt the mid∣dle of March, and the middle of September, from 5. in the morning till betwixt 7. and 8.
at night, except two houres allowed for breakfast, dinner, and drinking, and halfe an houre for sleeping from the middest of May, til the middest of August, & all the rest of the yeare from twylight to twylight, except an houre and a halfe allowed for Breakfast, and Dinner, in paine to have one penny defal∣ked out of their Wages for every houres absence. XIII. None that takes work by Great shall leave the same before it be quite finished, except for not payment of his Wages, the Queenes service, licence of the Workma∣ster, or other lawfull cause, in paine to suffer one moneths imprisonment without Baile, and to forfeit five pounds to the party grie∣ved, besides his Costs, and dammages to be recovered at the common Law for the losse sustained. XIV. None retained in service to work, shall depart without Licence, in paine of one moneths imprisonment. XV. Such Wages of Labourers, Artifi∣cers, and others as have been formerly rated, or concerne husbandry, shall be yearly asses∣sed for the County by the Sheriffe and I. of P. in Sess. and in Corporations by the Head Officer at their Easter Sessions, or within six weeks after and before the 12. of July following shal be certified under their hands and seales into the Chancery: whereupon the Lord Chancellor or Keeper shall send downe printed proclamations thereof into every County, and Corporation before the
first of September then next following, with the said Sheriffe, Justices and Head officers shall before Michaelmas after cause to be inrolled, and proclaimed; But here, when the old Rates shall be certified to stand, no pro∣clamation is needfull, 56.58. XVI. A I. of P. or chief officer, which shall be absent at the taxing of Wages (being not letted by sicknesse, or some other reaso∣nable cause to be allowed by the Justices u∣pon Affidavit) shall forfeit x. l. XVII. None shall give greater wages, then those so rated (as aforesaid) in paine of 5. l. and ten dayes imprisonment, without Baile, and if any person shall be convicted (before two I. of P. or a Head officer) of ta∣king more wages, he shall suffer 21 dayes imprisonment without Baile. XVIII. Every retainer, promise, gift, or payment of wages, or other thing contrary to the true meaning of this Act; and every writing and Bond to be made for that pur∣pose shall be voied. XIX. If any servant, or other shall be con∣victed before two Just. of P. or a Chiefe officer, as aforesaid, by his own Confession, or the testimony of two honest men to have assaulted his Master, Mistris, Dame or Over∣seer, he shall suffer one whole yeares impri∣sonment, or lesse, if the Justice, or chief ossi∣cer shall think fit: And if the party shall be thought to deserve a more severe punish∣ment, then to receive such open punishment (life and member excepted) as the Just. in
Sess. or the chief officer, and 4 of the dis∣creetest men in the Corporation shall think convenient. XX. Artificers shall work in Hay time, and Harvest, in paine of Imprisonment in the stocks two dayes & one night, which the Con∣stable shall inflict upon them in pain of xl. s. XXI. It shall be lawfull for Labourers (o∣ther then such as are retained in Service ac∣cording to this statute) to go to other shires to work in Hay time and Harvest, so that they bring with them a testimoniall under the hand and seale of one Just. of P. or a chiefe officer, testifying that they have not sufficient work in the place, where they lived the winte before, for which testimoniall they shall only pay 1. d. XXII. Every unmarried woman (sit to serve) being above 12 years old and under xl. shal by two I. of P. a Chief Officer or two Bur∣gesses be compellable to serve for conveni∣ent time and wages, in pain of Imprisonment. XXIII. Husbandmen being housholders & using halfe a plough land (at least) in tillage, may take (by Indenture) Apprentices above the age of ten years and under 18. to serve in husbandry, untill the age of xxi. yeares (at least) or 24. yeares as the parties can agree. XXIV. Every householder of the age of 23. yeares dwelling in a towne Corporate, and using there any art or mystery shall and may take an Apprentice for seaven yeares at least: Howbeit the terme ought not to expire before the Apprentice accomplish
the age of 24. yeares. XXV. Merchants, Mercers, Drapers, Gold∣smiths, Iremongers, Embroyderers, and Clothiers dwelling in Corporate townes shall take no Apprentices, but their owne Children, or such whose Parents have Inhe∣ritance, or Freehold of xl. s. per Annum to be certified under the hands and seales of three Just. of P. of the County, where such lands lye, to the Head officer of the said Corpo∣ration, who shall cause the same to be recor∣ded. XXVI. Artificers in market townes not Corporate being housholders, and of the age of 24 yeares, may take other Artificers Children to serve as Apprentices. XXVII. Merchants, Mercers, Drapers, Goldsmiths, Iremongers, Embroyderers, and Clothiers dwelling in Market townes not corporate, shall take no Apprentices but their owne Children, or such whose Parents have inheritance or Freehold worth 3. l. per Annum, to be certified under the hands and Seales of three Just. of P. as aforesaid. XXVIII. Smiths, Wheelewrights, Plough∣wrights, Millwrights, Carpenters, rough Ma∣sons, Plasterers, Sawyers, Lime-burners, Brickmakers, Bricklaiers, Tylers, Slnters, He∣lyers, Tilemakers, Linnen Weavers, Turners, Coopers, Millers, Earthen Potters, Woollen Weavers, (of Huswifes Cloth only) Fullers, Wool burners, Thatchers, and stringers may take Apprentices though their Parents have no Land.
XXIX. None which hath not served seaven yeares in any Art or Mystery shall use the same, or set any other to work thercin, which have not served out that time, in paine to forfeit xl. s. for every moneth. See Actiors popular. 17. XXX. Woollen Clothweavers (ohter then such as inhabite Cumberland, Westmerland, Lancaster, or Wales, or in Cities, Corpora∣tions or Market townes) shall take no Ap∣prentices, nor teach any their art, save their own Children, or such, whose parents have Inheritance, or Freehold worth 3. l. per An∣num, to be certified under the hands and seales of 3. l. of P. of the County where the lands lye, in pain to forfeit xx. s. for every moneth; And the Indenture shall within 3. moneths be registred in the parish, where the Master dwels, the Fee of which registring is 4. d. XXXI. Every Clothworker, Fuller, Sher∣man, Weaver, Taylor, and Shoomaker shall for every three Apprentices keep one Jour∣neyman, and for every Apprentice above three another Journeyman, in paine of ten pounds. XXXII. This Act shallnot preiudice wor∣sted makers, nor worsted weavers, in Nor∣wich or Norfolk. XXXIII. If any person fit to make an Ap∣prentice refuse to serve upon demaund, one I. of P. Maior or Head officer unto whom complaint there of shall be made, have power o commit him to ward, untill he shall be
willing to serve accordingly. XXXIV. If there shall arise any difference betwixt the Master, & the Apprentice, one I. of P. in the Country, or the Maior or Head of∣ficer in a Corporation, or Market town, shall have power to reconcile it, if they can; if not, then to bind over the Master to the next Qu. Sess. where the I. of P. or any four of them (1. Qu.) or the the Head officer with the consent of three of his brethren shall (upon default found in the Master) in writing under their hands and seales have power to discharge the Apprentice of his Service, and if default shall be found in the Apprentice, then to in∣flict such punishment upon him as in their discretions shall be thought fit. XXXV. None shall be bound to enter into an Apprentyship, other then such as be un∣der the age of 21. years. XXXVI. Justices of P. in their severall Di∣visions, and Head officers in townes corpo∣rate shall meet twice every year, viz. once betwixt Michaelmas and Christmas, and a∣nother time betwixt the Lady day and Mid∣sommer to give order for the due execution of this statute. XXXVII. Justices of P. and Head officers shall have 5. s. for every day they sit about the execution of this Statute, to be allowed them out of the Fines, which accrew upon the Breach thereof, so that their sitting be only for matters contained in this Statute, and not above 3. dayes at one time. XXXVIII. The forfeitures abovesaid (ex∣cept
those otherwise limited) shall be divi∣ded betwixt the Queene, and the prosecutor; And all Just. of P. or any two of them (1. Qu.) and every Head officer shall have pow∣er to hear and determine the breach of this statute upon Indictment or otherwise, and to award proces and execution accordingly, And shall yearly in Michaelmas terme by Estreat certifie into the Exchequer the fines, which accrue upon this Statute in like man∣ner as they ought to doe in other Cases. XXXIX. This act shall not restraine the Cities of London and Norwich, from taking of Apprentices, as in times past. XL None shall take Apprentices other∣wise then is limited by this Act, in paine of ten pounds, and all indentures otherwise made shall be void. XLI. An Apprentice shall be bound by his Indenture notwithstanding his non age of 21. years. XLII. The Inhabitants of Godalming in Surrey may take and use such Arts and Ap∣prentices as market townes may doe by ver∣tue of this Act. XLIII. The Fines accrewing by this Act in townes corporate shall be appointed by the Head officer to be collected (as other fines and Amerciaments) for the use of the same townes. XLIV. When an Apprentice departs from his Masters service into another County, or Corporation, it shall be lawfull for the Just. of P. or Head officers there (being Justices
of P.) to direct a Capias to the Sheriffe, or other chiefe officer for his apprehension, and being taken the said Just. of P. or Head offi∣cer shall commit him to ward untill he give good Security, that he will honestly serve out his time. XLV. Notwithstanding this Act high Constables have power to keep their Statute Sessions, so that they there doe nothing re∣pugant thereunto. XLVI.  Stat. 5. El. 5. Every housholder u∣sing the trade of the Seas, Fisher, Gunner, or Shipwright may take Apprentices according to the custome of the City of London, so that the Apprentice be seaven yeares old, & the Indenture inrolled in a corporate towne, for which Inrolment the officer shal not take a∣bove 12. d. XLVII.  Stat. 8. El. 11. None shall make any Hat or Felt with forraine stuffe, unlesse he hath served Apprentice to that Art seaven yeares at least, in pain of forfeiting the Hats or Felts so made, and 5. l. for every mone the continuance in so doing. XLVIII. No Hatmaker shall have above two Apprentices at one time, nor them, for lesse time then seaven yeares a pecce, in pain to suffer one moneths imprisonment for e∣very one he keepes more, and to be for ever after disabled to keep any more then one. XLIX. This Act shal not restraine Hatma∣kers to imploy their Children. L.  Stat. 1. Jac. 17. None shall make any
Hat or Felt of any Stuffe what soever, which hath not served an Apprentice seaven yeares in that Art, in pain of 5. l. for every month; neither shall he have above two Apprentices at one time, or imploy any Journeyman in that Art, which hath not served the like time upon the like pain. LI.  This Act shall not restraine Hatma∣kers to imploy their Children, so that they be bound for seaven yeares, and their terme doe not expire untill they shall have accom∣plished the age of 21. yeares. LII. The forfeitures of this Statute, as also those of the 8. El. 11. shall be divided betwixt the King, and the prosecutor. LIII.  Stat. 3. Jac. 9. None shall imploy any Journeyman or apprentice in the Art of Skinner, unlesle he use the same Art him∣selfe and hath served seaven yeares therein as an Apprentice, in pain of forfeiting dou∣ble the value of the Skins dressed to be di∣vided betwixt the King and the proecutor or Seisour. LIV.  Stat. 1. Jac. 6. The statute of 5. El. 4. Shall give power to the Justices of P. to rate the Wages of any Labourers, Wea∣vers, Spinsters, and workmen or workwomen whatsoever. LV. The rating of such wages in Sess. by the more pact of the Justices within any particular Ryding or Division (where gene∣rall Sess. have been used severally to be kept) shall be as effectuall as those rated at the ge∣nerall Sess. of the whole County.
LVI. The Sheriffe and Head officers within their severall precincts shall cause the said rates to be proclaimed in such sort, as if they had been sent downe printed from the Lord Keeper, which all persons shall be bound to observe upon the paines and pe∣nalties mentioned in the said Statute of 5. El. 4. LVII. A Clothier convicted before the Justices of Ass. or P. in Sess. or before two Just. of P. (1. Qu.) by his own confession or the evidence of two Witnesses not to have observed the said Rates, shall for∣feit x. s. to the party grieved, to be levied u∣pon warrant from the same Just. by distresse and sale of goods. LVIII. None shall incurre any danger for not making Certisicate of the Rates into the Chancery according to 5. El. 4. LVIX. A Clothier being also a Just. of P. shall not be a Rater of Wages for any Arti∣ficer, that depends upon making of Cloth. S. Masons, Poore people, 6. 20. &c. Lader, S. Badger. Larceny, S. Bailement. 2. Trespasse. Latten, S. Brasse.
Leather Tanner, Currier, and Shoomaker. I.  Stat. 5.6. E. 6.15. None shall buy or ingrosse Leather, to the intent to sell the same againe, in pain to forfeit the same Lea∣ther, or the value there of be divided be∣twixt the King and the prosecutor, or Sei∣sor. II. This Statute shall not restrain Gird∣lers and other Artificers to sell their necks, Wombes, and Shreds, nor the buying of so much Leather, as the party which buyes it hath licence to transport. III. None shall transport any Shooes, Bootes, Buskins, Stertups, or slippers, in pain to forfeit the same, or the value there∣of, to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor or seisor. IV. No Girdler or other cutter of Lea∣ther in London shall curry it in his owne house, in paine to forfeit the same Leather, to be divided betwixt the King and the pro∣secutor. V.  Stat. 1. M. Parl. 2.8. No Artificer u∣sing the Mystery of Leather buying shall buy any Leather and sell the same againe to be transported, in pain to forfeit the same to be divided betwixt the King and the prose∣cutor. VI. Curriers of London shall use their own stuffe, in pain to forfeit the Leathers
otherwise curried, to be divided as afore∣said. VII. No Currier shall curry any hides betwixt Saint Jamestide, and the Lady day, but onely such as have been sufficiently dip∣ped twice in the Pan, inpaine to forfeit the same to be divided as aforesaid. VIII. A Currier shall dresse his Leather within the space of 5. dayes in Summer, and of x. dayes in Winter, in pain to forfeit to the party grieved for every hide otherwise dressed 10. s. IX.  Stat. 5. El. 22. None shall make Pelts, or buy any skins of Stag, Hind, Buck, Doe, Goat, Fawne, or Kid, except to make tawed or tanned Leather, or parchment, or otherwise to convert them to his owne use, in pain to forfeit the value thereof, and be∣sides 2. s. 6. d. for every pelt, or skin so made or bought. X.  Stat. 18. El. 9. The penalty of trans∣porting Leather. XI.  Stat. 1. Jac. 22. None shall gash any hide in paine of xx. d. nor water them ex∣cept in June, July, and August, nor put them to Sale being putrified, in pain to for∣feit for every hide so watred or put to sale 3. s. 4. d. XII. None shall kill any Calfes under 5. weeks old in pain to forfeit for evey Calfe so killed 6. s. 8. d. XIII. No Butcher shall exercise the My∣stery of a Tanner, in pain of 6. s. 8. d. for e∣very day he so continues both professions.
XIV. None shall be a Tanner, but such as have served seaven years as Apprentices, or hired servants in that trade, or the widow or children of a Tanner having a tan fat left them and having been brought up in that profession by the space of 4. yeares, in paine to forfeit all the Leather they tan, or the full value thereof. XV. None that useth the cutting, or work∣ing of Leather shall be a Tanner, in paine to forfeit all the Leather he tans, or the value thereof. XVI. None shall buy any rough Hides, or Calfeskins in the haire, but only such as doe and may lawfully tan them (except salt Hides for the necessary use of Ships) in pain to forfeit them, or their just value, neither shall any forestall hides, but buy them in o∣pen Faire, or Market (except of such as kill beasts for their own provision) in pain to for∣feit for every hide otherwise bought, 6. s. 8. d. XVII. None shall buy any tanned Leather unwrought but only such as will and shall convert the same into made wares. XVIII. This Act shall not restraine Ar∣tificers from buying tanned Leather every Munday at Leaden Hall to be converted into made wares being first duly searched, sealed, and registred, as hereafter is limited, nor Sadlers, and girdlers from selling their Necks and Shreds of tanned red Leather. XIX. The Tanner that overlimes his Hides, or useth in his tanning any thing save Ash∣bark,
Oakbark, Tapwort, Mault, Meal, Lyme, Culverdung, or Hendung, or suffers them to be frozen, or to be parched with the fire, or sun, or tannes hides which are rotten by long lying or otherwise, or continues not utter sole Leather 12 moneths in the Woozes, and upper Leathers 9. moneths, or doth negli∣gently work his hides in the Woozes, not re∣nuing, and strengthning them, as often as need shall require, or doth work them in a∣ny other sort, then is by this statute limited, shall forfeit every Hide so tanned and put to Sale, or the full value of the same. XX. No Tanner shall by mixtures raise any Hide for sole Leather, which shall not be fit for that use, in pain of forfeiting the same. XXI. None shall put to sale any tanned Leather red, and unwronght, but in open Fair, or Market, unlesse the same hath been searched and sealed in some Faire or Market before; neither shall any offer to sell any such Leather before it be searched and sealed, in paine to forfeit for every hide, otherwise put to sale 6. s. 8. d. and for every dozen of Calfeskins, or Sheepskins, 3. s. 4. d. besides the hides and skins themselves, or the full value there of. XXII. None shall put to sale any Leather insufficiently tanned, or dried, in pain to for∣feit the whole, or at least so much as shall be so misused. XXIII. No Tanner shall hasten the tan∣ning of his Leather by giving it unkind heates with hot woozes, or otherwise, in
paine of x. l. and and to stand upon the Pil∣lory three dayes, in the next market. XXIV. None shall buy or ingrosse Barke to the intent to sel the same again in pain to forfeit it, or the value thereof; neither shall any fel Oak trees apt for barking, where Bark is worth 2. s. the Cart load (timber for the present and necessary repair of houses, Ships and Mills excepted) but only between the first of Aprill and the last of June, in pain to forfeit the trees, otherwise felled, or the double value of the same. XXV. Purveyers of trees for the Kings use shall fell them only in barking time (ex∣cept for the present repaire of the Kings houses or Ships) and shall take no more ther∣of from the owner, then what may serve the Kings present occasion, in paine to for∣feit to the party grieved for every tree o∣therwise felled or the Lops and tops thereof taken away xl. s. XXVI. A Currier shall not curry a Hide or Skin, which is not sufficiently tanned and dried, and that in his owne house scituate in some Corporate, or Market towne, and not else where, neither shall he gash, or any o∣ther way spoile, or impaire them, but work them sufficiently in all points, in pain to forfeit for every skin, or hide, so spoiled (o∣therwise then by gashing) 6. s. 8. d. besides the value of the same skin, or hide; And for gashing them, to forfeit to the party grieved twice so much, as he impaites them by gash∣ing.
XXVII. No Artificer within London, or within three miles distance from it, shall put any Leather to be curried save only to some person free of the Company of Curriers in London, in pain to forfeit the same, or the value thereof. XXVIII. None within the aforesaid Juris∣diction of London shall use or put into made wares any curried Leather, before the same be searched, and sealed, in pain to for∣feit for every Hide or Skin 6. shillings eight pence, and also the value of every such Hide, or Skinne. XXIX. A Currier shall not use the Art of a Tanner, Cordwainer, Shoomaker, But∣cher, or of any other Artificer, which useth the cutting of Learther, in paine to forfeit for every hide, or skin he currieth during that time, 6. s. 8. d. XXX. No currier (sufficient stuffe being tendred unto him) shall refuse sufficiently to curry Leather within eight dayes in sum∣mer and 16. dayes in Winter, after he shall or may take it in hand, in pain to forfeit for every Hide, or piece of Leather not curried accordingly, x. s. XXXI. The Wardens of the Company of Curriers, or officers by them appointed, shall within one day after request made unto the them search and seale Leather curried, for which the Currier shall pay after the rate of a 1. d. for every Dicker of hides, and of as much for every six dozen of Calfe skins; And the Currier shall forfeit for every hide,
not searched and sealed as aforesaid 6. s. eight pence. XXXII. Shoomakers shall make their bootes, &c. of good and sufficient stuffe, sow them well, and not put them to sale upon Sundayes, in pain to forfeit for every such default, or offence 3. s. 4. d. and also the full value of all other wares otherwise made or sold. XXXIII. The Masters and Wardens of the Companies of Shoomakers, Curriers, Girdlers, and Sadlers, within the jurisdicti∣on of London aforesaid, or the more part of them, shall once every quarter (or oftner if need reqire) make search and view of all wares made of tanned Leather, in pain to forfeit 40. l. for every yeares default to be divided betwixt the King and the pro∣secutor, and shall also have power to seise all insufficent Wares found upon search. XXXIV. The said Masters and Wardens shall only search the wares of such as use their own professions, and Coachmakers shal be under the survey and search of the Com∣pany of Sadlers. XXXV. The Maior, and Aldermen of Lon∣don shall (within the said jurisdiction, and upon the like paine of xl. l. to be imploiod as aforesaid) choose, and sweare 8. expert men out of some of the 4. Companies above∣said, to be searchers, and Sealers of all tan∣ned Leather there, whereof one shall be as∣signed to keep the Seale. XXXVI. Head Officers and Lords of Li∣berties
shall yearely in all other parts of the Kingdome (upon the like pain of xl. l. to be imployed as aforesaid, appoint and sweare two, three, or more, honest and skilfull men to be searchers and sealers of Leather, who shall have power to seale sufficient wares, and likewise to seize, and retaine, such as be insufficient, untill they shall be tried by Triers to be hereafter appointed by this Act. XXXVII. There shall be appointed six triers of insufficient Leather, and Leather wares, which shall be seized within the said jurisdiction of London; And when any in∣sufficient Learther, or wares made of Lea∣ther are seised within any other jurisdiction, the chief officer, or the Lord of the Liberty, or his Deputy, shall cause tryall thereof to be made by the oath of six honest men upon some Market day, and within 15. dayes after such seisure made. XXXVIII. The Lord Maior of London and the Head officer, and Lord or Deputy aforesaid shall appoint Triers in their seve∣rall jurisdictions, in pain of 5. l. to be divi∣ded betwixt the King and the prosecutor; And those Triers shall doe their duties in that office without delay, in paine to forfeit for every default 5. l. XXXIX. Foure of the Triers in London shall by yearly changed, and other four pla∣ced in their roomes, and none shall continue that office here above one yeare, and if any shall happen to be Trier two years together
he shall not be chosen againe within three yeares after, in pain to forfeit for every moneth he continues otherwise in that Of∣fice, x. l. XL. No Searcher and sealer of Leather shall refuse within convenient time to doe his office, or allow any wares, which are in∣sufficient, in pain of xl. s. And shall not take Bribes, or exact more then due Fees, in pain of xx. l. nor being lawfully elected shall re∣fuse the office, in pain of x. l. XLI. All red tanned Leather which shall be brought within the aforesaid jurisdiction of London shall be carried to Leaden Hall before it be housed, and there searched sea∣led, and registred by the officers aforesaid, for which if it were sealed before (out of the said jurisdiction) they shall take halfe Fees only. XLII. None shall sell any tanned Lea∣ther within the abovesaid Jurisdiction of London, before the Officers there have searched and sealed it, in pain to forfeit the same, or the value thereof. XLIII. None shall withstand the searchers and Sealers in the due execution of their of∣fice, nor the seising of insufficient wares, in paine of 5. l. XLIV. The abovesaid Searchers and Searchers and Sea∣lers shall register all tanned Leather sold in Faires or Markets together with the Prices thereof, and the names and dwelling places of the buyerand seller (being thereunto requi∣red by the said Buyer and Seller) taking as
well of the buyer as of the seller 2. d. for every ten hides, backes or buts of Leather, and 2 d. for every six dozen of Calfe skins or Sheep skins, and no more. XLV. None shall sell any tanned Leather (red and unwrought) before it be registred, in pain to forfe it the value thereof. XLVI. None shall buy any tanned Leather before it be searched, and sealed, nor carry it out of the Faire or Market before it be re∣gistred, in pain to forfeit the same or the va∣lue thereof. XLVII. The Currier within the juris∣diction of London aforesaid, which curri∣eth not his Leather sufficiently, and every other Artificer there (using tanned and curried Leather) which putteth into his Wares Leathers insufficiently tanned or cur∣ried, shall forfeit for every such default the said Wares, and the just value thereof. XLVIII. No such Artificer shall sell any wares, but in open Shop, Faire, or Mar∣ket, where due search may be made, in paine to forfeit the wares otherwise sold, and besides x. s. for every such offence. XLIX. Here the summes of money afore∣said forfeited shall be divided into three parts, whereof the King is to have one, the prosecutor another, and the City, Corpora∣tion, or Lord of the Liberty, the third. L. The Value of the wares forfeited with∣in the jurisdiction of London, after praise∣ment shall also be divided into three parts, whereof one shall be given to the seisor, ano∣ther
to the Chamber of London, and the third to the poore: And in all other places, one third part to charitable uses, another to the Head officer, or Lord of the Liberty, and the third to the Seisor or Seisors for their paines. LI. None shall buy any forfeited wares to sell them againe, in pain to forfeit for every parcell thereof 3. s. 4. d. LII. This Act shall not prejudice the au∣thority of the Universities, so that their Of∣ficers observe the provisions of this Act, un∣der the Penalties therein contained. LIII. The Hides or Skins of Oxe, Steer, Bull, Cow, Calfe, Deere, Goates, and Sheep being tanned or tawed, & salt hides are repu∣ted Leather within the Letter of this Statute. LIV. Justices of Ass. Just. of G. D. Just. of P. Stewards of Leets, the Maior of London, and Head officers within their several pre∣cincts have power to heare, and determine these offences. LV. The Kings Steward of a Leet, or Liberty shall have the same authority and be subject to the like penalties, that a Lord of a Leet hath and is subject to. LVI. It shall be lawfull for all Artificers (save only Shoomakers betweene September, and the twentieth of Aprill) to use dry, cur∣ried and frised Leather, being well tanned according to this Act. LVII. This Act shall extend to Wales. LVIII. If any Customer or other such Offi∣cer having notice of the transporting of any
Leather, doe not use his best indeavour to seise it, or being transported doe not dis∣close it within forty dayes, he shall forfeit for the first default 100. l. and for the second lose his place; And every such Officer for making a false Certificate of the Arrivall of any Leather shall also forfeit 100. l. LVIX. This Act shall not extend to Scot∣tish Hides brought to Barwick. LX. Licences to dispence with the Offen∣ces prohibited by this Act shall be void. LXI.  Stat. 4. Jac. 6. There shall be no penalty for housing, buying or selling Sheep∣skins unsealed. LXII. None shall sell tanned Leather by weight, in pain to forfeit the same, or the value thereof to be divided betweene the King and the prosecutor. See Actions popular, 18. Labourers, 53. Letters of Administration, S. Ecclesiasticall Court. Liberties, and Franchises. Stat. 27. H. 8.24. All Stewards, Bayliffes, and other Ministers of Liberties, and Fran∣chises which have used to attend the Just. of Ass. G. D. and of P. shall doe it still, and shall also make due execution of all Process directed unto them: the said bayliffes like∣wise, or their Deputies shall give attendance, and assistance upon the Sheriffe at all Courts of G. D. for execution of Prisoners there ac∣cording to Justice. S. Sheriffes.
Maineprise, S. Bailment. Maintenance, Champerty, Embracery, and Buying of Titles. I. STat. West. 1.3. E. 1.25.  None of the Kings officers shall either by himselfe, or others maintain Pleas, Suites, or Matters hanging in the Kings Court, for land, tenements or other things for to have part or profit thereof, in pain to be punished at the Kings pleasure. II. Stat. West. 1.3. E. 1.28.  No Clerk of the King, or of any Justicer shall receive the presentment of any Church, for which there is debate in the Kings Court, without the Kings speciall Licence, in paine to lose the Church, and his service, and that no Clerk of any Justicer or Sheriffe take part in any Suites, or use fraud whereby Com∣mon right may be delayed, in paine to be punished as aforesaid, and more grievously, if the Trespasse require it. III. Stat. West. 2.13. E. 1.48.  The Chan∣cellor, Treasurer, Justices, any of the Kings Councell, Clerk of the Chancery, Exche∣quer or of any Justice, or other officer, or a∣ny of the Kings house, Clerk, or Lay, shall not receive any Church or Advowson of a
Church, Land, or Tenement in Fee by gift, by purchase, to farme, by Champerty, or o∣therwise, so long as the same thing is in Plea, nor shall take any reward thereof, in pain to be punished at the Kings pleasure both the buyer, and seller. IV.  Stat. 28. E. 1.11. None shall take upon him a businesse in Suit, with an intent to have part of the things sued for; neither shall any upon any such Covenant give up his right to another, in pain that the taker shall forfeit to the King so much of his lands and goods as doth amount to the value of the part so purchased for such maintenance, to be recovered by any that will sue for the King before the Justices, before whom the Plea hangeth. V. This statute shall not prohibite any to take Counsell at Law, for his Fee, or of his parents, or next friends. VI.  Stat. 33. E. 1. He that shall be at∣tainted of Champerty, or Maintenance shall suffer three years imprisonment, and be fined at the Kings pleasure. VII.  Stat. 1. E. 3.14. None shall take up∣on him to maintain quarrels, and parties in the Country, to the Let, and disturbance of the Common law. VIII. Stat.  4. E. 3.11. Justices of the Benches, Justices of Assise, and of nisi prius shall heare, and determine, maintenance, Conspiracy, and Champerty. IX.  Stat. 20. E. 3.4. None shall maintain any quarrels, save only their own.
X. Stat. 1. R. 2.4.  No great officer of the King shall maintaine quarrels in the Country, in pain of a Fine, to be set by the King, and his Councell, and no other person in pain of Imprisonment, and to be fined at the Kings will, and if he be the Kings officer, or houshold servant he shall also lose his place. Stat. 1. R. 2.7.  None shall give liveries for maintenance of Quarrels, in paine of Fine, and imprisonment. XII. Stat. 1. R. 2.9.  All gifts or Feoff∣ments of lands, Tenements, or goods for maintenance shall be void. XIII Stat. 7. R. 2.15.  The Statutes of 1 E. 3.14.4. E. 3.11. & 1. R. 2.4. & 9. shall be duly executed in all points. XIV. Stat. 4. H. 4.8.  If any make forci∣ble entry into lands by way of Maintenance, the Chancellor of England shall grant a speciall Assise without suing to the King, and if the Disseisor shall be attainted there∣of, he shall suffer one whole yeares impri∣sonment and restore double damages to the party grieved. XV. Stat. 32. H. 8.9.  All statutes which concerne Maintenance, Champerty, and Embracery shall be duly put in execution. XVI. None shall buy any pretended right or Title in any land, unlesse the seller hath taken the profits thereof one whole yeare before, in pain that both the buyer and seller shall each of them forfeit the value of the same land to be divided betwixt the King
and the prosecutor. XVII. None shall unlawfully maintain any Suit or action, retain any person for Maintenance, Embrace Jurors, or suborn witnesses to the hinderance of Justice, or the procurement of perjury, in pain to for∣feit for every such offence x. l. to be divi∣ded betwixt the King and the prosecutor. XVIII. Howbeit purchasing of a preten∣ced Title by him that is already lawfully possessed of the thing whereunto Title is made, is lawfull. XIX. Proclamations shall be made at the Assises of the Statutes made against Maintenance, Champerty, Embracery, and unlawfull Retainers. XX. The Offenders against this Act shall be prosecuted within one yeare. See Actions Popular, 12.15.18. Force, 4. Marches. Stat. 31. H. 6.3. They may punish such as shall unlawfully (against the provi∣sion of this Statute) attach men dwelling farre off, to appeare in the Warden Courts of the Marches neere Scotland.
Mariners, S. Captaines, 32.35. &c. Markets, S. Horses, 11, &c. Marshalls of the Kings Bench, S. Bailement, 3. Marshalsey, S. Poor people, 15. Marshes. Stat. 7. Jac. 20. Their power in reco∣vering Marshgrounds in Norfolk, and Suf∣folk. Masons. Stat. 3. H. 6.1. It shall be Felony to plot confederacies amongst Masons, & those which assemble upon such confederacies shall suffer Imprisonment, and pay fine and ran∣some at the Kings pleasure. Matrimony. I. Stat. 7. Jac. 11. It shall be Felony for any person to marry, which hath had notice
that his or her former husband or wife was living, within seaven yeares before. II. The Triall in this case shall be in the County where the party delinquent shall be apprehended. III. But this Statute shall not extend to question any for Felony, where the former marriage was (before the latter) severed by divorce, or declared void, in the Ecclesi∣asticall Court, or was made before the age of consent, neither shall the breach of statute draw after Corruption of blood, losse of Dower, or disinherison of heire or heires. Mault. I.  Stat. 17. R. 2.4. Mault made in the Counties of Huntington, Cambridge, Nor∣thampton, and Bedford, and brought to Lon∣don, for the provision of the Court, and Ci∣ty shall be well clensed from Dust, and other filth: And Maiors, Bailiffes, and Wardens of townes and places, where it is sold, have power to make search, and to see such de∣faults redressed. II.  Stat. 2. E. 6.10. None shall imploy lesse time in the making, and drying of Mault, except in the moneths of June, July, and August, then three weekes; and in these moneths, lesse then seaventeen dayes; nor put to sale any Mault mingled of good and bad, in pain to forfeit for every quarter o∣therwise ordered or sold, 2. s. to be divided
betwixt the King and the prosecutor. III. None shall put any Mault to sale before (by tredding, rubbing, and Fanning it) he shall have conveniently taken out of every quarter halfe a peck of Dust, or more, in paine to forfeit xx. d. for every quarter otherwise sold, to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor. IV. Justices of Peace in Sessions, and Stewards of Leets have power to heare and determine these offences as well by present∣ment of 12. men, as by information of two Witnesses. V. Baylisses and Constables of townes, and places, where faulty Mault is made or mingled as aforesaid, have power to make search for it, and being found (with the Advise of a Justice of P.) to make sale there∣of at their discretions. VI. None shall be punished by this Act, which only maketh mault for his owne pro∣vision, nor unlesse the Action be prosecuted within one yeare. VII. Stat. 39. El. 16.  Justices of Peace in Sess. have power at their discretions to restraine the superfluous number of Maul∣sters and also of the Buyers of Barly to be converted into Mault. VII. If any man shall be convicted by the testimony of two witnesses, or his owne Confession to have disobeyed the restraint aforesaid, he shall suffer three dayes im∣prisonment, withont baile, and there shall still remain untill he shall (before some I. of P.)
become bound by recognisance in xl. l. to obey the said Restraint. IX. Justices of P. of the County shall not execute this law within Corporations; but only the Justices and chiefe officers of the same Corporations. X. Those which have Barley of their own growing, Tith Corne, or rent Corne, may convert it into Mault notwithstanding this Statute. XI. Maulsters shall not meddle with the execution of this Act. S. Forestallers, 5. Measures, S. Weights. Millers, S. Weights, 12. Money. I.  Stat. 25. E. 3.2. It shall be high Trea∣son to counterfeit the Kings money, or to bring into this Kingdome counterfeit mony knowing it to be false. II.  Stat. 3. H. 5.7. Just. of Ass. and Just. of P. shall have power by Commission the Kings to heare, and determine the offences of bring∣ing in of false money as also of counterfei∣ting, washing, or Clipping it, and of every other falsity concerning money. III.  Stat. 1. M. 6. It shall be adjudged
high Treason to counterfeit forraine Coyn, currant in England. IV. Stat. 1.2. P. M. 11.  It shall be high Treason to bring into this Kingdome any counterfeit forraine Coine to the intent to utter it here, knowing the same to be false. V. Stat. 5. Elizab. 11.  It shall be high Treason to clip, wash, round or file currant money, whether English or Forraine; for which the offender shall suffer, as in case of high Treason, and also shall forfeit his goods and Chattels for ever, and his lands also during life. VI. Stat. 14. El. 3.  It shall be misprision of Treason to counterfeit forrain Coine, not currant in England; for which the of∣fender shall suffer imprisonment, and for∣feit such lands and goods, as in case of mis∣prision of Treason for concealment of high Treason. VII. Stat. 18. El. 1.  It shall be high trea∣son to diminish, shale or lighten any Cur∣rant Coine, English, or forraine, for which the offender shall forfeit his goods and Chattels for ever, and his lands during life; But here there shall be no Corruption of Blood, or losse of Dower. VIII. A Peere of the Realme guilty of this offence shall be tryed by his Peeres. Mortuaries. I. Stat. 21. H. 8.6. None shall take, or
demand for a mortuary any thing at all, where (by the Custome) they have not been usually paid, nor upon the death of a woman Covert, a Child, any person not keeping house, a wayfaring man, one not residing in the place, where he happens to die, or where the goods of the dead person (debts deduc∣ted) amount not to the value of x. markes, or above the summe, 3. s. 4. d. when they exceed not xxx. l. or above 6. s. 8. d. when they exceed xxx. l. and not xl. l. or above x. s. when they amount to xl. l. or above, in pain to forfeit so much as they shall take above the severall summes limited by this Act, besides xl. s. to the party grieved to be recovered by Action of Debt. II. Mortuaries for wayfairing men, and all other, which die out of their place of Re∣sidence, shall be paid only in the place, where they had their most habitation at the time of their death, and no more but one Mortu∣ary upon one death. III. Lesse Mortuaries already setled by Custome, shall not be encreased by this Act; And there also, persons exempted by this Act, shall not hereafter be chargeable. See the stat. 29. H. 8.15. Note that I. of P. may punish those for extortion which take more then this statute allowes, Vide Lambert, 435. & Rast in Tabula. Murder. I.  Stat. 52. H. 3.25. Murder from hence∣forth
shall not be judged before the Justices, where it is found misfortune only, but it shall take place in such as are slaine by felony and not otherwise. II. Stat. 6. E. 1.9.  No Writ shall issue out of the Chancery for the death of a man: but the delinquent shall be imprisoned till the comming of the Justices in Eyre, or Ju∣stices of G. D. and having put himselfe up∣on the Country, if it shall be found by mis∣fortune, or in his own defence, upon report thereof by the Just. the King (if he please) may take him to his grace. III. An Appealor, which declares the deed, the year, the day, the houre, the time of the King, the place where, the weapon by which the party was slain, and prosecutes his Suit within a yeare and a day, shall not be barred for default of fresh Suit. IV. Stat. 2.3. E. 6.24.  If one be stricken, or poisoned in one County, and die there∣of in another, an Indictment found against the Offender in the County where the party died, shall be as effectuall, as one found in the County, where he was first stricken or poy∣soned: And there also may an Appeale be sued as well against the Accessaries as Prin∣cipall. V. An Indictment found against an Ac∣cessary to any such Murder, or Felony in another County, then where the principall offence was committed, shall be as effectuall, as if it had been found in the same County; And the Justices, before whom such Accessary
shall be tried, or tvvo of them, shall write to the Custos Rotulorum, of the other County for a Certificate of the proceeding against the Principall, and shall give Judgement ac∣cordingly. S. Eastardy, 4. Clergie, Felony, 15. Newes. Stat. West. 1.3. E. 1.33. None shall re∣port any false or slanderous nevves, or tales whereupon discord may arise betweene the King, and his People, or the great men of the Realme, in pain of Imprisonment, till he produce the Author. See also 2. R. 2.5. & 12. R. 2.11. S. Pishdayes, 11. Oatmeale, S. Forestallers, 5. Oathes, S. Recusants, 8.88. Sewers, 2. Sheriffes, 17. Ordinary, S. Ecclesiasticall Court. Oldfeild Dike in the Isle of Ely, S. Felony, 13.
Outlawed persons, S. Baile∣ment, 1. Sheriffes, 4. Outlawries, S. Certificate. Pannell, S. Jurors. Pardon. I. Stat. 2. E. 3.2. No Pardon shall be granted of Manslaughter, Robery, Felony,  or other trespasses against the Peace, but only where the King may doe it, saving his oath, viz. where one slayeth another in his owne defence, or by misfortune. II. Stat. 4. E. 3.13. & 10. E. 3.2. The sta∣tute of 2. E. 3.2. shall be duly put in Execu∣tion. III. Stat. 10. E. 3.3.  Those which ob∣taine the Kings Pardon for Felony shall within three months after such Pardon pro∣duce before the Sheriffe, and Coroners six sufficient mainprisors, or Sureties, who shall under their seales be bound for the good be∣haviour of the party pardoned, which Main∣prises shall be returned into the Chancery within three weeks after the said 3. months. IV. If the party pardoned faile to pro∣cure
such surety, or having procured beare himselfe otherwise against the Peace then he ought, the pardon shall be holden for none. V.  Stat. 14. E. 3.15. No pardon of the death of a man or other Felony shall be gran∣ted, but only where the King may doe it, sa∣ving the oath of his Crowne, and if any par∣don be granted against the Statutes made be∣fore this time, it shall be holden for none. VI.  Stat. 27. E. 3.2. Pardons, which have not in them the suggestion, whereupon they are granted, and also the suggestors name, shall be void; so are those likewise, which are granted upon false suggestions. VII.  Stat. 13. R. 2.1. In a Pardon the offence committed shall be specified, other∣wise it shall not be allowed. VIII. No pardon of Treason or Felony shall passe without warrant of the Privy Seale. IX. If the offence pardoned be afterwards found wilfull murder, that Pardon shall not be allowed. X.  Stat. 5. H. 4.2. If an approver shall commit felony after he is pardoned, he that procured his pardon shall forfeit C. l. whose name shall also (for that purpose) be inserted in the said Pardon. Parks, S. Hunting. Parliament.
I. Stat. 23. H. 6.11.  The Sheriffe the next County Court after he shall have recei∣ved the writ for assessing the wages of the Knights of the Parliament, shall make pro∣clamation that the Coroners, Chiefe Consta∣bles, Bayliffes, and all other (that will) appeare at the next County Court to Assesse the same Wages, at which last County the Sheriffe and the other officers shall be present in proper person in pain that every one which makes default shall forfeit xl. s. II. The Sheriffe or other officer which le∣vies more then is assessed shall forfeit xx. l. to the King, and x. l. to the prosecutor. III. Justices of both the Benches, Just. of Assise, G. D. and of P. have power to heare, and determine these abuses, as well at the Suit of the King, as of the party. IV. This Assessment shall not be levied, but only in places, where it hath been for∣merly levied, and hereafter in every writ for that purpose, this Act shall be inserted. V. Stat. 35. H. 8.11.  Two Justices of P. in every County of Wales, and Monmouth∣shire have power to tax the Cities, Burroughs, and townes there, what proportion every of them shall pay towards the Charges of their Burgesses for the Parliament. VI. It appeares by the preamble of this Statute that the Wages of a Knight of the Parliament is 4. s. the day, and of a Burgesse, 2. s. or more.
Partridges, S. Hawkes. Paving. I.  Stat. 13. El. 23. An Act made for the paving of certaine streets, and Lanes about Aldgate, and white Chappell in the suburbs of London, and for clensing certaine ditches thereabouts, and that I. of P. of London and Middlesex may inquire, and assesse fines for defaults to the Queenes use. II.  Stat. 23. El. 12. This Statute is an Addition of the former by vertue whereof I. of P. there have power to make a Scaven∣ger. Penall Statutes, S. Actions Popular. Perjury. I. Stat. 5. El. 9. None shall suborne a Witnesse to give testimony in any Court of Record concerning any lands, goods, Debts, or damages, in paine of xl. l. And if the of∣fender being convicted thereof hath not wherewithall to satisfie the said Forfeiture, he shall suffer six moneths imprisonment
without Baile, stand upon the Pillory one whole houre in the next or same market Towne where the offence was committed, and be for ever after disabled to give Testi∣mony in any Court of Record, untill the Judgement given against him be reversed by Attaint or otherwise. See Maintenance. II. He that commits wilfull perjury shall forfeit xx. l. suffer six moneths Imprisonment without Baile, and be ever after disabled to give Evidence, untill the Judgement given against him shall be reversed as aforesaid; And here also, if he hath not wherewithall to discharrge the fine (in the Country) the Sheriffe, or (in a Corporation) the Head offi∣cer shall cause him to be set upon the Pillory in some market place, and to have both his eares nailed. III. The Forfeitures abovesaid shall be di∣vided bet wixt the Queene and the party grie∣ved. IV. Judges of the Courts where such offen∣ces shall happen to be committed, I. of Ass. G. D. and of P. have power to heare and de∣termine the same offences. V. This statute shall be proclaimed at e∣very Assise. VI. This Act shall not extend to any Court ecclesiasticall, but that they may there proceed as in times past. VII. This Act shall not restraine the pow-of the Star Chamber to punish haynous Per∣juries. VIII. Howbeit, none served with a Pro∣cesse
out of a Court of Record to testifie, as a witnesse (being tendred convenient char∣ges, and having no reasonable let) shall there∣in make default, in pain to forfeit x. l. and to yeild such further Recompence to the par∣ty grieved, as the Judge of the same Court shall think fit, according to the damage su∣stained; which said summes shall be recove∣red by the said party grieved in any of her Majesties Courts of Record by Action of Debt, wherein no wager, essoine, or protecti∣on shall be allowed. Petty Treason, S. Clergy. Pewter, S. Brasse. Physitians. I. Stat. 14. H. 8.5. None shall practice Physick in the Country without a Testimo∣niall of his sufficiency from the Colledge of Physitians in London, unlesse he be a Gra∣duate of one of the Universities. II. Stat. 1. M. 9. Sess. 1 Just. of P. Mai∣ors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and o∣ther officers shall assist the President of the Colledge of Physitians in London, and all persons authorised by them for the due exe∣cution of their Lawes, and Statutes, in pain to run in Contempt of the Queenes Maje∣stic,
her heires, and successors. Pillory, S. Weights. Plague. I. Stat. 1. Jac. 31. The Maior, Bayliffes, Head officers, or Just. of P. of a Corporation or any tvvo such Justices, have power to tax the Inhabitants there towards the reliefe of those, which are infected with the Plague, and to make warrant under their hands and seales for any person to levy the said tax up∣on the goods of those, which shall refuse or neglect to pay the same; And if no goods can be found to satisfie the tax upon the par∣ties refusall of it, to commit him to Prison there to remaine untill the tax be satisfied. II. If the Corporation shall not be able to relieve the persons infected, upon Certifi∣cate thereof to the Just. of P. of the County thereunto adjoyning, or any tvvo of the said Justices shall have like povver to tax, levy, and imprison, as aforesaid, within five Miles distance of the said Corporation. III. In townes, and places not corporate, or where there are no Justices, or Head offi∣cers as aforesaid tvvo Justices of P. of the County, shal tax, levy, and imprision, as afore∣said, vvithin five Miles distance of the towne, or place so infected. IV. These taxes shall be certified in at the next Qu. Sess. of the Corporation, or County respectively, and shall there be
ordered, as by the Justices there, or the more part of them shall be thought fit. V. The Constable or other officer, which wilfully neglects to levy the tax upon a war∣rant, as aforesaid, shall forfeit for every such default x. s. to be imploied upon the charita∣ble uses aforesaid. VI. If any infected person residing in an infected house after command by a Justice or other officer presume to come forth, the Watchmen may resist him, and if any hurt happen to him thereupon, the Watchmen shall not be impeached therefore. VII. If any person having a sore upon him go abroad, and converse in Company, he shall suffer as a Felon, and if he have no sore, he shall be punished, as a vagabond according to the Statute of 39. El. 4. See Vagabonds, 3. &c. VIII. No Attainder of Felony by vertue of this Act shall extend to Corruption of Blood, or forfeiture of goods or Lands. IX. It shall be lawfull for the Just. of P. and Head officers to appoint Scarchers, Watch∣men, Examiners, Keepers, and Buriers, and to minister unto them oathes for the due performance of their offices, and to give them other directions as in their discretion shall be thought fit. X. Justices of P. or Head officers shall not by force of this Act meddle in the Universi∣ties, Cathedrall Churches, or Colledges. Playes and Games.
I Stat. 33. H. 8.9. None shall keep, or maintain a house or place of unlawful games, in pain of xl. s. and none shall use, or haunt such places, in paine of 6. s. 8. d. II. In every Placard to keep common Ga∣ming the Games there to be used shall be in∣serted, as also the persons, who shall play thereat, and every Placard otherwise granted shall be void: The G antee also of such a Placard shall be bound by recognisance in the Chancery with good sureties, not to use it contrary to the from thereof. III. It shall be lawfull for Justices of P. in every County and for Head Officers in Corporations (as well within Liberties as without) to enter and resort into all such houses, and places, where such unlawfull Games are suspected to be used, and aswell the Keepers thereof, as the resorters thereun∣to, to arrest and imprison, untill they shall severally give good Security (at the discreti∣ons of the said Justices or officers) not to keep, or use such games any more. IV. Every Maior, Sheriffe, Bayliffe, Con∣stable, and other Head officer within every City, Borough, or towne shall make due search (as aforesaid) once every moneth at least, in pain to forfeit xl. s. for every such de∣fault. V. No Artificer, or his Journeyman, No Husbandman, Apprentice, Labourer, Servant at husbandry, Mariner, Fisherman, Water∣man, or Servingman, shall play at Tables, Te∣nis, Dice, Cards, Bovvles, Clash, Coyting,
Logating, or any other unlawfull game out of Christmas, or then, out of their Masters house, or presence, in paine of xx. s. And none shall play at Bowles in open places out of his Garden or Orchard, in pain of 6. s. 8. d. VI. All Informations, or suits upon this Statute shall be prosecuted within one year, and the forfeitures thereof, which happen within a Leet or Liberty shall be divided be∣tvvixt the King & the Lord therof, & in all o∣ther places betwixt the King & the prosecutor. VII. Proclamation of this Act shall be made quarterly in every Market Tovvne, as also at every G. D. Ass. and Sess. VIII. This Act shall not restraine a servant by his Masters Licence to play at Cards, dice, or Tables with the Master himselfe, or other gentleman resorting to the Masters house; and if the Master hath Freehold of 100. l. per annum, he may also licence his servant to play at Bovvles, or Tenis. IX. Stat. 2.3. P. M. 9. All Licences to keep houses and places of unlavvfull Games shall be void. X. Stat. 3. Jac. 21. None shall in any stage play, Shew, May-game, or Pageant profane∣ly use the name of God, Christ Jesus, the Holy Ghost, or Trinity, in pain of x. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecu∣tor. S. Actions Popular, 17. Alehouses, 2. Holydayes, 1.
Ponds, S. Hunters. Poore People. I. Stat. 43. El. 1. The Churchwardens of every parish, and 4.3. or 2. housholders there, (according to the greatnesse of the parish) to be nominated yearly in Easter week or within one moneth after under the hands and seales of two Justices of P. (1. Qu.) shall be called Overseers of the Poore for the same parish. II. These Officers or the greater part of them shall take order (vvith the Consent of tvvo such Just.) for the setting of poore peo∣ple to work, and for raising (by taxation) a convenient stock, to work upon, to relieve impotent persons, to put forth Apprentices, and to performe all other things concerning the premisses. III. These officers or such of them as shall not be let by some just excuse (to be allow∣ed two such Justices) shall meet monethly in the Church upon the Sunday after Eve∣ning prayer, and there consider of some meet direction in the premisses; And shall within foure dayes after the end of their yeare and other Overseers nominated, yeeld up a true accompt to such tvvo Justices, pay the Sur∣plusage thereof to their successors, and use all possible diligence in their office, in pain
to forfeit for every such default xx. s. IV Where the Inhabitants of any parish are not able to relieve themselves, tvvo such I. may tax other parishes and places, and the vvhole Hundred also (if need require) and where the whole Hundred is not able, Just. of P. in Ses. may tax the County in part or wholly at their discretions. V. It shall be lavvfull for the said officers upon warrant from two such Just. to levy such tax or surplusage by distresse and sale of goods, and in default of distresse tvvo of the said Just. have power to commit the party to Prison there to remain without Baile, untill it be discharged, and also to commit persons, which refuse to work to the house of Cor∣rection. VI. The said officers, or the greater part of them vvith the assent of two I. of P. may bind poore Children Apprentices, viz. a man child till 24. yeares of age, and a woman Child till 21. yeares, or Marriage. VII. The said officers shall (with the Con∣sent of the Lord of the Mannor first obtaind in writing under his hand and Seale) either of themselves or by vertue of a Sess. order erect Cottages upon the wast and lodge Inmates therein, notwithstanding the statute of 31. El. 7. But those Cottages shall not be afterwards otherwise imployed then to lodge impotent persons therein, upon the paines mentioned in the said statute of 31. El. VIII. Justices of P. in Sess. shall rectifie unjust taxes, whose order therein shall be bin∣ding
to all parties. IX. The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, and Children of every poore person shal be assessed towards their reliefe, as the Just. of P. in Sess. of the County where such Father, &c. dwels, shall limit and ap∣point, in paine to forfeit 20. s. a month. X. Officers in Corporate townes, and Aldermen of London, have in their severall precincts like authority that Just. of P. have in the Counties, which said Just. are not to intermeddle in Corporations for the execu∣tion of this Law. XI. When one parish extends into seve∣rall Counties or Liberties, the Justices or head Officers shall onely intermeddle within their respective limits; but the Churchwar∣dens and Overseers shall have mixt Juris∣diction, and shall render accompt (as afore∣said) to the Justices or head. Officers of both places. XII. If it happen no Overseers to be ap∣pointed according to this Statute, every Just. of P. or head Officer of that Division, or Corporation, shall forfeit 5. l. to be levied by a Sessions warrant, and imployed to the use of the poore of the Parish, where such de∣fault is made. XIII. The forfeitures of this Statute shal be imployed to the use of the poore, as afore∣said, and shall bee levied by distresse and commitment, as is above remembred in the fifth clause. XIV Justices of P. of every County and
Corporation, or the more part of them, at their Easter Sessions, shall yearely (or as often as they shall thinke fit) rate every Pa∣rish at a certaine summe, to be paid weekly; but so, as no parish may pay more then six pence, nor lesse then a halfe penny, and (one Parish being considered with another) not above two pence a piece, through the whole County or Corporation; which summes so ra∣ted, the Church-wardens and Constab. of eve∣ry Parish, or any of them (or in their default a Just. of P.) have power to assesse and levie by distresse, sale and commitment, as afore∣said. XV. Justices of P. shall then likewise rate every parish, towards the reliefe of the Kings Bench and Marshalsie, and also of Hospitals and Almes-houses situate within their seve∣rall Jurisdictions, appointing onely so much to the said Hospitals and Almes-houses, that the Kings Bench and Marshalsie may each of them receive at least 20. s. yearely out of every County: And the summes thus to be as∣sessed upon every Parish, the Churchwardens there shall collect and pay over quarterly to the high Constable of that respective Di∣vision, ten dayes before every quarter Ses∣sions, and the high Constable shall every quarter Sess. pay the same over to the two Treasurers of the County, or one of them, to be yearely chosen by the more part of the Justices of P. and such Subsidie-men as were taxed in the last rate of Subsidies at 5. l. lands, or 10. l. goods: which Treasurers so
chosen, shall yearely at Easter Sessions ren∣der a true accompt to their successors, and pay the moneys in their hands to the L. Chiefe Justice of the Kings Bench, and the Knight Marshall, by equall portions. And here, the Churchwarden or his Executors, &c. which failes in payment to the high Const. shall forfeit 10. s. and the high Const. or his Ex∣ecutors, &c. which failes in payment to the Treasurers, shall forfeit 20. s. to be levied and imployed by the said Treasurers, as aforesaid. XVI. The stock of every County shall be ordered and disposed to charitable uses, as the Justices or the more part of them shall think convenient. XVII. The Treasurer that refuseth to ex∣ecute his office, to distribute reliefe, or to ac∣compt, as the more part of the Justices shall direct, shall be fined by the same Justices, or (in their default) by the Judges of Assise, three pounds at least, which fine shall be le∣vied by sale of goods, upon the prosecution of any two Justices authorized by the rest. XVIII. A provision for the Island of Fowlenesse in Essex. XIX. Upon an Action brought for the due execution of this Act, the defendant may plead the generall Issue, and yet give speci∣all matter in evidence; and shall also reco∣ver treble damages, and his costs of suit. XX. Stat. 1. Jac. 25. All persons,  to whom the Overseers of the poore shall (ac∣cording to the Statute of 43. El. 2.) bind any
children Apprentices, may take, receive, and keep them as Apprentices. Stat. 21. Jac. 28. XXI.  Stat. 3. Car. 4. All persons, to whom the Overseers of the poore shall (ac∣cording to the Stat. of 43. El. 2.) binde any children Apprentices, may take, receive, and keep them as Apprentices. XXII. The Churchwardens and Over∣seers of the poore (mentioned in the Statute of 43. El. 2.) may, with the consent of two or more Just. of P. (1.Qu.) within their respe∣ctive limits, wherein there shall be more Just. of P. then one, and where no more shall be then one, with the assent of that one Ju∣stice, set up, use and occupie any Trade, My∣stery or Occupation, onely for the setting on worke, and better reliefe of the poore of the parish, or place where they so beare of∣fice respectively. Poulters, S. Victuall, 2. 10. Powdike in Norfolke, S. Felo∣ny, 13. Poysoning, S. Murder. Presentments, S. Indictments. Priests, S. Recusants.
Prisons, Prisoners, Gaoles, Gaolers. I. Stat. 4. E. 3.10.  Sheriffes and Gao∣lers shall receive offenders without any thing taking, in paine to be punished by the Justi∣ces of Gaole-delivery. II. Stat. 14. E. 3.10.  Gaoles which were wont to be in the Sheriffs custodie, shall be againe rejoyned to their Baliwicks. See Stat. 13. R. 2.15. & 19. H. 7.10. III. The Gaoler, which by dures compels a prisoner to become an Approver, shall have judgement of life and member. IV. Stat. 5. H. 4.10.  Justices of P. shall imprison none, but in the common Gaole. V. Stat. 14. El. 5.  Just. of P. in Sess. or the more part of them, have power to tax every parish in the County (but not above 6. d. or 8. d. a piece) towards the reliefe of prisoners, which tax the Church-wardens of every Parish shall levie every Sunday, and pay it in quarterly to the high Constable, or (in a Corporation) to the head Officer, and the high Const. or head Officer shall pay the same at every Qu. Sess. to the Collectors thereof, to be appointed by the said Justices, who shall distribute it weekly to the said prisoners. VI. The Church-wardens, high Con∣stables, head Officers, or Collectors afore∣said, which herein shall be found negligent,
shall forfeit 5. l. to be divided betwixt the Queene and the prisoners. VII. Justices of P. within the County shall not intermeddle within a Corporation for the execution of this Act; but onely the Maior or head Officers of the same. VIII.  Stat. 3. Jac. 10. An offender which is to be conveyed to the Gaole, shall beare all charges, both of himselfe, and of those which guard him. IX. If he refuse so to do, upon warrant from a Just. of P. the Constable of the town∣ship where he hath any goods, (being within the same County) may sell so much thereof, as in the discretion of the said Justice shall be thought sufficient to satisfie the said char∣ges; the appraisement thereof to be made by the neighbours there, and the overplus to be rendred to the said offender. X. If the offender hath no goods to satis∣fie the charges, the Constables, Church∣wardns, and two or three other honest In∣habitants, or (in case there be no such Offi∣cers there) foure of the principall Inhabi∣tants of the Parish where he was taken, shall make a tax, according to which (being al∣lowed under the hand of a Just. of P.) every Inhabitant shall pay the said charges; And upon refusall, (by warrant from a Just. of P.) the Constable, Tythingman, or other Offi∣cer, hath power to levie the same by distresse, and (after appraisement by foure Inhabitants there) to sell the same, rendring the overplus to the party so refusing.
XI. Here if the Officer which distraines be sued, he shall plead Justification, and up∣on verdict for him, or nonsuit of the Plain∣tife, he shall recover treble damages, besides costs of suit. See Bailement, 1, 10. Cerciorari, Felony. 2, 3, 11. Probat of Wils, S. Ecclesiasticall Court. Processe. Stat. 5. E. 3.11. Justices assigned to heare and determine felonies, may make out pro∣cesse against felons appealed, indicted, or outlawed before them, into forraine Coun∣ties for their apprehension. See Supersedeas, 2. Prophecies. I. Stat. 5. El. 15.  None shall publish or set forth any phantasticall or false pro∣phecie, with an intent to raise sedition, in paine to forfeit for the first offence 10 l. and to suffer one whole yeares imprisonment; and for the second, all his goods, and to in∣curre imprisonment during life; which said forfeitures are to bee divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor. II. Justices of Ass. Oyre and Term. and of P. have power to heare and determine this
offence, being prosecuted within six months, otherwise not. Purveyors, Takers. I.  Stat. Magna Charta, 9. H. 3.19. No Constable of a Castle, or his Bailiffe shall take Corne or Cattell of a forraigne dweller without present payment, nor of an Inhabi∣tant, without payment within forty dayes. See Stat. 3. E. 3.7. II.  Ibidem, cap. 21. No Sheriffe or Bai∣liffe of the Kings, or any other, shall take the Horses or Carts of any man to make car∣riage, except he pay for carriage with two horses, after the rate of 10. d. a day, and with three, 14. d. a day. III. No Demesne cart of any Spirituall person, Lord, or Knight, shall be taken for carriage by the Kings Bailiffes; neither shall any wood be taken for the Kings use, without the owners licence. IV.  Stat. de Tallagio non concedendo, tempore H. 3. None of the Kings ministers shall take any Corne, Hides, or any other goods, without the owners consent. Stat. tempore E. 1. V.  Stat. 3. E. 1.1. None shall make purveyances of goods, carriages, Ships, or Barges, without the owners consent. VI.  Stat. 3. E. 1.31. Purveyors, which take any thing for the Kings use upon cre∣dence, shall, immediatly after they have re∣ceived money of the King, for the discharge
thereof, pay the Creditors, in paine to have the same (together with damages) levied of their lands and goods, and also to make fine for the trespasse: And if they have nei∣ther lands nor goods, they shall suffer impri∣sonment at the Kings will. VII. None shall take more Horses or Carts for the Kings use, then need requires; nor take reward to excuse any, in paine to be punished by the Marshals, if he be of the Court; and if not (being thereof attainted) to pay treble damages, and to remaine in the Kings prison forty dayes. VIII. Stat. 28. E. 1.2.  None save the Kings Purveyors shall take any prises, and they onely for the use of his house, paying, or making agreement with the party for the same, if the prises taken be meate, drink, or such other meane things. IX. Purveyors shall before they take any goods, shew their warrant to the owner, which warrant shall be under the Great or petty Seale, declaring also their authority, and the goods, whereof they are to make purveyance; neither shall they take any more then need requires. X. Purveyors shall not take any thing for them that be in wages, nor for any other; but shall make full answer in the Kings house and in the Wardrobe, for all things taken by them, without making their larges elsewhere, or Liveries of such things as they have taken for the King. XI. A Purveyor (upon complaint made
to the Steward or Treasurer of the Kings house) being attainted to have offended in the premisses, shall forthwith agree with the party grieved, be put out of the Kings service for ever, and remaine in prison at the Kings pleasure. XII. If a Purveyor be attainted to have taken any thing without warrant, he shall be conveyed to the next Gaole, and suffer as a Felon, if the value of the goods do so require. XIII. Concerning prices made in Faires, good Townes, and Ports, for the Kings great Wardobe, the Purveyors shall have their common warrant under the Great Seale. XIV. This Act shall not diminish the Kings right for ancient prices due and accu∣stomed, as of Wines and other goods, See this Stat. confirmed, 18. E. 2.2. & 4. E. 3.4. XV.  Stat. 4. E. 3.3. No purveyance shall be made, but onely for the houses of the King, Queene, or their Children. XVI. Purveyances made for those houses shall be taken by ordinary striked measure, and prised at the true value by the Con∣stable, and other good men of the place, ac∣cording to their Oath, and without threats or dures; for which expresse payment shall be made before the Kings departure out of the verge. See this Statute confirmed, 10. E. 3.1. XVII.  Stat. 5. E. 3.2. Purveyances for the Kings, Queenes, or Kings Childrens hou∣ses, shall be made without menace by the Constables, and foure discreet men of the
place, where they are to be taken, who shall also be thereto sworne; And Tallies of the goods so taken shall be strook betwixt the Purveyors and the owners thereof, in the presence of those Constables and praisers, under the seales of the said Purveyors, ac∣cording to which the said owners shall be af∣terwards paid; And if a Purveyor shall be attainted to have taken any thing otherwise then is limited by this Statute, he shall be imprisoned, and suffer as a Felon, if the value of the goods require it: And in every war∣rant of Purveyance, the forme and penalty of this Statute shall be inserted. See Stat. 25. E. 3.1. XVIII. Stat. 10. E. 3.4.  The Sheriffe shall make purveyance for the Kings horses. XIX. Stat. 14. E. 3.1.  Spirituall per∣sons goods shall not be taken by Purveyors, nor their houses charged with Horses, Dogs, Hawkes, or the like, without their consent and good liking. Stat. XX. 14. E. 3.19.  The Kings Pur∣veyors shall take nothing without the owners consent, and shall pay for what they take, before the Kings departure out of the verge; And if they attempt to do any thing against this Statute by colour of their Commission, no man is bound to obey them. XXI. For the Purveyance of Castles, and Townes in Scotland and England, Mer∣chants shall be appointed by the Treasure without Commission; but none shall be cm∣pelled to sell any thing against their will.
XXII. The Sheriffe shall make Purvey∣ance for a certaine number of the Kings hor∣ses, and Dogs, out of the issues of his Bai∣liwick. XXIII. The Countrey shall not bee charged with any more then to keep these horses, viz. for every horse a servant, without bringing women, Pages, or dogs with them. XXIV.  Stat. 18. E. 3.4. In Commissi∣ons for Purveyance, the fees of the Church shall be excepted. XXV.  Stat. 25. E. 3.6. No purveyour shall take any timber growing about a mans house, in paint of one yeares imprisonoment, and the losse of his Office. XXVI.  Stat. 25. E. 3.15. No Purvey∣our shal take more Sheep for the Kings house before sheere-day, then shall be needfull, in paine to suffer as Felon; and this paine shall be inserted in every Commission of Purveyance. XXVII.  28. E. 3.12. When the value of the Purveyance exceeds not 20. s. present payment shall be made for it; when it amounts to more, payment shall be made for it within one quarter of a year after, upon a certain day, and at a place convenient for the party that is to receive it. XXVIII.  Stat. 34. E. 3.2. No Purvey∣ance shall be hereafier made, save onely for the King, Qucene, or Prince. XXIX.  Stat. 34. E. 3.3. As concer∣ning Purveyances for the Qucene or Prince, present payment shall be made for Poultry
or other shall things; but for other great purveyances, within a month or six weeks. XXX. Stat. 36. E. 3.2.  From henceforth purveyances shall be made for the King and Qucenes houses onely, and no other. XXXI. The heinous name of Purveyor shall be changed, and named Buyer. XXXII. If the Buyer and Seller cannot agree, the goods shall be appraised by the Lords, or Bailisses, Constables, and foure men, containing the quantity of the takings, the price, and of what persons: which takings shall be made without dures or compulsion, in places of plenty, and in a convenient time. XXXIII. Purveyors shall be men of suf∣ficiency, and shall make no Deputies; Their Commission shall be renewed every halfe yeare under the Great Seale; which none is bound to obey, unlesse they pay ready mo∣ney, as well for things bought, as also for carringes. XXXIV. Purveyance of Graine or Malt shall be taken by striked measure, according to the Standard, and no more carriages to be used for it then shall be need∣full. XXXV. If any Purveyor or Buyer of∣fend against this Statute, he shall suffer pu∣nishment of life and member. See this Statute consirmed, 23. H. 6.1. XXXVI. Stat. 36. E. 3.3.  No Buyer shal spare any from carriages for reward, nor charge any for hatted or evill will, in paine
to yeeld to the party grieved treble dama∣ges, suffer two yeares imprisonment, to be ransomed at the Kings will, and to abjure the Court; and if the party grieved will not sue in this Case, any other that will, shall have the third penny of what shall be re∣covered. XXXVII.  36. E. 3.4. Commis∣sions shall be awarded to inquire of the be∣haviour and acts of such Buyers. XXXVIII.  Stat. 36. E. 3.5. None shall keep more horses of the Kings then shall be committed to him. XXXIX. None of the King or Queenes houses shall make any Purveyor, but shall buy provision, as others do, of those which are willing to sell. XL.  Stat. 36. E. 3.6. It is felony for any subjects servant to take any thing by way of Purveyance without the owners no∣tice. See Stat. 7. R. 2.8. XLI.  Stat. 1. R. 2.3. Prelates shall have their actions of Trespasse against Pur∣veyors offending, and shall also recover treble damages. XLII.  20. R. 2.5. None shall take away any mans horse, or other thing whatsoever, upon pretencde of hastice businesse, in paine of Imprisonment, till he agree with the party grieved. XLIII.  2. H. 4.14. When the va∣lue of the thing taken exceeds not 40.s. the Purveyor shall make present payment for it, in apine to lose his Office, and also to pay as
much to the party grieved. XLIV. Stat. 1. H. 5.10.  No Purveyor shall take any Corne by other measure then according to eight bushels striked for the Quarter, in apine to suffer one yeares Im∣prisonment, forfeit 5. l. to the King, and as much to the party grieved: And the Purvey∣or shall make present payment for the carri∣age thereof; and nothing shall be taken for the measuring of such Corne. Justices of P. have power to heare and determine this of∣fence. XLV. Stat. 1. H. 6.2.  The Statutes of Purveyors shall be proclaimed quarterly by every Sheriffe throughout his Bailiwick, in paine to forfeit 5. l. for every time he makes default. XLVI. Stat. 20. H. 6.8.  A Purveyor that takes goods, whose value exceeds not 10. s. and payes not present money for them, may lawfully be resisted: And here the Con∣stable, Headborough or other Officer, shall (upon request) assist the owner, in paine to yeeld unto the said owner, the value of the goods so taken, and double damages. XLVII. None of the Kings Officers shall arrest or trouble any of the Kings sub∣jects for any such resistance, in paine of 20. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the pro∣secutor. XLVIII. Justices of P. have power to heare and determine the offences committed against this Act, and, upon conviction of the defendant, to award damages to the Plain∣tiffe.
XLIX. In every Purveyors Commission this Act shall be inserted, and shall also be sent to the Sheriffes of every County to be proclaimed amongst other Statutes of Pur∣veyors, according to the Stat. of 1. H. 6.2. L.  Stat. 23. H. 6.1, 2. Every Purveyor before he receive his Commission shall be sworne in the Chancery to take nothing of the Kings subjects, contrary to the Statute of 36. E. 3.2, 3. LI. The party grieved by taking, which (upon request) was not assisted by the Pray∣sor, Towne, or Townes adjoyning, may bring his Action of Debt against the Towne, or the Purveyor, which he likes best, and shal recover the treble value of his goods so taken away, together with his costs & treble dama∣ges; And none of the Kings Officers shall trouble any of the Kings subjects for the exe∣cution of this Act, in paine to forfeit 20. l. to the party grieved, besides his costs and dama∣ges, for which he may have a Writ of Debt, in which Action no Wager of Law, Assoigne, Aide of the King, or Protection shall be al∣lowed: And the debt, damages, and execu∣tions recovered against a Purveyor in this Case (if he hath not whereof to pay them) shall be satisfied by the Serjeant of the Ca∣tery, unto whom a Scine facias shall be dire∣cted for that purpose. LII. These Statutes shall be sent to the Just. of P. in every County, to the end they may be yearely proclaimed. LIII.  Stat. 23. H. 6.14. All Maiors,
Bailiffes, Constables, and other Officers, shall (upon request made) arrest and impri∣son without baile all Purveyors (except only the Kings or Queens) which take any goods or carriages from any of the Kings subjects, in paine to forfeit 20. l. to be divided be∣twixt the King, and the party grieved, in case he will sue for it; but if not, then betwixt the King and the prosecutor: And the party offending, being duely convicted thereof, shall yield to the party grieved the treble value of the goods so taken, and double costs, and besides shall fine to the King for the trespasse committed. LIV. Here no Wager of Law, or the Kings Protection shall be allowed to the Defendant. LV. This Act shall not restraine the pu∣nishment ordained against the Kings Pur∣veyors. LVI. Stat. 28. H. 6.2.  No person keep∣ing an Hostry, Brew-house, or Victualling, shall be a Purveyor, and all Letters Patents of Purveyance granted to such shall be void. LVII. No Purveyor shal take any Horse or Cart, but by the consent of the owner, or delivery of the Maior, Sheriffe, Bailiffes, or Constable, in paine to be subject to an Action of Trespasse, wherein the party grieved shall recover treble damages. LVIII. Stat. 27. H. 8.24.  Purveyors assigned by the Kings Commission, may pro∣vide victuall, Corne, and all other things for the houses of the King, Queene, and their
Children, as well within Liberties as with∣out, notwithstanding any grant to the con∣trary: Provided such Purveyors shall ob∣serve the Statutes for them ordained, in eve∣ry behalfe. LVIX.  Stat. 2, 3. P.M. 6. No Commissi∣on of Purveyance shall continue in force above six months. LX. In every such Commission shall be inserted the proportion and number of the things to be taken; as also the County or Counties where such purveyance is to be made. LXI. To every Commission shall be an∣nexed blanks in parchment, according to the number of the Counties into which it extends, and in every such blank shall be faire written the proportion and number of the commodi∣ties there to be taken, which shall also be subscribed by the high Constables, Consta∣bles, or other Officers, which shall be privy to the delivery of the said goods. LXII. The Purveyor shall make wri∣tings or dockets of all things by him taken, and subscribing his name thereunto, shall de∣liver them to the Constables, Headboroughs, or other Officers of the places, where he takes the same things, in paine for every such default to suffer one yeares imprison∣ment, and to forfeit a 100. marks, to be di∣vided betwixt the King and the prosecutor; which said dockets shall be by the said Offi∣cers delivered over to the Justices of P. at their next generall Sess. and by them certifi∣ed
to the Lord Steward, Treasurer, or Comptroller of the King and Queenes hou∣ses, if such purveyance were for the house; but if for the Navy, then to the Treasurer, or Comptroler of the Navy; And all this, to the end a true answer of the Purveyors Commission may fully appeare. LXIII. This Statute shall not give liber∣ty to Purveyors, or their Deputies, to execute their office otherwise, then is provided and expressed in other Statutes heretofore made, upon the paines and penalties in the same former Statutes contained. LXIV. Statutes made and provided for Purveyors, or Takers, shall also extend to their under takers, deputies and servants. LXV. All Commissions of Purveyance shall be written in English. LXVI. Stat. 2, 3. P.M. 15.  No Purvey∣ance shall be made within five miles of Ox∣ford, or Cambridge, except by the owners consent, or when the Court is within seven miles distance of the same Universities, in paine to suffer three months imprisonment without baile, and to forfeit foure times the value of the things so taken, to be divided betwixt the common. Treasurers of the same Universities respectively, and the Prosecutor. LXVII. The Chancellor, Vice-Chan∣cellor, or their Commissary, together with two Just. of P. of the County adjoyning, have power to heare and determine this of∣fence. LXVIII. Stat. 13. El. 21.  Purveyance
may be made within five miles of Oxford and Cambridge, by licence from the Chancel∣lour or Vice-Chancellour, under their seale of office; And by licence under the hands and seales of the said Chancellor or Vice-Chancellor, and two Just. of Peace of the County adjoyning, Purveyors may take vi∣ctuall from such, as refuse reasonably to serve the said Universities, notwithstanding the Stat. of 2, 3. P.M. 15. LXIX. This Act shall be in suspence during the Queens abode within seven miles of either of the said Universities. S. Fish. 18. Leather, 25. Putting out of eyes, S. Felony, 5. Quarrelling, S. Fighting. Quarter Sessions, S. Justices of Peace, 12.20. Rape. Ravishment. I.  Stat. De Officio Coronatoris 3.4. E. 1. If any be Appealed of Rape, he must be at∣tached, if the Appeale be fresh, and they must see apparent signe of truth, by effusion
of bloud, or an open cry made; and such shall be attached by foure or six pledges, if they may be found; but if the Appeale were without cry, or any manifest signe or token, two pledges shall be sufficient. II. Stat. West. 2.13. E. 1.34.  It is fe∣lony for a man to ravish a woman, although she consent after. III. Stat. 6. R. 2.6.  Both the Ravisher, and the Ravished, (which shall consent after the fact) are disabled to have or challenge any Inheritance, Dower, or Joynt-estate, after the death of their Husband or An∣cestor. III. Here the Husband, Father, or next of the blood shall have the sult, wherein the Defendant shall not be received to wage battle. IV. Stat. 3. H. 7.2.  Where a woman which hath lands or goods, or is heire appa∣rant to her Ancestor, is taken away against her will, hoth principall and accessaries shall suffer as felons. V. Stat. 18. El. 7.  He that is guilty of Rape shall not have the benefit of his Clergy. VI. To know a woman carnally under the age of ten yeares, shall be felony without al∣lowance of Clergy. VII. Stat. 39. El. 9.  He that takes away a woman against her will, contrary to the Statute of 3. H. 7.2. together with the Ac∣cessaries before that offence committed, shall lose their benefit of Clergy.
Record, S. Felony, 6. Recusants, Rome, Jesuits, Semi∣nary Priests, &c. I.  Stat. 16. R. 2.5. If any shall purchase or pursue from the Court of Rome, or else∣where, any translations from one Spirituall promotion to another, or any Processes, sen∣tences of Excommunication, Buls, Instru∣ments, or any other thing whatsoever dero∣gatory to the King, his Crowne, Realme, or Regalty, he and his accessaries shall incurre a Praemunire, viz. shall be attached by their bodies, put out of the Kings protection, for∣feit to the King all their lands and goods, and if they cannot be found, processe shall be made out against them by Praemunire facias. II.  Stat. 25. H. 8.19. None shall sue any Appeale from Rome, nor execute any Processe from thence, in paine that both they and their accessaries shall incurre a Prae∣munire. III.  Stat. 28. H. 8.16. All Buls, Bre∣ves, Faculties, and Dispensations obtained from the Bishop of Rome, shall be void, and never hereafter used or alledged in any pla∣ces or Courts of this Realme, upon the pains contained in the Statute of Praemunire, made in 16. R. 2.5. IV.  Stat. 1. El. 1. None shall affirme
or maintaine the Power, or Jurisdiction of any forreigne Prelate or Potentate within any of the Queens dominions, in paine to forfeit all his goods and chattels; and if he be not worth 20. l. at the time of his convicti∣on, he shall forfeit all he hath, and besides suffer one whole yeares imprisonment with∣out baile: And here for the second offence he shall incurre a Praemunire, and for the third shall be adjudged guilty of high Trea∣son: But this offence must be prosecuted within one yeare after it is committed. See. 26. V. If he be a Clergy-man, Beneficed, up∣on the first conviction all his Spirituall pro∣motions shall be void. VI. If he be imprisoned for this offence, (committed by words onely) and be not in∣dicted for the same within six months after it is committed, he shall be set at liberty. VII. If a Peere of the Realme happen to be guilty of this offence, he shall be tried by his Peeres. VIII. And here for the better observance of this Law, was the oath of Supremacy esta∣blished, in these words following; I. A. B. do utterly testifie and declare in my conscience, that the Queenes Highnesse is the onely supreme Governour of this Realme, and of all other her Highnesse Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spirituall or Ecclesiasticall things or cases, as Temporall; and that no forraigne Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, hath or ought to have any Jurisdiction, Power, Supe∣riority, Preheminence, or Authority, Ecclesiasticall
or Spirituall within this Realme; and therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all fonaigne Ju∣risdictions, Powers, Superiorities, and Authori∣ties, and do promise, that from henceforth I shall beare faith and true Allegiance to the Queenes Highnesse, her Heires and lawfull Successors, and to my power shall assist and defend all Jurisdicti∣ons, Priviledges, Preheminencies, and Authori∣ties, granted or belonging to the Queens High∣nesse, her Heires and Successors, or united and an∣nexed to the Imperiall Crowne of this Realme: So help me God, and by the Contents of this Book. IX.  Stat. 5. El. 1. None shall main∣taine the Jurisdiction of the Bishop or See of Rome, within any of the Queenes domini∣ons, in paine to incurre a Praemunire. X. Just. of Ass. and Justices of Pain Sess. or any two of them, (1. Qu.) have power to heare and determine this offence; and are to certifie such presentments into the Kings Bench within 40. dayes after they receive them, if it shall be then Terme time; if not, then the first day of the Terme then next in∣suing, in paine of 100. l. The Justices of the Kings Bench also, as well upon such Certi∣ficate, as also before themselves, have power to heare and determine the same offence. XI. None compellable to take the oath of Supremacy by this Act, or by that of 1. El. 1. (which see in the Statutes at large) shall re∣fuse to take it accordingly, in paine to incurre a Praemunire. XII. If any refuse to take the same Oath upon the second tender, or being formerly
convicted of maintaining the jurisdiction of the Bishop or See of Rome, as aforesaid, do commit the like offence the second time; in both these cases they shall suffer as in case of high Treason: But here, there shall be no corruption of Bloud, disheriting of any heire, forfeiture of Dower, or preju∣dice to the right of any, save onely of the offender during his life. XIII. This Act shall be published every Qu. Sess. by the Cl. of the P. and at every Leete by the Steward there, and once every Terme in the open Hall of every Inne of Court and Chancery, at such times and by such persons as shall be appointed by the Lord Chancellor or Keeper for the time being. XIV. None of or above the degree of a Baron shall be compellable to take this oath: And here also a Peere offending, shall be tried be his Peeres. Provided that none shall be compellable to take this oath upon a second tender, or be in danger (by the re∣fusall thereof) to incurre the penalty of high Treason, save only Clergy-men, Offi∣cers of Ecclesiasticall Courts, or such as shall not observe the Rites of Divine Ser∣vice, do deprave by words or writing the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, or do use to say or heare private Masse. XV. It shall not be lawfull to slay one attainted in Praemunire. S. after 26.
XVI.  Stat. 13. El. 2. It shall be high Treason to obtaine oor put in ure any Bull of Absolution, or reconciliation from the Bishop of Rome, or to absolve or be absol∣ved thereby. XVII. The comforters and maintatiners of such offenders shall incurre a Praemunire and their concealers misprision of Trea∣son, unlesse within six weeks they discover them to some of the Privy Councell, or to one of the Presidents or Vice-Presidents of the Councels established in the North, or Marches of Wales. XVIII. If any shall bring into any of the Queens Dominions any Agnus Dei, Crosses, Prictures, Beads, or any such vaine or super∣stitious thing, or deliver, or offer the same to any person to be used; both the person so doing, and the person so receiving the same shall incurre a Praemunire; howbeit, if the party unto whom tender thereof shall be made, apprehend the pary tendring the same, and carry him before the next Just. of P. or not being able so to do, within three dayes after discloseth his name, and the place of his abode, or resort unto the Ordinary, or some Justice of P. within the same County; or having received the same, doth within one day after deliver it to some such Justice of peace, then shall he not incurre any preju∣dice by reason of this Act. XIX. A Just. of P. shall disclose the of∣fences aforesaid to the Privy Councell with∣in 14. dayes after he shall have notice of
them, in paine to incurre a Praemunire. XX. Here the triall of a Nobleman shall be by Peeres. See after 26. XXI. Stat. 23. El. 1.  It shall be high Treason to have, or pretend to have power, or to put in practise to absolve, perswade, or withdraw any within the Queenes domi∣nions from their naturall obedience to her majesty, or to withdraw them for that intent from the Religion now established, to the Romish Religion: And them also, which shall be willingly so withdrawne or recon∣ciled, as aforesaid, and ther procurers and counsellors thereunto, shall be adjudged guilty of the same offence. XXII. If any having notice of the said of∣fences, do not discover them within 20. dayes to some Just. of P. or other such Officer, he shall be adjudge guilty of misprision of Treason. XXIII. None shall say or sing Masse, in paine to forfeit 200. marks, to suffer one yeares imprisonment, and not to be enlarged thence till that fine be paid; And none shall heare Masse, in paine of onw whole yeares imprisonment, and 100. marks. XXIV. Every person not repairing to Church, according to the Stat. of 1. El. 2. (which see in Sacraments 24.) shall forfeit 20. l. for every month they so make default: and if they so forbeare by the space of twelve months, after certificate thereof made by the Ordinary into the Kings Bench; a Justice of
Assise, G. D. or Peace of the County where they dwell, shall binde them with two suf∣ficient sureties in 200 abl. at least, to the good behaviour, from which they shall not be re∣leased, untill they shall repaire to Church according to the said Statute. XXV. None shall keep a Schoolemaster which absents himselfe from Church, or is not allowed by the Bishop or Ordinary, in paine of ten pounds for every month he so keeps him: And such Schoolemaster shall be for ever after disabled to teach youth, and shall suffer one whole yeares imprisonment without baile. XXVI. The offences against this Act, and the Acts of the first, fifth, and thirteenth years of the Queens Reigne, touching the acknowledging of her Supreame government in causes Ecclesiasticall, the service of God, coming to Church, or establishment of true Religion within this Realme, shall be inquirable before Justices of Oyer and Term. Assise, G. D. and P. in their circuits and Sess. within one yeare and a day after every such offence committed, except Treason, and mis∣prision of treason. XXVII. Provided, that any of the offen∣ders aforesaid, which shall before judgment submit and conforme themselves to the Bi∣shop of the Diocesse, or in open Assise or Ses∣sions shall be discharged of every the offen∣ces aforesaid, (except Treason, and misprision of Treason) and of all paine and penalties incurred for the same.
XXVIII. Of the forfeitures abovesaid, two third parts the Queene shall have, one to her own use, the other for reliefe of the poore in the Parish where the offence is com∣mitted, to be delivered without further war∣rant then of the principall Officers of the Receit of the Exchequer, and the other third part the prosecutor shall have: And here the offender that is not able to pay the forfei∣tures, or doth not pay them within three months after judgement, shall be committed to prison, and there remaine untill he have satisfied them, or shall conforme himselfe to go to Church. XXIX. They that have on Sundayes the Divine Service established usually read in their houses, and are commonly present themselves thereat, and do not obstinately refuse to come to Church, but foure times in the yeare (at least) are present at Divine Service in their own Parish Church, or some other open Church, or Chappell of ease, shall not incurre the penalty aforesaid, for not coming to Church. XXX. All covinous Grants to defrand the interest which the Queen, or any other person may claime, by vertue of this Act, or of 13 El. 2. shall be adjudged void. XXXI. If a Peere of the Realme happen to be indicted for any offence, made Trea∣son, or misprision of Treason by this Act, he shall be tried by his Peeres. XXXII. This Act shall not abridge the Jurisdiction of Ecclesiasticall Censures.
XXXIII.  Stat, 27. El. 2. All Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other Ecclesiasticall persons, borne within any of the Queens do∣minions, and ordained or made such by the pretended Jurisdiction of the See of Rome, which com into, or remaine in any of the said Dominions, shall be adjudged guilty of high Treason; And their receivers, ayders, and maintainers, (knowing them to be such, and at liberty) shall be adjudged Felons, without benefit of Clergy. XXXIV. All others, brought up on Se∣minaries beyond Sea, and not as yet in Or∣ders, as aforesaid, which do not, within six months after Proclamation made in London, (in that behalfe) returne into this Realme, and within two dayes after such returne, be∣fore the Bishop of the Diocesse, or two Just. of P. of the County where they shall ar∣rive, submit themselves to the Queen and her Laws, and take the Qath of Supremacy, shall also bee adjudged guilty of high Treason. XXXV. They which give or send reliefe to any such Ecclesiasticall person, or Semi∣nary, or to any brought up there, as afore∣said, shall incurre a Praemunire. XXXVI. These offences shall be heard and determined in the Kings Bench, or in any County, where they shall be committed, or the offender taken. XXXVII. This Act shall not extend to any Jesuit, or other Ecclesiasticall person aforesaid, which within three dayes after
his arrivall shall submit himselfe to some Arch-bishop, Bishop, or to some Just. of P. of the County where he lands, and there take the Oath of Supremacy, and under his hand acknowledge to continue in due obedience to her Majesties Laws. XXXIX. Here the triall of a Peere shall be by his Peeres. XL. If any, knowing a Jesuit or Priest to remain within any of the Queens dominions, do not within twelve dayes discover the same to some Just of P. he shall make fine, and suf∣fer imprisonment during the Queens plea∣sure; And the Just. of P. which doth not within 28. dayes after disclose it to some of the Privy Counoell, or to the President, or Vice-President of the Councels in the North, or Marches of Wales, shall forfeit 200. Marks; And such of those Councels, to whom that information shall be made, shall deliver a writing under their hands unto the party informing, testifying, that such infor∣mation was made unto them. XLI. All Oaths, Bonds, and submissions, as aforesaid, shall within three months be certified into the Chancery by the parties before whom they are taken, in pain of 100. l. XLII. None having submitted, as afore∣said, shall within ten yeeres after come with∣in ten miles of the Court, in paine to lose the benefit of such submission. XLIII. Stat. 29. El. 6. All Grants, In∣cumbrances,  cumbrances, or Limitations of use made by any person not repairing to the Church
(according to the Stat. of 23. El. 1.) which are revokeable by the offender, intended for his maintenance, left at his disposition, or in consideration whereof he and his family are to be kept, shall be utterly void against the Queen, as to hinder the levying of the for∣feitures for not coming to Church, or say∣ing, hearing, or being at Masse, or the making of seisures for the same purpose. XLIV. Every conviction for any offence before mentioned, shall be in the Kings Bench, or at the Assises or G. D. and not elsewhere; and shall by the Justices there be certified into the Exchequer before the end of the terme then next following. 82. XLV. The Queene may seise all the goods, and two thrid parts of the lands and Leases of every offender not repairing to Church, as aforesaid, which after their first conviction do not pay into the Exchequer, in such of the Termes of Easter and Michael∣masse, as shall happen next after such con∣viction, the summe then due for the for∣feiture of 20. l. a month, and yearely after that, (in the same Termes) according to the rate of 20. l. a month, for so long time as they shall forbeare to come to Church, ac∣cording to the said Statute of 23. E. 1. vide infra, 71, 72, 73, 83. XLVI. An Indictment against such an offender shall be sufficient, although no mention be therein made that the party is within the Realme. XLVII. When an Indictment is found
against such an offender, Proclamation shall be made, that he shall render himselfe into the Sheriffes hands before the next Ass. or G. D. which if he do not, that neglect shall be as sufficient a conviction, as if upon the same Indictment a triall by verdict had proceeded. XLVIII. But here upon the offenders submission (according to the said Stat. of 23. El.) or death, no forfeiture shall insue, save onely the arrerages due at the time of such submission or death. XLIX. The Lord Treasurer, Chancel∣lor, and chiefe Baron, or any two of them, shall assigne a third part of the forfeitures of 20. l. a month, for the reliefe and mainte∣nance of the poore, houses of Correction, and maymed souldiers. L. This Act shall not extend to Grants Bona side, nor to continue any seisure after the death of the offender, in such lands, wherein he had only an estate for life, or in the right of his wife. LI, Stat, 33. El. 1.  If any above sixteen yeeres of age, shall be convicted to have (without any just cause) absented themselves above a month from Church, impugne the Queenes authority in causes Ecclesiasticall, or frequented Conventicles, or perswaded others so to do, under pretence of exercise of Religion, they shall be committed to prison, and there remaine, till they shall conforme themselves, and make such open submission, as hereafter shall be prescribed: And it,
within three months after such conviction they refuse to conforme and submit them∣selves, being thereunto required by a Just. of P. they shall in open Ass. or Sess. abjure the Realme; and if such abjuration happen to be before Just. of P. in Sess. they shall make certificate thereof at the next Ass. or Gaole delivery. LII. If such an offender refuse to abjure, or go away accordingly, or do returne with∣out the Queens licence, he shall be adjudged a felon, and shall not enjoy the benefit of Clergy; but if before he be required to ab∣jure, he make his submission, the penalties aforesaid shall not be inflicted upon him. LIII. The forme of the submission is as followeth; 1 A. B. do humbly confesse and acknowledge, that I have grievously offended God, in contemning ber Majesties godly and lawfull Government and authority, by absenting my selfe from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to the godly Statuies and Lawes of this Realme, and in using and frequenting disordred and unlawfull Conventicles and Assemblies, under pretence of exercise of Religion: And I am heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and testifie in my conscience, that no other person hath, or ought to have any power or authority over her Majesty: And I do promise and protest, without any dis∣simulation, or any clour or meanes of any dispen∣sation, that from henceforth I will from time to time obey and performe her Majesties Laws and Statutes, in repairing to the Church, and hearing
Divine Service, and do my uttermost endeavour to maintaine and defend the same. LIV. The Minister of the Parish, where the submission is made, shall presently enter the same in a Book, and within ten dayes after certifie it to the Bishop of the Diocesse. LV. The offender that after such submis∣sion falleth into a relapse, shall take no be∣nefit thereby. LVI. The forfeitures of this Act, and of 23. El. 1. may be recovered by Action of debt. LVII. The third part of the penalties which accrue by this Act, shall be bestowed as those of 29. El. 6. LVIII. A Feme Covert shall not be compelled to abjure, but any other offender that abjures, or (being required) refuseth so to do, shall forfeit all his goods, and his lands during life: howbeit here shall be no corruption of blood, losse of Dower, or disherison of heire. LVIX. Stat. 35. El. 2. Recusants above sixteen yeares of age,  shall within forty dayes after their conviction, repaire to their usuall dwelling, and not remove above five miles from thence, in paine to forfeit all their goods, and their lands and annuities during life: And if they have no certain abode, then are they to repaire to the place where they were borne, or where their father or mother dwels, and within twenty dayes after their arrivall, there to give their names in writing to the Minister, Const. and H. B. which Mi∣nister is to enter them in a Book, to be kept
for that purpose, and he, together with the said Const. and Head Boroughs, is to cer∣tifie the same to the next. Qu. Sess. where the Just. of Peace shall cause them to be enrolled. LX. A Copyholder also shall in this case forfeit his estate during life, if his estate con∣tinue so long, to the Lord of the Mannor if he be no Recusant convict, nor seised or pos∣sessed in trust to the use of a Recusant; for then the Queene shall have the forfeiture. LXI. A Popish Recusant (being no Fe∣me Covert, nor having lands worth 20. Marks per annum, or goods worth 40. l. which within the time above limited, doth not re∣paire to the place of his abode, or doth de∣part above five miles thence, or within three months after his arrivall there, doth not make the submission hereafter following, (being required so to do by the Bishop, a Just. of P. or the Minister there) shall before two Justices of the Peace, or the Coroner, abjure the Kingdome; which abjuration shall be by the said Justices or Coroner cer∣tified in at the next Assises, or G. D. LXII. If such Popish Recusant depart not the Realme, within the time limited by the said Justices or Coroner, or returne with∣out the Queens licence, he shall be adjudged a felon without Clergy. LXIII. A Jesuit or Priest refusing to answer, shall be committed to prison, and there remaine, till he will answer the que∣stions whereupon he was before examined.
LXIV. This Act shall not restraine a Recusant (urged by Processe or summons without fraud) to travell without the above∣said limits, so he returne againe in conveni∣ent time, neither him that is compelled to render his body to the Sheriffe. LXV. If such an offender before convi∣ction, upon a Sunday, or some Festivall day, repaire to Church, and there heare Divine Service, and before the Gospell make the confession following, he shall be discharged of the penalties inflected by this Act. LXVI. The confession is this: 1. A. B. do humbly confesse and acknowledge, that I have grievously offended God, in contemning her Majesiies godly and lawfull government and Authority, by absenting my selfc from Church, and from hearing Divine Service, contrary to the godly Laws and Statutes of this Realme; and I am heartily sorry for the same, and do acknowledge and testifie in my conscience, that the Bishop and See of Rome, hath not, nor ought to have any power or authority over her Majesty, or within any of her Majesties Realmes or Dominions: And I do pro∣mise and protest without any dissimulation, or any colour or meanes of any Dispensation, that from henceforth I will from time to time, obey and performe her Majesties Laws and Statutes, in repairing to the Church, and hearing Divine Ser∣vice, and do my uttermost endeavour to maintains and defend the same. LXVII. The Minister of the Parish where such submission is made, shall presently en∣ter the same in a book, and within ten dayes
after. certofie it to the Bishop of the Dio∣cesse. LXVIII. The offender that after such submission, falleth into a relapse, shall take no benefit thereby. LXIX. Every married woman shall be bound by this Act, save only by the clause of Abjuration, LXX.  Stat. 1. Jac. 4. All the aforesaid Statutes made in the time of Queene Eliz. shall be duely put in execution, against all such as do not conforme themselves, as afore∣said. LXXI. Where the Ancestor dies a Re∣cusant, the heire being none, or conforming himselfe, and taking the Oath of Suprema∣cy before the Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocesse, the lands shall be freed from all penalties. LXXII. If an heire (within age) after he shall have accomplished the age of 16. years, doth still continue a Recusant, his lands shall not be freed, untill he do conforme, and take the Oath of Supremacy, as afore∣said. LXXIII. A third part of every Recusants lands, shall remaine cleere unto him from seisure or extent, and the other two parts shall remaine in the Kings hands, (both before and after the Recusants death) untill the King shall be fully satisfied all the arrerages for the 20. l. a month, according to 23. El. 1. LXXIV. None shall send any child, or other person, under their government, beyond
the Seas, to be instructed in the Popish Re∣ligion, in paine of 100. l. and they which are so sent, shall be incapable (as to themselves only) of any grant or Inheritance due unto them, or to others for their use. LXXV. Ifa woman or child under the age of 21. yeares, be suffered to passe the Seas, without the licence of the King, or of six of the Privy Councell, under their hands, (except Saylors, Ship-boyes, or Merchants, Factors, or Apprentices) the Officers of the Port shall forfeit their Offices, and all their goods; the Owner of the Ship, his Ship and Tackle; and the Master of the Ship, all his goods, and besides, shall suffer a yeares im∣prisonment without Baile. 119. LXXVI. None out of the Universities shal keep Schoole, (except a Free Schoole, or in some persons house that is no Recusant, or by licence of the Bishop or Ordinary) in paine to forfeit 40. s. a day. LXXVII. The forfeitures of this Act shall be divided bewixt the King and the Prosecutor. LXXVIII. Stat. 3. Jac. 4.  A Recusant that conformes, shall within one yeare after, and so once every yeare (at least) receive the blessed Sacrament, in paine to forfeit for the first yeare 20. l. for the second 40. l. and for every default after 60. l. and if after he hath received it, he make default therein by the space of a whole yeare, he shall forfeit 60. l. LXXIX. These forfeitures may be re∣covered
before Just. of P. in Sess. or in any other Court of record, and are to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecuter. LXXX. The Church-wardens and Con∣stables of every Parish, or one of them, or if there be none such, then the High Con∣stable of the Hundred there, shall present once every yeer at the Generall Sessions of Peace, the monethly absence from Church of every Popish Recusant, and their children, being above the age of nine yeers, and their servants, together with the age of their chil∣dren, as neer as they can know them, in pain to forfeit respectively for every such default 20. s. which presentment the Clerk of the Peace, or Town Clerk, shall record without fee, in pain of 40. s. LXXXI. If upon such presentment (be∣ing the first) the Recusant be convicted, the Officer that presents him shall have 40. s. to be levied by warrant upon the Recusants goods and estate, as the more part of the Ju∣stices of Peace shall think fit. LXXXII. Just. of Ass. G. D. and P. have power to heare & determin of all Recusants & offences, as well for not receiving the Sa∣crament, according to this Act, as also for not coming to Church, according to former laws. And likewise to make proclamation, that they shall render themselves to the Sheriffe, or Bailiffe of the Liberty where they are, before the next Ass G. D. or Sess. respective∣ly; which if they do not, that default, being recorded, shall be taken for as sufficient a
conviction of them as a tryall by verdict. LXXXIII. Every offender not repairing to Church, as aforesaid, after their first con∣viction, shall pay into the Exchequer, in such of the Terms of Easter and Michaelmas as shall happen next after such conviction, the summe then due for the forfeiture of 20. l. a moneth, and yeerly after that (in the same Terms) according to the rate of 20. l. a moneth; except where the King shall be pleased to take two third parts of their lands and leases in lieu thereof; or that they con∣form themselves, and come to Church. LXXXIV. Every conviction shall, be∣fore the end of the Term next following, be certified into the Exchequer in such conve∣nient certainty, that the Court may there∣upon award Processe for the seisure of all the offenders goods, and two parts of his lands and leases, in case the 20. l. a moneth be not paid, as aforesaid. LXXXV. The King may refuse 20. l. a moneth, and take two third parts of the Re∣cusants lands and leases: but here he shall not include the Recusants Mansion house, nor demise his two parts to a Recusant, or to any other for a Recusants use. And the Kings lessee for his two parts shall give such security against committing of waste, as by the Court of Exchequer shall be thought sufficient. LXXXVI. It shall be lawfull for the Bishop of the Dioccsses, or two Justices of P. (one Quorum) out of Sess. to tender the
Oath hereafter following to any person eighteen yeers old, or above, (except noble men and noble women) which stands convi∣cted or indicted of Recusancy, hath not re∣ceived the Sacrament twice in the yeer next before; or passing thorow the Countrey, and examined upon oath, confesseth, or (at least) denyeth not, that he or she is a Recusant, or that he or shee hath not received the Sacra∣ment twice in the yeer next before; which Bishop or Justices shall certifie the name and dwelling of the person so taking the same Oath, at the next generall Sess. where the Clerk of the P. or Town Clerk shall re∣cord them. LXXXVII. If the parties refuse to an∣swer upon oath, or to take the Oath afore∣said, tendered unto them, the Bishop or Ju∣stices aforesaid shall bind them over to the next Ass or Sess. where if they again refuse it, they shall incurre a Praemunire. except women covert, who in that case shall only suffer imprisonment till they take it. LXXXVIII. The tenour of the Oath is as followeth: 1 A. B. doe truly and sincerely acknowledge, professe, testifie, and deelare in my conscience, be∣fore God and the world, That our Soveraigne Lord King James, is lawfull and rightfull King of this Realme, and of all other his Majesties Do∣minions and Countries: And, That the Pope, neither of himselfe, nor by any authority of the Church or See of Rome, or by any other meanes with any other, hath any power or authority to
depose the King, or to dispose of any of his Maje∣slies Kingdomes or Dominions, or to authorize any forrain Prince to invade or annoy him or his Countries, or to discharge any of his subjects of their allegiance and obedience to his Majestie, or to give licence or leave to any of them to beare armes, raise tumult, or to offer any violence or hurt to his Majesties Royall person, state, or go∣vernment, or to any of his Majesties subjects within his Majesties Dominions. Also, I doe sweare from my heart, That, not∣withstanding any declaration, or sentence of ex∣communication, or deprivation made or granted, or to be made or granted by the Pope, or his suc∣cessors, or by any authority derived, or pretended to be derived from him or his Sce, against the said King, his heires or successors, or any absolution of the said subjects from their obedience, I will beare faith and true allegiance to his Majestie, his heires and successors, and him & them will de∣fend, to the uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever which shall be made against his or their persons, their crowne and dignity, by reason or colour of any such sentence or declaration, or otherwise; and will do my best endeavour to disclose and make knowne unto his Majesty, his heires and successors, all treasons and traiterous conspiracies which I shall know or heare of, to be against him or any of them. And I doe further sweare, That I doe from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and hereticall, this damnable doctrine and position, That Princes which be excommunicated or depri∣ved by the Pope, may be deposed or murthered by
their subjects, or any other whatsoever. And I do beleeve, and in my conscience am re∣solved, That neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, hath power to absolve mee of this Oath, or any part thereof, which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministred unto mee, and doe renounce all pardons and dis∣pensations to the contrary. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these expresse words by mee spoken, and according to the plain and common sense and understanding of the same words, without any equivocation, or mentall evasion, or secret reserva∣tion whatsoever. And I do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly; and tru∣ly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help mee God. LXXXIX. Unto this Oath the party ta∣king it shall subscribe his name or mark. XC. No indictment against a Recusant shall be reversed for lack of form, other then by direct Traverse to the point of not coming to Church, or not receiving the Sa∣crament, as aforesaid. XCI. The party conforming himself shall from thenceforth be admitted to discharge or reverse an indictment. XCII. None shall go out of this Realm to serve any forrein Prince or State, without first taking the Oath aforesaid, in pain to be adjudged a felon. And if hee hath born office amongst souldiers before his depar∣ture out of the Realme, hee shall enter into bond unto the Kings use, with the condition
following, upon the like pain of being ad∣judged a felon. XCIII. The condition is this: That if the within bounden, &c. shall not at any time then after be reconciled to the Pope or See of Rome; nor shall enter into, nor consent un∣to any practice, plot, or conspiracie whatsoever against the Kings Majestie, his heires and succes∣sors, or any his or their estate and estates, Realms or Dominions: but shall within convenient time after knowledge thereof had, reveale and disclose to the Kings Majesty, his heires and successors, or some of the Lords of his or their honourable pri∣vie Councell, all such practices, plots, and con∣spiracies: That then the said Obligation to be void. XCIV. None but the Customer and Controller of a Port, or their Deputies, shall have power to take such bond, or to minister the Oath in such case; for which bond they shall only take 6. d. and nothing for the Oath: And shall once every yeer certifie into the Exchequer every such bond, in paine of 5. l. and every such Oath, in pain of 20. s. XCV. To absolve or withdraw any of the Kings subjects from their naturall obedience to his Majesty, to reconcile them to the Pope or See of Rome, or to move them to pro∣mise obedience to any pretended authority of the See of Rome, or to any other Prince or State: Or to be absolved, withdrawn, reconciled, or to make promise, as aforesaid, shall be adjudged high Treason. XCVI. This last clause shall not extend
to any reconciled, as aforesaid, (for and touching the point of so beingreconciled only) that shall returne into this Realme, and within six dayes after, before the Bishop of the Diocesse, or two Justices of P. (joint∣ly or severally) of the County where hee shall arrive, submit himselfe to the King and his lawes, and take the Oath of Supremacie, and also the Oath abovesaid; which said Oathes the said Bishop and Justices respe∣ctively, shall by this Act have power to mi∣nister to such persons, and shall certifie them in at the next generall Sess. in pain of 40. li. XCVII. Here the tryall of Treason shall be before Justices of Ass. and G. D. of that County for the time being; and may also be before the Justices of the Kings Bench: But Peers in this case shall be tryed by their Peers. XCVIII. If any person repaireth not every Sunday to some Church or Chappel, proof thereof being made to a Justice of P. by the parties owne confession, or the evi∣dence of one witnesse; the same Justice hath power to call the party before him; and if the party give not the Justice a good reason of his absence, the Justice may give warrant to the Church-warden of the parish under his hand and seale, to levie xii. d. for every such default, by distresse and sale of goods; and in default of distresse, the Justice may commit the offender to prison, untill he pay the forfeiture aforesaid, which shall be im∣ployed
ployed for the use of the poore: But this of∣fence must be prosecuted within one moneth after it is committed, and none punished by this Law, shall also be punished by the for∣feiture of 12. d. upon the Statute of 1. El. 2. which see in Sacraments 24. XCIX. None shall keep or retaine any person in their house, (servant or other) which shall forbeare to come to Church by the space of a month together, in paine to forfeit 10. l. for every month they so keep them: Howbeit Children may relieve their Father, or Mother; and Guardians their Wards or Pupils. C. The Sheriffe, upon a lawfull Writ, may justifie to breake a house, for the taking of a Recusant Excommunicate. CI. The Justices of the Kings Bench, and Justices of Ass. and G. D. may heare and de∣termine all the offences committed against this Act; and so may Justices of P. all save Treason. CII. The offences made felony by this Act, shall not cause losse of Dower, corrupti∣on of blood, or disherison of heire. CIII. Here, if an action shall be brought against an Officer for the execution of this Act, he may plead the Generall Issue, and yet give speciall matter in evidence. CIV. This Act shall not abridge the Ju∣risdiction of Ecclesiasticall Censures. CV. None shall be punished for his wives offence, neither shall any married wo∣man be chargeable with any penalty or for∣feiture
by force of this Act. CVI. Six of the Privy Councell (where∣of the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer, or Principall Secretary shall be one) have power to minister the Oaths abovesaid to Noblemen (being 18. yeares old) and to Noblewomen also of like age and unmarri∣ed, who shall take the same Oaths according∣ly, in paine to incurre a Praemunire. Vide infra, 128. CVII. The Warden of the Cinque Ports, or some authorized by him, shall take the bond, and minister the Oath aforesaid, where any person passeth beyond Sea, out of them of any of their members. CVIII.  Stat 3. Jac. 5. The person that within three dayes notice shall discover to a Just. of P. any that entertaines a Popish Priest, or any which have heard or said Masse, shall have a thrid part of the forfei∣ture due for the same offences, if the whole exceed not 150. l. and then onely 50. l. there∣of to be delivered unto him by the Sheriffe or other, Officer, which shall have power to levie the same. CIX. No convicted Recusant shall come into the Court, without command from the King, or warrant from the Privy Councell under their hands, in paine of 100. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the Discoverer. CX. A Popish Recusant convicted, or indicted, or any person not coming to Church by the space of 3. months together, which remains in London, or within ten miles
distance thereof, shall within ten dayes after such conviction or Indictment depart from thence, and also shall deliver their names (in London) to the Lord Maior there, and (in the Country) to the next Just. of P. in pain. of 100. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor: Howbeit this clause shall not extend to Tradesmen, or such as have no other habitation then in London, or within ten miles distance, as aforesaid. CXI. It shall be lawfull for a Recusant to go about his necessary occasions, as farre as a license (obtained from the King, or from three of the Privy Councell under their hands, or foure of the next Justices of Peace, under their hands and seales, with the assent in writing of the Bishop, Lieutenant, or any deputy Lieutenant of the same County) shall give him leave, notwithstanding the Statute of 35. El. 2. which lecence shall not be gran∣ted by the said Justices, till the party hath made oath of the true reason of his journey, and that he will make no causelesse stayes. CXII. No convicted Recusant shall practise the Common Law, Civill Law, Physick, or Art of Apothecary or be an Of∣ficer of or in any Court, or beare any Office amongst souldiers, or in a Ship, Castle, or Fortresse, in paine of 100. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor. 130. CXIII. No Popish Recusant convict, or whose wife is a Recusant convict, shall ex∣ercise any publique Office in the Common∣wealth by himselfe, or his deputy, unlesse he
bring up his children in the true Religion, & together with his children & servants, repaire to the Church, and receive the Sacrament at such times as by the Law are limited. 130. CXIV. A married woman being a Popish Recusant convict, (her husband being none) that doth not conforme her selfe, as afore∣said, by the space of one whole yeare, before her husbands death, shall forfeit two third parts of her Dower or Joynture, and shall be incapable of being Executrix or Administra∣trix to her husband, and of enjoying any part of her husbands goods. CXV. A Popish Recusant after convi∣ction shall be reputed to all intents, as a per∣son excommunicate, untill he shall con∣forme, go to Church, receive the Sacra∣ment, and take the Oath of obedience, or∣dained by 3. Jac. 4. Howbeit he may sue for his interest in lands not seised into the Kings hands. CXVI. A Popish Recusant convict, which is married otherwise then in open Church, and by a lawfull Minister, accor∣ding to the Orders of the Church of Eng∣land, shall not be tenant by the Counrtesie; And a woman (in this case) shall be disabled to enjoy her Dower, Joynture, Widowes estate, or any of her husbands goods: And where the man cannot be tenant by the Cour∣tesie, he shall forfeit 100. l. to be divided be∣twixt the King and the prosecutor. CXVII. Every Popish Recusant shall within one moneth after the birth of his
child, cause it to be baptized by a lawfull Minister, in pain to forfeit 100. l. if he out∣live the moneth; if not, then his wife is to pay the same forfeiture, which shall be di∣vided into there parts, whereof the King shall have one, the prosecutor another, and the poor of the parish the third. CXVIII. Every Popish Recusant shall be buried in the Church of Church-yard, and according to the Ecclesiasticall lawes of this Realm, in pain that his executor or ad∣ministrator, or the party that caused him to be otherwise buried, shall forfeit 20. l. to be divided into three parts, and disposed as a∣foresaid. CXIX. A child (being no Souldier, Ma∣riner Merchant, or Apprentice, or Factor to a Merchant) shall not be sent or go be∣yond sea, without the licence of the King, or of six of the privie Councell (whereof the principall Secretary shall be one) in pain to be thereby incapable to enjoy any lands or goods by descent or grant, untill, being eighteen yeers of age or above, he take the said oath of Obedience before some Justice of Peace of the County where his parents doe, or did dwell: And in the mean time, the next of his kin (being no Popish Recu∣sant) shall enjoy the lands and goods; but shall be accountable to the other, in case he after conform himself, as aforesaid. And he that so goes out of the kingdome without licence, shall forfeit 100. l. to be divided and imployed as aforesaid.
CXX. A Popish Recusant convict, shall be disabled to present to a Benefice, or to grant any avoydance of a Benefice; but in stead of him, the Chancellor and Scholers of the Universities of Oxford or Combridge shall present within severall Counties re∣spectively; for which see the Statute at large. Howbeit, they shall not conferre it upon a man already Beneficed. CXXI. A Popish Recusant shall not be an Executor, Administrator or Guardian; but the next of the kin (being no Recusant, and unto whom the land cannot lawfully de∣scend) shall have the wardship and tuition of an heir or orphan in that case. CXXII. A grant of the Kings Ward to a Popish Recusant convict shall be void. CXXIII. None shall bring from be∣yond sea, print, sell, or buy any Popish Pri∣mers, Ladies Psalters, Manuals, Rosaries, Popish Catechismes, Missals, Breviaries, Por∣tals, Legends or lives of saints, in what language soever they shall be printed or written; nor any other superstitious books printed or written in the English tongue, in pain to forfeit xl. s. for every such book, to be divided into three parts, and imployed, as aforesaid. CXXIV. Two Justices of Peace, and all Maiors, Bailiffes, and head Officers, have power to search the houses and lodgings of Popish Recusants convict, and of every per∣son whose wife is a Popish Recusant convict, for Popish books and reliques, and to burn
or deface such as they shall finde in their custodie; but such as are of value shall be defaced in open Sess. and afterwards resto∣red to the owner. CXXV. All the Armour, Gunpowder, and Munition of a Popish Recusant convict, shall be taken from him by warrant from foure Justices of Peace at the generall Sess. (other then such weapons as shall be allow∣ed unto him by the same Justices) which said Armour and Munition shall be kept at the costs of such Recusant, in such places where the said Justices shall appoint, and shewed at every Muster as his armes, toge∣ther with his horse which hee shall buy, pro∣vide, and maintain for that purpose, accor∣ding to his ability, as other subjects do. And here, the Recusant that refuseth to declare what armour or munition he hath, or to de∣liver it to such persons as shall have power to sease it, shall forfeit the same to the King; and besides, shall upon warrant from any Just. of Peace of that County, be imprisoned by the space of three moneths without baile. CXXVI. This Act shall not abridge Ec∣clesiasticall censures. CXXVII. Stat. 7. Ja. 6. Who shall take the oath of Obedience:  by whom it shall be ministred: and within what time. CXXVIII. It shall be lawfull for any of the privie Councell, or any Bishop within his Diocesse to require a Baron or Baronesse of eighteen yeers of age or above, to take
the said Oath: And likewise for any two Justices of Peace (one Quorum) to require any person of the age aforesaid, or above, and under the degrees aforesaid, to take the same Oath. CXXIX. If any Baron or Baronesse stand presented, indicted, or convicted for Recusancy, three of the privie Councell (whereof the Chancellor, Treasurer, Lord privie Seal, or principall Secretary shall be one) shall minister unto them the said Oath. But if it be any other convicted person under those degrees, or if the Mini∣ster, petty Constables, and Church-wardens of any parish, or any two of them, shall complain to any Justice of Peace of any person suspected for Recusancy; then any such Justice may in either of these cases minister the said Oath, and upon refusall, shall commit the party to prison, there to re∣main till the next Ass. or Sess. where, if he again refuse to take it, hee shall incurre a Praemunire; except women covert, who shall only be imprisoned, and there remain without baile, till they shall take the said Oath. CXXX. None refusing the said Oath shall be capable of any office of Judicature, or other office (being no office of inheri∣tance or ministeriall function,) or to pra∣ctise the common Law, the civill Law, Phy∣sick, Surgery, the art of Apothecary, or any liberall science for gain. CXXXI. If a married woman, being a
convicted Recusant, doe not conform within three moneths after conviction, she shall be committed to prison by a privie Councel∣lor or the Bishop of the Diocesse, if she be a Baronesse: but if any other of a lower degree, then shall she be committed by two Justices of P. (one Quorum) and there shall remain till she conforme, as aforesaid, un∣lesse the husband (for his wives offence) will pay unto the King x. l. for every moneth, or yeeld the third part of all his lands, at the choice of the said husband. CXXXII. None shall goe himselfe, or send any person whatsoever beyond sea, to be trained up in Popery, or any mainte∣nance or reliefe to the party so sent, or to any School or Religious house there, in paine (after conviction thereof) to be ad∣judged unable to prosecute any suite in any Court of equity, to be committee of any Ward, executor or administrator; to be un∣capable of any legacy or deed of gift, or of bearing Office within this Realme: and besides, to forfeit all his goods and chattels, and his lands also during life. But if hee conforme within six weeks after his return, according to the Statutes in that case pro∣vided, he shall not incurre the penalties a∣foresaid. CXXXIII. These offences shall be heard and determined by the Justices of the Kings Bench, Assise, Gaol delivery, and Oyer and Termin. of such Counties where the offenders did last dwell, or whence they
departed, or where they shall be taken. See Actions popular, 18. Regrators, See Forestallers. Vi∣ctuall, 2. Riots, Routs, and unlawfull As∣semblies. I.  Stat. 17. R. 2.8. The Sherisses, and all other the Kings Officers, shall supprese Riotors, and imprison them, and all other offending against the peace. II.  Stat. 13. H. 4.7. The Justices of Peace, or two of them (at least,) together with the Sheriffe or under-Sheriffe, shall by the power of the County suppresse Ri∣ots, Routs, and unlawfull assemblies, arrest the offenders, and record what shall be done: By which record of the said Justi∣ces, and Sheriffe or under-Sheriffe, the of∣fenders shall stand convict, as by the Stat. of 15. R. 2.2. in case of forcible Entries: And if the offenders be departed, the said Justices and Sheriffe or under-Sheriffe shall within a moneth after make enquiry thereof, and heare and determine the same according to law. See Force, 2. III. If upon such inquiry the truth can∣not be discovered in manner aforesaid; then shall the said Officers, within one moneth after such inquiry, certifie the fact, toge∣ther with the circumstances thereof, unto the
King and his Councell; which certificate of theirs shall be in the nature of a present∣ment by twelve, whereupon the offenders shall be brought to answer, and those that be found guilty shall be punished at the di∣scretion of the King and his Councell. IV. If the offenders traverse the said certificate; then that, together with the tra∣verse, shall be sent into the Kings Bench, there to be tried. V. If the Offencers upon the first precept do not appear before the Councell, or in the Kings Bench; a second precept shall issue forth, upon which if they cannot be found; or if within three weeks after Pro∣clamation made agaist them in the next County Court after the delivery of the se∣cond precept, they doe not make their ap∣pearance before the Councell in the Kings Bench, or in the Chancery (in vacation time) upon returne of the said Proclama∣tion they shall stand convict and attainted of the offence committed. VI. Justices of Peace dwelling neerest the place where such offences shall be com∣mitted, and Justices of Assise for the time they shall be in their Session (in case any be then committed) shall doe execution of this act, in pain of 100. l. VII. Stat. 2. H. 5.8. If default be found in the Justices of Peace or Assise,  or in the Sheriffe or under-Sheriffe touching the due execution of 23. H. 4.7. at the instance of the party grieved, the Kings Commission
shall go out to inquire as well of the truth of the case & originall matter, as of the defaults aforesaid, directed to sufficient men in the County, at the discretion of the Lord Chan∣cellor, which Commissioners shall presently returne into the Chancery the enquests and matters before them found. VIII. Here, during the Sheriffes, or un∣der-Sheriffes remaining in his Office, the Coroners shall Impanell the Jury, each of them having lands worth 10. l. per anuum at least; and upon each of which, for making default, the Coroners shall returne Issues, viz. for the first day 20. s. for the second 40. s. for the third 100. s. and for every day after, double: And all this the Coroner shall do, in paine of 40. l. But in case the Sheriffe or under-Sheriffe, reputed in default, be dis∣charged of their office, the new Sheriffe shall do that which the Coroners are above en∣joyned to do, and shall incurre the like pe∣nalty, if they therein make default. IX. The Lord Chancellour upon know∣ledge of any such offence shal send the Kings Writ to the Justices of P. Sheriffe, and un∣der-Sheriffe of the same County, to put the said Statute of 13. H. 4.7. in execution, upon the paine therein contained: but although no such writ be sent, yet shall they not be excused of the said paine, if they make not execution of the same Statute. X. A Riot, &c. shall be repressed, and inquired of at the Kings charge, which the Sheriffe shall disburse by indenture betwixt
the Justices of P. and him, and shall be an∣swered him againe upon his accompt in the Exchequer. XI. Persons guilty of heynous Riots shall suffer one whole yeares imprisonment with∣out baile; but petty Rioters shall be impri∣soned, as shall seeme best to the King and his Councell; And greater Fines shall be set upon Rioters then in time past, in ayde and supportation of the Justices, and other Officers in that behalfe. XII. All the Kings liege people, upon warning, shall be assistant to the Justices, Commissioners, Sheriffe, and under-Sheriffe aforesaid, upon paine of imprisonment, and to make fine and ransome to the King. XIII. Bailiffes of Franchises shall cause sufficient men to be impannelled upon such enquests, if any such be found within their liberties; And the Ordinances and paines aforesaid shall extend to Corporations and Liberties, where they have Justices of P. within themselves. XIV. Stat. 2. H. 5.9.  Upon a Bill of complaint for any Riot, &c. preferred by the party grieved to the Lord Chancellor for the time being, together with a suggesti∣on testifying the same, under the seales of two Just. of P. and the Sheriffe of the Coun∣ty, the said Lord Chancellor shall send forth a Capias, returnable in the Chancery at a certaine day, by which, if the parties offen∣ding, or any of them be taken, they shall be committed to ward, or let to mainprife, at
the discretion of the said Lord Chancellor, and shall be proceeded against, as the Law requireth; But if the Sheriffe returne Non est inventus, a Writ of Proclamation (to be proclaimed two County Court dayes) shall goe out returnable in the Kings Bench at a certaine day, before which if they render not themselves, they shall be adjudged con∣vict and attainted of the offence suggested. XV. If the offence be committed within the County Palatine of Lancaster, or other Franchise, where there is a Chancellor and Seale; The Lord Chancellor of England shall send a Writ to the said Chancellor, commanding him to make such execution, as in this Act is comprised. 17. XVI.  Stat. 8. H. 6.14. Two Justices of P. of the Counties where Riots are suppo∣sed to be committed, shall testifie that the common fame runneth in the same Counties of the same Riots, before the Capias shall be awarded according to the Stat. of 2. H. 5.9. XVII. If the offence be committed within a Liberty, where there is a Chancellor and a Seale, upon information of the Riot, &c. from a Justice of P. and Sheriffe there, the said Chancellor hath power to award Writs of Capias and Proclamation, as the Chancel∣lor of England hath. XVIII.  Stat. 19. H. 7.13. If any Riot, &c. be committed, the Sheriffe upon a Pre∣cept directed unto him, shall returne 24. per∣sons, whereof every one shall have free-hold within the same County worth 20. s. per an∣num,
or Copy-hold worth 26. s. 8. d. per an. or Copy-hold and Free-hold together worth 26 s. 8. d. per annum, for to inquire of the same Riot, &c. And shall returne Issues up∣on every Juror making default, viz. for the first day 20. s. and for the second 40. s. And all this the Sheriffe shall do, in paine of 20. l. XIX. If the said Riot, &c. be not found, by reason of any maintenance or embracery of the said Jurors, then shall the Justices and Sheriffe, or under Sheriffe, (besides the Cer∣tificate they are to make, according to the Stat. of 13. H. 4.7.) certifie the names of such maintainers and embraceors, together with their misdemeanors, in paine to forfeit 20. l. a piece; which Certificate shall have like force of proving the offence as a verdict of 12. men: And then such maintainers and embraceors shall forfeit 20. l. a piece, and re∣maine in prison at the discretion of the Justices. Robbery. Stat. 8. El. 4. A Cut-purse, Pick-pocket,  or other person whatsoever, which feloni∣ously and privily taketh away any money, or other goods from the person of another, without his knowledge, shall not have the benefit of Clery. S. Clergy. Felony. 15. Hue and Cry. Rogues, S. Vagabonds.
Rome, S. Recusants. Sacraments and Service Divine. I.  Stat. 50. E. 3.5. and 1. R. 2.15. None shall arrest Priests, or other Clerks, while they attend Divine Services, in paine of im∣prisonment, and to be ransomed at the Kings will, so that no collusion or fained cause be found in them. II.  Stat. 1. E. 6.1. None shall speake or do any thing in contempt of the most holy Sacrament, in paine of imprisonment, and to make fine and ransome at the Kings will. III. Three Just. of P. (1. Qu.) have pow∣er to take information by the oaths of two lawfull persons (at least) concerning the offence aforesaid, and to bind over by Re∣cognisance every Accuser and Witnesse in 5. l. a piece, to appeare at the next Sess. to give evidence against the offenders, who are there to be inquired of before three such Ju∣stices or more, by the oathes of 12. men, and also indicted, if the matter alledged against them shall be found true. IV. Three such Justices or more, have likewise power to send out two Capias, an Exigent, and a Capias utlagatum against such offenders into all Counties and Liberties, and upon their appearance to determine the
contempts and offences aforesaid, or to take baile for their appearance to be tried, as aforesaid. V. The Justices also have power to direct a Writ, in the kings name, to the Bishop of the Diocesse where the offence was commit∣ted, by which he shall be required to be pre∣sent himselfe (or some for him, sufficiently learned) at the arraignement of the offender, and to give advice concerning the offence committed. VI. This offence shall be prosecuted within three months, and the offender shall be admitted to produce witnesses for his de∣fault. VII. Stat. 2, 3. E. 6.1.  Every Minister shal use the Church service in such forme as is mentioned in the Book of Common Prayer, established by this Act, and shall not use any other, or deprave the same, in paine (if he be beneficed, and convict thereof by the verdict of 12. men, his owne confession, or notorious evidence of the fact) to forfeit to the King for the first offence that of his benefices, which the King will choose, and to suffer six months imprisonment; for the second, to suffer one whole yeares imprisonment, and to be deprived ipso facto of all his Spirituall promotions, whereupon every Patron may present; and for the third, to suffer imprison∣ment during life: And if he be not beneficed, for the first offence he shall suffer six months imprisonment, and for the second, imprison∣ment during life.
VIII. If any shall be convicted to have by enterludes, playes, songs, thymes, or other∣wise depraved the said books, or to have compelled or procured the Minister to sing or say any other Church Service, or in any other forme then as aforesaid; or by any such means to have interrupted or let the Minister to sing or say the said Service, they shall, for the first offence, forfeit x. li. to the King; or (that not paid within six weeks after conviction) shall suffer (in stead there∣of) three moneths imprisonment without baile: for the second time offending, shall forfeit xx. l. or (that not paid within six weeks, as aforesaid) shall suffer six moneths impri∣sonment without bail: and for the third time shall forfeit all their goods, and suffer imprisonment during life. IX. Justices of Oyer and Termin. and Justices of Assise have power to hear and de∣termine these offences: unto whom the Arch∣bishop or Bishop of the Diocesse may associ∣ate himself, if he please. X. This shall not restrain any private man, or publick Colledges to use the said Service in such tongues as they understand, the holy Communion only excepted; or any other to use Psalms or prayers taken out of the Bible at convenient times, not letting thereby the said Service. XI. The offences aforesaid shall be pro∣secuted at the next Assise or Sessions of Oyer and Terminer after they are com∣mitted: And here tryall of Peers shall be by Peers.
XII. Chief Officers of Cities and Cor∣porations shall also heare and determine these offences within their severall prccincts; and so likewise shall Ecclesiasticall Magi∣strates. Howbeit, none shall be punished a∣bove once for one offence. XIII. Stat. 5, 6. E. 6.1.  Every person shall resort to his Parish Church or Chap∣pel; or (upon just let so to doe) to some other, every Sunday and Holiday, in pain to be punished by the censures of the Church. XIV. The Common prayer book now made perfect and annexed to this Act. toge∣ther with the addition of consecrating Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons, shall be used and esteemed as by the Statute of 2, 3. E. 6.1. is ordained, under the pains in the same Statute expressed. XV. If any shall be convict by verdict of twelve men, before Justice of Assise, Oyer and Terminer, or Peace in Sess. to have wittingly heard, or to have been present at any other form of Common prayer, admini∣stration of Sacraments, making of Mini∣sters, or other rites then what are expressed in the said book, or which are contrary to the said Statute of 2, & 3. E. 6.1. shall for the first offence suffer six months imprisonment without bail; for the second, twelve months imprisonment; and for the third, imprison∣ment during life. XVI. Stat. 1. M. Sess. 2. cap. 3.  If any shall disturbe a Preacher lawfully licenced,
he shall be by the Constables or Church∣wardens of the parish brought before a Just. of Peace, who, upon due accusation, shall presently commit him to safe custody, and within six dayes after, together with another Justice, shall diligently examine the fact; who, if they find cause, shall commit him to the common Gaole, there to remain for three moneths, and from thence to the next quarter Sessions; at which, upon the parties reconciliation, and entring into bond for the good behaviour for one whole yeer (at the discretion of the Justices in Session) he shall be released: but if hee persist still in his obstinacie, he shall remain in prison without bail, untill he shall reconcile, and be peni∣tent for his offence. XVII. Hee that rescues an offender in this kind, shall suffer like imprisonment, as aforesaid; and besides, shall forfeit v. li. to the Queen. XVIII. The inhabitants of a towne that suffer such an offender to escape, shall for∣feit v. li. being presented before the Justices of Peace in Sess. within the County or Cor∣poration where the escape was made. XIX. Justices of Peace, Assise, and Oyer and Terminer, and Maiors, and head Offi∣cers of Corporations, have power to heare and determine these offences, and to impose the fines aforesaid. XX. This Act shall not restrain the ju∣risdiction of the Ecclesiasticall lawes. How∣beit, none shall be punished twice for one offence.
XXI. Stat. 1. El. 2.  Every Minister shall use the Church Service in such forme as is mentioned in the book of Common prayer established by 5, 6. E. 6.1. together with the addition of certain lessons to be used on e∣very Sunday in the yeer, and the form of the Letany altered and corrected, and two sen∣tences only added in the delivery of the Sa∣craments to communicants. XXII. If any Minister shall be convicted by the verdict of twelve men, his owne con∣fession, or notorious evidence of the fact, to have refused to use the said Church ser∣vice; or to have used any other rite, cere∣mony, order, forme, or manner then is set forth in the said book, or to have depraved the same book, or any thing therein contai∣ned, he shall forfeit (being a benefited man) for the first offence, one whole yeers profit of all his spirituall promotions, and suffer six moneths imprisonment: for the second, shall be deprived ipsofacto, whereupon every Patron may present; and shall suffer one whole yeeres imprisonment: and for the third, shall be also deprived, as aforesaid, and shall suffer imprisonment during life. And if he be not beneficed, for the first of∣fence he shall suffer one whole yeeres impri∣sonment; and for the second, imprisonment during life. XXIII. If any shall be convicted to have by enterludes, playes, songs, rhymes, or other∣wise depraved the said book, or to have compelled or procured the Minister to sing
or say any other Church service, or in any other form then as aforesaid: or by any such means to have interrupted or let the Minister to sing or say the said service; they shall for the first offence forfeit 100. Marks to the Queen, or (that not paid within six weeks after conviction) shall suffer (in stead thereof) six moneths imprisonment: for the second offence shall forfeit 400. Marks, or (that not paid within six weeks, as aforesaid) shall suffer one whole yeers imprisonment: and for the third offence shall forfeit all their goods and chattels, and suffer impri∣sonment during life. XXIV. Every person shall resort to their parish Church, or (upon let thereof) to some other, every Sunday and Holiday, upon paine to be punished by censures of the Church, and also to forfeit xii. d. to be levied by the Church-wardens there, for the use of the poor, upon the offenders goods by way of distresse. See Recusants, 98. XXV. Justices of Oyer and Terminer and of Ass. and Maiors and head Officers of Corporations have power to hear and deter∣mine these offences: unto whom the Arch-Bish. or Bishop of the Diocesse may associate himself, if he please. Howbeit, note that by the Stat. of 23. El. 1. Justices of Peace have also power to meddle therein; which see in Title Recusants, 27. XXVI. None shall be impeached by this Act, unlesse the offence be presented at the
next Sessions of Oyer and Terminer, or Ass. after it is committed: and here tryall of a Peer shall be by Peers. XXVI. This Act shall not restrain Ec∣clesiasticall jurisdiction. Howbeit, none shall be punished twice for one offence. Sacriledge, See Clergie. Schoole-masters, See Recu∣sants, 26, 67. Scotland, See Corn, 1. Horses, 9, 10. Seminary Priests, S. Recusants. Servants, S. Labourers. Service divine, S. Sacraments. Sewers. I. Stat. 23. H. 8.5.  Commissioners of Sewers (before they can have power to exe∣cute their Commission) shall take the Oath ordained by this Statute, before the L. Chan∣cellour, or those whom he shall depute by Dedimus for that purpose; or else before the Justices of P. in Sess. II. The form of the Oath is this: Yee shall sweare, That you, to your cunning, wit, and power shall truly and indifferently exe∣cute
the authority to you given, by this Commis∣sion of Sewers, without any favour, affection, corruption, dread, or malice, to be borne to any manner person or persons; And, as the case shall require, you shall consent, and endeavour your selfe for your part, to the best of your knowledge and power, to the making of such wholsome, just, equall, and indifferent Laws and Ordinances, as shall be made and devised by the most discreet and indifferent number of your fellowes, being in Commission with you, for the due redresse, refor∣mation and amendment of all and every such things as are contained and specified in the said Commission; And the same Laws and Ordinan∣ces to your cunning, wit, and power, cause to be put in due execution, without savour, meede, dread, malice, or affection: As God you help, &c. III.  Stat. 13. El. 9. A Commission of Sewers shall continue in force ten yeares, and the orders made by their Commissioners one yeare longer,: during which time of one yeare, the Justices of Peace of that County, or six of them, (2. Qu.) have power to exe∣cute such Commission and Orders as fully as the Commissioners themselves, unlesse in the interim a new Commission be sent forth. Sheep, S. Cattell. Sheriffes. I.  Magna Charta, 9. H. 3.17. No Sheriffe,
Constable, Escheator, Coroner, or any o∣ther our Bailiffes shall hold Pleas of our Crowne. II. Stat. 1. H. 4.11.  If a Sheriffe com∣mit extortion, and be thereof attainted, he shall be punished for the same at the Kings will. III. Stat. 23. H. 6.10.  No Sheriffe shall let to farme his County, or Bailiwicks; neither shall he, his under-Sheriffe, or any other Bailiffe, returne upon Enquests any Bailiffe, Coroner, Steward, or any servant of theirs; neither shall they take any thing for arresting, or for omitting to arrest, save onely the fees that follow, viz. for the She∣riffe, 20. d. for the Bailiffe that makes the arrest, 4. d. and for the Gaoler, (when the party is committed) 4. d. Neither shall any Sheriffe, under-Sheriffe, Sheriffes Clerk, Steward, or Bailiffe of Franchise, Servant, Bailiffe, or Coroner take above 4. d. for the Copy of a Pannell. IV. Sheriffes and other Officers shall let to Baile persons by them arrested upon reasonable Sureties, having sufficient with∣in the County (persons in ward by Con∣demnation, exemption, Capias utlagatum, or Excommunicatum, surety of Peace, or com∣mitted by command of the Justices, and Va∣gabonds refusing to serve, only excepted.) V. The said Officers shall take no bond of any arrested person, but for appearance, and to themselves onely, and shall not take for it more then 4. d. and bonds otherwise
taken (colore officii) shall be void. VI. Sheriffes shall make Deputies in the Kings Courts at Westminster, to receive Writs to be delivered unto them. VII. Sheriffes, under-Sheriffes, Clerks, Bailiffes, Gaolers, Coroners, Stewards, Bailiffes of Franchises, and all other Offi∣cers, which do contrary to this Act, shall forfeit for every such offence treble dama∣ges to the party grieved, and besides 40. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the pro∣secutor. VIII. Justices of Assise of both the Ben∣ches, and of Peace, have power to heare and determine these offences. IX. If the Sheriffe returne a Cepi Corpus, or Reddidit se, he shall be chargeable to have the body of the party ready at the day of returne mentioned in the Writ. X. The Warden of the Fleet, or of the Gaole of the Kings Palace at Westminster, shall not be prejudiced by this Ordinance. XI.  Stat. 11. H. 7.15. No Sheriffe, un∣der-Sheriffe, or Shire-Clerk shall enter in the County Court any Plaint in the absence of the Plaintife, or his Attourney, nor above one Plaint for one cause, in paine of 40. s. to be divided betwixt the King and the pro∣secutor. XII. A Justice of Peace upon complain made hath power to examine the abovesaid Officers, and Plaintife concerning the pre∣misses, and finding any of the same Officers guilty, shall within three months after cer∣tifie
that examination into the Exchequer, in paine of 40. s. upon which examination the said Officers shall be convicted to pay the abovesaid forfeiture of 40. s. without farther inquiry. XIII. The Defendant in the County Court shall have lawfull summons, and if the Bailiffe be therein found faulty, he shall forfeit 40. s. And here also examination and certificate shal be made by a Justice of Peace, as aforesaid. XIV. Before the Sheriffe issue forth any Estreats out of the County Court, two Just. of P. (1. Qu.) shall view them, and there be∣ing two parts of them indented and sealed by the said Justices and Sheriffe, one of them shall remaine with the Justices, and the other with the Sheriffe; and here the Officer that collects them, shall make oath before the said Justices, to levy no more then what is con∣tained in them, in paine of 40. s. who may be convict of that offence by the examination of one Just. of P. as aforesaid. XV. The Justices of P. which are to have the controllement of the Sheriffe and his Estreats, shall be named at Michaelmasse Sess. by the Custos Rotulorum, or (in his ab∣sence) by the eldest of the Quorum: And the said Justices of P. upon information of the party grieved, may make out like Processe against the offenders, as in Actions of Trespasse. XVI. Stat. 27. El. 12.  Every under-Sheriffe before he intermeddles with his Of∣fice,
shall before one of the Justices of Ass. or the Custos Rotulorum of the County, or two Justices of Peacethere, (1. Qu.) take the oath of Supremacy, (which see in Recusants 8.) and also the oath hereunder written, in paine to forfeit treble damages to the party grieved, if he commit any act contrary to the same oathes, or either of them. XVII. The forme of the other oath is as followeth: I A. B. shall not use or exercise the Office of under-Sheriffe corruptly, during the time that I shall remaine therein, neither shall or will accept, receive, or take by any colour, meanes, or devise whatsoever, or consent to the taking of any manner of fee or reward, of any person or persons for the Impanelling or returning of any Inquest, Ju∣rie, or Tales, in any Court of Record for the King, or betwixt party and party above two shillings, or the value thereof, and such fees as are allowed and appointed for the same, by the Laws and Statutes of this Realme: But will, according to my power, truly and indifferently with convenient speed im∣panell all Jurors, and returne all such Writ or Writs touching the same, as shall appertaine to be done by my duty or Office, during the time that I shall remaine in the said Office: So help me God. XVIII. No Bailiffe of a Franchise, De∣puty, or Clerk of a Sheriffe or under-She∣riffe, shall intermeddle with their severall Offices before they have taken the said Oaths, as aforesaid, (altering onely the termes of Office) in paine to forfeit 40. l. to
be divided betwixt the King and the pro∣secutor. XIX. Justices of Ass. and Just. of P. in Sess. have power to heare and determine the defaults and offences aforesaid, and upon conviction to award Processe accordingly. XX. Stat. 29. El. 4. No Sheriffe,  un∣der-Sheriffe, Bailiffe of a Liberty, or any of their Deputies, shall either directly or indi∣rectly take more for serving an extent or execution, then after the rate of 12. d. for eve∣ry pound under 100. l. and 6. d. for every pound above 100. l. in paine to forfeit treble damages to the party grieved, and besides 40. l. to be divided betwixt the Queen and the prosecutor. XXI. This Act shall not extend to fees for Executions within Cities or Corpora∣tions. S. Bailement, 2. Indictments, 5. Jurors. Justices of P. 18. Ship-Wrights, S. Labourers, 46. Shoo-makers, S. Leather. Silver, S. Gold. Skinners, S. Labourers. 53. Souldiers, S. Captaines.
Stabbing, S. Clergie, 18, 19. Stewards of Courts, S. Justices of P. 14, 16, 28. Strangers, S. Aliens. Supersedeas. I.  Stat. 21. Jac. 8. Processe of the Peace or good behaviour, shall not issue out of the Chancery or Kings Bench, but upon motion in open Court, and good cause alledged upon oath, which shall also be endorced upon the Writ: Howbeit, if that cause shall be after∣wards disproved, the Judge or Judges of the said Courts (respectively) shall commit the offender to prison, till he pay the party grieved all his costs and damages. II. All Writs of Supersedeas shall be void, unlesse such Processe be likewise granted up∣on motion, as aforesaid; and upon such suf∣ficient sureties, as shall appeare to the Court upon oath to be Subsidie-men, assessed at 5. l. lands, or 10. l. goods; and also, unlesse the prosecution against the party for the Peace or good behaviour be bona fide: And here, false sureties procured for the gaining of such Writs, shall be punished by the Judges. III. Certioraries shall not be allowed, un∣lesse
the Indictee will become bound with sufficient sureties (such as the Justices of P. in Sess. shall think fit) to pay to the pro∣secutor, within one month after conviction, such costs and damages, as the said Justices shall assesse. Sunday, S. Holy-dayes. Lea∣ther, 32. Recusants. Swans, S. Hawks, 7.20. Swearing, Cursing. I. Stat. 21. Jac. 20.  If any shall sweare or curse within the hearing of a Justice of P. or shall be convicted thereof by his own confession, or the evidence of two witnesses upon oath before the same Justice, they shall forfeit 12. d. to the use of the poore where the offence shall be committed, to be levied by the Const. Churchw. and Overs. of the poore there, (upon warrant from such Ju∣stice) by distresse and sale of goods: And in defect of distresse, if the offender be a∣bove 12. yeares old, he shall (upon war∣rant, as aforesaid) be set in the stocks three houres; but if under; then shall he be whip∣ped by the Constable, or by the Parent or Master in the Constables presence. II. Here, if an Officer be sued for the due execution of his Office, he may plead the
generall Issue, and yet give speciall matter in evidence. III. This offence shall be complained off and proved, as aforesaid, within twenty dayes after it is committed: And this Act shall be read in every Church twice in the yeare, upon Sunday after evening prayer. Tanner, S. Leather. Testimoniall, S. Labourers, 9, 10, 11. Tiles. I.  Stat. 17. E. 4.4. Tile-earth shall be cast up before the first of November, stirred and turned before the first of February, and not made into Tile before the first of March; And shall likewise be well tried and severed from stones, malme, marle, and chalke. II. A plaine Tile shall containe in length ten Inches and an halfe; in breadth, six Inches and a quarter; and in thicknesse, halfe an Inch and halfe a quarter at least: A Roofe or Creast-Tile, in length thirteen Inches, and in thicknesse, as before, with convenient deepnesse accordingly: A Gutter and Cor∣ner-Tile, in length ten Inches and an halfe, with convenient thicknesse, breadth and deep∣nesse. III. If any shall sell Tile otherwise made,
he shall forfeit to the buyer the double va∣lue thereof, to be recovered by action of debt; and besides shall make fine and ran∣some at the Kings will. IV. Justices of P. shall hear and deter∣mine these defaults and offences as well at the suit of the King, as of the party grieved; and shall not set lesse fine upon an offen∣der against this act, then after the rate of v. s. for every thousand of plain tile, vi. s. viii. d. for every hundred of roof-tile, and ii. s. for every hundred of corner or gutter∣tile. V. The said Justices have also authority to appoint searchers of Tile, who shall dili∣gently execute that office, in paine to forfeit to the King for every default x. s. and shall have of every Tile-maker, for such search, after the rate of i. d. for every thousand of plain Tile, ob. for every hundred of roof-Tile, and qu. for every hundred of corner or gutter-Tile; and shall make present∣ment of all defaults found at the next Sess. which shall be as effectuall in law, as a pre∣sentment of twelve men. VI. None shall put any Tile to sale be∣fore such search be made, in pain to forfeit the same: and the Justices of P. have also power to hear and determine the defaults of the said searchers. Tinne, S. Brasse.
Tithes. I.  Stat. 27. H. 8.20. If the Judge of an Ecclesiasticall Court make complaint to two Justices of Peace (one Quorum) of any con∣tumacie or misdemeanour committed by a defendant in any suit there depending for matter of Tithes, the said Justices shall com∣mit the said defendant to prison, there to re∣main till he shall find sufficient surety to be bound (before them) by recognisance, or o∣therwise, to give due obedience to the processe, proceedings, decrees and sentences of the said Court. II.  Stat. 32. H. 8.7. If in such a Court, after sentence for Tithes, the defendant ap∣pealeth, the Judge there shall compell the party appellant by processe and censures ecclesiasticall, to satisfie the other party his reasonable costs; and in case of contu∣macie or disobedience, upon complaint there∣of, two such Justices shall proceed as afore∣said. Howbeit, here the Judge shall take surety of the plaintife to repay the costs, in case the cause passe against him. Toll, S. Fish, 17. Transportation, S. Actions po∣pular, 18. Corn, Leather, 58. Recusants, 75.
Treason, S. Bailment, 1. Trespasse. I. Stat. 43. El. 7.  If any shall be convi∣cted by his own confession, or by the testi∣mony of one witnesse upon oath, before one Justice of Peace or head Officer, to have un∣lawfully cut and taken away any grain grow∣ing, robbed any orchard or garden, digged up or taken away any fruit trees, broken any hedges, pales, or other fences, cut or spoi∣led any woods or under-woods standing and growing, or the like, or to have been ac∣cessary thereunto, shall for the first offence pay unto the party grieved such damages, and within such time as by the said Justice or head Officer shall be appointed: And in case the party offending shall not by the said Justice or Officer be thought able to discharge the said damages, or shall not discharge them according to the order; then shall the said offender be by them, or either of them (respectively) committed to the Constable or other officer of the place where the offence was committed, or the party ap∣prehended, to be whipped; and for every other offence committed afterwards, and proved as aforesaid, the party offending shall receive the like punishment of whip∣ping. II. The Constable or other inferiour of∣ficer that herein refuseth or neglecteth to do
his duty, shall by any such Justice of Peace or head Officer be committed to prison without baile, till hee whip, or cause to be whipped the party offending, as is above limited. III. No Justice of Peace shall execute this Statute for offences done to himselfe, unlesse hee be affociated with one or more Justices of Peace whom the offence doth not concerne. Vagabonds, Rogues. 1.  Stat. 39. El. 4. Justices of Peace with∣in every County and Corporation have power in Sess. to give order for the erection of houses of correction, and also for the maintenance and government of the same, and for the punishment of offenders which shall be thither committed. II. All Scholars and seafaring men which beg; All wandring persons which either beg, use unlawfull games and playes, faine themselves to have skill in Physiognomie, Palinestry, or the like, or pretend to tell for∣tunes; All persons that are, or pretend to be collectors for Gaoles and Hospitals; All Fencers, Bearwards, common Players, and Minstrels wandring abroad (other then such as shall be authorised by Noble-men under their hands and seales;) All Juglers, Tinlkers, Pedlers, and petty chapmen wan∣dring
abroad; All labourers which wander, and refuse to work for wages reasnably taxed, having not living otherwise to main∣tain themselves; All persons delivered out of Gaoles, which beg for their fees, or other∣wise do travell begging; All Which wander abroad begging, pretending losse by fire, or otherwise; And all such persons (not be∣ing felons) wandring, and pretending them∣selves to be Egyptians, shall be adjudg∣ed Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturd Beg∣gars. 16. III. If any such vagabond shall be ta∣ken begging, wandring, or misordering him or her selfe, he or she, by the appoint∣ment of any Justice of P. Constable, Headbo∣row, or Tithingman there (the two last being assisted by the Minister, and one other of the parish) shall be stripped naked from the middle upwards, openly whipped till their body be bloudy, and forthwith sent the next, way from parish to parish, by the Officers of each parish, towards the place of their birth: but if it cannot be known, then to∣wards the place where they last dwelt, by the space of one whole yeer before such pu∣nishment; and if that cannot be known, then to the towne thorow which they last passed without punishment; And if it can∣not be discovered where they were born, or last dwelt, as aforesaid, then are they to be conveyed by the officer there to the house of Correction, or common Gaole of the County, to be imployed in work, or pla∣ced
in some service, and so to continue by the space of one yeer: or in case they be not able of body, that towne is to keep them, till they may be placed in some Alms∣house within the same County. IV. After which whipping, the vagabond shall have a testimoniall under the hand and seale of the said Justice, Constable, Head-borow, Tithingman, and Minister, or any two of them, testifying the day and place of his punishment, the place to which he is to be conveyed, and the time limited for his passage thither; which time, if by his owne default he exceeds, hee shall from time to time incurre the like punishment, till hee arrive at the place limited: the substance of which testimoniall shall be registred by the said Minister in a book provided for that purpose, in pain of v.s. V. If any such rogue seeme dangerous, or will not be reformed, two Justices of P. (one of Quorum) shall commit him to the house of Correction; and if at the next quarter Sess. by the more part of the Justi∣ces there, he shall not be thought fit to be de∣livered; he shall by them be banished; and at the charge of that County shall be con∣veyed to such parts beyond the seas, as shall by six or more of the privie Councell for that purpose be assigned to her Majesty, her heirs, and successors, whereof the Lord Kee∣per or Treasurer to be one; or otherwise adjudged to the gallies of this Realme, as the said Justices shall think fit: And if a
rogue so banished return without licence, he shall suffer as a felon, to be tryed in the County where he shall be apprehended. 17. VI. If a Constable, Headborow, or Ti∣thingman be found negligent in the due exe∣cution of this act, they shall forfeit x. s. for every default; and none shall make rescous against any Officer, or hinder the execution of this law, in pain of v. li. and to be bound to the good behaviour. 18. VII. None shall transport such a rogue out of Ireland, Scotland, or the Isle of Man, (being born in any of those places) in pain to forfeit xx. s. to the use of the poor where he lands: And if any such shall be hereaf∣ter found in England or Wales, they shall suffer punishment, and be conveyed the next way home, as aforesaid; or (in case they came by sea) to the place where they landed, from whence they are to be transported (at the charge of that County) to the place from whence they came. VIII. No impotent poor person shall passe to the Bath or Buxton without being licensed to passe by two Justices of P. where they dwell, and provided with relief both for their journey and abode there; and shall also return within the time limited by their licence, in pain to be reputed and punished as Rogues; and the city of Bath or towne of Buxton shall not be chargeable with any such. IX. Justices of P. of the Counties shall not intermeddle in Cities or Corporations,
but only the Officers of the same, who shall have like power there that the said Justices have in Counties. X. This act shall not extend to restrain the power which the citie of London hath in the government of St. Thomas Hospitall in Southwark, or to prejudice any jurisdiction or inheritance of John Dutton of Dutton, in the County of Chester Esquire. XI. The forfeitures and fines which shall accrue by this act (other then that above o∣therwise limited) shall be imployed for the maintenance of houses of correction, or the reliefe of the poor where the offence shall be committed, at the discretion of the said Justices of P. and may be levied by war∣rant under the hands and seals of two Justi∣ces of P. by distresse and sale of goods: And here the confession of the offender, or proof by two witnesses before two such Just. shall be sufficient conviction. XII. Two Justices of P. (one Quorum) shall have full power to hear and determine all causes which may come in question by reason of this act. XIII. The Lord Chancellor, or Keeper for the time being, shall have power to make Commissioners to enquire of money given towards the erection or maintenance of hou∣ses of correction, stocks for the poor, or o∣ther such like uses. XIV. A seafaring man suffering ship∣wrack, not having wherewithall to relieve himselfe, and having a testimoniall under
some Justice of P. his hand and seale near the place where he landed, declaring the time and place of his landing, the place of his dwelling or birth unto which he is to passe, and the time limited for his passage, may, in the direct way home, and within the time so limited for his passage, ask and re∣ceive necessary reliefe, without incurring the penalties of this act. XV. This act shall not extend to chil∣dren under seven years old; nor to glasse∣men, which travell without begging, by li∣cence under the hands and seals of three Ju∣stices of P. (one Quorum) of the County thorow which they travell. XVI. Stat. 1. Jac. 7.  Noble personages shall authorize none to goe wandring a∣broad; and glasse-men shall be reputed and used as rogues, notwithstanding the Statute of 39. El. 4. XVII. In stead of banishing an incor∣rigible rogue, or committing him to the gallies, (as was ordained by 39. El. 4.) he shall in open Sess. be branded in the left shoulder with a burning iron, having a great Roman R upon it as broad as a shilling; and from thence shall be sent to the place of his last dwelling, or (if that cannot be known) to the place of his birth; after which time, if he offend againe, hee shall suffer as a felon, without benefit of Cler∣gie. 5. XXVIII. Every person that seeth or knoweth any rogue to beg, shall convey, or
cause him to be conveyed to the next Con∣stable or Tithingman, in pain of x. s. to be levied and imployed as the forfeitures of 39. El. 4. and in default thereof, then by the Lord of the Leet, or his officer, in like man∣ner as the persons authorized by the said Statute should have levied and imployed the same. And here also, if the Constable or Tithingman doe not punish him according to that Statute, he shall forfeit xx. s. to be also levied and imployed as by the same Statute is appointed. XIX. This act shall not prejudice the jurisdiction or inheritance of John Dutton of Dutton in the County of Chester Esquire. XX.  Stat. 7. Ja. 4. There shall be an house of Correction provided in every Shire, to set rogues and other idle people to work. XXI. The Justices in Sess. shall from time to time appoint a Governour for the said house, who shall have power to set such rogues and idle people to work, and to punish them by moderate whipping, or putting fet∣ters or gyves upon them; which rogues and idle persons shall not be chargeable to the Country, nor have other allowance then what they shall deserve by their owne la∣bour. XXII. The said Justices shall at least twice every yeer within their severall divi∣sions (and oftner if need be) assemble and meet together for the better execution of this Statute, and some foure or five dayes before
their meeting, shall by warrant command the Constables and Tithingmen of every Hundred, Town, and Hamlet (being assisted with other sufficient men) to make a gene∣rall privie search in one night within their severall precincts, for the finding and ap∣prehending of rogues, &c. and such as shall be found, to bring to the said meeting, to be examined, punished, or sent to the house or houses of Correction, there to be set to work. XXIII. The said Constables and Ti∣thingmen shall appear at the said meeting, and there give an account upon oath in wri∣ting, under the Ministers hand, testifying what rogues &c. they have taken in the last search, or since the last meeting, and how many have been punished, or otherwise sent to the house of Correction: which if they neglect to do, or safely to convey such to the house of Correction as by the said Justi∣ces warrant shall be committed thither, they shall incurre what fine the said Justices shall please to set upon them, so it exceed not xl. s. XXIV. The Governours of the houses of Correction shall have such a summe of money yearly, as shall be thought fit by the more part of the Justices of P. in Sess. the same to be paid quarterly before hand by the Treasurers of the County, the Governours giving security for their continuance in the said service. XXV. If any lewd woman have a ba∣stard,
which may be chargeable to the pa∣rish, the Justices of P. shall commit her to the house of Correction, there to be puni∣shed, and set to work one whole yeer; and if she offend again, then is she to be com∣mitted again, there to remain till she put in good sureties for the good behaviour, and not to offend so again. Persons running away, and leaving their charge to the parish, shall be deemed and punished as incorrigible rogues: And those that threaten so to do, (it being proved by two witnesses upon oath before two Justices of P. of the same division) shall be by the same Justices sent to the house of Correcti∣on, there to be punished as sturdy rogues, (unlesse they will put in sufficient sureties to discharge the town,) and not to be deli∣vered but at such a meeting, as aforesaid; or in open Sess. XXVII. If the Governours shall not e∣very quarter Sess. yeeld to the said Justices a true account of all such persons as shall be committed to their custody; if they suf∣fer any within their charge to make escape, or to be trouble some to the Country by go∣ing abroad, or otherwise, they shall incurre what fine the same Just. in Sess. shall think fit to impose upon them. XXVIII. All fines which shall accrue by this act (other then those already limi∣ted) shall be paid to the Treasurers of the County, and by them be accounted for. See Labourers, 11. Sheriffes, 4.
Victuall, and Victuallers. I. Stat. 12. E. 2.6.  No person in any City or Corporation, which by reason of his Office ought to keep the Assise of Wine and Victuals, as long as he shall be attendant up∣on his Office, shall buy or sell Wines or Victuals, in paine to forfeit the same to the King, whereof the prosecuter shall have the third part by the Kings gift. 8. II. Stat. 23. E. 3.6. All Butchers,  Fishmongers, Regraters, Hostlers, Brewers, Bakers, Poulters, and all other sellers of Victuals, shall sell the same at reasonable prises, and for moderate gaine, in paine (upon proofe of the contrary, before the Sheriffe or the Kings Bailiffes, or before the Constables of the place, by the evidence of two true men) to forfeit the double value thereof to the party damnified, or (in his de∣fault) to him that will sue for the same: And all Maiors, and head Officers of Corpora∣tions have like power, and upon neglect of their duty herein, shall forfeit the treble value thereof to the party or prosecuter, as aforesaid; and besides shall incurre a fine to the King, to be imposed by Justices to be as∣signed by the King. III. Stat. 6. R. 2.10.  Aliens (being in amity with the King and Realme) may bring in victuall, and sell the same in grosse, or by retaile, without the impeachment of any. See Stat. 11 R. 2.7. 1. H. 4.17. and 14. H. 6.6.
IV.  Stat. 13. R. 2.8. Victuallers shall sell their victuals at such reasonable prises as shall be set down by the Just. of P. in two of their Sess. to be holden betwixt Easter and Mich. in paine to be punished at the discre∣tion of the said Justices, where no paine is already limited in certaine. 9. V. And here, Sheriffes, Stewards, Maiors, Bailiffes, and all other, which have power to keep Assise of Bread and Ale, shall take no fine or amercement for any default touching the Assise, for which the offender ought by Law to have bodily punishment. VI.  Stat. 23. H. 6.13. Justices of Peace shall twice every yeare cause all Statutes concerning Victuallers (before this time made) to be openly proclaimed in Sess. VII.  Stat. 12. E. 4.8. No person (other then Maiors, Bailiffes, Lords of Leets, or others in point of Charter) shall execute any Office of searching or surveying of Wine, Ale, Beere, or any other Victuall, or of the correction for breaking the Assise thereof, in paine to forfeit 40. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecuter. And all Letters Patents of the King granted for that purpose shall be void. VIII.  Stat. 3. H. 8.8. When a Victu∣aller (in a City or Corporation) is chosen to beare an Office, by reason whereof he ought also to have the Assising of Victuall, during that time, two other (being no Victu∣allers) shall be joyned and sworne with him, truly to Assesse and set prises and Assises of Victuall there.
IX. Stat. 25. H. 8.2.  The prises of Vi∣ctuall in all places (except Corporations) shall be assessed by the Kings Councellours, Justices of either Bench, and some other great Officers. X. Stat. 2, 3. E. 6, 15. Butchers, Brewers,  Bakers, Poulters, Cooks, Coster-mongers, or Fruiterers, which conspire or promise to∣gether, that they will not sell their victuals, but at certain prises, shall forfeit for the first offence 10. l. to the King; and if they pay it not within six dayes after conviction, they shall suffer 20. dayes imprisonment, and during that time shall have no sustenance but bread and water: for the second offence they shall forfeit 20. l. and, that not paid within six dayes, as aforesaid, shall suffer the Pillory: And for the third offence shall forfeit 40. l. and, that not paid within the time above limited, shall againe suffer the Pillory, lose one of their eares, and be ever after taken as men infamous, and not to be credited. XI. Just. of P. Maiors, Bailiffes, and Stewards, in Sess. Leets and Courts, have power to heare and determine these offences. See Alehouses, 5, 15, 26, 28. Butter, 1. Corne, Forestallers, 5. Purveyors, 56. Vintners, S. Wines. Alehou∣ses, 29.
Under-Sheriffe, S. Sheriffes. Usury. 1.  Stat. 37. H. 8.9. None shall sell his wares or merchandise to any, and within three months after buy the same againe at a lesser prise, knowing them to be the same wares; or by any corrupt bargaine of wares, money, or other thing, or by any mortgage of Land, take in gaines for giving day of pay∣ment, more then according to the rate of 10. per centum, for one whole yeare, in paine to forfeit the treble value of the wares or money so put forth, or the treble value of the profits of such lands mortgaged, to be di∣vided betwixt the King and the prosecutor; And besides shall suffer imprisonment, and make fine at the Kings will. II.  Stat. 13. El. 8. All bonds, con∣tracts, and assurances upon Usury, in lending or doing any thing contrary to the Stat. of 37. H. 8.9. shall be void, and all brokers, and soliciters thereof, shall be adjudged and used as Councellors, Attornies, or Advocates in any case of Praemunire. III. He that taketh no more then after the rate of 10. l. per centum, or lesse, shall onely forfeit the interest; to be recovered and im∣ployed, as the forfeitures of 37. H. 8.9. IV. Justices of Oyer and Terminer, of
Ass. and of P. in their Circuits and Sess. and Maiors, Sheriffes, and Bailiffes of Cities, have power to heare and determine all of∣fences committed against 37. H. 8.9. V. This Statute of 37. H. 8.9. shall be construed largely and strongly against the party offending by any way or devise, di∣rectly or indirectly. VI. This Act shall not extend unto any allowances or payments for the finding of Orphans, according to the ancient rates of London, or of any other City, where order is taken for their custody and goods, as in London. VII. The offender against the Stat. of 37. H. 8.9. may also be punished by the Ec∣clesiasticall Laws. VIII. Stat. 21. Jac. 17.  None shall up∣on any contract, directly or indirectly, take for loane of any money or other commodi∣ties, above the rate of 8. l. per centum for one whole yeare, in paine to forfeit the treble value of the money, or other things so lent. IX. No Scrivener, Broker, or Soliciter shall take or receive directly or indirectly for brokage, above the rate of 5. s. for the loane of 100. l. for one whole yeare, nor above 12. d. for making of a bond, in paine to for fet 20. l. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor; and also to suffer six months imprisonment. See Actions popular, 15.
Wages, S. Justices of P. 13, 18. Labourers, 15, &c. Parlia∣ment. Wagoner, S. Holy-dayes, 2. Waine-man, S. Holy-dayes, 2. Wales. 1.  Stat. 26. H. 6. Just. of P. in the Counties next adjoyning to Wales, may heare and determine the felonies committed in Wales, and in the Marches thereof, and how they may proceed therein. II.  Stat. 27. H. 8.7. The said Justices may heare and determine certaine offences (there mentioned) of Foresters in Wales about unreasonable customes, and how they are to proceed therein. III.  Stat. 34. H. 8.26. In this Statute is set downe by whom the Justices of P. in Wales are to be appointed, how many there ought to be in every County, what manner of men they ought to be, and how they ought to deale in their office, concerning their Sess. Certificates, Fees, Amerciaments, and Fines, together with divers other matters there mentioned. S. Boat-men, 1.
Warrens, S. Hunters. Watches. 1. Stat. of Winchester, 13. E. 1.4.  In great Towns walled, the gates shall be shut from Sun-set till Sun-rising, and none shall lodge without the Town, unlesse his Host will an∣swer for him: for which purpose, the Bai∣liffes of Towns shall make search once every fortnight at least, and if they find any suspi∣cious persons to have been lodged against the peace, they shall do right therein. II. Betwixt Ascension day and Michael∣mas, Watch shall be kept all night, from Sun-setting till Sun-rising; viz. in a City with six men at every gate, in a Borough with twelve men, and in every Town with six or four men, according to the number of the inhabi∣tants there; and if any stranger passe by them, he shall be arrested till morning; and if he will not obey the arrest, they shall levie Huy and Crie upon him. III. Stat. 5. H. 4.3.  Watches shall be made upon the sea-coasts, as they were wont to be; and in that case the Statute of Winche∣ster shall be observed. IV. In every Commission of Peace hereafter to be made, this article shall be inserted, That the Justices of Peace shall have power in their Sessions to enquire of Watches, and to punish them which shall be found in default, according to the tenour of the said Statute.
Watermen, S. Boatmen. Wax. I.  Stat. 11. H. 6.12. No Wax-Chan∣dler shall sell or put to sale any Candles, or other wares made of wax, at a dearer rate then that he may have only iiii. d. in every pound of wares over the price of plain wax, in pain to forfeit all such waxes put to sale, and the value of them sold; and besides, to make fine to the King. II. Justices of Peace, Maiors, Bailiffes and Stewards of Franchises have power to examine and search concerning the breach of this law, and also to heare and deter∣mine the offences committed against the same. Stat. 23. El. 8. Wears, S. Fishing, 6, 26. Weights and Measures. I.  Magna Charta, 9. H. 3.25. One mea∣sure and one weight shall be used throughout England. II.  Assisa Penis & Cervisia, 11. H. 3.
A Table of the assise of Bread according to Troy weight, having twelve ounces in a pound, and twenty penny weight in each of those twelve ounces. Price of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Houshold. s. d. l. oun. d. l. oun. d. l. oun. d. 19 6 1 5 7 2 2 0 2 10 19 20 0 1 4 18 2 1 6 2 9 16 20 6 1 4 10 2 0 14 2 9 0 21 0 1 4 2 2 0 2 2 8 4 21 6 1 3 14 1 11 12 2 7 8 22 0 1 3 6 1 11 0 2 6 12 22 6 1 3 0 1 10 10 2 6 0 23 0 1 2 14 1 10 0 2 5 8 23 6 1 2 8 1 9 12 2 4 16 24 0 1 2 2 1 9 2 2 4 4 24 6 1 1 16 1 8 13 2 3 12 25 0 1 1 10 1 8 6 2 3 0 25 6 1 1 5 1 7 18 2 2 10 26 0 1 1 0 1 7 10 2 2 0 26 6 1 0 15 1 7 3 2 1 10 27 0 1 0 10 1 6 16 2 1 1 27 6 1 0 6 1 6 8 2 0 12 28 0 1 0 1 1 6 0 2 0 2 28 6 0 11 17 1 5 15 1 11 14 29 0 0 11 13 1 5 10 1 11 6 29 6 0 11 9 1 5 4 1 10 17 30 0 0 11 5 1 4 18 1 10 10
30 6 0 11 1 1 4 12 1 10 2 31 0 0 10 18 1 4 6 1 9 16 31 6 0 10 14 1 4 1 1 9 8 32 0 0 10 11 1 3 16 1 9 2 32 6 0 10 8 1 3 12 1 8 16 33 0 0 10 5 1 3 6 1 8 10 33 6 0 10 3 1 3 0 1 8 4 34 0 0 9 19 1 2 15 1 7 18 34 6 0 9 16 1 2 12 1 7 12 35 0 0 9 13 1 2 8 1 7 6 35 6 0 9 10 1 2 4 1 7 0 36 0 0 9 8 1 2 1 1 6 16 36 6 0 9 5 1 1 18 1 6 10 37 0 0 9 2 1 1 14 1 6 4 37 6 0 9 0 1 1 10 1 6 0 38 0 0 8 18 1 1 7 1 5 16 38 6 0 8 15 1 1 4 1 5 11 39 0 0 8 13 1 1 0 1 5 6 39 6 0 8 11 1 0 16 1 5 2 40 0 0 8 9 1 0 12 1 4 18 40 6 0 8 7 1 0 9 1 4 14 41 0 0 8 5 1 0 6 1 4 10 41 6 0 8 3 1 0 3 1 4 6 42 0 0 8 1 1 0 0 1 4 2 42 6 0 7 19 0 11 18 1 3 18 43 0 0 7 17 0 11 16 1 3 14 43 6 0 7 15 0 11 13 1 3 10 44 0 0 7 13 0 11 10 1 3 6 44 6 0 7 12 0 11 6 1 3 3 45 0 0 7 10 0 11 4 1 3 0 45 6 0 7 8 0 11 2 1 2 17
46 0 0 7 6 0 11 0 1 2 14 46 6 0 7 5 0 10 18 1 2 10 47 0 0 7 4 0 10 1 1 2 7 47 6 0 7 2 0 10 13 1 2 4 48 0 0 7 1 0 10 10 1 2 1 48 6 0 6 19 0 10 8 1 1 18 49 0 0 6 17 0 10 6 1 1 16 49 6 0 6 16 0 10 4 1 1 13 50 0 0 6 15 0 10 2 1 1 10 50 6 0 6 14 0 10 0 1 1 7 51 0 0 6 12 0 9 18 1 1 4 51 6 0 6 11 0 9 16 1 1 2 52 0 0 6 10 0 9 14 1 1 0 52 6 0 6 8 0 9 12 1 0 17 53 0 0 6 7 0 9 10 1 0 14 53 6 0 6 6 0 9 8 1 0 12 54 0 0 6 5 0 9 6 1 0 10 54 6 0 6 4 0 9 5 1 0 8 55 0 0 6 3 0 9 4 1 0 6 55 6 0 6 1 0 9 2 1 0 3 56 0 0 6 0 0 9 0 1 0 0 56 6 0 5 19 0 8 18 0 11 18 57 0 0 5 18 0 8 17 0 11 16 57 6 0 5 17 0 8 15 0 11 14 58 0 0 5 16 0 8 14 0 11 12 58 6 0 5 14 0 8 13 0 11 9 59 0 0 5 13 0 8 12 0 11 6 59 6 0 5 12 0 8 10 0 11 4 60 0 0 5 11 0 8 8 0 11 2 60 6 0 5 10 0 8 6 0 11 1 Note, that (by the Book of Assise now in use)
Bakers Inhabiting Corporate Towns (in regard they pay scot and lot there) are allowed six shil∣lings in every Quarter of the middle-prised wheat for their charge in baking; And Countrey or for∣raigne Bakers, only four shillings: For example, when the middle-prise of wheat is 30. s. the Quar∣ter, for the Assise of Towne Bakers you are to find in this Table the Assise of Bread answering to 36. s. but for the Assise of forraigne Bakers, that of 34. s. And therefore (in that case) the penny white loafe put to sale by Towne Bakers ought to weigh nine ounces, eight penny-weight; but that uttered by forraigne Bakers nine ounces, ninteene penny-weight, as appeares in the Table. III. An English penny sterling (being now three pence) shall weigh 32. grains of Wheat taken out of the middle of the eare, and 20. pence do make an ounce, 12. ounces a pound, 8. pound a gallon, 8. gallons a London Bushel, which is the eighth part of a Quarter, Stat. 31. E. 1. See Rastall, Weights, 7, 8. IV.  Stat. of the Pillory and Tumbrell, 51. H. 3. If a Baker or Brewer be convict not to have observed the Assise, for the first, second, and third fault he shall be amerced, except the of∣fence be grievous and often, and then shall the Baker to the Pillory, and the Brewer to the Tumbrell, or some other correction. V. Six men shall be sworne truly to ga∣ther all the measures and weights of the Towne, and of Mills, and upon the measures and weights, as also upon every loafe shall the name of the Owner be distinctly writ∣ten: After this, 12. lawfull men shall be
sworne to make true answer on the Kings be∣halfe upon Articles, hereafter following; And the Bailiffe shall be commanded to bring the Bakers and Brewers with their measures, and all things under-written. VI. Then first the Jury shall inquire the first, second, and third prises of Wheat sold the last Marker day, and also how Barley and Oats; and upon how much increase or decrease of the price of Wheat, the Baker ought to change the Assise of his Bread, and how much it ought to weigh according to the present price of Wheat; and whether the Town have a Pillory of convenient strength. VII. Againe, they shall inquire of the Assise and price of Wine, and the Vintners names, and how they fell, and whether they utter that which is wholesome for mans bo∣dy: Also of the Assise of Ale in the Court of the Town, how it is, and whether it be obser∣ved; and if the Brewers be found to have sold contrary to the Assise, they shall be a∣merced, or else judged to the Tumbrell. VIII. They shall inquire likewise of such as use double, or false weights or measures; of Butchers and Cooks, that sell unwhole∣some meat; & of Forestallers, which buy any thing before the accustomed time of Marker. IX. Stat. de pistoribs, 31. E. 1.  The As∣sise or weight of Wheat shal never be chang∣ed, but when there is six pence increasing or decreasing in the price of a Quarter. X. If a Bakers Bread be found a farthing weight lacking in two shillings six pence or
under, he shall be amerced; and if it passe the same number, he shall suffer the punishment of the Pillory, which shall not be remitted for gold or silver: And every Baker shall have a marke of his own for his bread. According to which proportion, it seems that if a Bakers bread wants not a peny weight in six ounces, he shall not incurre amerciament. XI. Every Pillory or Stretch-neck must be made of convenient strength, so that exe∣cution may be done upon offenders without perill of their bodies XII. The toll of a mill shall be taken ac∣cording to custome, and the strength of the water, either to the 20. or 24. corn; also by a measure agreeable to the Kings standard, and by the race, and not by heap or cantell: And if the Farmors find the Millers their ne∣cessaries, they shall take nothing besides their due toll, in pain to be grievously amerced. XIII. The assise of Ale shall be assessed, proclaimed, and kept according to the price of corn whereof malt is made; And the Brewer shall not increase more in a gallon, but according to the rate of six pence rising or falling in a quarter of malt: And if he break the assise, for the first, second, and third time he shall be amerced, but for the fourth he shall incurre the Pillory. XIV. A Butcher that sels Swines flesh mezled, or dead of the morin, shall for the first time be amerced; for the second incurre the Pillory; for the third be imprisoned and make fine; and for the fourth shall forbear
the town: And in this manner shall it be done to all that offend in like case. XV. The standard of bushels, gallons, and els shall be signed with an iron seale of the Kings; and no measure shall be in any towne, unlesse it do agree with the Kings measure, and be marked with the seal of the Shire town. XVI. If any do sell or buy with measures unsealed, and not examined by the Maior or Bailiffes, he shall be grievously amerced. XVII. All measures shall be viewed twice every yeer; and if any be convict of a double measure, he shall be imprisoned, and grie∣vously punished. XVIII. The Standard bushels, and els shall be in the custody of the Maior and Bailiffes, and of six lawfull persons of the town being sworn, before whom all measures shall be sealed: and no grain shall be sold by the heap or cantell, except it be oats, malt, and meal. 24. XIX. No forestaller shall be suffered to dwell in any town; and if any shall be con∣vict of that offence, for the first time he shall be amerced, and lose the thing so bought; for the second shall have judgment of the Pillory; for the third shall be imprisoned and make fine; and for the fourth shall ab∣jure the town: And like judgement also shall be given against his accessaries. XX. An Ordinance for measuring land. 34.  E. 1. See the Statute at large. XXI. Stat. 14. E. 3.12.  There shall be
one weight and one measure throughout the Realm of England: And the Treasurer shall cause to be made certain standards of bu∣shels, gallons, and weights of brasse, and shall send them into every County, where such standards are not already sent: and thereup∣on shall be assigned two sufficient persons in every County (or more, if need be) to survey weights and measures according to the stan∣dard, who shall have power to hear, deter∣mine, & punish all those that shall be thereof found guilty, and to command the Sheriffe to imprisō them till they shal make fine to the K. XXII. The said Officers shall every yeer, the next day after the feast of S. Micha∣el, deliver their estreats into the Exchequer, and take for their expences a fourth part of that they can levie, and shall answer the King the other three parts: And the fourth part also of that they cannot levie, shall be answered them in the Excheq. and the other three parts shall be levied for the Kings use. XXIII.  Stat. 25. E. 3.9. Auncell weight shall be quite put out, and weighing shall be by equall balance. Stat. 34. E. 3.5 XXIV.  Stat. 25. E. 3.10. Every measure shall be according to the Kings standard, and shall be striked without heap, saving the rents of Lords: And the King will assigne certain Justices in every County to inquire, hear, and determine upon the points afore∣said, and to inflict punishment according to the trespasse. XXV.  Stat. 27. E. 3.10. There shall be
one weight and one measure; and none shall use any deceit in weighing commodities by an uneven tong of the balance, or by putting hand, foor, or other touch, in pain to forfeit the value of the commodities so weighed, to suffer one yeers imprisonment, and to be ransomed at the Kings will; and the party grieved shall recover quadruple damages. XXVI. There shall be Justices assigned to inquire of such trespasses, & to do right as well at the K. suit, as at the suit of the party. XXVII. Stat. 13. R. 2.9.  There shall be one weight and measure throughout Eng∣land; and he that shall be convicted to have used any other, shall suffer six moneths im∣prisonment, and yeeld double damages to the party grieved. XXVIII. Stat. 15. R. 2.4.  Eight bushels of corn striked shall be accounted a quarter, as well by water as by land: and none shall buy otherwise, in pain to forfeit the corn or malt so bought. XXIX. Stat. 9. H. 5. Parl. 2.8.  The Ju∣stices of P. Sheriffes, Escheators, and other persons to be assigned by the King, shall have power by Commission to inquire of the counterfeiters of false weights, and to com∣mit them to prison, and there to hold them till they shall be acquit or attainted, and be∣ing anainted, they shall still remain in pri∣son, till they have made fine and ransome at the discretion of the said Just. who shall have power ther of to inquire, hear and determine, as often as to them shall seem necessary.
XXX.  Stat. 2. H. 6.11. The tun of wine shall contain 252. gallons English measure, the pipe 126. gallons, the barrell of Her∣rings or Eccles shall contain 30. gallons, the butt of Salmon 84. gallons; and so of other lesser vessell after the same rate. XXXI. None shall import or make any vessell contrary to this act, in pain to forfeit the commodities therein contained to the lord of the town where they are found, wher∣of the prosecutor shall have the fourth part. XXXII. Justices of P. and Maiors, and Bailiffes (having power to inquire of the peace) have power to hear and determine these offences. XXXIII.  Stat. 8. H. 6.5. Every Citie, Borough and Town within England shall have a common balance, with common weights sealed, and according to the standard of the Exchequer, upon the common costs of the said Citie, Borough or Town, in the keeping of the head Officer, or Constable there, in pain that the Citie for such de∣fault shall forfeit x. l. to the King; the Bo∣rough v. l. & every other Town xl. s. 39, 48. XXXIV. At this balance all the inhabi∣tants may weigh gratis; but a forreiner shall for every draught under xl. l. pay a farthing; for a draught betwixt xl. li. and an hundred an halfpenny; and for a draught betwixt an hundred and a thousand a penny; whereof the weights shall be maintained, and the offi∣cers which attend that service rewarded, at the discretion of the said inhabitants.
XXXV. None shall buy woollen yarn, un∣lesse he will make cloth thereof; nor use weight or measure, or any other thing in place thereof, which is not sealed according to the standard, nor set any thing to the same by way of tacking or hiding, or in any other manner, that may increase the measure or weight, or let the balance to have his natural course, upon the pain mentioned in the Sta∣tutes of 27. E. 3.10. and 13. R. 2.9. XXXVI. Justices of P. Maiors, Bailiffes, and Stewards of Franchises have power to hear and determine these offences. XXXVII. Stat. 9. H. 6.8.  A weigh of Cheese shall contain 32. cloves, and every clove seven pound. XXXVIII. Stat. 11. H. 6.8. The Stat.  of 1. H. 5.10. (which see in Purveyors, 44.) and 8. H. 6.5. shall be duly put in execution. XXXIX. In every Citie, Borough, and Town there shall be a common bushell sea∣led, and according to the standard, in like manner and pain as in the said Stat. of 8. H. 6.5. is specified, for a common balance. 48. XL. All Ju. of P. Maiors, & head Officers shall have power to hear and determine the offences committed against the said Statutes by examination or inquisition, and as well at the suit of the King, as of the party grieved. XLI. The Maior of London, and all o∣ther Maiors and Bailiffes, in their oaths shall be charged to keep and execute all the said Statutes, and shall be accountable in the Ex∣chequer for all profits and forfeitures which
shall grow due thereupon to the King. XLII.  Stat. 1. R. 3.13. The contents of every vessel of wine and oyl: And they shall not be sold untill they be gaged by an officer to be appointed by the King for that purpose. XLIII.  Stat. 7. H. 7.4. (or according to Rastal cap. 3.) Measures and weights of brass shall be fent to every City and Borough, there to be kept as their treasure, according to which all measures and weights in every County shall be reformed. XLIV. The Maior or chiefe Officer of every such place shall have a speciall mark wherewith he shall seal the said measures and weights; and shall take for sealing of a bushell a penny, and of every other measure an halfpenny; for an hundred weight a pen∣ny, for half an hundred an halfpenny; and for every lesser weight a farthing. XLV. If he refuseth or delayeth to seal them, or doth any thing contrary to this act, he shall forfeit xl. s. to be divided betwixt the King and the party grieved, and to be recovered by action of debt, wherein no wa∣ger of law shall be admitted. XLVI. Justices of P. have power to hear and determine the said defaults. XLVII.  Stat. 11. H. 7.4. Measures and weights of brasse shall be sent to Cities and Boroughs there especially named. XLVIII. Onely Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns shall be enjoyned to have common balances, weights and measures, and all other towns shall be excused, notwith∣standing
the Statutes of 8. H. 6.5. and 11. H. 6.8. above mentioned. XLIX. The Maiors and chief Officers of the said Cities, Boroughs, and Market Towns, which shall have delivered unto them such weights and measures sealed with the letter H. crowned, (or with the first letter of the name of the present King of England for the time being) shall have authority and power to signe like weights and measures unto any of the Kings subjects (duely requiring the same) taking for the marking of every bu∣shell only one penny. L. None shall use any other weights or measures but such as are so marked. LI. Maiors and chiefe Officers shall at least twice every yeer view all measures and weights within their jurisdictions, and break or burn them which they finde defe∣ctive, and also inflict punishment upon the offenders; viz. for the first offence vi. s. viii. d. for the second xiii. s. iiii. d. and for the third xx. s. and besides, adjudge them to the pillory. LII. Two Justices of Peace (one Quo∣rum) have authority as well by examination as inquiry, to hear and determine the de∣faults of Maiors and other head Officers, and also of buyers and sellers contrary to this act; and to set fines and amerciaments upon the offenders at their discretions: and the defective weights or measures are to be forfeited and burnt. LIII. Eight bushels of corn raised and
stricken shall be accounted a Quarter, 14. l. a stone of Wooll, and 26. stone, a sack: Howbeit this Act shall not extend to any person selling or buying by water measure within ship-board, whereof every bushell shall containe five pecks raised and stricken. LIV. Within the Cinque Ports the Lord Warden or his Lieutenant shall order the weights and measures. LV.  Stat. 12. H. 7.5. A Bushell shall containe 8. gallons of Wheat; and every gallon 8. pounds of Wheat, Troy weight; and every pound 12. ounces; and every ounce 20. sterlings, (or penny weights;) and every sterling shall weigh 32. graines of Wheat, that grew in the midst of the eare of Wheat: And a standard for the Kings trea∣sury is to be made according to this Assise. LVI. Whereas the weights and measures sent downe to Cities and Boroughs last yeare by the Stat. of 11. H. 7.4. were found defe∣ctive, others more perfect shall be sent thither at the charge of the said Cities and Townes, according to which all other weights and measures shall be regulated, upon the paines in the said Statute contained. LVII.  Stat. 16. Car. 19. There shall be one weight and one measure according to the standard of the Exchequer throughout the Realme, and every measure of Corne shall be striked without heape. LVIII. Whosoever shall sell by, or keep any other weight or measure, whereby any thing is bought or sold after six months after
this Sess of Parliament, shall forfeit for every such offence 5. s. being thereof lawfully con∣victed by the oath of one witnesse before a Justice of P. Maior, or other head Officer, (in their severall precincts respectively) who shall have power to administer an Oath in that behalfe, which said forfeiture shall be levied by the Church-wardens, and Over∣seers of the poore (or one of them) where the offence shall be committed, to the use of the poore there, by distresse and sale of goods, rendring the overplus to the party offending; And in default of distresse it shall be lawfull for any Justices of P. Maior, or other head Officer, (in their severall pre∣cincts respectively) to commit such offender to prison, untill he shall pay the summe so forfeited. LVIX. The Clerk of the Market of the King or Princes houshold, and his deputies, shall only execute their of∣fice within the verge, and not else∣where: And head Officers of Corporations, and Lords of Liberties, and their deputies, may execute theirs in their severall pre∣cincts, as they might have done before this Act was made. LX. If any of the Officers aforesaid shall seale any weight or measure which is not agreeable to the said standard, or shall re∣fuse to seale such as are agreeable thereunto, (the party paying only such fees for the al∣lowance thereof, as are warranted by Sta∣tute, or some ancient custome) they and their
deputies (respectively) shall for every such offence forfeit 5. l. to be levied as aforesaid, to the use of the poore where the offence was committed. LXI. If they shall take any other fine, fee, reward, or summe of money, then what are allowed by Statute, or some such ancient custome, for the signing or examination of any weights or measures, which have beene formerly marked or sealed; or shall impose any fine or amerciament without a legall triall of the offence; or shall otherwise mis∣demean themselves in the execution of their office, and shall be thereof lawfully convict; they shall forfeit for the first offence, 5. l. for the second, 10. l. and for every other of∣fence, 20. l. to be levied, as aforesaid, to the use of the poore, where the offence was com∣mitted. LXII. He that is fined or amerced by this Act, shall not be again punished for the same offence by force of any former Law or Sta∣tute. LXIII. This Act shall not extend to the measure of Rent-corn, nor to Water-measure. LXIV. If any Officer authorised for the execution of this Statute shall be impleaded for any act he shall do therein, he shall plead the generall Issue, not guilty, and yet give this Statute, or any other speciall matter in evi∣dence; And if he be found not guilty, or the Plaintiffe be non-suited, he shall recover treble costs.
Wild Fowle. Stat. 25. H. 8.11. None shall destroy or take away the eggs of any wild Fowle, in paine to forfeit for every egge of a Crane or Bustard so taken or destroyed 20. d. of a Bitter, Herne, or Shovelard 8. d. of a Mallard, Tele, or other wild Fowle 1. d. to be divided betwixt the King and the prosecu∣tor: And here Justices of P. shall have pow∣er to inquire, heare and determine offences of this kind, as they use to do in cases of Trespasse. S. Hawks, 19, 20. Hunters, 7. Wines. I. Stat. 7. E. 6.5. None shall utter Wine by retaile, in any other place then in Cities, Boroughs, Port Townes, or Market Towns, or in Gravesend, Sittingborne, Tuxford, or Bagshot, in paine to forfeit 10. l. for every day that they sell Wine otherwise. II. None shall utter Wine by retaile in any City, Borough, or Corporation, but by li∣cense of the most part of the Common-Coun∣cell, Aldermen, Burgesses, or Communalty there, under their common Seale; nor in any City, Borough, Port towne, or Market town not Corporate, or in Gravesend, Sitting-borne, or Bagshot, without licence of the Justices of P. of the County in Sess. under their Seales; in paine to forfeit 5. l. for eve∣ry
day that they sell Wine otherwise: which said Officers, Communalty, and Justices have power to continue or change such li∣cences at their discretions; but shall not licence above two in one place, in paine to forfeit 5. l. a piece except in these hereafter following, in which it shall be lawfull to li∣cence more then two, viz. in London 40 York 8 Norwich 4 Westminster 3 Bristoll 6 Lincolne 3 Hull 4 Shrewsbury 3 Exeter 4 Salisbury 3 Glocester 4 Westchester 4 Hereford east 3 Worcester 3 South-hampton 3 Canterbury 4 Ipswich 3 Winchester 3 Oxford 3 Cambridge 4 Colchester 3 Newcastle 4 III. None shall sell or utter Wine by re∣taile to be spent in his or their mansion house, or in any other place in their tenure, by any colour, craft, or engine, in paine of 10. l. IV. The abovesaid forfeitures shall be divided betwixt the King and the prosecutor. V. Justices of P. within every County and Corporation in Sessions, Stewards in Leets, and Sheriffes in their Turnes, have power to enquire (by the oaths of twelve men) of all offences committed against this Act; in which case the forfeitures, which shall there∣upon grow due, shall be divided betwixt the
King and the poore of the Towne or place where the presentment shall be found. VI. This Act shall not prejudice the li∣berties of either of the Universities; nor charge any person offending, unlesse the suit be prosecuted within a yeare. S. Weights, 6. Witchcraft. I. Stat. 1. Jac. 12. If any shall be law∣fully convicted to have used or practised the invocation or conjuration of any evill spirit; or to have taken up any dead person out of their grave, or any part of such person to be used in witchcraft or inchantment; or to have used witchcraft, wherby any person hath been killed, pined, or made lame; they, together with their accessaries, shall be adjudged felons, without benefit of Clergy. II. If any shall be lawfully convicted to have taken upon them by witchcraft, in∣chantment, charme, or sorcery to discover a∣ny place of hidden treasure, or where lost or stollen goods are become, or to provoke any person to unlawfull love, or to destroy or impaire any cattell or goods, or to hurt or destroy any person in their body, although the same be not effected: they shall for the first offence suffer one whole years imprison∣ment without bail, and once in every quarter of that yeer, at a Market or Fair, stand up∣on the pillory six hours, and there openly confesse the offence committed: and for the
second offence shall suffer as a felon with∣out benefit of Clergy: But here shall be no losse of dower, or disherison of heire; and in these cases a Peer (being an offender) shall be tryed by his Peers. Witnesse, S. Perjury, 8. Wood. Stat. 35. H. 8.17. Two Justices of Peace appointed by the more part of the other Ju∣stices, have power (in a form there set down) to set out between the lord of a wood and his commoners (when they cannot agree) the lords part, which (being as neer a fourth part as can be laid out) the said lord or owner shall inclose or sell at his pleasure. See Corns. Wooll. Stat. 2, & 3. P. & M. 13. Justices of P. about Hallifax in Yorkshire, have power to punish such of the inhabitants there, as ha∣ving bought wooll, doe sell the same again in any other place, and not in Hallifax; or to the richer sort there, or to such as sell it again, and not to the poor to be wrought into yarn. See Actions popular, 18. Writs, S. Processe. Supersedeas. FINIS.
