W352 12369323 60523
Licensed, BY Command of the Right Honourable the Earl of Shrewsbury, Principal Secretary of State. Sept. 13. 1689. J. Vernon.
A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE SIEGE OF London-Derry. By the Reverend Mr. George Walker, Rector of Donogh∣moore in the County of Tirone, and late Governour of Derry in Ireland. The Second Edition Corrected. LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, and Ralph Simpson, in St. Paul's Church-yard. MDCLXXXIX. Also published, A new and exact Map of London-derry, and Culmore Fort, drawn with great Exactness, by Captain Macullach, who was there during the Siege. Price 6 d. Sold by Robert Clavel, and Ralph Simpson.
TO Their Sacred MAJESTIES, William and Mary, KING and QUEEN OF ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, FRANCE, and IRELAND. May it please Your Majesties, NExt to the Pleasure of doing well, there is no greater satisfaction than where the Performance meets with a favourable reception from those for whose sake it is designed. I thank God I have this dou∣ble Comfort in the Testimony of a good Conscience, and Your Majesties Gracious Acceptance of the poor services God enabled me to doe for your Majesties In∣terest, and the Safety of those Protestants, whom the Fu∣ry of the Papists drove into London-Derry. Nor am I more pleased with Your Majesties Royal Bounty to me, much above not only my Merit, but Expectation, than with Your Majesties Tenderness for my Poor Fellow Sufferers and Partners in that Action, whom I doubt not but Your Majesties will find as brave
in the Field, and in taking other Towns, as in defend∣ing that, which neither the Number, nor Rage of their Enemies without, nor those more cruel Ones within, of Famine and Sickness, could ever make them think of Surrendring. The Part I Acted in this Service might more properly have been done by other hands; but that Necessity which threw it upon me, will I hope justifie me before God and the World, from the irre∣gularity of interessing my self in such an Affair, for which I was neither by Education or Function quali∣fied; Especially since the necessity which called me to it, was no sooner over, than I resigned more chearfully than ever I undertook the Employment, that I might apply my self to the Plow to which I had put my Hand. I am not at all angry with the Reflexions that some make, as they think, to my Disparagement; because all they say of this kind, gives God the greater Honour, in whose Almighty Hand no instrument is weak, in whose Presence no Flesh must glory. But as the whole Conduct of this matter must be ascribed to Providence alone, as it ought, this should then give them occasion to consider that God has Espoused your Majesties Cause, and Fights your Battels, and for the Protestant Religion; and by making use of a poor Minister, the unworthiest of the whole Communion, of which he is a Member, would intimate to the World, by what Hand he will defend and maintain both your Majesties Interest, and the Religion you have delivered from those that were ready to swallow both up.
That which I here presume to lay at Your Majesties Feet, is indeed very unfit for Your Royal View; but that since Importunity would have it publick, I thought it Sacrilege to entitle any other to the Copy, than those to whom the Original was devoted. The Picture can∣not be commended for the Workmanship, but it may possibly be the more acceptable, for that because more resembling the Life from which 'tis drawn: There is little Skill, or Art, in either, but there are Ornaments much more valuable in both, natural Simplicity, Sin∣cerity, and a plain Truth, In which character I hum∣bly beg Your Majesties will always consider, and ac∣cept of the Endeavours of Your Majesties most Obliged, Most Faithfull, and most Obedient Subject and Servant, George Walker.
A Description of the CITY of London-Derry. THE Form of the Town comes some∣what near an Oblong or long Square; and its Situation lengthways, is N. W. and S. E. or a Diagonal drawn from the Church through the Market-house, to the Maga∣zine, is near upon a N. and S. Line. The Length of the Town through the mid∣dle from Ship-key gate to Bishops-gate, is about 300 Paces, or 1500 Feet. The Wall on the W. side the Town 320 Paces; the Wall on the E. about 380. The Breadth at the N. W. End 140; at the S. E. End 120; from Butchers-gate to Ferry-key-gate, where the Town is Broadest, 180 Paces. The Wall is generally 7 or 8 Foot thick; but the out-side Wall of Stone, or Battlements above the Terra-plene, is not more than two Foot in thickness. The Four Corners have each of them a Ba∣stion; on the long side to the West-ward are two other Bastions; and on the side to the East-ward, one Bastion, one Demi-bastion, and two other Works which are commonly call'd Flat-forms.
There are Four Gates; Bishops-gate at the S. E. End, Ship-key-gate at the End opposite to it: Butchers-gate at the N. E. Side, and Ferry-key-gate over against it. In the middle of the Town is a Square, call'd the Diamond; where the Market-House stands (du∣ring the Siege, turn'd into a Guard-House.) Near the S. W. end of the Town, stands the Church; on the top whereof, being a flat Roof, were placed two of our Guns, which were of great Use in annoying the Enemy. In the S. E. Angle of the Town, was the principal Magazine. within the Town also were several Wells, &c. and before Bishops-gate was a Ravelin built by Col. Lundy; and the Ground on forwards to the Wind-mill-hill, was taken in by the Besieged to the Distance of 260 Paces from the Town, and about the same Distance a cross from the Ri∣ver; and for fear this Ground should be taken from the Besieged by the Enemy, another Line was industriously drawn from the S. W. Quar∣ter of the Town, to the River, to secure their Retreat. The Number of Guns planted on the Bastions and Lines, was 8 Sakers and 12 Demi-culverins The whole Town stands upon an easy As∣cent, and exposed most of the Houses to the Enemies Guns.
A Diary of the SIEGE of LONDON-DERRY. BEing prevail'd on, to give an Account of the Siege of London-Derry, it is convenient, by way of preliminary, to take notice how that Town came to be out of the Hands of the Irish, when all places of the Kingdom of any strength or consideration were possessed by them. It plea∣sed God so to infatuate the Councils of my Lord Tyrcou∣nel, that when the three Thousand Men were sent to England to assist his Master against the Invasion of the Prince of Orange, he took particular care to send away the whole Regiment Quartered in and about this City; he soon saw his Error, and endeavoured to repair it, by Commanding my Lord Antrim to Quarter there with his Regiment, consisting of a numerous swarm of Irish and Highlanders; upon the 6th. of December, they were on their March in and about New-Town (a Market-Town belonging to Col. George Philips, 12 Miles di∣stant from Derry) Col. Philips having notice of this, and joining with it the apprehensions they were under, of a general Insurrection of the Irish intended on the 9th. of December, and considering that Derry as well as other places was to be presently possessed by the Irish, and having several Informations brought him, and some taken before him that gave some credit to the Fear and Jealousies they were under, and encreased his suspicion of some damnable Design against the British of those parts; He immediately dispatches a Letter to Alderman Norman, giving an Account of these Matters, and his Opinion of them, and impor∣tuning
him to consult with the sober People of the Town, and to set out the Danger of admitting such Guests among them: The next day he sent an Express, advising him to cause the Gates of the City to be shut, and assured them he would be with them with his Friends the day following, and would stand by them and serve them to the hazard of his Life and Fortune. Alderman Norman and the rest of the graver Citizens were under great Disorder and Consternation, and knew not what to resolve upon. One of the Companies was already in view of the Town, and two of the Officers within it, but the younger sort who are sel∣dom so dilatory in their Resolutions, got together, run in all hast to the Main-Guard, snatcht up the Keys, and immediately shut up all the Four Gates, and the Magazine. On the 9th day, Col. Philips comes into London-derry, he had been Governour of that Town, as also of the Fort of Culmore in King Charles's time, and therefore the Inhabitants desire him to resume the Government, and immediately delivered him the Keys of the Gates and the Magazine: He being well acquain∣ted with proceedings in England, with the Advice of the Gravest sort, dispatches Mr. David Kerns as their Agent thither, to represent their Condition and Re∣solutions, and to procure some speedy Relief. News being carried to Dublin of this Revolt, as they call'd it, the Lord Montjoy with his Lieute∣nant-Collonel Lundy and six Companies, are sent down to reduce the Place The Governour had already form'd Eight Companies of good effectual Men in the City, and Armed them out of the Stores, and with some Management, quieted all Factions and Tumults, and reduced all things to good Order, so that all were Unanimously resolved to stand it out till they received a Return to their Address sent into England. My Lord
Montjoy appears before the Town; his Interest among us, and the consideration of our own Circumstances, that there was no appearance of any sudden Relief from England, no Provisions in the Town, and (which was worst of all) but two Barrels of Powder in the Maga∣zine, which my Lord Montjoy must needs understand, being Master of the Ordnance; made it thought most adviseable to listen to a Treaty; so the Governour with the Consent of the City-Council agreed upon certain Capitulations; that only two Companies should en∣ter the Town, and they to be all Protestants, and that the Town-Companies should be allow'd to keep their Arms, and to do Duty with the others, & that no stran∣ger is to be admitted into the City, without License from the Governour and Sheriffs. Having obtained Conditions of so easy a Nature, and of so probable Ad∣vantage to the Town, they receiv'd my Lord Montjoy, who made Lieutenant-Collonel Lundy, Governour of the Town. The Gentlemen of the other Parts of the North of Ireland, being well acquainted with the Proceedings at Dublin; that particularly, Commissions were given out to raise many Thousands of Irish, all over the Kingdom; and all to be Maintained at the Expence of their Officers (who were not able to Support themselves) for the space of three Months. They were with good reason equally appre∣hensive, this was not intended for their Safety or Advan∣tage; and therefore they generally resolved to put themselves in the best Posture they could to Defend themselves against any inconveniences such Methods might bring upon them: They had several Consultati∣ons with their Neighbours, and some Great Men were not wanting in their Advice and Encouragement. One left some Instructions with Mr. George Walker Rector of
Donaghmore in the County of Tyrone, recommending the necessity of Securing Dungannon by a Garrison of their own, and of Victualling that Town; in order to which, Mr. Walker saw it not only excuseable, but necessary to concern himself, and raise Men, out of which he form'd a Regiment, and to apply what Interest he could make towards the Preserva∣tion of that Town. Gordon O Neale, observing those Preparations, sends his Priest to inquire into the mean∣ing of them, which was readily interpreted to him: So many Irish were Arm'd in the Country, they thought fit to put themselves in a Posture of Defence against the Danger they saw themselves Exposed to. The Men complain of want of Powder, but by the Contri∣vance of their Officer, a Bag of Mustard-Seed was laid upon the Carriages, which by its resemblance, easi∣ly obtained the Credit of a Bag of Powder, and im∣mediately gave motion to the Souldiers. In order to Settle a Correspondence with London-Derry, Mr. Walker Rides to that Town, and Con∣sults Collonel Lundy. The Opinion they had of his Experience in War, and Zeal for the Cause they were to Maintain, gave all People great Expecta∣tion from his Conduct; he Approves and Encourages the Design, sends two Files of his Disciplin'd Men to Dungannon, and afterwards two Troops of Dragoons. March 14. Orders are sent to Col. Steward (who was very considerable among us) from Col. Lundy, that the Garrison at Dungannon should break up; some con∣sidering the Advantagious Situation of the Place, and the great quantity of Provisions already laid in, and the consequence of leaving both, to give strength to their Enemies, shew'd some unwillingness to comply with Commands so different from the Measures they had hitherto pursued; but at last, agreed to March to
Colrain or Derry according to Collonel Lundy's Orders. March 17. We March'd as far as Strabane, and there met our Order from Collonel Lundy to return to Omagh, and the Rash. Five Companies of the above Regiment are Quartered at Rash, under Command of Mr. Walker; and five at Omagh, Commanded by Lieutenant-Collonel Mervin: A Fortnight after, we receiv'd a Potent to March to St. Johnstown, five Miles from Derry. March 20. Captain James Hamilton Arrived from England, with Ammunition and Arms, 480 Barrels of Powder, and Arms for 2000 Men, and a Commission from the King and Queen for Col. Lundy to be Gover∣nour of the City, together with Instructions to swear all Officers Military and Civil, and assurance of speedy Supplies from England. The King and Queen are pub∣lickly Proclaimed with great Joy and Solemnity. About this time the Irish made a descent into Vlster, and drove great Numbers of poor Protestants before them, who took shelter in Colrain and London-Derry. March 23. Col. Philips is sent to England with an Address to the King, and to Sollicit a speedy Supply. Col. Lundy goes to Colrain to give his Advice and Assistance to that place. The rest of this Month, and the beginning of the next, is spent in Preparations a∣gainst the Enemy; they had possessed themselves of Colrain, & drove all before them till they came to Clody-Bridge, of which I shall give this short Account. April 13. Mr. Walker receiving Intelligence, that the Enemy was drawing towards Derry, he Rides in all hast thither, and gives Col. Lundy an Account of it, but the Collonel believed it only a false Alarm; Mr. Walker returns from him to Lyfford, where he joined Col. B. Crofton; the Enemy come to Clody-ford; all Night long the Enemy and We fired at one another; and in the Morning, Mr. Walker took his Post at the long Cawsey
as Commanded by Col. Lundy, leaving Col. Crofton to maintain the Post against the Enemy, which he perfor∣med with good Resolution. The Souldiers having spent all their Ammunition, viz. three Charges of Powder a man, are forced to give way; Major Stroud rallies the Horse in order, to bring off the Foot: The Regiment at the Long-Cawsy was in some dan∣ger, having staid too long, expecting Orders, but got off under the shelter of some Horse, & followed the Army, which was 10000 strong, and make good their Retreat to Derry; Col. Lundy and several of Quality being then at the Head of them. Mr. Walker found the Gates shut against him and his Regiment, and staid all Night with∣out the Gates; next day with much difficulty and some violence upon the Centry they got in: Mr. Walker waited on Col. Lundy, and press'd the taking the Field; but he not being satisfied with the behaviour of his Army the day before, gave Advice of a different Nature, which did not agree with Mr. Walkers Sentiments, who thought himself obliged to stand by his Men that he had brought from their own homes, and not to Expose them again to the Enemy, by dismissing them. April 15. Col. Cunningham and Col. Richards came into the Lough from England, with two Regiments and other Necessaries for Supply of Derry. There were several remarkable Passages might be here inserted, relating to those that came from Drumore and Colrain; but as I would not reproach any, so I can∣not do right to all; and whatever mis-fortune the dif∣ficulty of those places brought upon them, the beha∣viour of such of them as staid in the Garrison of Derry, sets them above Apologys for any miscarriage; for certainly there could not be better Men in the World; and many of those that left us, have been exposed to Censure; but I hope the World will be so just, not to give Characters from things done in such a confusion.
April 17. Upon the News of King James's Army being on their March towards London-derry, Colonel Lundy, our Governour, thought fit to call a Councel; and that Col· Cuningham, and Col. Richards, that were sent from England, to our Assistance, should be Members of it; accordingly they met, and with other Gentlemen equally unacquainted with the Condition of the Town, or the Inclination and Resolution of the People, they make this following Order. Vpon inquiry it appears, That there is not Provision in the Garrison of London-derry, for the present Garrison, and the two Regiments on Board, for above a Week, or Ten Days at most, and it appearing that the Place is not tenable against a well ap∣pointed Army; Therefore it is concluded upon, and resolv'd, That it is not convenient for His Majesties Service, but the contrary, to land the two Regiments under Col. Cuningham & Col. Richards, their Command now on Board in the River of Lough-foyle.— That considering the present Circumstances of Affairs, & the likelihood the Enemy will soon possess themselves of this place, it is thought most convenient, that the principal Officers shall pri∣vately withdraw themselves, as well for their own preservation, as in hopes that the Inhabitants, by a timely Capitulation, may make terms the better with the Enemy; and that this we Judge most convenient for His Majesties Service, as the present State of Affairs now is. After this Resolution, an Instrument was prepar'd to be Subscribed by the Gentlemen of the Councel, and to be sent to King James, who was advanced in Person with his Army as far as St. John's Town; it was recom∣mended with this Encouragement; There was no doubt, but upon surrender of the Town, King James would Grant a Ge∣neral Pardon, and Order Restitution of all that had been Plunder'd from them. Some Gentlemen were influenced by these considerations to subscribe, others did not only refuse but began to conceive some Jealousies of their Governour; and some, tho' they did but guess at their proceedings, ex∣press'd themselves after a ruder manner, threatning to hang both the Governour and his Council. Captain White is
sent out to the King, to receive proposals from him; and it was at the same time agreed with Lieutenant General Hamilton, that he should not march the Army within four Miles of the Town. Notwithstanding which, King James having some confidence given him, that the Town, upon His Majesties approach, would undoubtedly surrender to him; and that the very sight of so formidable an Army would fright them into a Com∣pliance: Upon the 18th. of April Advances, with his Army, before our Walls, with Flying Colours; His Majesty think∣ing it discretion, to use the shelter of a Party of Horse on South-end of Derry-Hill, the more safely to observe what sa∣lutation His Forces had from the Garrison. Orders were given, that none should dare to fire till the King's Demands were first known, by another Messenger to be sent to His Majesty for that purpose; but our men on the Walls, won∣dering to see Lieut. Gen. Hamelton (contrary to his Engage∣ment, not to come within four Miles of the Town) approach∣ing our Walls in such order, they imagining they were by some means or other betray'd, thought it reasonable to consider their own safety, and to keep the Enemy at distance, by firing their Guns upon them, which they accordingly did. The Enemy that were great strangers to this sort of ex∣ercise, upon this could not be kept in any order by their Officers, but some took to their heels, others with less La∣bour could hide themselves, and a great many were kill'd. King James did shew himself in some disorder, and much sur∣prised to find the behaviour of his Army, as well as of the Besieged, so different from the character he had receiv'd of both; some were apprehensive of the King's displeasure upon such a disappointment, and sent Arch-Deacon Hamilton, and Mr. Nevil, to beg His Majesties pardon for having drawn His Majesty into so dangerous and unsuccessful an undertaking, and to signify to him the difficulty of commanding or per∣swading so tumultuous and untractable a Rabble, to any moderation or complyance; but if His Majesty drew off his Army, till those Gentlemen return'd, and brought assu∣rance
of His Majesties presence with it (of which some questi∣on was yet made) they doubted not but they could bring them to a better understanding. This evening King James retired with his Army to St. John's-Town. In the mean time Mr. Muckcridge the Town- Clark sees it absolutely necessary, to give some intimation of Proceedings at the Council of War, which (tho' every mans concern) care was taken not to make too publick, viz. That Colonel Cuningham, his Ships, Men, and Provision should return to England, and all Gentlemen and others in Arms should quit the Garrison, and goe along with him: this dis∣covery occasion'd great uneasiness and disorder in the Town, which had like to have had very ill effects upon the Gover∣nour and some of his Council; it did also add much to the rage and violence of the Garrison, when they heard some wrong had been done my Lord Kingston and his Party, by the indirect measures of some within our Walls; their con∣cern for him being as great as their expectations from him. The Governour and his Council finding themselves of little interest in the Town, and that they could not be further ser∣viceable, &c. thought fit to retire, and not to press the matter further. Some of the Gentlemen left us in all this confusion, and made their escape to the Ships at Kilmore, tho' not with∣out some hazard; for the Souldiers were under great discon∣tent, to find themselves deserted by those that engaged them in the difficulties they were then under, and were not easily kept from expressing it with violence upon some Persons; but it was the care of others to keep them in temper, and from those outrages, as well as to support them against such discourage∣ments. Sir Arthur Royden protested against the proceedings of the Council, and would not have left the Town, but that he was dangerously sick, and was forc'd from us by the advice of his Physitian, and his Friends. Governour Lundy could not so easily make his escape, being conceiv'd more obnoxious than any of the rest, but sound it convenient to keep his Chamber; a Council being appointed,
Mr. Walker and Major Baker meeting him there, desired him to continue his Government; and that he might be assur'd of all the assistance they could give him; but he posi∣tively refused to concern himself any further. The Com∣mission he bore, as well as their respect for his Person, made it a duty in them to contribute all they could to his safety; and therefore, finding him desirous to escape the danger of such a Tumult, they suffered him to disguise himself, and in a sally, for the relief of Culmore, to pass in a Boat with a load of Match on his back, from whence he got to the Shipping. April 19. The Garrison seeing they were deserted, and left without a Governour, and having resolv'd to main∣tain the Town, and to defend it against the Enemy, they considered of some Person they could have confidence in, to direct them in the management of this Affair, and unani∣mously resolv'd to choose Mr. Walker, and Major Baker, to be their Governours dureing the Seige; but these Gentlemen considering the importance, as well as the uncertainty of such an Office, acquainted, by Letter, Col. Cunningham (whose busi∣ness they thought it was to take care of them) with this matter, and desired him to undertake the Charge; but he being obliged, by his instructions, to obey the Orders of Col∣lonel Lundy, thought fit to take other measures. They then accepted the Government of the Garrison. These Gentlemen chose Eight Collonels, and Regimented the men in this order: Col. Walker 15 Companies. Colonel Baker 25 Companies. Col. Crofton 12 Comp. Col. Michelturn 17 Comp. formerly Col. Skivingtons Regiment. Col. Lance 13 Comp. Col. Mountro 13 Comp. formerly Col. Whitneys. Col. Hamil. 14 Comp. Col. Murrey 8 Comp. In all 117 Companies, each Comp. consisting of 60 Men. In all 7020 Men, 341 Officers.
This was our complement after having form'd our selves, as above mentioned; but the Number of Men, Women and Children in the Town, was about Thirty thousand. Upon a Declaration of the Enemy to Receive and Protect all that would desert us, and return to their dwellings, Ten Thou∣sand left us; after that many more grew weary of us, and Seven thousand died of Diseases. The same day our Governours view the Stores, and give other necessary Orders and directions: In the mean time they observe the motion of the Enemy, and that their Guns were so placed, that they could not draw out to their usual place of exercising, therefore they divide the Outline into Eight parts; each Regiment had its own ground, and each Company knew their own Bastion. The Drummers were all enjoyned to quarter in one house, so that on the least notice they repair'd to the respective post of the Com∣pany they belong'd to; and upon all Alarms, without any parademg, all officers and private men came into their own ground and places, without the least disorder or confusion. There were Eighteen Clergy-men in the Town of the Communion of the Church, who in their turns, when they were not in Action, had Prayers and Sermon every day; the Seven Nonconforming Ministers were equally careful of their people, and kept them very obedient and quiet, much different from the behaviour of their Brother Mr. Osborn, who was a spy upon the whole North, imployed by my Lord Tyrconnel, and Mr. Hewson, who was very trouble∣some, and would admit none to fight for the Protestant Re∣ligion till they had first taken the Covenant. After injoyning all parties to forget their distinctions, and to joyn as one man, in defence of the interest of K. William and Q. Mary, and the Protestant Religion, against the Enemies of both; we betake our selves, in the first place, by order, to our several Devotions, and recommend our selves, and the Cause we undertook, to the Protection and Care of the Al∣mighty; for we might then truly say, with the Church in the Liturgy, there is none other that fighteth for us, but only thou,
O God. It did beget some disorder amongst us, & confusion, when we look'd about us, and saw what we were doing; our Enemies all about us and our Friends running away from us; a Garrison we had compos'd of a number of poor peo∣ple, frightned from their own homes, and seem'd more fit to hide themselves, than to face an Enemy; when we consi∣der'd we had no Persons of any Experience in War among us, and those very Persons that were sent to assist us, had so little confidence in the Place, that they no sooner saw it, but they thought fit to leave it: that we had but few Horse to Sally out with, and no Forage; no Engineers to instruct us in our Works; no Fire-works, not as much as a Hand-Granado to annoy the Enemy; not a Gun well mounted in the whole Town; that we had so many Mouths to feed, and not above ten days Provision for them, in the Opinion of our former Governours; that every day several left us, and gave con∣stant intelligence to the Enemy; that they had so many op∣portunities to divide us, and so often endeavour'd it, and to betray the Governours; that they were so Numerous, so Powerful and Well appointed an Army, that in all human probability we could not think our selves in less danger, than the Israelites at the Red Sea. When we considered all this, it was obvious enough what a dangerous undertaking we had ventur'd upon; but the Resolution and Courage of our people, and the necessity we were under, and the great confidence and dependance among us on God Almighty, that he would take care of us, and preserve us, made us overlook all those difficulties. And God was pleased to make us the happy instruments of preserving this Place, and to him we give the Glory, and no one need goe about to undervalue or lessen those he was pleas'd to choose for so great a work; we do allow our selves to be as unfit for it as they can make us, and that God has only Glorified himself in working so great a wonder with his own right hand, and his holy arm getting himself the Victory April 20. A part of the Enemy march'd towards Peny-burn
hill, a place about a Mile distant from the Town N.B.E. on the side of the River, there they pitch'd their Tents, & by that means hinder'd all passage to, & correspondence with, Culmore. We sent Mr. Bennet out of the Garrison, with Orders to go to England, and to give account of our Resolutions to defend the Town against the Enemy. Our men were order'd to fire after him, that the Enemy might think he had deserted us. This day my Lord Strabane came up to our Walls, make∣ing us many Proposals, and offering his Kings Pardon, Pro∣tection and Favour, if we would surrender Town; but these fine words had no place with the Garrison. At that ve∣ry time of his Capitulating with us, we observ'd the Enemy using that opportunity to draw their Canon to a conveni∣ent stand, we therefore desired his Lordship to withdraw, otherwise we would make bold to fire at his Lordship; his Lordship continued in his Complements, till we plainly told him we would never deliver the Town to any but K. William and Q. Mary, or their order. My Lord having ended all his Insinuations, found himself at last obliged to retire. Several Trumpets were likewise sent to us from the Enemy, but with as little success. April 21. The Enemy placed a Demi-culverin, 180 Per∣ches distant from the Town, E. B. N. on the other side the water: they play'd at the houses in the Town, but did little or no mischief only to the Market-house. This day our Men Sallied out, as many as pleased, and what Officers were at leasure, not in any commendable Or∣der, yet they killed above 200 of the Enemies Souldiers, be∣sides Mamow the French General, and several other Officers whose Names you will fid in the annexed List. A party of Horse came with great Fury upon the Salliers, and forced their retreat, which they made good with the loss of four private Men, and one Lieutenant Mac. Phedris, whom our Men brought off; and having leisure and more concern then upon us for the loss, then afterwards on such occasi∣ons; we buried them with some Ceremony. We had at
this time 50 Horse Commanded by Col. Murry; upon whom they press'd so hard at first, that some of his Horse were bea∣ten to the very Gates; so that Mr. Walker found it necessary to mount one of the Horses and make them rally, and to Re∣lieve Col. Murry, whom he saw surrounded with the Enemy, and with great Courage laying about him. In this Action we took three pair of Colours. April 23. The besiegers planted four Demi-culverins in the lower end of Mr. Strongs Orchard, near 80 Perches distant from the Town, opposite to Ship-key-Street: these playing incessantly, hurt several People in the Houses, battered the Walls and Garrets, so that none could Lodge safely above Stairs. The besieged make due returns to their Firing from the Bastions, kill'd Lieut. Fitz Patrick, Lieut. Col. O Neale, two Serjeants, and several Souldiers; and besides these, two Friars in their Habits, to the great Grief of the Enemy, that the Blood of those Holy Men should be spilt by such an He∣retical Rabble, as they call the besieged. April 25. They plac'd their Mortar-pieces in the said Or∣chard, and from thence play'd a few small Bombs, which did little hurt to the Town, all of them lighting in the Streets, except one which kill'd an old Woman in a Garret; from the same place they threw afterwards many larger Bombs, the first of which fell into a House while several Officers were at Dinner; it fell upon the Bed of the Room they were in, but did not touch any of them; forced into a lower Room, and kill'd the Landlord, and broke down one side of the House, and made a large passage for the Guests to come out at instead of the Doors it had choaked up. April 28. The besieged made another Sally, and killed several of the Enemy at Penyburn-Hill, but were forced to Retreat, being pressed by the Enemies Horse, who charged us on all sides. In this Action, we lost only two Men, had eight or ten wounded, which in few days recovered, and were fit for Service. This day by a shot from one of our Bastions, the Enemies Gunner was kill'd, and one of his Guns broken.
May 5. This Night the Besiegers draw a Trench cross the Wind-Mill Hill, from the Bog to the River, and there begin a Battery; from that they endeavour'd to Annoy our Walls, but they were too strong for the Guns they us'd, and our Men were not afraid to advise them to save all that Labour and Expence; that they always kept the Gates open, and they might use that Passage if they pleas'd, which was wider than any Breach they could make in the Walls. May 6. The Besieged fearing that Battery might incommode that part of the Town nearest to it, consult how to put a stop to their further proceeding in that work; Mr. Walker draws a Detachment out of each Company, of Ten men, and after putting them into the best Order their Impatience could allow, he Sallies out at the Head of them (with all imaginable Silence) at Ferry-Key Gate, at four of the Clock in the Morn∣ing. One part of them beat the Enemies Dragoons from the Hedges, while the other possesses their Trenches. The Dispute was soon over, and the Enemy, thô a very considerable De∣tachment, are so pressed by the forwardness of our Men, and discouraged at the sight of so many lying in their Blood, that they fled away, and left us the Ground we contended for, and some Booty, besides the plunder of the Dead. The Salliers in this Action kill'd Two hundred of their Men, most of which were shot through the Breast or Head; Five hundred were Wounded, Three hundred of them within few days died of their Wounds, as we were informed by Messengers, and the Prisoners we took afterwards. The account of the Officers kill'd, or taken Prisoners in this Action, you will find in the Bill annexed. Our side lost Three men, and had only Twenty wounded. At this time we took Five pair of Colours. We sent a Drummer to desire the Enemy to send an Officer with 14 Men to bury their Dead, which they did perform very negligently, scarce covering their Bodies with Earth. After this performance, the Enemies want of Courage, and our want of Horse occasion'd, that some Weeks produced
but little of Action, except Skirmishes; in which Captain Noble was very active and successful; kills several of their Officers, and finds Letters about them that afforded some Intelligence, and particularly instructed us about the Surren∣der of Culmore; but upon what Conditions, and for how much Mony, we could not understand. Our Sallies many times began but with small parties; Capt. Noble, and sometimes other Officers, when they saw the Enemy make an approach, wou'd run out with about Ten or Twelve men at their Heels, and Skirmish'd a while with them: When the Besieged saw them Engaged, and in any danger, they issued out in greater numbers to their Relief, and always came off with great Execution on the Enemy, and with very little loss to themselves. In all these Sallies we lost none of any Note, but Lieute∣nant Douglas and Captain Cuningham, whom the Enemy took Prisoner, and after Quarter given, basely Murdred. They did not want being reproach'd with so signal an Instance of their Cruelty and breach of Faith, neither did they want Impu∣dence to deny it by the addition of many bloody Oaths and Protestations; but it was too evident by the Testimony of their own Officers and Souldiers, that were afterwards our Prisoners. But this sort of proceeding was very usual with them, and agreeable to an account we had of their obligation by Oath and Resolutions, not to keep Faith with us, and to break whatever Articles were given us: Which a Prisoner with us, (troubled in Conscience, that he had engaged himself with so wicked and perfidious Men) dis∣cover'd to us. We were convinced of the Truth of it by some Examples they gave us after this: When they hung out a White Flag to invite us to a Treaty, Mr. Walker ventur'd out to come within hearing of my Lord Lowth and Colonel O Neale, and in his passage had an hundred Shot fired at him; he got the shelter of a House, and upbraiding them with this Trea∣chery, bid them order their Men to be quiet or he wou'd
order all the Guns on the Walls to fire at them; They deny'd they knew any thing of it: And this was all the satisfaction to be expected from persons of such a Principle. At another time the Enemy desired one White might have leave to come to them; the Besieged sent him in a little Boat, with two Men, upon Parol, which they broke very dishonourably, keeping both the Men and Boat with them. The loss of the Boat was considerable to us, for the Gentlemen that left us took all our Boats, and left them to the Sea and Wind, and this was the only Boat we had remaining. The Enemy remove their Main Body from St. Johnstown, and pitch their Tents upon Bely ugry-Hill, about two Miles distant from Derry S.S.W. They place Guards on all sides of the Town, so that the Besieged found it impossible to receive or convey any Intelligence, and great difficulty to come to the Wells for Water, which they often Fought for, and cost some of them their Blood. One Gentleman had a Bottle broke at his Mouth by a Shot; yet the Water of the Town was so muddy and troubled with our continual-Firing, and so many going to it, that we were forced to run those hazards. June 4. The Besiegers make an Attack at the Wind-Mill Works, with a Body of Foot and Horse; the Horse they divi∣ded into three Squadrons, and Assaulted us at the Rivers side, it being Low water; the Foot Attack the rest of our Line. The Front of the Horse was composed of Gentlemen that had bound themselves by an Oath, that they wou'd mount our Line; they were Commanded by Captain Butler, second Son to my Lord Montgarret. Our Men place themselves within our Line in three Ranks, so advantageously that one Rank was always ready to march up and relieve the other, and discharge successively upon the Enemy, which (thô 'tis strange how they could think otherwise) was great surprize and astonishment to them; for they it seems expected we should make but one single Volley, and then they cou'd fall in upon us. Their Foot had Fagots laid before them for a defence against our Shot; they and the Horse began with a loud Huzza, which
was seconded from all parts of their Camp with most dreadful shrieks and howlings of a numerous Rabble that attended the E∣nemy. The Fagot-Men are not able to stand before our Shot, but are forced to quit their New defence and Run for it: Capt. Butler tops our work, which was but a dry Bank of 7 foot high at the Water side, and thirty of his Sworn party of Horse follow him. Our Men wondred to find they had spent so many Shot, and that none of them Fell: But Capt. Crooke observed they had Armour on and then commanded to Fire at their Horses, which turn'd to so good account▪ that but three of these bold Men with much difficulty made their Escape. We wonder'd the Foot did not (according to Custom) run faster, till we took notice that in their Retreat they took the Dead on their backs, and so pre∣serv'd their own Bodies from the remainder of our Shot, which was more Service than they did when alive. The Enemy in this Action lost 400 of their Fighting Men, most of their Officers were kill'd Captain Butler was taken Prisoner, and several others, which are mentioned in the List. We lost on our side six private Men, and one Captain Maxwell: two of the Men were kill'd by a Shot of a great Gun from the other side the Water, opposit to the Wind-Mill Works. This Night the Enemy from Strong-Orchard play their Bombs which were 273 pound weight apiece, and contained several pounds of Powder in the Shell; they plowed up our Streets, and broke down our Houses, so that there was no passing the Streets nor staying within Doors, but all flock to the Walls, and the Remotest parts of the Town, where we con∣tinued very safe, while many of our sick were killed being not able to leave their Houses: They plied the Besieged so close with great Guns in the Day time, and Bombs in the Night▪ and somtimes in the Day, that they could not enjoy their rest, but were hurry'd from place to place, and tyer'd into faintness and diseases, which destroy'd many of the Gari∣son, which was reduced to 6185 men the 15 of this Month; these Bombs were some advantage to us, on one account, for being under great want of Fuel, they supply'd us plentiful∣ly
from the Houses they threw down, and the Timber they broke for us. June 7. Three Ships came up to Killmore Frt, and fired at the Castle, and attempted coming up the River; but one of them unfortunately run aground, and lay some time at the Mercy of the Enemies Shot, and so much on her side, she could not make any return; but at length with some pleasure we saw her get off, and, as we believed, without much loss or damage. June 15. We discovered a Fleet of 30 Sail of Ships in the Lough, which we believed came from England for our relief, but we could not propose any method to get intelligence from them, and we did fear it was impossible they could get to us; and the Enemy now begin to watch us more narrowly. They raise Batteries opposite to the Ships, and line both sides of the River with great numbers of Fire locks. They draw down their Guns to Charles-Fort, a place of some strength upon the Narrow part of the River, where the Ships were to pass; here they contrived to place a Boom of Timber, joyned by Iron Chains, and fortified by a Cable of 12 Inches thick twisted round it; They made this Boom first of Oak, but that could not float, and was soon broke by the force of the water: Then they made one of Firr-beams which answered their purpose better; it was fastned at one end through the Arch of a Bridg, at the other by a piece of Timber forced into the ground and fortified with a piece of stone work. This account, as we had it from the Prisoners, did much trouble us, and scarce left us any hopes; We made several signs to the Ships from the Steeple, and they to us from their Ships, but with very little information to either. At last a Messenger got to us, one Roch, from Major General Kirk, who gor to the Water-side over-against us, and then swam cross the River; he gave us an account of the Ships, Men, Provision and Arms in them for our relief; the great concern of the Major General for us, and his care and desire to get with his Ships up to the Town. He sent another Messenger along with
this, one Crumy a Scotch man, to give us this account, and to know the Condition of our Garison, but he was taken pri∣soner: There was soon an understanding between him and the Enemy, he is instructed to frame a Message much dif∣fering from the other; they hang out a white Flag, invite∣ing us to a parlee; they tell us we are under great mistakes about the Major General, and our expectation of relief from England, that they were all there in confusion, and that we might have leave to inform our selves further from the Mes∣senger they had taken, either in private or publick: We sent some to that purpose, but they soon discovered the cheat, and re∣turned to us with other particular accounts of his Treachery. We received further intelligence in July by a little Boy, that with great Ingenuity made two dispatches to us from the Major General at Inch. One Letter he brought ty'd in his Garter, another at his second coming within a Cloth But∣ton. We sent our first answer made up within a piece of a Bladder, in the shape of a Suppositor, and the same way ap∣plied to the Boy; Our second Answer he carry'd within the folding of his Breeches, and falling among the Enemy, for fear of a discovery he swallowed the Letter, and after some short confinement and endeavour to extort some thing from him, he made his escape again to the Major General. Major General Kirk's Letter to Mr. Walker. Sir, I Have received yours by the way of Inch: I writ to you Sun∣day last, that I would endeavour all means Imaginable for your relief, and find it impossible by the River, which made me send a party to Inch, where I am going my self to try if I can beat off their Camp, or divert them, so that they shall not press you. I have sent Officers, Ammunition, Arms, great Guns, &c. to Iniskillin, who have 3000 Foot and 1500 Horse, and a Regiment of Dragoons, that has promised to come to their relief, and at the same time I will attack the Enemy by Inch; I expect 6000 Men from England every Minute, they having bin Shipt
these 8 days; I have Stores and Victuals for you, and am re∣solved to relieve you. England and Scotland are in a good posture, and all things very well setled; be good Husbands of your Victuals, and by Gods help we shall overcome these Barbarous People: Let me hear from you as often as you can, and the Mes∣senger shall have what reward he will. I have several of the Enemy has deserted to me, who all assure me they cannot stay long: I hear from Iniskillin the Duke of Barwick is beaten, I pray God it be true, for then nothing can hinder them joyning you or me. Sir, To Mr. George Walker. Your faithful Servant, J. Kirke. But to return to our Story, the Besieged send many a longing look towards the Ships, their Allowance being very small, as you may see by the Account of Allowances out of the Store: They build a Boat of 8 Oars a side, and Man it well, with intent to make to the Fleet, and give the Major General an account of the sad Condition we were in; they set out with the best of our Wishes and Prayers but were forced to return, it being impossible they could indure the Showers of Shot that were poured in upon them from each side the River. June 18. Captain Noble went up the River, and took twen∣ty Men along with him, with a design to Rob the Fish-House, but was prevented by Alarum from the Enemies Boats; however he Engaged them, killed a Lieutenant, one Ensign, and five private Men, took fourteen Prisoners and both their Boats. The Boats we offer'd to return, and to give the best Prisoner we had, for leave to send a Messenger to the Ships; but we could not prevail: We had agreed for five Hundred pound for L. Col. Tlbot's Ransom, (commonly called Wicked Will) we profer'd him his liberty, and to remit the Mony on the same score, but we could not obtain this favour upon any Terms: Soon after the Lieutenant Col. died of his Wounds, and we lost the benefit of our bargain; Tho' we took all Imaginable care to keep him alive, permitted him his Chirurgeon and Diet from the Enemy, at times agreed on, Favours that we
allow'd all the Prisoners, when we were starving our selves, which we did not put any great value on, but that the Enemy so ill deserv'd them. At this time Governor Baker is very dangerously ill, and Col. Michelburn is chosen and appointed to assist Governor Walker, that when one Cōmanded in Sallies the other might take care of the Town; and if one shou'd fall the Town might not be left without a Government, and to the hazard of new Elections. June 24. or thereabouts, Conrad de Rosen, Marshal General of the Irish Forces, is received into the Enemies Camp; and finding how little the Enemy had prevail'd against us, expressed him self with great Fury against us, and swore by the Belly of God, He would demolish our Town and bury us in its Ashes, putting all to the Sword, without consideration of Age or Sex, and wou'd study the most exquisite Torments to lengthen the misery and pain of all he found obstinate, or active in oppo∣sing his Commands and Pleasure: But these Threatnings, as well as his Promises, in which he was very eloquent and ob∣liging▪ had very little power with us; God having under all our Difficulties establish'd us with a Spirit and Resolution above all Fear or Temptation to any mean Compliances, we having devoted our Lives to the defence of our City, our Re∣ligion, and the Interest of King William and Queen Mary. For fear any one should contrive Surrendring the Town, or move it to the Garrison▪ the Governour made an Order, That no such thing should be mention'd upon pain of Death. Every day some or other Deserted the Garrison, so that the Enemy receiv'd constant Intelligence of our proceedings. This gave some trouble and made us remove our Ammunition very often, and contrive many other Amusements. Our Iron Ball is now all spent, and instead of them we make Balls of Brick, cast over with Lead, to the weight and size of our Iron-Ball. The Gunners did not pretend to be great Artists, yet they were very industrious and scarce spent a Shot without doing some remarkable Execution. The Marshal de Rosen orders 3 Mortar pieces and several Pieces of Ordnance against the Windmill side of the Town, as also two
Culverins opposite to Butchers-Gate; He runs a Line out of Bog-street up within ten Perches of the half Bastion of that Gate, in order to prepare Matters for laying and springing a Mine; He made approaches to our Line, designing to hinder the Relief of our Out guards, and to give us trouble in fetching Water from Colum kills Well; He defends his Line with a strong Guard in hopes to seize our Out-works, if we shou'd chance to be negligent in our Posts and neglect keeping good Guards. By the Contrivance of our Governour and Colonel Michelburn, and the directions and care of Captain Shomberg, or rather being instructed by the Working, Motions and Example of the Enemy, as well as we could observe them; We Counter∣mine the Enemy before the Butchers-Gate, the Governour con∣trives a Blind to preserve our Work, from the Enemies Battery. The Enemy Fired continually from their Trenches, and we make them due returns with sufficient damage to them; for few days passed, but some of the choice and most forward of their Men fell by our Arms and Firing. June 30. At ten of the clock at nght my L. Clancarty at the Head of a Regiment, and with some Detachments, possesses himself of our Line, and enters some Miners in a low Cellar under the half Bastion. Capt. Noble, Capt. Dunbar and several other Gentlemen fally by Order at the Bishops-Gate, and creep along the Wall till they came very near the Enemies Guards; our Men receive their Firing quietly, til they got to a right dince, and then thundred upon them. Our Case-Shot from the Bastion and small Shot off the Walls second the Salliers Firing so effectually, that his Lord∣ship was forc'd to quit his Post, and hasten to the main Body of the Enemy, and to leave his Miners and an hundred of his best Men dead upon the place; besides, several Officers and Soul∣diers were wounded▪ and died of their Wounds some days after this Action, as we were informed. We were often told, That some great thing was to be perform'd by this Lord; and they had a Prophecy among them, That a Clancarty should knock at the Gates of Derry; the credulity and superstition of his Coun∣try, with the vanity of so brave an Attempt, and some good
Liquor, easily warm'd him to this bold Undertaking; But we see how little value is to be put on Irish Prophesies, or Courage so supported. June 30. Governor Baker dies, his death was a sensible loss to us, and generally lamented, being a Valiant person; in all his Acti∣ons among us shew'd the greatest Honour, Courage and Con∣duct, and would it suit a design of a Journal, might fill a great share of this Account with his Character. And indeed there were so many great things done by all our Officers and Men, and so often, that 'tis impossible to ac∣count them all; but certainly never People in the World be∣haved themselves better, and they cannot want mentioning upon other occasion, where it may be more to their advantage than to fill this Paper with their Story. About this time Lieutenant Gen. Hamilton offers Conditions to the Garrison, and they seem to hearken to them▪ till they had us'd that opportunity to search for Provision to support the great Necessity of the Garrison, which was now brought to that extremity, that they were forc'd to feed upon Horse flesh, Dogs, Cats, Rats and Mice, Greaves of a year old, Tallow, and Starch, of which they had good quantities as also salted and dried Hides, &c. yet they unanimously resolv'd to eat the Irish, and then one another, rather than surrender to any but their own King William and Queen Mary. Our Answer to the Lieutenant General was, That we much wonder'd he shou'd ex∣pect we cou'd place any confidence in him, that had so unwortily broke Faith with our King; That he was once generously trusted, thô an Enemy, yet betray'd his Trus, and we cou'd not believe that he had learn'd more sincerity in an Irish Camp. General Rosen sends us a Letter to this effect, That if we did not deliver the Town to him by Six of the Clock in the Afternoon on the 1st day of July, according to Lieutenant Gen. Hamilton's Proposals, he wou'd dispatch his Orders as far as Balishanny, Charlimont, Belfast, and the Barony of Inishowen, and rob all Protected, as well as Vnprotected Protestants, that were either related to us, or of our Faction, and that they shou'd be driven
under the Walls of Derry, where they should perish, if not reliev'd by the Besieged. He threatned, to burn and lay waste all our Country, if there should appear the least probability of any Troops coming for our Relief: Yet, if the Garrison would become Loyalists (as they termed it) and Surrender the Town on any tolerable Con∣ditions, he would protect them from all Injuries and give them his Favour. But the Besieged receive all these Proposals with contempt and some indignation, which did produce some heat and disorder in the Mareschal. Among the Bombs thrown into Town, there was one dead Shell, in which was a Letter declaring to the Souldiers the Proposals made by the Lieutenant General; for they imagined them Strangers to their Condescensions, and that their Officers wou'd not communicate such things to them. Copies also of these Proposals were conveyed into Town by Villains, who disperse them about the Town, but all to no purpose; for they will not entertain the least thought of Surrendring, and it would cost a mans Life to speak of it, it was so much abhor'd. July 2. The Enemy drive the poor Protestants, according to their threatning, under our Walls, Protected and Unprotected, Men, Women and Children, and under great distresses. Our Men at first did not understand the meaning of such a Crowd, but fearing they might be Enemies, Fired upon them; we were troubled when we found the mistake, but it supported us to a great degree, when we found that none of them were touch'd by our Shot, which by the direction of Providence (as if every Bullet had its Commission what to do) spared them, and found out and kill'd three of the Enemy, that were some of those that drove the poor People into so great a danger. There were some Thousands of them, and they did move great Compassion in us, but warm'd us with new rage and fury against the Enemy, so that in sight of their Camp we imme∣diately erect a Gallows, and signified to them we were resolved to hang their Friends that were our Prisoners, if they did not suffer these poor People to return to their own Houses. We send to the Enemy, that the Prisoners might have Priests
to prepare them after their own Methods for death; but none came. We upbraid them with breach of Promises, and the Prisoners detect their barbarity, declaring, They could not blame us to put them to death, seeing their People exercis'd such Se∣verity and Cruelty upon our poor Friends, that were under their Protections. They desired leave from the Governor▪ to write to L.G. Hamilton; they had a much better opinion of him than we cou'd be perswaded into; yet we allow a Messenger to carry the following Letter to him from their Prisoners. My Lord, UPon the hard dealing the Protected (as well as other Protestants) have met withal in being sent under the Walls, you have so incens'd the Governor and others of this Garrison, that we are all condemn'd by a Court Martial to dye to morrow, unless those poor People be withdrawn. We have made application to Marshal General de Rosen; but having received no Answer, we make it our Request to you (as knowing you are a person that does not delight in shedding innocent Blood) that you will represent our condition to the Martial General. The Lives of 20 Prisoners lye at stake, and therefore require your diligence and care. We are all willing to die (with our Swords in our hands) for His Majesty; but to suffer like Malefactors is hard, nor can we lay our Blood to the charge of the Garrison, the Governor and the rest having used and treated us with all Civility imaginable. We remain To L.G. Hamilton. Your most dutiful and dying Friends, Netervill, Writ by another Hand, he himself has lost the Fingers of his Right-hand. E. Butler, G. Aylmor, —Mac Donnel, —Darcy, &c In the Name of all the rest. The Lieutenant General, to shew his great concern for his Friends, returns this Answer to our Prisoners Letter. Gentlemen, IN Answer to yours; What those poor People are like to suffer, they may thank themselves for, being their own fault; which they may prevent by accepting the Conditions have been offer'd them; and if you suffer in this it cannot be help'd, but shall be reveng'd on many Thousands of those Peo∣ple (as well innocent as others) within or without that City. Yours R. Hamilton. But however the sight of our Gallows and the Importunity of some Friends of those that were to Suffer upon them, pre∣vailed upon the Lieutenant General: So that July 4. the poor Protestants have leave to repair to their several Habitations; we
took down the Gallows, and order'd the Prisoners to their usual Apartments. Our Garrison now consisted of 5709 Men, and to lessen our number yet more, we crowded 500 of our useless People among the Protestants under the Walls, who pass'd undis∣cover'd with them, thô the Enemy suspected the design; and to distinguish them, they pretended of finding them out by the smell. We also got into our Garrison some Effectual Men out of their number: They were in a most miserable condition, yet dreaded nothing more than our pity of them, and willingness to receive them; begging of us on their knees, not to take them into the Town, but chose rather to perish under our Walls, than to hazard us within them. The Governour has several Intimations given him by a Friend in the Enemies Camp, That he should look to himself, that some mischief was intended him. Soon after this he understood some Jealousy was entertain'd among the Souldiers, That he had great quantity of Provisions hid in his House. Some of the Garrison improv'd this to that degree, that there was great dan∣ger of a Mutiny among the Men, and that he then began to re∣member the Caution was given; but by his Instructions to a Souldier, that was to pretend, he himself had the same Suspicion; it was contriv'd that the House was privately search'd, and their Curiosity being satisfied, they return to the good Opinion of their Governour. He observ'd likewise, that the Enemy had endeavour'd to in∣sinuate to the Garrison, That he was to betray the Town to King James, and was to be highly prefer'd for the Service. This put them in mind of a Message that one Mr. Cole brought to Mr. Walker in the beginning of May last, and however it was then supprest, the Story is now reviv'd, and the Governour in some danger. —Mr. Cole being taken by the Enemy, and continuing their Prisoner for some time, is at last admitted to some discourse with the Lieutenant General, who enquired particularly, what sort of person Mr. Walker was; who he was most intimate with? Mr. Cole (among several of Mr. Walker's Friends) at last names himself, hoping by this means to be employ'd on a Message to him and to obtain his liberty. The Lieutenant General askd,
Whether he wou'd do Service for K. James, and carry some Pro∣posals he had orders to make to Mr. Walker? He told he wou'd; and upon this immediately he has a Pass given him, and is dispatch'd upon a Message to Mr. Walker. Mr. Cole being got safe into the Town, was receiv'd with great Joy, and so well pleas'd with his liberty that he forgot his Business, only casu∣ally mentions it to some of the Garrison, with other discourse. Mr. Walker (after this) meeting several of them, they Saluted him by some great Names and Titles. Mr. Walker easily saw the danger of this, and finding it was occasion'd by Discourses of Mr. Cole, he order'd him immedi∣ately to be confin'd; and being examin'd, he unriddles the My∣stery, and gave all People satisfaction, so that they remain'd in no more doubt of their Governour. But under these, and many other such like difficulties, the Governour (not without some trouble and industry) reassum'd his Credit with the Garrison, which God was pleased to preserve to him in spight of all the inventiōs and designs to the contrary. From our Works we cou'd talk with the Enemy; several of our Men gave account of Discourses with the Irish, That they express'd great prejudice and hatred of the French, Cursing those Damn'd Fellows that walked in Trunks, (meaning their Jack-Boots) that had all Preferments in the Army that fell, and took the Bread out of their Mouths, and they believ'd wou'd have all the Kingdom to themselves at last. July 8. The Garrison now is reduced to 5520 Men. July 13. The Garrison reduced to—5313 Men. July 17. The Garrison is reduced to—5114 Men. July 22. The Garrison reduced to—4973 Men. July 25. The Garrison reduced to —4892 Men. This Day the Besieged made another Sally, which was per∣formed after this manner: The day before we had a Council of War, and all sworn to Secresie; the result of which was, That the net day at Three in the Morning 200 Men should Sally out of Bishops-Gate, 200 Men at Butchers-Gate, and 1100 should be ready within the Ravelin for a Reserve. Our design was to bring in some of the Enemies Cattle; they surprized
the Enemy in their Trenches. One Regiment draws up against them in good Order, but had only three of their Matches lighted; we came upon them over against Butchers-Gate and kill'd 300 of their Men, besides Officers. The Execution had been much greater, but many of our Men being much weak∣ned with Hunger were not able to pursue them, some falling with their own blows. We return'd without any purchase of Cattle, but were advis'd to a more easie Experiment; having one Cow left we ty'd her to a Stake, and set Fire to her. We had hopes given us, that by the Cry and Noise she wou'd make, the Enemies Cattle would be disturbed and come to her relief; and they began to move and set up their Tails, so that we hoped to have gain'd our point; but the Cow got loose, and turn'd to no account, only the danger of losing her. July 27. The Garrison is reduced to 4456 Men, and under the greatest extremity for want of Provision, which does appear by this Account taken by a Gentleman in the Garrison, of the price of our Food.   l. s. d.   Horse-flesh sold for 0 1 8 per pound. fatned by eating the Bodies of the slain Irish. A Quarter of a Dog 0 5 6 A Dogs-Head 0 2 6 A Cat 0 4 6 A Rat 0 1 0 A Mouse 0 0 6 A small Flook taken in the River, not to be bought for Mo∣ny, or purchased under the rate of a quantity of Meal. A pound of Greaves 0 1 0 A pound of Tallow 0 4 0 A pound of salted Hides   1 0 A quart of Horse blood 0 1 0 A Horse-pudding 0 0 6 An handful of Sea wreck   0 2 of Chick-weed   0 1 A quart of Meal when found,   1 0 We were under so great Necessity, that we had nothing left unless we could prey upon one another: A certain Fat Gen∣tleman
conceived himself in the greatest danger, and fancy∣ing several of the Garrison lookt on him with a greedy Eye, thought fit to hide himself for three days. Our drink was nothing but Water, which we paid very dear for, and cou'd not get without great danger; We mixt in it Ginger and An∣niseeds, of which we had great plenty; Our necessity of Eating the Composition of Tallow and Starch, did not only Nourish and Support us, but was an Infallible Cure of the Looseness; and recovered a great many that were strangely reduced by that Distemper, and preserved others from it. Note, That in the midst of this Extremity, the Spirit and Cou∣rage of the Men was so great, that they were often heard dis∣course confi∣dently and with some An∣ger contend, Whether they should take their Debentures in Ireland or in France, when alas! they cou'd not promise themselves 12 hours Life. The Governour being with good Reason apprehensive, that these Discouragements might at length overcome that Reso∣lution the Garrison had so long continued, considers of all imaginable methods to support them, and finding in himself still that confidence. That God would not (after so long and miraculous a Preservation) suffer them to be a prey to their Enemies, Preaches in the Cathedral, and encourages their Constancy, and endeavours to establish them in it, by re∣minding them of several Instances of Providence given them since they first came into that place, and of what consideration it was to the Protestant Religion at this time; and that they need not doubt, but that God would at last deliver them from the Difficulties they were under. July 30. About an hour after Sermon being in the midst of our Extremity, we saw some Ships in the Lough make towards us, and we soon discovered they were the Ships Major General Kirk had sent us, according to his promise, When we could hold out no longer, that he would be sure to relieve us, to the ha∣zard of himself, his Men and his Ships. The Mountjoy of Derry, Captain Browning Commander, the Phoenix of Colrain, Captain Douglas Master; Being both Loaden with Provision, were Convoy'd by the Dartmouth-Frigat. The Enemy Fired most desperately upon them from the Fort of Culmore, and both Sides the River; and they made sufficient returns, and with the greatest Bravery. The Mount∣joy made a little stop at the Boom, occasioned by her Rebound after striking and breaking it, so that she was run a-ground;
Upon this the Enemy set up the loudest Huzza's, and the most dreadful to the besieged that ever we heard: Fired all their Guns upon her, and were preparing their Boats to Board her; Our Trouble is not to be expressed at this dismal Pros∣pect, but by great Providence firing a Broad side, the shock loosned her so that she got clear, and passed their Boom. Cap∣tain Douglas all this while was Engaged, and the Dartmouth gave them very warm Entertainment: At length the Ships got to us, to the unexpressible Joy and Transport of our distres∣sed Garrison, for we only reckon'd upon two days Life, and had only nine lean Horses left, and among us all one Pint of Meal to each Man; Hunger and the Fatigue of War had so prevail'd among us, that of 7500 Men Regimented, The besieged had only 80 men slain by the Enemy. we had now alive but about 4300, whereof at least one fourth part were rendered unserviceable. This brave Undertaking added to the great Success God had blessed us with in all our Attempts, so discourag'd the Ene∣my, that on the last of July, they ran away in the Night time, rob'd and burnt all before them for several Miles, leaving no∣thing with the Country People, but what they hid the Night before, in which their Care was so great, that Provision grew very plentiful after it. In the next Morning our Men, after refreshment with a pro∣per share of our new Provisions, went out to see what was become of the Enemy; they saw them on their March, and pursued them a little too far, so that the Rear-Guard of the Enemies Horse turned upon them, and killed seven of our Men. They encamped at Strabane, but hearing of the Defeat of their Forces under L. General Maccarty, by the Innis killing Men, they removed their Camp, The besieged took above 2000 Arms from the Ene∣my, besides Mo∣ney and Cloths, &c· and thought fit to make some haste to get farther off; they broke into pieces four of their great Guns, and threw twelve Cartloads of Arms and Ammu∣nition into the River. Thus after 105 days, being close besieged by near 20000 Men constantly supplied from Dublin, God Almighty was pleas∣sed in our greatest Extremity to send Relief, to the Admirati∣on
and Joy of all good People, and to the great disappoint∣ment of so powerful and inveterate an Enemy; who were concerned in point of Interest, as well as Reputation to have Rendered themselves Masters of that Town. The Enemy lost between eight or nine thousand Men before our Walls, and a hundred of their best Officers, according to the best Computation we could make of both, by the Information of the Prisoners we took, most of these fell by the Sword, the rest of Fevers and Flux, and the French Pox, which was very remarkable on the Bodies of several of their dead Officers and Soldiers. We are now under some Impatience, to see Major-General Kirk, under God and the King, our Deliverer. Aug. 1. The Governor orders C. White, C. Dobbin, C. J. Ha∣milton. Capt. Jenny and Mr. Jo. Fox, both Clergy-men, to wait on the Major-General at Inch, to give him an account of the raising the Siege, and to carry him our Thanks, and desire him to come and receive the Garrison. The next day the Major-General sent to us Col. Steward, and Col. Richards the Engineer, to Congratulate our Deliverance. On Sunday the Major-General came into the Town, and was received by the Governor, and the whole Garrison, with the greatest Joy and Acclamations. The Governor presents him with the Keys, but he wou'd not receive them. The next day the Governor (with several of his Officers) Dined with the Major-General at Inch; he complemented the Major-General with his Regi∣ment, That after doing the King all the Service in his power, he might return to his own Profession: But the Major-Gene∣ral desired him to dispose of it as he pleased, and accordingly he gave it to Captain White, as a mark of his Respect, and the Gentleman's known Merit. Upon this, we call a Council at Derry, the Governor is prevailed on to go to the King, and to carry an Address from the Garrison. The Garrison is now form'd, and of eight Regi∣ments made into six. After assurance from the Major-General, of his Care and Favor to his Men, and particularly to his own Regiment, he took leave of them and embarked for England.
To the Most Excellent Majesty of WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, &c. The humble ADDRESS of the Governors, Officers, Clergy, and other Gentlemen, in the City and Garrison of LONDONDERRY. WE the most Dutiful and Loyal Subscribers of this Address, (out of a deep sense of our late miserable Estate and Condi∣tion) do hereby return our due Acknowledgments to Almighty God, and to Your Sacred Majesty, and, under you, to the indefatigable Care of Major-General Kirk, for our unexpected Relief by Sea, in spight of all the opposition of our industrious, but bloody and implacable Ene∣mies; which Relief was no less wonderfully, than seasonably, convey∣ed to us, and that, at the very nick of time, when we (who survived many thousands that died here of Famine during the Siege) were just ready to be cut off, and perish, by the hands of barbarous, cruel, and inhuman Wretches; who no sooner saw us delivered, and that they could not compass their Wicked Designs against this Your Majesties City, and our Lives, (for which they thirsted) immediately set all the Country round us on fire, after having plundered, robbed, and strip∣ped all the Protestants therein, as well those Persons they themselves granted Protections to, as others: We do therefore most sincerely re∣joice with all our Souls, and bless God for all his Singular and Repeat∣ed Mercies and Deliverances; and do for ever Adore the Divine Providence for Your Majesties rightful and peaceable accession to the Imperial Crown of these Kingdoms (the proclaiming of which was justly celebrated in these Parts with Vniversal Joy;) and we do with all humble Submission present to Your Sacred Majesty our unfeigned Loyalty, the most valuable Tribute we can give, or Your Majesty re∣ceive from us. And since the same Providence has (through much dif∣ficulty)
made us so happy as to be Your Subjects, we come in the like humility to lay our selves intirely at Your Royal Feet, and do most heartily and resolvedly offer and engage our Lives and Fortunes to Your Service. And further, we do most unanimously join in a firm and unchangeable Vow and Resolution of improving all occasions of becoming Serviceable to Your Majesty, in what Station soever it shall please God and your Majesty to place us; and will expose our selves to all Hazards and Extremities to serve Your Majesty against the Common Enemy. From all which Promises, Vows and Services, we and every of us promise (without any Exception or Reserve) not to recede unto our Lives end. In testimony of all which, we have here∣unto subscribed our Names at Londonderry this 29th day of July, Anno Dom. 1689. GEORGE WALKER John Michelbourn Richard Crofton Thomas Lane Hugh Hamill Charles Kinaston William Campbell Gervase Squire Henry Monry Henry Campsie Adam Morrow John Dobbin Alexander Steward Thomas Gughtredge Thomas Johnston Thomas Newcomen Edward Davyes John Hamilton Thomas Ash Robert Boyd Ralph Fullerton Michael Cunningham Joseph Johnston Robert Bayley William Grove John Mc Clelland James Graham William Thompson James Young Richard Cormach Oliver Apton Alex. Knox Patt Moore John Humes Robert Dennison Marmaduke Stewart James Fleming Andrew Grigson Christopher Jenny Thomas Smyth Bartholomew Black John Campbell Robert Morgan Michael Clenaghan Richard Fane Stephen Godfrey
William Hamilton Robert Rogers Jame Galtworth Richard Islen Arthur Hamilton Michael Rullack James Stiles James Cunningham Archibald Mc. Culloch Francis Obre Alexander Sanderson Archibald Sanderson Arthur Noble Philip Dunbarr George White Thomas White Ja. Gledstanes John Maghlin James Tracy John Halshton Joseph Gordon James Hairs Andrew Hamilton Adam Ardock Robert Wallace George Church Richard Flemin Henry Cust John Crofton Benjamin Wilkins Thomas Lane James Blair Dudley Phillips John Buchanan Edward Curling William Church Dalway Clements Albert Hall Matthew Cocken Thomas Brunett William Stewart Franc. Wilson Matt. Mc. Clellany George Crofton William Babington Robert King John Logan Alexander Rankin Edmund Rice Robert Walker James Mc. Carmick John Cochran James Mc. Cartny Warren Godfrey John Cunningham Henry Lane George Walker Hannston Andrew Bailly Daniel Mons. Cuistion John Bailly Robert Lyndsie Francis Boyd James Carr William Montgomery James Moore Nicholas White John Fuller Thomas Key Frederick Kye Thomas Baker John Hering James Hufton Adam Downing Abraham Hilhouse John Mucholland
Robert Bennet William Dobbin George Garnet James Barrington Henry Pearse Alexander Ratliffe Thomas Odayre John Hamilton Henry —verett Daniel Fisher John Cross William Cross Bernard Mulhollan David Mulhollan Thomas Conlay Robert Skinner Richard Robinson Robert Maghlin Matthew Clarke John Clements VVilliam Manson Theophilus Manson James Manson The DECLARATION of the Gentlemen of Derry, upon the News of a General Massacre intended of the Protestants, Decemb. 9. TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Citizens of the City of London-derry, send Greeting. Having received intimation from several creditable Persons, that an Insurrection of the Irish-Papists was intended, and by them a general Massacre of the Prote∣stants in this Kingdom, and the same to be acted and perpe∣trated on or about the 9th. of this instant December; and being confirmed in our fear and jealousie of so horrible a Design by many palpable Insinuations, dubious Expressions, monitory Let∣ters, and positive Informations, all conducing and concurring to beget in us a trembling Expectation of a sudden and inevitable Ruin and Destruction; we disposed our selves to a patient and quiet resignation to the divine Providence, hoping for some de∣liverance and diversion of this impending Misery, or to receive from the hands of GOD such a measure of Constancy and Courage as might inable us to possess our Souls in patience, and submissively to wait the issue of so severe a Trial: Accordingly, when on the 5th. Instant part of the Earl of Antrim's Forces advanced to take possession of this Place, though we looked on our selves as Sheep appointed for slaughter, and on them as the
Executioners of Vengeance on us, yet we contrived no other means of escape than by flight, and with all precipitation to hurry away our Families into other Places and Countries. But it pleased GOD, who watches over us, so to order things, that when they were ready to enter the City, a great number of the young∣er, and some of the meaner sort of the Inhabitants, run happily to the Gates and shut them, loudly denying entrance to such Guests, and obstinately refusing Obedience to us. At first we were amazed at the Enterprise, and apprehensive of the many ill Circumstances and Consequences, that might result from so rash an Vndertaking; but since that, having received repeated Adver∣tisements of the general Design, and particular Informations, which may rationally induce us to believe it; and being credi∣bly assured, that under the pretence of six Companies to quar∣ter amongst us, a vast Swarm of Highland and Irish Pa∣pists, were on the Ways and Roads approaching to us; That some of the Popish Clergy in our Neighbour-hood, had bought up Arms, and provided an unusual Furniture of Iron Chains for Bridles, (whereof sixty were bespoke in one place) and some of them seized, and now in our Custody; We began to consider it as an especial Instance of God's Mercy towards us, that we were not delivered over as a Prey unto them, and that it pleased him to stir up the Spirits of the People so unex∣pectedly to provide for their and our common Safety, and Pre∣servation: Wherefore we do declare and remonstrate to the World, that as we have resolved to stand upon our Guards, and defend our Walls; and not to admit of any Papist whatsoever to quar∣ter amongst us, so we have firmly and sincerely determined to persevere in our Duty and Loyalty to our Sovereign Lord the King, without the least breach of Mutiny, or Seditious Oppo∣sition to his Royal Commands. And since no other Motives have prompt us to this Resolution, but the preservation of our Lives▪ and to prevent the Plots and Machinations of the Enemies of the Protestant Religion; We are encouraged to hope that the Government will vouchsafe a candid and favourable Interpre∣tation of our Proceedings, and that all his Majesties Prote∣stant Subjects will interpose with their Prayers to God, their Sollicitations to the King, and their Advice and Assistance to
us on this so extraordinary and immergent an Occasion, which not only have an Influence on the rest of the Kingdom, but may have a probable aspect towards the Interest of the Protestant Re∣ligion, and may deserve a favourable regard from all the Professors thereof in his Majesties Dominions. GOD Save the King. An ORDER of the Council of War before the Defeat at Claudyford. LONDONDERRY, April 31. 1689. AT a General Council of War then held, it was resolved una∣nimously, that on Munday Morning then next following, at Ten of the Clock, all Officers and Soldiers of Horse, Dra∣goons and Foot, and all other armed men whatsoever of our Forces and Friends, inlisted and not inlisted, that can and will fight for their Country and Religion, against Popery, shall ap∣pear in the fittest ground near Claudyford, Lifford, and Long-Kaw∣sy, as shall be nearest to their several and respective Quarters, there to draw up in Battalions to be ready to fight the Enemy, and preserve our Lives, and all that is dear to us, from them; And all Officers and Soldiers of Horse and Foot, and Dragoons, and others that are arm'd, are requir'd to be then and there in or∣der to the purpose aforesaid, and to bring a weeks Provision at least with them for Men, and as much Forage as they can for Horses. Proposals made to Collonel Lundee, Governour of Derry, by Major Stroud. April 13. as aforesaid. I. THE said Major proposed to the said Governor, to de∣fend the Castle of Raphoe, or demolish it. II. How inconsiderable every Troop and Company were, that went by the names of Troops and Companies, instancing the Re∣giment of my Lord Mount-Allexander, all then dispersed except his own Troop, and Capt. Vpton's Troop; which both joined would not make one good Troop.
III. That the said Major proposed to the said Governor, that Harrows should be thrown into the Fords, and for want thereof, the Instruments called Round-head, which would have answered the same purpose; and fearing that the Proposals aforesaid might be neglected that Night, the said Major Stroud writ also to the same effect and purpose to the Governor by Captain Whaley, who delivered the same Letter accordingly; and if these Propositions had been observed, the Enemy could not have passed the Ford: But not being observed, and on Monday following, finding the Enemy in good posture on the other side of the Water, drawing Battalions down to the Ford, he drew up what Men he could to make Opposition, who cried out, that they wanted Powder, and most of them Arms; and in like manner the Major applying to the Fort near Claudy Bridge, they also cried out for want of Pow∣der; and from thence returning to the Horse, he found them breaking, and after retreating near a Mile, prevailed with them to Rally, in order to bring off the Foot, especially the Regiment of Antrim's, which was accordingly done. At the same time the Souldiers told me, that the Governor was gone by, and some others, which made him very earnest to be gone; saying, I would keep them there to be cut off. Declaration of VNION, March 21. 1688. WHereas either by Folly, or Weakness of Friends, or Craft and Stratagem of Enemies, some Rumours and Re∣flections are spread abroad among the Vulgar, That the Right Honourable the Lord Blaney, Sir Arthur Rawdon, Lieute∣nant- Colonel Maxwel, and other Gentlemen and Officers of Qua∣lity, are resolved to take Protections from the Irish, and desert the General Service for Defence of the Protestant Party in this Kingdom, to the great Discouragement of such who are so weak, as to give Credit to so False, Scandalous, and Malicious a Report. For wiping off which Aspersion, and clearing the Minds of all Protestant Friends wheresoever, from all Suspicions and Jealousies of that kind or otherwise, It is hereby unanimously Declared, Pro∣tested, and Published to all Men, by Col. Robert Lundy, Gover∣nour
of Derry, the said Lord Blaney, Sir Arthur Rawdon, and other Officers and Gentlemen, subscribing hereunto, That they and their Forces and Souldiers are entirely united among themselves, and fully, and absolutely resolved to oppose the Irish Enemy with their utmost Force, and to continue the War against them to the last, for their own and all Protestants Preservation in this Kingdom. And the Committee of London-Derry, for themselves, and for all the Citizens of the said City, do hereby Declare, Protest, and Publish to all Men, that they are heartily and sincerely united with the said Col. Robert Lundy, Lord Blaney, Sir Arthur Rawdon, and all others that joyn in this Common Cause, and with all their Force and utmost Power will labour to carry on the said War. And if it should happen that our Party should be so Oppress'd by the Irish Enemy, that they should be forced to retire into this City for shelter against them, (which God forbid) the said Lord Blaney, Sir Arthur Rawdon, and their Forces, and all other Prote∣stant Friends, shall be readily received into this City, and as much as in us lies, be cherished and supported by us. Dated at Lon∣don-Derry the 21st. of March, 1688. Robert Lundy. Blaney. William Stewart. Arthur Rawdon. George Maxwell. James Curry. John Forward. Hugh Mac Gill. William Ponsonby. H. Baker. Chich. Fortescus. James Brabazon. John Hill. Samuel Norman. Alexander Tomkins. Matt. Cocken. Horas Kennedy, Sheriffs. Edward Brookes, Sheriffs. Alexander Lecky. Francis Nevill. James Lennox. Frederick Cowsingham. John Leslie. Henry Long. William Crookshanks. Massareene. Clot. Sheffington. Arthur Vpton. Samuel Morrison. Thomas Cole. Francis Ferster. Ed. Cary. John Cowan. Kilner Brasier. James Hamilton. John Sinclare.
From on Board the Swallow, near Red-Castle, at Two Afternoon, the 15th. of April, 1689. SIR, HEaring you have taken the Field, in Order to Fight the Enemy, I have thought it necessary for His Majesty's Service, to let you know there are two well-disciplined Regiments here on Board, that may joyn you in two days at farthest, I am sure they will be of great Use in any Occasion, but especially for the Encouragement of Raw Men, as I judge most of yours are: Therefore it is my Opinion, that you only stop the Passage of the Enemy at the Foords of Finn, till I can joyn you, and afterwards, if giving Battel be necessary, you will be in a much better po∣sture for it than before. I must ask your Pardon if I am too free in my Advice; according to the Remote Prospect I have of things, this seems most Reasonable to me; but as His Majesty has left the whole Dire∣ction of Matters to you, so you shall find that no Man living shall more chearfully Obey you, than Your Most Humble Servant. JOHN CUNNINGHAM.
Orders and Instructions for Our Trusty and well-beloved,Vid. p. 20. John Cunningham Esquire, Colonel of one of Our Regiments of Foot, and upon his Death or Absence, to Col. Solomon Richards, or to the Officer in Chief, with the Regiments whereof they are Colonels. WILLIAM, R. YOU are without delay to repair to the Quarters of the Regiment under your Command, and take care that it be in a readiness to March to Liverpool at such a time as you shall Appoint. Whereupon you are to go to Liverpool, and to Enquire what Ships there are in that Port appointed to carry over the two Regiments, whereof you and Solomon Richards are Colonels, to the Town of London-Derry; and whether the Frigat, ordered for their Convoy, be arrived there; and as soon as the said Ships and Frigat shall be in a readiness to sail, and fitted with all Provisions necessary for the sustenance of the said Regiments in their Pas∣sage to the said Town, and for their return from thence, if there be occasion. You are to cause Col. Richards Regiment to go on Board, and at the same time to Order the Regiment whereof you are Colonel, to March to Liverpool, and to Embarque with all speed. And whereas We have Ordered one thousand Arms to be car∣ried to Liverpool, you are to cause such a number of the said
Arms as shall be wanting in the said Regiments to be delivered unto them, and the residue of the said Arms and Stores now there to be put on Shipboard, and carried to Londonderry, to be there employed for Our Service as the Governour of the said Town and you shall think fit. And We having also directed the Sum of Two thousand pounds sterling, to be paid unto you at Chester, by Matthew Anderton Esq Collector of Our Customs there, you are hereby Authorised and required to receive the same, and o dispose of the said Sum to∣wards the necessary subsistance of the said Regiments, and for the defence of the place, in repairing and providing what shall be de∣fective therein, and to such other uses as you with the Governour of the said City, with whom you are to entertain a good Corre∣spondence and Friendship as you shall find necessary for Our Ser∣vice; of all which Expences you are to give Us an account by the first opportunity. When the Particulars necessary for the Voyage shall be fully complied with, you are then, Wind and Weather permitting, with the Regiments under your Command, to make the best of your way to Londonderry, and being arrived there, or near that place, you are to make enquiry, whether the said City be yet in the hands of the Protestants? and whether you may with safety put our said Regiments into the same? and in that case you are imme∣diately to acquaint Lieutenant Colonel Robert Lundy Our Gover∣nour thereof, or the Commander in chief for the time being, with Our care in sending those Regiments and Stores; and for the fur∣ther relief of our Protestant Subjects in those parts, and deliver∣ing him Our Letters and Orders to him directed, you are to Land the said Regiments and Stores, and to take care that they be well Quartered and disposed of in the said City, following such Dire∣ctions as you shall receive during your stay there from Our said Governour Lieutenant Colonel Robert Lundy, in all things rela∣ting to Our Service. You are to assure the Governour and Inhabitants of London∣derry; of further and greater Succours of Men, Arms, Money, and Provisions of War coming speedily from England for their
relief, and the security of those parts, and in the mean time you are to make the best defence you can against all persons that shall attempt to Besiege the said City, or to annoy Our Protestant Sub∣jects within the same. You are to give Us an account soon after you Arrival (and so from time to time) of the condition of the place, the Forti∣fications, number, quality and affection of the People, Soldiers and others therein, or in the Country thereabouts, and what quantity of Provisions of all sorts for Horse and Foot, and Dra∣goons, shall or may be bought up or secur'd, in those parts for Our Service, without the necessity of bringing any from England, upon sending more Forces thither. You are to inform Us whether Captain James Hamilton be Ar∣rived at Londonderry, and how he has disposed of the Money and Stores committed to his Charge, and in general you are to return Us an account of every thing which you in your discretion shall think requisite for Our Service. In case you shall find it unsafe to Land the said Regiments at or near Londonderry, so as to put them into the Town, which you are to endeavour by all reasonable and prudent means, you are not to expose them to extraordinary hazard in so doing, but to take care that they be carried in the same Ships, and under the the same Convoy, with the same Armes, Stores, Money, and Provisions above mentioned, to Carrickfergus, and to endeavour the Landing of them there, if the same may be done with safety, or otherwise to Strangford, at both or either of which places you are to use the same caution, and to follow as near as may be the like directions, as are now given you in relation to Londonderry, but in case you do not find it for Our Service to Land the said Regiments at any of the said Places, you are then to take care that they be brought back to the Port of Liverpool, giving us speedy notice for Our further Orders. Given at Our Court at Whitehall the Twelfth of March 1688/9, in the first year of our Reign. By His Majesties Command. SHREWSBVRY.
Mr. Osburn's Letter to Sir Arthur Royden. Hilsburgh, March 9th, 1688/9 SIR, ON the 6th. Instant I was Introduced by my Lord Granard in∣to my Lord Deputies Presence, in the Castle of Dublin,Vid. p. 21 and have his Pass to come and go to, through and back from Vlster, and though I have not his Excellencies direct Commission, yet I assure your Honour, I am at least permitted by the Lord Deputy to ac∣quaint the chief and others of those of the Vlster Association with his Discourse to me, which was to the effect following, to wit, That his Excellency, 1. Doth not delight in the blood and devastation of the said Pro∣vince, but however highly resents their taking and continuing in Arms, and the affronts done by them to his Majesties Govern∣ment thereby, and by some Indignities done to the late Proclama∣tion of Clemency, issued and dated the  day of 2. Notwithstanding whereof is willing to receive the said Pro∣vince into protection, provided they immediately deliver up to his Army for his Majesties use their Arms and serviceable Horses, and provided they deliver up to his Excellency these three Persons, to wit,  if they remain in this Kingdom, and can be had. 3. And for further manifestation of his design to prevent blood, is willing to grant safe Conduct even to the said three Persons, or any other of their party to and from his Excellency, or to and from Lieutenant General Hamilton, Commander of a part of his Army hereafter mentioned, if they intend any peaceable and rea∣sonable Treaty; but withal, will not upon the said or any other account stop the March of the said part of his Army, no not for one hour; and if it shall appear in such Treaty, that they took up Arms meerly for self-preservation, then he will pardon even the said three Persons also, but is hopeless that any such thing can be made appear, seeing many of them have already received and ac∣cepted
of Commissions from the Prince of Orange, and display his Colours in the field, as his Excellency is credibly informed. 4. If these terms be not immediately agreed unto, he will with a part of his Army fight them, which part he intends shall be at Newry on Monday the 11th. Instant, which will from thence march to Belfast, and from thence to Colerain and Londonderry, as his Excellency intends. And that the Country Irish (not of the Ar∣my) Men, Women and Boys, now all armed with Half-pikes and Baggonets, in the Counties of Cavan, Monaghan, Tyrone, London∣derry, &c. will upon the approach of the said part of the Army, and Resistance thereunto made, immediately enter upon a Massacree of the British in the said Counties; which force and violence of the Rabble, his Excellency says, he cannot restrain. These are the heads of what I can offer to you to the best of my memory from his Excellencies own mouth, but I intend to stay here this night, where if you think fit, I shall fully Discourse with you of all the above Particulars, whereof I hope you will give immediate notice to all chiefly concerned in your Neighbourhood. This in haste is all from SIR, Your most humble Servant, Alexander Osborn.
Conrard de Rosen, Marshal General of all His Majesties Forces, DEclares by these presents, to the Commanders, Officers,Vide Page 34. Soldiers, and Inhabitants of the City of London-Derry, that in case they do not betwixt this and Munday next, at Six of the Clock in the Afternoon, being the first of July in the Year of our Lord 1689. agree to surrender the said place of London-Derry unto the King upon such Conditi∣ons as may be granted them according to the Instructions and Power Lieutenant General Hamilton formerly received from the King; that he will forthwith issue out his Orders from the Barony of Innishowen, and the Sea-costs round about, as far as Charlemont, for the gathering together of those of their Faction, whether protected or not, and cause them immediately to be brought to the Walls of London-Derry, where it shall be lawful for those that are in the Town (in case they have any pity of them) to open the Gates and receive them into the Town, otherwise they will be forced to see their Friends and nearest Relations al starved for want of Food, he having resolved not to leave one of them at home, nor any thing to maintain them: And that all hopes of Succor may be taken away, by the Landing of any Troops in these Parts from England, he further declares, That in case they refuse to submit, he will forthwith cause all the said Country to be immediately de∣stroyed, that if any Succors should be hereafter sent them from England, they may perish with them for want of Food; besides which he has a very considerable Army, as well for the opposing of them in all places, that shall be judged necessary, as for the protection of all the rest of His Maje∣sties dutiful Subjects, whose Goods and Chattles he promises
to secure, destroying all the rest that cannot be conveni∣ently brought into such places as he shall judge necessary to be preserved; and burning the Houses and Mills, not only of those that are in actual Rebellion, but also of their Friends and Adherents, that no hopes of escaping may be left for any Man; beginning this very day to send his ne∣cessary Orders to all Governors and other Commanders of His Majesties Forces, at Colerain, Antrim, Carrigfergus, Bel∣fast, Dunganon, Charlemont, Belturbat, Sligo, to Colonel Sarsefield Commanding a flying Army beyond Ballishany, Col. Sutherland Commanding another towards Inniskellin, and the Duke of Berwick another on Fynwather, to cause all the Men, Women and Children, who are any ways Related to those in London-Derry, or anywhere else in open Rebellion, to be forthwith brought to this place, without hopes of withdrawing further into the Kingdom; that in case before the said Munday, the first of July in the Year of our Lord 1689. be expired, they do not send us Hostages, and other Deputies, with a full and sufficient Power to Treat with us for the Surrender of the said City of London-Derry, on reasonable conditions, they shall not after that time be admitted to any Treaty whatsoever; and the Army which shall continue the Siege, and will with the assistance of God soon reduce them, shall have orders to give no Quarter, or spare either Age or Sex in case they are taken by Force; but if they return to the Obedience due to their natural Prince, he promises them that the Conditions granted to them in His Majesties name, shall be inviolably observed by all His Majesties Subjects; and that he himself will have a care to protect them on all occasi∣ons, even to take their part, if any injury, contrary to agreement, should be done them, making himself response∣able for the performance of the Conditions on which they shall agree to Surrender the said Place of London-Derry to the King. Given under my hand this 30th of June, in the Year of Lord 1689. Le Mareshal de Rosen
Col. Hamilton's Proposals. I. THAT Col. Oneil has a Power to Discourse with the Governours of Derry from General Hamilton,Vide Page 34. as appears by his sending of this. II. That the General has full Power, does appear by his Commission. III. That General Rose has no Power from the King to intermeddle with what Lieutenant General Hamilton does, as to the Siege, being only sent to oppose the English Suc∣cour; and that all Conditions and Parlies is left to the said Lieutenant General Hamilton: That as to what Articles shall be agreed on, they may may see by the Kings Warrant he has full Power to confirm them: Notwithstanding, if they do not think this sufficient, he will give what other reason∣able Security they can demand. As to the English Landing, such as had Commissions from the Prince of Orange, need not be apprehensive, since it will be the Kings Interest to take as much care of his Protestant Subjects, as of any other, he making no distinction of Religion. IV. As to what concerns the Inneskillin People, they shall have the same Terms as those of Derry, on their Sub∣mission, the King being willing to shew Mercy to all his Subjects, and quiet his Kingdoms. V. That the Lieutenant General desires no better, than having it communicated to all the Garrison; he being willing to employ such as will freely swear to serve his Ma∣jesty faithfully; and all such as have a desire to live in Town, shall have Protection, and free Liberty of Goods and Religion. As to the Last Point, Such as have a mind to return to their Homes, shall have a necessary Guard with them to their respective Habitations, and Victuals to supply them; where
they shall be restored to all they possess'd formerly, not on∣ly by the Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace, but also by Go∣vernours and Officers of the Army, who from time to time will do them right, and give them Reprisals of Cattle from such as have taken them to the Mountains. At the Camp at Derry, 27 June, 89. Rich. Hamilton. An Account of Officers Killed and Taken by the Besieged in London-Derry during the Siege in 1689, whose Names we could learn. At Penny-burn-Mill. General Mommune a Frenchman Kill'd. Major Tafe Kill'd. Major Waggun Kill'd. Major General Pusinan Kill'd. Capt. Fitzgerald Kill'd. Quartermaster Cassore, a Frenchman. Kill'd. At the Windmil, May the 6th. Brigadeer General Ramsey Kill'd. Capt. Fleaming Kill'd. Capt. Fox Kill'd. Lieutenant Welch Kill'd. Lieutenant Kelly Kill'd. Ensign Kadel Kill'd. Captain Barnwel Kill'd. Ensign Barnwel Kill'd. Prisoners. Sir George Aylmer Prisoners. Lieutenant Colonel Talbot Prisoners. Lieutenant Netervel Prisoners. Lieutenant Newcomen Prisoners.
At the Windmill, June the 4th. Lieutenant Colonel Farwel Kill'd. Two French Captains Kill'd. Adjutant Fahey Kill'd. Quartermaster Kelley Kill'd. Ensign Noris Kill'd. Capt. Graham Kill'd. Lieutenant Burcke Kill'd. Ensign Arthor Kill'd. Prisoners at the same. Captain Butler, Second Son to my Lord Mountgerret, led on the Forlorn Hope of Horse. Captain Mac Donnell. Captain Mac Donogh. Captain Watson. Lieutenant Eustice. Sergeant Peggot. A French Lieutenant. At the Attempt of the Walls, June 28. A French Leiutenant Colonel Kill'd. Capain Mac Carlie Kill'd. Captain O Breayen Kill'd. A French Captain Kill'd. An English Captain Kill'd. An English Lieutenant. Kill'd. Prisoners. A Corporal and Private Centinel. Officers Killed in several Places about the Town. Lieutenant Fitz Patrick in the Orchard on other side of the Walls. Lieutenant Con O Neal. Ensign Conelly kill'd in a Boat, and 13 Prisoners taken. Two Friers kill'd in their Hbits in the same Orchard. Ensign Ambross on the Mountains.
Lieutenant Talbot had his Arm shot off at Colmore, from the Ships. Drowned coming over at Liford. Major Nangle An Ensign. Generals 1 Ensigns 6 Brigadeer Generals 1 Sargents 1 Major Generals 1 Corporals 1 Lieutenant Colonels 3 Cornets 1 Majors 5 Quartermasters 2 Captains 16 Adjutants 1 Lieutenants 9     In all 48 And two Fryers.   An Accompt of the Subsistance delivered to the Soldiers, and how many Companies and Regiments received. Col. Bakers 25 Companies. Col. Walker 15   Col. Craston 12   Col. Skiventon 17 Col. Michelbourn Col. Lance 13   Col. Mount-ro 13   Col. Hamill 14   Col. Morea 8   In all 117 Companies. Each Company consisting of Sixty Men; in all Seven thousand and twenty private Men, and Three hundred and fifty one Officers.
April 20. To each Company a Barrel of Beef, and a Boll of Meal. In all 117 Barrels of Beef, and 117 Bolls of Meal. April 27. To each Man 4 pounds of Beef, and 4 quarts of Meal, and 3 pounds of Salmon. In all 21060 l. of Sal∣mon, 28080 quarts of Meal, 28080 l. of Beef. May 4. To each Company a Barrel of Beef, 120 l. of Meal, half a hundred weight of Butter. In all 107 Barrels of Beef, 14050 l. of Meal, 58½ hundreds and a half of Butter. May 11. Six pounds of Meal for each private Man. In all 42020 l. of Meal. May 18. Two pounds of Wheat to each Man. In all 14040 l. May 24. Half a Barrel of Beef to each Company, 120 l. of Meal, half a Barrel of Barley. In all 58½ Barrels of Beef, 58½ Barrels of Barley, 14340 l. of Meal. June 1. To each Regiment 5 Barrels of Wheat, and 5 Bar∣rels of Shilling. In all 40 Barrels of Wheat, and 40 Bar∣rels of Shilling. June 8. One pound and a half of Meal to each Man, and half a Barrel of Barley to each Company. In all 9530 l. of Meal, of Barley 10530 l. of Wheat. June 15. Half a Barrel of Barley to each Company, and a pound of Meal to each Man. In all 58½ Barrels of Barley, and 7020 l. of Meal. June 19. One pound of Meal, and one pound and half of Wheat to each man. In all 7020 l. of Meal. June 21. One pound and an half of Wheat to each Man. June 25. One pound of Tallow to each Man, one pound of Meal, and half a pound of Beef, the Army consisting of 6185 Men. July 4. Allowance to the Army being 5709 Men, to each Man one pound of Meal, one pound of French Butter, and two pound of Ginger, per Com. being 114 l. of Ginger.
July 8. To the Army being 5520 Men, to each Man one pound of Meal, Try'd Tal∣low, so call'd. one pound of French Butter, two pounds of Anniseeds, to each Company, being 114 l. and one quarter of a pound of Tobacco. July 13. To the Army, consisting of 5334. to each man half a pound of Meal, Oats after grinding un∣sifted half a pound of Shilling, half a pound of Beef. July 17. To the Army, consisting of 5114, to each man half a pound of Meal, half a pound of Shilling, half a pound of Tallow, 3 pound of salt Hides. July 22. The Army being 4973, to each half a pound of Starch, a quarter of a pound of Tallow, one pound of Anniseeds, to a Company, being 117. July 25. The Army being 4892. half a pound of Tallow, half a pound of Shilling, three quarters of a pound of Dry Hides. July 27. The Army being 4456 Men, to each Man half a pound of Meal, one pound and an half of Horse flesh, with two pecks of Bay Salt to each Company, being an 117 Companies. July 30. The Army being 4508 Men, to each man 3 pound of Meal, 2 pound of Beef, one pint of Pease. May 5. To the Officers of Mr. Skiventon's Regiment, 4 Bar∣rels of Beef, 4 Barrels of Meal, 4 Firkins of Butter. May 15. To Colonel Mountros's Officers 4 pound of Beef, 3 pound of Salmon, 4 pound of Meal to each Officer. May 25. Colonel Hamill's Officers one Firkin of Butter. July 5. To 288 Officers, to each 2 pound of Meal, and 2 pound of Salmon. July 13. To 351 Officers, to each 2 pound of Meal, and one pound and a half of Butter. July 23. To 300 Officers, to each one pound of Wheat, one pound of Groats. July 16. To 260 Officers, to each half a pound of Tobacco.
July 27. To each Officer one pound and a half of Horse-flesh, one pound and a half of Barley, being 252 Officers. The Names of the Clergy-men that stayed in London-Derry during the Siege, 1689. Mr. G. Walker Governor of London-Derry Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. Mich. Clenakan Minister of the same Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. Seth Whittel of Bellioghy, dead Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. James Watmough of Arigal, dead Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. John Rowen of Belteagh, dead Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. Rich. Crowther, Curat of Comber, dead Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. Tho. Sempel Curat of Donaghmore Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. Robert Morgan Curat of Cappy Of the Diocess of Derry. Mr. Christ. Jinny Prebend of Mullahbracke Of the Diocess of Ardmah. Mr. John Campbel of Segoe Of the Diocess of Ardmah. Mr. Moses Davies of Stewart Town Of the Diocess of Ardmah. Mr. Andrew Robison of Stewar Town Of the Diocess of Ardmah. Mr. Bartholomew Black Curat of Aghalon Of the Diocess of Ardmah. Mr. Ellingsworth, from besides Newry, dead Of the Diocess of Ardmah. Mr. John Knox Minister of Glascogh, &c. Of the Diocess of Clogher. Mr.  Johnson of  Of the Diocess of Clogher. Mr. Christy Curat of Monaghan Of the Diocess of Clogher. Mr. William Cunningham of Killishondra in the Diocess of Kilmore. As also Nonconforming Ministers, to the Number of Seven, whose Names I cannot learn, Four of which dyed in the Siege.
The Number of Bombs thrown into the City of London-Derry, since the beginning of the Siege.   Big. Small.   April 24.   3 Memorandum that one of the great Bombs being brought to the Scale did weigh 272l. after 17 l. of pouder was emptied out of it. And that one of the smallest Bombs being emptied, did weigh 34 l. April 25.   3 April 27.   18 From April the 27th till the 4th of May, at several times   6 June 2. 3 1 June 3. 28   June 4. 37   June 5. 2   June 6. 30   June 7. 6   June 8. 36   June 11.   28 June 13. 26   June 21.   21 June 24. 6   June 27. 13   June 28. 22   June 29. 10   July 2.   22 July 3.   28 July 4. 14   July 5. 3 6 July 6. 5 10 July 7.   18 July 8. and tenth   24 July 11.   4 July 14.   18 July 15.   24 July 16.   16 July 17.   14 July 18.   12 July 19.   22 July 21.28   28   261 320 Total 587 Till the 22th of July.
July 22. 42 Cannon Ball thrown into the City about 20 l. weight a piece, before nine of the Clock in the Morning. More, 6 the same Evening. July 23. 20 more before Dinner, and we could not compute them afterwards, they came so thick upon us. A Letter writ by an Iniskellin-Man, about the Wrong done my Lord Kingston by drawing him from his Gar∣rison at Sligo, to one at Derry. SIR, HAving this opportunity, Page 19. I think fit to let you know the great and most lamentable disappointment we are under. My Lord Kingston is basely us'd by your Officers; they have drawn him from the Garrison of Sligo, which he had so bravely Fortify'd, and had such a number of Disci∣plin'd Men both Horse and Foot in, and so well arm'd, that he could not but have done Service with them, and have made good that Post against the Enemy: But Col. Londy writ to him, That the Blood of all the Protestants of the North will lie upon him, if he does not quit the Garrison of Sligo, and come to their Assistance. Upon this he marches from Sligo, and at Balishanny meets a Letter of Col.Londy's, telling him, There was no Provision for him at Derry, and that he must quarter there. My Lord takes Horse, rides twenty Miles in the Night to understand the meaning of these things, but finds the Enemy had stop't all passages to Derry; so he returns to his Men, and there finds that Sligo was possessed also by the Enemy. You may imagine what a Distraction we were in upon this; but with the most earnest entreaty we prevailed with my Lord to go for Eng∣land, to solicit for Relief from thence, and are resolv'd to to take our shelter in Iniskellin; if any thing happen amiss to us, our Children, if they survive, may curse your Great Men for it; &c. FINIS.
Advertisement. THE Trial of Mr. Price and One hundred Prote∣stants at Wicklow before Chief Justice Keating, with the Condemnation of about Two hundred Protestant Gen∣tlemen at Galloway, price 6 d. The Journal of the proceedings of the Parliament in Ireland, beginning May 7. 1689, price 3 d A true Account of the present State of Ireland, price 6d. The History of Gustavus Adolphus, in 8o. Translated by Ferrand Spence. The Delucidator, or Reflections upon Modern Trans∣actions. Spanhemius's Panegyrick on K. William and Q. Mary. The Detestable Designs of France Exposed; or, the true Sentiments of the Spanish Netherlands, representing the in∣justice of the King of France by his Declaration of War against His Catholick Majesty, and the Justice of the Coun∣ter-declaration of the Marquess of Gastanuaga, his Governor General of the Low Countries. Printed for Robert Clavel at the Peacock in St. Pauls Church-Yard.
