W734 99830866 35327
Female Policy DETECTED. Or, The Arts of a Designing Woman LAID OPEN. In Maxims proper to be observ'd by all, Especially the Youth of this Nation, to Arm themselves against the Subtilties and devi∣ces of Intreiguing Women. Divided into Six Chapters. I. Of their Allurements. II. Of their Inconstancy. III. Of their Love. IV. Of their Revenge. V. Of their Pride. VI. Of their Ingratitude. To which is addd, Two POEMS, one in Commen∣dation of Vertue, the other in Dispraise of Vice. Dedicated to the Apprentices of LONDON. London, Printed for Benj. Harris, at the Lower end of Bartholomew , near the Royal-Exchange, 1695.
THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE Apprentices of LONDON. WE may observe the Happiness or Unhappiness that waits up∣on this Life, are most com∣monly owing to the Vigilent and Indu∣strious, or the careless and ungovern'd Actions of our Youth; and as the for∣mer lays a probable Foundation, upon which (by a continued Care) we may build our succeeding Fortunes to a com∣fortable height, so the latter robs us of that Substance upon which we ought (for our Security) to place the Pedestal of our future Prosperity: And as there
is nothing tends more to the Destruction of Youth, or renders them more inca∣pable of considering their own Welfare, than the Conversation of Intrieguing Women: I thought, Young Men, I could not do you a greater Service in this Age, where to tempt cunningly, and deceive slily, are the Study of the Female Sex, than present you with a small Pocket-piece, which shall serve as Armour to defend you from the Darts thrown from Wanton and Designing Women, whose evil Communication corrupts good Manners, and will make you (if deluded by them) Disobedient to the Laws of GOD, un∣dutiful Children to your Parents, unjust Servants to your Masters, ill Husbands (when you Marry) to your Wives, ba Fathers to your Children, Enemies to your Countrey, and Slaves to others, as well as to your own Vices. There is nothing more evident, than that several Young Men in this City of London have been drawn aside, to their Ruin, by the attractive Sorcery of these bewitching
Load-stones, which having been observ'd of late by the Right Honourable the Mayors, and other the Iustices of London, that they have been so commendably In∣dustrious in suppressing this Vice, within the Bounds of their Jurisdiction, that it is a hard matter for a Night-walking Strumpet to strole through the City un∣punish'd. The Magistrates have done their Parts, and nothing is requir'd fur∣ther, (for the more effectual Promotion of the City's Glory) but your Care to avoid the Lust and Subtilty of those private Madams, whose gay Apparel, and false Pretence to Modesty, gives them Covert in reputable Families, where they heard with the Vertuous, declaim against the Vices of the Age, and seem to won∣der at that Wickedness in others, which themselves do practice daily, to maintain their Pride. I have therefore Taught you how to know these Vultures in Peacocks Plumes, and how to avoid them, and how to converse with them without Prejudice
in the following Treatise, which I dedi∣cate to your View, and commend to your Practice, as you are the Flower of our Nation, and Glory of the Metro∣polis; to whom I Subscribe my self Your most Humble Servant, E. W.
THE PREFACE. THE Study of Designing Women in all Ages having been to Improve, and set off Nature with such Arti∣ficial Charms, alluring Dresses, and resist∣less Glances, that most of our Youth, before they have shifted of the tender years of their Infancy, are subdued by their Pollitick In∣ducements, to their Ruinous Embraces, which are frequently succeeded by irrecover∣able Injuries, either to Estate or Person, if not Both, except withdrawn Timely, (by Prudence) from this Epidemical Folly. I have therefore thought it necessary, to present the Age (in this following Treatise) with a fair Prospect of the Dangers that wait on the Conversation of Intreiguing Women: With a Scheme of their Allure∣ments,
Subtile Stratagems and Devices, by which they oft Trepan Unwary Youth, into a State of Misery. I have not only (in brief Sentences) laid open the studied Policies, and cunning Delusions of the Female Sex, but have given such Maxims of Prudence, that shall Arm you against their Subtilties, and teach you to act Counter to all their Designs, though laid and carried on with the greatest Cunning and Industry. As Vertue is better understood by Expe∣perience than Precept, so the knowledge of Vice is better gain'd by Precept than Ex∣perience; and as all things are distinguish∣ed by their Contraries, so it is necessary to be acquainted with the latter, to compare it as a Foyl, to set off the true Lustre and Beauty of the former. In the Performance of my Task, I have been as Compendious as possible; so that I hope I shall neither offend the Judgment, or Trespass much upon the Patience of the Reader, but rather furnish him with such Rules and Maxims, (against Designing
Women) that shall be delightful to Read, easie to Remember, and very proper to Practice. There are few Persons, who have been re∣duced from a Plentiful Fortune, into a State of Necessity, but the World may observe, Women have always had the greatest share in their Ruin; Therefore, to be fortified against Female Policy, is a matter of no small Moment; and he that is without these Prudentials, is not a day secure of either his Estate or Person, from the Gripes of a Female Vulture, but is lyable to be Trick'd into such Labyrinths of Misfortune, where you will find no Clue to return by to his for∣mer Liberty. All that I entreat of the Youthful Reader, is, to peruse it without Prejudice, and make it useful to himself, and I will engage, he may at Eighteen or Twenty Years of Age, evade the Designs, resist the Temptations, and withstand the Sor∣cery of those Crafty Witches, better than most Men (without it) shall be able to do at Forty.
I do not intend any affront to the Chast or Vertuous, nor would I have them offen∣ded at my Vndertaking, for may Design is rather to raise them to such an Esteem, that nne should have Title to Love or Admi∣ration, but such Women, whose affection to Vertue, and resolutions against Vice, shall oblige them to be Faithful. And if the Reader will observe the Rules I have laid down, he shall know how to Judge, and how to Choose; To Instruct him in which, is the end of the following Treatise.
FEMALE POLICY Detected &c. CHAP. I. Of the Allurements of Women. OF all Vices, an unlawful Fre∣dom with the Female Sex is the most predominant, and, of all Sins, hath the most powerful Temptations and Allurements to betray and draw Men into this Folly. The Inducements of the Fair Sex are so prevailing, a Propensity in Nature so forcible, it is hard to stand unmov'd, when tempted forward by the Charms of a subtle Woman, and drove by the frail Desires of an unbounded Lust.
But as there is not Passion too strong to be conquer'd, or Temptation too great to be resisted; so if you will ob∣serve the Maxims I shall give you in this little Treatise, you will be arm'd against Beauty; make Love your Subject, and all the Subtilties of the Fair Sex shall truckle, and become Instruments of your Direction, instead of your Ruin. Be careful how you conceive too good an Opinion of a Woman at first Sight, for you see not the Woman truly, but her Ornaments. Paint, Patches, and fine Dresses, are to hide Defects; for Beauty, like Truth, is always best when Plainest. Many in rich Ornaments look in∣viting, whose Beauty, when they un∣dress, flies away with their Apparel, and leaves you (as Iuno did Ixion) nothing but a cloudy Mistress to embrace. If you like a Woman, and would dis∣cover if she be in Nature, what perhaps she may seem by Art, surprize her in a Morning undrest, and it is Ten to One,
but you will find your Goddess hath shifted off her Divinity, and the Angel you so much admired turn'd into a Mag∣mallion. Be always Jealous of a Maid, who extols her own Vertue; a Wife, who exclaims against her Husband in his Ab∣sence; and a Widow, that courts your Company; for when a Woman praises her Vertues, 'tis as a Shop-keeper does a Commodity, with a desire to be rid of it; and she that will lay open the Fail∣ings of her Husband to another, will, to the same Man, lay open her self when∣ever he shall require it of her; and when a Widow seems fond of your Con∣versation, be sure 'tis through design; and if you are not careful, she will bury you alive. Be not tempted to pick up any Wo∣man in the Street; but if you should, be sure you have one Eye before you, and another behind you; for wheresoever Lust leads, Danger follows.
Covet not the Presents of a fond Woman, for they are Baits left to in∣snare you, and while you think you are a gainer by her Gifts, you are loosing your Self. Whoever is trepann'd by a Woman's Smiles, is as a Fly hampered in a Cob∣web, who waits the Leasure of the Spider when he shall be devoured. He that serves the Lust of a Woman, makes himself her Monkey; for she ad∣mires him no longer than while he is playing with his Tail. Be careful how you live upon a Whore, as how you keep one; for by the former you will get nothing, and by the latter loose every thing you have got. Mistrust a Woman that seems Rich by her own Discourse; for she that talks much of her Fortune, hath generally but little. Think not every Woman Rich that wears gay Apparel; for many forfeit their Vertue, to maintain their Pride.
Build not too great a Faith upon the sight of a few Guineas, or a Gold Watch, these may be but shooing Horns, to draw you on to your Ruin. Believe no Man's Affirmation of a Woman's Fortune, unless you know him; for Designs are never carry'd on with∣out Abettors. Be sure of her Portion, though you take her Vertue upon Credit; but he that takes both upon Trust, may find, when too late, he hath neither to trust to. Endeavour not to continue a Wo∣man's Love by Gifts, for every Present you make her may be the Purchase of a Rival: besides, they love Gifts, and if you use them to it, they will Love you no longer than you are giving. Believe not hte trivial Favours of a Woman a demonstration of her Love; for they pride to be Belov'd, though it be by those they Scorn. Raise not an Opinion of your self upon the Flatteries of a Woman, nor think her Praises any sign of Love, but
of her Cunning; for Designing Women, like great Polititians, flatter them most they design to Ruin. no Woman charm you with the Musick of a smoh Tongue; for many can talk well, that act ill. Believe no Woman the more Virtuous for resisting the first Attempt; for, like besieged Towns, they will withstand several Efforts, and, at last, Surrender upon Capitulartion. Some Women (like strong Holds) are to be taken but one way, which if you cannot readily discover, be content, she her self will find ways to direct you, if she likes you. When a lewd Woman serves your Necessity, 'tis with a certain expectancy you should serve her Lust: her Kind∣nesses are measured by your Capacity, and a continuance of her Favours dwell upon the Repetition of your Perform∣ances; she will stretch her Purse-strings to support you in Extravagancy, if you strain as hard to supply her unbounded
Leachery; but be sure she will be your Servant no longer than you will re∣main her Drudge. Who is Stallion to a Whore, is a Slave to Iniquity, and a Champion to a∣nothers Vices, a Coward in a Good Cause, and a Curse to himself. Let no Woman tempt you by her Wit to Love her; for she who hath Wit enough to tempt you, hath e∣nough to deceive you. Suffer not your self to be Ensnared by a Woman over free in her Gestures, or Conversation; for whosoever is much active in Behaviour, behaves her self like a Lover of much action; and whoever is free in much Company, will be much freer when but Two toge∣ther. Think not the Amorous Glances of a Woman towards you, gives you Ti∣tle to her Affection; for they can look one way, when their Hearts are ano∣ther. Expect no good Quality in a Wo∣man
more than what she shows; for it is a Maxim in their Politicks, to put the best side outward. If you Love a Woman, be careful how you show it; for your Nibbling at the Bait, may too early discover a wil∣lingness to be Caught. Wast not your Strength in the En∣joyments of Beauty, neither your Time or Money in Corrupting Vertue; but Marry a Chast Wife, of a Good Family, with a Moderate Fortune, and you need not question being Happy.
CHAP. II. Of the Inconstancy of Women. WHosoever resigns her Vertue, to gratify anothers Lust, will not scruple the same freedom with a∣nother, to Pleasure her own; for few Women Love so well, as to Love a Gallant better than themselves. She who will lose her Reputation to Oblige you, will Hazard your Love to Gratify her self; and she that will do both, can never be Constant. Put no Confidence in a Woman that hath lost her Honour; for she who is without Reputation, hath nothing to engage her to be Faithful. Constancy is maintain'd by Vertue, and she who hath lost her Vertue, hath nothing left to oblige her to be Con∣stant.
She that preferrs Pleasure before Ver∣tue, will be Constant to her Lust, but not to you. Nothing engages a Mans Affection so much to a Woman, as a belief of her Constancy; but 'tis better to believe her otherways, for then she can never Deceive you. Women are sensible that Constancy is more priz'd than Beauty; but it is a Maxim among their Sex, to Deceive us most in what we most Value. Nothing is more Ridiculous than to keep a Miss; for the that you keep, will keep another if she can; there be∣ing the same Ambition in her to be Mistriss of another, as there is in you to be Master of her: and he that thinks a Woman Constant, because he keeps her, proves a Knave to himself, and a Fool to his Madam. Put no Faith in a Woman that is Wife to another; for she who is not Constant to her Husband, will never be so to you.
A Woman who hath a Husband, and will admit of a Gallant, let him look upon her as Faithful as Monsieur Raggou's Mistriss, who was Constant to the whole Troop. A Married Woman, if Lewd, is Subtle by Experience; for she who hath her Husband to Deceive every Day, can Deceive a Gallant at Leisure. A Durable Love is the Supporter of Constancy; but that Love can never be Lasting which stands on a False Bottom. Be Constant to no Woman but a Wife, if you be, you Deceive your self; expect no Constancy in a Whore, for she'll deceive you. Credit no Womans Words who hath lost her Vertue, but believe the contrary, for she talks Counter. If you have Contracted any Friend∣ship with a Woman, let all she can do for you be no more than you deserve; but if she prove Constant, let it be more than you expect.
Think not a Woman is most Faithful to him she is most Fond off; for to him the Deceives most, she seems al∣ways most Obliging. Believe not all to be Virgins that talk much of their Virginity; for all would seem Maids that have been made other∣wise. To one, a Woman may be Constant; but if she divides her Affections between two, she can be Constant to neither. If you are Familiar with anothers Wife, believe her not, when she says she knows none but her Husband and you; for she will Swear to her Husband, she knoweth none but himself. Credit nothing a Woman says, as to her Constancy or Vertue; for she will judify her Innocence before him, with whom she hath been Guilty. Love no Woman in the Absence of her Husband; you only stop a Gap for another, who will return you no thanks for your Labour; and remember, his Approach, will be your Distance.
If you Love a Woman, Conceal it, Oblige her with common Courtesies, but show no Passion; for by your Prudence you may Master her, to whom a disco∣very of your Love will make you be∣come a Servant. Measure a Womans Love by her Jea∣lousy; for she Loves him best of whom she is most Jealous, and of whom she is most Jealous, to him she is most Constant. Be Jealous of a Woman that wo'nt be Jealous of you; for she that won't be Jealous, Loves you not; and she that Loves you not, will never be Constant to you. Answer all the expectations of a Wo∣man you would keep Constant; for one single neglect hazards the loss of her Affections. Keep a Watchful Eye over the Wo∣man which you Love, seem not to be over Credulous of her Vertue, if you do, she will make tryals of your Faith. She who Kisses her Husband in Pub∣lick, hath generally her Eyes upon him
she would Kiss in Private; and she that will Kiss both in Publick and Private, values not where she Kisses. Be Constant to your Wife, that she may be Constant to you; for Gratitude may constrain a Woman to preserve those Bonds which Revenge may make her violate. Chuse for your Wife a Prudent Wo∣man; for Prudence preserves Vertue, Vertue Love, and Love Constancy. Inconstancy in a Wife makes Wed∣lock a Bramble, which bears Abundance of Thorns. Inconstancy in a Husband makes In∣constancy in a Wife; and an incon∣stant Wife makes a Husband a constant Cuckold. Trust no Man with your Wife Abroad, nor court your Friend to bear her Com∣pany at Home in your Absence; for Opportunity and Importunity may con∣quer the most Heroick Vertue. Carry no Man to your Mistress if you prize her; for if she loves you, she
will be civil to your Friend for your Sake. 'Tis the Policy of a Designing Woman to oblige the Friend of him that loves her, to acquaint her self, by that means, with his Affairs, that she may manage him the better. Most Women are of cold Constitu∣tions, and under the Dominion of the Moon; and, remember, 'tis an approved Maxim, That all Sublunary things are subject to Mutation. Constancy is a great Vertue, and its opposite is a dangerous Vice; whoever neglects the former, to practice the lat∣ter, is neither to be Belov'd or Trusted. 'Tis Good to be Wise, 'tis Wisdom to be Just, and Just to be Constant.
CHAP. III. Of the Love of Women. THE Love of a Woman is easie to be gain'd, but difficult to be preserv'd; you may with more facility subdue Vertue, and bring a Chast Wo∣man to your Embraces, than engage her to be Constant, after she hath re∣sign'd her Honour. 'Tis a receiv'd Opinion among their whole Sex, That the Passion of Love ceases in a Man after Enjoyment, and the Esteem he had be∣fore of her Person is much lessen'd by her Condescention to his Desires, which Conception occasions her to withdraw her Affections from you, (unless every Hour you confirm her in a different Faith by fresh Assurances) coveting to be Belov'd by some Body who hath a good Opinion of her Vertues; for there
is nothing more certain, that Women who have been deceiv'd themselves, take a secret Delight in Deceiving others; therefore, you that are the Deceivers, be careful you are not Deceiv'd. The Love of a Virgin is innocent and lasting, as her Vertue. The Love of a Just Wife friendly and delightful. The Love of a Widow politick and de∣ceitful. The Love of a Lewd Woman lustful and revengeful. If you are the Favourite of a Lady, and depend upon her Courtesies, you must be industrious to oblige her, and as watchful to preserve her from the Efforts of Rivals, or you will soon find your Mistress like a Pot-Gun, the last Pellet she receives will drive out the former. Simpathize not with a Woman who loves you Passionately; for as she finds your Love encreases, she will cool her own with the Assurance of yours. If you have gain'd a Woman's Love, and would preserve it, be sure be constant
in your Visits, or you will find most Women have so bad Memories, that a Weeks Absence will make them quite forget you. The Love of a Woman hath its Sea∣sons, like the Year, its Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter. It begins with a warm desire, and is nourished to a grearer heat, by the kind Influence of the Object, till the Harvest of her Joys are full ripe; but when the Fruits of her Affections are reap'd and gather'd, you will soon perceive some sharp Breezes, as Signs of an approaching Winter. The Love of a Chast Woman will be continued towards you as long as you behave your self well; but the Love of a Woman who hath lost her Vertue, is but during Pleasure. Love a Woman with Moderation that loves you to an excess; her Passion will naturally reduce it self to the same E∣quality, for no Extreams are lasting, and then you have the Advantage, for the Continuance of a little Love shews
a constant Temper, and looks friendly and obliging, when a Passion cooled to the same Indifferency will look slighting and neglective; besides, he that loves a Woman too much, is apt to love him∣self too little. Depend not on the Love of a lewd Woman, 'tis a Reed will soon deceive you, her Love is intangled with her Lust; to continue the one, is to be a Slave to the other; and rather than be that, I would share the Punishment of Cesaphus. Secure not your Love to a Woman by Oaths or Protestations; for she will then think you have bound your self to continue that Respect which would be otherwise her Care and Study to merit and preserve. Let not the Protestations of a Wo∣man's Love to you be a President for you to follow, though you Love her, for she does it purely to tempt you to give in the same Security, that she may have the more to upbraid you with when∣ever you shall prove false.
If you are Belov'd by a Person you cannot Marry, whom you are willing to secure to your own Embraces, draw what you can from her by Insinuations; the more you get, the faster you bind her; she will not part with that easily, she hath purchas'd dearly; and the more you cost her, the more she'll prize you. The Love of a Virgin is much to be pitied; the Love of a Wife highly to be valued; but the Love of a Vitious Woman deserves neither; for she will Love any that will serve her Lust. Give no Encouragement to the Love of anothers Wife; for it is Lustful in the beginning, Treacherous all along, and Dangerous in the end. Love is a Distemper will wade through the greatest Difficulties to obtain a Cure; he that is the Phisician may exact what Fees he pleases; therefore, do you be careful how you become the Patient. Seraphick Love, is the Bliss of An∣gels; mutual Love, the Comfort of Mankind; natural Love, the Chain of
the World; but Lustful Love, the Mo∣ther of Misfortune. To Love a Wife, is our Duty; to Love a Friend, our Interest; but to Love a Curtizan, is a dangerous Ven∣ture. CHAP. IV. Of the Malice and Revenge of Women. OF all Passions, that of Revenge is the most opposite to Reason and good Humour; it will so far blind and deceive the Judgment, that Persons un∣der this Madness value not what Injuries they do themselves, in rashly attempting some trifling Prejudice to an Adversary. This Passion in Women springs frequent∣ly from the envenom'd Seeds of Cor∣rupted
Love, (as the best Wines once turn'd become the sharpest Vinegar) and is so predominant in this Sex, that they value nothing they do to accom∣plish those ends in which the Sweetness of their Revenge is center'd; and as they love to extreams, every little neglect they construe a great Slight, and through their Weakness, mistake Accident often for Design, and fling themselves, by their own Whimsies and Conceits, into an evil Opinion of Persons which they Love. Thus, oftentimes, they let their own Jealousies pass for Realities, and sowre their Affections into a sharp Re∣venge, without a just Occasion, turning Furies to those they Lov'd, through a fanciful Ingratitude, which I conceive to be the chief Reason why Women are much more Subject to this Passion than Men; therefore, covet no Wo∣man's Love, but whom you will be di∣ligent to Oblige; for a small neglect is taken by them as a great Ingrati∣tude.
Deal with a Revengeful Woman, as with a Hand-Granado, which you cast from you as soon as the Fuse is lighted, lest it burst, to the Prejudice of him that fir'd it. Have no Familiarity with her you have highly disoblig'd, least (Bee-like she stings you with her Tail. She who once Lov'd you, and is turn'd your Enemy, look upon her al∣ways to be so; be not deluded by her Flatteries, to give it into her Power to hurt you; for Women, though they seem to forget a Wrong they have been forced to suffer, yet you will find they have good Memories when they have Power to revenge it. Trespass not on the Affections of a Woman who Loves you to Excess; for Women, (like Ale) if over Sweet, will turn sowre the sooner. Take not always a Womans Frowns as Slights, nor her Smiles as a sure Argument of her Love; for every time the Sun is clouded, it does not
predict soul Weather, and when it shines out a Storm may be near at hand: Women can dissemble their Passions, and change their Looks, as a Scorpion can its Colour. A Woman's Love turn'd into Revenge, is like Wine turn'd to Vinegar, which can never be reduced to its primitive Goodness, but will always remain Sowre till its dead. Nothing is so Revengeful as an injured Woman; for which Reason, the Poets have ordered the Furies to be put up in the Feminine Gender. The Love of a Vertuous Woman is a great Blessing; but if once lost by In∣gratitude, you will find she will turn her Love that could not last, into a Revenge that will. Shun a Woman that's your Enemy; for every time she sees you it puts her upon fresh Mischiefs. If you have dealt Ingratefully by a Woman, converse with none that respect her, lest at some time or other it should happen to your Prejudice.
The Passion of an Envious Woman is virulent, and Flattery the only Antidote to expell the Poyson: To dissemble, shows more Prudence than to aggra∣vate; by the one, you may pacifie the Fury of fermented Spirits, when the other will beget in your Enemy fresh Resolutions of further Mischiefs. Be Merciful to those you can over∣power; but Flatter such Enemies you cannot Conquer; for Revenge (though sweet to those who seek it) is always bitter to the Sufferers. Some Women are so politickly Pe∣nitent after a Revenge compleated, they will palliate the Injury with succeeding Pity; but think the Sorrow of such a Person as great as hers, who (weeping) follows a dead Husband to the Grave, whom she hath wish'd out of the World a Thousand Times whilst he was Living. Changes in inconstant Tempers are never to be minded; she who does you a wilful Injury, and seems Sorry for it, it is your Prudence to believe she only
grieves, that the Mischief she hath done you is no greater. Trust an Enemy who hath once hurt you, upon a Reconciliation, no further than you would the Fawning of a Ma∣stiff Dog who hath attempted to worry you. Most Women are Politick in their Love, but much more Subtle in their Revenge; therefore, be careful how you affront them or deceive them to deserve it: besides, 'tis Ignoble to offend the Pevish, or to hurt the Weak. Make not her that Loves you, by Ingratitude, your Enemy; nor let not the Ingratitude of whom you Love excite you to be hers; for Revenge (like a Crab-Tree) produces a sweet Blossom, but a sowre Fruit.
CHAP. V. Of the Pride of Women. STateliness in a Woman may become her as she walks; but Pride in Con∣versation is hateful and ridiculous, and exposes the Persons affected with it to the Censures of the Company in such awker'd Gestures, and uncouth Beha∣viours, such peremptory Sentences, and impertinent Loquacities, that offends both the Eyes and Ears of all that have either Modesty or Prudence. Nothing shows the want of Judgment more than Female Pride, which is (doubtless) nourish'd by the vain Conceits of their own Perfections, and begets such a Self-Love, grounded upon Self-Opinion, that they look upon their whole Sex beside with Envy and Contempt, and like
Narcissas, daily dote on the Reflection of their own imaginary Excellencies. Cast not your Eyes too often upon such Women, for they are chargable Mistresses, implacable Wives, and ill Mothers to your Children. A Proud Woman, like an imprudent Prince, always Love him best by whom she is most slatter'd. If you Aim at the Favours of a Lofty Dame, you must highly extol her Per∣son and her Parts, and conceed with her Opinion in all things, though ne'er so opposite to Reason; for Flattery and Humility must be the Supporters of your Interest. Let Pride in a fine Woman anticipate your Admiration; for never admire her who admires her self too much; con∣ceive her as a large Looking-Glass crack'd, by which single defect is ren∣dred of small Value, by reason it can ne'er be mended. Pride in a Witty Woman, is like a Whet-stone to a Scyth, it only serves to
sharpen her Reflections, and makes her a more dangerous Weapon for a Man to meddle with. A Proud Woman, like a stately Horse, must be rid with a Curb, and manag'd with a streight Rein, or she will soon be the Bane of her Rider. If you Marry a Haughty Woman, you ought to have a good Estate; for you will find, a Proud Wife, in a low Station, will be an uncomfortable Com∣panion, and the first in Adversity that shall lend a hlping Hand to your Ruin. Pride in a Friend is dangerous, in a Mistress chargable, but in a Wife an implacable Torment. Many Women have forfeited their Vertue, to gratifie their Lust, but more to maintain their Pride; and Lust, though it will make a Woman a Whore, yet 'tis Pride that makes her Mercenary. Many Women have Vertue enough to resist the bare Attempts of Familia∣rity; but few that can stand against the powerful Charms of Gold, fine Dresses,
Coach and Horses, and Attendance. It is Grandeur influences Pride, and leads Ambition by the Nose through the worst of Vices; for there are many who are honestly Poor by constraint, who would willingly commit any Evil to be Rich. That Vertue is never Safe which is under the Guardian-ship of Pride; the latter will be maintain'd, though the for∣mer is sacrifie'd to support it. He that hath a Proud Woman to his Wife is like an Oak begirt with Ivy, he Suffers himself to be Embraced by that which will bring him to his Ruin. When Ambition leads the Van, the whole Body of Vice follows; and where∣ever you see Pride in the Front, be sure Lust Marches in the Rear. Pride in a Beautiful Woman is like a Flaw in a Diamond, it lessens the Value, Spoils the Lustre, and Remains Incurable. He that Marries a Proud Wife is as unhappy as a Prince who hath a Rebel∣lious Nation to Govern, as the latter
must grant every Petition of the People to secure Peace in his Kingdom, so must the former every request of his Wife to preserve the same in his Family. Of all Imperfections in a Woman, Pride is the most Intollerable, for that is hardest to be excused, which is ne∣ver to be mended. Pride in a Wife, makes a Husband appear little; it oft-times compels him to Submit, where he hath right to Go∣vern. He that hath a Prudent Wife, hath a Guardian Angel by his Side, but he that hath a Proud Wife, hath the De∣vil at his Elbow. A Proud Woman is an Imperious Wife, an Undutiful Daughter, an Im∣placable Mistriss, a Harsh Mother, and a Sawcy Servant. Pride is the Parent of Iniquity, the Innovator of Vice, the Seed of Rebellion, and the Rise of Faction. Pride lost Mankind their Paradice, the World its Peace, and made a Devil of an Angel.
CHAP. VI. Of the Ingratitude of Women. LET no Man deceive himself with the Expectancy of Gratitude in a Mercenary Woman; for she, who for Suks and Satins, or a splendid Mainte∣nance, will submit to your Pleasure, and swear Constancy to her Keeper, shall be first that forsakes you in a declining Con∣dition; and though she hath built a Pro∣vision for her self out of the Ruins of your Fortune, yet she shall be the last Person that shall lend you the least Assistance when your Occasions shall most require it; Therefore, look upon whatsoever you give such a Woman to he buried, as in a deep Sea, from whence no Returns can be expected.
If you love a Woman, be not deluded by her trifling Presents to make chargable Returns, for that's the Aim of her Policy. Let not a Point Cravat, because 'tis her own Working, give her Title to a Settle∣ment out of your Estate, lest while your Mistriss extols your Gratitude, the World laughs at your Folly. Giving Presents to a Woman to secure her Love, is as Vain as the Endeavouring to fill a Ceive with Water; for you may continue Giving the one, and Pouring into the other, till the last Trump sounds, e're you find the one the Faster, or the other the Fuller. The Gratitude of a Mercinary Woman lies only in her Tayl, with it she dissolves all Obligations, and will still be a Gainer even when the Debt's Paid. Whoever blames a Woman for her In∣gratitude, is equally culpable for Trusting her with the Power to prove so; for Love with Moderation, keeps a close Heart and a wary Hand, and her Ingratitude can never hurt you.
Debauch no Virgin to maintain her after, lest you are serv'd as a Gentleman, who having wasted his Fortune in the ex∣travagant Support of a Young Gentlewo∣man whom he had first desil'd, sent his Man to her upon a particular Exigence, to desire her to lend him Ten Guinea's; to which she answer'd, Pray present my Service to your Master, and tell him when he hath made me amends for the Vertue he hath forc'd from me, I shall be glad to Oblige him; but I wonder he should think I would lend Money to him who hath rob'd me already of that which admits of no Restitution, but for ever continues him my Debtor. Therefore, corrupt no Vir∣gin, or the Surrender of her Vertue to your mbraces, will remain upon you as a perpertual Obligation, and serve her at all times to excuse the highest Ingratitude, or the greatest Injury she shall act against you: besides, the World shall condemn you under all the Mischiefs you shall suf∣fer by her means, crying, you were first her Ruin, and all the Evils she can do you is no more than you deserve.
Love is the Legature that binds a Wo∣man to Gratitude; she that Loves you, will gratefully accept, and generously re∣turn the lest Favour that shall signalize the Affection of the Giver; but a Designing Woman esteems the Donor by his Pre∣sents, and not the Presents by the Donor. She that hath a Design upon you, will first oblige you with some engaging Cour∣tesie to become her Debter; but be care∣ful of those Women who are generous in the Beginning, lest you pay, with your Ruin, for their Kindness in the End. Ingratitude is said to be worse than the Sin of Witchcraft, and he that trusteth a Woman he hath once found Ingrateful, is worse than bewitch'd. Court not a Reconciliation with a Woman who hath once deciv'd you, lest she triumphs over your Submission, and makes von become an Ass to bear the Luggage of her Infirmities. To a Woman you Love, behave your self boldly, and with freedom, tho' justly and re∣spectful, for a Manly Carriage will awe her to be grateful, when a cringing fondness may occasion her to presume on your good nature.
In Commendation of Vertue. VErtue, thou Ornament of Humane Life, That Crowns the Virgin, and Adorns the Wife, From thy Blest Treasure of Contentments flow All the true Blessings we enjoy below. Those Sweet Delights, which in thy Bosom dwell, Rise up in Springs, and into Rivers swell, Which know no Ebb, or Storm, but free from Noise, Flow Calmly in a constant Tide of Joys: Thou bring'st Contentment to the Meanest Birth, And gives us Taste of Heaven here on Earth: From whence, thro' Christal Innocence, we see A pleasing Prospect of Eternity; Where Angels, to receive the Vertuous, wait, And bid them Welcome to a Happier State. When Vice hath drest her Wanton Daughters Head, With Tresses loose, in Airy Modes Displaid. Complection heighten'd, and improv'd by Paint, And all the Arts that Pride could e're invent: Yet Vertue in plain Coif, adorn'd no way By Nature, looks so Innocently Gay: She in her Home spun Garbshines brighter far than they. As Precious Gems, of which the India's boast, The plainer set, the greater Lustre cast. Vertue, like Beauty, wants no Study'd Smile, But of it self shines bright without a Foil. Could the Corrupted World but truly tast The Sweet Delights which Vicious Actions Blast,
Their Lewd Excesses they'd repeat no more, Their Counterfeit Enjoyments soon give o'er To Gaze at Vertues Beams, and the Chast Dame Adore. 'Tis she emboldens us to fear no Fate, And gives Contentment to the meanest State. Closely Embrac'd, she Blesses each Degree With a Calm Mind, from Perturbations free, And, by Content, Improves Felicity. Would all Mankind her pleasing foot-steps tread, Which do to Truth, and all Perfections lead, Sexes would join, as Angels do above, Not to Fulfil their Lust, but Seal their Love. In Dispraise of Vice. WIth what reproachful Blushes do the Wise, Those Follies, which the Age embrace, despise, With Wonder and Contempt they Gaze to see Vertue thus Sacrific'd to Leachery, By the Sly Snares of Female Policy. What strange Temptations draw the World aside, To Embrace Vice, and Vertues Charms deride: As Thieves and Ruffians, who abhor the Light, Shun the Bright Day, and seek the Gloomy Night, Tell me, mistaken Souls, what Baits allure From Vertues Paths, so pleasing and so sure, Where no deep Sloughs, or dangerous Bogs are found, But sundry Prospects of Delight all round; Who'd quit so happy, so secure a Road, To Wade along in Filthiness and Mud.
Where Paths so rugged are, Friend Jossels Friend, Each for Precedency in Vice contend, But Sorrow is (alas) their Journeys end. So is the unweary Traveller betray'd, When by an Ignis Fatnus misled 'Mong Brakes and Pools, from whence the treach'rous Guide Flies undiscern'd, and doth his Tapor hide, Leaving the Wand'ring Wretch quite void of Light, Expos'd to all the Accidents of Night. Thus fare the Unhappy Mortals, who receed From Vertues Paths, the tracts of Vice to tread, Where Fears and Cares each Wanton step succeed. Look at the Monster Vice with Steddy Eye, Who thus devours the Worlds Tranquility, You may discern the Beast in ev'ry part, By Nature Black, tho' Whiten'd o're by Art; As Strumpets, when Distemper'd and Unclean, Paint Fair their outsides when most Foul within, Vice, thou Black Parent of Revenge and Strife, Thou Shame of Humane Race, and Sting of Life, By thy Rank Bowels every ill is fed, From thee all Rapes and Villanies proceed; Ambition, Envy, Lust Adultery, Murder, Rebellion, every Infamy, Have all their Birth and Nourishment from thee. Shun the Dark Fiend, and its alluring Toys, Reject its Trifles and Embrace true Joys; Which if you'll find, choose Vertue for your Guide, Woo the kind Dame, and keep her by your side, Kiss her Soft Lips, and Wed her for your Bride. FINIS.
