W953A 09141832 42508
A PANEGYRICK TO HIS EXCELLENCY RICHARD Earl of TIRCONNELL. By ALBERTUS WARREN. RIse Muse! and quickly too; for all delay Looks like a sulen crime, Time slides away: The Tritons smile, and Neptune has convey'd Our Prince, for whom we passionately pray'd. Dress not thy Lines in painted florid stuff, Stol'n from the Antients Store: Thanks are enough For Heaven. 'Tis dangerous these Critick days To steer 'twixt Flattery and deserved Praise. He, who, between those two Points, truly knows To Sil, securely like a Workman Rows. traverse in a Circular. Least Tilting, and too rudely, unaware, I step too far; Wsdom cosists with Fear, Which made the Gods at first, as some men say, Whom to adore; Man' Reason taught the way. So, Catholck I am, I boldly dre Think Ireland's Angel truly Tutelar. Did Royal JAMES inspire in giving Power To brave TIRCONNELL in a happy hour: The Guilty only are surpris'd to see His due Reward for constant Loyalty. Such a commanding Presence does reside In him, 'is wholly Natural, not Pride. Cyphers when added (thô alone appear For Nought) advance the Sum, the Figure's here; And so significant, that I dare say, None will uneasie be who will obey. 'Tis Virtue solely which secures the Just; Men must suspect those whom they dare not trust. But his brave Soul cannot at all despise These Converts, which in season will be wise. The bravest Men when they have greatest Might, By Condescention often conquer Spite. He that's above all Censure fears no thrust: From Emulation, nor from vulgar Dust. Trees shaken by the loud tempestuous Wind, Surer fixation radically find! He's barbarously void of Christian Sence, Who questions oft Protected Innocence Ev'n to a Miracle, by friendly, Jove, 'Tis the Heart only makes Heaven prone to Love. Cowards are most vindictive; Frauds reside In narrow Breasts; the Antient Martyrs dy'd; As Stoicall, as Brutus; the pretence Of dark and young passive Obedience Was angry Calvin's Forge: Give me the pure And willing Duty, that will Peace assure. We're blest with one in this auspicious day. Who knows as well to Govern as Obey. Long may he live and weild the Sword, and then, (When Canoniz'd) enjoy a lasting Pen: Mean time, what's here in Wit defective, I With future awful Rev'rence will supply: He who misguided fails in time to do The like, is impious and silly too; For sure good Subjects are oblig'd to bring Respects for him, so honour'd by the King: A King to whom no mortal man denies The Character of Valiant, Good, and Wise; The best of Friends, in whom does fully shine The mature Glory of the Norman Line. For him succeeding Chronicles shall raise Worthy Memoires, and Pyramids of Praise. DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray on Colledg-green, 1686.
