L1621 13459971 99644
A LETTER SENT TO THE HONOURABLE GEORGE Lord DIGBY in FLUSHING, From a Worthy Gentleman in Windsor, January the 24. 1641. Together, With the true Coppy of a Letter sent from Sir JOHN BYRON, Lieutenant of the Tower, to the House of Commons, concerning divers matters of great note and Consequence. Printed at London for R. J. 1641.
A LETTER Sent to the Honourable George Lord Digby in FLUSHING, from a worthy Gentleman in WINDSOR, January the 24. 1641. NOw the world seeth by wofull experience in you, that it is end that crowneth the accord, and that the fairest beginnings, some∣times are attended with sad, if not blacke issues: let me advise you to reflect upon your selfe, not onely as Baron, and eldest Sonne of an Earle, but as a father of divers sweet chil∣dren, and a husband unto a faire Lady; and that your Lordship would not attempt both causelessely and necessitously to make that noble race on her side mourne. If true naturall affection is so dead and stiffe in you, that you have left us almost no hope to see or heare of you, to be cause of joy unto your owne. Oh, my Lord we have all too just cause to feare, that the Straffordian leaven hath leavened the better part, if not the whole lumpe: The Lord God grant that you bleed not inward, and at length prove a dolorous object to the world, but most of all to none but your selfe: whose
ruine will seeme to many the least condolea∣ble, by how much the more it will prove ap∣parently wilfull, not casuall, much lesse ne∣cessary. My Lord, there are too many eyes open: there is no thought of dazeling them, all your Lordships not long since saw a gallant starre fall, and were pleased to give forth, that that starre wanted not light but grace. Your Lord∣ship was not for some good time together, either unwilling or backward in the just per∣suit of him, with the rest of the Worthies: what caused you to retreat? God only knowes certainly, men by conjecture: but this may be assured of, that if you or others goe his wayes, you will after so notorious and remarkeable an example, find harder and more impassable difficulties in the accomplishment of your designes, and lesse favourable usage upon your defeat. My Lord, notorious and wifull errors, if not crimes, after so late and famous ex∣emplary indiction and infliction of Law, will seeme to be his, who is rather possessed then reduced. My Lord, your Lordship did very ill to take Sea, and for Flushing, worse to give occa∣sion, which may seeme, first to perswade it, if not to enforce it. But good my Lord, as you respect God, your Countery, your noble Wife and Father, your owne honour, and that
of your ancient family looke no further: nei∣ther once thinke upon France, except with griefe and feare, the one for those three unfor∣tunate, if I may not say unworthy: or unnatu∣rall men, who by their unnaturall forwardnes to violate their Country, have utterly as de∣servedly, ruinated themselves, and caused di∣vers of their friends though innoent to sa∣vaour ill, if not to stinke. My Lord, I beseech you let me not heare of you; therefore if I should, upon my truth and honour, I shall not onely hold and esteeme you, but absolute∣ly pronounce you and vote you for lost, there is hopes either upon returning or staying, there's some space. There may be hopes that the Parliament, which seekes no mans over∣throw but his reclaiming, may passe by some things, may forget others, may qualifie this, and remit that: so that your Lordship be found either in State or place, that may not give cause. This counsell that may doe much good can doe you no harme, you are heartily desired to follow from him, who you perfectly know was never guilty of any thing but of hearty love and fidelity towards you and yours, nei∣ther ever willingly would alter his mind, you still persisting in tearmes thereof capable.
The true Coppy of a Letter sent from the Lieutenant of the Tower r I. Byron. to the Speaker of the Honourable House of Commons in defence of himselfe and to satisfie the world. Sir, MY words have already been so misrepor∣ted, that I am forced to return my an∣swer in writing, and think my condition at this time very unfortunate, that according to the warrant of Summons, I received this mor∣ning from the honourable House of Com∣mons, I cannot personally attend there with∣out both the breach of His Majesties expresse command, not to stirre out of the Tower without his leave, and likewise of the oath I took at my coming into this place, to observe His Majesties commands. This I hope well considered will exempt me from the sensure of contumacy, or disobedience to the com∣mands of that honourable House, whose just Liberties and Privileges, I shall ever be ready
to maintaine with my life and fortunes. And I most humbly desire the honourable House to rest assured, that it is farre from my thought (what false reports soever have been raised to the contrary) to divide my selfe betwixt the King and the Parliament, and that my affecti∣ons are united equally to serve both, though in the condition I am indifferent from other men) I can perform only a single personall o∣bedience here (unlesse His Majesty please to absolve me from this command) In the mean time, if by the house, it shall be thought fit to demand any particulars, I am ready with all clearnesse, and ingenuity to give satisfaction, and with the like cander and fidelity, to be∣have my selfe in all other actions, as becomes a person intrusted, and one more willing to deposite his life for the true Protestant Reli∣gion, the peace and tranquillity of this City and Common-wealth, then ambitious to con∣tinue Lieutenant of the Tower. In which re∣solution, I rest. Your humbly Servant, I. Byron. Tower of London, 12. lanuary, 1641. FINIS.
